Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ovidio Bellando] </F>
  [Text] Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella told LA NACION on 4 
March that after his meeting with Foreign Office head Douglas 
Hurd in London on 3 March, "he is absolutely convinced" that 
Great Britain "sees Argentine-Chilean relations with good eyes." 
  In a telephone call from the United Kingdom, the minister 
analyzed the meeting and commented on an article about it, which 
was published on 4 March. Di Tella said the British Government 
"supports rapprochement between the two countries." He added 
that if relations with Chile were good during President Aylwin's 
administration "they will be very good during the Frei 
administration, and will have still more impetus." 
  It is hard to understand Di Tella's ideas, particularly the 
emphasis given to British support of ties between Argentina and 
Chile, if facts kept in absolute secrecy until 4 March are 
ignored. These facts caused surprise and uneasiness among 
official circles. 
  The reason behind it was a donation. 
  Argentina had to conduct diplomatic actions to clarify a 
British donation to the Chilean Air Museum. 
  The donation consists of a Harrier plane that still shows 
where it was hit by Argentine bullets. The plane participated 
in the Malvinas War. The donation will be officially made on 22 
March, presided over by former iron lady Margaret Thatcher, who 
will visit Santiago from 20 to 23 March. 
  Some Argentine representatives of the media believe there is 
the clear intention of affecting the good relations being 
enjoyed by the two countries, seeking to revert to the times 
when the theory of balanced forces -- sponsored by the large 
producing centers -- was fervently complied with in Latin 
America. 
  As LA NACION reported, Deputy Foreign Minister Fernando 
Petrella traveled to Chile practically the same day Di Tella 
left for London. Chilean civilian officials who will soon be 
installed allegedly knew nothing about the issue. 
  Although Hurd's answer about the donation has not been made 
public, the Argentine foreign minister said he had received 
"full explanations" about the discussed issues. 
  In Di Tella's opinion, following the almost 80-minute 
private 
meeting with his British counterpart on 3 March, the objective 
of Thatcher's presence in Santiago are merely to sell her book 
and give a paid lecture. 
  Di Tella pragmatically said: "The possibility of receiving a 
few dollars for a book should not be disdained." 
  Di Tella said Hurd's upcoming visit to the Malvinas Islands 
has only a relative political importance. 
  The minister said his British counterpart mentioned to him 
that he has not visited the islands during the five years he has 
been in the government. 
  His visit, however, could be interpreted as a sort of 
political homage to the islanders, perhaps under pressure from 
the Conservative Party's hard wing. He will be in Malvinas the 
day marking the 12th anniversary of the arrival of Argentine 
forces on the islands on 2 April 1982. 
  During the telephone conversation, Di Tella gave the 
impression that Hurd could explain to the islanders the 
securities offered that "Great Britain is clearly seeking ways 
to cooperate over oil exploration...if that is possible." 

