CSO 

  [Text] Indian forest wardens do not suffice to protect the 
Chiman Forest from depredation. The Forest Development Center 
cites the need for reconciliation between equitable treatment 
and conservation of resources. 
  Bolivia's forests are declining by an average of 1,400 
square 
km annually, equivalent to 140,000 hectares per year, as the 
director of the National Forest Development Center [CDF], Javier 
Lopez Soria, admits. 
  Lopez Soria is a professional conservationist, ex-director 
of 
the League for Protection of the Environment (LIDEMA), and 
currently a leading government authority. He is convinced that 
the new Forest Law will prevent indiscriminate exploitation of 
wood, the forests' principal resource. 
  "Good regulations included in the law must be aimed at 
preventing plundering activities, encouraging rational use, and 
promoting forestation." Lopez made this comment in the very 
heart of the Chiman Forest, where he had arrived as a member of 
a group of government officials who had come to hear the demands 
of the Beni Indians and to assess the deterioration of their 
habitat. 
  The Indians have shown the authorities evidence of 
indiscriminate felling of trees, primarily the mara or mahogany, 
a precious species, very highly priced on the domestic and 
foreign market for the manufacture of furniture, flooring, 
doors, etc. 
<H5>  In Beni, 18 Percent of the Forests </H5>
  A total of 18 percent of Bolivia's forests (covering an area 
of 109.8 million hectares) are located in Beni. The Chiman 
Forest, with 1.2 million hectares, is facing an accelerated 
process of deterioration. Hence, if urgent measures are not 
adopted, this habitat, in which 2,266 Indians live, could be 
completely destroyed. 
  Not only is the mara tree becoming extinct, but the fauna as 
well; and the rivers are threatened by the intense activity of 
business firms still operating in an extensive area that was 
declared "Indian territory" in 1990. It was presumed that there 
would be no exploitation of resources by third parties in that 
area. 
  Lopez Sora claims that the situation in Chiman is complex, 
but remarked that its solution is part of a structural approach 
to the problem of the forests. 
  A study made by Lopez himself, titled "Forest Resources in 
Bolivia and Their Utilization," warns of the risk run by the 
forests if rational programs are not adopted. He comments: "The 
forests are subject to major risks. During the 15-year period, 
from 1971 to 1986 alone, the wooded areas were reduced by 21,000 
square km, according to studies conducted by the FAO." 
  As he claims: "The annual volumes of utilization currently 
total about 350,000 cubic meters of trunk wood, but with the use 
of very few species." 
  The CDF director observes that only a few species are being 
exploited, but that there is an immense variety that could be 
used rationally. 
<H5>  Selective Exploitation in the Chiman Forest </H5>
  He notes that what is happening in the Chiman Forest is 
selective exploitation of wood that is putting an end to the 
mara, one of the most precious varieties. He stresses: "It is 
not that the woods should not be exploited; what should be done 
is to maintain equitable treatment and conservation of forest 
resources." 
  According to the director, the CDF resources for curbing the 
illegal exploitation of wood have proven inadequate thus far, 
but there is a willingness to reinforce these agencies. 
  The government authorities have decided to return to the 
former administration in the CDF, which was decentralized in 
recent years. The undersecretary of sustainable development, 
Juan Carlos Quiroga, in turn, declares: "The CDF will be 
subordinate to the Ministry of Sustainable Development and 
Environment, and its administration will not be decentralized 
based on regions." 
  In the undersecretary's opinion, "The former 
decentralization 
of Forest Development Centers has served to allow for many 
irregularities." 
<H5>  Taking Care of What Belongs to Them </H5>
  With those restructuring problems in the CDF, the Beni 
Indian 
peoples have assumed responsibility for taking care of their 
forests with their own resources. "There is among the Beni 
Indian peoples the view that an effective model of sustainable 
development can be achieved, using the Indian communities and 
settlements located in the territory as the main executors." 
This was stressed by the researcher and director of the Research 
and Documentation Center for the Development of Beni 
(CIDDEBENI), Zulema Lehm. "There is also a conservationist 
tendency among large sectors of the Indian peoples, who are 
inclined to reinforce it." 
  Lehm comments: "Meanwhile, the Beni Indian peoples have 
created a Coordinating Board for the Multiethnic Indian 
Territory, with one representative for each people." 
  She explains that this coordinating board has, in turn, an 
Indian technical team, including 20 Indian youths who were 
elected at a meeting of mayors, and are to be trained to assist 
the coordinating board in the administration and management of 
the area. 
  The Indian technical team is subdivided into two groups: one 
for planning and another for protection. They were trained in 
planning, administration, management, and control of resources 
by institutions such as the Beni Biological Station, the 
Institute of Ecology of San Andres Major University, the 
Technical University of Beni, the CIDDEBENI itself, and other 
organizations. 
<H5>  Getting to Work </H5>
  The president of the Beni Indian Peoples' Center, Marcial 
Fabricano, claims that the young people who joined the technical 
team prepared a "Preliminary Plan for Protection and Development 
of the Multiethnic Indian Territory" in 1992. Its purpose was to 
"promote the socioeconomic and cultural development of the 
Indian peoples, and the conservation of natural resources." 
  Fabricano remarks: "The forest's natural resources can be 
used by retrieving traditional techniques." 
  According to Lehm: "The plan is an unprecedented experience 
in the country, because it was devised by the Indian peoples 
themselves, and because it adapted the methodology of the 
Management Plans for Protected Areas (which number few in the 
country) to the needs of the Indian Territory." 
  The CIDDEBENI director stressed that the Indians have 
organized six programs in their territory: for protection, 
productive development, research, social development, 
communication and dissemination, and operations. Each of them 
is, in turn, subdivided into subprograms. 
<H5>  An Indian Forest Warden </H5>
  As part of the protection program, the Indians have trained 
15 forest wardens, who monitor the territory from strategically 
located stations. However, their warnings are not heeded by the 
power saw operators who are numerous in the woods, armed with 
their tools for felling trees. 
  Fabricano admits: "Sometimes there are conflicts, insults, 
and death threats, because the power saw operators pay no 
attention to the forest wardens, and we fear for their lives." 
  The Indian forest warden is recognized by the state, because 
the peoples themselves negotiated for legal support of their 
protective activity. 
  On 9 April 1992, Supreme Decree 23,107 officially created 
the 
Indian Forest Warden, granting him authority to monitor and 
protect Indian territories recognized as social and community 
property; to defend and conserve the flora and all the natural 
resources in the territory; and to direct and support activities 
aimed at the protection, conservation, and sustainable use of 
natural resources on the part of the Indian organizations. 
  And that is not all: The warden is authorized to "confiscate 
all products extracted in violation of the legal regulations for 
protection and conservation of territories; to penalize and 
impose fines on violators; and to have custody of the products 
and species that have been confiscated." 
  Nevertheless, the lumber companies find ways of extracting 
the resources from the forests; and, sometimes, when the Indian 
opposition is very strong, they find ways of winning over the 
communities, by offering them color television sets, radios, and 
money. 

