BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jamal 'Isam-al-Din: "IMF Reforms Under Attack"] </F>
  [Text] The government got a fresh vote of confidence from 
the People's Assembly in the early hours of Tuesday after Prime 
Minister 'Atif Sidqi defended its economic performance against a 
verbal onslaught by two left-wing deputies who lashed out at its 
International Monetary Fund inspired economic reform policy. 
  The verbal lashing came from al-Badri Farghali, the Port 
Said 
representative of the leftwing National Progressive Unionist 
Grouping, and Ahmad Taha, an independent with leftist leanings 
from Cairo's al-Sahil district. Both charged that widespread 
poverty and greater social instability were the inevitable 
results of economic reform measures imposed on the government by 
the IMF and the World Bank. 
  Sidqi denounced Farghali's speech as "hollow and outdated 
slogans" and said it must have been written for him by "people 
whom time had left behind". Sidqi said the IMF and World Bank 
never dictate policies, asserting that the economic reform laws 
were not the product of their instructions but rather a 
reflection of the need to generate high rates of growth. 
  To prove his point, he cited statistics that the budget 
deficit fell from 30 per cent in the pre-reform period to 2.6 
per cent at present. Inflation rates, he added, fell from 25 
per cent to 7.3 per cent at present, while the balance of 
payments secured a surplus for the first time in 1991 amounting 
to US$5.6 billion. This surplus dropped, however, to $2 billion 
in 1993/94 as a result of the slump in tourism. 
  Sidqi argued that the sale of public assets is a means of 
attracting more investments and attributed the financial losses 
suffered by public sector companies to "old and shameful" 
economic policies. These companies are under financial 
restructuring at present. 
  Stressing that the government is mindful of the social 
dimensions of economic reform, Sidqi said it devotes special 
attention to the deprived sectors of society. As a result, 
budgetary allocations for education rose from LE [Egyptian 
pound] 674 million in 1981 to LE9.4 billion this year, health 
allocations from 267 million in 1981 to 3.5 billion, and subsidy 
allocations from LE1.6 billion in 1981 to LE4 billion. 
  Farghali had charged that economic reform measures gave the 
IMF and World Bank the upper hand in tightening their control 
over the destinies of Egyptians. He said agreements concluded 
with them contributed to the disintegration of Egyptian society 
and undermined its long-time cohesion. 
  Farghali showed the House a document purporting to be an 
agreement with the World Bank to raise local energy prices to 
world levels by 1995. Displaying a letter from the World Bank 
to under-secretaries at the International Cooperation Ministry 
and the Social Insurance Organisation asking them to abide by 
the time-schedule of economic reform, Farghali charged the IMF 
and World Bank gave themselves the right to interfere in the 
performance of government under-secretaries. He also produced a 
letter from the World Bank to Deputy Prime Minister Kamal 
al-Janzuri listing 65 economic reform measures that the 
government has to take before July 1995. These include laws on 
foreign exchange, a new sales tax, a unified tax, a reduction in 
tariff levels, more investment incentives and the liberalisation 
of housing rents. 
  Farghali said that among the negative social consequences of 
economic reform was the escalation of terrorism. "Roses never 
grow in swamps and swamps never produce roses," said Farghali, 
asking Sidqi to tell him how many terrorists were employed. 
  Sidqi admitted that most of the documents produced by 
Farghali were authentic but denied that they wee deliberately 
kept secret by the government. "The contents of such documents 
were freely debated on more than one occasion. May our hands be 
cut off if they sign anything that is contrary to the interests 
of Egypt or its people," Sidqi said. He stressed that at no 
time was economic reform dictated by the IMF and World Bank. 
  For his part, Ahmad Taha described the agreements with the 
IMF and the World Bank as "colonial intervention and a cultural 
setback" which breed "parasitic, capitalist forces that plunder 
Egypt and diffuse corruption". He said the Egyptian economy was 
falling prey to those Mafia-like parasitic forces and urged the 
government to rebel against the IMF and World Bank, liquidate 
the ill-effects of their dictated policies and develop a 
self-reliant approach. Taha said that Egypt has such great 
resources that "we can grow to become not only tigers but also 
Pharaohs". 
  In his speech, Sidqi denied that the government violated the 
constitution in introducing economic reforms. The constitution 
is not static, he said, and "we cannot live without making 
changes". 

