CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kieu Xuan Sang] </F>
  [Text] Editor's note: At the end of 1993, Minister of 
Energy Thai Phung Ne answered a number of reporters' questions 
about the implementation of the 1993 plan and the 1994 tasks of 
the energy sector. The following are some of the ideas of the 
minister. 
<H5>  I. The Implementation of the 1993 Plan </H5>
  1. On electricity production and supply: 
  In 1993, both production and commodity electricity supplied 
to satisfy economic and social needs exceeded the plan and 
increased as compared with 1992. Production electricity reached 
10.641 billion kwh, 5.29 percent above the planned norm and an 
increase of 10.25 percent as compared with 1992. Commodity 
electricity reached 7.794 billion kwh, 4.14 percent above the 
planned norm and an increase of 12.45 percent as compared with 
1992. 
  The program to overcome electricity shortages in southern 
and 
central Vietnam was carried on actively. In the south, as a 
result of adding another 100-mw gas turbine and filling the 
reservoirs of the Tri An and Da Nhim hydroelectric plants at the 
end of last year and because of the measures used to mobilize 
the various sources of electricity, both production and supply 
electricity exceeded the plan and increased greatly as compared 
with 1992. Specifically, production electricity exceeded the 
plan by 9.18 percent and increased 16.48 percent as compared 
with 1992, and commodity electricity exceeded the plan by 8.71 
percent and increased 16.69 percent as compared with 1992. This 
ensured a normal supply of electricity during the dry season and 
prevented electricity blackouts as in previous years. In central 
Vietnam, too, the distribution of electricity improved because 
of the use of measures to strengthen obtaining electricity from 
the northern system and bring electricity to Quang Ngai and Binh 
Dinh in conjunction with regulating the diesel sources of 
electricity among the regions. Because of this, as compared with 
1992, the electricity received and produced increased 18.48 
percent and commodity electricity increased 17.6 percent. 
  Bringing electricity to rural and mountainous areas has 
continued to expand. At present, more than 81 percent of the 
districts and more than 55 percent of the villages in the 
country are receiving electricity from the national electricity 
network. 
  The sector has coordinated things with the localities in 
order to expand the program to reduce electric energy losses. 
Very encouraging initial results have been achieved in key 
areas: In Haiphong City, January energy losses in Haiphong City 
amounted to 52.66 percent, but by November the figure had 
dropped to 29 percent. In Hanoi, January losses amounted to 31.4 
percent, but by November, this had declined to 23.5 percent. 
  Using many guidance and control measures, the sector has 
striven to reduce the planned deficit as much as possible. In 
addition to the 100 billion dong contributed to reduced the 
deficit, efforts have been made to further reduce the deficit in 
order to create sources of investment capital for a number of 
urgent capital construction projects. 
  The sector must continue to strive to reduce the electricity 
loss norm (in the north it is now higher than the norm set); 
reduce failure rates, improve safety, and increase the prestige 
of the electricity network, particularly that of the electricity 
distribution network; and control the price of electricity sold 
retail to consumers in rural areas. 
  2. On coal production and supply: 
  Even though there are many difficulties concerning 
distribution markets (within the country, the thermoelectric 
plants still use very small amounts of coal, and coal exports 
are limited because of many factors), because the coal sector 
has used many control measures, such as increasing internal 
sales to households outside the electricity sector and exporting 
small amounts and gradually raising domestic coal prices to 
almost the level of production costs, the amount of washed coal 
produced and sold has exceeded the planned norm and increased as 
compared with 1992. The amount of washed coal produced reached 
4.768 million tons, which is 100.5 percent of the planned norm 
and a 6-percent increase as compared with 1992. The amount of 
washed coal sold reached 5.032 million tons, which is 100.3 
percent of the planned norm and a 3.7-percent increase as 
compared with 1992. The value of coal sales revenues increased 
5.4 percent as compared with the plan, thereby contributing to 
reducing the difficulties with respect to financial balance in 
production and the incomes of the laborers. 
  The sector and localities have coordinated things to 
continue 
restoring order in coal production and circulation based on mine 
boundaries. 
  There are many reasons for the problems now confronting the 
coal sector. In particular, because of fluctuations in the world 
coal market in 1993, coal exports did not reach the planned norm 
and declined as compared with 1992. Because of the lack of 
financial balance, it has not been possible to remove the volume 
of overburden and dig the number of shafts in accord with the 
technical requirements in the mining process, and this has 
affected the preparation of natural resources. 
  3. On capital construction: 
  In 1993, with the concentration of state investments, the 
energy sector implemented a large number of capital construction 
projects: 
  Sources of electricity: Turbines 6 and 7 of the Hoa Binh 
hydroelectric plant were put on line, and preparations were made 
for putting the final turbine into operation by the beginning of 
1994. The Thac Mo hydroelectric project blocked the Be River in 
December 1993. Together with the Vinh Son hydroelectric plant, 
construction on this plant is progressing based on a schedule of 
putting turbine 1 into operation in June 1994 and completing 
construction on the project by the end of 1994. Construction on 
the Yaly hydroelectric project got underway at the beginning of 
November 1993. Electricity projects to support the 1994 dry 
season in the south, which include the Ba Ria 100-mw gas turbine 
group and the Ba Ria-Long Binh 220-kv landline, are being 
constructed at a rapid pace. Three large projects to help 
satisfy electricity needs during the period 1996-2000 and in the 
future are the Phu My thermoelectric project (600 mw), the Pha 
Lai II thermoelectric project (600 mw), and the Ham Thuan-Da Mi 
hydroelectric group (472 mw). Efforts have been concentrated on 
carrying out procedures in order to take ODA [Official 
Development Assistance] loans from the Japanese Government. 
  The electricity network: Construction on the 500-kv 
north-south electricity carrier system has been stepped up. The 
technical plans have been completed, and an overall estimate has 
been submitted to the premier. Contracts for importing materials 
and equipment have been signed, and except for the electric 
cable, which arrived late, almost all of the project materials 
and equipment arrived on time. As for construction, in December 
1993, the foundation was completed, and the pillars were erected 
(including the reinforcements). Stretching the carrier lines and 
lighting arrester lines was basically completed. Some of the 
construction work on the four transformer stations, one 
compensation station, and national electricity moderating center 
has been completed, and some of the equipment has been 
installed. Along with the rate of construction on the 500-kv 
system, construction is urgently being carried on on the 
connecting projects, landlines, and synchronized 110- and 220-kv 
stations with the above sources in order to use the 500-kv 
carrier system to supply electricity to southern and central 
Vietnam and the Central Highlands. In 1993, many projects to 
supply electricity to localities in northern, central, and 
southern Vietnam were completed. This included many projects to 
supply electricity to rural and mountainous areas. 
  The coal sector has invested using the loan mechanism in 
order to remove overburden and dig shafts. Work has begun on the 
Nam Cau Trang tipple and the Tay Khe Sim tunnel, preparations 
have been made to build the La Hien cement plant and plants to 
produce explosives and process coal, and a number of other 
support projects have been built. 
  In the capital construction activities of the energy sector, 
the sector has begun broadly implementing a bidding mechanism 
and welcoming competition in supplying materials and equipment 
in order to reduce costs, ensure quality, and maintain the rate 
of construction on the projects. 
  4. On machine production: 
  The production of the machine installations has continued to 
be shifted in the direction of manufacturing equipment to 
support the projects to develop energy and vary the products 
based on market needs, such as machining and electroplating 
electric rods for the 500-kv and 110- and 220-kv carrier 
projects, producing carrier lines, lightening arrester lines, 
and insulated cable, machining pressure tubes for the 
hydroelectric plants, manufacturing high-voltage circuit 
breakers, spare parts, annexes, and so on to support the 
production and construction activities of the electricity and 
coal sectors. 
  5. Other spheres: 
  Finances: State budget receipts have been maintained, and as 
mentioned above, an effort has been made to reduce the planned 
deficit by hundreds of billions of dong. 
  Fighting corruption and opposing negative aspects: 
Inspections have been conducted, and 18,698 cases of corruption 
and other negative activities have been dealt with. Among these 
were 8 cases of embezzlement, 293 cases of people intentionally 
damaging state property, and 18,397 violations in supplying and 
using electricity (most involved stealing electricity or helping 
others steal electricity for personal interests). A total of 
19.451 billion dong has been recovered for the public fund, and 
635 people have been disciplined, 11 of whom were prosecuted by 
judicial organizations. Those disciplined included 11 enterprise 
directors and deputy directors, 3 corporation directors and 
deputy directors, and 16 heads and deputy heads of corporation 
and enterprise offices. 
  Management organization: the enterprises have been 
reorganized and registered. In the entire sector, there are 20 
state enterprises, with the electricity and coal sectors each 
having 10 enterprises. 
<H5>  II. 1994 Guidelines and Tasks </H5>
  In order to hit the targets and complete the tasks of the 
1991-1995 five-year plan in the remaining 2 years and contribute 
to successfully implementing the resolution of the seventh 
congress, in 1994 the energy sector will strive to hit the 
following targets and carry out the following main tasks: 
  1. Electricity production and supply: 
  The completion of the 500-kv north-south electricity carrier 
system will create a unified national electricity system, and 
electricity capacity will increase by almost 600 mw. The 
electricity sector will be able to maintain the supply of 
electricity based on the needs of the secondary carriers in the 
north, eliminate "electricity shortages" in the south (after 
phase 1 of the 500-kv carrier project is implemented at the 
beginning of the 2d quarter of 1994) and in central Vietnam 
(after the 500-kv carrier project is completed based on the 
designs at the end of 1994). 
  The 1994 plan estimates production electricity at 11.535 
billion kwh, an increase of 8.4 percent as compared with 1993 
and commodity electricity at 8.598 billion kwh, an increase of 
10.3 percent as compared with 1993. 
  Developing new secondary carriers will be encouraged, and 
the 
program to electrify the rural and mountainous areas in order to 
support rural area economic and social development based on the 
spirit of the resolution of the Fifth Plenum of the CPV Central 
Committee will continue to be carried on. The results achieved 
in 1993 will be maintained and exploited, the program to 
eliminate the use of contract electricity will continue to be 
promoted, and electrical power losses, with Hanoi being the key 
point, will be reduced. The quality of operations control will 
be improved, the electricity networks will be repaired in order 
to reduce failure rates to the lowest level possible, and safety 
and confidence in supplying electricity will be increased. Along 
with the localities, the problems concerning rural electricity 
prices will gradually be solved. 
  2. Coal production and supply: 
  Domestic coal consumption needs will be satisfied, and 
emphasis will be placed on supplying coal to support the rural 
and mountain areas. The traditional coal export markets will be 
solidified, and new markets will be opened. The sale of coal in 
a disorderly manner will be overcome, and the preparation of 
base commodities will be maintained in order to stabilize the 
content capacity of the export coal. The amount of overburden 
removed and the number of shafts dug will be increased in 
preparation for production based on the technical requirements. 
Things will be coordinated with the localities in order to 
regularly maintain order in coal mining. The main coal 
production and supply norms for 1994 are: Washed coal for 
distribution, 4,885,000 tons, including 1.5 million tons for 
export; washed coal for production, 4,935,000 tons; overburden 
removed, 16,696,000 cubic meters; and shafts dug in preparation 
for production, 41,461 meters. 
  3. Capital construction: 
  Things will coordinated with the integrated state 
organizations in order to overcome the difficulties concerning 
capital and, in particular, the difficulties in switching to a 
mechanism in which entities borrow investment capital on their 
own. The main targets of the 1994 capital construction 
investment plan are: 
  Electricity: As for the 500-kv north-south carrier project, 
efforts will be made to complete phase 1 by the beginning of the 
2d quarter of 1994 and complete phase 2 by the beginning of the 
4th quarter. The Hoa Binh hydroelectric plant: Turbine No 8 will 
go into operation in the 1st quarter, and construction will be 
completed in 1994. The Thac Mo and Vinh Son hydroelectric plant: 
Turbine No 1 will go into operation in the 2d quarter and 
construction will be completed in 1994. The Yaly hydroelectric 
plant: Construction will proceed as scheduled, and turbine No 1 
will be put into operation in 1998. The program to restore the 
Pha Lai, Uong Bi, and Ninh Binh thermoelectric plants will 
continue, and work on converting the Thu Duc thermoelectric 
plant to gas will be carried on. Work will get underway on the 
Phu My thermoelectric plant, and preparations for building the 
Ham Thuan-Da Mi hydroelectric plant and the Pha Lai 
thermoelectric plant will continue. Connecting projects and 
110-220 kv networks will be constructed in line with the rate of 
construction on the 500-kv carrier system and other sources 
mentioned above. Investments will be concentrated on developing 
and expanding the electricity network in the rural and mountain 
areas in accord with the program to implement the resolution of 
the Fifth Plenum of the CPV Central Committee. Projects to 
improve the electricity networks in Hanoi, Haiphong, Nam Dinh 
and Ho Chi Minh City will be developed using loans from the 
World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and SIDA [Swedish 
International Development Agency]. 
  Coal: Efforts will be concentrated on removing overburden 
and 
digging shafts in order to ready raw materials to satisfy needs 
in the coming years. Construction on the Nam Cau Trang tipple 
project, the Tay Khe Sim tunnel, the La Hien cement plant, and a 
number of other support projects will be stepped up. 
  4. Other sectors: 
  Machine production: A program to manufacture equipment for 
the 35-kv electricity network and equipment for 20-kv voltage 
levels will be implemented. Quality will be improved, and 
product production costs and machining and manufacturing costs 
will be reduced. 
  Based on reviewing things and gaining experience, 
anti-corruption activities will continue at all echelons and in 
all management and work spheres in the sector. 
  The policies will be studied in detail, and plans to 
organize 
strong state enterprise groups that can operate independently 
and effectively in a mechanism in which the ministry does not 
manage the energy sector will be formulated. 
<H5>  The Energy Sector--Four Major Events in 1994 </H5>
  1. Phase 1 of the 500-kv north-south carrier system will be 
completed at the beginning of the 2d quarter, and the entire 
project will be completed by the 4th quarter. 
  2. The final turbine (turbine No 8) of the Hoa Binh 
hydroelectric project will go into operation in the 1st quarter. 
The plant has a planned capacity of 1,920 MW. 
  3. Turbine No 1 of the Vinh Son hydroelectric project (with 
a 
capacity of 66 MW) and the turbine of the Thac Mo hydroelectric 
project (with a capacity of 150 MW) will be put into operation 
at the end of the 2d quarter. Construction on these two projects 
will be completed in 1994. 
  4. An effort will be made to block the Se San River at the 
Yaly dam, Yaly hydroelectric project. 

