BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" Report No. 19 of 12 May 1994] </F>
  [Text] At the end of April the Estonian President Lennart 
Meri received at Kadriorg Palace in Tallinn a group of Russian 
journalists invited to Estonia by the Foreign Ministry. During 
the meeting the president answered questions from Aleksandras 
Budris and Boris Grishchenko of INTERFAX. 
  Corr.: Mr. President, what do you think of the present state 
of Estonian-Russian relations? 
  Lennart Meri: Thank God, the bitterness, the sense of insult 
which Estonians felt for Russia are disappearing. I think that 
the psychologically most difficult period in our relations was 
in 1988-89 when the local Russian community found itself in an 
absolutely new position. 
  Russians in Estonia, mostly unconsciously, considered 
themselves proponents of state policies, kulturtregers [as 
received] in a way. It was insulting for us to hear that before 
occupation Estonia was an illiterate country. Such were the 
convictions of persons who knew little even about Russian 
culture and history. They would work for five years on the 
Baykal-Amur railway, then for five years somewhere in West 
Siberia. They did not take root anywhere as they were always 
after big money. They never cared about the state in which they 
left the places which they "developed," as it was said in those 
days. 
  The rapid change of the past few years took many people 
unawares. I am very glad that our northern coolness never gave 
cause for real clashes. The well-organized rallies of Estonians 
served as a model for the meetings of the Russian community. I 
am satisfied with the fact that in Estonia we can speak calmly, 
in a civilized manner of the problems that naturally exist now. 
  However, two years ago I was more optimistic in this 
respect. 
I thought that all the existing problems could be resolved in a 
peaceful and friendly way, even the ones inherited from the 
criminal agreements between Stalin and Hitler. I believed that 
we could disregard the past and switch to normal relations. 
  It so happens that there has never been hatred or prejudice 
between us in our history. The relations were quite good and 
normal. In the Middle Ages old believers persecuted in Russia 
always found refuge in Estonia and could peacefully follow their 
religious canons. We want the same today. These aspirations 
are not shared by everyone in Russia or Estonia, because the 
extremism on one side always arouses extremism on the other. 
  We are realistic enough, though, to realize that Russia will 
always remain our closest neighbor. And from our common past we 
would want to keep the positive, not negative experience. Here 
we could recall the influence St. Petersburg, which was a 
leading center of European culture, had on Estonia. The 
cultural ties between Tallinn and St. Petersburg remain strong. 
  Corr.: Are you satisfied with Estonian-Russian talks? How 
do you think they could be stepped up and channelled to concrete 
decisions? 
  L.M.: I cannot say that I am satisfied with the state of 
Russian-Estonian negotiations. The recent 18th round marked the 
second anniversary of the process. Naturally we would want to 
advance much faster. 
  I get the impression that if for two years delegations are 
arguing about details, it becomes natural to go deeper and 
deeper and get submerged under these details. There is the 
danger of losing the most important in these arguments - the 
purpose for which we are negotiating. 
  I think that my meeting with President Yeltsin could break 
this vicious circle. Both sides can openly speak of their 
willingness to establish not simply neighborly but friendly 
relations in all spheres beginning with the economy and ending 
with culture. 
  Corr.: Do you have direct contacts with Yeltsin? 
  L.M.: We exchange letters. This does not mean, of course, 
that a postman knocks on my door. It is usually the Russian 
ambassador who brings me messages from Boris Yeltsin. 
  Corr.: Lately there has been talk in Estonian political 
circles about the need to invite Finland as a mediator to 
Russian-Estonian negotiations. What is your opinion of the 
proposal? 
  L.M.: I welcome any step that would improve relations 
between Estonia and Russia. I think the mediation of an 
experienced politician, the President of Finland Martti 
Ahtisaari, could to a certain extent disperse the depressing 
atmosphere at the talks. I want to repeat that for two years 
despite regular meetings the delegations have made virtually no 
progress. 
  Martti Ahtisaari has declared that if Russia and Estonia 
wish 
so, he is ready to try to use his ample experience of working 
with the United Nations. I know that President Ahtisaari is 
closely linked with the UN. I do not doubt that the 
organization will also help us in this respect. 
  I would like to remark that the withdrawal of troops from 
Estonia and Latvia would benefit Russia itself. I am convinced 
that after the withdrawal economic relations between our two 
countries will grow more active. And this means that we are 
speaking of mutual benefit, not a victory of one side over the 
other. 
  Estonia is a small country but it is also capable of 
benefitting such a continent as Russia. Take for example, our 
geographical location, our good sea ports. Can one say today 
that the port of Rotterdam belongs to just one country? It 
belongs to the whole of Europe and serves many countries. Hence 
the Swiss, the Hungarians or the Austrians will never think of 
conquering it in order to break a window into Europe. 
  There remains a strong tendency of thinking in 19th century 
categories in Russia. Estonia wants this stage to end and see 
Russia as a modern European nation get down to finding spheres 
of active cooperation with both big and small countries. I am 
sure that this time is slowly but steadily approaching. 
  Corr.: What do you think of the differences between Estonia 
and Russia on the border problem? 
  L.M.: I will try to give a very cautious answer to this 
important question. In 1940 the border between Russia and 
Estonia was absolutely different and it was drawn in keeping 
with the treaty signed in 1920 in our university town Tartu. 
(The town was founded in the 11th century by the Russian Grand 
Prince Yaroslav the Wise and was part of Russia for almost 900 
years -- INTERFAX.) The borderline was to the east of the 
present one. 
  However, "the father of nations" Josef Jugashvili (Stalin) 
with an arbitrary hand took away part of Estonian territory in 
1944. The territory that went to Russia was very small -- 
approximately 5 percent of Estonia. It is even smaller on the 
Russian scale. Still it is of great emotional significance for 
Estonians. 
  It might sound strange but the collection of folklore in 
Estonia is a kind of a national sport. That area which is 
called Setumaa after the Setu people living is a treasure-box of 
folklore. I can compare it with Central Karelia where Finnish 
folklore experts collected the most colorful parts of the 
Finnish national epic "Kalevala." 
  We know that in modern Europe borders are a very delicate 
matter. It is like Pandora's box, which is probably best left 
closed. This constitutes a sphere in which we should look for 
and find a reasonable compromise. 
  It is possible to simply put off the matter for five or ten 
years finding some civilized solution to keep a normal border, 
not an iron curtain. 
  The border should equally protect Estonia and Russia from 
criminals, smugglers, drug and arms trade, from everything that 
can provoke a conflict. It should be a good filter and assume 
European nature. 
  Corr.: How do you think the problems of non-Estonians, 
non-citizens can be resolved? 
  L.M.: I do not think the question should be resolved by 
politicians. The choice of citizenship is the right and duty of 
each concrete person. It is a very intimate decision. Let 
every person decide which country his heart longs for. 
  Probably we have failed to explain in simple and friendly 
words how the problems should be tackled. There have also been 
mistakes on the other side. Some Russian politicians thought 
that they have the right to act as guardians and speak on behalf 
of Russians, Ukrainians, Georgians living in Estonia. This 
aroused mixed feelings among those people -- Georgians, Kazakhs, 
Ukrainians as well as Russians many of whom are descendants of 
Estonian citizens and have no problems with getting full 
citizenship now. 
  Many Russians are quite loyal to Estonia even though we have 
not reached the stable atmosphere that was inherent in pre-war 
Estonia where even frontdoors were not locked up. 
  I could compare this big group of people to a column the 
beginning of which clearly knows the direction while the people 
in the tail are doubtful: what should be done? 
  All these are practical difficulties. They can and probably 
have aroused bewilderment. I think it is an open secret that 
Estonian bureaucracy is no better than Russian. The 
comparatively simple matters that could have been resolved two 
years ago took the bureaucrats unawares as always. 
  When it is said that non-Estonians in Estonia should defend 
their rights, I ask: what particular rights? Our opponents 
find it difficult to answer the question, this is even more 
difficult for us. It is good that our northern placidity has 
allowed to keep the debate peaceful and civilized. 
  Corr.: What do you think of the role of NATO in the world 
today? 
  L.M.: For decades Europe was divided by the Berlin wall. 
NATO, "an instrument of treacherous imperialists for capturing 
the Soviet Union," was on one side of the wall, the Warsaw 
Treaty Organization existed on the other "to rebuff the 
treacherous imperialists." 
  Then one fine day the wall disappeared. The peoples that 
used to be under the iron fist of the Soviet aggressive policy 
restored their independence. But NATO remained and has no 
enemies now. Naturally in this fundamentally different world the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization wondered about its mission. 
I think it should become a parallel body of the United Nations. 
  NATO does not have adversaries, except seats of instability, 
that might grow into sources of major international conflicts. 
In other words, the alliance has transformed from a military 
bloc into a kind of a fire brigade. It acts in a disciplined 
and coordinated way. Its might is not directed against anyone, 
it is meant to protect international stability. That is why our 
attitude to NATO is quite trusting. 
  Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania can set up a peace-making 
battalion together. The tragedy of Yugoslavia has proved once 
again that a peaceful Europe where human rights are truly 
guaranteed and social problems are resolved step by step is 
being born in pain. 

