BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundup" by Li Wei: "Organ Transplantation Developing in </F>
China"] 
  [Text] Beijing, April 8 (XINHUA) -- Xue Liansheng, 17, who 
suffered from severe hemophilia, received a mother-donated 
spleen transplant three years ago in Wuhan, capital of central 
China's Hubei Province. Now he can walk to school with a cane 
instead of crawling on all-fours. 
  Nearly 20,000 people in China have received various organ 
transplants since the 1970's. To date, 21 different kinds of 
clinical transplants have been performed in China, including 
kidney, liver, spleen, pancreas, heart, bone marrow, adrenal 
gland, parathyroid, lung, testicle, pancreas-kidney, hepatic 
cell, spleen cell, brain cell and brain nervous tissue. 
  Shortage of organ donors -- in part because of the grip of 
old ideas -- is restricting the expansion of these operations to 
help yet more people. 
  Kidney transplants have been the most numerous in China's 
clinical organ transplants: more than 10,000 have been done by 
nearly 90 medical institutions so far. 
  By 1993, nearly 800 kidney recipients had survived for five 
years and over 100 recipients survived for ten years. 
  More than 60 liver transplants have been performed in China. 
Eleven heart transplants have been done and two recipients have 
survived for nearly two years. 
  In addition, pork islet grafts were done for eight patients 
who had been suffering from "type one" diabetes for five to 22 
years. 
  Transplants of cranial nerve tissue and brain cells have 
also 
been developed with good results in treating Parkinson's 
disease, dwarfism, chorea and cerebral hypoplasia in recent 
years, said experts. 
  The study of organ transplantation in China began in the 
1970's, about ten years later than abroad. However, all the 
kinds of organ transplants which have been developed elsewhere 
in the world can now also be done in China, said Qiu Fazu, 
honorary president of the Wuhan-located Tongji Medical 
University. He is one of the founders of China's organ 
transplant research. 
  The Institute of Organ Transplantation of Tongji Medical 
University is China's only large-scale comprehensive research 
unit in this field. In addition, there are several dozens of 
medical units in China which have also joined the study and 
clinical practice of organ transplantation. 
  More than 60 researchers work in the three-storey building 
of 
the Tongji Institute. They have developed 13 kinds of organ 
transplantations, including liver, pancreas, kidney, spleen, 
islets as well as cell perfusion. 
  Xia Suisheng, 70, who is director of the institute and 
president of the Society of Organ Transplantation of the Chinese 
Medical Association, has performed nearly 1,000 transplant 
operations and saved the lives of a number of people who were 
suffering from serious diseases. 
  According to Professor Qiu Fazu, China has made some 
up-to-international-level achievements in organ transplants in 
recent years. However, it still lags behind advanced countries 
in the transplantation of large organs such as liver and heart, 
said Qiu. 
  One of the main causes lies in a shortage of organ donors 
because of the public rejection of the "brain death" concept, 
Qiu said. In China, it is morally and legally prohibited to 
procure organs from corpses whose heart is still beating. 
  "As a result, the quality of grafts in China is lower than 
that of advanced countries," he said. 
  In addition, medical expenses for an organ transplant in 
China are so high that ordinary people cannot afford it. A 
liver transplant costs more than 100,000 yuan (about 11,500 U.S. 
dollars), and the imported immuno-suppressive drugs are also 
very expensive, said Qiu. 
  It is learned that Chinese scientists have been trying to 
extract immuno-suppressive materials from traditional Chinese 
herbal medicines so as to lower the medical expenses for organ 
transplantation. 
  Medical specialists said they would continue to appeal to 
the 
public to accept the concept that "brain death is the beginning 
of irreversible death" and strive for its legal recognition. 
  "With enough organ donors, more Chinese people suffering 
from 
severe diseases will be saved through organ transplants," said 
Qiu. 

