BFN 

  [Text] Mae Sai, Chiang Mai -- Khun Sa's Mong Tai Army 
(MTA) claimed yesterday it inflicted severe damage on Rangoon's 
forces during ten days of fierce battles in the Shan State 
opposite northern Thailand. 
  MTA claimed in a statement yesterday it had killed 150 of 
Rangoon's troops and injured about 100 others. 
  The statement claimed the MTA had also captured three 
government bases and destroyed a dam which has flooded the Mae 
Sai River near Tachilek. 
  The main column of MTA soldiers have moved closer to 
Tachilek, a government-controlled border town opposite here, MTA 
sources claimed. 
  The opium warlord's army lost 17 guerrillas and suffered 39 
injuries during the fighting described as the heaviest in 40 
years. 
  The war has sent a large number of Burmese villagers across 
the border but many have been sent back by Thai authorities who 
have beefed up security along the border to prevent the fighting 
from spilling over. 
  Troops from the Third Army and Border Patrol policemen have 
been sent to man border passes along the Thai-Burmese frontier. 
  Tachilek has been nearly deserted since the fighting began. 
  Young men have left the town to stay closer to the border in 
apparent preparation to cross over leaving women children and 
the aged behind for fear of being recruited to become arms 
porters. 
  The Burmese border town, which only days ago was bustling 
with trading activity, has become quiet because of the drastic 
drop in Thai and foreign tourist arrivals. 
  Tachilek is now being defended by about 500 government 
troops. 
  Military sources said Rangoon's military drive against Khun 
Sa's MTA was aimed at opening up a strategic route in the Shan 
State for the government force to attack three minority rebel 
groups along the Thai western border. 
  The sources claimed SLORC [State Law and Order Restoration 
Council] planned to open an all-out military campaign against 
the Karen National Union [KNU], the Karenni Nation Progress 
Party [KNPP] and the New Mon [State] Party [NMSP] if peace talks 
failed. 
  Rangoon has negotiated a peace settlement with eight 
northern 
minority groups. The Kachin Independent Organisation, the 
second largest member of the anti-Rangoon Democratic Alliance of 
Burma [DAB] has become the latest rebel movement to lay down 
arms. 
  No headway has been made in peace talks between SLORC and 
the 
KNU, the KNPP and the NMSP because Rangoon wants negotiations to 
be held in Burma and the others, especially the KNU, which is 
the largest member of the DAB, wants the talks in a neutral 
country. 
  The sources said Rangoon was expected to declare all-out war 
with the three rebel factions if the peace talks failed, by 
telling the world it had done its best to stop the armed 
struggle. 

