Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Bill Reynolds: "Party Weakens Slovak </F>
Coalition"] 
  [Text] With the stability of Slovakia's governing coalition 
hanging in the balance, the fight for control of the Slovak 
National Party (SNS) entered a decisive phase mid-January as the 
two warring factions began gearing up for next month's party 
congress. 
  SNS Chairman Ludovit Cernak is battling Deputy Chairman 
Marian Andel and Honorary Chairman Jozef Prokes for the support 
of SNS delegates from across Slovakia. The delegates will attend 
a special Feb. 19 party congress called to resolve the 
leadership conflict. 
  Jozef Hrabina, a former party secretary, said there were two 
possible outcomes of the power struggle: the party would split, 
or one faction would simply leave. 
  The key to victory lies in successfully influencing the 
delegates, Hrabina said. "The rank and file base their opinions 
on the information they get from the top." 
  The SNS has been the junior partner in the Slovak government 
since October, when Andel and Prokes dragged a reluctant Cernak 
into a coalition agreement with Premier Vladimir Meciar's ruling 
Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS). With 14 seats in 
parliament, SNS provided Meciar's government with a bare 
majority in the 150-seat Slovak parliament. The rift within the 
SNS, however, has rendered the coalition virtually unworkable. 
  Cernak, who is engaged in a year-old personal feud with 
Meciar, charged Andel, Prokes and other colleagues with blindly 
following HZDS in exchange for power. In turn, Cernak was 
attacked for allegedly holding secret talks with ethnic 
Hungarian politicians to topple the government. 
  The breaking point came Dec. 21, when Cernak and five other 
SNS parliamentary deputies voted against Meciar's 1994 state 
budget. Cernak and his loyalists then formed the "National 
Democratic Club" of SNS, sealing the breach within the party. 
  The faction led by Prokes and Andel gained the upper hand on 
Jan. 15, when the SNS Central Council passed--by 29 to 15 with 
eight abstentions--a no confidence vote in Cernak. The council 
also dismissed several deputy chairmen and accepted the 
resignation of SNS General Secretary Igor Uhrik, who later 
accused Andel and Prokes of "slavishly" supporting Meciar. 
  After Cernak rejected a request that he resign, the council 
called the special congress, to be held in Zilina, north 
Slovakia, and adopted a resolution lamenting the party's 
divisiveness, "at a time when Hungarian irredentists in south 
Slovakia are jeopardizing our country's integrity." 
  A party press conference following the Jan. 15 session only 
served to aggravate the split. Prokes said Cernak's on-and-off 
support for the coalition was hurting Slovakia's international 
credibility, while Cernak reiterated his doubts about the 
coalition's ability to function. 
  Cernak kept up the fight last week when his parliamentary 
deputies' club introduced an amendment to the privatization law 
aimed at preventing the "accumulation of economic and political 
power." Specifically, the amendment would separate the positions 
of privatization minister and chairman of the National Property 
Fund, both currently held by Meciar. 
  After Meciar steered the country through the breakup of 
Czechoslovakia at the end of 1992, the SNS, which advocated 
Slovak independence, has been cast adrift. Bereft of a unifying 
cause, the party has fished about for a new program while 
continuing to criticize Hungarian leaders in both south Slovakia 
and Budapest. The SNS now officially defines itself as a 
"left-of-center party with a social dimension." 
  The Slovak press generally views Prokes and Andel's faction 
as the probable victor at the Zilina congress. The trade union 
daily PRACA sees Meciar as the ultimate winner in the scenario, 
sweeping the political base out from under his enemy Cernak. 
  The opposition paper SLOVENSKY DENNIK said Cernak's apparent 
strategy of keeping the SNS united by entering into the 
coalition while at the same time trying to remain independent of 
Meciar's political whims had been wishful thinking and a 
political illusion. 

