Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pierre Laperrousaz: "Medical: Merieux Gives Up </F>
Extraction of Placental Albumin; Genetic Engineering Does Not 
Deliver"--first paragraph is L'USINE NOUVELLE introduction] 
  [Text] Genetically engineered albumin could rule out any 
risk of contamination. But the process is still too costly. 
  The decision made by the Merieux Institute to stop the 
production of placental albumin should logically reawaken 
interest in recombinant albumin obtained through genetic 
engineering. 
  The Merieux Institute, which had set up an original process 
using placentas collected throughout the world, had to stop 
production under the pressure of health authorities. The latter 
are in fact quite concerned about the risk of contamination by 
infectious agents, such as the one that causes the 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob syndrome in patients treated with growth 
hormone. 
  In principle, using genetically engineered products will 
rule 
out any risk. The best example of this is precisely the growth 
hormone which, today, is exclusively of genetic origin. Why, 
then, not follow the same path for albumin? 
  Rhone-Poulenc, in collaboration first with Genetica, then 
with Merieux, which since then has joined the group headed by 
Jean-Rene Fourtou, was among the first to think of it. Research 
was even sufficiently advanced to consider applying for an AMM 
[marketing authorization] by 1995-1996. Today, however, the 
group is questioning the feasibility of the process, and the 
project has been put on the backburner. 
  Actually, manufacturing albumin by genetic engineering poses 
a fearsome industrialization problem, in particular at the 
product purification stage. "Compared with other recombinant 
products introduced in recent years, for instance tPA, we are 
working on a quite different scale because the quantities 
involved are much larger and the market price much lower," 
people at Merieux explained. The current world albumin 
production is 250-300 tons, eight percent of which is produced 
by Merieux. The product sells for 18 francs per gram and is used 
in quantities of several hundred grams per dose, whereas a 
recombinant drug sells for several thousand francs per gram but 
is administered in doses measured in micrograms. 
  Does that mean that we should give up all hope of ever 
manufacturing genetically engineered albumin? Will the need for 
maximum security tip the scales in the right direction, as was 
the case for another blood product, the antihemophilic Factor 8, 
the first recombinant version of which was introduced on the 
market this year by the U.S. company Baxter? But it is true that 
this is another product used in infinitesimal doses. 

