BFN 

<F P=106> [Cristinel Popa dispatch from Oslo] </F>
  [Text] At the yearly spring meeting of the North Atlantic 
Assembly, which is taking place in Oslo, the attention focused 
today on the proceedings of the Political Commission, which were 
also addressed by representatives of the Romanian delegation. 
In the first part of the day, the head of the Romanian 
delegation, Mr. Ion Ratiu [vice president of the National 
Peasant Christian Democratic Party] made a speech on the draft 
report "After the NATO Summit," presented by the British 
delegate Bruce George. Basically, Mr. Ion Ratiu said that 
Russia should not be granted privileges to make it join the 
Partnership for Peace scheme, since this would allow Russia to 
go on fishing in East Europe. What is more, such privileges 
would facilitate its return to a policy of domination in the 
region, something which might affect the fragile stability 
established after the end of the Cold War. 
  In the afternoon, Mr. Petre Roman [president of the 
Democratic Party (National Salvation Front]) presented a draft 
special report entitled: "A Romanian Perspective on Creating 
and Strengthening the New European Security Order." The report 
aims at presenting a concept on the two questions raised after 
the Partnership for Peace initiative took effect. The first 
question is whether this initiative amounts to a closed door, 
for an indefinite length of time, to the countries wishing to 
adhere to the North Atlantic alliance. The second question is 
whether the Partnership represents a concrete prospect for 
expanding the alliance and enhancing stability in Europe. From 
a Romanian viewpoint, the first variant is inconceivable. 
Romania was the first country to sign the Partnership for Peace 
in January 1994. In the opinion of the rapporteur, the 
country's special geostrategic situation, the potential threat 
represented by the presence of Russia's 14th Army in eastern 
Moldova, the fact that the treaties of mutual understanding with 
Hungary and Ukraine have not yet been signed, and the tense 
situation in the Balkans are strong arguments for wanting to 
adhere speedily to the North Atlantic alliance. In Bucharest, 
the Partnership for Peace is not seen as a closed door. All 
political forces consider it as an important step toward the 
expansion of the alliance and hope that the current NATO members 
view it in the same light. Very concisely put, one can say that 
the Partnership for Peace offers a necessary time of reflection, 
not only for the United States and its NATO partners, but also 
for the countries whose security is very important for the 
entire European security system, namely Bulgaria, Czechia, 
Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Slovakia, on the one hand, and 
Russia, on the other hand. In the rapporteur's opinion, Romania 
cannot feel secure until it finds its place alongside the 
Western democracies and becomes a full- fledged NATO member. 

