BFN 

<F P=106> [Amendments to the Constitutional Law adopted at the </F>
Bosnia-Herzegovina Assembly session in Sarajevo on 30 March; 
read by Kasim Begic, member of the Constitutional Commission -- 
live] 
  [Text] The commission has decided to adopt the amendments 
that apply to the (?original) text. Article 1, paragraph 2 
should include the words: possible changes. So, (?this is) a 
decision on possible changes. 
  Moreover, Article 4 will have a new paragraph, which reads: 
The Government of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, reshuffled 
according to the Constitution of the Federation, will perform 
the duties of the Government of the Federation. 
  Article 5, instead of the old paragraph 2, which is being 
nullified, contains a new paragraph: The competences of the 
Federation as determined by the Constitution of the Federation 
that refer to the international status [subjektivitet] and 
territorial integrity of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina will 
be exercised after the completion of the peace process for 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  You have in the meantime received these changes to the 
original text, in other words, the amended text. 
  In addition, the commission proposes that Article 5 be 
followed by a new Article 6 that should read: In Article 9 of 
the Constitution of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, the word 
Muslim is replaced with the word Bosniak. 
  The commission did not accept other amendments because some 
of them are not in the domain of constitutional matters. Some 
other amendments presented in the discussion here are not in 
line with the Washington Agreement, nor in line with the 
decision adopted by the Assembly of Bosnia-Herzegovina last 
night, which ratified the Washington Agreement. Some amendments 
are simply not correct. Therefore, they are not a result of the 
text of the Constitutional Law, but of a lack of understanding. 
For instance, regarding the name of the federation, the 
Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina cannot include the words: the 
Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Regarding the amendments proposed by Mr. Ceman, the 
amendment 
that referred to a new paragraph in Article 2, the 
Constitutional Commission proposes that this be presented in the 
form of a statement by the Assembly, and that the text of the 
Constitutional Law not be changed, as this would open the 
question of whether the text of the Constitutional Law and the 
Washington Agreement are complementary. 
  Therefore, regarding the presented amendments, you now have 
in the edited text all the amendments that have been adopted by 
the Constitutional Commission, except the new Article 6. The 
existing, old Article 6 is now to become Article 7. 
  Finally, the Constitutional Commission is recommending to 
the 
deputies not to hold a discussion on the proposed Constitutional 
Law for two reasons. First, there has already been time to 
discuss it and the deputies, and the Presidency and the 
Government of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina have already 
expressed their views on it. The other reason is that every new 
amendment would require additional assessment by the 
Constitutional Commission. In this way we would only prolong 
what we are all waiting for, I hope, namely the session of the 
constituent assembly. 
  Therefore, I ask the deputies to ratify, as stated here, the 
proposed Constitutional Law, as a supplement to the Constitution 
of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 

