Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sian Clare, PRESS ASSOCIATION lobby correspondent] </F>
  [Text] The IRA can still join the peace talks if it 
renounces violence, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd stressed 
today. He made his pledge as the Government faced calls to 
withdraw the offer to the terrorists following two attacks on 
Heathrow Airport. 
  Mr Hurd insisted that the Downing Street declaration still 
stood, but accused the IRA of "devious dishonesty" in claiming 
that it wanted clarification of the document. 
  The latest mortar attack, just after midnight this morning, 
came after Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams warned of more 
"spectacular" strikes to remind the world of the Republican 
cause. 
  Mr Hurd said: "The Downing Street declaration isn't a 
bargaining document. It is a statement of the two governments, 
the British and Irish governments, that the future of Northern 
Ireland is going to be settled by consent, by the wishes of the 
people who live there, and that everyone can take part in that 
process -- except those who are practising violence. That is 
clear enough and that stands." 
  Mr Hurd attacked the IRA, saying: "These are people who 
claim 
to be asking for clarifications of this document about democracy 
and in fact they are scaring and killing people. I hope the 
devious dishonesty of that is clear to everyone everywhere who 
might have been taken in in the past." 
  Northern Ireland's problems could not be solved by violence 
and the people of Ireland no longer had any sympathy for 
settling them through aggression, he told the BBC Radio 4 Today 
programme. 
  Earlier politicians from all sides condemned the overnight 
mortar bomb attack on Heathrow Airport -- the second in as many 
days -- and urged a cooler approach to the IRA. 
  Seamus Mallon, Social Democratic and Labour Party MP for 
Newry and Armagh, warned that the IRA was sending a clear 
message that it was prepared to continue its campaign of 
violence. 
  It was clear that the IRA was "intent on pursuing their 
objectives through this type of very vicious cynical attacks on 
not just personnel at Heathrow but on personnel in Northern 
Ireland," he told the programme. "I believe there is a section 
within the IRA who simply are not going to stop." 
  Wolverhampton South West Tory MP Nick Budgen said the 
Government should not invite the IRA to join the peace talks, 
adding: "The IRA ought to be treated as criminals and not as 
people who have a legitimate right to negotiate about the 
constitutional arrangements in Northern Ireland." 
  Lord Holme, Liberal Democrat spokesman on Ulster, also 
denounced Gerry Adams's "callous" warning of more spectaculars, 
saying: "Wherever the road to peace leads it doesn't lead 
through the IRA." 
  Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew last night 
condemned Mr Adams. His comment came after the Sinn Fein leader 
warned of more attacks by saying: "The conflict is ongoing. 
Every so often there will be something spectacular to remind 
the outside world." 
  Sir Patrick said in London last night: "I deeply resent and 
reject the tone and content of what he is reported to have said." 
  He told a meeting of the European Atlantic Group: "The 
gloating character of that observation seems to me to be quite 
despicable and a remark of profound cynicism." 

