Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [INTERFAX-SEGODNYA report: "The Russian Economy in the </F>
Beginning of 1994"] 
  [Text] According to the Russian Federation [RF] Goskomstat 
[State Committee for Statistics], in January Russian industry 
produced more than 15 trillion rubles' [R] worth of output in 
current prices. However, the physical volume of production 
continued to decline. As compared to the first month of last 
year, it declined in January by 23.1 percent. The total 
industrial output also declined considerably as compared to the 
level of December 1993--by 17.2 percent. 
  The volume of industrial production in Russia continues to 
slide unrestrainedly. According to RF Goskomstat data, in 
January 1994 it declined by 23.1 percent as compared to last 
year's January. The industrial output was 17.2 percent below 
that for December 1993. 
  While production in fuel and power generation sectors and 
nonferrous metallurgy declined by only 5-9 percent as compared 
to January 1993, in most processing sectors the scale of decline 
has been much greater. In light and food-processing industry 
production declined by 19-28 percent. 
  In the sectors producing producer goods, the scale of 
decline 
in the volume of production ranges from 23 percent in ferrous 
metallurgy to 28-35 percent in construction materials, chemical 
and petrochemical, and timber, woodworking, and pulp and paper 
industries, and 52 percent in machine building. 
  Nevertheless, the general trend toward shrinking production 
has not affected all sectors. For instance, the volume of gas 
production increased somewhat in January of this year (by 0.1 
percent) as compared to January 1993 and amounted to 57.2 
billion cubic meters. There was a 1-7 percent increase in the 
output of foundry machines, buses, refrigerators and freezers, 
and multipurpose kitchen machines. According to Goskomstat data, 
there were no flax-harvesting combines, forge-press machines 
with numeric program control, or magnetic tape produced in the 
first month of 1994. 
  Foodstuffs and consumer goods prices, as well as fees for 
consumer services in Russia, continued to rise in January. As 
reported by the RF Goskomstat, prices in the consumer market 
rose overall by 21.4 percent, including those for foodstuffs--by 
21.1 percent, nonfood items--by 12.5 percent, and for-fee 
services--by 73.8 percent. 
  In organized trade, the greatest price rises have been 
registered with respect to milk and milk products, bread and 
bakery items--by 34-35 percent, as well as eggs--by 23 percent. 
Prices for potatoes and vegetables rose by 22 percent. Prices 
for meat and meat products, cereals, and pasta items went up by 
15 percent. Sugar prices remained practically unchanged. 
  Among nonfood items in January the most significant price 
rise was registered with respect to sewn items (14.1 percent) 
and fuel sold to population (by 23.8 percent). Prices for 
gasoline rose over the month by more than 30 percent. As of 1 
February, one liter cost on average R228 (R179 in the end of 
December). 
  According to RF Goskomstat data, the cost of railroad 
transportation and communications services more than doubled in 
January. Apartment rents, and the cost of preschool care and 
health care services, increased by a factor of 1.5. 
  Prices for consumer services increased at a lesser rate--by 
20-30 percent. 
  The inflation rate over the period of 1-8 February measured 
at 3.3 percent. According to the data of the Center for Economic 
Trends under the Government of Russia, food prices rose over the 
week by 3.8 percent, for-fee services to the population--by 3.1 
percent, and prices for nonfood items--by 2.8 percent. 
  The highest rate of increases in consumer goods prices and 
fees for services was registered in the Far East--by 4.4 
percent, and the lowest in the Urals region--1.7 percent. 
  With respect to foodstuffs, the greatest increases were 
registered in prices for milk--by 9 percent, bread and 
vegetables--by 6 percent, and fish and butter--by 5 percent. 
Prices for vegetable oil, sugar, fruit, and vodka went up by 1 
percent. 
  The average cost of a monthly consumer basket of 19 most 
important foodstuffs as of 8 February amounted to R39,100. In 
Moscow the cost of this consumer basket was R43,800, and in St. 
Petersburg--R39,900. 
  With respect to nonfood items, the greatest increases were 
registered in the price of fuel--17 percent, medicines--by 5 
percent, and household and cultural purpose goods--by 4 percent. 
Prices for footwear and tobacco items changed the least. 

