Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The Atom, American Concern, and Islamic </F>
Countries"] 
  [Text] The distinguished journal ECONOMIST has disclosed 
that the United States has decided to intensify surveillance of 
nuclear facilities in Muslim countries because of fears about 
the possible proliferation of nuclear arms in Islamic countries 
by the end of this century, and that it will take military 
action against them if they do not refrain from making atom 
bombs. Pakistan is the only country in the Islamic world that 
has acquired the capability to manufacture nuclear weapons. 
According to American experts, Iran is making serious efforts 
to manufacture nuclear weapons, but it may take eight to 10 
years to succeed in this task. Besides, the Islamic countries 
are so rich with oil wealth that any one of them may become 
inclined to acquire nuclear weapons. 
  The apprehensions of the United States and its allies 
reflect 
their thinking and logic. Pakistan has assured the Clinton 
administration in clear-cut terms that its nuclear program is 
meant only for peaceful energy purposes, that it does not have 
any intention of manufacturing nuclear weapons, and that it will 
strictly adhere to its policy of not transferring nuclear 
technology to any other country. Despite this, the United 
States is not ready to trust these assurances. 
  Besides Pakistan, the United States is also planning to take 
to task those Muslim countries that may attain nuclear 
capability within eight to 10 years, as well as those with the 
financial capacity to buy such weapons. This clearly shows that 
to establish world supremacy under the new world order, the 
United States is targeting Islamic countries by raising the 
specter of nuclear proliferation. Under one pretext or another, 
Iraq and Libya have already been U.S. targets. Other Islamic 
countries -- especially Pakistan and Iran -- should work out a 
common strategy to foil these American designs. 

