Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on remarks by Dr. Mohammad Javad Zarif, Iranian </F>
deputy foreign minister in charge of international affairs; 
place and date not given; from the "World of Politics" 
program--recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Unidentified announcer] [passage omitted] A 
group of our listeners have asked us to provide some information 
about the present nature of our country's relations with Iraq, 
the exchange of Iraqi and Iranian delegations, and finally the 
POW issue. 
  We invite all these dear listeners to pay attention to 
remarks made over the telephone by Dr. Mohammad Javad Zarif, 
deputy foreign minister in charge of international affairs. 
  [Mohammead Javad Zarif] In the name of God, the merciful, 
the 
compassionate. The Islamic Republic -- on the basis of its 
general policy of seeking relations based on peaceful 
coexistence with all its neighbors -- has been trying to 
normalize its ties with Iraq. A number of meetings were held in 
Karachi and New York between the foreign affairs ministers of 
Iran and Iraq during the course of last year. During these 
meetings, the two sides decided that delegations should be 
exchanged between the two countries at the ministerial level, so 
that bilateral ties may improve and develop by resolving the 
problems that exist on the path of relations between the two 
countries. 
  In order to prepare the ground for the first visit by a 
minister -- that is to say, the visit by His Excellency Dr. 
Velayati -- to Baghdad, and in order to lay down the agenda of 
work for the ministers, it has been decided that an Islamic 
Republic delegation should visit Baghdad and an Iraqi delegation 
should reciprocate the visit. It is hoped that the visits may 
pave the way for the resolution of the two countries' 
outstanding problems, as far as possible. [passage omitted] 
  The basis of our approach to Iraq is our emphasis on that 
country's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and on peaceful 
coexistence on the basis of the 1975 accord and UN Security 
Council Resolution 598. In order to attain these goals, the 
remaining problems that surround relations between the two 
countries should be essentially resolved. In particular, the 
POW issue, with its humanitarian dimensions, should be dealt 
with as a first step toward reaching an all-embracing solution. 
  The Islamic Republic has always been ready to cooperate 
fully 
to resolve this humanitarian issue. However, right from the 
outset and during the course of the imposed war -- as well as 
after the cease-fire and even after the release of the first 
batch of POWs -- the Iraqi Government has unfortunately been 
pursuing a secretive policy in this area. In order to improve 
bilateral ties, this policy needs to be reviewed. This was an 
issue that the Iraqi delegation was reminded of in a serious 
tone during my visit to Iraq and also during the course of the 
recent visit to Tehran by the Iraqi delegation. 
  They were reminded that they needed to review their policy 
and clarify the situation surrounding the Iranian POWs still 
remaining in Iraq. This implies that the remaining POWs who 
intend to return to Iran should be repatriated. In this case, 
an important obstacle that stands in the way of relations 
between the two countries may be removed. We hope the Iraqi 
Government will make the appropriate decision in dealing with 
this issue. 
  Discussions were also held on other issues, such as frontier 
problems and the other outstanding issues. It was decided that 
delegations of experts and specialists should be exchanged 
between the two countries during the period of time between the 
return of the Iraqi delegation to their country and the visit by 
Dr. Velayati to Iraq in the second half of Ordibehesht 1373 
[5-21 May 1994]. These delegations will study the details of the 
outstanding issues, so that, God willing, a sufficiently high 
degree of understanding will have been reached to enable the 
ministers to implement decisions. [passage omitted] 

