Language: <F P=105> Latvian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Agita Berzina: "Number of Drug Addicts Rising in </F>
Latvia"] 
  [Text] Riga, 29 Jan -- The death rate among drug addicts in 
Latvia has increased, the number of drug-related crimes and the 
number of drug seizures have also risen, and drugs which were 
previously not available have now appeared on the streets of our 
country -- such were the gloomy facts given to journalists today 
by Janis Stradins, the chief drug expert at the Health 
Department. 
  The most worrying fact -- confirmed by statistic data on the 
problem of drug abuse in Latvia -- is the high death rate from 
willful drug indulgence, explained J. Stradins. 
  Last year, 47 drug addicts died, in 1992 -- 27 died, in 1991 
-- nine. Most of them died from drug overdoses. In 20 cases, 
experts could not determine precisely which drug had caused 
death since several narcotics had been used simultaneously. 
  The number of crimes related to drug use, storage, and 
trafficking has also increased. In 1993, 269 people were 
prosecuted on criminal charges, in 1992 -- 156. Last year, 320 
drug dens were discovered, in 1992 -- 210. 
  The quantity of confiscated drugs is also rising. Last year, 
166.2 kg of poppy straw were confiscated, in 1992 -- 114.8 kg. 
Given our circumstances, these are the most dangerous cases, 
stated J. Stradins, because addicts, by using relatively simple 
technology, can extract heroin from the straw. At present, the 
greatest share of drugs reaching Latvia come from Lithuania, 
Russia, and southern Ukraine. Thus, poppies from the south, 
containing more heroin than locally grown ones, are making their 
way into Latvia. 
  Another substance widely used by addicts is efedron, which 
is 
extracted from medicine already containing the narcotic. It is 
a very effective drug which creates distinct addiction. Heroin 
is usually injected one to three times a day, whereas it is 
necessary to inject efedron as many as 15 times a day. 
  Marijuana and hashish are being found less and less 
frequently. But, as J. Stradins stated, there is presumably 
still quite a considerable volume of trade in these substances. 
  The most alarming aspect today is the appearance of cocaine. 
The appearance of this drug is linked primarily with the 
stabilization of the lat, and there is good reason to think that 
when the lat becomes convertible, it will be possible to 
purchase any drug in any amount throughout Latvia. 
  A letter has been sent to the prime minister, in which he 
was 
asked to support the operation "Poppy," similar to one that was 
organized in 1987, when the growing of poppy was outlawed, 
reported J. Stradins. In those times, local authorities used to 
organize campaigns to destroy them. Taking into account the 
present situation in Latvia, a similar action is now being 
planned. Stradins said: We understand we cannot gain much by 
restrictions, but to some extent it is a cry of despair. 
  Data from Riga police and the Ministry of Home Affairs 
suggest that there might be between 2,500 and 6,000 drug users 
in Latvia. According to J. Stradins, these numbers are more 
close to reality than the number of addicts estimated by the 
medical service -- 800. 
  The most unfavorable situation is in Olaine, also in the 
district of Riga, in Riga itself (mainly in the suburb of 
Latgale), Ogre, Jurmala, and Tukums. 
  Drug abuse is widespread mostly among "Russian speakers," as 
well as among people from the Caucasus, and Gypsies. Between 80 
and 90 percent of addicts receiving medical help are Russian 
speakers. 
  The most important element in the fight against drugs is 
prevention, as was stressed by all members of the conference 
[not further identified]. It is more effective than any control. 
Therefore the news that an agreement has been reached with the 
Scandinavian organization "Parents Against Drugs" to hold their 
plenary meeting in Riga on 25 February, with the aim of 
establishing a similar organization in Latvia, is very 
encouraging. The experience of these states shows clearly that 
parents can help their children much more, if they have met, 
discussed their problems together, and exchanged experiences. 

