Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Umberto Rosso report: "Alarm Over Subversion; Ciampi: `Now </F>
There Are Mercenaries Too'"] 
  [Text] Rome -- A war against the secret organizations, the 
subversive structures threatening the institutions. This is 
point number one on the report that [Prime Minister] Ciampi 
submitted to parliament yesterday: The semi-annual report on 
the secret services, which reviews the security situation 
through the second half of last year, sounds another alarm over 
destabilizing activity. Within this disturbing scenario there 
is also emerging "another subversive phenomenon, not yet 
well-defined." In this Italy racked by conspiracies, "mercenary 
elements" and people "prepared to engage in violent initiatives 
-- probably in the service of secret instigators -- are 
emerging." The soldiers of fortune sent in to mount the 
extraordinary attack on the RAI [Italian State Broadcasting 
Company] building at Saxa Rubra made the headlines. The threat 
from mercenaries now seems to be more serious than on that 
occasion. 
  The prime minister also denied the reports of [League 
Secretary] Bossi's home being bugged, of an espionage operation 
that the League claims Sismi carried out against the League. 
[League lower house floor leader] Maroni yesterday reiterated 
his suspicions ("It was confirmed to me by a couple of people 
who said they were former agents for the service and have 
evidence") and asked Ciampi and [Interior Minister] Mancino for 
a "political reply" within 24 hours. The government note states 
that the prime minister received from the security service 
chiefs "an assurance that they have never organized infiltration 
and interception activities or unconstitutional activities" with 
respect to the political parties. It stresses that any abuses 
would entail "the immediate dismissal of the persons concerned." 
  With regard to the report on secret service activities, 
which 
has also focused on the Mafia, the activities of left-wing and 
right-wing extremists, and channels of illegal immigration, 
which also serve for movements of weapons, drugs, and dangerous 
individuals, a request has been made to include the Mafia's 
infiltration of the major financial circles on the agenda for 
the G-7 summit to be held in Naples. But above all the 
government reaffirmed that activity to counter "any and every 
clandestine organization" is "still relevant and a priority." 
And there are structures "even outside the familiar ideological 
and criminal frameworks" that are aiming to "pursue, by means of 
various kinds of action (acts of aggression, intimidation, 
misinformation, and so forth) a strategy to subvert the 
institutions, undermine the democratic dialectic, and in any 
case influence the process of the country's growth and 
evolution." In particular, the report states that "it is 
impossible not to take account of the possibility of the 
emerging links" between organized crime and these unspecified 
subversive organizations. 
  On the "external" front, attention is being focused on the 
former Yugoslavia: A number of nuclear reactors are very much 
at risk, "having been identified by the warring factions as 
potential targets for terrorist attacks." The government's 
report to parliament stresses that organized crime in Italy "has 
become all the more dangerous inasmuch as it has shown itself 
capable of exploiting for its own ends even situations outside 
the national context, such as those of the eastern European 
countries, where conditions have made it relatively easy to 
acquire explosives and logistical support." 
  In Italy the strategy of terror can be traced through the 
attacks in Rome and Milan, and apart from the car bombs "there 
has been a series of mysterious events, some characterized by 
explicit violence, whose common denominator -- leaving aside the 
evidence currently being examined -- has proved to be a strategy 
designed to undermine the credibility of the state and its 
resilience. These events have caused disorientation and perhaps 
alarm, which have sometimes resulted in negative repercussions 
on the country's international image": attacks and poisonings, 
bloodshed and suspicion, gunmen and palace conspiracies. With 
regard to the danger of links between subversive phenomena and 
large-scale crime, the report talks in terms of "a web of 
mysterious vested interests." 
  A key role in this web is assigned to the Mafia. The Mafia 
has resolutely opted for the terrorist path, and since the 
Capaci and via D'Amelio atrocities the strategy has acquired a 
"destabilizing character." The government report states that 
within the Mafia "the conceptual and organizational center could 
prove to be separate from the operational nucleus and composed 
of elements of differing extractions." In other words, we are 
back to the web, the interconnections, the collusion between 
various different criminal organizations for subversive ends. 
  As for the activities of the far left, the report mentions 
"a 
special commitment to the use of on-line resources, together 
with other groups abroad, as part of a broad plan designed to 
identify common objectives." The subversive right "still retains 
its familiar extremely dangerous character, by virtue of the 
frequently stated possibility of its reestablishing itself at 
the clandestine level." 
  However, the report states, a renewal is under way within 
Sisde, entailing a "considerable reduction of personnel," as 
envisaged by the reform. Ciampi wishes to leave the Chigi 
Palace [prime minister's residence] having "cleaned up" the 
secret services, since "the government's task and my own 
personal task have come to an end." The prime minister will not 
be running for reelection. He also denied another rumor, that of 
the assignment of an official role to Fininvest: "Nobody in the 
government has ever considered such a step or has ever suggested 
it. Ask the newspapers how they acquired such information." 

