Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed RAY: "Martens: Lubbers Is Giving Up on </F>
Brussels"; as released by The Hague ANP Database] 
  [Text] Brussels, 20 Mar (ANP) -- Prime Minister Lubbers no 
longer has any interest in the European Commission presidency 
post. Rather, he is supporting former Belgian Prime Minister 
Wilfried Martens, who is ready to succeed Frenchman Jacques 
Delors. 
  According to Martens, Lubbers would have to be pressed very 
hard to become Commission president. "However, my impression 
from Netherlands politicians is that he has already made his 
decision," he said Sunday evening [20 March] on KRO's [Catholic 
Radio Broadcasting Company] "Focal Point" news show. He stated 
that Lubbers would have to be begged to do it if there was no 
other good candidate. 
  The alternative is Martens himself, who is counting on 
Lubbers. "I have always been able to count on the faithful 
support and appreciation of Ruud Lubbers, and I am extremely 
grateful for it," he said. 
  The Netherlands prime minister did not give anything away 
during the "Focal Point" program. It remains up in the air 
whether or not he is giving up on the top European position in 
Brussels. However, Lubbers has never officially submitted his 
candidacy. He came out in favor of Martens, but pointed out 
that there were "several" candidates who could take over the 
reins from Delors. 
  Current Belgian Prime Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene refused to 
make any comment on Martens' candidacy. Moreover, he was quiet 
about his own chances. Newspaper reports claim that Dehaene is 
supposedly the first choice of German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and 
French President Francois Mitterrand. 
  The successor of Delors, who will officially take office on 
1 
January next year, will be decided at the end of June during the 
semiannual European summit conference on the Greek island of 
Corfu. So far, only British European Commissioner Sir Leon 
Brittan has officially been nominated as a candidate by the 
British Government in London. 

