Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS) 
contributes to international cooperation in Earth environment 
observation by acquiring global observation data for studying 
the greenhouse effect, ozone layer depletion, tropical rain 
forest reduction, and climatic anomalies. It will also help 
development of platform bus technology and inter-orbit data 
relay technology. Its utilization has attracted a wide range of 
interest internationally because multiple source environmental 
data can be obtained by the satellite. 
  ADEOS will carry nine sensors, including sensors developed 
by 
NASDA and other sensors solicited by the announcement of 
opportunity (AO) sensors domestically and abroad. Sensors are 
transferred to the system office after finishing development 
testing. They are then mated with bus equipment, and 
system-level development tests are conducted using the two 
models listed below. 
  1) Engineering Model (EM) 
  The EM is electrically equivalent to the flight model and 
undergoes system tests for the following objectives: 
  (1) Verify interfaces after installing sensors and bus 
equipment on the satellite; 
  (2) Verify the function and performance as a satellite 
system; 
  (3) Check for electromagnetic interference. 
  2) Structural and Thermal Model (STM) 
  The STM is equivalent thermally and structurally to the 
flight model. System STM tests are being conducted for the 
following purposes: 
  (1) Verify endurance to the vibrational, acoustic, and 
shock environments; 
  (2) Verify endurance against on-orbit thermal and vacuum 
environments; 
  (3) Verify the thermal control function. 
  Frequent interface coordination has been conducted so far. 
Satellite development in a new form is being conducted. This new 
form of satellite development includes advancing acquired data 
evaluation in cooperation with each sensor organization when 
sensors are actually installed to conduct development tests as a 
system. 
  The EM tests finished in September 1993, and STM tests, in 
November 1993. The critical design review (CDR) will reflect the 
test results. ADEOS will be launched from Tanegashima Space 
Center in February 1996. 

