BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "'Id-al-Adha and the Extraordinary Challenges"] </F>
  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn's visit to fraternal Syria 
yesterday, on the eve of the first day of the blessed 'Id 
al-Adha, is another effort that can be added to his majesty's 
work to reactivate Arab solidarity and bolster coordination and 
consultation between the two fraternal countries regarding all 
issues of joint interest, particularly the latest developments 
in the peace process. The two sides agreed on the need to adopt 
a unified Arab stand toward the peace talks and against the 
continuous Israeli procrastination in responding to the 
requirements of a just, lasting, and comprehensive peace 
acceptable to coming generations. 
  Israel has again proved its evasive policy toward the peace 
process by foiling U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher's 
recent tour of the region as part of its attempts to conclude 
separate deals with each Arab party. This requires a unified 
Arab stand based on true and serious coordination. Perhaps, the 
Amman- Damascus line is the basic pillar of this path. 
  In the current difficult circumstances, our Arab nation 
needs, at least, a minimum level of solidarity to heal wounds 
and to turn a new leaf in order to confront huge challenges. 
These challenges are embodied by the peace process, the bloody 
and regrettable fighting among the brothers in Yemen which has 
been going on for more than two weeks, the unjust embargo 
clamped on fraternal Iraq which has lost all its justifications, 
and the embargo on fraternal Libya. Many other issues and 
problems affecting Arabs and Muslims also require a courageous 
stand. 
  The blessed 'Id al-Adha is the best opportunity to reexamine 
inter-Arab relations, to show tolerance, to heal wounds, and to 
proceed toward a better future that restores the nation to its 
position and pride. While calling for making 'Id al-Adha a true 
'Id for the entire nation so it can close ranks, we would like 
to remember that His Majesty King Husayn has always been 
persistent in his initiatives and efforts to settle and discard 
Arab differences and return life to fraternal relations. 

