Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed "voel": "Smuggling of People Is a Thriving </F>
Business"] 
  [Text] Vienna -- At the security meeting entitled "The 
International Threat," which was held on Thursday [10 March] on 
the occasion of the Security and Safety fair in Vienna, Interior 
Minister Franz Loeschnak reported on new types of organized 
crime: The smuggling of refugees, mafia-type blackmail, and 
economic crimes. 
  According to Loeschnak, 5,000 to 10,000 people are 
"smuggled" 
into Austria illegally every year. Further tens of thousands, 
mainly from African countries, are transported by gangs to other 
countries via Austria. Loeschnak stated: "This is a thriving 
business." Up to $10,000 is being charged per person. 
  Another type of crime is also spreading in Austria, namely 
the extortion of money through blackmail. Loeschnak believes 
that "at least every third, but maybe even every second" citizen 
from Turkey and the former Yugoslavia is being blackmailed by 
organized gangs to pay protection money. 
  Austrian companies that are carrying out orders abroad are 
also faced with blackmail. Loeschnak claimed that they are 
"paying without hesitation" so as not to endanger their workers 
abroad. The climax of these criminal machinations has not yet 
been reached, and the international threat has reached a 
"considerable extent." 
  Loeschnak spoke of "very sophisticated" econmic crime where 
"big chiefs" of international concerns illegally "embezzle 
hundreds of millions of schillings, German marks, or dollars." 
  Loeschnak mentioned several measures to be taken by the 
executive bodies to get the situation under control. The 
establishment of special units are an initial step. In the 
sphere of drugs, specialist have been active for years. This 
must be extended to economic crimes, the smuggling of refugees 
and of cars. 
  To achieve success in the fight against organized crime, 
"suitable tools" are needed. Loeschnak mentioned the so-called 
bugging campaign, "no matter whether big, medium-sized, or 
small," and the state's regulation of evidence. "We should not 
develop any philosophies or principles in this respect. This is 
not important. What we need are suitable instruments." 
  In this respect, the interior minister clearly supported 
membership in the European Union, because international 
cooperation against cross-border crime must be intensified. 

