BFN 

  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn has stressed the need for 
promoting general performance, caring for Jordanians, and paying 
attention to the internal front to build an ideal homeland. 
These remarks were made by His Majesty King Husayn after 
chairing part of the cabinet's session in the presence of His 
Highness Crown Prince Hasan, Prime Minister Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam 
al-Majali, and Royal Court Chief His Excellency al-Sharif Zayd 
Bin-Shakir. More details in the following report by our 
correspondent for political affairs Salim 'Ali Dhiyab: 
  [Begin recording] [Dhiyab] The most important events and 
developments in the region in addition to reviewing the most 
important domestic issues were the main topics of the cabinet's 
session, part of which was chaired by his Majesty King Husayn. 
His majesty stressed the need for promoting the general 
performance and caring for the Jordanians, who are the object of 
all concerns, to build an ideal homeland. 
  Speaking to reporters at the Prime Ministry following the 
cabinet session, his majesty the king commended the performance 
of the government of Dr. al-Majali and called for paying 
attention to the internal front. 
  [Husayn] I believe the information ministers will adequately 
cover the issue. The meeting was, undoubtedly, good. We 
thanked his excellency the prime minister and the brothers for 
their efforts and continuous giving. We also made a review of 
both the regional situation and the expected developments in the 
coming phase. We emphasized the need for this country to remain 
cohesive as one family from various origins and descents. We 
should enjoy awareness and vigilance and study all that took 
place and has thus far taken place so we will draw the 
conclusions required for effective action that guarantees the 
country's future in terms of its steadfastness, in order to 
serve the kinsfolk and brothers in Palestine with regard to 
their rights on their national soil. We discussed many things, 
and God willing, you will be acquainted with the details. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] Sir, how do you view the peace 
process and its future in light of the new developments, 
including the aggression against southern Lebanon and the 
cancellation of the visit to the region by the U.S. secretary of 
state? 
  [Husayn] I believe that the process is serious and 
continuous 
despite any urgent events. There is no doubt that we all were 
pained by what happened to sisterly Lebanon, the human losses, 
and the encroachment on its territory. However, the train is 
proceeding. We are here talking about terms that are more 
accurate than the issue of coordination, because it seems to us 
that coordination with the brothers is a desire and a hope. 
Practically, however, it has not been crystallized into 
reality, not even to a satisfactory minimum level -- that is, we 
understand the details of all that is happening and the others 
understand the details of all that is taking place. It seems 
that the work in this direction is unilateral. 
  In any case, we should continue on the basis of the agenda, 
concentrate on the issue of land and water, and discuss all 
developments to tackle all items related to us with regard to 
the abovementioned agenda as a basis to reach the objective of 
peace which reassures people about their present and future 
situation, and which will give them all opportunities in the 
future. At the same time, we have great hope that the other 
tracks will proceed in a satisfactory way. I am fully convinced 
that this will happen. 
  With regard to the Jordanian-Palestenian coordination, we, 
on 
our part, are ready. Once again, our stand is clear. If our 
brothers raise with us any issue we will support them with our 
utmost. But, to say we are one team working together, this, 
regrettably, is still within the framework of wishes that would 
not turn into reality. Therefore, we should also pay attention 
to ourselves. The basis is that this country must be firm. It 
has a power to reinforce the opportunities of our kinsfolk and 
brothers to reach their rights. They are now walking on the road 
they have chosen--a sole and legitimate representative of the 
Palestinian people in terms of the leadership. With regard to 
their soil and situation, the Palestinian Arab people decide 
with regard to the present and future situation, with regard to 
the soundness or unsoundness of the course. We cannot say 
anything in this regard or track. We wish them success and we 
will support them to our utmost. At the same time, we should 
pay attention to our situation here so that we will not become 
the weak or marginalized part. The results of that would be, 
God forbid, catastrophic on both the national and pan-Arab 
levels. 
  [Correspondent] Regarding the borders with Israel, there are 
signs that Israel is ready to discuss the issue. Will this be 
discussed by the tripartite committee? 
  [Husayn] This topic is on the agenda which I have noted. I 
believe it should be discussed. Yes. 
  [Correspondent] During the meeting of the tripartite 
committee in Washington? 
  [Husayn] I believe it should be done. We consider this a 
basic issue as well as the issue of border, territory, water. 
[end recording] 

