Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Beijing Central Television Program One 
Network in Mandarin at 0605 GMT on 25 February broadcasts the 
56-minute ninth installment of a 10-part series consisting of 
nine lectures and one question-and-answer session, entitled "TV 
Lecture Series on Several Current Major Programs for Reforming 
the Economic System." The ninth installment, entitled "A Modern 
Enterprise System," is presented by Chen Qingtai, vice minister 
of the State Economic and Trade Commission. 
  Chen begins by saying that the installment is about changing 
the operating mechanisms of enterprises to establish a modern 
enterprise system. He discusses four issues in this respect: 
"1) Improving state-owned enterprises as the centerpiece of 
reforming the economic system; 2) The need to solve some 
deep-seated problems if state- owned enterprises are to enter 
the market; 3) Changing operating mechanisms to establish a 
modern enterprise system; 4) The need to accumulate experience, 
create conditions, and advance gradually in establishing a 
modern enterprise system." 
  In discussing the first issue, Chen enumerates the 
weaknesses 
of state-owned enterprises under the planned economy and goes on 
to note that the 14th CPC National Congress called for 
establishing a socialist market economic system. Chen notes 
that there are three conditions for establishing such a system: 
"To create a unified socialist market to provide a forum of 
fair competition for enterprises," "to establish market economic 
administrative and legal systems to create an environment 
favorable to market competition for enterprises," and "to deepen 
enterprise reform to foster principal competitors in the market." 
  Turning to the second issue, Chen outlines several solutions 
for the deep-seated problems arising in the course of economic 
reform: "1) Achieving the separation of government 
administration from enterprise management to turn state-owned 
enterprises into independent entities"; "2) Smoothing the 
relations of property rights and improving the system of 
enterprise-type legal entities"; and "3) Changing operating 
mechanisms and effecting the transformation of the enterprise 
system." 
  Chen then goes on to discuss the third issue. After 
discussing the importance of changing operating mechanisms in 
establishing a modern enterprise system, Chen explains that "a 
modern enterprise system is characterized by clearly defined 
property rights, clearly delineated duties and rights, separate 
government and enterprise functions, and scientific management." 
Elaborating on the modern enterprise system, Chen discusses the 
meaning of enterprise-type legal entities, the limited liability 
system, and the forms of incorporation under a modern enterprise 
system. The promotion of a modern enterprise system, Chen says, 
is significant for improving state-owned large and medium 
enterprises because it separates government administration from 
enterprise management, standardizes the behavior of business 
operators, expands the leading role of the state economic 
sector, preserves and increases the value of state assets, and 
promotes a convergence with international practice. 
  Turning to the fourth issue, Chen underscores the need to 
create conditions and lay the foundation for converting 
state-owned enterprises to the modern enterprise system, to 
carry out experiments in selected enterprises and accumulate 
experience, to promote changes in the enterprise system in 
accordance with the law and in a standardized manner, to carry 
out reform gradually according to different categories and in 
different stages and groups, and to prevent formalism and 
headlong mass action. 
  In closing, Chen says: "Establishing a modern enterprise 
system will provide the microeconomic basis for the socialist 
market economy and will effectively combine the public ownership 
system with the market economy." 

