Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article entitled: "Revamped and Adjusted Batteries, Motors, </F>
and Electronics"; first paragraph is INDUSTRIES ET TECHNIQUES 
introduction] 
  [Text] Electrochemists, electrical engineers, and 
electronics engineers are going back to the drawing board with 
electric cars in mind. This new consumer product might also 
benefit electrical installers and mechanics. 
  "Electric cars require a 40-percent ratio of new 
components," 
says Jacques Saint Marc, general secretary of GIVE, the 
Interministerial Group for the Development of Electric Vehicles. 
Industrialization of the new product raises dazzling prospects 
of new technological outlets for electrochemistry, of course, 
and for electrical and electronics engineering. It allows 
planners to dream of new professions, from electrical installers 
of computerized point-of-sale devices, to mechanics certified as 
"electric car maintenance technicians." 
  The electric cars now on the market have given a few 
equipment manufacturers, such as Leroy Somer or Oldham, an 
opportunity to join the ranks of automobile equipment makers. 
Both already specialized in industrial traction--one for engines 
and the other for batteries. Like Valeo, auto equipment 
manufacturers are inclined to wait for the next generation of 
vehicles and firm orders before committing themselves to the 
market. 
  The first component stimulated by electric cars is 
batteries. 
Field experiments conducted by cities and by Electricity of 
France (EDF) are expected to quickly produce a "smart" battery 
similar to sensors of a decade ago. "The trick is to incorporate 
monitoring functions into the battery, so that it has a good 
energy gauge. The battery must control its life," explains 
Syriacus Bleijs, Electric Car Program coordinator at EDF's 
Research Division. The battery will feature sensors and 
electronics that will provide it with information on its 
available energy capacity, the amount of energy it could absorb 
via recharge, and its aging status. 
  Renault's Express and Clio already have a small computer 
that 
fully controls the battery and that hooks up to the corrective 
maintenance unit available to dealers. Charger research is 
moving in the same direction, to determine whether batteries can 
tolerate rapid recharges. The goal is to restore 50 percent of a 
battery's capacity in 20 minutes. The 3.3-kWh terminals 
developed by Merlin Gerin and installed in La Rochelle recharge 
an electric car in eight hours. Rapid recharge terminals, which 
have been ordered from Westinghouse SGTE, should offer an 
additional 1-2 km of autonomy per minute. The rapid terminals 
offer far greater electrical power--over 30 kW--and research on 
them is being conducted as part of the European Elegie program. 
Induction recharge--that is, recharge without making 
contact--seems the best way to get electrical energy from the 
terminal to the car. The Praxitele program involving 
freely-traveling vehicles will experiment with this technique. 
  Naturally, batteries themselves are spurring the creativity 
of many researchers. Most vehicles now on the road are equipped 
with lead batteries, which are the cheapest and best known. A 
few models are running on nickel-cadmium batteries, which are 
more expensive but offer more autonomy as well as an energy 
density of 65 Wh/kg against 35 Wh/kg for lead. By using other 
materials, electrochemists hope to push the limit beyond 100 
Wh/kg and provide automobiles with autonomy of over 100 km. 
  The 33 percent state-subsidized PREDIT, or Ground Transport 
Industries Research and Development Plan, has opted to push 
lithium batteries. It has teamed up with Saft to promote 
carbon-lithium ones, and with EDF, Bollore Technologies, and 
Grenoble University to push polymer-lithium batteries. According 
to Syriacus Bleijs, EDF's research coordinator, carbon-lithium 
batteries seem closer to industrialization than fully solid 
lithium ones do. 
  Battery research has given rise to a new component: 
supercapacity, or a condensor that can deliver 10 kW/kg 
instantaneously. Supercapacity can handle strong acceleration 
surges, eliminating the traction power limitations of electric 
cars. When the supercapacity is discharged, it can also recover 
the energy produced during braking. PREDIT official Claude 
Prost-Dame says the very robust condensor seems well suited to 
automobile use. 
  Engines do not require as much research as batteries. 
Electrical engineers need only adapt their old standbys, which, 
roughly speaking, consist of d.c. motors, induction motors, and 
autopiloted, synchronous motors. Adaptation means not only 
meeting the technical specifications of automakers, but learning 
to live with their test procedures and quality checks. Leroy 
Somer is undergoing that apprenticeship as it develops three 
lines of d.c. motors. Indeed, d.c. motors are the most common 
engines used in electric cars today. Leroy Somer has totally 
revamped its industrial traction models, while the Danish firm 
Thridge Enco custom-designed one to meet the demands of the 
automaker Erad. The advantage of this type of engine is that it 
is controlled by relatively simple and low-cost thyristor power 
electronics. 
  Vector-control induction motors seem rather promising for 
upcoming models. They eliminate problems stemming from exhaust 
manifold wear, but require more complicated electronics, 
especially for starting. ABB has supplied Renault with a very 
compact prototype induction motor that can run at over 10,000 
rev/min. A sensor placed directly over the rotor checks the 
state of the motor as it starts up. Michel Kant is working with 
Valeo at the University of Compiegne to study the various 
characteristics of autopiloted, synchronous motors and of 
vector-control induction engines in a Volta body. "It is the 
whole pull chain that has to be considered, especially since it 
will not necessarily involve one motor, but two, or even four, 
one on each wheel," he says. 
  The Engineering School of La Rochelle (EIGSI) is working on 
protocols for measurements made on electric vehicles. "We have 
cabinets full of data that will not do us much good until we 
learn how to interpret them," stresses Claude Ades, one of the 
school's officials. "We have modified the measuring center that 
is used by CERAVE, the Center for Applied Research on Electric 
Vehicles. And we are developing new test procedures to model the 
behavior of electric vehicle drivers." The long-term goal of the 
school's research is to devise an assisted-driving or automatic 
help system. If electrical cars never hit the road, they will at 
least have helped advance a number of techniques. And if their 
use becomes widespread, new occupations could spring up. The 
electrical installers responsible for recharge systems could 
become electrical experts in point-of-sale devices, and 
mechanics could become "electric vehicle maintenance 
technicians." CERAVE has just teamed up with the La Rochelle 
Occupational Chamber to provide continuing adult education in 
"electric vehicle maintenance" to mechanics or newcomers (two 
years of college are desired) in 1994. The EDF-GDF Services 
Center in Versailles has also concluded a technical partnership 
agreement with Seer to provide maintenance for electric vehicles 
in the Paris area. 
  In the meantime, more and more hip technocrats are rallying 
round the product--which uses technology to fight pollution for 
the benefit of local collectiviies--with the expectation that it 
will one day become a consumer product (what better issue to use 
in an electoral campaign!). We have already cited CERAVE, the 
Center for Applied Research on Electric Vehicles; PREDIT, the 
Ground Transport Industries Research and Development Plan; and 
GIVE, the Interministerial "Electrical Vehicles" Group. Other 
important names are ADEME, the Agency for the Development of the 
Environment and Energy Control; a manufacturer organization 
AVERE, the European Association for Electric Road Vehicles; and 
CETUR--soon to be renamed CERTU--which is a division of the 
Equipment, Transport, and Tourism Ministry that coordinates 
municipal programs. 
<H5>  In a Nutshell </H5>
  --Batteries must become "smart." They need the equivalent of 
a gauge so that drivers can know how much energy they have. 
  --The goal of quick recharging is to provide 2 km of 
autonomy 
for each minute of recharge. 
  --Vector-controlled induction motors seem fairly promising 
for the next crop of models. 

