BFN 

<F P=106> ["Governments and International Organizations Urged To Take </F>
Joint Action Against Japan's Nuclear Armament" -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, May 19 (KCNA) -- A spokesman for the 
Foreign Ministry of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
released a statement today concerning the exposure of an 
extra-large case in Japan -- the concealment of 70 kilograms of 
plutonium at the nuclear fuel-making factory in Tokaimura. 
  The statement reads: 
  Recently, the true color of Japan as a nuclear criminal was 
dragged into the light of day, causing quite a stir worldwide. 
  As was already reported, an extra-large case of the 
concealment of 70 kilograms of plutonium at the nuclear 
fuel-making factory in Tokaimura, Ibaraki Prefecture, Japan, was 
disclosed. 
  Japan had so far boasted itself of its "uprightness", 
claiming that it had opened to the public the amount of 
plutonium stockpiled by it and had accepted "strict inspections" 
by the International Atomic Energy Agency. But it was disclosed 
recently that the Japanese authorities had not declared the 
amount of plutonium enough for the manufacture of nine nuclear 
bombs in the total inventory of plutonium, keeping it in 
secrecy. This clearly showed their shamelessness. The 
concealment of plutonium is a violation of the universally 
recognized international law, which should be taken seriously 
and denounced. 
  The case also clearly indicates that the socalled "three 
non- 
nuclear principles" advertised so often by Japan are nothing but 
a "screen" for concealing a large quantity of plutonium and 
accelerating nuclear armament in real earnest and the noisy row 
Japan has raised over the non-existent "nuclear issue" of the 
DPRK, taking the van in the intrigues to stifle it, was 
motivated by a trick to veil its nuclear armament and divert the 
public attention elsewhere. 
  The Japanese authorities, caught red-handed, are these days 
vociferating about "probe into the truth" and "removal of 
suspicion," but no one will believe that. 
  Judging from the fact that many nuclear facilities of Japan 
have been in operation for scores of years, it is self-evident 
that the recently discovered plutonium is only a tiny part of 
the amount concealed in Japan. 
  As regards Japan's production and concealment of much 
plutonium, the world public is demanding that the International 
Atomic Energy Agency treat it as a grave case and take relevant 
measures. It says if the IAEA Secretariat fails to take issue 
with the dangerous nuclear activities of Japan and continues to 
make the matters complicated over the fledgling peaceful nuclear 
activities of the DPRK, throwing "suspicion" on them, it cannot 
be construed otherwise than an application of a double standard. 
  The IAEA Secretariat must pay a due attention to this 
problem 
in compliance with the principle of impartiality. 
  The United States, which has used the "nuclear issue" of the 
DPRK for a sinister political purpose, calling for a 
"cooperation system" to stifle the DPRK, joining hand with 
Japan, the real nuclear criminal, cannot evade the 
responsibility for the case. 
  We do not feel any need of serious argument about the poor 
lot of the South Korean authorities, who have recklessly made a 
fuss about "nuclear issue" of the North, currying favour with 
the United States and Japan, the two big powers. While the 
South Korean authorities ran about like mad, following Japan, 
the latter did what it wanted to. What a ridiculous sight it is. 
  The Japanese authorities must declare to the world public 
the 
exact total amount of plutonium now concealed nationwide, and 
immediately stop nuclear armament. 
  We consider that since it has been confirmed as a fact that 
Japan's nuclear armament is being promoted on the danger line, 
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula is practically 
meaningless. 
  We call on the governments of all countries, international 
organisations and anti-nuke organizations to make unbiased 
efforts to remove the danger of nuclear development from our 
planet and launch a joint action to check the nuclear armament 
recklessly accelerated by Japan with the ambition to become a 
military power and a nuclear power. 

