BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Indonesia Acquires A U.S.$500 Million Standby </F>
Loan] 
  [Text] The Government of Indonesia signed a U.S. $500 
million syndicated standby loan [preceding two words in English] 
agreement with the United States. The syndicated loan was 
acquired from 65 foreign banks in Frankfurt, Germany. The 
commercial loan is repayable over a seven-year period with a 
further extension of a five-year grace period [preceding two 
words in English]. The availability period [preceding two words 
in English] is extended over a period of five years. The 
settlement of the loan will be made through five annual 
half-yearly repayments over the stipulated period. 
  There is nothing exceptional about the loan. It is also not 
an emergency action whereby the country is facing a crisis or 
anticipating one in the future. According to J. Sudradjat 
Jiwandono, governor of the Bank of Indonesia, the government 
acquired the standby loan on an annual basis at a value of U.S. 
$2 billion in foreign exchange. There is a need to seek a fresh 
standby loan from time to time. 
  The standby loan only serves as a precautionary measure. The 
previous loans had proven to be beneficial, but the main 
objective is to anticipate any crisis the government might face. 
  The Indonesian Government will only be charged an annual 0.5 
percent commitment fee [preceding two words in English] if the 
loan is not utilized, besides making the stipulated repayments 
in installments. But if the loan is utilized, then the interest 
rate charged will be on an annual commercial rate of 0.75 
percent based on the LIBOR (London Inter Bank Offered Rate) 
[preceding term in parenthesis in English] interest rate for the 
first two years and 0.875 percent based on LIBOR for the 
remaining years. LIBOR's current interest rate is 3.94 percent. 
  Indonesia pays a high interest rate to LIBOR because of our 
country's current economic situation. Thailand and Malaysia pay 
a lesser interest rate to LIBOR because of their strong economic 
situation. 
  In fact, the objective of taking out an annual U.S. $2 
billion standby loan is for maintaining Indonesia's steady and 
safe balance of payments (balance of payments for trade, 
services, and financial transactions between Indonesia and other 
nations). 
  As stated by the governor of the Central Bank, the standby 
loan will only be utilized as a last resort should the country 
face difficulty in disbursing its balance of payments. He also 
added that the standby loan will not be used immediately because 
Indonesia's financial reserves currently stand at U.S. $12 
billion. In other words, Indonesia is currently in a safe 
position regarding its balance of payments. 
  If any urgent "shortfalls" should occur, then the problem 
can 
be solved through utilizing the U.S. $2 billion standby loan. 
  We need to be cautious about our country's economic 
situation 
this year. The previous 1.8 trillion rupiah deficit in the 
1993/94 budget was covered by using the excessive budget. The 
1994/95 fiscal year, which will officially come into effect 
tomorrow, faces an uncertain position because of declining oil 
prices, while the export of non-oil commodities faces certain 
challenges. If anything undesirable should befall these two 
sectors, then the balance of payments will be distinctly 
affected during the 1994/95 fiscal year. As such, it is of 
utmost importance to have a standby loan. 
  We have also learned from experience that numerous 
speculation arose whenever there was an "identical shortfall" in 
foreign exchange over a certain period, which means that there 
was a temporary irregularity in our balance of payments. Then 
the issue of devaluing the rupiah emerged. People would then 
exchange their local currency for foreign denominations and make 
their exodus to other countries. In truth, such a premonition 
could turn into a reality and such a self-fulfilling prophecy 
[preceding three words in English] is much feared. 
  The government does not desire an unstable monetary 
situation. Therefore, this is the reason for acquiring the U.S. 
$2 billion standby loan. 
  An announcement and clarification were made regarding the 
acquisition of a fresh U.S. $500 million standby loan, the 
annual U.S. $2 billion loan, and the announcement that 
Indonesia's current foreign reserves stand at U.S. $12 billion. 
In our opinion, such an announcement was issued with the 
objective of planting a psychological effect amid the prevailing 
trepidation concerning this year's economic situation. The 
objective of the above action was to suppress the possibility of 
various negative issues concerning the country's economic 
situation being brought to the fore, particularly issues related 
to the country's monetary sector. 
  Our economic situation is not really at a desired level even 
though we have an annual U.S. $2 billion standby loan for 
supporting funds and monetary capability. Apart from needing to 
attract loans to carry out development projects, the government 
also needs commercial loans as a measure to safeguard our smooth 
balance of payments. 
  This indicates that the income from exports (whether 
petroleum or non-oil exports) and ongoing foreign investments 
within the country are still insufficient to meet the balance of 
payments. Thus, there is no other alternative but to increase 
our exports (particularly non-oil exports) and to also increase 
our investments abroad. 
  On the other hand, even though the standby loan (which is 
mostly left unused) poses a burden for Indonesia, it nonetheless 
constantly indicates the country's ability to maintain its 
economic stability, particularly stability in its monetary 
sector. 

