BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Wu Xiaobo (0702 2556 3134)] </F>
  [Text] Hangzhou, 21 Jun (XINHUA) -- Since the start of the 
rainy season, heavy and at times torrential rain has fallen in 
Zhejiang Province, causing flooding. Provincial party committee 
and government leaders, including secretary Li Zemin and 
Governor Wan Xueyuan, have gone to the frontline to direct 
rescue operations and the fight against the flooding. 
Throughout the province a million cadres and people are 
participating in the flood-fighting struggle to save themselves 
and rebuild their homes. 
  Heavy to torrential rainfall has hit Zhejiang since 8 June, 
with more than 300 mm falling in 80 percent of the province and 
more than 500 mm in 10 percent of the province. Throughout the 
province rivers and the river network on the plain rose beyond 
the warning level, causing flooding. Along the Qiantang Jiang 
and Puyang Jiang, in particular, flood waters have risen to 
super-dangerous level three times in 10 days. 
  According to preliminary figures, at present 925 villages 
and 
towns and 6.19 million mu of farmland throughout the province 
have been damaged by floods. About 1 million mu of this 
farmland had not been harvested. About 30,200 houses have 
collapsed and 8,600 factories have been forced to suspend 
production or operate at half capacity. A number of water 
conservation projects and highway bridges have also been 
destroyed. 
  Various localities and departments in Zhejiang have 
demonstrated the spirit of collectivism, heeding unity and 
taking the overall interest into consideration, in their rescue 
work and flood fighting. 
  For 11 years the Xinanjiang Hydroelectric Power Station, the 
first giant hydropower station built by New China, has not 
opened its sluices to release flood waters. To reduce economic 
losses in the Hangzhou-Jiaxing-Huzhou plain as much as possible, 
the provincial government decided on 14 June to open the sluices 
and release flood water. The flood water flowed safely into the 
sea after local cadres and the masses completed work to 
strengthen the dam, clearing obstacles, and relocating residents 
as quickly as possible. 
  The sluices of the Xinanjiang Reservoir have been opened 
twice so far to release flood waters, playing a pivotal role in 
water control. 
  The province has decided to urgently arrange the 
distribution 
of 50 million kg of grain from its reserve, as well as some 
diesel oil, chemical fertilizer, and other materials to help 
flood-stricken areas. 

