BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 8 Apr (EFE) -- Cuban Foreign Minister 
Roberto Robaina and Argentine Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella 
both agreed and disagreed over the state of bilateral relations 
at the end of an unofficial meeting they held today in Buenos 
Aires. 
  Robaina, who arrived in Buenos Aires on a private visit of 
less than 24 hours, stressed that "agreement over our 
disagreements predominates" in relations between Cuba and 
Argentina. 
  Di Tella, who gave a separate news conference after the 
unscheduled meeting, indicated that "serious disagreements" 
still persist in the political area. 
  Witnesses to the meeting told EFE that during his 45-minute 
meeting with Robaina, Di Tella nevertheless promised to ask 
Argentine businessmen to explore the possibility of investing in 
Cuba in all the sectors that are open to foreign capital. 
  Robaina, who made a 5-day official visit to Uruguay, will 
travel within the next few hours to Bolivia, and will return on 
13 April to Buenos Aires to begin his programmed 48-hour 
official visit. 
  The total debt that Havana maintains with Buenos Aires can 
be 
highlighted among the disagreements. While Robaina states that 
"it does not amount to $1 billion," Di Tella maintains that it 
surpasses $1.2 billion. 
  Robaina insisted that his government "has the political 
desire" to pay this debt, within the context of the inviability 
of its overall debt throughout the world; that the outcome must 
be reached with "creative solutions" from the experts of the two 
countries; and that it is necessary for these to meet. 
  He also stressed that the present time "is a new time in the 
history of the relations" between the two countries, and that he 
believes that relations remain "firm and close despite the 
political disagreements" that have lasted since 1989, when 
Carlos Menem became president. 
  Di Tella again demanded "the beginning of a process of 
political transformation" in Cuba, and said that "it still can 
not be seen." 
  Di Tella told the reporters that the trade opening program 
that was expounded by Robaina is just a "sample." 
  Di Tella, who was in the company of Vice Foreign Minister 
Fernando Petrella and Central America and Caribbean Director 
Raul Martinez, met with Robaina in the Foreign Ministry. 
  Moreover, he admitted that in the future "there could be" 
Argentine businessmen who would be interested in investing in 
Cuba. 
  Robaina's "quick" visit -- people in his entourage indicated 
that he had to stop over in Buenos Aires due to flight 
connections -- allowed him to meet with Di Tella, because the 
Argentine foreign minister is off to Morocco on 13 April. 
  Sources close to Robaina consider the results of this first 
contact "positive", within the framework of the process that 
includes the signing of the cooperation agreement in the 
antidrug fight that was signed in Havana on 5 April, which could 
lead to the signing of an agreement regarding the mutual 
guaranteeing of investments. 

