CSO 

  [Text] Three-fourths of Iran's northern forests have been 
destroyed in the last 15 years. The transfer of living soil from 
high ground to the rivers and plains and the rate of 
sedimentation in the mouths of rivers has become much faster and 
more evident, and it has not been without effect in creating 
problems for the coastal cities. If we continue at this rate, 
the useful forests in northern Iran, which have trees usable in 
industry, will be destroyed in the next five years. This is part 
of a report from the monthly publication JAME'E-YE SALEM, 
published in Tehran, entitled "Iran's Environment," written by 
Dr. 'Ali Hazuri. 
  The report's author continues: In the last two years we have 
seen faster and more extensive soil erosion throughout Iran. 
However, these events are mostly happening in areas where there 
were formerly forests or suitable plant cover and have now 
become bare, such as the heights of Gilan, Mazandaran, Chahar 
Mahal va Bakhtiari, and Doshmanziari in western Fars. 
  The rate of sedimentation at dams has increased and no 
solution has been found. Even in places where resources come to 
hand suddenly and with the help of nature, there is nothing we 
can do. 
  In the year 1371 [21 March 1992-20 March 1993] the water 
levels at Iran's dams were much lower than in the year 1370 [21 
March 1991-20 March 1992]. For example, at the Zayandehrud Dam 
it was about seven meters lower. As a result of the falling 
water level, a great volume of the sedimentation at the mouth of 
the dam reservoir rose out of the water and could have been 
removed with ordinary equipment. Clearly, the readiness to do 
this task did not exist and no work was done. 
<H5>  Pastures and Fields Overrun </H5>
  An important part of Iran's fields and pastures has been 
destroyed in the last 30 years because of the increased 
population, the spread of the cities and the establishment of 
factories, warehouses, and military bases. Even now, instead of 
building these kinds of installations on unsuitable land, they 
are using best lands for this purpose. For example, the metal 
foundry plant, was built next to the city of Asfarin, was 
allocated the best agricultural land next to the city. After its 
construction, this plant took over almost all the irrigated land 
adjacent to the city, and even the city itself is threatened by 
the creation of pollution. The day when cheap fuel is no longer 
available for these factories and they are faced with closure, 
their land will also be of no use, and they will be absorbed by 
the rapid expansion of the cities and the population explosion. 
  In his report, the author also discusses the destruction of 
forests in other parts of Iran in recent years. 
  There is no small number of other areas in Iran that have 
lost their plant cover in recent years. The Doshmanziari area, 
which was completely forested in the year 1357 [21 March 1978-20 
March 1979], has now lost perhaps two-thirds of its trees. In a 
trip there last summer, I did not recognize many areas I had 
seen before. I even needed a guide to identify the area and the 
likely limits of areas I knew, and the soil erosion and the 
destruction of the environment in this region is also evident. 
  The stripping of Iran's pastures is an obvious phenomenon, 
which anyone can see throughout Iran. This is also the result of 
the population increase, including the tribal population, and 
greater need for livestock products. 
<H5>  Sounding of Alarms </H5>
  The author of the report on Iran's environment discussed the 
death of Iran's green forests, pastures and agricultural fields, 
and the extinction of animals such as the elephant of southern 
Iran, the lion throughout the south and east of Iran, the tiger 
in Mazandaran, and the deer of Azerbaijan. According to him, 
these were not destroyed by the earthquake, but rather when many 
Iranians in these years obtained firearms and shot them with 
bullets. Of course, there was even more savage treatment of the 
boar herds in Lorestan and Mazandaran. 
  He also warns about the stripping of pastures and increasing 
air pollution. He said: The aggregate of the factors mentioned, 
along with poverty, ignorance and illiteracy, inability to tell 
the difference between immediate and long-term profits, and to 
understand the earth as the cradle of humanity, the spread of 
profiteering and rapacious production, which has little by 
little had its effects on agriculture and animal husbandry and 
entails indifference to nature, sound the alarm for a healthy 
life in Iran's environment. 
  The pollution of bodies of water, even important ones like 
Zayandehrud, dumping poisons such as cyanide into the river, the 
death of ancient beliefs about keeping water pure, the dumping 
of garbage into the water by government agents, the 
disappearance of ugliness in polluted water, the flow of sewage, 
sometimes in a city like Masjed-e Soleyman, rapacious use of 
resources in such a way that, for exampl,e all the farms and 
rural areas surrounding the Sar Cheshmeh Copper Mines (from 
Miduk to the north of it to Pariz to the south of it) are 
threatened with destruction, do not indicate a bright future for 
the environment of Iranians. 
  This is no longer anything like freedom or human rights for 
two sides to negotiate, for one to say it exists and the other 
to say it does not. The reality is naked and dangerous. The 
small deserts and plains, which can now be seen throughout the 
province of Fars to the shores of the southern sea, were 
formerly forest. There were once wild oak and fig forests 
throughout the province of Khorasan and the province of Sistan 
va Baluchestan. During the Sassanian period they harvested 
cochineal from these trees and cochineal was known as the color 
of Khorasan. Iran was verdant, the deserts were few and the 
people of Iran were comfortable. 


