BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel by Ferdos </F>
Forudastan and Charima Reinhardt; place and date not given: 
"Turkey Has a Very Difficult Problem With the Kurds"] 
  [Text] [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] Mr. Kinkel, what else has 
to happen for you to believe that the Turkish Government is 
using German arms against the Kurdish people and for the Federal 
Government to stop arms supplies there once and for all? 
  [Kinkel] We need evidence that the claims about the use of 
German arms are justified. I know you will promptly mention 
pictures allegedly from Kurdistan, which we received from human 
rights activists, church people, and deputies. After 
examination by the Federal Defense Ministry, these pictures do 
not prove these accusations. The tanks, which are said to have 
come from Germany, may have been supplied by Russia, for 
example, and none of the pictures prove the use of those arms 
for internal purposes. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] Should the Turkish military drive 
dead Kurds on German trucks to the German Embassy in Ankara to 
make you acknowledge that German arms are being used for 
internal conflicts? 
  [Kinkel] The Turkish Government has assured us that it is 
not using any arms provided by Germany against the Kurds. I 
have to trust the correctness of this statement as long as I 
cannot be convinced of the contrary through watertight evidence. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] Why are you not dispatching any 
Foreign Ministry representatives to Kurdistan as observers? 
  [Kinkel] Turkey is a friendly country, a NATO partner. I 
cannot simply ignore official government declarations and show 
my distrust by sending official investigators there. The 
embassy is acquainting itself with the situation, and I have to 
be able to rely on the Federal Defense Ministry experts in 
Turkey. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] What is certain is that there are 
heaps of German arms in the military depots in Turkey, making it 
possible for the army to wage this war. Yet, you are sending 
signals to Turkey insinuating that we do not find your policy 
against the Kurds bad enough to suspend arms exports. 
  [Kinkel] I am not signaling anything. Moreover, things are 
not quite as simple as you present them. Turkey has a very 
difficult problem with the Kurds. Unfortunately, it is hardly 
possible to help Turkey solve this problem from the outside. 
This is not only true for Germany. Of course, this must not 
prevent us from insisting again and again on the compliance with 
human rights, and, above all, from pressing for solving the 
Kurdish question by means of the law-governed state. This is 
what I am constantly doing; considering our good relations with 
Turkey, it is not always very easy because it obviously puts a 
strain on our relations. Turkey regards it as interference in 
internal affairs. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] Has your policy of carefully wagging 
your admonishing finger toward Ankara not failed? Turkey is 
waging the war against the Kurds with increasing brutality. 
  [Kinkel] Turkey is fighting against the terrorist activities 
of the Workers Party of Kurdistan (PKK), which we have banned 
here in Germany. It is true that the human rights situation in 
Turkey has unfortunately not improved, but deteriorated. I 
commented on this problem in a recent government declaration. 
Yet, one must also look at the overall situation in the 
country. The government in Ankara is not bringing the problems 
under control. The responsible ministers sometimes obviously 
only have a limited influence on what is going on in police 
prisons in rural Anatolia. The government officials have 
emphasized that they reject human rights violations.... 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] ...and you believe all that: that 
the strong Turkish state is unable to prevent the numerous cases 
of torture of Kurds, of killings by death squadrons; or that, 
meanwhile, the approximately 300,000 soldiers in the southeast 
were only concentrated there to fight against the PKK fighters, 
that the military forces have not destroyed hundreds of Kurdish 
villages and expelled the villagers, sometimes in a most bloody 
way.... 
  [Kinkel] Unfortunately, the German foreign minister does not 
have the possibility to better the world as a deus ex machina, 
much as I would like to. Yet, you must not forget that Ankara 
is also struggling against striving Islamic fundamentalism. In 
such difficult times, one does not leave one's partners in the 
lurch and turn one's back on them or isolate them. With Turkey, 
with which we have been associated through friendly ties for a 
long time, we must keep up friendly dialogue, which includes, of 
course, criticism --at the right moment and in the right way. 
Besides, we must keep in mind that Moelln and Solingen have not 
been forgotten yet. We were unable to protect fellow Turkish 
citizens, children from Moelln and Solingen, against being 
killed by right-wing extremists. I know what I am talking 
about: I stood at the open graves in Turkey. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] Still, does the Federal Government 
not have to step up its pressure? 
  [Kinkel] Tell me how? 
  [Kinkel] Your could threaten to create difficulties 
regarding the associate membership relations with the European 
Union [EU], think loudly about economic sanctions, or threaten 
to temporary exclude Turkey from NATO. 
  [Kinkel] Excuse me, I am finding all that hardly realistic 
and helpful. When judging a country, we must always take into 
consideration the overall situation in terms of foreign policy. 
Two million Turks live in the FRG, and we have close political, 
economic, and cultural ties with the country, it is a partner in 
NATO, it is located between Europe, on the one hand, and the 
central Asian states and the Islamic world, on the other, and it 
has even gained in importance since the end of the East-West 
confrontation. We have no reason -- and our partners are 
pursuing the same policy -- to end friendly contacts, and we 
cannot do it so easily, either.... 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] ...but you could, at least, threaten 
to do it. 
  [Kinkel] No, not even that. One must be able to carry out 
threats after some time; otherwise, the threats are empty. 
Considering our unlucky history, we Germans, in particular, 
should be careful not to wag our finger too much and make 
exaggerated moral claims. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] NATO sees itself as a community of 
shared values. Do you still have enough shared values with the 
torture state on the Bosporus to sit in the same alliance? 
  [Kinkel] First of all, your judgment on Turkey is certainly 
inappropriate. Second, Germany is not NATO's master. Third, 
just like economic sanctions, temporary exclusion from NATO 
would dramatically becloud the atmosphere in domestic policy in 
Turkey and lead to a major escalation of the conflict between 
the government and the PKK. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] Or it would force Ankara to give in. 
How much longer will the Federal Government regard Turkey's 
partnership in NATO, its geostrategic position, and the economic 
ties as being superior to the Kurdish people's right of 
existence? 
  [Kinkel] We do, of course, recognize this right of existence 
and have again and again appealed to our friends in Ankara to 
settle the conflict in the southeast of their country 
peacefully. Let me emphasize once more that, in my capacity as 
German foreign minister, I have virtually no possibility to 
exert any influence on the Kurdish issue. Unfortunately, in the 
sphere of foreign politics, one has to put up with the fact that 
there are problems that cannot be solved at all or are very hard 
to solve. I share your moral-ethical position, but very often I 
do not have the means to translate it into concrete policy. 
Yet, I am not the only one who has this problem. Just look at 
other countries' policies toward Turkey. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] Would you advise the Turkish 
Government to accept the PKK's offer for talks on a peaceful 
solution of the Kurdish issue? 
  [Kinkel] Of course, I am in favor of a peaceful solution of 
the Kurdish issue. Yet, one also must see that terror emanates 
primarily from the PKK and that thousands of security people had 
to give their lives. So far, the PKK has unfortunately often 
escalated terror when there were signs for agreement. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] The Turkish Government under Prime 
Minister Tansu Ciller has not yet accepted any PKK offer for 
negotiations. Do you support the demand for an autonomy statute 
for Kurdistan. 
  [Kinkel] The Federal Government supports cultural 
self-administration for the Kurds, but is against changing 
borders. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] Why do you not propose a CSCE 
conference on the Kurdish question? 
  [Kinkel] I very much like the idea for such a conference. I 
also support the demand to send CSCE monitors to Turkey to get 
firsthand information of the situation there. 
  [FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU] Should the Kurds living in Germany 
not finally be granted cultural rights? There are 
Turkish-language radio programs and classes in schools, but not 
in Kurdish. 
  [Kinkel] We have about 400,000 Kurdish fellow citizens. 
They have a right to cultivate their language and their 
traditions. We should support them in their efforts. 

