Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by "na": "Easing of Temporary Work Agreements </F>
Provides New Momentum to Employment"] 
  [Text] Duesseldorf, 15 Feb--The modifications in the 
conclusion of temporary labor contracts introduced as part of 
the May 1985 Job Creation Act will not be phased out at the end 
of 1995 but will be extended for another five years. This is 
what the government's action program for greater economic growth 
and more jobs calls for. 
  In 1992, the permanent additional employment effect brought 
on by the Job Creation Act amounted to about one percent of new 
private sector jobs. In other words, between 20,000 and 45,000 
persons found permanent jobs in 1992 under the provisions of the 
Act. 
  These findings are part of an empirical study conducted by 
Infratest Sozialforschung [Infratest Social Research] in late 
1992 on behalf of the Labor Ministry. Commenting on the recently 
published findings of the study, the Labor Ministry notes that 
temporary labor contracts under the Job Creation Act have 
resulted in additional permanent jobs and have thus proven their 
worth as an effective job policy instrument. Generally speaking, 
these findings corroborate the research results obtained in 
1987/88. At that time, the results of this procedure were also 
found to have a positive effect on the labor market. 
  In 1992, between 60,000 and 110,000 temporary labor 
contracts 
were concluded in the private sector nationwide. These contracts 
would have been illegal in the absence of the Job Creation Act. 
The temporary labor contracts in question may be concluded for 
up to a maximum of 18 months by firms with more than six 
employees--where the limitation is applied in the main because 
of uncertainty concerning future economic developments and/or 
where no legally accepted substantive cause for such a 
limitation existed. 
  Temporary labor contracts under the Job Creation Act play a 
markedly bigger role in western than in eastern Germany both in 
terms of absolute numbers and as compared to new jobs. 
  The new Infratest study refutes the concern already voiced 
when the act was passed that making it easier to conclude 
temporary labor contracts would result in the conclusion of only 
such contracts. According to the study, the so-called temporary 
quotient, i.e. the ratio of temporary jobs to total jobs in 
western Germany amounts to just about 7 percent as compared to 8 
percent in 1987/88. The modifications introduced under the Job 
Creation Act thus have not resulted in more temporary jobs. 
<H5>  Main Impact of Job Program Efforts in Eastern Germany </H5>
  Temporary labor contracts concluded under the act's 
provisions account for only a part of all temporary jobs. 
Nationwide, 1.5 to 1.6 million blue- and-white collar private 
sector and public service workers had temporary labor contracts 
in 1993. In the western part of the Federal Republic, 6 percent 
of all blue- and white-collar workers (i.e. 1.1 million) had 
temporary labor contracts. In eastern Germany, 8 percent of all 
blue- and white-collar workers (about 500,000 individuals) have 
temporary jobs. 
  In eastern Germany, the overall total of temporary jobs is 
marked by the widespread use of job creation programs. 
Forty-four percent of the temporaries are taking part in such 
programs. In western Germany, only 8 percent of the temporaries 
are involved in such programs. 
  In western Germany, there are about 400,000 persons holding 
temporary second jobs in addition to the approximately 1.1 
million temporary blue- and white-collar workers. They include 
high school and college students and, to a lesser extent, 
housewives and retirees. 
  In 1992, one out of every three new private sector jobs was 
a 
temporary job. In 1992, some 900,000 new temporaries were hired. 
Fifty-six percent of such new temporary private sector jobs in 
1992 in firms employing more than five persons were limited to a 
maximum of six months. As a consequence, the legal guidelines 
for protection against wrongful dismissal did not apply to these 
jobs. Thirty-seven percent of the jobs were limited to a 
duration of 6 to 18 months and were thus within the permissible 
limits stipulated by the Job Creation Act. Three percent were to 
run for more than 18 months and 4 percent were not specifically 
limited. 
  Temporary labor contracts are more likely to be adhered to 
in 
the public than in the private sector. Those with minimal skills 
and academics tend to be employed as temporaries at a higher 
than average rate. 
  More important than the directly available additional 
possibilities for temporary employment provided by the Job 
Creation Act are the indirect effects which result from the fact 
that the need to show cause no longer applies and the 
concomitantly increased legal security afforded by the 
conclusion of temporary job contracts. 
<H5>  Giving Priority to Hirings </H5>
  From a labor policy point of view the advantage of the Job 
Creation Act would seem to consist above all in the fact that 
employers are encouraged to give priority to hire new workers. 
Wherever economic trends and the needs of employers warrant, it 
is very likely that temporaries will become permanent employees 
at a later date. About one-half of those hired as temporaries 
under the Job Creation Act do in fact end up on the permanent 
payroll. 
  In its evaluation of the [Infratest] study the Labor 
Ministry 
also points out that it refutes the frequently voiced warnings 
and fears that temporary workers would be treated as 
second-class employees. The vast majority of temporaries does 
not feel discriminated against in working life as against their 
permanent colleagues. This applies to efficiency standards, 
employee rights and career possibilities. Ninety percent of 
job-seekers both in western and eastern Germany accept an 
initially temporary position. 

