Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mikhail Dodidze under "Neighboring Countries" </F>
rubric: "Georgia: Come and Have Your Say"] 
  [Text] The Georgian parliament has given its assent for 
Eduard Shevardnadze to extend the state of emergency in the 
republic for a further month -- until 0000 hours 20 February. 
In the Georgian leader's opinion, another month is needed for a 
trend toward improvement in the situation to finally emerge. 
  However, many people believe that Shevardnadze wants the 
state of emergency not only to combat bandits, but also as a 
pretext for the Russian military to continue its participation 
in securing transport networks and assisting the return of the 
first wave of refugees to Abkhazia. Shevardnadze intends to 
discuss the possibility of expanding the Russian military 
presence in Georgia with Boris Yeltsin, who is planning a visit 
in early February. 
  Russian troops are currently continuing to guard railroad 
communications in western Georgia. They have been rendering 
this service for almost three months now. The local population 
look on the Russians maintaining peace with gratitude. Only one 
incident of a bandit attack on the Russian military has been 
recorded in all this time. 
  Representatives of the Georgian delegation at the Geneva 
talks report that discussions are currently underway on the form 
of Russian troops' participation in implementing the Geneva 
agreements. At the same time Boris Dyukov, first deputy 
commander of the Russian group of troops, denied rumors that 
Russian Army special purpose units are stationed near Tbilisi in 
order to establish order in Georgian cities, and that it is 
planned to relocate four divisions here from Germany. The 
military, according to Dyukov, does not yet have information 
about whether Shevardnadze has asked Yeltsin to sent additional 
military forces to Georgia. 
  In the opinion of Dzhaba Ioseliani, Yeltsin's forthcoming 
visit should finally determine Georgia's relations with Russia. 
"Either we are good neighbors, or we remain a province..." 

