Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Viktor Ivanovich Baranov, convicted </F>
counterfeiter, by Oleg Karmaz; date and place not given: "King 
of the Counterfeiters"] 
  [Text] Allow me to introduce you to a genius, a criminal 
genius--a man who served his full term in the "zone"--12 years. 
This self-taught man once led the whole Soviet militia on a 
merry chase. 
  They say that when he was arrested, former USSR Minister of 
Internal Affairs N.A. Shchelokov immediately reported the arrest 
personally to L.I. Brezhnev. That is how notorious 
"Counterfeiter Number One" was at that time. 
  After President Ivan Barbot of Interpol had taken a good 
look 
at Viktor Baranov's "products," he tersely remarked: "If your 
country does not join Interpol, you will be ruined...." 
  We did not hear anything about him for a long time. We heard 
that he was "doing time," and that was all. His name was not 
mentioned in the press, and people tried not to discuss him. It 
was as if he was a top-security nuclear physicist. 
  Some of the events of our daily life, however, did evoke 
some 
mention of him. These were news items that were not particularly 
pleasant to hear--especially for the scrupulous Central Bank 
staff. I am referring to the recent official announcements of a 
mass epidemic of counterfeiting in Russia. 
  Counterfeit banknotes, primarily 50,000-ruble bills, are 
"surfacing" everywhere--in bank branches, stores, and in markets 
(one of these, incidentally, even reached the bookkeepers in our 
editorial offices). Some of them are ordinary xerox copies, but 
some others have all the earmarks of hand-crafted items. We have 
learned that the new Russian rubles have almost no protective 
features (experts, incidentally, did issue cautionary warnings 
about this), and that their duplication is an easy and 
rudimentary task. 
  It was rumored that Viktor Baranov had been asked to serve 
as 
a consultant to Goznak [State Bank Notes, Coins, and Medals 
Administration]. They say he was asked to do this by his 
namesake, Central Bank Chairman of the Board Viktor 
Gerashchenko, and that the "king of the counterfeiters" is now 
in the government's good graces. 
  "That is utterly absurd," Viktor Ivanovich snapped 
at the very start of our conversation. "No one ever asked me to 
do anything or suggested that I do anything. The people there, 
in Goznak, would turn up their noses at the very thought. They 
see me as a criminal, a convict--in general, an unsalvageable 
man. Meanwhile, for some reason, no matter how much they try, 
they cannot make authentic banknotes. But I can, and I could 
devise a currency that no one could ever copy." 
  [Karmaz] If they did invite you, would you go there? 
  [Baranov] Without question. The sight of today's money is 
painful to me: It is so flimsy. It does not even feel like 
money, and it does not command any respect. Money has to look 
like money and have a commanding design. I could create that 
kind of currency. I promise I could! Evidently, however, that 
will never be. 
  [Karmaz] At one time you made bills that were virtually 
indistinguishable from real money. Furthermore, from what I have 
heard, you printed them in a shed, with equipment you built 
yourself. 
  [Baranov] Why do you say "virtually"? They were completely 
indistinguishable from the originals! Even under a microscope. 
This was true of the 50- and 100-ruble bills. It is true that I 
stopped making them after a while. They were boring. My 25-ruble 
bills had a tiny "glitch." You might call it a trademark. There 
was just one irregularity in one of the thousands of links of 
the protective grid on the back of the note. This one link on my 
bill tilted upward just slightly. That was all. Everything else 
was exactly the same--as if in a mirror. 
  As for the equipment, I had my own Goznak in the shed, and I 
hope you will not take this as an idle boast. Of course it was 
only a tiny fraction of the real Goznak's size, but this was not 
a problem--it is just what I wanted. Why take the trouble of 
building a press the size of a three-story building if one no 
bigger than a television set will do exactly the same thing? 
  [Karmaz] As a nonprofessional, I would think that the 
watermark would be the most difficult part of the process. Then 
there would be the problems of copying the design, the colors, 
and so forth. Am I right? 
  [Baranov] In principle, yes, although all of the stages are 
difficult. I can tell you that I spent 3.5 years getting the 
watermark right, and the colors took another 2.5 years, although 
I did come up with the press right away. I remember that the 
investigators asked me to conduct an experiment and print a bill 
in the inspector's office. All of the generals and all of the 
"bigwigs" from Moscow came to see this: No one could believe 
that money could be printed with equipment taking up no more 
space than two writing desks. The first thing I did was to print 
the watermark, Lenin's profile. After that, just for fun, I 
printed the design of one side of the bill on ordinary paper 
from the inspector's desk instead of on "currency-grade" paper. 
There was no more doubt. The experts wrote that my forgeries 
represented an "exceptional danger to society." And they gave me 
12 years, although they certainly could have given me a lighter 
sentence. 
  [Karmaz] You have suggested that you "cooperated fully and 
voluntarily with the investigators." 
  [Baranov] What would you call it? I told them everything, I 
showed them everything, and I explained everything. I even 
refused the services of an attorney. I figured that I had been 
caught, and now I had to pay for the crime. 
  [Karmaz] That sounds so virtuous. 
  [Baranov] There was nothing virtuous about it! I am not an 
angel. If you do something wrong, you have to suffer the 
consequences. But this case.... The prosecution asked for 12.5 
years, and the judges "were lenient" and sentenced me to 12. But 
enough about that. It happened and now it is over. 
  [Karmaz] But what made you set up this underground Goznak? 
Was it the thrill of taking risks? 
  [Baranov] It was just something I had to prove to myself. I 
wanted to see if I could do something that was supposed to be 
absolutely impossible. The experts at the hearing said that no 
one before me or after had even come close to what I had done. 
  The whole thing started this way. When I got out of the 
army--I was serving in Germany--I came back home just when the 
currency reform began, in 1961. When I looked at the new crisp 
rubles, believe it or not, my heart began to pound. It was as if 
I were looking at "La Gioconda." The bills were beautiful, like 
fine works of art. The design on the 25-ruble bill was 
particularly striking. It was elaborate, imaginative.... In 
short, it was a feast for the eyes. 
  I decided to copy the design. I tried tracing it, but under 
a 
microscope I saw that the drawing consisted of several 
layers--one on top of the other. Some of the lines could only be 
seen when they were magnified 60-80 times. I went to the local 
library and took out all the books I could find on engraving, 
printing, and plating. I had a sense that these were not enough. 
I was still only an ignorant dilettante at that time. I went to 
Moscow, to the Lenin Library. I remember looking through 
Professor Sinikov's "The Production of Engraved Printing 
Plates," Berezin's "Printing Materials," and a couple of other 
books. After I had read them, I realized that I would have to 
have copies of my own. I had to "borrow" them from the Lenin 
Library. 
  In general, I started with the fundamentals and learned 
everything I could. Then I began developing my own printing 
methods. I designed miniature machine tools and presses and 
developed solutions and dyes. Everything fit into a small shed. 
No one could have suspected anything. The only clue was that my 
neighbors suffered brief power lapses when I began working. 
  [Karmaz] In the case file I read your statement that money 
could also be printed by another method, a completely different 
method from the one you used. 
  [Baranov] I told the investigators at that time: Give me 
three years, and I will come up with an even simpler method of 
printing currency. It will not call for any gigantic 
institutions like Goznak, all types of scientific research 
institutes, and so forth. I was already planning to build a 
machine in my shed. I had made some notes. I wanted to put the 
raw material into one side of the machine, push a button, and 
then take the finished bills out of the other side. 
  [Karmaz] But that sounds like science fiction. 
  [Baranov] Why science fiction? I had already made all of the 
calculations. I am not a naive theorist, after all. I am a 
craftsman, and an exacting one. In general, they told me: Just 
try to design anything of the kind. 
  [Karmaz] But how did they catch you? After all, for a long 
time all of the investigators and security personnel thought 
that this was the work of a large gang of counterfeiters--around 
50 or 100 people. They were looking for you for a long time. 
From what I heard, all of Russia was divided into sectors, 
depending on the number of your "products" in circulation there. 
All Goznak personnel without exception were under suspicion. And 
all of this was futile. Was it really just a fluke that you were 
caught? 
  [Baranov] Of course.... I usually got rid of most of my 
bills 
in the marketplace in Cherkessk, about 100-120 kilometers from 
here, from Stavropol. All of the cashiers, clerks, and private 
vendors in the markets had been warned, it goes without saying, 
that a man with a large sum of money might come there to 
exchange bills on the sly. On 12 April, right on Space 
Exploration Day, at around three in the afternoon, they caught 
me. A kolkhoz farmer in the marketplace saw me exchanging bills 
and "alerted" the militia, and things went on from there. 
  [Karmaz] I heard that the kolkhoz farmer was later granted a 
private audience with Shchelokov and was awarded an engraved 
watch for "vigilant action leading to the apprehension of a 
particularly dangerous criminal." 
  [Baranov] I know, I know. So what? Maybe he deserved it. 
  They drove me to Stavropol, where all of the militia 
personnel and officials were already waiting for me. 
Incidentally, the whole interrogation and all of the pre-trial 
experiments were taped. The tape was later shown, they told me, 
to L.I. Brezhnev among others. I do not know what he said about 
me, and I did not really care that much. 
  When the interrogation began, I was asked, as I already 
said, 
to print just one bill. I told them what kind of reagents and 
paper I needed and asked them to bring me my confiscated 
equipment. That was the start of an elaborate charade: I would 
ask them, for instance, for vitriol, and they would bring me 
cyanide. I would ask for lead oxide, and they would bring barium 
oxide. They were trying to find out if I really understood what 
I was doing. Later, they acknowledged that I knew just what I 
was doing. 

