Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Ivan Zhagel report: "It Seems That There Will Be No Rent </F>
Rebate for Savings Bank Investors"] 
  [Text] The threefold compensation for Savings Bank 
accounts held on 1 January 1992, which is being carried out in 
accordance with the Russian president's edict, is being viewed 
by many people as a token gesture which will not cover the 
losses due to inflation. However, the document envisaged other 
benefits for investors. 
  In particular the edict contains recommendations to local 
executive organs "to grant to individuals in receipt of one-off 
compensation payments the right to use those funds to pay for 
municipal and housing services at the tariffs (rates) in force 
at 1 November 1993 on condition that they transfer the entire 
amount of compensation into a separate interest-free deposit 
account during January 1994." Bearing in mind the rapid rise in 
prices for housing and municipal services, of course, this 
measure could considerably stifle the discontent at the token 
compensation. But this measure is not being fulfilled yet in 
any of the Russian regions. 
  The point, of course, is not that, according to the edict, 
money should have been paid into the special deposit account 
back in January. The beginning of the compensation was delayed 
so the deadline for the transfer of the funds could have been 
postponed, too. So there are no problems there. Incidentally, 
the letter of instruction on how the payment for municipal and 
housing services from the special account is to be made in 
practice was not sent out by the leadership of the Savings Bank 
to its branches until March. 
  A far more serious problem, however, is the fact that the 
provision of the edict on the payment for services at a reduced 
rate is recommendatory in character. The final word here rests 
with the local authorities. And they are in no hurry to adopt 
the appropriate decision. 
  Nor has such a decision been made in Moscow. Furthermore, a 
senior official from the Moscow government has stated that it is 
hardly likely to be adopted at all. The payment of municipal 
and housing services at reduced rates will hit the capital's 
budget. 
  I think that in this instance what we are seeing is a 
classic 
example of administrative sleight of hand in which nothing is 
decided but the semblance of the solution of a problem is 
created. 
  The question, then, is whether the local authorities have 
the 
money to introduce extra concessions or not. The answer is no. 
In that case why should the local authorities be held 
accountable for the fact that the holdings of Savings Bank 
investors have lost value? 

