BFN 

  [Text] It has been learned that the Construction Ministry 
and the construction industry have asked the Fair Trade 
Commission [FTC] to drastically revise its draft "guideline on 
public bidding," which aims at regulating business operations to 
discourage bid-rigging. 
  In a position paper presented to the FTC, the Construction 
Ministry and others strongly urged that voluntary agreements to 
refrain from dumping, and free sales activities with 
organizations placing construction work orders be permitted. 
Apparently, the construction sector is seriously concerned that 
the industry as a whole may face common ruin with the expected 
intensified competition for orders and greater transparency in 
the bidding system, while the ministry for its part is strongly 
disinclined to lose its connections with the industry. 
  The guideline on public bidding is to replace the guideline 
for the construction industry formulated in 1984. It lists 
practices violating the Antimonopoly Law and those permitted 
under this law. The old 1984 guideline was rendered powerless 
under the pressure of the construction industry and 
construction-zoku Diet members [Diet members lobbying for the 
construction industry], and it has been criticized by the United 
States for "abetting bid-rigging." 
  A new guideline is to be decided on this summer, and the FTC 
last month solicited position papers from the construction 
industry, academicians, and the concerned government ministries 
and agencies. 
  The Construction Ministry's position paper, the contents of 
which have been disclosed, consists of six sections. Apart from 
voluntary agreements to refrain from contracting for orders at a 
low price -- for fear of extensive cut-price competition -- and 
free sales activities with the contracting parties, the document 
also asks that the following be allowed: 1) legitimate 
information-gathering for participation in bids; and 2) an 
exchange of information indispensable for forming joint ventures 
(JV). 
  Voluntary agreements to refrain from taking orders at a low 
price are permitted under the old guideline, but the FTC has 
deleted this from the new draft in the belief that "this may be 
taken as condoning prior agreements on prices." The 
Construction Ministry wants this to be retained in the new 
guideline, saying "taking orders at a low price will result in 
the harassment of subcontractors and a deterioration of working 
conditions." 
  In the construction industry, there has been a frequent 
acceptance of orders at a price substantially lower than the 
estimated price (upper limit of the contracting price) after the 
experimental implementation and actual introduction of open 
public bidding. The industry wants to avoid a general price 
decline. It has presented similar demands to the Japan 
Federation of Construction Contractors [Nikkenren] and the 
Associated General Constructors of Japan [Zenken]. 
  Furthermore, the draft new guideline also stipulates that 
the 
construction firms can only express their intention to 
participate in bids and to provide technical information if 
there is a request from the contracting party to supply 
information. The Construction Ministry complains that "this is 
inappropriate because it restricts the contracting party's 
opportunity to obtain useful information on technological trends 
and other matters." 
  The ministry denies that it is applying any "pressure" by 
presenting the aforementioned demands and says, "What we are 
saying is merely to make the contents of the guideline more 
lenient." On the other hand, the FTC says, "We do not see any 
need to change our view." 

