BFN 

  [Text] La Rioja, 20 May (NA) -- President Carlos Menem 
tonight denied the existence of a cabinet crisis prompted by 
disagreements between Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo and 
Presidential Secretary General Eduardo Bauza over the 
establishment of a security "super secretariat." 
  Menem said the decision to establish this secretariat and 
"to 
subsequently convert it into a ministry was made and 
acknowledged." 
  Nevertheless, Menem confirmed that this issue "was not 
discussed during the cabinet meeting." He announced that "maybe 
next week or later we will have some information on this issue." 
  Menem said: "We keep talking about the issue. We must not 
forget that there are eight laws on the security issue and that 
two extremely important institutions, the Argentine Coast Guard 
and the National Border Police, are involved." 
  Menem confirmed: "They are all subordinated to the Defense 
Ministry and their activities are coordinated with the Interior 
Ministry." 
  Menem indicated: "This legislation must be reconciled. We 
will continue to discuss this issue next week." 
  After an alleged argument with Bauza, Cavallo today walked 
out of a cabinet meeting with the obvious goal of returning to 
Buenos Aires. Before boarding the plane, however, he was 
persuaded by Labor Minister Jose Caro Figueroa to return to the 
cabinet meeting. 
  Menem explained Cavallo's and Caro Figueroa's departures, 
claiming that he had asked them to submit reports "on the 
progress of their respective ministries." 
  The president stressed: "I asked them to supply information 
on these issues so that the cabinet would be duly informed on 
basic aspects of the progress achieved by the two ministries." 
  The president told journalists at a news conference in La 
Rioja that "anything else you may say is sheer speculation." 
  Nevertheless, it is still not clear why Cavallo and Caro 
Figueroa had to go at full speed to the airport to get the 
information requested by the president, nor does it explain the 
efforts by the guards to prevent the departure of the economy 
minister's car. 

