CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "The Lambese Prison Breakout: The </F>
Director Had Sounded the Alarm"--first paragraph is LIBERTE 
introduction] 
  [Text] One day will we know the entire truth about the 
Tazoult breakout? Is it a breakout that is still far from 
yielding its secrets and in particular its political 
consequences? 
  In any event, it would seem that this spectacular breakout 
could have been avoided. Indeed, the prison's director, 
according to certain sources, was reported to have sent several 
reports to the authorities concerned to draw their attention to 
indications his jail would soon be attacked. 
  He is reported to have expressed his suspicions to several 
guards. What conclusion should be drawn from this information 
when it is known that the director of the Chlef prison had sent 
a similar report and expressed the same fears? 
  Unlike Tazoult, measures were taken and the prisoners were 
quickly transferred from Chlef to Berrouaghia. It is clear that 
the work of the investigative commission looking into the 
Lambese case will absolutely have to elucidate this question. It 
will also need to provide some answers about the unbelievable 
freedom of movement that the attackers enjoyed. The latter, 
according to the same sources, were reported to have lists of 
all the prisoners "to be freed," with their names, their home 
region, and where they were supposed to go. 
  The possibility cannot be ignored, in this respect, that 
many 
of the prisoners could have vanished into thin air and might 
even have reached the major cities. It is believed, in this 
respect, that among the escapees are all the "emirs" of the 
armed groups that had been arrested and convicted by the special 
courts. 
  Despite the seriousness of this deed and despite the shock 
that the people have been dealt, official information is 
distilled parsimoniously when it exists. This silence gives free 
rein to all sorts of hypotheses and all sorts of speculations. 
  Whereas the news had practically gone around the country and 
even beyond it, 72 hours had to pass before the Justice Ministry 
would at last deign to make the information public in a most 
laconic communique. 
  The Justice Ministry's communique spoke of "a very large 
number of armed groups," which attacked the prison without 
specifying their number or the methods they used. Furthermore 
the communique described the breakout of "a large number of 
persons convicted in cases of terrorism by assassination and 
acts of sabotage and subversion"; here too no further 
information was given. 
  Given this, and according to tradition, all sorts of 
speculations were permissible. Beginning the following Saturday, 
LIBERTE devoted its front page to the event with the headline: 
"Breakout of 900 Islamic fundamentalists." Basing its report on 
information received from reliable sources, LIBERTE pointed out 
that the attack had been carried out by "a great many 
terrorists, perhaps several hundred"; the attack was reported to 
have been carried out with trucks, which therefore, according to 
LIBERTE's source, made possible the breakout of "900 terrorists, 
including 280 who had been sentenced to death"; about 100 of the 
regular prisoners were reported to have been tempted by the 
breakout but were said to have "given it another thought and 
returned to the prison." 
  For its part, AFP, picked up by EL WATAN and EL KHABAR, 
spoke 
of "several hundred prisoners" reported to have escaped, among 
whom were some who had been condemned to death. AFP, which 
quoted "confirming reliable sources," added that when the prison 
was attacked, four prison guards had been killed by "an 
undetermined number of assailants." The French agency put 
forward the number of 280 Islamic fundamentalists sentenced to 
heavy labor who were reported to be among the escapees, whereas 
"about 100 ordinary prisoners were reported to have returned to 
their cells after a brief escape." 
  Almost five days after the most spectacular of the 
breakouts, 
the entire national press corps came back to the event. Most of 
them preferred not to get involved, preferring to publish a 
communique drawn up by the security services and reported by APS. 
  Just as laconic as the Ministry of Justice's, the communique 
from the security services said only that a total of 79 persons 
who had escaped had been arrested whereas 24 others had been 
shot by police. At no time did the communique speak of the 
prisoners' status, it was simply a matter of "people arrested," 
"escapees," and "attackers." 
  Nowhere was there mention of "terrorists" or "Islamic 
fundamentalists." Was this caution or a determination to 
minimize the facts? 
  The other main daily newspapers devoted their front page to 
the event and cited figures that were sometimes contradictory 
but all wondered about the disconcerting ease with which the 
breakout had been accomplished. 
  EL WATAN no longer talked about "several hundred prisoners" 
but of "about 1,000 prisoners," among whom, the paper noted, 
there were "64 from the high security unit reserved for those 
sentenced to death and 400 prisoners serving life sentences." 
  There was another detail about the 1,000 escapees: "200 are 
ordinary prisoners." 
  EL WATAN devoted its front-page headline to the figures and 
announced in yesterday's edition that "26 escapees have been 
killed and 114 captured." 
  That, according to EL WATAN, was "the official figure." But 
would not the one given out by the police be the official 
figure? EL WATAN, which put the number of attackers at "some 100 
attackers," no longer put forward, as it had in its Saturday 
edition, the number of 280 Islamic fundamentalists among the 
escapees. 
  LIBERTE, which in its edition yesterday reported new 
information, corrected the figure of 280 prisoners sentenced to 
die among the escapees, published in its Saturday edition, and 
this time spoke of 70 prisoners sentenced to die being among the 
escapees. With regard to the number of attackers, and according 
to its sources, LIBERTE estimated the number of armed attackers 
who reportedly attacked the prison as being between 150 and 200, 
going on to add that the latter had arrived onboard "about 40 
trucks and encircled the prison." 
  This time around the number of escapees was put at being on 
the order of 909. Several other pieces of information concerning 
the breakout were reported by LIBERTE, which did not fail to 
wonder about the impact of such an operation. The daily 
newspaper EL MOUDJAHID, which ran the story only five days 
later, made up for lost time by publishing an article written on 
location by one of its reporters. 
  Many details were reported, including the length of the 
breakout operation, which was reported to have lasted "one hour 
and 15 minutes." LE MATIN was practically the only newspaper not 
to deal with this story. It was an odd silence. 
  Whereas the number of escapees was put by all newspapers at 
being around 900 people, an AFP release, citing a spokesman for 
the Islamic Salvation Front [FIS] living abroad, mentioned the 
figure of 1,684 escapees and the fact that these escapees were 
"all political prisoners from FIS's base." Indeed, in this 
instance, this increase in the figures is, we might say, fair 
play, encouraged, it should be pointed out, by the laconic 
communiques from the concerned official authorities. 
  Since Thursday, the date of the attack on the prison, rumors 
have traveled about and already the most improbable scenarios 
have been put forward as we await the results from the official 
commission of inquiry. 

