BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by President 'Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani </F>
with domestic and foreign media correspondents in Tehran on 7 
June -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] In the name of God, the 
compassionate, the merciful. I will not give an introduction. 
I shall wait for questions from reporters so that we make more 
use of the time. You can start. 
  [Unidentified correspondent, in English with superimposed 
Persian translation] I have two questions. My first question 
is, how do you see the international oil market? My second 
question is, has there been any improvement in the relations 
between Iran and the United States after the visit of the 
American journalists? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] About oil, it seems the rest of the 
year 
will be the same, or a little better. About the second 
question. I do not think the presence of editors of American 
press in Iran would have any fundamental effect on relations. 
It could only clarify more the truths for the Americans. We 
shall have to see what conclusions they draw from those truths. 
  [GUARDIAN correspondent, name indistinct] Two questions. 
First of all, does the Iranian Government believe Britain's 
policy on former Yugoslavia precludes the creation of a strong 
country by Bosnian Muslims? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] In that respect there is evidence the 
British Government does not cooperate properly in repelling 
Serbian acts of aggression. Of course, final judgement should 
be based on further investigation, or one should wait for the 
future. 
  [GUARDIAN correspondent] Second question. What is the 
president's reaction to the remarks by Mr. Zhirinovskiy in the 
Soviet Union who said we have to go south, which includes Iran? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We consider those remarks as those of 
an 
irresponsible person. We attach no value to them for us to show 
an official reaction. 
  [KUNA correspondent, name indistinct, in Arabic] Hello. 
During your meeting with the students and teaching staff of 
Amir Kabir industrial university last week, you accused the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia of creating trouble and annoyance to 
some of its neighbors, including Iraq. Your Excellency, you 
know very well that the Iraqi regime was, and still is, the 
source of problems in the region. It started with its 
aggression against Iran in 1980, with the ambition of seizing 
the oil wells of Khuzestan and under the pretext of defending 
the eastern gate of the Arab nation. It then used chemical 
weapons against the Kurds in north Iraq, in Halabja. Then 
followed the invasion of Kuwait and the various immoral and 
inhuman crimes it committed there. It also committed various 
crimes against the Iraqi people in the north and in the south 
and has continued, up to the present, to use tanks, guns, and 
aircraft against its people. Would it be more beneficial, Your 
Excellency, if, instead of accusing the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
of creating problems for Iraq, you had offered advice to the 
tyrant of Baghdad to abide by the international resolutions 
pertaining to the recognition of the sovereignty of the state of 
Kuwait, its independence, and its international borders. 
  This is the first question. If you allow me I have another 
question. It was also during your meeting with the students and 
lecturers of Amir Kabir university when you said satellite 
technology would not constitute an obstacle in the way of our 
exporting the Islamic revolution. Your Excellency, such 
utterances about the export of the revolution were made by some 
Iranian officials at the beginning of the revolution and caused 
a cooling in the relations and a schism between Iran and its 
neighbors in the region. Your Excellency, why is there this 
insistence on making such slogans concerning the export of the 
revolution? It had been better if you had concentrated your 
efforts on rebuilding Iran and overcoming its economic and 
social problems. Thank you. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] About his first question, we have 
already -- both verbally and practically -- condemned Iraq's 
acts of aggression, and we still do. Iraq -- and particularly 
the Ba'thist party of Iraq -- has acted very badly towards its 
own people, us, and the people of Kuwait. About the question on 
Saudi Arabia, we have said Saudi Arabia is not doing the right 
thing to save the people of Iraq, and they are not coordinating 
their effort to resolve the Iraqi issue. 
  About his second question, it was not a question of 
exporting 
the revolution, as they are constantly accusing us. The 
question was, that with the existence of foreign satellites in 
Iran, how do we raise the issue of exporting the ideology of the 
Islamic revolution? I have said that we put forward our ideology 
whether there are any satellites or not. That is what we have 
always said. We have never said we would take our revolution to 
other countries. We say we put forward our ideas, and if 
anybody is interested, they could accept those ideas. Followers 
of any ideology would do the same. It is not interfering in the 
affairs of others. In practice we are now using all our 
facilities to build our own country; we do not use them abroad. 
  [Ghoroghi, Iranian TV correspondent] In the name of God, 
the compassionate, the merciful. Mr. President, regarding the 
discovery of a bugging device at the Iranian Embassy in London, 
could you say how Tehran-London relations will be from now on? 
Furthermore, the information minster has announced that the 
greater dimensions of the affair will be revealed later. Could 
you expand on this issue if possible? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Well, the information minister will 
later announce in an appropriate time what he intends to say. 
However, the consequence of the British violation has created 
insecurity in relations and an atmosphere of mistrust, which is 
negative. We do not wish to see the creation of insecurity and 
mistrust among countries that have representation in other 
countries. 
  [Ghorighi] With regards to foreign currency fluctuations, 
how 
do you see the implementation of the policy on the single 
currency rate, which started last year? And from a government 
point of view, what is the price for a regulated foreign 
currency and when will it be successful? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] The new policies we announced as of 
last 
week are a continuation of the single-currency-rate policies. 
With these policies we intend to regulate demand and supply in 
the market to allow the actual realization of a single rate. We 
predict that in the coming months and with regulation of demand 
and supply in the market, the real price of currency will become 
clear. But it is not possible to predict precisely. I think 
the price will be less than what it is in the free market now. 
  [Takashi] Hello, Mr. Hashemi. I am Japanese correspondent 
Takashi. I have one question. Three years from now your 
excellency's term of presidency will come to an end, and under 
the Constitution you will have to step aside. Do you wish to 
continue, or make certain changes in the Constitution to enable 
you to continue your presidency? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Those quiet Japanese make such a hue 
and 
cry. It is interesting. [Hashemi-Rafsanjani laughs] We would 
rather the Constitution were not changed and implement it as is. 
If I carry out my duties well during these eight years, I think 
there would be no need for my re-election and matters would, God 
willing, progress. 
  [Amiriyan, IRNA correspondent] I have two questions for your 
Excellency. The first is, what is the situation regarding 
privatization and the private sector in the country, and how far 
have things progressed regarding attracting foreign investments? 
My second question is, are Dr. Velayati's visit to Egypt and 
his talks with his Egyptian counterpart signs of change in 
Iran's Middle East policy? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] [passage omitted] About foreign 
investment, it is permissible under our laws, and we are 
agreeable. If some people wish to invest in Iran within the 
bounds of our laws and constitution, they would be accepted. 
  About Dr. Velayati's trip to Egypt, it is not a change in 
our 
Middle East policy. First, travelling to Egypt has never been 
forbidden. Our ministers have gone there in the past; Egyptian 
ministers have also come to Iran. Those comings and goings will 
continue. Second, the nonaligned movement session was there. 
Irrespective of relations with the host country, it was natural 
for Iran, which is an effective country in the nonaligned 
movement, to have an active participation in it. When the 
United Nations has a session in America, we take part. As you 
have seen, that happens every year. 
  [Notalli Nowari, LIBERATION correspondent, in English] Mr. 
President, I have two questions. My first question concerns 
satellite television, which you mentioned earlier. I wonder 
whether his excellency has watched any satellite television 
programs? Do you think the programs on satellite television are 
a threat to the youths in this country and should be banned? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] This is a new issue in our country and 
has created various discussions by people with various tastes. 
As you are aware, a draft bill has been put forward in the 
islamic majles. naturally, the deputies have the opportunity to 
discuss it there, and you too will hear the discussions through 
the majles. Our regime's view will be the majles's outcome. 
  [Nowari] What is your position? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I do not want to express any view 
before 
that discussion becomes ripe, because our prejudgement might 
influence the views. We expect the views to be expressed freely 
and the issue to become clear to the people. We will make a 
decision at the appropriate time. 
  [Nowari] I am sorry to insist, but you did not answer my 
question of whether you yourself had watched satellite TV? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I do not have that much time to sit and 
watch television. I might watch sometimes if an opportunity 
presents itself and there is something interesting. 
  [Heydarzadah, ETTELA'AT correspondent] Please, could you say 
whether Iranian diplomacy in Central Asia has so far been 
successful despite American measures and the fact that they 
threw wrench in the work? How do you assess the 
political-economic prospect of these relations? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Please repeat. 
  [Heydarzadah] [repeats question] 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We think the grounds for cooperation 
between Iran and Central Asian countries are so vast, natural, 
and essential that no one can prevent them. It is possible 
their dimensions may be reduced occasionally as a result of 
foreign pressure. But, Iran and Central Asia naturally complete 
[mokamal] each other. They need many things we have in Iran, 
and we need many things they have. The proper routes that 
connect Central Asia to the rest of the world pass through Iran. 
We are in the process of connecting the railway system. We 
have joined land routes. Customs offices have been set up. 
Airline routes and sea routes and communication systems have 
been set up. No one can change these facts. 
  [Muhammad Baqir Shar'i, correspondent of Beirut's AL-DIYAR, 
in Arabic] I am very interested in Iran and the Islamic 
revolution, and I come from a country which is very interested 
in your country and nation. My question is that, as it was you 
who proposed Khamene'i to the post of the leadership of Islamic 
revolution, is the relation between the two of you still of a 
special nature? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I do not think that any one who knows 
us 
can have any doubt about the fact that my relation with the 
eminent leader is one of the most cordial and sincere relations 
which can exist between two human beings. We have been together 
in the fronts of struggle for more than 40 years now. Since the 
revolution, too, we have always been together. 
  Even before the demise of the Imam, the arrogant media used 
to talk of my differences with Khamene'i. At that time, I said 
during a Friday prayer sermon: We are so close in our tastes and 
ideas that I am prepared to sign a blank piece of paper and give 
it to him to write down what would in fact be my opinions and 
thoughts. Apparently, he had the same idea too, although I 
cannot remember the details. We really are like that, and so 
far we have not had any unresolvable differences. We sometimes 
conduct negotiations [mozakereh] and discussions [mobaheseh]. 
But we always agree with one another. I consider him at 
present to be the most suitable person for the post of 
leadership of the country, and he, too, has the same kind of 
trust in me in my present capacity. I think that some kind of 
jealousy exists about our friendship, and that is why the 
foreign media sometimes react the way they do. All this used to 
happen when he was not the leader yet, let alone now that he is 
the leader. 
  In our Constitution, the relationship between the president 
and the leader is such that disputes are totally meaningless. 
The method of work is such that a number of decisions and 
general policies are in the hands of the leader, and every one 
should obey him. On the other hand, executive affairs are with 
the president, who receives the leader's approval and blessing. 
  There is, thus, no need to worry. The future is going to be 
even better than the past. 
  [Baqir Shar'i] Some of the economic difficulties the country 
is passing through are the making of foreign hands. There are 
people who say that one of the presidential candidates had 
received a larger number of votes than expected -- is this 
something to do with the economic difficulties? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] The extent to which Iran's economic 
problems are discussed, in reality, it is not as such. Our 
facts and figures are so obvious for all that judgment is easy. 
In this five-year plan, we had an average growth of eight 
percent, which is one of the better economic growth rates in the 
world. Not many countries could have such a growth rate in five 
subsequent years. We have fully reduced the shortcomings in our 
budget. We have well strengthened our infrastructure. We have 
passed well through the readjustment period, which is a 
difficult period and normally has social consequences. The 
largest phase of it has passed. If you visit our bazaars now, 
you will see how full they are. Our products in all fields -- 
agriculture, industrial, animal husbandry, fishery, etc. -- meet 
the country's demand to a large extent. We have reduced greatly 
our need for foreign currency with our work on the 
infrastructure. And in the second plan, our need for foreign 
currency might be approximately half that of the first plan. 
You have seen how this sort of readjustment has been 
implemented in other countries, such as Russia and some others, 
and how this is being implemented in Iran. We do not have a 
problem such as the one that has been talked about. Off course 
there are shortcomings in our country, as in many other 
countries, which is quite natural and is being removed. 
Naturally, the shortcomings and the issues which are the result 
of a period of readjustment might increase or decrease the 
number of some votes. This is not a very unnatural matter. 
  We have had vote fluctuations in previous general elections 
as well. The leader of the revolution was elected for two 
terms. At that time, the number of votes cast for him in his 
second term was reduced, similar as in my second term. This is 
not an issue that we want to give it a serious thought. You can 
see that the number of votes in our country are much higher than 
in other countries that hold free elections. We won around two 
thirds of the votes in our free elections, and that is in this 
situation of transformation from the difficult policy of 
readjustment and reconstruction. 
  A president who carries out the policy of readjustment, who 
carries out the process of reconstruction after the war and the 
earthquake, as well as carrying out many infrastructure tasks at 
the cost of reducing expenditures, and still gains two-thirds of 
the people's votes in a free elections, should be considered 
very successful, in my opinion -- not with difficulties . 
  [Unidentified Lebanese correspondent, in Arabic] Your 
Eminence, do you believe that the countdown has started against 
the Islamic movement in Lebanon? This can be observed in the 
wake of the abduction of Al-Dayrani, the struggling member of 
the Believers Resistance, and also the recent massacre in 
Ba'lbak. Do you also believe that there is a regional Arabic or 
local Lebanese collusion to demonstrate that the global and 
regional powers intend to liquidate the Islamic movement in 
Lebanon and to eliminate resistance against Israel? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] There is no doubt that the power 
centers 
of the world would very much like to smash the Islamic movement 
in Lebanon. This is definitely true, even if the recent event 
had not taken place. We have no doubt that major powers of the 
world-- particularly the West--are against the Islamic movement 
in Lebanon. Of course, the recent developments were further 
indications of the past signs. 
  [HAMSHAHRI correspondent Ebrahimi] Mr. President, during 
your 
speech at the press festival, you pretended as though the 
government's behavior toward the press has been correct. 
Whereas the press has responded, to some extent, vindictively. 
In your opinion, what are the qualities of an ideal press in 
the Islamic Republic? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We do not wish to specify what a good 
press should be. It is, however, clear from my speech at the 
press festival that we expect the press to study issues more 
deeply. It is unprofessional for the press to resort to slogans 
and demagogy to become popular. The press should help to 
clarify facts. They should approach issues analytically, 
instead of provoking blind sentiments. 
  Another point raised was that the press should understand 
the 
regime's general policies and deal with issues within that 
framework. I gave an example of the British press and their 
response vis-a-vis the recent problem with Iran. In connection 
with a question, the British press responded in a particular 
manner and alleged that an Iranian official had forged a 
document. I said that it seems the British press, as a whole, 
adopts coordination toward certain issues supported by their 
government. 
  [Ebrahimi] My next question is about the economic 
readjustment policy. Five years after the first five-year 
economic development plan, I would like to know your views on 
the positive points and the problems of adopting the economic 
readjustment policy? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] In my view, all the achievements of the 
first plan and of the economic readjustment were positive. The 
issue raised is the problem of some price rises. This was one 
of the objectives. We have to raise prices to their real level 
if we wish to achieve a healthy economy. Subsidized prices will 
never allow an economy to take shape. 
  Perhaps we can say, as a point of weakness, that some 
merchants, producers, or importers took advantage of this free 
atmosphere created by the readjustment policy to overcharge the 
people. This was bearable at the time when there were shortages 
of commodities; however, this cannot be tolerated now. We have, 
therefore, planned to stop the practice of overcharging. We, 
however, believe that it is in the country's interest to reach 
real prices. A large portion of the resources used to subsidize 
some commodities unfairly in the past is now transferred to 
reconstruction. 
  Great tasks were fulfilled in the country. Power stations, 
highways, ports, and large steel and aluminum factories were 
built. Telecommunication were expanded. A number of 
universities were set up. Deprived areas were developed. 
Irrigation projects, including sprinkler irrigation systems, 
were implemented. Dams were built, and many other large 
projects were completed. None of these would have been possible 
without the economic readjustment policy. [passage omitted] 
  [Indian correspondent (?Sukimra Golgani), WEEKLY NEWS] I 
have two questions. What is your opinion about the current 
situation in the world economy? 
  My second question concerns the countries of Southeast Asia 
and the present state of economic cooperation in that area. I 
must point out that there is very good economic cooperation in 
Southeast Asia, but in our part of the Asian continent, the 
field of economic cooperation has not developed as such. In 
view of your talks last year with the Indian prime minister 
about economic cooperation, I would like to ask what tangible 
steps have been taken and what more can be done toward this 
important task in order to enable us to expand our economic 
cooperation like the Southeast Asian countries? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] It is correct to say that cooperation 
between other Asian countries is not as good as cooperation 
between east and Southeast Asian states. We have two fronts in 
our own area. One is the ECO [Economic Cooperation 
Organization], and we have extensive plans for cooperation 
within that organization. The other front, which we must pay 
more attention to, is cooperation with countries such as India, 
Malaysia, and the Indian subcontinent countries in general. 
  Our negotiations with Mr. Rao have paved the ground for this 
process; however, one of the obstacles we face is the present 
situation in Indo-Pakistan relations. We must try to improve 
the ties between these two countries. In our negotiations, we 
also talked about the transfer of Iranian natural gas to 
Pakistan and India. This can only materialize if these two 
states enjoy cordial relations. We think that, in view of the 
potential enjoyed by India, Iran, and other countries such as 
Malaysia, we can have a very large economic unit here. Our 
progress has not been ideal, but we are satisfied with the 
agreements reached so far. [passage omitted] 
  [RESALAT correspondent] If government decisions are based 
on plans and expert advice, why are certain decisions regularly 
revised? Does that not shift resources from construction and 
manufacturing areas to bogus tasks and middlemen? 
  For example, the multitudinous decisions of the Foreign 
Exchange Committee have caused severe fluctuations in exchange 
rates so that the dollar rose by 50 tomans in one day. That 
resulted in investors becoming foreign exchange middlemen 
instead of investing their foreign currency in manufacturing and 
in their having an overnight windfall of 50 million tomans with 
a 1 million toman investment. Are the revisions of these 
decisions to continue? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] In transition from one state to 
another, 
those decisions are sometimes necessary. All those problems are 
not caused by changing decisions. There are numerous factors in 
the country today. Attempts by middlemen, false propaganda, and 
an adverse atmosphere created by certain media have had a 
combined effect. In addition, the amount of foreign currency 
bought and sold on the market cannot be compared with the total 
foreign currency that we spend in the country. For example, 2 
million dollars is not a large sum compared to 30 or 40 million 
dollars a day, which is our foreign currency expenditure in the 
country. 
  The exchange rate fluctuation is partly due to psychological 
conditions. Each of those decisions have their own reasons. 
During transition, decisions are sometimes changed; of course, 
these are not fundamental decisions. 
  [RESALAT correspondent] My next question is that, although 
you say that Iran is owed more than it owes, why have we signed 
debt rescheduling agreements with a number of countries? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Their debts to us are not such that 
they can be substituted for our debts to them. For instance, 
Germany owes us with regard to the Bushehr nuclear power 
station, where we spent around 7 billion German marks, but the 
Germans did not finish the work. They owe us that sum plus the 
due compensation. This case has now gone to the court, which is 
to issue a verdict. Once this verdict is issued, then we can 
consider that sum as money owed to us. Or, for instance, there 
is the large investment we made at the Krupp. This, however, is 
investment and cannot be considered as a debt to us. Only if we 
sell our shares there can we accept the proceeds as payment of 
our debts. 
  Yet one more example is America's hefty debt to us. This is 
money that the Americans are in no hurry to return to us. We 
say that the Islamic Republic of Iran is owed a lot of money 
abroad. However, there are certain conditions necessary for 
receiving these payments, and these conditions have not come 
about as yet. 
  France, too, used to owe us a lot of money. Part of these 
debts have been paid to us, while as payment for the rest of it, 
we have been made a partner in a huge uranium enriching plant. 
Of course, we can sell our shares and have the money instead. 
  The answer, therefore, is that the situation is not such 
that 
Iran has no money and has lots of debts. We indeed have large 
investments, and when these are exchanged, the country's 
creditworthiness will not be marred. 
  [Italian correspondent Andre Corvatorrio, CORRIERE DELLA 
SERA] In some European countries, investigations are going on 
concerning the assassination of Iranian dissidents living 
abroad. In some cases, it has been shown that there is some 
connection between these cases and Iranian citizens and 
officials. How do you evaluate these investigations, and how 
does Iran react to them? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] What the esteemed reporter said was a 
mere claim, since the investigations thus far have not been able 
to ascertain that Iranian officials have been involved in the 
incidents. There are court cases ongoing in France and Germany 
right now. In general, however, we say that all of these 
reports are false propaganda. We do not know the causes of 
these incidents, although our guess is that these are due to 
factional infighting abroad. It really is not the policy of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran to deal with the opposition in this 
way. Despite all the efforts by those opposing us, they still 
have not been able to prove one single case. I would like to 
ask you to mention a proven case, if you know of one, so that I 
can explain here. 
  [Corvatorrio] There was a case published by TIME magazine, 
as 
well as the case of Bakhtiyar. My question is: What is Iran's 
position toward the trial of these people abroad? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We comply with international laws. 
Where we have an extradition agreement, these people should be 
extradited to Iran. Where we do not have such an agreement, we 
have no opposition to a fair trial for these individuals. Of 
course, we expect that foreign governments should refrain from 
false propaganda and improper methods of investigations. If 
they seek to misuse their powers in the course of these trials, 
then we naturally oppose them. However, if we witness fairness, 
then we can accept the court verdict. [passage omitted] 
  [Correspondent Farid Hashemi] This question was also asked 
by a foreign reporter. However, another aspect is in question. 
Considering the record of many western--particularly 
American--media in distorting news and facts about Iran, I 
wanted to ask why was it necessary to invite editors of American 
newspapers to Iran? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] The Islamic Guidance Ministry 
apparently 
invited them. We think it is not a negative step; it is a 
positive action. We believe newspapers in the world have 
certain facilities at their disposal and can inform the people 
to a great extent. 
  You know that there is a great deal of false propaganda 
against Iran in America. That event was like the news 
conference that is happening now. Well, we should not think 
that every person who holds a pen in America is an agent of 
arrogance. There are free and liberal people who write the 
truth in many parts of the world. 
  So far, we have not decided to cease trading with America. 
On the whole we do not think that severance would be right. 
You are probably aware that much of our military equipment from 
the past is American. Many of our factories and much of our 
expensive machinery is American, and so forth. They require 
spare parts. They require repairs. They should be looked 
after. If you say we should throw away those great national 
assets, that would not be logically right. They cannot be 
replaced either. 
  For example, Iran Air's planes are all Boeing, which belongs 
to the Americans. Their repairs sometimes need to be carried 
out in places that are affiliated with the Americans, or at 
least it is necessary to obtain their permission. As a reporter 
are you suggesting that we should sever all that? 
  [Hashemi] Excuse me, that was not the question. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I am saying that trade on a wide scale 
cannot be severed if there are certain problems. It is not 
right for you to agitate feelings like this. The Americans also 
need trade with Iran. We are selling large quantities of oil to 
America. Of course, it does not go to America directly. We sell 
it elsewhere, and the Americans take it from there. Are you 
saying we should not sell that oil? 
  [Hashemi] I was speaking symbolically, about America as a 
symbol. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] In my opinion, that symbolism is 
somewhat common, of the garden variety. 
  [ITAR-TASS correspondent Alexey Kozyrev] Mr. President, I 
have three questions related to your foreign policy. What is 
your opinion on the second round of talks to be held in Tehran 
soon between the Tajikistan Government and their opposition 
groups? 
  The next question is about the Iranian proposal two months 
ago to mediate in the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan. 
Does Iran intend to mediate, or is it going to remain an 
observer until others start mediating? 
  My final question is about relations between Iran and Egypt. 
Iran maintains diplomatic ties with such Islamic countries as 
Turkey and Kazakhstan, and with other countries that have 
established relations with Israel. Why should Iran maintain 
ties with those other countries--for instance, with Turkey, 
which enjoys close ties with Israel--while it has broken ties 
with Egypt? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] About the Tajikistan talks, we are 
doing our best. In our opinion the war is not in the interest 
of the people or the government of Tajikistan. A free 
environment should be created there through democracy, and 
anyone who wins elections can run the country. We are striving 
to implement this policy. 
  About Karabakh, we consider Azerbaijan to be the aggrieved 
party, and we are striving to end this conflict. Our efforts 
have not succeeded thus far, but we have not given up in 
despondency. We are prepared to mediate whenever we feel that 
the war can be terminated. We believe it will be in both 
Armenia's and Azerbaijan's interests, as well as in the interest 
of the Karabakh people, to end this war and to resolve the 
dispute through political means. We once became very active, 
but it became clear that the ground was not ripe yet. We 
currently plan to prepare the ground to help again. 
  About Egypt, our significant dispute with Egypt began after 
Camp David. We believe the Camp David accords led to a division 
between the Arabs and other Muslims. Israel exploited this 
issue immensely, and the Muslims and Arabs lost heavily. The 
Palestinians incurred massive losses. We severed our ties with 
Egypt for this reason. They have not abandoned the path that 
they adopted during Sadat's presidency. This is why our 
relations with Egypt are cool; otherwise, we regard Egypt as a 
great Islamic country, and we would like to work with them when 
circumstances permit. We hope they will pay attention to our 
remarks. 
  [JOMHURI-E ESLAMI correspondent Pur-Eskandar] In the name 
of God, the merciful, the compassionate. We have heard that in 
the process of merging the three ministries involved with 
industries, there is talk of selling to the private sector the 
steel and other nationalized industries, as well as the 
organization for promotion of industries. You have stressed 
during the course of this conference that all these processes 
will take place in accordance with the Constitution. My 
question, however, is whether or not it will be the case that 
the ministries concerned will be weakened as a result of the 
sale of important industries to the private sector? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Of course, this merger has been put 
forward by the Majles and not by the government. What the 
Majles has voted for is the merger of the two Ministries of 
Industries and of Heavy Industries. Some people talk of the 
merger of the third ministry, but we hope that this does not 
take place. 
  As far as the sale of the steel and other mother industries 
are concerned, we do not agree with such a move, and we have no 
plan to do such a thing. Apparently, the Majles will not take 
this step either. It seems that a proposal had been put forward 
in a certain Majles committee. 
  [Pur-Eskandar] [passage indistinct] 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Well, this has merely to do with 
individuals, and one should not attribute it to the Majles or to 
the government. 
  [Pur-Eskandar] But the collection of these individuals may 
begin a process.... 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani, interrupting] This will probably be 
contrary to the Constitution. If it proves to be so, then the 
Guardian Council will reject it. This is supposing that such a 
move receives the approval of the Majles, an approval that I 
consider to be very remote. The Majles, of course, is free and 
independent, and the deputies have a free vote. If they vote in 
favor of such a move--and if the Guardian Council does not 
reject the bill--then this will become a law and will have to be 
implemented. However, I do not think that such an outcome is 
likely. 
  [Pur-Eskandar] My second question concerns the recent 
remarks 
by the leader of the revolution, when he stated that we should 
not expect any help from the Satanic powers and should instead 
implement divine punishments [hodud]--even though the Satanic 
powers accuse us of violating human rights. As the head of the 
executive power, what means would you deploy to confront the 
plots of global arrogance? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Sometimes the issue has to do with 
propaganda. In this case, it is clear that they have more 
propaganda means at their disposal than we do. We should also 
convey our ideas to the world as much as possible. Compared 
with them, we really have much more to say about these issues 
since the real violation of human rights, in its real sense, is 
being carried out every day by those who point an accusing 
finger at us. 
  The events in Bosnia-Herzegovina today are a test case that 
can reveal their intentions. Alternatively, one can look at the 
incidents in Palestine and Lebanon during recent days. The 
Americans are even preventing the UN Security Council from 
giving a hearing to Lebanon's complaint. Why should it be that 
a government that has the right of veto in the Security Council 
chooses to prevent the complaint of an independent government to 
be put forward? It is therefore quite clear that they are not 
honest. 
  If the issue has to do with propaganda, then you media 
people 
should perform your duties. However, if we are talking about 
what is actually taking place in reality, then we claim that the 
Islamic Republic of Iran observes human rights more strictly 
than any other country within the framework of Islamic tenets 
and our Constitution. We are prepared to state and argue this 
anywhere in the world. 
  [Pur-Eskandar] I thank you for your reply to the people and 
to the readers of JOMHURI-E ESLAMI. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Thank you. 
  [INDEPENDENT correspondent Charles Richards] I have two 
questions. Does the Islamic Republic of Iran share the aims of 
the Marxist IRA and seek the creation of a united Ireland? The 
second question: Is Mr. Arat, the Israeli pilot, in Iran? 
Whether he is in Iran or not, what is Iran prepared to do to 
help secure his release? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Both issues, in our view, are part of 
the fabricated propaganda against the Islamic Republic. About 
the IRA, we have said before and have denied that there is a 
connection between it and the Islamic Republic authorities. It 
is a matter concerning Britain and the Irish. I think, due to 
their weakness in protecting themselves in Britain, they needed 
to say that their opposition is receiving help from abroad--to 
justify their weakness somehow. There was absolutely no truth 
in it. 
  About the Israeli pilot, we think probably they have raised 
the issue as a preemptive measure because the Israelis are 
accused of the kidnapping of Iranians in Lebanon some years ago. 
Whenever anybody has said this to us, we have told them to 
bring any document or evidence that states that any part of this 
matter is connected to Iran, and we would start our 
investigation from that point. They have not given us any 
evidence yet. Everyday they go to a government that is friendly 
with us and raise the issue to cover up the issue of the four 
Iranians who were innocently abducted in Lebanon and 
disappeared. No reporter ever comes here to ask who is 
responsible, who should answer. 
  Here is a pilot who has gone and bombed a place, and his 
plane has crashed. Whatever his fate--and we see that they ask 
about him--no one asks about our missing persons. I do not know 
why the feelings of you westerners are one-sided. What was the 
next question? 
  [Richards] Do you deny that the Israeli pilot is in this 
country? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Certainly. He is not here. It is a 
fabrication by the Israelis, as I said, to cover up the fate of 
the four Iranians. You ask the Israelis about the fate of the 
four missing Iranians. 
  [ABRAR correspondent Khalili] Mr. President, there have been 
questions regarding the British issue, but they have not been 
answered. The anti-Iranian propaganda in the West--and 
particularly in Britain, with accusations of terrorism--are 
intended to put the Islamic Republic on the defensive. Here, 
however, we see no serious attempt by the government. It seems 
that the new wave of accusations is an attempt to prepare the 
grounds for greater pressure at the Naples meeting to compensate 
for the failure of the Tokyo meeting. Britain failed to secure 
European cooperation in pressuring Iran at that meeting. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I do not refute your statement that our 
propaganda is not as strong as theirs. 
  [Khalili] My reference is to government action. I think the 
government has no serious action here. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] They have made accusations, and our 
response is the same. When there are active measures, our 
reaction will also be active measures. What, in your opinion, 
could be an active measure against such propaganda? 
  [Khalili] Well, London has recently violated diplomatic and 
conventional norms, including the placing of a microphone at the 
Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Iran. In such cases, the 
westerners themselves sometimes go as far as severing relations. 
Has the government thought about this? This is my question. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We do not see the need to take the 
initiative in severing relations. Relations were severed once. 
Both countries understood that they have certain cooperation. 
They need us for some things; we need them for others. Well, 
things come together in many places. Severing of relations will 
not change anything. In principle, we do not particularly 
benefit from a policy of severing relations, except in 
particular cases and for exceptional reasons--as in the case of 
Egypt. 
  I think the existing weak relations must exist for ordinary 
dialogue. We have many students in Britain. If we bring them 
all back it would cause damage. If they want to stay, someone 
has to look after their affairs. There are many Iranians there. 
There are, naturally, ordinary economic relations and the like. 
We have to see our interest in its totality. Yes, of course, 
we have to reciprocate their actions in kind. Your view is that 
there should be an offensive policy instead of a defensive one 
at times. 
  [Khalili] A policy of reciprocation in kind, as you said. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] There is reciprocation in kind. At no 
place have we abandoned reciprocation in kind. Even in some 
places, as they say in war, offense is the best defense. That 
is correct. In political affairs too, we must go on the 
offensive at times. 
  [Khalili] My second question is regarding the policy of 
economic adjustment. Does the government have a policy of 
supporting the salaried classes, beside maintaining some of the 
subsidies? Your excellency recently said that management of 
life for those on a fixed income has become somewhat difficult. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] This is indeed the case. I accept that 
wages should rise according to price increases. We raised wages 
at one stage. This year they will naturally increase according 
to employment laws. We should plan to compensate for the wages, 
however, if there is a backlog. We have done so with the 
workers. 
  [Khalili] It has not been implemented for government 
employees. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] It has been done for workers. We have 
added the 22 percent inflation to wages. I think we should do 
something for the employees, and we are preparing this. 
  [AFP correspondent Millot, in English] Mr. President I have 
two questions. The United States have become again the first 
trade partner of Iran. How long do you think Iran will be able 
to delay political normalization of its links? 
  [Millot] The second question is: Foreign minister, Dr. 
Velayati is to go to Baghdad soon. How do you see the prospects 
of this trip and what is the main condition for an improvement 
in relations? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Regarding America where the reporter 
said we are economic partners: I have said that we never 
stopped our economic relations with America. We have weakened 
them. We won't buy from America if we find goods from other 
places. We give priority to the non-American goods. America 
does the same with us. Regarding political relations: We really 
don't trust America to have good intentions. It opposed our 
movement and bothered us prior to the revolution. Since the 
revolution, it has always been the enemy of the revolution. You 
continue to see the examples which we can present. They claim 
to have an interest in talks to resolve the issues. But since 
we don't see good intentions in America, we don't think it wise 
to start negotiations. Because probably there are wrong 
intentions in these proposals. We have told them: If you have 
good intentions you should actually prove this in at least one 
case, for instance with our claims, we said. For the past 15-16 
years, we have had large amounts of money and valuable goods 
blocked in America. There are no conditions. The money is in a 
certain account there. America can, as a sign of good faith 
release our money. This would be a sign of good faith if they 
are serious. When the issue of hostages in Lebanon came up, the 
mediators... [pauses] the UN general secretary who was a 
mediator told us that if we helped with the release of Western 
hostages in Lebanon the U.S. reaction would be to release your 
assets. Well we did. We helped and the Western hostages, 
including the Americans in Lebanon, were freed. But we 
witnessed that the Americans failed to carry out the promise of 
the UN general secretary, the most senior figure who had made 
promises to us. Is this not an indication of enmity? This is 
sufficient reason for us to mistrust them. From our point of 
view, the Americans should first of all actually prove their 
good intentions. We are yet to see this. [passage omitted] 
  The visit by Dr. Velayati to Iraq is aimed at improvement of 
ties. Certain provisions of the resolution, which we have both 
agreed on have not yet been implemented. We still have problems 
to do with the issue of PoWs, the existing mines planted on the 
borders, the dredging of the Arvand River [Shatt al-'Arab], and 
a number of other issues. He is going to negotiate, and if the 
suitable ground is prepared and all solutions are acceptable to 
both sides, then we can hope for progress. 
  [TEHRAN TIMES correspondent Sajjadi] My question concerns 
the 
future prospects for Iran-Syria ties. In view of the fact that 
one of our original incentives to expand our ties with Syria was 
that country's position in the front line of struggle against 
the Zionist regime, and considering the current round of 
negotiations between Syria and the Zionist regime about the 
issue of the Golan Heights, what is the future prospect for our 
ties with the Syrian Government, should the said negotiations 
produce an agreement? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We have a lot of trust in the Syrian 
Government, and we are not worried that the Syrians may 
sacrifice their interests or the interests of the Palestinians. 
For this reason, we are optimistic about our ties with Syria. 
Hafiz al-Asad is a strong and powerful man, with a great sense 
of responsibility. 
  [Sajjadi] My next question concerns the internal strife in 
Afghanistan. It is said that the United Nations has a new plan 
about bringing Najibollah back to power and topple the forces 
currently on the scene in that country. What is the position of 
the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran toward this plan, 
and in general toward the internal strife in Afghanistan? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] These are rumors. I consider it as very 
remote that the United Nations should think that it is possible 
to bring back someone whom the people have overthrown with Jihad 
and armed struggle, especially as the people are still in 
possession of weapons. Of course, the Afghan forces are not in 
harmony with one another. But although they argue and bicker, 
they would still resist against such a move. 
  [Sajjadi] Does the Islamic Republic of Iran have any plan to 
lend more effective support to the Afghan situation? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Right now we have a delegation in 
Afghanistan trying to resolve the ongoing disputes. However, 
the task ahead is very arduous. 
  [Unidentified ANATOLIA correspondent, in English] Mr. 
President, I come from a Muslim country. I have lived in Iran 
for the past two years. In my country, the same as other 
countries, there are some problems. I have heard that it is 
said in Iran that Islam and its instructions are the only 
solution to all problems. But during the past two years of 
living in Iran, I have seen that Iran is suffering from the same 
problems that exist in other countries. The examples are: A 
very high inflation rate, foreign debt, and the fact that Iran's 
income ranks it somewhere between the rich and poor countries. 
Faced with all these, can we say that Islamic instructions are 
the best solution to Islamic countries' problems? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] When we say we are Muslims, it does not 
mean all our problems will be solved. We think we can solve our 
problems within Islam's framework, but it takes time. We must 
solve our problems gradually. As you can see in Iran today, 
conditions are better than the neighboring countries that are 
not committed to Islam. We still do not believe that Islam has 
been fully implemented in Iran. We must implement it gradually. 
The series of problems you mentioned, including the economic 
difficulties, can be solved in the long-term by relying upon 
foundations of the Islamic instructions. [passage omitted] 
  [SALAM correspondent Nuri-Shemirani] Mr. President, the 
price 
of goods -- according to policies for regulating the economy -- 
are set on the basis of supply and demand and the performance of 
the market. Do not the new pricing policies mean a diversion 
from the past policies and do they not confuse producers? Also 
do they not create problems for the production security and 
economic security that you had in mind? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I believe not. You see regulation does 
not mean that we do not set prices. If you refer to your own 
archives, you would be able to find out that during the first 
years that we opened up to trade we mentioned, at that time, 
that when there is a shortage of goods then price controls will 
cause everything to go underground and will create hoarding such 
as the black market and multiple prices. But under the 
conditions when goods are in the market in a normal way then it 
is the time for setting prices. Even if you go to the countries 
whose economies are the most free in the world you still see 
price controls. When you go to any store, in any country, you 
can see that there are price tags on their goods. We do not 
intend to impose unrealistic prices on goods. There are a 
series of goods that are monopoly goods. We set the price of 
those monopoly goods, which are chiefly controlled by the 
government and we have no problem with them. For example, lump 
sugar, sugar, tea, steel and so on. [passage omitted] 
  We believe that this does not contradict our regulating 
policies. Perhaps from the point of view that we do not allow 
any overcharging to take place, the customer being misled and 
unknowingly buying some product for many times its price, that 
will stop such things taking place. 
  [Nuri-Shemirani] My second question is, up to a point, 
similar to that of previous questions asked by other friends. 
The implementation of regulating policies has had some negative 
effects on the low-income strata of society during the past few 
years. Do you not think that such effects have caused some 
problems for the success of the regulating policies, even if we 
say, for argument's sake, that the regulating policy is correct? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Our plan was to increase wages for the 
wage earners even somewhat more than inflation. Those working 
for themselves will naturally set their own tariffs accordingly. 
For example, like the newspapers, who themselves increase their 
prices or increase charges for their advertisements. There are 
also some who earn no wages and have no income. Every year's 
budget has allocated a great deal of money, through the [Imam's] 
Relief Committee and other foundations, for them. We have also 
helped them a great deal. That is the policy and the plan is a 
comprehensive one, but you may even know of some cases that have 
not benefited from that; general policy has considered all the 
cases, but still there may be cases that we have not seen. 
  [British correspondent Podlin from Channel Four Television, 
in English] Mr. President, part of my question was answered by 
somebody else, but I will repeat it. 
  After 15 years, the model of the Islamic Republic of Iran 
has 
had no imitators and very few close friends, even in the Muslim 
world. 
  [Interpreter] He is from the British Channel Four. It is 15 
years now that the Islamic Republic of Iran has been created as 
a model of an Islamic state. During that time very few 
countries have emulated Iran, and Iran has few friends in the 
world. Many of the Western states are still regarding Iran with 
animosity and great fear. Do you feel that Iran will eventually 
have to distinguish between the practical economic and social 
needs of the country, and what are the sum total of the 
ideologies of the country? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We really do not see any need for such 
a 
change of method. We do not think that just because the Islamic 
revolution has been realized our ideology is in conflict with 
our needs. What did occur was that because of the revolution 
the interests of some developed countries of the world were 
threatened or that of some of the non-populist powers [qheyr-e 
mardomi] were threatened. They stood against us. They either 
make false propaganda against Iran; or they imposed the war 
against us; or they create economic problems through economic 
blockades and sanctions, etc. [sentence as heard] Those things 
have no correlation with Iran's ideology in that form, they are 
mostly related to Iran's independence-seeking policy. If, 
within the framework of Islam we were ready to pay the 
foreigners the same ransom that the Pahlavi regime used to pay 
in the past then may be these things would not have come about. 
There really does not seem to be any need for a change in 
ideology. The problems that you referred to were predictable 
for us and we are eliminating them gradually. 
  [Podlin] Thank you. 
  [Correspondent Fazel from KAR VA KARGAR] Your Excellency, 
you 
have always placed emphasis on expanding the social welfare 
system, alongside the implementation of economic regulation 
policies. However, it is witnessed that the Social Welfare 
Organization has cancelled a number of its undertakings to the 
wage-earning strata; such as the receipt of franchise from 
workers at present or omitting a number of medical drugs from 
their list of medical assistance. I would be grateful for some 
explanation. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Of course, the Social Welfare 
Organization has increased its payments significantly during the 
recent years. If you refer to the data available at the Labor 
Ministry, you will see that the said organization has sharply 
increased its payments. However, if it has reduced payments in 
specific areas, these reductions have been matched by increased 
payments to those receiving benefits and income supplements. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Fazel] I have one more question in connection with your 
support for the sale of factory shares to the workers. It has 
been witnessed that the National Industries Organization has 
been selling the shares of a number of factories it controls to 
real or corporate entities. I would be grateful if you would 
explain. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We have a bill in this connection, 
which 
has been approved by the cabinet. According to this bill, the 
employees receive priority in being granted 33 percent of the 
factory shares. There is however a deadline involved, and if 
the employees do not come forward within this set deadline, then 
the shares can be sold to other applicants. If an arrangement 
different to this has been seen at any place, then the case must 
receive due attention. 
  [Fazel] Thank you. 
  [DALLAS MORNING NEWS correspondent, name indistinct, in 
English] The first question is that the government of Husni 
Mubarak in Egypt continues to charge Iran with financing Islamic 
militants... [correspondent's voice fades to interpreter] 
  [Interpreter] She is from the DALLAS MORNING NEWS. She has 
two questions. The Husni Mubarak administration still believes 
that Iran is responsible for the unrest by Islamists in that 
country. Could you make a statement on that? [passage omitted] 
  Second question: What are the results of the efforts that 
are being made by the supporters of Islam in Egypt and Algeria 
for overthrowing the governments of those countries? How much 
do you think the Iranian revolution has affected those countries? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] As for our intervention in the internal 
affairs of Egypt, to be fair, it is not true. We have 
repeatedly asked for one instance of that to be given to us. 
Not one instance has been given. Some of the Egyptian media 
themselves have expressly said that we have no proof so far for 
the claims made by some of the Egyptian authorities. The same 
applies to Algeria. 
  As to our view: Our view is that people's opinion must be 
respected. You yourself -- whether in America, Britain, or 
wherever -- have the same claim. You yourselves seriously raise 
the issue of democracy, at least for others, or for yourselves, 
even if you do not support it. Well, when close to 70 percent 
of the people in Algeria voted for a group why should their vote 
be null and void. None of those who claim support for democracy 
has given an answer to that question -- those same people who 
support the Algerian Government. In our view the correct course 
is to respect people's opinion. If they do not have elections 
they should officially say that it is a dictatorship. But those 
who hold elections, well, they should respect the people's vote. 
We seek the second alternative -- that elections should be held 
and the vote should be respected. Then if those who come to 
power were unable to perform or perform badly then the people 
will not vote for them in the next session. That is our view. 
  [Correspondent, name indistinct, in English] Could you 
please answer the question to what extent the Islamic revolution 
here has had on Islamic movements in Algeria and Egypt. 
  [Interpreter] Could you please respond to this part of my 
question: To what extent has the Islamic revolution in Iran 
influenced the operations that go on in Egypt and Algeria. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I cannot truly specify Iran's influence 
now. It definitely has had some effect. Anyway, a revolution 
was easily successful in Iran; and in war showed valor; made the 
world notice; it is building its' country by itself and making 
it independent. Those things are inspirational for many. Of 
course, in Arab states there have been liberation-seeking ideas 
before Iran's revolution. You certainly know that in Egypt 
there were Islamic movements before us. When we ourselves were 
struggling we took inspiration from the Egyptians to a certain 
extent, from the era of their struggles. In Algeria the people 
embarked on jihad before us and liberated their country. 
Algeria was a progressive country. It is not so that they 
should now come and merely emulate us. Our path assists them 
also. The fact that an Islamic government was established and 
succeeded in going through so many conspiracies is definitely 
inspirational for other nations. Nations are not uninformed 
after all; they become informed these days. The people in the 
world understand many things nowadays that they did not 
understand before. 
  [Correspondent Qotbi of KEYHAN HAVA'I'] Mr. President, my 
colleague from HAMSHAHRI asked a question. I would like further 
explanation. While senior government managers and experts 
refrain from giving interviews to the press, how could the press 
be expected to give all-round coverage of the country's 
policies? If you wish I could give you examples. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] If it is as you say and the officials 
refrain from explaining, you are right in saying that you have 
difficulty in reporting facts. But I do not think it is so, 
because our ministers -- each about their own sector -- are 
ready to answer any questions and give any explanations you 
want. You should ask specifically and we will tell them to 
answer any questions you have. It is not our policy to leave any 
question unanswered. 
  [Qotbi] My second question is about the UAE [United Arab 
Emirates]. If we assume that the UAE, backed by super powers 
that support the UAE's claim, is able to somehow substantiate 
and legitimize that claim, what would Iran do? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] The UAE could, under no circumstances, 
substantiate that claim, which would be acceptable by 
international centers, because we have very strong documents. 
The UAE is not even prepared to talk. We say, come and talk, 
but they place preconditions. 
  [Qotbi] I mean if they go to the Security Council and, 
backed 
by the superpowers, substantiate their claims. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] They would not achieve anything. I said 
at the Friday prayers once that if anyone except Iran intends to 
lay a hand on those islands there would be a bloodbath. Iran 
would under no circumstances forego that right, whoever is 
behind it. In our view, to whichever court it is taken, if 
justice prevails, the UAE would be convicted. [passage omitted] 
  [AL-'ALAM correspondent al-Dahrani, in Arabic] Your 
Excellency, President Hashemi-Rafsanjani, what is your stance 
regarding the recent events in Yemen, especially as there have 
been important developments in the civil war in that country, 
such as the involvement of the Security Council last week, the 
GCC's recognition of the separation of the South, and the 
massing by Saudi Arabia of troops on the border with Yemen? 
Another question: What is the truth about the accusations made 
a couple of days ago by the southern leader 'Ali Salim al-Bid 
about Iran standing on the side of North Yemen? I have another 
question after these. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani, in Arabic] On the actual question of 
Yemen, we ourselves believe that Yemen should remain united. We 
are against Yemen's disintegration; but if the people of Yemen 
decide otherwise then Iran will take no action. But our view is 
that it is not in the interests of Yemen that it be 
disintegrated. On the allegations that we have supported one of 
the sides, that is totally false. We declared that we are 
against the civil war in Yemen and will not help either of the 
sides. That is usually so in all cases, let alone in the case 
of Yemen, which is a Muslim state and for which we have 
affection. We are not even prepared to help one of the sides of 
the civil war in a faraway country. 
  [Al-Dahrani, in Arabic] The second question, Mr. President, 
is if the criteria for your relations with the Arab countries 
depend on the nature of their relations with the Zionist entity, 
how will the Iranian Government deal with these countries, that 
is, the Arab countries, if they normalize relations with Tel 
Aviv, given that there have been several steps in this regard at 
the commercial and political levels? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Of course if they do such a thing it 
would affect our relations. Our relations will become somewhat 
weaker; but that does not mean the severance of relations. The 
reason we severed our relations with Egypt was because Egypt 
took the first step toward the Camp David agreement and the 
breaking of the Muslims' line of defense. That was a special 
move. If others also join them, we shall not cut our relations 
with all of them. Currently we have relations with many 
countries who deal with Israel. But friendship and sincerity 
would be damaged. 
  [Al-Dahrani, in Arabic] My last question is a brief one; it 
is about yourself. What do you intend to do once your second 
term as president ends? Are you thinking of taking a different 
job, or are you thinking of taking another political job? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] For 40 years, since I began the 
struggle, I have devoted myself to the revolution and to our 
country. At any time or in any situation, I shall do whatever I 
think useful for the people, and I am not particular about what 
that work is. 
  [REUTER correspondent Yusef Azmeh, in English with 
superimposed Persian translation] In the foreign currency 
sector, there have been allocations of foreign currency, import 
restrictions, and changes in economic policies. Also, reforms 
are being undertaken. I would like to know what the power of 
the state is in carrying out those tasks. It seems that the 
state has not shown much power in carrying out those tasks. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] In what? 
  [Azmeh] In determining the foreign currency rate of 
exchange, 
import restrictions, and on the whole, the carrying out of 
economic reforms. I would like to know how much power the 
government can exert in this regard. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I think that we have full power to 
adjust the markets. Our program in the first Five-Year 
Development Plan was to spend a great deal of foreign currency 
during the first three or four years for delayed work and 
infrastructure. It is in the second plan that the foreign 
currency commitments of the first plan will gradually be paid. 
The same thing has happened again. We are under the present 
price conditions getting $12 to $13 billion annually in hard 
currency for oil, and we have around $5 billion worth of nonoil 
exports. Our foreign currency requirements, according to our 
accurate calculations, are much less than they were during the 
first plan because now we produce many of the raw materials, and 
our big tasks, such as setting up power stations, refineries, 
and petrochemical units, have now been carried out. We will 
certainly have adjustments in the market. We think that the 
Central Bank is capable of managing a policy for the foreign 
currency prices in rials to stay at a particular point that we 
consider appropriate. 
  Our foreign debts have been well scheduled. We have a debt 
of about $17 billion which has been scheduled from now until the 
year 2000. We will be repaying some $2.5 to $3 billion of our 
debts annually. The rest of the foreign currency will be in our 
own hands for our day-to-day requirements. 
  [Azmeh] Can I go back a moment? One of the criticisms that 
we 
hear all the time from people in Iran is that because you've 
been changing policies, you decided you're going to abolish 
different exchange rates. Now you've come back to them. You 
wanted to get rid of subsidies, now you've slowed down getting 
rid of subsidies. It's creating a lot of uncertainty in the 
market and a lot of uncertainty in the economy. 
  [Interpreter] One of the criticisms levelled against Iran 
that we hear is that the policies change -- for example, 
regarding subsidies or other matters -- and that creates 
uncertainty regarding Iran's market. What is your view about 
those changes of policy? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Give us instances. When we announced an 
adjustment, we announced a gradual adjustment. We have repeated 
many times that in the course of 10 years we will gradually 
carry out the adjustment. In the past five years, about 60 to 
70 percent of the adjustment has been carried out, in, for 
example, bread and fuel, energy on the whole, and some 
pharmaceuticals. Some things remain which will be dealt with in 
the next five years. No change has been implemented in our 
economic policy in principle. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] There is talk of a creeping 
political movement aimed at weakening you and competing with 
you. On the other hand there are rumors about the leader 
rejecting your resignation. What political movement is it? Is 
it not one that seeks to slow down the country's economic 
reforms? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I think those rumors are being spread 
in 
the country by counterrevolutionaries. We do not have a 
creeping movement seeking to weaken the government. We really 
do not have any organized movement. It has never occurred to me 
to resign, for anybody to reject my resignation. As I said, 
since I started my political activities 40 years ago, I decided 
to serve this system for the rest of my life. I will work 
wherever I can serve better, and at present, I can serve best as 
president. I think there is no better place for me to serve at 
present. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] A Majles deputy talked about 
it. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I have not heard it. Who was it? It is 
definitely a lie. If he has said it somewhere, it is definitely 
not true, because there has been no such rumor and it would not 
even occur to me. 
  [Italian news agency correspondent Parhan] Mr. President, 
for 
some time now you have stretched the hand of unity toward 
Islamic countries, but there is no prospect of agreement between 
you and them. Do you not believe that in addition to political 
differences, there may be religious differences that prevent 
that agreement? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Do you mean sectarian differences? 
  [Parhan] Shiite-Sunni differences. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I think it unlikely that there are 
Shiite- Sunni differences between Islamic countries at the 
government level. For our part, we do not have any. I think 
those gentlemen's problems are mostly political and concern 
their connection with large countries, such as America and 
Britain, and so forth, in large issues. [passage omitted] 
  [Interpreter] As a result of the Armenian aggression 
against Azerbaijan, more than 1 million people have been made 
homeless. In these hard times, our people thank you for your 
fraternal assistance. 
  This is my question. A period of six months was envisaged 
for giving assistance to the homeless people of Azerbaijan. 
That period will soon expire. Does the Islamic Republic of 
Iran intend to continue its assistance to the Azeri people at 
the end of that period? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Yes, we intend to continue the 
assistance as long as you need our help and we have resources. 
Right now you are in need and we are able to assist, to 
continue. [addresses audience] Well, if you have any questions, 
ask them. 
  [Unidentified member of the audience] Several questions 
remain. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Well, since I am still sitting here, 
you might as well tell me. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] During the imposed war, the 
agriculture sector showed the least vulnerability. That sector, 
according to experts, has enjoyed good growth. Taking into 
consideration economic, political, and demographic developments 
worldwide, where foodstuffs embody the pressure levers and 
strategic points, what plans have you envisaged for the 
development of the agriculture sector and the improvement of the 
situation of agricultural producers? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We envisage acceptable figures for the 
second plan for controlling waters, for constructing canals, for 
setting up drip or spray irrigation, for mechanizing and 
incorporating lands, for supporting agricultural intermediary 
industries, for supporting farmers and the guaranteed purchase 
of farmers' products, and much more. We hope in the second plan 
to become totally self-sufficient in economic products and in 
some cases to be exporting. 
  [KYODO correspondent Yasushi Konji, in English] Mr. 
President, I would like to ask about the relationship between 
Iran and North Korea. The countries around North Korea, 
including Japan, now understand that that country, North Korea, 
is developing a nuclear weapon. Some reports say that North 
Korea also provides nuclear technology and ground-to-ground 
missiles to Iran. Other reports say these two countries are 
cooperating in the development of these weapons. What are your 
views on this issue? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] That information is not correct. 
First, we do not intend to seek nuclear weapons. You know that 
the International Atomic Energy Agency visits Iran regularly and 
all our installations are under their inspection. They have 
repeatedly confirmed that Iran is planning peaceful utilization, 
not a military application, of nuclear technology. Second, 
about North Korea, we do not know at all whether they have 
nuclear capabilities or not. Even if they have, we are not 
interested in receiving such technology from anybody, no matter 
who. 
  [Konji] Mr. President, the international community regards 
North Korea's plan to develop nuclear weapons as a threat to 
peace. What is your position on this? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We are not in favor of nuclear weapons 
proliferation. Of course, alongside this, we seriously believe 
that others must be disarmed too. No one should possess nuclear 
weapons. Those who think they should possess these weapons and 
others should not, they are wrong. This way of thinking is 
dangerous for the world. Those who are threatened by nuclear 
weapons would think of matching the threat, and this leads to 
proliferation. We must all cooperate, particularly the 
Japanese, who were victims of a nuclear catastrophe. They 
should help more to eliminate nuclear weapons in the world. 
  [Spanish news agency correspondent Beatrice Salas, in 
English] Mr. President, after 15 years of the revolution the 
system of the Islamic Republic of Iran is stable and as you say 
you have two thirds of the support of your people. When will it 
be the time for the others to express their opinion in political 
parties, not Islamic, please? 
  [Interpreter] Fifteen years after the Islamic revolution the 
system of the Islamic Republic of Iran is stable. What will 
you do to convey the views of the Islamic Republic of Iran to 
other countries? [passage omitted] In order to convey and 
spread Iranian views in other countries? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] To the extent that we have the ability 
to propagate our thoughts -- through our radio, through our 
media, through our meetings, through seminars, and through 
taking part in international organizations -- we express our 
views. 
  [Salas] Another light question please. I come from a very 
happy country and I can say that colors is very important for 
the spirit. Can we have ladies the permission of your 
excellency to wear Islamic dresses? For example, your regional 
dresses are full of color and Islamic and not these black 
chadors. 
  [Interpreter] She asks if it is possible for ladies to make 
use of different colors in their dress, instead of the black 
chador as hejab [Islamic dress]. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Of course it is possible. The color 
black has not been chosen as an Islamic color. In Shiite 
history, in Islamic history the color black was used by 
Bani-'Abbas [the Abbasid caliphate] as their distinctive sign. 
We, the Shiites, had different colors. Our women are also free 
to choose any color they wish. They decide what they wish to 
wear, the same as you, who are wearing a black coat now. 
  [Salas] Can they wear their regional dresses? 
  [Interpreter] Could it also be done with their regional 
dresses? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] It can be done everywhere. We have not 
chosen any color as the desired Islamic colour. In my remarks I 
have told the ladies that they can choose. However, in our 
society at the moment, black is regarded as a dignified and 
formal colour. Therefore, most people use it, and we have no 
opposition to this color. 
  [Salas] Thank you very much. 
  [NHK correspondent Re'isi, in Persian] Greetings. I have two 
questions. First, the course of the Middle East talks has to 
some extent been reactivated. Mr. 'Arafat has compared the 
recent PLO agreements with Israel with the Hudaibiyyah peace 
agreement [between Prophet Muhammad and some of his enemies in 
Mecca]. What are your views on this? Is Iran against the 
establishment of a Palestinian government led by the PLO or not? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We do not regard what is taking place 
as 
real peace. We believe it is onesided. In this way the right 
of the Palestinian people is being wasted. If a correct course 
is accepted... [pauses] Of course, these issues need to be 
discussed. For instance, if they accept that all the Palestinian 
refugees can return to Palestine and if there are free elections 
there -- the same as took place in South Africa -- then one can 
say that there is real goodwill toward peace. However, the way 
that they keep 4 or 5 million, 4 million Palestinians as 
refugees outside Palestine, and only raise the issue of autonomy 
in a small corner of Palestine, in return for which all the 
correct stances that which had been adopted by the Islamic and 
Arab world are given up, and everyone is forced to accept a 
compromise [sazesh] -- we believe that this path will not lead 
to a correct outcome. We have also announced our views. 
However, as regards practical interference, executive action, or 
the physical prevention of developments -- as far as these are 
concerned, we have not done so and we will not do so; but our 
view is what we have repeatedly expressed. 
  Now, as to who should be in charge if a government were 
formed in Palestine, that is a matter for the Palestinian 
people. Whoever is chosen by the Palestinian people is what 
they have desired. At the moment, we do not know who they will 
elect if a small Palestinain government is formed. 
  [Qatar AL-RAYAH correspondent al-Azab al-Tayyib al-Tahir, 
in Arabic] Peace be upon you, Mr. President. Mr. President, 
are there any Omani efforts to overcome the current tensions 
between Iran and Saudi Arabia? The other question is: There are 
currently certain ideas over the setting up of a Middle Eastern 
common market. What is Iran's position regarding this market, 
particularly in view of the fact that Iran is regarded as a 
would-be member country? Thank you, Mr. President. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Regarding Saudi Arabia, we continue to 
take the initiative and we try to solve our problems with the 
[Saudi] Arabian Government and to have sincere Islamic and 
neighborly relations. Although we have certain complaints from 
them, nevertheless, in view of the importance of the issue we 
are trying to solve our problems. 
  Concerning the common market among Islamic countries, we are 
among those who proposed it. Of course, it requires certain 
political and economic groundwork, prerequisites, and 
conditions. It is not a very urgent matter. We spread the idea 
and at a good and appropriate time, God willing, it will be 
implemented. 
  [KEYHAN correspondent Habibzadeh] Peace be upon you. Your 
Excellency, Mr. Rafsanjani, unfortunately, the issue of the 
three Persian Gulf islands has been turned into a complex 
question. It seems that this matter has been excessively 
prolonged and others are misusing the issue. Has the Islamic 
Republic of Iran any plans for settling this matter? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] The issue of the islands? 
  [Habibzadeh] Yes. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] Our proposal was... [pauses] We invited 
the UAE foreign minister to come here for discussions, returning 
the visit of Mr. Velayati, who went there. We believe that 
bilateral talks are the solution to the problem. This is our 
plan. 
  [Correspondent, name indistinct] Mr. President, can you say 
that you and your government have no opposition to you inside 
the country? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] We have opposition. Why should we 
claim otherwise? We have counterrevolutionaries, both inside 
and outside the country. There are also some who are not 
counterrevolutionaries but who do not accept government policies 
and oppose them. They are active too. Look at all the 
magazines and publications in Iran and see how much opposition 
there is. 
  [Correspondent] What is the policy of the Government of Iran 
on Kashmiri Muslims? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] On Kashmiris, our initial view was that 
UN resolutions should be implemented, that India and Pakistan 
should cooperate, and that, in accordance with UN resolutions, 
the rights of the people of Kashmir should be realized. 
  [Muhammad Mahdi from Lebanon] Peace be upon you. Your 
Excellency, Mr. President, in the Middle East region talks and 
negotiations are under way between Arab governments and Israel 
on ways of solving what is known as the Arab-Israeli conflict. 
How do you see this settlement in general, and do you think 
that there are any other ways apart from military means to end 
this conflict? Thank you. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I have already answered a part of your 
question. As to various methods, whether they should be 
military or nonmilitary, we also regard it as possible that one 
may use other weapons and other means in order to regain the 
rights of the Palestinians. We accept that such a possibility 
exists. If the issue is taken seriously, we will be able to put 
forward some clear proposals. 
  [JAHAN-E EQTESAD correspondent Bitaraf] I hope you are not 
too tired. Concerning youth, as we can see in society not much 
has been done, although newspapers write about it and officials 
make announcements. What are your views regarding the youth 
issue? This is my first question. 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] I am also aware of this issue. The 
needs of the young people are greater than what we are doing for 
them at the moment. We have started fundamental work in the 
Supreme Youth Council. We have started discussions on all the 
different issues that concern the young, such as guidance, 
sports, radio and television, employment, marriage, and other 
similar topics that will be gradually announced. I think this 
will be a long-term undertaking. It is difficult for us to 
achieve satisfactory results immediately in all these issues. 
  [Correspondent Bitaraf] Your Excellency, Mr. President, 
during the first plan the stock market was in practice not 
included in the course of privatization [as heard]. Do you have 
any plans for reactivating the stock market during the second 
plan or not? 
  [Hashemi-Rafsanjani] To say that it was not included is not 
correct. We attached importance to the stock market in the 
first plan. During the first two years, the stock market became 
very active. After the revolution, the stock market declined 
during the war. During the first plan it was made active. It 
stagnated for a couple of years, but again during last year the 
stock market has been active. A few days ago, when I opened the 
computerized site of the stock market, it was reported to me 
that in the entire period before the revolution they had 190 
billion rials of dealings in the stock market, but during the 
past five years of the first plan they have had 1,500 billion 
rials worth of dealings. During last year we have had the 
highest figure. I think that during the second plan as the 
factories come into production the stock market will be made 
more active. Our factories were in a bad state during the war. 
The stock market does not accept [as heard]. Many factories 
wish to participate, but they could not provide the necessary 
degree of confidence that the stock market requires. In the 
past five years, the performance of many companies and factories 
has gradually improved. The stock market admits them with 
greater speed. I think that during the second plan we shall 
witness a more satisfactory growth. 
  Is that all? Well, we thank you for your patience and we 
hope that the issues that were raised here will be reflected in 
the media truthfully and correctly. God be with you. Goodbye. 

