Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Some 600 tons of washed cocaine paste, the 
preliminary step to conversion into cocaine hydrochloride, were 
produced in Peru's coca-growing areas in 1993, according to a 
confidential report released by the Antinarcotics Intelligence 
Division of the National Police. 
  The efforts of law enforcement agencies in prohibiting or 
fighting production of the drug resulted in seizures amounting 
to less than 1 percent of the total produced, the document 
states. 
  Peruvian drug traffickers used some 2.134 million kilos of 
raw cocaine paste [PBC] and substantial volumes of chemical 
ingredients to produce that quantity of washed PBC. 
  The source reports that logistical and financial support 
extended to law enforcement agencies in their fight against 
illegal trafficking in Alto Huallaga and the various rain basins 
of the Peruvian central mountains and jungle was inadequate. 
  In addition, the American Government has cut its funding of 
the fight against the scourge. 
  The American State Department recently ordered the transfer 
of UH-1H and Bell 212 helicopters from the Santa Lucia antidrug 
base (in the heart of Central Huallaga) to the Pucallpa Air Base 
as part of its economic measures. 
  Nevertheless, our sources have reported that since the 
transfer about a month ago, the aircraft have not been sent out 
on antidrug operations for even five minutes! 
  When the helicopters were based at Santa Lucia, they were 
used in daily police interdiction operations. 
  One fact resulting in increased PBC production is that the 
peasants who grow coca for leaves now also produce raw PBC. 
  "The peasants plant and harvest coca leaves, dry them on 
their roofs, then crush them and produce from 2 to 3 kilos of 
raw PBC. They take it to collection centers indicated by the 
Peruvian drug traffickers, whence it is sent to Colombia," the 
spokesman said. 
  There are various means of shipping the drug to Colombia, 
where it is refined in underground laboratories. 
  Small planes (twin-engine aircraft that can carry up to 2 
tons in a single trip) and boats are used. Very little is hauled 
overland due to poor roads and police control. 
  Coca growing and the production of cocaine base have spread 
to other areas besides Central Huallaga, which has lost its 
exclusivity in this illegal business. 
  It is known that cocaine is produced in the Mayo River Basin 
(Department of San Martin), Alto Maranon (Amazonas), and the 
area of the Ene and Apurimac Rivers in the Departments of 
Ayacucho, Apurimac, and Junin. 
  Another important coca-growing area is Puerto Inca and 
Puerto 
Bermudez (Oxapampa and Pozuzo) in the Department of Pasco. 
<H5>  [Box, p A8] </H5>
<H5>  Fight Continues </H5>
  Even though it lacks the economic and logistical resources 
that it needs, the National Antidrug Directorate stepped up 
drugs seizures in the coca-growing areas of Alto Huallaga in 
1993. 
  For example, between January and October of 1993 alone, 
8,301 
kilos of drugs were seized, compared with 7,775 kilos for all of 
1992. 
  The number of underground laboratories discovered and 
destroyed during the first 10 months of 1993 was 38, compared 
with 54 in 1992. 
  Last year, 15 trenches for crushing coca leaves were 
destroyed. In 1992, 315 such trenches were found and dynamited. 
  Last year, authorities discovered 88,121 kilos of chemical 
ingredients, five small planes (three of which were seized and 
two destroyed), and 48 vehicles. 
  The 8,301 kilos of drugs seized from January to October of 
1993 included 5,195 of washed cocaine paste, 2,271 of raw PBC, 
434 of cocaine chlorhydrate, and 400 of marijuana. 

