Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vesna Roller: "Right To Have a Conscience"] </F>
  [Text] Fewer than 1,000 military conscripts took advantage 
of the possibility of resorting to the right to be a 
conscientious objector, i.e., they asked to perform their 
military service without weapons. More that 200 but fewer than 
1,000 conscientious-objector applications have been received at 
the Commission for Civilian Service, which was founded less than 
two years ago at the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of 
Croatia, the commission's president Dr. Ladislav Krapac says. 
  What does the law say? The right to be a conscientious 
objector, which the Yugoslav legislation did not respect, is 
guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia. It 
was adopted at the end of 1990, and later worked out by the law 
on defense. Its regulations set the procedure for implementing 
the right to be a conscientious objector and for informing each 
recruit of his right to be a conscientious objector. In the 
original version of the law, only new recruits could use the 
right to be conscientious objectors, while other conscripts had 
a deadline of three months during which they could submit the 
conscientious objector application. In May 1993, thanks mostly 
to the antiwar activities in Croatia, an amendment to the law on 
defense was passed, whereby a one-year deadline--until the end 
of May 1994--was given to all the conscripts during which they 
could use the right to be conscientious objectors. 
  The Croatian peace activists believe that, although Croatia, 
in contrast to other states on the territory of the former 
Yugoslavia, made a great step toward the Western-style of 
democracy by accepting the right to be a conscientious objector, 
its actual implementations has nevertheless significant 
shortcomings. "We still do not have an alternative service, but 
what is involved is military service which is performed without 
weapons," Srdjan Dvornik, an activist of the Antiwar Campaign of 
Croatia, claims. Such a formulation was specified in the 
law--one of its regulations states that civilian service is to 
be performed within the Croatian Army but without carrying 
weapons. Dvornik explains that this definition is contrary to 
the Constitution of Croatia, which acknowledges the right to be 
conscientious objector to military service, but not to carry 
weapons. Only military duties can be carried on in the army, 
Dvornik concludes, and so, according to international law, 
civilians who actively help the army are also considered as 
legitimate targets for attack in a war. 
  The peace activists believe that this discrepancy between 
the 
Constitution and the law should be resolved, and what is more 
important, those who resort to the right to be conscientious 
objectors should be enabled to perform their service outside of 
the army, in a real civilian service. Therefore, they propose 
that alternative military service be organized by another 
government body instead of the Ministry of Defense. The peace 
activists also demand that military service for persons who 
submitted the conscientious objector application be suspended 
during the procedure for its resolution, which is usually three 
months. 
  One of the basic objections to the decree regarding the 
right 
to be a conscientious objector, which the peace activists 
pointed out from the very moment when the law on defense was 
passed, concerns the regulation which stipulates that the 
applicant must explain, i.e., make a convincing case for, 
religious, moral, and other principles for which he refuses to 
perform military service. "The right to be a conscientious 
objector is a matter of a personal decision and no commission 
can decide on its validity," Srdjan Dvornik says, adding that, 
in most Western countries, conscientious objector status is 
automatically approved with the verification of the basic facts 
stated in the request. 
<H5>  Abuses </H5>
  The top leadership in the Ministry of Defense, on the other 
hand, believes that the civilian service is not a universal 
citizen's right: "We must protect ourselves from the abuse of 
the right of civilian military service. Every country has a 
protective filter. Military service is a duty and a right--one 
has to defend the country in which one lives," Stjepan Adanic, 
deputy defense minister for the civilian sector, says. Adanic 
believes that the only person who could be granted the right to 
perform civilian military service is someone who could prove 
that even before being drafted for military service or mobilized 
he had convictions against use of weapons. According to the 
same logic, Adanic explains, atheists, in his opinion, should 
not have the right to be conscientious objectors. 
  The supporters of the right to be a conscientious objector 
as 
a basic citizen's right and representatives of the Croatian 
government do not agree on another issue--whether the argument 
for abstaining from performing military service expounded by 
Croatian citizens of Serb nationality can be accepted as 
valid--the argument that they do not wish to shoot at their own 
people who are "on the other side." Dr. Ladislav Krapac, 
president of the Commission for Civilian Service, claims that 
such "political-ethnic" criteria are unacceptable anywhere in 
Europe. Miso Bozic, attorney and activist of the citizens' 
council for human rights from Karlovac states that a great 
number of Serbs from Karlovac turned to him with the request to 
use their right to be conscientious objectors because they did 
not want to shoot at their relatives, who live on the other side 
of the front line in the immediate vicinity of Karlovac. These 
arguments can be considered as moral reasons, Bozic says, adding 
that political convictions of peace activists can also be 
categorized as moral reasons for not aggreeing to peform 
military service. Ratko Dojcinovic, a member of the citizens' 
council of human rights in Karlovac, based on his personal 
experience, claims that persons who submit conscientious 
objector applications, undergo a special army procedure in which 
the officers try to convince them--by hook or by crook-- to 
change their decision. Thus, Dojcinovic spent 45 days in prison, 
was mistreated and insulted, just so that, as he says, he would 
change his mind and take a gun in his hand. "At the end they 
beat me up and sent me to do heavy physical work," Dojcinovic 
says, and claims that his was not an isolated case. A special 
work brigade--White Tigers--was also organized in Karlovac in 
which only Serbs who refused to carry weapons were mobilized. 
Its members wear white boots and thus, Dojcinovic says, 
everyone can immediately recognize them and "classify" them. 
"Tigers," he claims, "are sent to the front lines in order to 
dig the trenches, all the while being exposed to insults from 
`real' soldiers who consider them as traitors. Croats who 
refuse to carry weapons are also subject to pressures in the 
army." 
<H5>  Political Pressure </H5>
  Zoran Pusic, president of the Civilian Council of Human 
Rights claims that the Ministry of Defense also applies 
systematic methods toward the citizens of the Serbian 
nationality who resort to the right to be conscientious 
objectors. "These people feel that this is a type of ethnic 
cleansing," Pusic says, and claims that a significant number of 
such persons, although they submitted their request to be 
conscientious objectors, ended up in military court. Pusic 
believes that similar methods are also used for political 
pressure. In Karlovac, Pusic illustrates, out of 31 city 
councilmen, only those who are members of the Social-Democratic 
Union receive the call to mobilization. It is logical to expect 
that the right to be a conscientious objector would reduce the 
number of deserters. Their exact number from the begining of the 
war has never been revealed to the Croatian public. Mirsad 
Baksic, state military prosecutor, answering a journalist's 
question on the number of cases of desertion proceedings before 
the military court, says that "there are quite a few." He adds 
that only a few sentences have been pronounced, mostly because 
it is a very long process. It seems that the number of 
deserters in Croatia could increase following the recent mass 
mobilizations whose goal was to reinforce the brigades which 
were sent to the battlefield in Bosnia-Herzegovina. More than 
2,000 persons--mostly Croatian citizens from Bosnia-Herzegovina 
were mobilized at the end of last year and sent to the Bosnian 
front, as reported by the Croatian Helsinki Human Rights Council 
and unsuccesfully denied by the Croatian Defense Ministry. As 
the stories of two young men published in the foreign press 
attest, they were asked in the Zagreb barracks to sign a 
statement that they are voluntarily leaving for Bosnia. The two 
young men, who are students in Zagreb and who succeeded in 
fleeing from the buses on the way to the battlefield in the 
neighboring state, say that even those who refused to sign were 
taken in the end to Bosnia. They are hiding at the moment and 
are pondering whether to turn to the Croatian government to ask 
for the protection of their right not to fight on the territory 
of another state. 

