Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 14 Mar (XINHUA) -- The second session of 
the Eighth National People's Congress [NPC] today held another 
plenary meeting and group discussions to deliberate Premier Li 
Peng's Government Work Report. The deputies enthusiastically 
discussed the goal and tasks for reform and development this 
year in light of the present actual economic situation and 
social life. The deputies pointed out: The establishment and 
improvement of a socialist market economic structure should be 
guaranteed by a sound legal system. It is necessary to pay 
greater attention to the improvement of the socialist legal 
system, speed up legislation, implement laws in a strict manner, 
and guard the sanctity of the law to ensure the smooth progress 
of reform and development. 
  Several leaders of the CPC Central Committee, the NPC 
Standing Committee, and the State Council today visited a number 
of delegations to the ongoing NPC session to deliberate the 
Government Work Report together with the NPC deputies and to 
hear the deputies' opinions and suggestions. Vice Premier Li 
Lanqing said after hearing opinions expressed by the Yunnan 
delegation: We should develop areas where people of minority 
nationalities reside. On the one hand, we should do a good job 
in the construction of infrastructure facilities; and on the 
other hand, we should pay attention to developing education for 
minority people and cultivating capable people in various 
fields. He said: Education for minority people is very 
important in developing the economy of areas where minority 
people reside. Only when we develop education for minority 
people can we better develop the economy of areas where minority 
people reside. Vice Premier Zou Jiahua joined the Hubei 
delegation in deliberating the Government Work Report and 
expressed his opinions in light of questions raised by deputies 
there. He said: We should correctly handle relations between 
reform, development, and stability, and ensure a sustained, 
rapid, and healthy development of the economy. Continuity, 
speed, and soundness are interrelated, and they supplement each 
other. Sound economic development should have rational 
structure and good economic and social benefits. If we only 
stress speed, there will be the danger of imbalance in economic 
development. 
  Li Tieying, Political Bureau member of the CPC Central 
Committee and state councillor, joined the Zhejiang delegation 
in deliberating the Government Work Report and stressed issues 
of reform. He said: Ensuring the smooth implementation of 
reform is important work this year. Governments at various 
levels must organize the work in a careful and meticulous 
manner, conduct investigations and study in a penetrating way, 
and continuously strengthen adjustment and control. He also 
expressed his views on developing intermediary organizations and 
speeding up the development of production factors. 
  Wen Jiabao, Political Bureau alternate member of the CPC 
Central Committee, and State Councillor Chen Junsheng took part 
in deliberating the Government Work Report with the Anhui and 
Hunan delegations. They respectively spoke on the question of 
developing agriculture. Wen Jiabao said: We must proceed from 
reality in developing agriculture, suit measures to local 
conditions, respect the peasants' pioneering spirit, and 
adroitly guide action according to the circumstances. This 
year, we should attach importance to three things in 
agriculture. First, we should ensure the steady increase of 
outputs of grain, cotton, and oil-bearing crops, and do a good 
job in developing the "vegetable basket" project. Second, we 
should continue to find ways and means to increase peasants' 
income. Third, we should ensure social stability in rural areas. 
Chen Junsheng emphatically talked about the question of grain 
production. He said: Judging from the whole country, the grain 
output has set an all-time record. However, the development is 
still uneven in different locales. The agricultural structure's 
adjustment should be conducted under the condition of stabilized 
development and steady increase in grain production. 
  Tian Jiyun, NPC Standing Committee vice chairman, and State 
Councillors Song Jian, Li Guixian, and Peng Peiyun also met with 
the Shandong, Hebei, Heilongjiang, and Fujian delegations to 
take part in deliberating the Government Work Report together 
with deputies of those delegations. 
  In deliberating the Government Work Report, many deputies 
pointed out that the development of socialist democracy and 
improvement of the socialist legal system are important 
component parts of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and are an important guarantee for reform and 
development. Ma Sizhong of the Ningxia delegation said: 
Premier Li Peng has devoted a large portion of his Government 
Work Report to fully expound the building of democracy and the 
legal system. This shows that he has attached great importance 
to the building of democracy and the legal system. Building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics is the cause of hundreds 
of millions of people, and so we must give full play to 
democracy. The establishment and improvement of a socialist 
market economic structure must be protected by a sound legal 
system. We should be good at using legal means to administer 
the economy and the society, and we must strive to make progress 
in this respect. 
  Henan Deputy Wang Hongfan said: Attaching great importance 
to building the socialist legal system and properly learning how 
to use legal means to administer the economy and the society is 
very significant to China's reform, development, and stability 
in the future. He said: At present, some leading cadres and 
law enforcement personnel are not familiar with the legal system 
and the situation of using words to replace law and using power 
to prevail over law happens from time to time. This situation 
is unfavorable to reform, development, and stability. We must 
resolutely correct such practices as doing things not in 
accordance with the law, not being strict in implementing laws, 
and not paying attention to the violation of laws. We must 
strengthen education on the legal system for cadres at various 
levels, especially leading cadres, and also enhance all 
citizens' concept of the legal system. Only in this way can we 
guarantee the smooth establishment of a socialist market 
economic structure and social and political stability. 
  Many deputies pointed out: Market economy, in a certain 
sense, means an economy established on a legal system. With the 
change of the economic structure, many disorderly things and 
much confusion have cropped up in social and economic 
activities. We must accelerate the pace in building a legal 
system in accordance with the characteristics and requirements 
of a socialist market economic structure. Li Ligong and Zhang 
Kui of the Shanxi delegation said: Judging from the practice of 
reform and development, the building of the legal system is a 
very important thing. It is important to enact laws, but it is 
even more important to implement laws. Laws will be useless if 
we do not implement them. Only by grasping legislative work and 
implementing laws at the same time can we effectively protect 
reform and development with the legal system. 

