Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prague Feb 13 (CTK) -- Europe should be able to 
create a new security structure allowing the prevention of 
conflicts, both regional and those with wider significance, 
following the fundamental changes it has gone through, the Czech 
defence minister said Sunday [13 February]. 
  Speaking on the Czech Television programme "Debata", Antonin 
Baudys said that, following the fall of communism and the 
breakup of the Soviet Union, the Czech Republic wanted to become 
a "reliable and trustworthy" part of such a security structure. 
  Only a country felt to be reliable, by its neighbours and by 
the rest of the world, not only a democratic state, but one able 
to defend itself against an enemy, and clearly declaring its 
intention to defend its integrity and independence, can prosper, 
the minister said. "Armed forces, effective armed forces, are 
an expression of that," Baudys said. 
  The task and goal of the transformation of the Czech Army, 
begun by the Ministry in July 1993, is to structure and reform 
it in order to make it the counterpart to the armed forces of 
standard European democracies. 
  The complexity of that problem, and the Czech Army's small 
size, prompted the Ministry to work out a concept consisting of 
a shorter- term programme running somewhat over two years, and 
another expected to take until the year 2000, Baudys said. 
  He explained that the quicker measures would entail making 
the structure of the Czech Armed Forces compatible with those of 
NATO countries, switching to a system of brigades from a 
divisional structure, for example. 
  The minister said a completely new personnel system was 
important, as it would prepare the forces for a system of 
services. Significant personnel changes had already been made, 
he said, adding, however, that a broad measure such as 
reassessment of all graduates of Soviet military colleges was 
not called for. 
  The Armed Forces need to be built with the best available, 
Baudys said, though even better experts will come in the future. 
To that end, the Ministry was looking for ways to make the 
military profession interesting to young people, he added. A 
significant problem, he noted, was the change to a new method of 
financing and budgeting, as well. 
  The first steps in the transformation -- civilian 
leadership, 
control by parliament, and making spending visible -- had been 
made much earlier, during the middle of last year, Baudys said. 
Now, after the starting of "Partnership for Peace," the 
Ministry was discovering that these measures fulfilled precisely 
the NATO conditions for armies that want to become part of that 
initiative. 
  Baudys said he was convinced individuals' confidence in the 
Czech Armed Forces was on the rise. He pointed to the increase 
in neutral news articles regarding the institution which he had 
received from statistical surveys of the media during the last 
three years. 

