BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 31 May (MTI) -- Chairman of the Hungarian 
Socialist Party (MSZP) Gyula Horn on Tuesday [31 May] confirmed 
that his party -- which won an overall majority of 54.1 percent 
in the Hungarian parliamentary elections -- seeks to form a 
coalition government, as it believes the new government should 
reflect the will of the people. 
  Speaking on the breakfast television program "Nap TV" this 
morning, Horn said the Socialists consider the Alliance of Free 
Democrats (SZDSZ) -- which is the second largest party in the 
new Parliament, with 18.1 percent of the vote -- as their most 
likely coalition partner, as the SZDSZ's economic manifesto is 
closest to that of the socialists. 
  Horn added: "Yes, we do want a coalition. However, if this 
does not come about, if there is no partner for this, or if the 
chosen partner is afraid to accept the responsibility of 
coalition governing -- as this does not merely imply velvet 
ministerial chairs, but a very strong responsibility as well, 
and the Free Democrats are just as familiar with the country's 
situation as we are -- then we shall utilize the confidence 
conferred on us by the voters. We received an absolute majority 
from the voters. If there is no other way, then the Hungarian 
Socialist Party will form a government on its own. We would 
like to avoid this, but if there is no other way then we cannot 
let the voters down, we cannot hand back the confidence given 
us." 
  The Socialists will decided on the possible party or parties 
with which they shall begin coalition talks at their special 
congress this Saturday. The Free Democrats are to decide about 
participation in coalition talks at their special delegate 
assembly this Sunday [5 June]. 
  Horn said that for their part, the Socialists could begin 
coalition talks with the Free Democrats as early as next Monday 
[6 June], in order to conclude these talks by the end of June 
and for the new government to be formed as soon as possible, as 
it faces urgent, monumental tasks. 

