Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Anyone Will Give In"] </F>
  [Text] The dark shadow in map square number 3664 reminds 
one of a gigantic, mutilated insect. One of the trapeze-like 
wings had broken off, the nose was missing, and in the dull gray 
water of Lake Constance even a diving robot of the "Sear Rover" 
type could send only diffuse video pictures from 159 meters 
below the surface of the lake. 
  A two-engine Cessna 425 plane, license number D-IEFW, lay on 
its back like a helpless beetle. The plane had taken off from 
Prague shortly after 1800 on the Monday before last [24 January] 
and had crashed into Lake Constance during a failed landing 
approach to the Swiss airport of Altenrhein in St. Gallen Canton. 
  In the plane there were professional pilot Rudolf Wirschen, 
44, Berlin merchant and hobby flier Josef Rimmele, 54, his 
partner Klaus Eichler, 53, as well as Czech citizens Iveta 
Ranetova, 30, and Alena Petrusova, 39. Rimmele's loyal terrier 
Asta, 8, was also aboard. 
  Lake Constance hides various mysteries. Occasionally, 
defective small planes, helicopters, or boats sink, their cargo 
disappearing in the far reaches of the lake. The largest German 
inland lake has had to swallow a lot, particularly dirt and 
poison: Year after year, 21,000 tonnes of nitrates, 2,300 
tonnes of phosphor, and 800 tonnes of other pollutants, such as 
lead and zinc, mingle in the water between three countries 
[Austria, Germany, and Switzerland]. 
  However, what was assumed to lie at the bottom of the lake 
last week seemed to be far more dangerous: a sinister threat 
that one could not smell, see, or taste. 
  Reportedly, the Cessna carried at least 70 kg of highly 
radioactive material called cesium 137. And BILD knew early 
that Rimmele and Eichler were the "nuclear traders of the 
Russian Mafia." 
  A clear case: Europe's largest drinking water reservoir, 
which supplies water to about 4 million people every day, from 
St. Gallen in Switzerland to far behind Stuttgart, seemed to be 
in danger. Disaster relief experts worked out emergency plans 
for the worst possible accident. 
  When the German research submarine "Iago" began rescuing the 
Cessna last Friday afternoon, it had long been determined that 
the highly poisonous cargo could not have been aboard. In order 
to shield 70 kg of radioactive cesium 137, which is a by-product 
of nuclear fission and is used in measurement and control 
engineering, one needs a lead casing that would weigh four 
tonnes. The Cessna would not have been able to take off in the 
first place. 
  The mysterious events playing against the scenery of Lake 
Constance are an example of contemporary hysteria. They show 
how uncertain policemen, politicians, and media are because of a 
new variety of crime: Since the fall of the Wall, poisonous 
substances and radioactive material from the arsenals of the 
former East Bloc are being offered on a worldwide, bizarre 
fleamarket of death. And the danger that emanates from vagrant 
nuclear material has meanwhile become real. 
  The Federal Office of Criminal Investigations (BKA) in 
Wiesbaden and the Federal Intelligence Office (BND) in Pullach 
are warning against the new threat that comes from the East. In 
an alarming 18-page report to the Chancellor's Office ("Nuclear 
Black Market/Nuclear Terrorism") at the beginning of January, 
the BND noticed a "trend toward an escalation of the situation," 
which "gives" everyone "reason for concern." 
  For the first time, "the threshold to high enrichment" has 
been "crossed" with stolen uranium material. A "friendly 
intelligence service" received a sample of material with a 
"degree of enrichment of slightly less than 40 percent." This 
is a step forward on the path toward a nuclear bomb, which needs 
either plutonium or highly enriched uranium 235 as fissionable 
material. 
  It is also alarming that, for the fist time, it is not only 
dictators, but possibly also "two extreme Islamic fundamentalist 
associations" that are trying to obtain access to technical 
knowledge about nuclear matters. In addition, the confidential 
BND paper notes that there are "credible intelligence service 
findings" that, in the East, "individual high-ranking officials 
from ministries, embassies, industrial enterprises, and research 
facilities" are involved in the dubious nuclear deals. All this 
means crossing a "threshold of danger." 
  BKA experts and intelligence service officials can imagine 
that further developed nuclear specialities or frightening 
biological weapons could get into the hands of Western gangs -- 
a completely new field for blackmailers. "If this happens," BKA 
chief Hans-Ludwig Zachert predicts, "any community will give in." 
  At the beginning of last year, the Bavarian Land Office of 
Criminal Investigations alarmed the authorities with a report 
that a gang of nuclear smugglers had considered blackmail with 
fissionable material. However, it remained just a plan. 
  In November, a madman threatened that he would destroy the 
inner cities of Frankfurt, Hamburg, Berlin, and Munich with 
thermonuclear warheads. He demanded 100 million marks [DM] from 
the Munich State Lottery Administration. 
  Also, in November, the threatening letter of a "Bosnian 
Indignation Front" turned up, according to BND findings. The 
hitherto unknown organization wanted to detonate nuclear 
warheads in four European capital cities, if its political 
demands for the benefit of Bosnia were not fulfilled. 
  For the time being, the intelligence services still react 
with relative composure to such threats. According to current 
knowledge, it can still be ruled out "that nuclear warheads are 
indeed available in an uncontrolled manner," the BND report says. 
  However, the composure might soon shatter. Individual terror 
already is one of the achievements of the nuclear age. Not only 
Western intelligence service officials seem to consider the 
terrible end of Vladimir Kaplun, 63, as a model case. The 
manager of a Moscow packaging company died horribly in great 
pain: Opponents had put a source of radiation in his chair. 
  In the crumbled Soviet empire, where nuclear material "of 
all kinds, at least from civilian institutions" (BND) is 
available as easily as a handgun in St. Pauli [Hamburg], things 
like that are happening more often now. 
  In Irkutsk, Siberia, a saboteur wanted to kill two company 
heads with the same method. The gentlemen noticed in time that 
they felt bad, and survived. A potential killer of his 
mother-in-law -- also in Siberia -- hid the radioactive 
substance in the basement. This did not work. 
  Hesse Environment Minister Joschka Fischer, 45, was also 
supplied with radioactive material. After 6 December, the 
Greens politician received a nuclear pill made of uranium 235 in 
a letter. The anonymous letter accompanying it said: "Mr. 
Fischer, check the Hanau nuclear companies.... Be careful, 
radioactive." 
  Since in CIS trade everything can be had that was kept under 
lock and key by the state in the past, a wave of radioactive 
material is coming to the West, at "extremely excessive prices," 
the BND says. 
  Germany is the turntable of the new nuclear smuggling. 
"Germany's economic prosperity," Peter Kroemer of the BKA says, 
"has a particular power of attraction." 
  In 1990 the BKA registered four offenses of this kind, in 
1991 there were already 41, in 1992 they numbered 158, and last 
year there were about 200 cases. During a visit to neighboring 
Poland, which often serves the dealers as a transit and storage 
site, Kroemer told the Senate Human Rights Committee about the 
most popular products on Germany's merchant scene. 
  The list ranged from plutonium to uranium 235, cesium 137, 
and cobalt 60 to strontium 90. The radioactive substances, in 
particular strontium and cesium, are considered to be dangerous 
because they cause cancer. The sellers boast that they can lay 
their hands on any material. 
  Smuggling is booming. How hotly the market is contested is 
shown by 108 incidents all over the world, which the BND has put 
together in "event lists" for the past two years. 
  Armed, uniformed men stole radioactive material from the 
Geophysics Institute in Tbilisi, Georgia. During a routine 
check in Murmansk, Russia, last November, it was noticed that 
nuclear fuel had been stolen from a storage facility for nuclear 
submarines. A total of 200 kg of uranium disappeared from a 
nuclear power plant in Lithuania. Even in Vietnam, 3 kg of 
plutonium were allegedly offered for sale. A network of dubious 
nuclear-trading companies is developing. 
  The investigators are often helpless, because legal and 
illegal practices are inseparably interlaced in these deals. 
Ice-cold defaulters, bulls, and speculators are hunting for 
rare and allegedly highly profitable metals, such as scandium or 
osmium 187 from the former East Bloc states. 
  All of them are mysterious substances. Not even experts know 
what scandium is supposed to be used for. Osmium 187 is to be 
used not only for refining the surface of fountain pens, but 
also as a hard-metal material. 
  No matter what, prices are high. About $70 million is 
charged for 1 kg of osmium 187, scandium can already be had at 
$50,000 per kilo. 
  For a long time, the experts of BKA and BND have wondered 
about the actual point of the strange deals. Finally, they 
arrived at the most obvious conclusion: greed and simple fraud. 
In some cases they also think that the motive is money 
laundering -- pretended deals are a popular method of legalizing 
illegal money. German and Russian security authorities have 
been watching this strange poker game for three years. 
Following the principle of a chain letter, new clients are 
sought out and there is no lack of participants right from the 
beginning. 
  "The criminal energy is great, the circle of participants is 
becoming increasingly confusing," says Vadim Raistein, 37, head 
of the foreign trade department of an analysis center in Moscow, 
which is located next door to the Nuclear Energy Ministry. 
  According to Raistein, the institute has had "a lot of bad 
experiences with German dealers," who send "the strangest 
offers." The senders are renowned lawyers in Munich, Hamburg, or 
Duesseldorf. 
  Seized exhibits of nuclear fraud are accumulating in the 
cupboards of the institute. Says Raistein: "Sometimes the 
material is really radioactive, but virtually always it is 
completely worthless." A total of 99 percent of the examined 
offers are "pure nonsense." 
  Everybody cheats everybody else. Raistein knows several 
directors of formerly state institutes and nuclear factories, 
who sign delivery contracts for nonexistent goods and draw up 
forged expert reports: "They are tempted by the big money." 
  Even government members have signed papers for export 
without 
checking them. Raistein: "They are happy about every single 
company that is able to fend for itself." 
  Western service can often only speculate who is behind the 
trade in the radioactive materials. Of the roughly 300 suspects 
who have attracted attention in Germany, about half come from 
East European countries -- mainly Polish and Russian. According 
to the findings of the BND, the centers of the illegal nuclear 
activities are Vilnius and Kaunas in Lithuania. 
  The German accomplices mostly turn out to be rather 
sinister multitalents. Most of them have attracted attention by 
fraud or illegal arms deals in the past. Some of them worked 
for the now-bankrupt Listen-and-Look company, that is, the East 
Berlin Ministry of State Security. 
  The dead merchants in Lake Constance were obviously small 
fry. Rimmele and Eichler were two figures in a milieu in which 
the use of a charter plane also helps to compensate for a bad 
reputation. 
  In the small Noribau company in Berlin they dealt with real 
estate, but they always dreamed of the big coup. Contact with a 
former colonel of the People's Police was supposed to provide 
the initial impetus. Klaus-Peter Nedwig, 48, son of Lieutenant 
General Helmut Nedwig, former head of the GDR [German Democratic 
Republic] criminal police, was Rimmele's great hope. 
  Last autumn, Nedwig, who failed as an insurance agent in the 
past, telephoned old colleagues from the criminal police and 
told them to come to Edisonstrasse 63 in Berlin. One of the 
participants remembers that Rimmele was the one who did the 
talking there. One could "make a lot of money" with rare 
metals, but the business had to be "done on a large scale." 
  Rimmele announced that he would bring rare metals and other 
substances to the bonded warehouse of Zurich Kloten Airport by 
private plane. Now one has to work big, Rimmel said; 
double-digit million sums were allegedly involved. 
  However, the nuclear chandlers probably had the wrong sense 
of scale. Until the alleged big coup they had mostly dealt with 
small amounts and usually lost: Here a few business contacts 
with merchants from China, there a deceptive hope for a cesium 
deal in the Baltic states. That involved only the harmless 
cesium 133 isotope, which does not emit radiation. 
  Their partner in Switzerland was also such a loser. Juerg 
Jacomet, arms dealer and former informer of the Swiss Military 
Intelligence Service, used to meet ex-agents of the KGB or the 
Stasi in the Poestli restaurant in Rumlang near Zurich and 
dreamed of golden times. At the moment he is reportedly 
involved in arms deals in Zagreb -- fleeing from the Swiss 
federal police. 
  Eichler, who was a limited partner of Noribau, is remembered 
by Uwe Kranz, head of the Thuringian Land Office of Criminal 
Investigations, as a "negligible figure." In a hotel in Erfurt 
he once wanted to conclude an osmium deal with some boisterous 
Hungarian fellows, but that did not work out. The BKA took over 
the case. 
  Berlin merchants Rimmele and Eichler spent their last day as 
they spent their lives -- boasting and unsuccessful. Before 
they were permitted to charter the Cessna, Martin Ewers, 29, 
manager of the "Aerowest Braunschweig" company, demanded that 
Rimmele pay about DM30,000, which had to be paid right at Prague 
Airport. 
  Rimmele paid by Eurocard. The final destination was a Paris 
laboratory with measuring instruments for rare substances. 
During a stopover at Altenrhein Airport, 5 km from the site of 
the accident, a client was waiting, who was interested in the 
miraculous Red Mercury. 
  When the plane did not come, the client, a man from Vaduz, 
Liechtenstein, quickly disappeared. Better safe than sorry. 

