Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Communique of the Third Plenary Session of the Central </F>
Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Communist Party of 
China, dated 1 March 1994] 
  [Text] The Central Commission for Discipline Inspection of 
the Communist Party of China held its third plenary session in 
Beijing from 25 February to 1 March 1994. The session was held 
in a new situation in which the whole party is thoroughly 
studying Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng 
Xiaoping," implementing in an all-around way the guidelines 
of the 14th CPC National Congress and the Third Plenary Session 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee, accelerating the 
establishment of a socialist market economic structure, and 
working for a sustained, rapid, and healthy development of the 
national economy. Under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory on building socialism with Chinese characteristics and 
the party's basic line, the session worked in accordance with 
the major principle of the party's work -- seizing the 
opportunity, deepening reform, opening up wider, promoting 
development, and maintaining stability -- and the central 
authorities' demand for waging a deepgoing, protracted and more 
effective anticorruption struggle. It reviewed and summed up 
how the whole party has implemented the central authorities' 
decision on performing several tasks well in the near future 
with respect to the anticorruption struggle since the second 
plenary session of the Central Commission for Discipline 
Inspection. It also discussed and arranged the tasks of the 
anticorruption struggle for 1994. 
  Attending the session were 103 members of the CPC Central 
Commission for Discipline Inspection, and present as non-voting 
delegates were persons in charge of discipline inspection and 
supervision organs of all provinces, autonomous regions, 
municipalities, central departments, State Council departments, 
and the People's Liberation Army. The plenary session was 
chaired by the Standing Committee of the Central Commission for 
Discipline Inspection. It examined and approved the report of 
"combating corruption in a deepgoing and protracted way and 
serving reform, development, and stability," delivered by Wei 
Jianxing, secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline 
Inspection, on behalf of the Commission's Standing Committee. 
  Jiang Zemin, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, 
delivered an important speech at the plenary session. Present 
on the occasion were party and state leaders, including Li Peng, 
Li Ruihuan, Liu Huaqing, and Hu Jintao. Also present were 
responsible comrades of central and state organs and relevant 
departments. 
  The meeting, after earnestly studying and discussing Comrade 
Jiang Zemin's important speech, reached a consensus: Comrade 
Jiang Zemin's speech is very profound, there is no mistaking 
what it is aimed at, and it is good guidance. All comrades of 
the party should seriously study and implement the guideline of 
"affirming achievements, seeing problems, summing up experience, 
keeping a clear head, and continuing the efforts to do an even 
better job in fighting corruption" emphasized in his speech; and 
carry out the several requirements, put forward in the speech, 
for doing good anticorruption work in the next stage. At the 
same time, the party organizations at all levels should 
earnestly adhere to Comrade Jiang Zemin's demand for further 
strengthening the flesh-and-blood ties between the party and the 
people, and step up the education in upholding the mass 
viewpoint and the mass line among the party members and cadres, 
particularly leading cadres. The party organizations should 
call on the party members and cadres to constantly measure their 
own words and deeds with the party's purpose of serving the 
people wholeheartedly, and take a further step to create a 
situation in which the party and the masses are of one mind, a 
unity exists between the cadres and the masses, and concerted 
efforts are made to safeguard and deepen reform, open up wider, 
promote development, and maintain stability. 

    The plenary session reviewed and summed up how the whole 
party had carried through the party Central Committee's decision 
on fighting corruption since the second plenary session of the 
Central Discipline Inspection Commission. The session pointed 
out: Since August 1993, party committees and governments at all 
levels have resolutely and swiftly implemented the party Central 
Committee and State Council's "Decision on Concentrating on 
Anticorruption Work in Some Areas in the Near Future" and have 
done a great deal of work in this regard. The vast numbers of 
cadres and masses have sincerely supported the work and have 
actively participated in it. Discipline inspection and 
supervision cadres at all levels have worked diligently and done 
their job conscientiously. Following their arduous efforts over 
three years, considerable results have been achieved in fighting 
corruption and results to varying degrees also have been 
achieved in carrying out the work in three areas decided by the 
central authorities. Some localities and departments have done 
a great job and have achieved fairly demonstrable results in 
some respects. Some negative and corrupt practices also have 
somehow dwindled. Generally speaking, the trend of the 
anticorruption struggle has been good and work in this regard 
has been carried out in a healthy manner, basically fulfilling 
the central authorities' expected objectives and creating a 
positive effect on preserving political stability, promoting 
reform and opening up, accelerating economic development, and 
ensuring the exercising of macroeconomic regulation and control 
of the economy. The plenary session holds that the 
anticorruption work has not developed in a balanced manner and 
some results have not been secured. We should realistically 
affirm the anticorruption results achieved during the preceding 
stage; at the same time, we should realize that negative and 
corrupt practices are still serious. Therefore, we should 
continue to work diligently and must not relax for a moment. 
  The plenary session maintains that the anticorruption 
decision made last year by the CPC Central Committee and the 
State Council is completely correct; and the guiding ideology, 
principle, and policy set forth in the decision have ensured the 
healthy and orderly development of the anticorruption struggle. 
Following the practice during the precedent stage, party 
committees and governments at all levels have deepened their 
understanding of the party Central Committee's idea and measures 
on fighting corruption. They have summed up some effective ways 
to carry out the work: 1) Anticorruption work must be viewed 
from the overall situation of reform, development, and 
maintaining stability; we must focus on those outstanding 
problems that hamper reform, development, and stability; we 
should define the anticorruption tasks and objectives step by 
step; we should closely integrate the anticorruption work with 
the implementation of the party Central Committee and State 
Council's major decisions and measures on reform and 
construction. 2) Anticorruption work is a long-term task; 
therefore, we should have an overall strategic plan and yet have 
a real sense of urgency. The work should be carried out step by 
step and efforts should be made to ensure results in each stage. 
We should begin with taking stopgap measures and gradually 
solve deep-rooted problems. 3) Anticorruption work should be 
viewed from the general situation and we must adhere to the work 
in three areas decided by the central authorities. While 
resolutely punishing corrupt elements, we should resolutely wipe 
out all kinds of negative and corrupt practices, including 
correcting unhealthy practices prevailing in various trades and 
professions. The key to doing this work well is that leading 
cadres should practice self-discipline and be honest in 
performing their duties. 4) Not only should well-defined and 
specific anticorruption tasks and objectives for each stage be 
laid down, but we also must strengthen top-to-bottom and 
bottom-to-top supervision, inspection, and guidance. 5) The 
whole party must be mobilized to fight corruption; the party and 
government must join forces in fighting corruption; major party 
and government leaders should personally take charge of the 
work. All trades, professions, and sectors should act as a 
whole according to the unified planning of the party Central 
Committee and State Council and engage themselves in total 
warfare. 6) Anticorruption work needs the media's effective 
support so that a generally favorable atmosphere can be formed. 
The aforementioned effective ways should be adhered to and 
gradually be supplemented and developed. 
  The plenary session pointed out: The general guideline for 
this year's anticorruption work is, under the guidance of 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and the party's basic line, to persist 
in thoroughly carrying out the guidelines of the 14th CPC 
National Congress and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC 
Central Committee; to attend to the overall situation of the 
party's work closely revolving around the central task of 
economic construction; to continue to carry through the central 
authorities' anticorruption decision; and, proceeding from 
securing the anticorruption results we have achieved, to carry 
through the anticorruption struggle in an in-depth and more 
effective manner over a long period. According to the central 
authorities' instructions, the anticorruption work in three 
areas will remain unchanged this year, but new substances should 
be added based on the characteristics of the situation. 

    First, the five requirements put forward by the central 
authorities for leading party and government cadres at and above 
the county (department) level to maintain integrity and honesty 
should be continuously and firmly implemented. On that basis, 
the following measures are formulated and reiterated: 1) It is 
not allowed to purchase imported luxury cars or replace existing 
ones in violation of regulations. It is not allowed to use 
one's authority to order enterprises or subordinate units to 
replace one's cars, to borrow cars from them, or to apportion 
expenses among them for purchasing cars. It is not allowed to 
use loans, raise funds, or special allocated funds to purchase 
cars for use by leading cadres. Leading party and government 
organs and units at the county (city) level that are behind in 
paying their staff members and workers are not allowed to 
purchase cars. 2) It is not allowed to purchase homes by 
depressing their prices in violation of the State Council 
regulations on housing reform. It is not allowed to use one's 
authority to offer preferential terms for the purchase of homes 
for oneself, or one's children or relatives. It is not allowed 
to use public funds to renovate one's home above the established 
standards. 3) Leading cadres shall travel light when conducting 
official activities in the country, and their meals and 
accommodations shall not exceed the local reception standards. 
It is not allowed to organize special dance parties for leading 
cadres. 4) It is not allowed to hold extravagant, wasteful 
ceremonies on such special occasions as weddings, deaths, job 
transfers, birthdays, and moves to a new home; still less is it 
allowed to use public funds and property to hold extravagant 
ceremonies or to use these special occasions to accumulate 
wealth. 5) It is not allowed to use one's authority to delay 
paying back public funds. It is not allowed to borrow public 
funds to purchase or build homes for oneself or for one's 
relatives or friends, or to engage in profiteering. 
  Leading cadres of enterprises and institutions must also 
maintain integrity and honesty and observe law and discipline; 
they must oppose all kinds of negative, corrupt practices, such 
as abuse of power for personal gains, embezzlement, bribery, and 
waste. 
  Second, we must continue to do a good job of investigating 
and handling major and serious cases. We must focus on 
investigating and handling cases of violation of discipline and 
law by leading party and government organs and cadres and by 
judicial, administrative law enforcement, and economic 
administrative departments and their working personnel, 
particularly on leading cadres involved in embezzlement, 
bribery, and abuse of power for personal gain; on law and 
discipline enforcement personnel involved in fraudulent 
practices, embezzlement, and other law-breaking and 
discipline-violating practices in the course of enforcing the 
law and discipline; and on legal persons involved in violation 
of law and discipline. Party committees and governments at all 
levels must strengthen their leadership over case investigations 
and firmly remove all kinds of resistance and interference. A 
superior organ shall send people to assist or supervise its 
subordinate units in investigating major, difficult cases. 
Further steps should be taken to strengthen cooperation and 
coordination among discipline inspection and supervision organs, 
judicial organs, organization and personnel departments, 
propaganda departments, and administrative law-enforcement and 
supervision departments to form a total operation force so as to 
improve our ability to crack major and serious cases. 
  Third, we must further strengthen our work to rectify 
unhealthy practices in various trades and professions, restore 
discipline, carry out special projects to rectify practices, and 
earnestly resolve one or two prominent problems. We must 
continue to resolutely stop the unhealthy practices of state 
organs and their subordinate departments in wantonly collecting 
fees. We must implement the central regulations on "separating 
revenues and expenditures" in the collection and disposal of 
administrative fees and fines and make it a main emphasis of 
this year's work to resolutely stop wanton collection of fees; 
we must produce notable results in this work. We must earnestly 
resolve the problem of party and government organs as well as 
their working personnel using their authority to seize 
enterprises' property for their own use under various pretexts 
without compensation; and we must earnestly resolve the problem 
of party and government organs transferring enterprises' funds 
to set up small reserve funds for their own use or to use them 
to wantonly give out cash awards. In addition, we must 
resolutely stop the unhealthy practice of demanding that 
enterprises sponsor various activities under various names. We 
must continue our work to reduce the peasants' burden. We must 
adopt effective measures to resolutely implement the regulations 
requiring party and government organs to separate themselves 
from business entities set up by them. We must continue to 
rectify the unhealthy practice of using public funds for tourism 
outside the country (border) and strictly screen official trips 
out of the country (border) to firmly reduce those excessive 
trips. Corresponding policies and control measures shall be 
formulated to resolve this question from the sources. 
  The plenary session demanded that while concentrating on 
carrying out the three anticorruption tasks, discipline 
inspection and supervision organs, in the process of 
implementing the party Central Committee and the State Council's 
major policy decision and measures on deepening reform, 
developing the economy, and safeguarding stability, should also 
strengthen law enforcement and supervision, earnestly supervise 
the implementation of democratic centralism, safeguard the 
inviolability of political discipline, and ensure that all 
policies and decrees are implemented to the letter. 
  The plenary session analyzed the situation in the struggle 
against corruption. It pointed out: This is an important year 
in our efforts to comprehensively implement the guidelines of 
the 14th National Party Congress and the Third Plenary Session 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee to promote sustained, rapid, 
and healthy development of China's economy, a year crucial to 
bringing about change in our economic structure. We must 
approach and grasp the task of combating corruption, improving 
party style, and building a clean government from the 
consideration of the overall interests of our entire party work, 
and we must carry out this task in the interests of our entire 
party work. Rapid economic development and in-depth reform will 
inevitably cause readjustments involving the interests of 
different quarters and a change of thinking and viewpoints. The 
struggle against corruption, to improve party style, and to 
build a clean government will also encounter new developments 
and problems. We still face a grim situation and shoulder an 
extremely arduous task in the struggle against corruption. 
Party committees and governments as well as discipline 
inspection and supervisory organs at all levels must even more 
steadfastly implement Comrade Deng Xiaoping's strategic policy 
of "fostering both material and cultural and ideological 
progress, attaching equal importance to both" by waging the 
anticorruption struggle in a deep-going, sustained, and more 
productive way and by strengthening the building of party style 
and clean government. To ensure a more productive 
anticorruption struggle, party committees and governments at all 
levels, particularly their principal leading comrades, must 
continue to place this major task, which is vital to the party 
and country's future, as an important item on their agenda and 
earnestly strengthen their leadership over it. We must render 
vigorous support to discipline inspection and supervisory 
organs' work. We must strengthen supervision and inspection 
according to the principle of accountability at each level to 
ensure the accomplishment of the three anticorruption tasks. 
  The plenary session demanded: It is necessary for discipline 
inspection and supervisory organs to further strengthen 
themselves. It is necessary for discipline inspection and 
supervisory cadres to profoundly study Volume 3 of the 
Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, arm themselves with 
the theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, 
and use it to guide their work. At the same time, it is 
necessary for them to earnestly study the decisions of the 14th 
National Party Congress and Third Plenary Session of the 14th 
CPC Central Committee, learn about socialist market economy, and 
improve their political and professional standards. It is 
necessary strengthen the building of the leading bodies of 
discipline inspection and supervision organs at all levels, 
strictly enforce democratic centralism, and enhance their 
fighting capacity. It is necessary to further rationalize work 
relations, bring their discipline inspection and supervisory 
functions into better play, and raise their work to a new level. 
  The plenary session firmly believed: As long as party 
committees and governments at all levels resolutely implement 
the central decision on the anticorruption struggle, achieve 
unity in thinking and understanding, earnestly strengthen 
leadership, fully rely on the masses, and vigorously carry out 
their work, this year's anticorruption work will definitely 
score new interim successes. 
  The plenary session called: Under the guidance of Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the party's basic line and rallying closely 
around the party Central Committee, with Comrade Jiang Zemin as 
its core, all party comrades should earnestly study and 
implement the guidelines of Comrade Jiang Zemin's important 
speech at the Third Plenary Session of the CPC Central 
Commission for Discipline Inspection, overcome all kinds of 
difficulties and obstructions with perseverance and a solid work 
spirit, and firmly wage the anticorruption struggle to make new 
contributions to safeguarding political stability, guaranteeing 
reform and opening up, and promoting economic development. 

