Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jeremy Laurance, Health </F>
Services Correspondent: "12,000 at Risk From Brain Disease May 
Never Be Traced"; first paragraph is THE TIMES introduction] 
  [Text] A new alert started over Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 
as women trying to call a helpline found the switchboard jammed. 
  Up to 12,000 brain surgery patients who are at risk of dying 
from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) may never be traced, the 
Department of Health said yesterday. 
  Details of the threat to thousands more patients emerged as 
hundreds of callers jammed an emergency helpline set up after 
the health department announced that a hormone treatment for 
infertility might put some patients at risk. 
  Women complained that they could not get through to the 
helpline despite an increase in the number of operators 
answering calls from 12 to 65. "I am not hysterical about this 
but I want to establish what is going on," said a company 
director who called THE TIMES. "I have been on the phone all 
morning and I cannot get through. I think the way this is being 
handled is appalling." 
  Doctors estimate that 300 women who took human pituitary 
gonadotrophin over a 30-year period up to 1985 may be at risk, 
but more than 100,000 women have taken other forms of the 
hormone and have been jamming the lines. People who received 
growth hormone obtained from human pituitary glands as children 
are also at risk. 
  The department confirmed last night that brain surgery 
patients operated on between 1971 and 1991 who had a form of 
preserved human tissue grafted into their brains were also at 
risk from CJD, the human form of "mad cow" disease. 
  Three patients in the UK have died from the condition after 
brain grafts and there have been five other deaths worldwide. 
The preserved tissue, obtained from the brains of cadavers and 
marketed as Lyodura, was withdrawn in 1991. The health 
department had given a warning about its risks four years 
earlier. 
  Lyodura is a preserved form of the membrane covering the 
brain used to replace the patient's own membrane when it is 
damaged in surgery. It was obtained from the brains of cadavers 
and freeze-dried to preserve it. Scientists assumed that this 
process would destroy the CJD virus but when the first case of 
the disease linked with the material emerged in the US in 1987, 
the manufacturing process was tightened. 
  A second warning was issued by the health department in 1989 
after a second patient died of the disease in New Zealand. The 
British cases occurred in 1990 and 1991. 
  "We have acted at each stage as the evidence has hardened," 
a 
health department spokesman said. Six hundred people a year had 
received the grafts over 20 years, but the chances of further 
cases emerging were "likely to be small," he said. 
  However, the department said later that the disease could 
take up to ten years to develop following infection through a 
brain graft. There is a 30-year incubation period following 
infection through pituitary hormone. 
  The spokesman said it would be extremely difficult to 
identify the brain surgery patients at risk. "Many who had 
surgery wouldn't know whether they were treated with Lyodura. 
Millions of records would have to be checked, some of which may 
have been destroyed," he said. 
  Professor Ian Cooke, who is heading the counselling 
co-ordinating centre at Sheffield's Jessop Hospital for Women, 
said there were records for half the 300 believed to be at risk, 
but some data were up to 25 years old. 
  Only six women who had contacted the helpline had been 
definitely identified as having received human pituitary 
gonadotrophin out of the thousands who had called. Many had been 
treated with human menopausal gonadotrophin, a product obtained 
from the urine of postmenopausal women, which carries no risk. 
  TIMES NEWSPAPERS LIMITED, 1993 

