Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Wu Shuqing, Beijing University president; </F>
Zhou Shulian, researcher at the Industrial Economics Institute 
under the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences; and Fan Hengshan, 
deputy director of the State Commission for Restructuring 
Economy General Planning Department by staff reporters Liu Zhida 
(0491 1807 6671), Fu Weihai (0265 1218 3189), and Chen Pingao 
(7115 0756 7559): "Development Is the Last Word"] 
  [Text] [GUANGMING RIBAO (GR)] The year 1993 is now over. 
Looking back on China's economic development in 1993 when 
macroeconomic control was strengthened, we can see the economic 
situation in the first half was different from that of the 
second half. How can we assess the overall economic situation 
in 1993? 
  [Zhou] In the first half of 1993, every field of the 
national 
economy grew rapidly, the GNP was 13.9 percent up over the same 
period last year, industrial production registered sustained and 
rapid growth, there was a good harvest of summer crops, the 
domestic market was brisk, and the residents' income went up 
fairly rapidly. 
  But this period also witnessed some problems, including an 
excessive investment scale and an irrational investment pattern, 
excessive money supply, chaotic financial order, greater 
financial difficulties, declining state foreign exchange 
reserves, acute structural contradictions, and great price 
fluctuations. All these indicators pointed to "economic 
overheating." It was to solve these problems that the party 
Central Committee and the State Council proposed strengthening 
macroeconomic control in a timely manner. 
  [GR] Some people have said that we should not be afraid of 
an 
"overheated economy." What do you think of that? 
  [Zhou] In my view, the statement is rather too sweeping. We 
should make specific analysis of the extent, nature, causes, and 
consequences of the "overheated economy" in question. It is 
incorrect not to strive for quicker economic development out of 
fear of "economic overheating." But if the economic overheating 
is so serious as to affect economic growth, we can no longer say 
we should not be afraid of it. We must pay special attention to 
this problem at the current stage when the old and new economic 
systems stand side by side and the old system is still 
functioning. 
  [Wu] In the first half of 1993, China basically followed the 
beaten path of increasing investment to develop the economy. 
Again, some people who were eager to accelerate economic 
development ended up bringing about a bubble economy. The high 
speed obtained this way was not the high speed for which Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping hoped. 
  [Fan] In my view, in the first half of 1993, reform 
coincided 
with development in a number of special fields. They were 
seemingly going full steam ahead but, behind the exciting 
phenomena, lurked undesirable problems which were more exposed 
in March and June. In general, what should have been 
accelerated was not and what should not have been, was. For 
instance, many localities were busy building provincial- or 
county-level markets but the important market for essential 
factors of production grew rather slowly. Most of the markets 
built with government assistance were almost deserted and some 
undertakings were overly expanded irrespective of actual 
conditions. For instance, government departments, enterprises, 
institutions, and individuals entered the property market at the 
same time when there was neither a fully-fledged market, 
effective management, nor transaction regulations. Take the 
futures market as another example. Comparatively standard 
futures markets did not exist in capitalist countries until 
their market economy had developed considerably but futures 
markets were opened in many places in China when we began to set 
up a market economy and when most people were completely in the 
dark concerning "futures." A survey shows that there are 
hundreds of futures exchanges or futures exchange centers across 
the country. 
  [GR] Comrade Deng Xiaoping once said during his south China 
tour, "In a big developing country like China, a quicker rate of 
economic growth is not always attained in a calm and steady 
environment. We must strive for a stable and coordinated 
economic development but stability and coordination is relative, 
not absolute. Development is, after all, the last word." Under 
the situation mentioned above, how should we interpret the 
statement that "development is the last word"? 
  [Zhou] As far as I can remember, when we were drawing up the 
"Eighth Five-year Plan," some people maintained that we should 
be content with 6 percent economic growth. It was after hearing 
this viewpoint that Comrade Deng Xiaoping made the statement 
that "development is the last word." In my view, Comrade 
Xiaoping actually gave us an important law governing economic 
development. That is a developing country usually experiences 
every few years a period of particularly rapid development in 
its efforts to achieve modernization. In the process of 
economic development, we are not likely to always enjoy a calm 
and stable environment as fluctuations are inevitable. Some 
comrades, however, defended the tendency to place undue emphasis 
on speed by quoting the statement, believing they could strive 
for a high growth rate at any cost. This was not what Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping meant. While speaking about the economic growth 
rate, Comrade Deng Xiaoping usually stressed the need to improve 
economic efficiency. For instance, he once said, "To develop 
China's economy, we should try hard to bring about a period of 
particularly rapid development every few years. Naturally we 
should not encourage an unrealistically high growth rate. 
Instead, we should get down to earth to work and should be 
particular about efficiency. We should strive for a steady and 
coordinated development of the economy." This reveals that 
Comrade Xiaoping regards efficiency as a precondition for 
high-speed development. Where the relationship between stability 
and development is concerned, stability is relative, development 
is absolute and is the last word. However, this does not mean 
that we can afford to ignore stability and coordination. There 
would be no smooth economic development if the economic 
structure were out of balance and there were drastic economic 
fluctuations. 
  [Wu] To build socialism, we must first liberate and develop 
the productive forces. If the cake is very small, how can we 
achieve common prosperity. Poverty is not socialism, nor is 
slow development. Development is the last word. The Third 
Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee set the party's 
basic line for the new period. I believe that the decision to 
focus on economic development, to uphold the four cardinal 
principles, and to persist in reform and opening up to the 
outside world all share the purpose of developing the economy. 
It is safe to say that "development as the last word" 
constitutes the core of the party's basic line. Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping, in fact, stated a very profound principle in the 
common language used by Chinese people. 
  However, the statement does not mean we can go ahead at the 
fastest speed possible irrespective of actual conditions because 
we cannot achieve economic development in one or two years. 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping approached the problem from the high 
plane of a certain historical period. To develop the economy, 
we should not only increase the gross amount and the growth rate 
but also elevate the quality of the national economy to a new 
level in the following stage. Otherwise, we will not be able to 
catch up with others if we are inferior to them in terms of the 
quality of the national economy despite our high economic growth 
rate. 
  [GR] In that case, development is not a matter involving 
only 
the growth rate. Can we understand development this way? 
  [Fan] Naturally, development cannot be separated from the 
growth rate. But what is important is the type of growth rate. 
Strictly speaking, the growth rate itself does not indicate 
anything. What matters is whether the high growth rate is 
accompanied by an optimized economic structure and improved 
efficiency. For instance, the growth rate is 6 percent but it 
goes with a poorer structure and a lower efficiency. In that 
case, the 6 percent growth rate should be considered excessive 
and undesirable. On the contrary, if the economic structure is 
constantly upgraded and the efficiency improved, we should not 
regard a 20 or 30 percent increase as excessive--of course, I am 
talking in extreme terms. In the first half of 1993, the 
economic development was characterized by a high rate of 
investment and of consumption but the high growth rate resulted 
from a high increase in fixed assets investment, in money 
supply, in expenditure, and in imports. To solve the problem, 
the central authorities adopted a series of policies to improve 
macrocontrol, guiding the economic development and reform to a 
standard and healthy path. This was a very correct approach. 
  [Zhou] The policies proved successful several months after 
they were introduced. The excessive industrial growth rate was 
held down; the financial market was brought out of chaos; the 
real estate craze, the rush to set up development areas, and the 
stocks fever were cooled down; the yuan's value against the 
greenback went up immediately; the prices of raw and 
semi-finished materials gradually dropped; and the strain on 
transportation was alleviated. In a word, the overheated 
economy was successfully brought under control. 
  [Wu] On balance, the year 1993 witnessed good economic 
development. Though some problems cropped up, timely measures 
were taken and fairly good results were attained. Again, these 
measures converged with the reform measures decided on by the 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee for the 
next stage to provide favorable conditions for economic 
development in 1994. If the work is done properly, the economy 
will develop in a sustained, rapid, and healthy manner in 1994. 
  [GR] The new formulation "in a sustained, rapid, and healthy 
manner" has attracted the general public's attention. What 
problems should we address in achieving this? 
  [Wu] The most important thing to do is to develop a new 
principle. In the past, we relied upon extensive management and 
reproduction, increased investment, and large scale construction 
for economic development. We must now replace the old principle 
with a new one, namely, we must rely upon economic restructuring 
and improved management and efficiency for economic development. 
  [Zhou] We must also tackle the problem of poor enterprise 
management. For example, there was an increase in the number of 
fake and shoddy goods, the production costs went up, there were 
more industrial accidents, workers were lax in labor discipline, 
and there were more violations of rules and regulations. The 
enterprise reform was designed to liberate productive forces. 
To turn liberated essential factors of production into actual 
productive forces, we must improve management. For the present, 
we must integrate reform with improvement of management and give 
equal attention to both. 
  [Fan] The central authorities have repeatedly stressed the 
need to keep tabs on the infrastructure and on agriculture. But 
we were only interested in extensive investment in short cycle, 
appropriate technology, and fast efficiency projects. As a 
result, the growth rate climbed, the structure was further 
distorted, and the efficiency stagnated. Over the last few 
years, such a phenomenon has occurred repeatedly. Thus, it is 
correct for the central authorities to call for a "sustained, 
rapid, and healthy" development of the economy. The root cause 
for the above-mentioned failings lies in improper management 
systems and mechanisms. Thus, to achieve a "sustained, rapid, 
and healthy" economic development, it is essential to solve the 
problems concerning the management system and to promote reform. 
In the meantime, it is necessary to exercise scientific and 
pertinent macroeconomic control. In particular, we should 
channel the limited amount of funds to basic industries, large 
and medium-sized state enterprises, and agriculture through 
implementing monetary, currency, and industrial policies. 
  It is also very important to correctly handle the 
relationship between development and opening up. The open 
policy is undoubtedly correct but we have misunderstandings 
about it. For instance, some comrades believe that opening up 
to the outside world is equivalent to setting up development 
zones and granting preferential policies. Consequently, they 
grant preferential policies to foreign businessmen whom they 
hardly know--such a practice easily causes losses of state-owned 
assets. Again, some development areas sold their land to 
foreign businessmen for several thousand yuan per mu and bought 
it back from them at millions of yuan per mu, after the property 
prices were jacked up. 
  [Wu] Such a practice is not allowed even in foreign 
countries. According to the theory of land rent, the increase 
in the land price is not due to the investment, so the added 
value should not go to the property developers. For instance, 
if the state builds a rail line on this piece of land, the land 
price will naturally go up. But the credit should not go to 
investors and the added value should go to the state rather than 
to investors. 
  [Fan] To make opening up a success, what matters is creating 
a favorable investment environment, setting up a sound legal 
system, and introducing mechanisms and systems compatible with 
international practices rather than offering land at low prices, 
granting preferential policies, and offering projects for 
investment. 
  [GR] Would you mind giving a forecast of economic 
development 
in 1994? 
  [Zhou] Many favorable conditions for economic development 
exist in 1994. First, the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC 
Central Committee has decided to carry out enterprise, monetary, 
taxation, and investment reforms on a fairly large scale in 
1994. This will breathe new life into the economy. Second, the 
rapid growth in 1992 and 1993 has laid a fairly sound material 
foundation for economic development in 1994 and the macrocontrol 
practiced in the latter half of 1993 has eased the strain on 
energy, transportation, and raw and semi-finished materials. 
All this will facilitate fairly rapid economic growth in 1994. 
Third, sufficient capital accumulation will make a fairly rapid 
growth possible. In terms of international comparable items, 
China's annual accumulation rate is over 30 percent and the 
capital output ratio indicates such an accumulation rate will 
help achieve a fairly rapid economic growth. Fourth, there is a 
greater demand for investment and a bigger increase in 
consumption. Some products are being updated and upgraded and 
they will possibly become hot items. Fifth, the policy-related 
environment is more congenial and this will contribute to 
economic growth and economic restructuring. And sixth, the 
economic development cycle shows that the year 1994 will see 
steady economic growth. A 10 percent growth rate is likely. 
  [Wu] In my view, at least two achievements made in the 
macroeconomic control in the latter half of 1993 will have a 
favorable impact on the 1994 economic development. First, the 
funds needed for key construction projects have been guaranteed. 
The amount of funds available for key projects in the last few 
years was not as great as it was in the second half of last year 
and this will ease the restrictions presented by "bottlenecks" 
on economic growth. Second, the funds needed for agricultural 
development have been guaranteed, thus solving fairly well the 
problem of "handing out white slips as IOUs" to peasants. 
  [GR] The year 1994 is crucial for reform and a number of 
reform measures will be introduced. Of all the enterprise, 
financial, monetary, taxation, investment, and planning reforms, 
which will be accelerated simultaneously in 1994? Which is the 
hardest nut to crack? 
  [Wu] Relatively speaking, monetary and taxation reforms are 
easy because thorough preparations were made in 1993. Though 
some localities will get up to little tricks, for example using 
up money stored for next year, increasing the base figure of 
1993 tax revenues, and so on, we will introduce the tax-sharing 
system all the same and find a way to hold the little tricks in 
check. Financial reform is comparatively difficult because 
changing a special bank into a commercial bank involves many 
complicated matters. For instance, if a special bank has a 
large debt to pay, how will this debt be brought forward? When 
a special bank has been changed into a commercial bank, it will 
not provide loans to loss-making enterprises. Will such a 
measure be allowed? The restructuring of the investment set-up 
is closely related to that of the enterprise set-up and the 
latter will become a hard nut to crack in 1994. We have carried 
out enterprise reform for 10 years but have failed to solve the 
problem. Now we have found a solution to the problem--establish 
a modern enterprise system. However, in the process of 
establishing a modern enterprise system, the state-owned assets 
may suffer great losses. The job is tough because while we must 
change special banks into commercial banks, we must prevent 
losses of state-owned assets. 
  [Fan] Enterprise reform is essential to the establishment of 
a new system, so we must work hard to make it a success. The 
enterprise reform began as early as 1980. We carried out 
enterprise reform by first delegating powers to enterprises, 
followed by the introduction of the economic responsibility 
system and the policy of changing from profit delivery to tax 
payment, a policy which was carried out in two phases. In 1987 
we introduced the contract responsibility system and in 1990 we 
proposed changing the way the state-owned enterprises operate. 
In short, we have tried in many ways to enliven the large and 
medium-sized state-owned enterprises but the results left much 
to be desired. The reason lies in our failure to straighten out 
the relations between management and ownership of enterprises 
and to set up an enterprise system and a mechanism that will 
effectively restrain operators on matters related to management 
and ownership of enterprises and will stimulate them to seek 
profits. It is correct now for us to shift from the policy of 
"relinquishing part of the power and profits to enterprises" to 
the policy of setting up a modern enterprise system. The reform 
in this respect should coordinate with administrative 
restructuring and the change in government functions. 
Nevertheless, even if we have established a modern enterprise 
system, it does not mean that everything will go off without a 
hitch because we will still have to tackle the problem 
concerning management. A good system only serves to provide 
enterprises with favorable conditions for developing themselves 
and the system and favorable conditions will come to nothing if 
operators of enterprises fail to make use of them. Therefore, 
enterprise management is an important issue. 
  [Wu] In 1994 we have another fairly tough task in preventing 
inflation getting out of control. At a meeting of the NPC 
Standing Committee, I said that the people are now concerned 
about three things: One, prices; two, the anticorruption 
campaign; and three, public security. They are indifferent to 
other things no matter what clamor you have made. The 
anticorruption campaign and public security are not our topics 
for today, so I will leave them alone. As far as economic 
matters are concerned, if we allow inflation to go from bad to 
worse, there will be serious consequences. When the inflation 
rate exceeds 20 percent, it will go up very quickly. It will go 
up at a great speed rather than step by step from 20 to 21 and 
then to 22 percent. Therefore, we should keep a close watch 
over the inflation rate and take action whenever something goes 
wrong. We must work hard to keep the inflation rate below 10 
percent. 
  [Zhou] The "Company Law" has just been approved by the Fifth 
Plenary Session of the Eighth NPC Standing Committee. This is a 
major event. With a law to go by, we can step up the reform of 
companies. We must set a clear objective in carrying out trials 
of the modern enterprise system. We must focus on solving 
difficult problems and analyze our experience gained in running 
the pilot cases. In particular, we must make concentrated 
efforts to solve the problem of separating the functions of the 
government from those of the enterprise because this is the most 
difficult problem for economic reform. 
  [Fan] In the future development, we must handle the 
relationship between economic development and economic 
legislation properly and guarantee a sustained, rapid, and 
healthy development of the economy through enforcing the 
relevant laws and regulations. We have enacted many laws but we 
have only formulated a few of them from the prospective of 
development. 
  [Wu] There is one current problem with legislation. Since 
the law is drafted and enacted by the responsible department, 
the responsible department will tend to pass into law what is 
beneficial to it. In 1994, we should try to find out a 
principle for economic legislation that will sever economic 
legislation from the interest of any unit and that will give 
full expression to the objective demands of economic development 
and social interests. 

