BFN 

<F P=106> ["Last Word" column by Hamid Sa'id] </F>
  [Text] All U.S. statements on Iraq have lost their 
credibility and aroused anger and ridicule at the same time. 
These statements have always been premeditated, hostile, and 
biased. 
  Many -- if not all -- of these statements fail to convince 
those who hear them. It is noted that U.S. officials issue 
judgments that are supposed to be made by the United Nations or 
the Security Council. Those officials, without even taking into 
consideration the formal side, speak about issues which are the 
main responsibilities of international organizations. 
  In the past, U.S. officials used to drop hints for the 
international organizations with their positions and ideas. 
Today, however, they do not bother themselves with this. 
  Examples of this can be seen in the statements by Michael 
McCurry, official spokesman of the U.S. State Department, on the 
killing of the AFP correspondent in Iraq's Kurdistan and the 
wounding of two UN guards in that area. 
  This U.S. spokesman cited information revealing a hellish 
imagination. We listened to an unbelievable story. He said: 
The United Nations has information that the Iraqi Government 
rewards people who are ready to kill workers in the United 
Nations and in humanitarian organizations. He then spoke about 
the value of these rewards and how they were raised at the 
beginning of March. He then said: If giving these rewards 
proves to be true, they represent violations of the UN 
resolutions. In other words, he is not sure whether or not the 
information is true. 
  It is natural to say that the information -- if there is 
such 
information -- is fabricated by their agents in the area, who 
live under their protection and who play a treacherous and 
terrorist role with the weapons they receive from their masters. 
  Since the area is under their protection and is run by their 
agents, they are responsible for all the crimes and violations 
there. Why don't such acts happen with other UN officials 
throughout the rest of Iraq, despite the Iraqis' rancor and 
rejection of their presence, and despite the fact that hundreds 
of reporters visit Iraq and carry out their tasks under the best 
of conditions, provided by the Culture and Information Ministry? 
  Why do the Americans remain silent about the daily killings, 
looting, and robbery carried out by their agents against Iraqi 
Kurds? 

