BFN 

<F P=106> [By Pak Chong-mun] </F>
  [Text] At the present phase of dialogue, the United States 
has decided not to take issue with North Korea's past nuclear 
activities for the time being, and the ROK has been examining 
the possibility of revising its policies toward accepting this 
U.S. policy. 
  The United States decided not to probe its nuclear past, 
which includes the extraction of plutonium, because it believed 
that it had already become impossible to measure the spent fuel 
rods and that inspections of the two unreported facilities, 
which are storage facilities, would not bring satisfactory 
results in finding the truth of the North Korean nuclear program. 
  This U.S. policy is reportedly related to the fact that the 
United States gives priority to preventing North Korea from 
pursuing nuclear development, replacing fuel rods, and 
reprocessing them over probing the past of its nuclear 
activities. 
  A ROK Foreign Ministry official said on 21 June: "The United 
States outwardly insists on the policy of pursuing special 
inspections. I know, however, it will not immediately demand 
special inspections because of technological limitations and a 
policy for continuing the present phase of dialogue." He also 
said: "Our government also considers special inspections to be a 
matter requiring political judgment." 
  This official added: "North Korea has so far attached 
greater and greater importance to special inspections of the 
unreported facilities. Therefore, it is expected that North 
Korea will not agree easily to special inspections. Also, there 
is no assurance that any physical evidence will be found in 
special inspections because North Korea may have relocated a 
significant amount of nuclear waste materials elsewhere. This 
is the general conception of the ROK and the United States." In 
this way he made it clear that the government is considering a 
plan to withhold special inspections for the moment. At the 20 
June closed session of the National Assembly's Diplomacy and 
Reunification Committee, Yi Hong- ku, deputy prime minister and 
minister of the National Unification Board, reportedly said that 
the special inspections issue is a matter requiring not 
technological approaches but political judgment. 
  However, the ROK and the United States have not officially 
discussed and announced their plan to "withhold the probe into 
North Korea's nuclear history for the moment." Therefore, the 
United States is expected to refer to special inspections in a 
roundabout way at the third round of North Korea-U.S. talks. 
  The ROK Foreign Ministry believes that North Korea processed 
the fuel rods from the five-megawatt reactor in Yongbyon in 1989 
and accumulated seven to 10 kg of plutonium. This is enough 
plutonium to make one to two small nuclear bombs. 

