Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak on 
17 and 18 March publishes reports by its parliamentary 
correspondent Marcela Kostalova on the 16 and 17 March sessions 
of the National Council of the Slovak Republic [NRSR]. The 
reports mention personnel changes in the NRSR called forth by 
the passage of a no-confidence vote in Vladimir Meciar's 
government on 11 March and the appointment of a new government 
on 16 March. Under the Slovak Constitution, parliamentary 
deputies' mandates are suspended while their holders execute 
government posts. 
  Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak on 17 March carries a 
650-word report by Marcela Kostalova on the 16 March NRSR 
meeting. The report notes that, during the meeting, five 
members of the outgoing government assumed their seats in the 
NRSR again and were assigned places in NRSR committees. 
According to the report, Vladimir Meciar (Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia, HZDS) and Katarina Tothova (HZDS) will both 
be working on the NRSR Constitutional and Legal Affairs 
Committee, Olga Keltosova (HZDS) on the Health Care and Social 
Affairs Committee, Marian Andel (Slovak National Party, SNS) on 
the Education, Science, and Culture Committee, and Jozef Prokes 
(SNS) on the Privatization Committee. The report also mentions 
that Michal Pridala, who assumed the seat vacated by the 
recently deceased HZDS deputy, Hvezdon Koctuch, was assigned to 
the National Economic and Budget Committee. 
  Bratislava NARODNA OBRODA in Slovak on 18 March on pages 1 
and 2 carries a 1,000-word report by Marcela Kostalova on the 17 
March NRSR meeting. According to Kostalova, the meeting 
approved six new NRSR deputies as substitutes for members of 
parliament who have become government members. The new deputies 
are: Karol Dubovan (Christian Democratic Movement, KDH), who 
stands in for Julius Brocka, minister of labor, social affairs, 
and the family; Mikulas Danko (KDH), who replaces Mikulas 
Dzurinda, minister of transport, communications, and public 
works; Emil Panci (KDH), in lieu of Ladislav Pittner, minister 
of interior; Juraj Horvath (Party of the Democratic Left, SDL), 
instead of Juraj Hrasko, minister of environment; Alena 
Chlapikova (SDL), instead of Pavol Kanis, minister of defense; 
and Milan Kralik (SDL), instead of Pavol Koncos, minister of 
agriculture. 

