BFN 

  [Text] Federal Judicial Police [PJF] arrested an alleged 
drug trafficker in Tijuana, Baja California, for trying to take 
317.2 kg of cocaine base to the United States. The drug would 
have been worth $30 million on the international market. 
  The PJF conducted three operations in Guerrero, Morelos, and 
Tijuana, seizing approximately two kg of pure heroin. 
Operations in four other states resulted in the seizure of 62 
kg of ephedrine and 1,024 kg of marijuana. In other operations 
conducted in seven states, 31 alleged drug traffickers were 
arrested and 13 vehicles confiscated. 
  The Attorney General's Office [PGR] reported that PJF 
members, on duty at the checkpoint in (Precos) in Benjamin Hill 
Municipality along the Tijuana border with the Unites States, 
forced a truck driver who was hauling lumber to stop for 
inspection. 
  The policemen carefully checked the vehicle inside and out 
and discovered a false bottom in which they found dozens of 
packages wrapped in plastic. Upon removing the plastic, they 
found that the packages contained pure cocaine weighing a total 
of 317.2 kg. 
  Ramon Lopez Salazar, the truck driver, was taken to the PGR 
and charged with crimes against public health. The driver said 
he had picked up the drug in Ciudad Obregon, Sonora and was 
instructed to take it to the town of Progreso, Baja California, 
from where it would be smuggled into California in the United 
States. The PGR said that if the 317.2 kg of pure cocaine had 
entered the drug market, it would have put some 5 million fixes 
into circulation. 
<H5>  Seizures in Seven States; 31 Alleged Drug Traffickers </H5>
Arrested 
  The PJF has seized nearly 2 kg of pure heroin, 62 kg of 
ephedrine, and one ton and 24 kg of marijuana in various 
operations in seven states. Police arrested 31 alleged drug 
traffickers and confiscated 13 vehicles. 
  In Guerrero, the PJF found 810 grams of heroin hidden 
between 
shoe boxes and car tires at a residence in Petatlan 
Municipality. Additionally, they arrested brothers Bartolo and 
Alejo Villasenor and Valente Nunez Cardenas. In Morelos, four 
alleged drug traffickers in possession of 613 grams of heroin 
were arrested. 
  A woman was arrested at Tijuana International Airport for 
having three packages containing 590 grams of heroin adhered to 
her body. According to the PGR, the drug was detected by a 
"narcotics dog." The woman told personnel at the Federal 
Prosecutor's Office that she received the drug from an 
individual in Caleta de Campos, Lazaro Cardenas Municipality, 
Michoacan, who paid her 500 nuevos pesos to take it to Tijuana. 
  Another four people were arrested in various operations in 
Tijuana. Authorities seized a total of 62 kg and 460 grams of 
the chemical precursor ephedrine, 181 kg and 280 grams of 
marijuana, and two trucks from them. 
  Meanwhile, a truck driver transporting 274 kg of marijuana 
inside his vehicle was arrested at a residence located at the 
km-17.5 marker on the road to San Felipe Ensenada, Baja 
California. 
  The PJF apprehended a bus driver from the Omnibus of Mexico 
line and his escort on the Durango-Parral road in the town of 
Morcillo, Durango. The report added that 107 kg of marijuana 
was inside the bus. 
  An individual who was promised $2,500 to transport 150 kg of 
marijuana to Vallecillo, Nuevo Laredo, was arrested in Nuevo 
Laredo, Tamaulipas. Two people were arrested in El 
Precos,located at the km-163 marker of the Mexico City-Laredo 
road, Linares-Hualahuises stretch. Officials seized 121 kg and 
500 grams from these two individuals, who were accompanied by 
two children. 
  Several operations in Baja California Sur resulted in the 
seizure of 84 kg and 500 grams of marijuana and a vehicle and 
the arrest of three alleged drug traffickers. 

