BFN 

  [Text] Hanoi VNA May 14 -- Vietnam and Myanmar [Burma] 
released in Yangon [Rangoon] today a joint communique on an 
official visit to Myanmar by Vietnamese Prime Minister Vo Van 
Kiet from May 11-14. 
  The communique says, among other things: 
  While in Myanmar Prime Minister of the Socialist Republic of 
Vietnam Vo Van Kiet paid a call on and had talks with His 
Excellency Senior General Than Shwe, prime minister of the Union 
of Myanmar. The two prime ministers had a friendly exchange of 
views on matters of mutual interest as well as on current 
regional and international issues. The talks took place in an 
atmosphere of friendship and understanding. 
  During the talks, the communique says: 
  `The Vietnamese side informed the Myanmar side of the 
comprehensive renewal policy and the achievements recorded as 
well as the measures aimed at bringing the country into the new 
stage of development, gradually realizing industrialization and 
modernization. The Vietnamese side also informed of its 
independent, sovereign, open and diversified foreign policy. 
The Myanmar side highly appreciated the renovation policy and 
the achievements recorded by the Vietnamese people and wished 
the Vietnamese people many new successes in their noble cause. 
  `The two sides reaffirmed that the people of each country 
has 
the right to freely choose their own political, economic and 
social system according to their needs, traditions and culture 
and agreed to continue their cooperation in upholding these 
principles. 
  `His Excellency Prime Minister Mr. Vo Van Kiet highly 
appreciated the efforts of the government and people of Myanmar 
to achieve economic development and social progress and 
expressed his wishes for the success of these endeavours'. 
  The communique goes on: `Talks between the two foreign 
ministers took place. Recent political and economic 
developments in the region were reviewed, with emphasis on 
bilateral and regional cooperation. Separate talks at 
ministerial level of industrial, agricultural, forestry, 
commercial, cultural, physical and sports and tourist affairs 
were also held. They agreed to promote cooperation in the 
respective fields between the two countries. 
  `On this occasion, the following agreements were signed: (1) 
agreement on the establishment of a joint commission for 
bilateral cooperation, (2) trade agreement and (3) agreement on 
tourism cooperation. 
  `The two sides reaffirmed their desire to promote 
cooperation 
in the economic, environmental, cultural, tourism, agricultural, 
forestry, educational and scientific fields as well as in the 
fight against illicit drugs. In the fields of transport, both 
sides agreed on specific steps to be taken to establish direct 
airline service between Myanmar and Vietnam at the earliest 
possible date. 
  `The two prime minister expressed their satisfaction on the 
successful visit of is Excellency Mr. Vo Van Kiet, prime 
minister of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, and his 
delegation to the Union of Myanmar which contributed 
significantly to strengthening friendship and cooperation 
between the two countries. They welcomed the opportunity 
provided by the visit to renew personal contacts'. 

