Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Bavarian Economics and Transport Minister Otto </F>
Wiesheu: "Between Emotion and Responsibility"] 
  [Text] Hardly any other subject is fraught with as 
negative a connotation as the issue of arms exports. The term 
itself triggers emotions. We long for a peaceful world. A 
dogmatic No to arms exports and a hopeful Yes to arms conversion 
seems to be the only answer that is morally defensible. 
Unfortunately, however, this is too narrow an interpretation. 
  NATO and the Western European Union [WEU] are indispensable 
as guarantors of peace. In this respect, too, international 
responsibility for our reunited country has considerably 
increased. To equip a modern army in accordance with its tasks, 
we therefore urgently depend on our arms industry, whose 
significance influences our role within the alliance. Only 
those who contribute something can codetermine the course. 
  For foreign policy reasons, our capability as an alliance 
partner can by no means be called into question. But the 
situation does not look good because the unpredictability of our 
Foreign Trade and Payments Law has affronted our alliance 
partners often enough -- even in official government programs. 
  In addition, having an arms industry base able to cooperate 
at home is an indispensable condition for our capability as an 
alliance partner. In recent years, the German arms industry has 
had to respond to changed security policy framework conditions 
by drastically decreasing its capacities. The number of jobs in 
this sector has been reduced from approximately 280,000 in 1990 
to 180,000 now. At present, the continued existence of about 70 
percent of our arms production capacities is in jeopardy. The 
situation in all the alliance states is marked by lower national 
demand, smaller series, higher costs, and tight budgets. The 
duplication of production capacities has no future. In other 
words, we can only retain the core of our military technology, 
which is an indispensable alliance policy element, by bringing 
in international cooperation and by cooperating more closely at 
the European level. 
  This is, however, only possible if all the member states are 
bound by equal export regulations. France and Britain, for 
instance, continue to stress the necessity of their respective 
arms industry bases, which are secured by a certain export 
volume as the amount required for their own military purposes is 
relatively small. Because of the strict German export regime, 
the countries mentioned in practice increasingly reject 
industrial cooperation that involves mutual dependence. 
  Germany's special exports policy hinders our industry's 
ability to cooperate and isolates it from open communication in 
the alliance area. On this basis, a network of mutual 
dependencies cannot emerge. Such a network would be 
indispensable for real cooperation and thus for safeguarding 
German production capacities. Instead of a politically agreed 
division of labor, Germany is threatening to drop out of the 
development and production area and thus depend unilaterally on 
other countries. What is fatal about this is that, if we do not 
have our own arms industry base, we are doomed to become a 
second class alliance partner. This cannot be the goal of 
German foreign policy. 
  In order that Germany remains an indispensable partner in 
the 
development and production of weapons systems, we must oblige 
our alliance partners and must accept a real harmonization of 
export provisions at a European level without any national 
reservations. Approximately 70 percent of all arms projects can 
only be carried out in cooperation with our alliance partners. 
  However, at present even the exchange of technical drawings 
with alliance partners or partners with an equal standing is 
intolerably complicated. Technology agreements for the support 
of friendly countries are also made relative by our export laws. 
The 1991 amendment to the External Trade and Payments Law has 
created obstacles, particularly in the area of dual use goods 
that can be used for civilian and military purposes, which have 
essentially caused the current problems of the entire German 
engineering sector. Common lists of countries and goods would 
be a first step in the right direction, but cannot replace a 
common licensing policy. To prevent misunderstandings -- what I 
have in mind is not a relaxation of export regulations. Rather 
I am considering a European arms policy with common regulations 
and common control provisions on the basis of a common foreign 
and security policy. 
  This is the only way to create the common European arms 
technology market that we need to retain an efficient industrial 
base in Germany with firms that remain able to cooperate and to 
make their contribution to the system. To this end, it is 
necessary to integrate weapons products into the European Union 
single market. 
  Such aspirations in no way mean that arms conversion would 
be 
given up. On the contrary, the firms must continue to pursue 
this course energetically. However, the hopes staked on it in 
the past have not materialized. The road to it is long and more 
difficult than expected. To pursue it successfully the firms as 
a whole will need the framework conditions to ensure an 
efficient core. 
  The German special policy on export issues has not only 
harmed our coordinating ability, but has in recent years also 
cost German industry many billions of marks' worth of civilian 
follow-up orders that are usually coupled with military 
procurements. 

