BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on news conference by King Husayn and U.S. Secretary </F>
of State Warren Christopher with unidentified correspondents; 
place and date not given -- in English] 
  [Excerpts] His Majesty King Husayn has started an official 
visit to the United States. Observers and political analysts 
described the visit as extremely important and said it will be a 
new turning point in Jordanian-U.S. relations. His majesty the 
king began his visit by meeting with U.S. Secretary of State 
Warren Christopher, who received his majesty outside the State 
Department in Washington. The latest developments of the peace 
talks, particularly on the Jordanian-Israeli track and the 
recent Middle East developments, in addition to bilateral 
relations, are expected to be discussed. [passage omitted] 
  [Begin recording] [Correspondent] Your Highness: When will 
you finally meet Israeli leaders face to face in open broad 
daylight? When will you pray in Jerusalem? Do you accept the 
Israelis' position that Jerusalem is open religiously, but 
closed politically? I am [words indistinct]. Thank you. 
  [King Husayn] I've never been afraid of daylight, sir. In 
fact, I've always thrived living in daylight and I hope that the 
opportunity will come sometime soon for meetings at the highest 
possible levels between Jordanians and Israeli officials and I 
hope that the beginning that we will see in the very coming 
future will enable us to progress to the point where such a 
meeting will be held. 
  [Correspondent] What about peace in Syria? Nothing seems to 
be happening. The Syrians are saying they are waiting for 
answers from you and the Americans are still waiting for answers 
from the Syrians. What's going on? Is there any hope for real 
progress this summer? 
  [Christopher] Yes, I think there is hope for progress 
because 
the leaders of both countries seem to be very, very serious 
about negotiations and I'll expect that before the summer is out 
we will see some progress is made. There are very difficult 
questions on that track as there are on all the tracks, but when 
the leaders are seriously engaged, when they're wrestling with 
the hardest underlined problems, the threshold issues, I think 
it's natural that it would take some time and that's what we're 
experiencing at the present time. But I am not at all 
discouraged about the fact that we can make some progress, and I 
agree with the king that it's necessary to see this in a 
comprehensive sense and expect all the tracks to be moving 
forward, not perhaps exactly at the same pace, but nevertheless 
making comprehensive progress. 
  [Correspondent] You mentioned Jordan's role in the Middle 
East peace process and also in previous statements you described 
it as central. So, what do you mean by central and what is the 
United States willing to do to lift the physical and the mental 
siege that (?goes around us during) the past four years? 
  [Christopher] I think the best thing the United States can 
do 
is to play its role as one of the cosponsors of the peace 
process and to encourage the parties to make progress. There 
are still obviously the enemies of peace in the region. We see 
tragic episodes take place, but nevertheless, in an overall 
sense, I do see progress has been made and the role of the 
United States will be to facilitate the negotiations between the 
parties to try to serve the role that we have served from the 
very beginning. [end recording] [passage omitted] 

