BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Nelson Mandela by SABC announcers, </F>
Leslie Mashokwe and Ameen Akhalwaya on 24 May; place not given; 
From the "Agenda" program -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] [Mashokwe] Good evening to you Mr. President and 
welcome. 
  [Mandela] Good evening. 
  [Mashokwe] And with me here is my colleague, the editor of 
Agenda, Mr. Ameen Akhalwaya. Good evening to you. 
  [Akhalwaya] Good evening Leslie. Good evening, President. 
  [Mandela] Good evening. 
  [Akhalwaya] President Nelson Mandela, when you say that it's 
a nightmare come true for hundreds of thousands of people in 
this country, it's also a dream come true for millions of people 
in this country. What does that mean to you, President Nelson 
Mandela, president of the Republic of South Africa? 
  [Mandela] That appellation arouses mixed feelings. The 
feeling of joy and even excitement, that our struggles have come 
to fruition, the day for which we have prayed so hard and long. 
It is the fulfillment of a dream and we are excited. At the 
same time there is a note of sadness, because some of the men 
and women who have made this day possible are not here to 
rejoice with us. One wishes you could arouse everybody in order 
to participate in this historic event. So we accept the new 
status with mixed feelings. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. President, at what stage did you feel a sense 
of fulfillment. Take us step by step from the day you voted, to 
the day you were inaugurated as president, and then to today 
when you are now president, and you are president of an all race 
democratically elected assembly of South Africa? 
  [Mandela] I don't think it's realistic to point to any 
specific hour or minute which you could regard as a day of 
fulfillment. It has been a process from the moment in which we 
established the liberation army. Its operations, the role on 
the part of our people, both inside prison and outside prison, 
inside the country and abroad, the support we received from the 
international community, built up the hope that we would return 
and that the day of fulfillment will come. And what has 
happened on the 10th of May is merely the culmination of a 
process where we felt certain that the day of fulfillment will 
come. 
  [Mashokwe] In your state of the nation address today you 
emphasized the need for a people-orientated policy which the 
government will be pursuing. You also emphasized the need for 
individual freedom. Does this fly in the face of people who 
would want to be communities, as a group like the Afrikaner 
Volksfront [National Front] or people with those ideologies? 
  [Mandela] Well, I am convinced that the Bill of Rights, 
which 
we have now adopted, makes full provision for the protection of 
basic human rights for all South Africans irrespective of the 
national group to which they belong. The rights of citizenship 
are all fully guaranteed in that Bill of Rights, and there is no 
necessity for people to demand protection as a group. Those are 
merely the vestiges of a racist approach which we have to try to 
address. I am having discussions with leaders from the 
ultra-right. I have had discussions shortly after the 
announcement of the results with General Constand Viljoen. I 
have also had discussions last Friday with Dr. Ferdi 
Hartzenberg. I am meeting him again tomorrow. I have to address 
their fears, and that is what I'm busy with. It is not 
sufficient for me to say we have made provision for all 
individuals in the Bill of Rights. One has to enter into 
negotiations in order to reach a settlement which will allay the 
fears of everybody and it is in this spirit that I'm having 
discussions with these leaders. 
  [Akhalwaya] Mr. President, before the elections the Freedom 
Front and the ANC entered into an agreement that there would be 
a volkstaat [homeland] council that the Freedom Front could set 
up. How far has that progressed and what is it's actual role 
going to be within Parliament? 
  [Mandela] We want firstly to find out facts on the basis on 
which we can address the demand. We must ascertain how many 
people, in particular how many Afrikaners, are behind this 
demand. If it is a minority, then we have one way of addressing 
the problem. If it is a majority of the Afrikaners, however 
much we may think that that demand is misplaced, we have a 
different attitude toward that demand. And therefore this 
council is intended to ascertain how much support this demand 
can command among the masses of the people on behalf of which it 
is intended to be put forward. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. President, in your speech today you alluded 
to 
the fact that about 2.5 billion rands will be appropriated this 
year for the Reconstruction and Development Program. Estimates 
run at about 80 to 90 billion being needed for that program to 
be brought to fruition. How are you going to finance the 
deficit, the shortfall if you look at about 10 years, five 
years' time you might indicate 10 billion rands. How are you 
going to come up with the shortfall? Is business going to be 
helping you and how committed will they be, together with the 
foreigners? 
  [Mandela] We must not take these figures as being in anyway 
accurate. They do not come from the National Working Committee 
of the ANC. They have been put forward by institutions which, 
although very close to the ANC, nevertheless do not necessarily 
reflect the conclusions reached by the ANC itself. We were not 
in government when these figures were first issued. We are now 
in government. We have access to accurate information and the 
budget which is going to be published on the 22d of June will 
come out with clearly considered figures and it is on the basis 
of what the budget says, that we can now talk of figures. 
  [Mashokwe] But Mr. President, the very civil service that 
is in place is the one that was been (?unfairly) run by the 
former government two years ago to implement social spending. 
Then how are you going to assure that they will deliver this 
time because in the past their track record is dismal? 
  [Mandela] Unlike the previous government, and I'm not saying 
this in a spirit of criticism, but unlike the previous 
government, the government of national unity is people 
orientated. This Reconstruction and Development Program [RDP] 
emerged from discussions with the masses of the people in 
people's forums, which took place across the length and breadth 
of this country. It is a program which was circulated to a 
wide-range of opinion makers and therefore it is a program which 
is based on consultations with the masses of the people 
themselves, and no government which has attached such importance 
to the participation of the masses themselves in formulating 
this particular plan can therefore take decisions which are 
contrary to the wishes of the people. 
  [Mashokwe] But the civil service that is in place, the [word 
indistinct] that is in place is the very one that did not 
deliver three years ago? 
  [Mandela] Well, what we can say about the National Party 
today, we can say that about the Freedom Front. They were all 
at one time in exactly the same position in which the AWB 
[Afrikaner Resistance Movement] is today. But through dialogue, 
through persuasion, through criticism, we have been able to take 
them on board, and to reach a breakthrough which all of us are 
celebrating today. And it is not a cause for alarm that we 
should find certain sections of our population serving policies 
which have now been renounced by everybody to be able to serve 
the interest of democracy. The National Party today is serving 
the interest of democracy in spite of the fact that they were 
the authors of the most brutal system of racial oppression in 
the history of this country. The civil service that you are 
talking about are themselves now serving the new government of 
national unity. I have received the support of the South 
African Defense Force, the South African Police, and other such 
important security services. I have received the support of the 
civil service, at least those that work with me in the Union 
Buildings, and I have no doubt that reflects the attitude of the 
civil service throughout the country. 
  [Mashokwe] We continue the interview with the president, 
Nelson Mandela, from his Tuynhuys offices in Cape Town. This is 
his first interview since being elected president of South 
Africa. 
  [Akhalwaya] President Mandela, the Reconstruction and 
Development Plan which you said in Parliament today has the 
support of the government of national unity depends a lot on 
partnership -- government, the private sector, civics, and so 
forth, I would say unions. Given the past with P.W. Botha when 
he was president, he had his famous seminars or famous meetings 
with the business sector as well. Earlier the Urban Foundation 
to address the housing shortage and so forth, and yet the 
problems have not only remained but in many cases the problems 
increased. What is so different now that the private sector 
especially will be able to deliver to make the RDP a success? 
  [Mandela] Again I want to draw a clear distinction between 
the previous government and the present government of national 
unity. I have already explained that the Reconstruction and 
Development Program emerges from consultation not only with the 
masses of the people across the length and breadth of this 
country, but also with state institutions, state corporations, 
government departments like the minister of finance, with 
business, consultation with academics. It is a program which 
mirrors the vies of opinion makers in this country, and it is 
for that reason that we are confident that business, both 
locally and abroad, is going to support this program. And we are 
saying so not only from speculations. We are saying so as a 
result of the numerous discussions we've had with business 
inside and outside the country --and the pledges of support 
which we have already received. We also have had extensive 
discussions with the World Bank, the International Monetary 
Fund, industrial organizations and commercial banks throughout 
the world, and massive support has been promised to us, and this 
is quite apart from the funds which are going to be generated 
from savings, from government departments in this country. 
These 2.5 billion rands are as a result of the cooperation from 
government departments in regard to funds that are already 
available and the change in the direction of spending in the 
country. It is for that reason therefore that we are confident 
that we have got the resources. We also have got the support of 
the masses of the people and opinion makers in the country. 
Because of our different approach as compared to the previous 
government -- where we rely on consultation with the people of 
South Africa. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. President, you touched on the issue of 
amnesty for criminal violence committed in the furtherance of 
political objectives. Does this in any way suggest that you are 
going to extend the deadline for criminal violence which will 
probably mean that Janus Walus, Clive Derby-Lewis will be given 
amnesty as well? 
  [Mandela] Well, firstly, let's take the position very 
clearly. There are three categories of people in regard to whom 
amnesty may be considered. There are those people who committed 
offenses before the 10th of October 1990. Those we have decided 
that, provided they follow a certain procedure, they are 
entitled to amnesty because there are similar categories of 
people before that cut off date who were granted amnesty, and we 
believe that a government of national unity should be 
even-handed and grant amnesty not only to those who committed 
offenses in their opposition to apartheid, but also to those who 
committed offenses in defense of apartheid. But then there are 
those who committed offenses between this cutoff date and 
December 1993. Their indemnity or amnesty is purely at the 
discretion of the government of national unity. But those who 
committed offenses after December 1993, we have no policy at the 
present moment; we have no decision at the present moment as to 
whether they will be granted amnesty. But I must say that our 
intention is to heal the wounds and to ensure that there is 
peace in our country, that everybody cooperates in the task of 
reconciliation and nation building. But cases will be examined 
on their merits. You must remember that in the case of people 
like Walus and Derby-Lewis, they are people who lost their 
beloved in a very cruel manner, in a manner which could have led 
to civil war in this country. And their case therefore is going 
to require special consideration. We, as the African National 
Congress, have openly declared that we are against the death 
sentence and of course that is an offense that was committed 
before we took over the government of the country. We will have 
to balance up issues in the light of our policy, but also in the 
light of the special nature of their offense, bearing in mind 
the people who have lost their beloved, and a country which has 
lost one of the most promising leaders in this country. So the 
question of these two is one that will have to be decided on its 
own facts. 
  [Akhalwaya] Mr. President, can we talk about the people 
outside prison who are still in prison to a large extent. [as 
heard] Your speech emphasized today the development of youth 
and the central role that youth play in the RDP and also the 
question of the emancipation of women. You have also announced 
special feeding schemes for children in need of feeding; you've 
also talked about free medical care for children under the age 
of six. While everybody applauds quite rightly the emphasis on 
youth, there are millions of people in this country who were 
deprived of their youth through the struggle, I'm talking now 
about pensioners, that there is no similar concession being 
extended to them in terms of your speech. Now surely in terms of 
the difficulties they are undergoing, queuing for long hours 
just to collect pensions for medical treatment and so forth, 
that similar concessions should be extended to them? 
  [Mandela] There are many issues of importance in this 
country 
which were not mentioned in this speech, not because they are 
not important, but because other policy had been made clear in 
countless speeches before today. 
  The question of pensions is one to which we are committed to 
honor. A person who takes up a job and contributes to the 
pension fund, wants to prepare for a day when he or she is no 
longer able to work, and no government can ignore the payment of 
pensions to which people are legitimately entitled. 
  [Akhalwaya] I asked specifically about the pensioners not 
being able to get free medical treatment as children would be 
entitled to. 
  [Mandela] Well, we are developing a social program in which 
people who are not able to afford to pay for medical expenses 
will be entitled to do so. We have mentioned the question of 
children specifically because it is part of our policy, but we 
have spoken about the disabled, about the aged being entitled to 
assistance form the government. This includes pensioners as 
well. We have made no discrimination whatsoever against 
pensioners. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. President, what about parity for pensioners 
and pensions for the civil servants who have been working in 
these homelands and independent states? Will the government 
find money to equal the (?package) that they are looking for? 
  [Mandela] Parity is a principle to which we are committed 
and 
we have to find the resources to put the policy in practice. 
  [Akhalwaya] If I may just come back on the question of 
funding the RDP and the finances that are required. There's 
also the question of taxation -- obviously it will be one of the 
sources of revenue. In your speech, and I just quote, you said 
that we agree that a permanently higher general level of 
taxation is to be avoided. Is that sort of code word 
"permanently" or does that mean that you are considering 
temporary higher taxes, and if so isn't temporary part of the 
government plan still out to continue temporary for a long time. 
[as heard] 
  [Mandela] I'm happy we have moved away from pensions because 
I was beginning to get the impression that you are concerned 
about your own pensions. [laughter] Now our policy is that we 
should have a low taxation system. That is our policy and it is 
absolutely important in order to get investments, both local and 
foreign, and that is why we are committed to the system of a low 
taxation system. We don't know of course about the future. We 
will resist any temptation to fund the government by raising the 
rate of taxation. And that formulation is merely intended for 
the... [changes thought] should it become necessary, because of 
concrete conditions to consider raising taxes. Even when we do 
so, there will be the widest consultation with the people who 
will be expected to pay a higher taxation. We will refrain from 
taking any unilateral action. But as presently advised, I cannot 
imagine a case where it will be necessary for us to raise 
taxation. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. President, let's go beyond the borders -- 
South Africa going back to the family of nations. Where is your 
focus going to be -- southern Africa in Africa, the UN, and are 
we going back as you stated to the Commonwealth? What is in it 
for us? 
  [Mandela] You can't approach this question from the point of 
view of prioritizing. We are in the southern African region. 
And of course, we have to play our role there. We have 
advantages as far as our economy and financial system is 
concerned, which are not enjoyed by our neighbors, and we will 
play our part as equal partners with organizations like SADC 
[Southern African Development Community]. We are part of the 
continent of Africa and we have now been accepted by the OAU. 
We will play our part in that region and on this continent. 
But at the same time we are going to be part of an 
organization, the Commonwealth, which draws its membership from 
all over the world. We will be part of the Non-Aligned 
Movement, which also has got a similar composition. We will be 
part of the United Nations -- a world body, and it's not 
possible to say we attach more importance to this particular 
organization. Insofar as the question of our membership is 
concerned and our activities, they are all on the same basis. 
  [Akhalwaya] President Mandela, tomorrow is Africa Day and 
the United Nations will be lifting the arms embargo on South 
Africa. Now Armscor [Armaments Corporation of South Africa] in 
this country has formed -- as a result of the arms sanctions -- 
according to reports, Armscor is now gearing up to tackle the 
international market to sell South African arms abroad, Given 
our own history, given what is happening in our own country in 
terms of violence, the indiscriminate use of firearms, firearms 
being obtainable freely. Are we gearing ourselves up as a 
nation that perhaps should know better, that we want to export 
weapons of death and destruction abroad? 
  [Mandela] The trade in arms is worldwide and I don't think 
it 
will be fair to say that a particular country should not engage 
in trade in arms. After all arms are not provided for the 
purpose of suppression of a particular population group in a 
country. Arms are for the purpose of defending the sovereignty 
and the integrity of a country. From that angle there is 
nothing wrong in having trade in arms. But we are going to look 
very carefully, in so far as our own country, to be sure that 
our trade in arms does not violate considerations of humanity, 
and does not allow any particular country to use those arms for 
suppressing the legitimate aspirations of any ethnic group in 
that particular country. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. President, you referred to South Africa's 
contribution to world peace, and [word indistinct] about Rwanda 
and Angola. Are there any specifics that you could give with 
(?effect) to what contributions South Africa is going to be 
playing in those two countries? 
  [Mandela] We are part, or we are going to be part of the 
Organization of African Unity. And we are going to form part of 
the frontline states and our contribution will be determined 
collectively by ourselves as well as the organizations I have 
referred to. We have no unilateral policy in this regard. It 
is sufficient for us to declare that as a matter of principle we 
are interested in peace throughout the world generally, and in 
particular in those areas like Rwanda where there is turmoil and 
conflict. But precisely what we'll do will be determined by the 
organizations that are addressing the question. Organizations 
of which we are now members. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. President, but we see South Africans as being 
mercenaries in Angola, having switched sides from supporting 
UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] to 
supporting the government of the day there. What is the 
government's viewpoint on this one? 
  [Mandela] Well, I think that the position in Angola has been 
complicated by the fact that the South African Government has 
been involved in trying to perpetuate this conflict. The 
approach of this government is totally different. We want 
peace, not only in our country, but in our neighboring states. 
And Angola is part of our neighboring states. King Hassan of 
Morocco, Houphouet-Boigny, the late president of Cote d'Ivoire, 
and myself were already involved in addressing the problem in 
Angola. Our concern is peace between the government of the MPLA 
[Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola] and UNITA, and 
we are committed to that, and will resist any development that 
is going to interfere with that initiative on our part. And 
therefore, the question of mercenaries, whether from South 
Africa or from any other country, is not consistent with the 
attainment of peace in Angola, and we will do everything in our 
power to ensure that the need for mercenaries is removed. 
  [Akhalwaya] Mr. President coming back home, when you were 
released from prison, one of the first (?meetings) that you gave 
for editors, you talked about the process that was started by 
Robert Mugabe in Zimbabwe in going for a cabinet of unity, and 
also President Nujoma, and you talked about a government of 
national unity in this country. That has now come to fruition, 
but at the same time the government of national unity that you 
now have is more a compromise, because especially for the 
cabinet ministers that come from other parties you had no hand 
in, and because of the bargaining not all the people from your 
own party would have been the best people of your choice. Is 
this something that you had planned. Is this government of 
national unity what you wanted all along? 
  [Mandela] We would have been very happy if this government 
represented only the African National Congress, but we are 
solving problems in South Africa, not in the earth. We have to 
take into account the actual conditions in our country. We 
have, through the multiparty forum, brought together the various 
organizations in this country with totally different 
backgrounds. As you know at one time we had no less then 26 
political parties in this country. We have been able to bring 
them on board and to achieve this breakthrough which we 
celebrated on the 10th on May. That alone shows that we have 
everything to gain by having involved all political parties in 
this process. As against 26 political parties, we only have 
three political parties in the government of national unity, and 
that is why consensus is comparatively easy to reach, and we now 
have had two cabinet meetings, and from all of them we have 
emerged with a united approach, and from the point of view of 
the conditions in our country this is the correct strategy for 
anybody who has embarked very seriously in reconciliation and 
nation building. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. President, do you [word indistinct] in your 
speech earlier today that vulnerable workers will be safeguarded 
by the government. Does this mean that the immigration policy 
will deal differently with skilled workers from outside South 
Africa? 
  [Mandela] We are interested that there should be no 
emigration of skills from the surrounding countries, just as it 
is tragic for South Africa to lose its citizens who have the 
knowledge, the skills, the expertise, the training. It is also 
tragic for our neighbors to lose people of skill. At the 
present moment we have a higher rate of pay, and people who are 
skilled from our neighboring territories, especially now that we 
have a democratic government, the temptation is going to be to 
come to our country, and whilst we may welcome them, but that 
would create serious economic problems for our neighboring 
states, and we are entrusted in stability in this entire region, 
and therefore the problems which will create economic 
difficulties for our neighboring states are our concern. 
  [Akhalwaya] Mr. President, how does that tie in with your 
emphasis on individual rights. Surely individuals from other 
countries will feel that this is where they can do the best for 
themselves. Can they be prevented from coming here? 
  [Mandela] Well you must understand that our Bill of Rights 
is 
intended for South Africans mainly. It does not mean that it 
should be applied mechanically. People coming from other 
countries, we are entitled to decide the question of immigration 
on the basis of problems which an influx of skilled people from 
other countries will create in those countries. You must 
realize how much the neighboring states are going to rely on 
South Africa. Not because we are going to throw our weight 
around, because we have got a developed economy, but because our 
economy can actually benefit the neighboring states. One of the 
issues we have been making in our appeal to the international 
community is that; to assist in the economic development of 
South Africa is actually to assist people of this region, 
because of the important role we are likely to play if the 
international community helps our economy to grow. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. President, on that note we have to thank you, 
and thank you Mr. Akhalwaya. Thanks for your time and thanks 
for being with us. 

