Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Daniel Santoro; copyright by CLARIN] </F>
  [Text] Seven words uttered by British Foreign Minister 
Douglas Hurd produced a smile on the face of his Argentine 
counterpart, Guido Di Tella. Hurd said: "We could possibly 
agree on broad cooperation" on the oil exploration the Kelpers 
want to initiate by the end of the year in the waters 
surrounding the Malvinas Islands. British sources told CLARIN on 
12 March that Hurd made this remark to Di Tella during a meeting 
last week in London. 
  As CLARIN already announced, this definition will be the new 
basis for the position the British will champion late this month 
or in early April when negotiations attempting to achieve some 
form of cooperation on the oil issue will be resumed. 
Negotiations have been suspended since late 1992, when the 
United Kingdom unilaterally decided to initiate seismic 
prospecting work in the sea bed surrounding the Malvinas Islands 
despite Argentine protests. 
  Initially, Hurd talked about cooperation alone, which 
ideally 
represented exchanging information. British sources announced 
that, in diplomatic parlance, however, this new definition means 
that London "is willing to accept the participation of Argentine 
companies in the exploration effort and the replenishment and 
repair of oil platforms in Argentine ports." A similar message 
was conveyed by the British ambassador in Buenos Aires, Peter 
Hall, to Vice Foreign Minister Fernando Petrella during a 
meeting they held on 7 March to discuss the crisis in Yugoslavia. 
  Nevertheless, this is not the final British position. Hurd 
will travel on 9 April to the Malvinas Islands for consultations 
with the islanders -- who refuse to restore communications with 
Argentina -- before initiating negotiations with Buenos Aires. 
The Malvinas Islands' residents only are willing to cooperate 
with Argentina "if necessary" and are moving ahead -- full steam 
-- with their preparations: They already have received a Royal 
Geological Service report recommending where to drill in order 
to determine the existence of oil and establishing the required 
legal or tax framework. 
  Incidentally, this is one of the most difficult points for 
negotiations that demonstrates that both oil and fishing are 
closely linked to the sovereignty conflict. Argentina wants to 
collect part of the taxes that will be charged to the oil 
companies, but the United Kingdom rejects this possibility, even 
though it is not yet known with complete certainty if there is 
oil. 
  Florencio Acenolaza, the Chamber of Deputies Foreign 
Relations Committee chairman and a geologist by profession, 
recently noted in a communique that there is no oil in the 
Malvinas Islands' submarine shelf. 
  YPF [Government Oil Deposits] President Jose Estenssoro 
quickly went to the Foreign Ministry to make it clear that 
Acenolaza based himself "on outdated information" and that YPF 
is studying one of the two seismic surveys carried out in the 
Malvinas Islands last year. Official sources confirmed to 
CLARIN that the survey was purchased through a YPF subsidiary. 
The report is confidential because it is a commercial secret. 
  Nevertheless, the existence of hydrocarbons will not be 
proven until the sea bed is drilled, despite the positive 
seismic reports. The basins may be empty, with more gas than oil 
or with little oil, which would make the business unprofitable. 

