BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 7 (CTK) -- Slovak Premier Jozef 
Moravcik has rejected the criticism from the opposition 
surrounding ex-premier Vladimir Meciar that the new government 
had retreated from the positions won in the division of former 
federal property with the Czech Republic. 
  "Talks are going on, almost nothing has yet been concluded," 
Moravcik said on Slovak Television last night. 
  He described as the most urgent problem the division of the 
assets and liabilities of the former Czechoslovak State Bank 
(SBCS). According to Czechs Slovakia owes to the Czech Republic 
more than 24 billion crowns ($820 million USD). Moravcik 
strongly denied that his government had accepted the claim. 
  "We have to negotiate, but we do not as yet intend to 
recognize this debt," Moravcik said commenting on Czech National 
Bank Governor Josef Tosovsky's optimistic statements made after 
a meeting of the banking boards of the two republics' central 
banking institutions two weeks ago. 
  Moravcik said an analysis was essential to find out how the 
sum of 24 billion crowns was set and also to consider "other 
connections." 
  "We have to think hard whether, during the division of the 
former federal property, a just approach was adopted concerning 
all property rights, know-how, and the usage of different trade 
marks. If we put all this into the package of interconnections 
then it will be possible to look for and to find a compromise," 
Moravcik said. 
  "Given the complicated nature of the issue I do not see a 
real possibility of settling it at the moment," he said, adding 
that the settlement of the problem would depend on the Czech 
Republic being accommodating. 
  Moravcik rejected criticism that the mutual recognition of 
quality certificates on imported and exported goods with the 
Czech Republic would threaten Slovakia's integration into the 
European Union (EU). 
  "The EU assumes the unification of the certificates which 
existed in the framework of the former Czechoslovakia. The 
former Czechoslovak standards have also been valid in Slovakia 
after Czechoslovakia's division. In no case can we be said to 
be threatening our commitments towards the EU," Moravcik said. 
  He pointed out that the complication of relations with the 
Czech Republic, should Czech exporters have to ask for Slovak 
certificates, would bring bigger losses than profits. 

