Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [As received via ANSASERVICE database] </F>
  [Excerpts] Rome, (ANSA) 10 Dec -- Obtaining an energy 
source that is an alternative to traditional sources, that is 
renewable and inexhaustible such as the sun, and clean. These 
are the three objectives of a research project for the 
production of hydrogen from microorganisms funded by the 
Japanese Ministry of Trade and Industry (MITI), with the 
participation of Eniricerche as the only "foreign" partner. 
Rather than being clean, the energy that it is hoped to develop 
under the project for the production of biosolar hydrogen can be 
defined as being a "cleaner." The fundamental steps of the plan 
(which is being managed by the semigovernment Japanese agency 
NEDO) include the recycling of refluent water and solid waste 
that become raw materials before the process. In addition, the 
choice of hydrogen as the fuel to be produced using 
microorganisms is part of a more wide-ranging MITI initiative 
for safeguarding the environment. The ministry's program is to 
obtain, by means of a series of coordinated measures, a 
reduction in carbon dioxide emissions which are considered to be 
one of the major causes of pollution on earth (greenhouse 
effect), at international level. Hydrogen produces water, not 
carbon dioxide, when it burns. 
  Eniricerche is taking part in the project as a member of 
RITE 
(Research Institute for Innovative Technology for the Earth) 
which manages the consortium. The other partners are all 
Japanese and include: IHI, Kubota, Tokyo Gas, Fuji Electric, 
Kajima, and NIBH (National Institute of Bioscience and Human 
Technology). Indirect and marginal participation comes from the 
University College of London, and Tokyo Agricultural University. 
Each partner is carrying out part of the project in its own 
laboratories. Eniricerche's studies focus on genetic 
engineering to improve the efficiency of hydrogen production by 
photosynthetic organisms. (passage omitted). 

