BFN 

  [Text] Kuwait, 26 Apr (KUNA) -- Lebanese Defense Minister 
Muhsin Dallul said in an interview published today that his 
country is strong and able to provide security for its citizens 
and residents. "No one, whoever it might be, can weaken it," he 
said. 
  In an interview with the Kuwaiti AL-ANBA' newspaper, Dallul 
said "There is an Arab country which attacked Lebanon, its 
security, its sovereignty, and its stability. Were we expected 
to stand with our hands tied over what happened?" He was 
referring to the recent assassination of an Iraqi opposition 
member Talib Suhayl al-Tamimi killed by members of the Iraqi 
Embassy in Beirut. 
  He added that his country has cut ties with the Iraqi regime 
because it chose Lebanon in particular as the site for the 
assassination. 
  "It is obvious that Iraq deems Lebanon to be weak and we 
want 
to prove to Iraq that Lebanon is a strong and capable country. 
No one, whoever it might be, can weaken it -- not Iraq or any 
one else," he said. 
  "We willfully cut ties with Iraq," he added, stressing the 
Lebanese Government's great responsibility for the security of 
Lebanese citizens and residents in the country. 
  Lebanon cut diplomatic ties with Iraq last week after 
Baghdad 
refused to lift diplomatic immunity from the Iraqi diplomats 
suspected of being involved in assassinating al-Tamimi. 
  Dallul said Lebanon will continue to confront what he 
described as "the dirty attack" which Iraq carried out against 
it and to teach everyone a lesson that his country is not "a 
sphere for settling accounts or a ground for others to fight 
each other on." 
  "We reject all these vile methods. Ties have been cut and 
will remain cut," he said expressing surprise that the killers 
confessed their crime based on a central decision from Baghdad 
to their embassy employees in Lebanon. 
  On the aggravated situation in southern Lebanon as a result 
of Israeli threats on the eve of U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher's arrival, Dallul said the threats were intended to 
heat up the negotiations so that they could remain "fiery." 
However, he ruled out an Israeli attack on his country as it 
would be "very costly." 
  Dallul rejected reports that Palestinians were (?singled 
out) 
and legally prosecuted, saying his country is going after those 
who committed crimes, be they Lebanese or otherwise. 
  "We are going after all those who commit crimes, whoever 
they 
might be, and not Palestinians in particular," he said. 
  Concerning the Lebanese army's raids on arm depots belonging 
to some groups and organizations and the confiscation of 
weapons, Dallul stressed that "no weapons, except legitimate 
weapons, will exist." 
  He indicated that several areas in the al-Biqa' and Beirut 
have been raided, but said that areas in southern Lebanon were 
excluded because Lebanese resistance is confronting the Israeli 
enemy and carrying out its national duty by doing so. He 
stressed the Lebanese Government's support for the resistance 
fighters. 
  On the government's media file, Dallul said that the 
ministerial committee assigned to drafting a law on the audio 
and visual media -- of which he is a member -- intends to 
prepare a draft law that is "advanced, civilized, and which 
guarantees the national interest." 

