Despite   Syria's obvious irritation and criticism from domestic 
opposition, the Jordanian government appears determined to move 
forward in bilateral negotiations with Israel following Israeli- 
Jordanian meetings in Washington on 6-7 June.  Statements by King 
Husayn during his recent visit to Washington and editorials in 
Jordan's mainstream press have strongly countered charges that 
the current negotiations betray pan-Arab ideals, while 
nonetheless arguing that Jordan must attend to its own interests 
in the peace process.  While the opposition's vocal criticism 
will probably continue, it appears unlikely to disrupt the 
government's agenda. 
                                     END SUMMARY 
      Jordan Determined To Proceed With Israel Negotiations 
   At his 21 June Washington press conference, King Husayn replied 
to criticism that his government had sacrificed pan-Arab ideals 
to achieve progress in talks with Israel and declared that Jordan 
is prepared to proceed with negotiations on matters--such as 
borders and water rights--that concern Jordan's sovereignty 
independently of progress in negotiations between Israel and 
other Arab parties.  He asserted that since "no other country in 
the Arab world" had contributed more to Palestinian and pan-Arab 
causes than Jordan, "nobody has the right to [tell Jordan] what 
to do" in its policy toward Israel.  While Husayn said he 
eventually hoped to see "the coming together of a comprehensive 
peace in the region," he stressed that above all, he is "aware of 
[his] responsibilities towards [his] people, and [is] carrying 
them out."  When questioned about Syrian criticism of Jordan's 
talks with Israel, he replied indirectly and with apparent 
irritation, asking rhetorically: "Is Jordan expected to be the 
last one to ratify a peace treaty?"  Moreover, the king indicated 
several times throughout the press conference that pan-Arab 
coordination on the Arab-Israeli peace talks had never been 
achieved at an acceptable level and that, while he hoped for 
progress on all tracks of the process, Jordan's talks with Israel 
are "a question of a sovereign matter regarding Jordan itself," 
and are not "tied to movement on another track" (Amman TV, 21 
June). 
   Significantly, King Husayn stopped short of categorically stating 
that Amman would not sign a final agreement with Israel before 
the attainment of a comprehensive peace.  Asked whether he would 
be willing to sign a peace treaty with Israel independently of 
the other tracks, Husayn responded that while Jordan is 
"searching for a comprehensive peace," it is a "sovereign 
country" that is "dealing with [its] own problems," adding: "We 
[Jordanians] started at the same point, and we are trying to see 
what we can achieve" (Amman TV, 21 June). 
   Editorials Hail Pragmatism, Ridicule Opponents 
   Editorials in Jordan's establishment press praised the 
government's stance toward Israel as being practical and 
farsighted, and combined support for border and water 
negotiations with firm reiterations of Jordan's commitment to a 
comprehensive final peace arrangement on all tracks.  In 
addition, several newspaper columns made disparaging references 
to opponents of the negotiations. 
   --A column in Al-Dustur urged "starry-eyed" citizens to "wake up" 
to a transformed Middle East, adding that talks between Jordan 
and Israel are "nothing to be ashamed of," and that "the day is 
not far off when Israel will have embassies in Arab capitals." 
In a thinly veiled swipe at opponents of the government's policy, 
the column concluded that Amman "cannot possibly be the citadel 
of verbal Arab rejectionism, whose bark has, over decades, been 
worse than its bite" (21 June). 
   --An Al-Ra'y editorial praised the "Jordanian Arab futuristic 
view of the comprehensive peace" that would start with border and 
water talks and proceed to "security, joint cooperation, and 
other issues within the framework of the comprehensive peace." 
In a likely reference to critical articles published in the 
opposition press, the editorial went on to denounce the "media 
clamor" over Jordan's unilateral moves as unwarranted, 
"especially since Jordan has always promoted Arab solidarity and 
encouraged Arab solutions to all the nation's issues" (13 June). 
   Opposition Reaction 
   Various opposition political parties, most prominently the Muslim 
Brotherhood-backed Islamic Action Front (IAF), have taken 
advantage of greater press freedom brought about by the king's 
cautious political liberalization to publicize a hard line 
against the government's course.  They have categorically 
rejected separate negotiations with Israel, accusing the 
government of deserting the Palestinian cause, damaging pan-Arab 
coordination, and abandoning the principle of a comprehensive 
solution.  The IAF, which has 16 members in the House of 
Representatives, also criticized Jordan's recent cabinet 
reshuffle, which brought 10 House deputies into the cabinet as 
ministers, (See Note 1) as a move aimed solely at consolidating 
government support for its negotiations with Israel. 
   (Note 1) Apparently, the cabinet reshuffle was intended to 
preempt parliamentary attacks on the government's peace process 
policy.  Information Minister Jawad al-'Anani stated that the 
ministerial shakeup was intended to "consolidate cooperation 
between the [executive and legislative] arms of government and 
strengthen the performance of the cabinet in light of the fast 
changes in the area and the peace process" (Jordan Times, 9-10 
June). 
   --IAF deputies in the House of Representatives issued a statement 
rejecting Jordan's negotiations with the "Zionist enemy," 
asserting that the bilateral agendas signed in Washington 
"reflect a Jordanian retreat from the constant principles" of 
"rejecting a unilateral peace, adhering to the Islamic and Arab 
character of Jerusalem, and the right of refugees to return to 
their country and territories from which they were expelled by 
the usurper Jews."  The statement also warned the government 
against "making the same mistake as the Palestinian negotiator by 
throwing himself into the lap of the Zionist entity" (Al-Majd, 20 
June). 
   --The Jordanian Arab Constitutional Front Party warned that the 
government's stance "constitutes an imminent threat to Jordan and 
the Palestinian cause and harms the cooperation and coordination 
between the Arab brothers in Syria and Lebanon" (Al-Majd, 20 
June). 
   --A joint statement issued by the IAF and the Pan-Arab Action 
Front (PAAF) condemned Jordan's 8 June cabinet reshuffle as being 
"aimed at weakening the opposition in the House of 
Representatives . . . in order to go ahead with plans to sign a 
unilateral reconciliation agreement with the Zionist enemy."  The 
joint IAF-PAAF statement also accused the government of deviating 
from its "so-called national constants that focused on a 
comprehensive solution, the return of Jerusalem, and solving the 
problem of refugees" (Al-Sabil, 21-27 June). 
   --A statement by the secretary of the Jordanian Arab Socialist 
Ba'th Party's Supreme Command emphasized "the need for pan-Arab 
solutions to any regional issue, since solutions to any regional, 
political, or economic issues will be incomplete if not discussed 
and addressed within the framework of the comprehensive Arab 
solution" (Al-Ra'y, 14 June) 
      Syria Criticizes Israeli-Jordanian Diplomacy 
   Steadily escalating attacks on Jordan in Syria's tightly 
controlled media illustrate Damascus' irritation over indications 
of significant progress in the 6-7 June talks between Jordan and 
Israel.  For example, a Damascus radio report on 22 June appeared 
to launch an indirect attack on King Husayn himself.  The report 
first cited optimistic statements by the king and other unnamed 
Jordanian officials on the course of Israeli-Jordanian 
negotiations, made during the the king's recent visit to the 
United States.  The radio went on, however, to quote extensively 
from what it said were Jordanian opposition statements, including 
such comments as: "the Israeli-Jordanian agenda is another step 
in the political capitulationist settlement plan" and "the 
Jordanian Government has placed the country in a dark political 
tunnel." 
   Following the 6-7 June talks, Syrian media initially voiced 
Syria's concern without criticizing the Jordanian Government.  On 
8 June, for example, the daily Tishrin harshly condemned 
Jordanian journalist Fahd al-Fanik's calls in two recent columns 
(Amman Al-Ra'y, 2 &amp; 4 June) for Jordan to move forward in 
negotiating a peace treaty with Israel.  The next day, Damascus 
radio reported that Jordanian Prime Minister 'Abd-al-Salam al- 
Majali had denied press reports that he had criticized Syria and 
had expressed "absolute faith" in the "common objectives and 
destiny" of Jordan and Syria. 
   Within the next several days, however, Damascus radio adopted an 
openly critical tone.  On the 11th, it hinted at official 
dissatisfaction, reporting that Syria had postponed a scheduled 
meeting that day of the Joint Syrian-Jordanian Higher Committee- 
-a body promoting bilateral cooperation--because "both the date 
and circumstances are not suitable for the Syrian side."  By the 
12th, the radio all but openly attacked Jordan.  After repeating 
standard denunciations of Israeli policy toward Syria, the radio 
attacked the "weakness of certain parties and individuals" [in 
dealing with Israel] as a result of shortsightedness, limited 
vision, and weakness of their pan-Arab affiliation and 
understanding of the objectives which the Arab people aspire to 
realize." 
   Implications 
   Notwithstanding continuing criticism from opponents of the 
government's decision to negotiate with Israel, King Husayn's 
statements indicate that Jordan is prepared to pursue economic 
and political gains from talks on water rights and border 
demarcation, even though Husayn is probably not at this point 
prepared to sign a final peace treaty with Israel independently 
of the other tracks.  While the domestic opposition is not likely 
to pose any substantial threat to his government, it is probably 
an irritant to King Husayn, who doubtless sees his personal 
credibility as a pan-Arab leader being challenged.  Nevertheless, 
the newly reshuf fled cabinet has probably made the government 
confident that it can manage opposition from the IAF and other 
dissenting parties. 
   Thus far, Damascus has shown no sign of relenting in its 
criticism of current Jordanian, or for that matter Palestinian, 
negotiations with Israel.  For now, Syria seems likely to 
maintain its rhetorical attacks while biding time in the hope 
that the Israeli-Palestinian track will break down, thereby 
strengthening Syria's position vis-a-vis both Israel and other 
Arab parties. 
   (AUTHORS: MURRAY, MORTON.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703) 733-6094.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/SM 29/1952Z JUN 

