BFN 

  [Text] Cambodia has expressed its wish to participate in 
the Asean Regional Forum (ARF) scheduled to be held in July, 
according to a Thai Foreign Ministry statement. 
  The ministry said Cambodian Foreign Minister Prince Norodom 
Sirivut conveyed the wish during a meeting with his Thai 
counterpart, Prasong Sunsiri, at last weekend's Non-Aligned 
Movement meeting in Egypt. 
  Prasong told Prince Sirivut he would forward Cambodia's wish 
to other Asean foreign ministers for consideration. Asean 
includes Brunei, Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines, Singapore and 
Thailand. 
  Cambodia will attend the 27th Asean Ministerial meeting on 
July 22-23 as a special guest. The meeting will be followed by 
the ARF meetings on July 25 and a Post Ministerial Conference on 
July 26-28 in which Asean's dialogue partners will participate. 
  The ARF will set aside three hours for participants to 
discuss security issues that they consider significant for 
regional peace and stability. 
  Participants in the forum are Asean members plus Laos, 
Vietnam and Papua New Guinea as observers. Asean's dialogue 
partners, which include the United States, Australia, Canada and 
Japan, will also participate. China and Russia will attend as 
Asean's consultative partners. 
  It is still uncertain whether Cambodia's participation will 
be possible as participants in the forum should have formal 
status in Asean, according to an earlier agreement among senior 
Asean officials. Senior Asean officials and representatives of 
prospective ARF participants met last month for the final ARF 
preparation. 
  Cambodia has not acceded to the treaty of Amity and 
Cooperation in Southeast Asia, a prerequisite for Southeast 
Asian nations to become Asean members. Vietnam and Laos both 
acceded to the treaty before being accorded observer status. 
  Prince Sirivut had previously expressed his country's 
interest in joining the ARF but later dropped the idea. During 
his visit to Cambodia earlier this year, Prasong Sunsiri 
suggested Cambodia write a formal letter expressing interest in 
the ARF, but the suggestion was not taken up. 
  Cambodia, which now has a democratically-elected government 
as a result of UN-organized elections last May, has not yet been 
accorded any status within Asean. Despite this, the country was 
invited at short notice to attend the 26th Asean meetings in 
Singapore. 
  King Norodom Sihanouk has said Cambodia at this stage wants 
to be a non-aligned country and will consider joining Asean at a 
later date. 
  In Egypt, Prasong also met with his Vietnamese counterpart, 
Nguyen Manh Cam. 

