Language: <F P=105> Indonesian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [New Year address by President Suharto on 31 December; place </F>
not given -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] In the name of God the Most Compassionate and Most 
Merciful! My fellow countrymen! Peace be upon you all! 
  We will leave 1993 in a few moments and enter the new year 
1994. As in previous years, I would like to ask for your time on 
the eve of the new year to recall and consider together the 
significance of 1993 for the life and development of our nation. 
With a clear mind, let us draw valuable lessons from all events 
and experience throughout the year that will end soon! Let us 
wisely use the lesson as an asset to continue our journey as a 
nation! 
  We feel very happy for being able to leave 1993 with a sigh 
of relief and self-confidence. Thus, we will welcome 1994 with 
high hopes and spirits to continue our national struggle. 
Important domestic and foreign events that will have 
far-reaching implications on the coming decades occurred in 
1993. We will leave 1993 by thanking God for allowing us to 
enjoy calm throughout the year. In other parts of the world, 
nations are suffering from disputes with others and internal 
upheavals, or are in the process of achieving national 
stability. We live in a changing world full of problems, 
challenges, and open opportunities. 
  My fellow countrymen! The General Congress of the People's 
Consultative Assembly [MPR] was held successfully and safely 
this year. This was a manifestation of our determination to 
consistently implement Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution. The 
MPR issued a broad new outline of state policies that not only 
sets targets for the Sixth Five-Year Development Plan, but also 
a new national strategy for the country over the next 25 years. 
As a nation, we are determined to have a better future -- 
better than what we have already achieved. We are determined to 
promote our living standards, quality, and dignity. We will 
continue to develop our country to attain our aspirations. The 
government and people must make serious preparations to ensure 
that development programs in the coming years will achieve the 
desired results. We should continue to revamp the civil service 
and improve its services to the government. Efforts will 
continue to make the civil servants more effective, efficient, 
cohesive, and receptive to the people's dynamism, aspirations, 
and interests. The people in general and sociopolitical and 
mass organizations in particular should also undertake equally 
intensive efforts. The success of our future national 
development plans will depend primarily on the participation of 
the people. Accordingly, political communication between the 
people and their leaders -- public figures and people's deputies 
-- should be maintained consistently. There must be continuous 
and sincere political communication between the deputies and 
sociopolitical forces and the people in their respective 
constituencies. 
  Ladies and gentlemen! After two and a half decades, we now 
give a sigh of relief for having established a solid foundation 
for development. Subsequently, we will enter the takeoff period 
a few months from now. 
  Ideologically and politically, we have revamped our 
political 
institutions in accordance with Pancasila and the 1945 
Constitution. Democracy continues to grow. We are responsibly 
and cautiously developing openness. We now have the National 
Commission for Human Rights that will work independently. The 
commission will promote the universal and national concepts of 
human rights and monitor the implementation of human rights in 
the country. All this will freshen our quality of life and 
energize our national stability. 
  Let us take a look at economic issues. We registered high 
economic growth in 1993, while the inflation rate was kept below 
10 percent. The volume and number of our exports increased. We 
consolidated our self-sufficency in rice, in addition to 
boosting agricultural development in general. Industrial 
progress was evident in the growing contribution of the 
industrial sector to economic development and export revenue. 
Trade, communications, tourism, and other sectors continued to 
make remarkable progress. Our economic progress has become all 
the more important in view of our past efforts to cool our 
overheating economy. We have developed many ideas and spent 
energy, time, and money to achieve the current level of 
progress. The government will continue to encourage our 
economic forces to play a dynamic role in development. We have 
achieved satisfactory progress in the sociocultural, defense, 
and security sectors. 
  We have achieved all this thanks to our solid political 
(?system), national resilience, and the success of development 
programs in all fields. Development and growth achieved through 
the end of 1993 has strengthened our conviction that a 
transition to the takeoff period will be smooth, calm, and 
orderly. It is this conviction that encourages us to welcome 
1994. From 1994 onward, there will be challenges and hope. We 
must satisfy various increasing aspirations and needs. We must 
eradicate the poverty that plagues some of us. We must catch up 
with other nations that are already ahead of us. We live in the 
Asia-Pacific region, which has registered the fastest economic 
growth in the world over the past two decades. APEC 
[Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation] has opened new 
opportunities. We must also be prepared for a new international 
trade system arising from the 1994 [as heard] GATT pact. 
Whether we will be able to exploit these opportunities for our 
own progress will depend on our own national strength. We must 
expand our economy further. Economic institutions, be they 
state enterprises, private companies, or cooperatives, should 
revamp themselves to enable our nation to compete with other 
nations economically. 
  My fellow countrymen! We regard 1993 as an important year 
because we will soon end the first 25-year long-term development 
scheme and enter a new era, which is the takeoff period, in 
1994. By working hard, maintaining national unity and cohesion, 
and energizing national stability, let us enter 1994 with high 
hopes and strong determination! 
  We wish you all a happy 1994 and a Merry Christmas to all 
Christians! May God the Most Compassionate and Most Merciful 
always bless all of us! Thank you and peace be upon you again! 

