BFN 

  [Text] Zagreb, March 31 (AFP) -- The UN Protection Force 
[UNPROFOR] in Bosnia-Herzegovina has detected no signs of a 
forthcoming "spring offensive" either by separatist Serbs or the 
Bosnian army, despite continuing Serb bombardments on enclaves 
in the east of the republic, an official said Thursday [31 
March]. 
  Responding to repeated Serb charges that the Bosnian army 
was 
preparing a spring offensive, UNPROFOR deputy commander General 
John MacInnis said he had "no indications" of such a campaign. 
  "There are various military activities going on, but we 
don't 
see it yet as a concerted large scale effort," the Canadian 
general said. 
  In Sarajevo earlier UN officials warned of a "difficult 
situation" in the Moslem-held enclave of Gorazde in eastern 
Bosnia, where Sarajevo radio said separatist Serbs were 
continuing a fierce bombardment begun earlier this week. 
  The offensive against the enclave, launched earlier this 
week, was "the most violent ever launched against the town," the 
radio said. 
  A spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Kris 
Janowski, said airdrops of humanitarian aid would become 
necessary if the fighting continued over the next two days. 
  UN Protection Force spokesman Major Rob Annink said the 
situation at Gorazde was "tense" following an all-day 
bombardment of the town. Zepa, further north, had also come 
under Serb bombardment on Wednesday, with three people seriously 
wounded, he added. 
  Janowski said that five people, including an 11-year-old 
girl, had died, with 21 other people wounded, in Wednesday's 
bombardment of Gorazde. Sarajevo radio put the figure at 15 
dead and 40 wounded. 
  Annick said the situation was "tense" around the northern 
pocket of Maglaj, where Sarajevo Radio said the Bosnian army 
seized several strategic villages and hillsides Wednesday. The 
radio also claimed military successes by the Bosnian army on the 
Brcko front, in the north, saying it had forced back Serb forces 
by 500 metres (yards). 
  On the Gorazde shelling, MacInnis acknowledged that there 
were "widespread shellings throughout Bosnia, but at a very low 
level, and they do not appear to be coordinated." 
  UNPROFOR was "not convinced as yet that there is a concerted 
spring offensive, nor a concerted widely coordinated reaction. 
But it is something of course that we have to be watching very 
carefully," he said. 
  In London the Foreign Office said Britain would open an 
embassy in Sarajevo next month to mark "the progressive return 
to normal life." London established diplomatic ties with 
Sarajevo in April 1992 soon after its independence was 
recognised, but did not open a mission there. A US embassy in 
Sarajevo was inaugurated Wednesday. 
  Also in London, the environmental protection group 
Greenpeace 
warned of the danger to civilian life in former Yugoslavia 
created by the more than two million land-mines that still 
littered the territory fought over by the various combatants. 
  "Landmines and unexploded munitions set by all factions will 
endanger civilians and children returning to their destroyed 
homes for years to come," the organisation said in a statement. 
  Greenpeace, which recently sent a delegation to the former 
Yugoslavia, deplored the lack of resources allocated to mine 
clearance. 

