Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In Washington the bilateral talks will resume this 
afternoon with discussions on economic issues. Representatives 
of the United States and Jordan will participate. At the same 
time negotiations between Israel, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and 
the Palestinians will continue. A Qol Yisra'el reporter says in 
the meeting with Syria, Israeli delegation head Itamar 
Rabinovich requested that security arrangements on the Golan be 
discussed. However, the Syrians, as in the past, said 
discussions had to first focus on an Israeli withdrawal. 
  Israeli delegation head to the talks with Jordan, Elyaqim 
Rubinstein, says only after a peace accord is made between the 
two countries will the issue of refugees be discussed. 
Rubinstein said he believes the issue is too vast to be 
negotiated only between Israel and Jordan, but rather should be 
dealt with in the multilaterals. Rubinstein's comments were 
made in response to King Husayn's remarks on Monday [14 
February] that the problem of Palestinian refugees should be 
solved prior to her making peace with Israel. 
  In Taba the discussions on security and civilian issues 
continue today. Qol Yisra'el's special correspondent at the 
talks, Karmela Menashe, says Israel has agreed to the deployment 
of 6,000 Palestinian policemen in the autonomous areas, but 
Palestinians are insisting on 10,000. The mood remains 
optimistic, but cautious, as we hear in this comment made last 
night by the head of the Palestinian delegation, Nabil Sha'th: 
  [Begin Sha'th recording] I learned from experience that the 
less we talk about the substance the better is the chance of 
reaching an agreement. And unless there are problems -- if 
there are problems everybody will have to explain to the press 
that it's not his problems, but the other side's. But I don't 
see there is any problem. And maybe this time we will make this 
agreement. I hope we have made benefit from all the traveling 
we made before and the agreement in Cairo. It might have really 
improved the credibility of the two parties. So maybe there was 
some good that came out of this long touristic negotiating round 
between Davos and [word indistinct], between Versailles and 
Oslo, and finally Cairo. But we have come back where we 
started, and I hope that's where we will complete everything. 
[end recording] 

