CSO 

<F P=106> [Article from Vybir Independent Information Agency special </F>
for NARODNA ARMIYA: "A Non-Nuclear Ukraine. Too Cheaply?"] 
  [Text] Should Ukraine be a non-nuclear state? That is 
the general question that includes thousands of other questions 
that have been officially resolved today. One step in that 
direction was the signing of the trilateral agreement in Moscow 
and the ratification of the START-1 treaty by the Ukrainian 
parliament. But it cannot be considered closed, not only because 
Ukraine has still not yet joined the Nuclear Non-Proliferation 
Treaty, but also because the official stance does not always 
coincide with the views of the leaders of the existing political 
forces. 
<H8>  The Right </H8>
  The head of the Ukrainian Conservative Republican Party, 
Stepan Khmara, feels that the signing of the trilateral 
agreement is a violation of the Constitution and a political 
stunt. The stance of UNSO is based on the postulate that Ukraine 
should be a nuclear power, since it has an age-old enemy right 
next door. By turning over the nuclear weapons of the former 
Soviet Union, Ukraine should without doubt simultaneously think 
about creating "its own nuclear bomb" today. 
  The head of the KUN, Slava Stetsko, had a negative opinion 
of 
the signing of the "trilateral agreement": "...KUN feels that 
this statement could not be signed, since after all it was not 
the only way out of the situation; quite a few influential 
politicians and commentators have stated that they understand 
why Ukraine is not rushing to disarm--it is afraid of Russia. 
The more so considering the recent evidence of aggressiveness... 
Russia is trying to return the former republics to its lap 
somehow, announcing its claims to the right to carry out 
`peacekeeping operations' on that terrain. They are maintaining 
their troops in the Central Asian republics and arranging 
provocations in the Caucasus and the Transcaucasus, as a result 
of which blood is being spilled. So returning to the problem of 
nuclear weapons, I would point out once again that the 
trilateral declaration is a mistake. We are not against 
disarmament in general. We are for a non-nuclear Ukraine. But in 
a non-nuclear world." 
  Unequivocal support for the idea of a strong nation state is 
characteristic of the representatives of the right wing; such a 
state is impossible today without nuclear weapons as a factor in 
restraining instability in its foreign-policy priorities with 
Russia, from their point of view. 
<H8>  National Democrats </H8>
  The convictions of some representatives of the 
national-democratic bloc are close to the positions of the 
right-wing parties. And although they advocate the idea of a 
non-nuclear Ukraine, they also would accept nuclear weapons as 
one of the determining factors in the security of the state and 
property, and which should be sold as dearly as possible. 
  Mykhaylo Horyn, the chairman of the Ukrainian Republican 
Party, feels that the trilateral agreement is an exceptionally 
important document that requires profound analysis, but "to 
accept it as is, as it is now, would signify a serious blow to 
Ukraine." 
  Rukh leadership member Ivan Zayets holds a similar 
viewpoint. 
He asserts that "there is no document today that discusses 
weapons, as well as strategic nuclear weapons, in full. We have 
no document of what the concrete guarantees of the national 
security of Ukraine will be. We have no document today that 
revokes the territorial claims of Russia against Ukraine." Ivan 
Zayets feels that as a consequence of the incarnation of this 
document, Ukraine will be destroying not only the nuclear 
warheads, but will also have to destroy the entire 
infrastructure--the aircraft, the ships, the missiles, the silos. 
  Larysa Skoryk expresses complete support and understanding 
of 
the actions of the president. She considers the transfer of the 
nuclear weapons to Russia the first step toward getting out of 
the economic crisis that Ukraine is experiencing today. "The 
resolution of the nuclear problem, this hopeless nuclear 
`kindling' that lies on our territory and which an outside hand 
could always ignite, from which we have gotten nothing but worry 
and a negative attitude toward ourselves, would open up a new 
way for Ukraine to receive urgent credits, of which, I am 
convinced, the very first portion should go to resolving the 
issues of food and power resources." 
<H8>  The Centrists </H8>
  The political parties on this portion of the spectrum have 
indicated clearly that Ukraine should be a non-nuclear state, 
and should accept nuclear disarmament as a contract from which 
the greatest profit should be obtained. Leonid Kuchma, who today 
holds a position close to that of the PDVU, for example, sees 
this contract as unsuccessful: "They already have us wrapped 
around their finger, whatever may be said now." 
  Volodymyr Filenko, the leader of the Party for the 
Democratic 
Resurrection of Ukraine [PDVU], says that "the trilateral 
agreement pertaining to START-1 signed in Moscow could be 
considered positive as a whole, but the details could be 
disputed: How much of a security guarantee there is, whether the 
nuclear fuel be returned to Ukraine, and guarantees of 
compensation to Ukraine." 
  "One of the basic program principles of the Green Party is 
to 
fight for a non-nuclear Ukraine. We are succeeding in this, but 
there are certain reservations. While entirely supporting 
nuclear disarmament, for example, we have reservations that in 
the case of our use of nuclear fuel, we will once again be 
energy-dependent. Because the nuclear fuel will be processed 
abroad, and we will have to buy it...," says Volodymyr Kononov, 
the head of the Green Party of Ukraine. 
  The social democrats hold a similar, clear-cut position. 
Yuriy Zbitnev, the head of the Social-Democratic Party of 
Ukraine: "Ukraine should, of course, be a non-nuclear state in 
the process that has started today as a whole." But in 
evaluating the withdrawal of nuclear weapons from Ukraine, he 
said pointed out that "in any case the signing of the agreement 
on nuclear disarmament will be an extraordinarily great step for 
Ukraine. The evaluation of that step should come in the next two 
or three years. The compensation will provide us with electric 
power, power resources and the possibility of creating a 
stabilization fund for the hryvnya. If the agreement really does 
provide an impetus for the world disarmament process, then it 
will be a substantial result. But if this process puts us once 
again on our knees before neighboring states and threatens the 
security of Ukraine with regard to the Near East, where the 
processes of nuclear disarmament are still only being planned 
(and it is doubtful that they will be developed in the near 
future), then the evaluation will of course be quite different." 
<H8>  The Left </H8>
  Sympathy with the idea of the nuclear status of Ukraine is 
felt to be lost among the socialist camp. This question is being 
considered within the context of a system of collective 
security, which cannot be created today without tensions in 
mutual relations with Russia. Oleksandr Moroz, the head of the 
Socialist Party of Ukraine: "We have taken on the resolution of 
a great many issues that have not permitted us to be occupied 
with the economy or strengthening the independence of our 
nation. National security is not guaranteed anywhere in the 
world through one's own forces alone. The mechanism of 
collective security operates all the time to this or that 
extent. We, in our jingoistic patriotism and ignorance, have 
rejected that. What has the state gained in that regard? 
Nothing. We have only lost the status of a nuclear power, a high 
technical level of production, and scientific and technical 
potential." 
  It is obvious from all of the aforementioned that the 
leaders 
of the leading political forces, independently of their 
positions with regard to the nuclear status of Ukraine, for the 
most part do not accept the form in which the withdrawal of 
nuclear missiles from the territory of Ukraine has been 
proposed. Most of them approve of the idea that this step was a 
mistake in the foreign policy of Ukraine. It is becoming more 
and more comprehensible that the question of nuclear status has 
no easy solution. 

