Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Straight Talk" program with host Juan Carlos Roque Garcia </F>
and guest, BOHEMIA reporter Luis Sexto -- live] 
  [Text] [Roque] Good afternoon friends. This is the Straight 
Talk program and our guest today is BOHEMIA reporter Luis Sexto. 
What has Cuba invested its money in throughout these past 35 
years? That is the question we will answer during today's 
program. 
  [Sexto] Juan Carlos, it is not necessary for us to talk 
about 
or defend the work done by the Revolution. I have always 
believed that because of its magnitude, the work done by the 
Revolution defends itself. It is so evident that perhaps it is 
not necessary to defend the work that throughout the past 35 
years, the Cuban revolutionary process has carried out for the 
good of the country and for the good of the Cuban people. 
  The situation we are experiencing today demerits -- demerits 
is not the most appropriate term, but we will use it -- the work 
of the Revolution. The things we lack, the crisis, the 
deterioration of the country's material life, for reasons 
everyone is aware of such as the U.S. blockade and the collapse 
of the Socialist bloc, have all contributed to paralyzing some 
of the work of the Revolution. All of the reasons mentioned 
above have contributed to the fact that the Cuban people are not 
fully enjoying the work of the Revolution as they did through 
1989. 
  [Roque] But the work is there; it is present. 
  [Sexto] It is there. 
  [Roque] The work of the Revolution is present in every 
sphere 
of our life. It is important that we remember this. 
  [Sexto] Yes, it is important. That is what I am going to do. 
I am going to remember, or rather, let us all remember all that 
the Revolution has done. 
  A few weeks ago we were saying that there are different ways 
to view the Cuban situation. We talked about people who viewed 
the situation as anguishing, uncertain, as the end. They viewed 
our situation in a negative and pessimistic manner. There are 
others who quite consciously undermine the work of the 
Revolution. These people purposefully wish to damage the 
Revolution. These are our internal enemies who echo the feelings 
of our foreign enemies. 
  [Roque] They are the ones asking what the money has been 
invested in during the past years. 
  [Sexto] They are not the only ones asking themselves that 
question. The same question is asked by the person who is 
afraid, who thinks that all is lost, the person who views the 
situation as uncertain. In his desperation, that person also 
asks himself that same question. He asks himself: Where did the 
money go? He says: This country is in ruins. That is not true, 
this country is not in ruins. This country has done things for 
the people. Everyday we see things that the country has done and 
we see where investments were made over the past 35 years. This 
is what I wish to discuss. 
  Even though you and I may agree on various matters, we both 
know that "Straight Talk" is a program on which a difference of 
opinion can be expressed. In one way or another we are offering 
the views of the listener. 
  [Roque] There are times when our views are completely 
different. 
  [Sexto] And that is good. That is the way I feel. 
  Well, going back to the people we were talking about. They 
are experiencing a situation similar to that of a person who 
looks at himself in the mirror and only sees poverty, misery. 
The person, who looks and sees only poverty and misery and never 
sees something positive, will despair. We must realize that when 
we look at ourselves in the mirror we must remember that behind 
that mirror there is something more. We must remember that the 
mirror is not only poverty and misery. We must remember there is 
something more behind it. If we do not see this, we will 
despair, we will be defeated. I do believe that in the country 
there is much more behind the mirror than we can see or imagine. 
  [Roque] Our guest today is BOHEMIA reporter Luis Sexto. We 
are talking about the work done by the Revolution in the past 35 
years. 
  [Sexto] Juan Carlos, when the program began, I said that I 
did not feel it necessary to mention all that the Revolution has 
done or to defend what it has done. Any person who wants to see 
has only to tour the country and see all the work done. It is 
like a monument built throughout the length and width -- that is 
if Cuba has width; it is so long and narrow that I always have 
my doubts when I say length and width -- of the country. 
  For example, the average life span of the Cuban citizen is 
75 
years. That is the work of the Revolution. You are seeing the 
work of the Revolution when you see our illiteracy rate at 
barely zero. When you see that 95 percent of the country has 
electricity -- even though we are currently experiencing outages 
-- you see the work of the Revolution. You do not have to make a 
great effort to see what the Revolution has done. 
  [Roque] And that money was used to make these works 
possible. 
  [Sexto] That is correct. In what has Cuba invested all the 
money it made in the past 35 years? Right now I do not have the 
figures, but I would say that Cuba has invested more than $50 
billion to build its material infrastructure over the past 35 
years. And I am just giving you an amount that I think could be 
in the range of what has been spent. Please note that I am only 
talking about investing in the material and industrial 
infrastructure of the country. 
  [Roque] But the Revolution has invested in much more than 
that material infrastructure you are talking about. You also 
mentioned earlier that the Revolution invested in education and 
health. I wonder how much has been spent in building new 
hospitals, new schools. I wonder how much has been invested to 
create the necessary conditions to ensure progress in the 
country. 
  [Sexto] That is correct. But before we continue to discuss 
the main topic on this program, I would like to talk a bit about 
the way some people are viewing our life, our situation. I want 
to bring this up again because I did not make myself very clear 
when I talked about it earlier. When we look in the mirror we 
see something we do not like. We do not have some of the things 
we need, and we are all suffering because of this. There is a 
clash between the things we need and what we can get. There is 
always a difference between what we want and what we have. 
  [Roque] We cannot ignore that truth. 
  [Sexto] There are things that bother everyone. The black 
market, for example. The other day Pepe Alejandro [Jose 
Alejandro Rodriguez] and you were talking about this. This 
morning, on my way to the studios, on "L" Street someone offered 
me Canadian chicken at $2 a pound. I ask myself: Is that Cuba? 
Does the man who is offering me Canadian chicken at $2 a pound 
represent the true image of my country? He was a young man. 
Does he truly represent our country's youth? 
  The other day some Argentine tourists were telling us, you 
were there when they were complaining about it, that some youths 
came up to them at the hotel and complained about the situation 
and the Revolution. We told them that they did not represent 
our youth. The youths who stick around the hotels do not 
represent our youth. Our youths are those who ride their 
bicycles 14 km to get to the Jose Antonio Chavarria University, 
where they are studying for a career; our youths are those who 
are part of the Youth Labor Army, who are at the agricultural 
camps in Havana, Pinar del Rio, or the eastern sector of our 
country as part of the Turquino Plan. Those are the youths who 
represent our country. 
  There are things that bother us, things that are not nice, 
but they are all the result of the crisis. Three years ago this 
country imported $8 billion in goods. Today it can only import 
$1.1 or $1.2 billion. There is no doubt this country is 
experiencing an anguishing and critical material situation. You 
do not have to be very bright to understand this. This 
situation unleashes certain types of reaction. This situation 
creates certain attitudes and feelings. These reactions, 
attitudes, and feelings can only be changed by us. 
  [Roque] Many of these feelings are only temporary. 
  [Sexto] Temporary. 
  [Roque] Many times we get home and find that there is no gas 
for cooking, that there is no electricity, or there is simply 
nothing to cook. At that moment you forget everything and begin 
to get mad and even fight. 
  [Sexto] But deep down, these things do not change most of 
the 
people's support for the Revolution. 
  [Roque] That is right. 
  [Sexto] It is quite normal to feel irritated. It is quite 
natural to air that irritation. If I do not have gas to cook 
with, I will get mad. That is normal. However, I am sure that 
if that same citizen who today is upset because he has no gas, 
if asked to choose between the Cuban Revolution and the 
capitalism we are being offered from Miami, he would not 
hesitate to choose the Cuban Revolution. The Cuban Revolution 
gave that citizen something that capitalism never gave the 
country. 
  [Roque] That something we are talking about on Radio 
Rebelde. 
In conclusion, Luis Sexto will summarize his opinion on today's 
topic. 
  [Sexto] Briefly, what can we say? Juan Carlos, just look 
at the investment in the field of hydraulics in this country. 
How much has the Revolution invested? In 1959 we only had two, 
three, or four dams. Today we have 180 big dams and 
approximately 800 micro dams. We have experienced considerable 
hydraulic development that guarantees water for agriculture. 
  We can also talk about science. We can say that today Cuba 
has unique products such as the meningitis vaccine. Despite the 
problems we are having to get the vaccine on the Latin American 
market, it is already being used in Latin America to save lives. 
  We can also say that the Revolution has doubled and 
modernized the sugar industry, Cuba's traditional industry. 
Most of the country's 156 sugar mills have been improved. 
Their milling capacity was increased and technology improved. 
That is the work of the Revolution. 
  [Roque] A new sugar mill was built. 
  [Sexto] Not one, several. 
  [Roque] Several yes, but one was built when the situation 
was 
getting worse. 
  [Sexto] Cuba has developed its mechanical industry, which is 
now capable of building 70 percent of a sugar mill in the 
country. That is the work of the Revolution. Cuba has been able 
to base its policy of social wellbeing for the entire country on 
its industrial and material infrastructure. What else can be 
said? We could also talk about the development of the 
pharmaceutical industry. 
  [Roque] We should specify, that there are areas where we 
have 
not been able to satisfy the need of the population. 
  [Sexto] Of course, Cuba had not concluded its plan for 
developing its strategic plan when this unbalance in the world 
arrived. It came at a time when Cuba was half way through its 
plan for development. There were many things that were still to 
be done, and there are still many things to be done. No one can 
deny that considerable work has been done which is the guarantee 
that we can overcome the special period or the crisis we are 
facing. If we had not had this project, if we had not had the 
pharmaceutical, sugar, nickel, and citrus industries, if we had 
not had a developed agriculture with developed technologies and 
research centers... 
  [Roque] If we did not have all this we could not think about 
an exit. 
  [Sexto] Yes, but since we have all this, we can think about 
an exit. Undoubtedly, the exit, in my opinion, is certain 
because we have a base and we are not naked. We lack many things 
but the country is not naked or crippled. That is what I am 
referring to. I am not justifying things. I believe we cannot 
justify the past. What was done wrongly was done wrongly. We can 
explain them but we cannot justify them. As a Spanish writer 
once said, we can only justify the future. We are struggling so 
our future can be justified and so it can be brighter. 
  [Roque] Even though the present has its difficulties, and we 
must recognize them, we must face those difficulties so that we 
can look forward to that future we are talking about. 
  [Sexto] We must face it knowing that we are stepping on 
solid 
ground. There are many things to be decided and solved in the 
economic area. But we have a material base for Cuba's takeoff. 
As a matter of fact, I believe the country is already taking 
off. An airplane begins its takeoff once it begins to go forward 
on the runway. Cuba is already going forward on the runway. 

