BFN 

  [Text] In the Kashmir valley, efforts are on to secure 
safe release of [words missing] militants near Pahalgam two days 
ago. Three other members of the trekking team have returned to 
Srinagar. A number of organizations have appealed to the 
militants to release the innocent trekkers. 
  Two Pakistan-trained militants were killed in Kupwara 
District in an encounter with the security force. Four 
militants were arrested and a large quantity of arms and 
ammunition was recovered. 
  [Hong Kong AFP in English at 1307 GMT on 9 Jun 94 in a 
report 
adds the following: "Kashmiri separatist groups Thursday 
demanded the immediate release of two British hikers kidnapped 
by Moslem militants while trekking in the Himalayas. 
  'The Indian authorities, meanwhile, rejected the demand by 
the Moslem rebels who snatched the two British nationals that 
three of their imprisoned leaders be freed in exchange for the 
hostages. 
  'David Mackie, 36, a video producer from London, and Kim 
Housego, 16, the son of the former Financial Times correspondent 
in New Delhi, were abducted in the Himalayan foothills southeast 
of here by three heavily-armed men claiming to be members of the 
militant outfit Harkat-ul-Ansar or Movement of Friends. 
  'In a note left for Kim Housego's father, David, the 
kidnappers demanded the release of three of the group's leaders 
from Indian jails and warned foreign tourists to stay out of 
Kashmir. 
  "Their release is not possible," a government official told 
AFP. 
  The latest kidnapping was forcefully condemned by the two 
most powerful Kashmiri Moslem militant groups, the Jammu and 
Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) which seeks independence for 
Kashmir and the pro-Pakistan Hizbul Mujahideen. 
  "Such moves help India at the international level," the JKLF 
said in an unconditional appeal for the release of the Britons. 
  The Hizbul Mujahideen, or Party of Moslem Warriors, called 
on 
the kidnappers to immediately release the Britons in the 
interests of the Kashmiri separatist movement. 
  "We have offered our help to identify these people," said 
Majid Jehangir, the second-ranking leader of the Hizbul 
Mujahideen, which helped rescue a Portuguese engineer who was 
kidnapped by a group opposed to a power project in the state two 
years ago. 
  Both the JKLF and the Hizbul Mujahideen raised the 
possibility that the kidnapping may be the handiwork of Indian 
agents seeking to discredit the secessionist movement. 
  In a statement released here Wednesday, the Harkat-ul-Ansar 
claimed responsibility for the kidnapping and said it was done 
to attract world attention to human rights abuses by Indian 
troops battling the insurgency. 
  The Jamiat-ul-Islami, the Hizb's political wing, denounced 
the abduction by the group and appealed for the release of the 
two "guests" without "delay or harm." 
  "It is unwise to commit such a human rights violation and 
then suggest that it would help focus world attention on gross 
rights abuses by Indian security forces," said Jamiat leader 
Ghulam Mohammed Bhat.'] 

