BFN 

<F P=106> [Dmitriy Volkov report under the "Privatization" rubric: </F>
"Boris Yeltsin Asks Chubays To `Leave Moscow Alone,' Hoping the 
Other `Federation Components' Will Not Take Yuriy Luzhkov's Cue"] 
  [Text] President Yeltsin made a resolute attempt yesterday 
to end the conflict between Moscow Mayor Yuriy Luzhkov and 
Anatoliy Chubays, chairman of the State Committee for the 
Management of State Property [Goskomimushchestvo]. He announced 
that he had let Mr. Chubays know via Oleg Soskovets "that he 
leave Moscow alone." Boris Yeltsin believes there is no danger 
of opposition to Goskomimushchestvo policy in the other regions. 
"The rest are not going to rush to do likewise," he stated at a 
press conference. 
  Meanwhile, the conflict between the Goskomimushchestvo 
chairman and the Moscow governor has been resolved only in form. 
Clearly the differences that have taken on a political nature 
will only grow with the start of the post-voucher privatization 
where denationalization of real estate and plots of land 
acquires special importance. Goskomimushchestvo Deputy Chairman 
Maksim Boyko told REUTER that Russia "should energetically move 
forward on the question of privatization of land and real 
estate," in particular to spur reforms in agriculture. More 
than that, Mr. Boyko identified the future of privatized 
enterprises with "workable bankruptcy procedures" and with their 
"complete introduction in the market sector." 
  Meanwhile, Yuriy Luzhkov described Anatoliy Chubays' 
statements about the Moscow government's retreating from its own 
privatization program as a bluff, and announced that far from 
stopping to press on with "its own" variant of 
denationalization, Moscow is going to "strengthen" its actions 
in this direction. Clearly, the Moscow authorities would not 
like to lose effective control of real estate in the capital. 
Besides, it is quite probable that the government of Mr. 
Luzhkov will come out for taking into account the special nature 
of Moscow's production facilities before "taking them into a 
market economy," that is to say, to take into account "social 
consequences," "state interests," and other such factors. 
  As for what the authorities in the other regions of Russia 
are going to do, Goskomimushchestvo chiefs can hardly take 
comfort in the Russian president's assurances. Without a doubt 
Boris Yeltsin's support of Yuriy Luzhkov's stance will be taken 
by regional bosses as a sufficient pretext for vigorous actions 
to get rid of Goskomimushchestvo tutelage. On 9 June the 
influential interregional association "Siberian Agreement" 
formulated demands to the government and the president that the 
regional interests "connected with the principles and approaches 
to privatization in the post-privatization period in Siberia" be 
taken into account. In the opinion of Leonid Polezhayev, one of 
the association's leaders, "It is necessary, before it is too 
late, to take measures in order to preserve everything that can 
be preserved taking account of the interests of the Siberian 
regions." The regional elite is clearly not going to preserve 
the role of the federal Goskomimushchestvo and follow its 
pro-market plans in effecting privatization. On the contrary, 
it wishes to retain as great a control over property as possible. 

