Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Gentlemen: The entire world has welcomed the 
results of the summit held by Presidents al-Asad and Clinton in 
Geneva, calling this summit a decisive turning point on the path 
to a just and comprehensive Middle East peace. 
  In their statements and news conference, the two presidents 
emphasized an real, honorable peace based on the Security 
Council resolutions and the land-for-peace principle. A real, 
honorable peace is one that ends occupation and secures rights 
for their owners, one that can be accepted by the present 
generation and safeguarded by coming generations. 
  President al-Asad explained that peace is not a phased 
Syrian 
objective but rather a strategic Syrian choice. He also called 
for the peace of the brave. For his part, President Clinton 
announced his support for President al-Asad's call to achieve 
the peace of the brave. 
  Politicians, observers, and media circles throughout the 
world are unanimous in saying that Syria has opened the door for 
peace and has completely paved the way for a just, lasting, and 
comprehensive solution. They are also unanimous in stating that 
the ball is now in Israel's court and that Israel should prove 
in practical terms that it seeks peace by responding to the 
outcome of the Geneva summit. Indeed, U.S. envoys flew to 
Israel directly from this Swiss city, the scene of this year's 
event, in order to explore the extent of Israel's response to 
the outcome of this summit. 
  It is now clear to everyone throughout the world that Syria 
has lived up to the level of the world's aspirations for a 
firmly-established peace in the Middle East, that Syria has made 
far more contributions to the cause of peace than the other 
party, and that peace would have been achieved in the region had 
it been up to Syria alone. However, peace cannot be established 
without Israel's response, which it has yet to give. In the 
Washington talks, Israel employed maneuvers and procrastination 
to create a drain at these talks. Moreover, both the overall 
peace process and the U.S. initiative were almost undermined by 
the conclusion of separate deals. All the events and 
developments have confirmed that such deals are far away from 
peace. 
  In view of such a decisive meeting as the Geneva summit, 
which yielded results drawing support throughout the world, 
Israel has found no other way to evade these results but to cast 
doubts on Syria's peaceful position, invoke feeble security 
pretexts, and call for an Israeli referendum on the Golan issue 
as if the Golan has not always been Syrian territory and as if 
the Israelis can cancel the facts of history and geography. 
  President al-Asad announced at the Geneva summit that 1994 
can be a year of peace in the Middle East if the Israeli rulers 
are courageous enough to respond to the peace of the brave. No 
doubt, he was hinting at the Israeli rulers' known 
prevarications, evasions, and procrastination. The Israeli 
rulers have wasted numerous opportunities to establish a firm 
and comprehensive peace in the region. However, the Geneva 
summit provided a unique and rare opportunity that will 
definitely be lost if the Israeli rulers do not rise to the 
level of the cause of peace, the international community's 
aspirations, the Security Council resolutions, and the 
principles of international law. This opportunity will also be 
lost if these rulers do not realize that full withdrawal from 
the Golan is essential in implementing the Security Council 
resolutions, and that they should end all settlement activities 
and honestly respond to the requisites of a just and 
comprehensive Middle East peace. 
  The Golan is Syrian territory and will remain so. It will 
never be bargained over. Occupation cannot change or undermine 
the Syrian Arab identity of the Golan. Israel's procrastination 
will not yield any result other than wasting this rare 
opportunity, which the Geneva summit has provided, and dashing 
the world's hopes for a firm peace in the region. 

