BFN 

  [Text] Prime Minister Chuan Likphai threw strong support 
behind the Thai military yesterday in its increasingly angry 
response to Cambodian allegations that Thai soldiers are still 
backing the Khmer Rouge. 
  Army Commander in Chief Gen Wimon Wongwanit yesterday 
accused 
Cambodian leaders of lying and threatened to reduce humanitarian 
assistance for Cambodia if Phnom Penh continues to accuse 
Thailand of supporting the radical faction. 
  The Army chief said if pushed to the limit, Thailand may 
have 
to respond with "an eye for an eye... there are limits to our 
patience." 
  Gen Wimon charged that a "third country" was behind the 
smear 
campaign against Thailand. "A third country is trying to drive a 
wedge between Thailand and Cambodia," he said, without naming 
names. 
  Prime Minister Chuan said in a separate interview it was 
necessary for Thailand to launch a diplomatic offensive against 
Cambodia. 
  "We are forced to hit back at Cambodia because we have to 
clear ourselves of such allegations. Thailand's image has been 
badly damaged," Chuan said. 
  He also said there might be a misunderstanding on the part 
of 
Phnom Penh. He noted that Cambodian soldiers who lost battles 
against the Khmer Rouge might put the blame on Thailand and 
unaware Phnom Penh leaders subsequently picked up the 
accusations. 
  "It may be that Cambodian leaders are listening to their 
army 
too much. The government's troops have been unsuccessful in 
suppressing the Khmer Rouge and have then accused others 
[Thailand] of helping the faction," he said. 
  "It's the govemment's policy to allow the Foreign Ministry 
and other agencies involved [in Cambodian affairs] to explain 
facts to the intemational community." 
  Gen Wimon said Cambodian leaders' unsubstantiated claims 
that 
Thailand still supported the Khmer Rouge had damaged Thailand's 
reputation. "The damage was much more severe than that caused 
by a bomb," he said. 
  First Prime Minister Norodom Ranariddh claimed the Khmer 
Rouge had been allowed to use Thailand as a sanctuary during the 
battle for the Cambodian town of Pailin. He also threatened to 
attack Khmer Rouge tanks even if they were on Thai territory. 
  Reiterating the Army's denial that it still assists the 
Khmer 
Rouge, Gen Wimon said the Cambodians lied when they claimed 
there were foreign tanks inside Thailand. "It (the accusation) 
is an insult to Thailand. The Army cannot tolerate it," he said. 
  The Army said if the Phnom Penh government continued to 
"misunderstand" Thailand's position "humanitarian assistance 
might have to be cut back." 
  Gen Wimon said while Thailand consistently provided 
humanitarian assistance to Cambodians fleeing fighting in 
Cambodia, Thai villagers had to suffer from battle spill-overs. 

