Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lahore -- Former Prime Minister and PML (N) 
[Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz] Chief Mian Nawaz Sharif has said 
there are three parallel power centres both in Punjab and Sindh, 
and also in the Federal Government where Prime Minister Benazir 
Bhutto and her husband Asif Ali Zardari have created two set-ups 
to run the State affairs and this situation would, ultimately, 
lead to the collapse of the present Government. 
  Addressing a Press conference at his Model Town residence on 
Tuesday, he said the three power centres in Sindh were headed by 
Chief Minister Abdullah Shah, Prime Minister Secretariat and 
Asif Ali Zardari, while in Punjab on the same line Chief 
Minister Manzoor Wattoo, Faisal Saleh Hayat and Asif Ali Zardari 
had their independent establishments to run the governmental 
affairs and this situation would not last long. Lashing out at 
the policies of the Benazir Government, he said the design of 
the Motorway approved by his Government had been changed and the 
number of lanes reduced to four from six just to lessen the 
expenditure of Rs [rupees] 20 billion, but it would incur a loss 
of Rs 30 billion to exchequer in form of fine and the contract 
of a Turkish firm had also been cancelled. 
  Any change in the design would mar the concept of the 
Motorway and it would be just an ordinary road. The 
cancellation of the contract with the Turkish contractor would 
affect "our relations with Turkey" and everybody knows who is 
behind this machination, he added. 
  Mian Nawaz Sharif alleged that the Benazir Government 
allotted a plot in a Karachi katchi abadi [slum] to a person 
after getting a bribe of Rs 120 million and also awarded 
licences for three sugar mills in Sindh and "everyone knows who 
is the man behind the game or who is the shareholder". He 
informed the newsmen that Safdar Abbas Zaidi who was involved in 
the fraud of Rs 130 million in the past had now been appointed 
as Chairman Investment Board. 
  The former Prime Minister said that the Prime Minister 
Benazir Bhutto was going to Switzerland along with her family to 
settle the accounts of Rs 20 billion and there was no other 
purpose to visit that country. When he was asked about the 
efforts of the PML (C) [Pakistan Muslim League-Chatha] for 
reunification with his faction he remarked "I am representing 
the largest political party of the country and there is no other 
Muslim League and there is no room for those individuals who 
have come to the Assemblies through PPP [Pakistan People's 
Party]". 
  Criticising the present Government's foreign policy Mian 
Nawaz Sharif said that Benazir Bhutto's recent tours to 
different countries were `purposeless' and devoid of commitment. 
He said that during his visit to Bosnia he witnessed the 
helplessness of the Bosnian Muslims who were the victims of 
Serbs brutality and the champions of the New World Order should 
come to the rescue of the oppressed Bosnians. 
  He further said that the NATO leaders meeting in Brussels 
should come at with a clear line of action either to stop 
aggression against Bosnians or let them defend themselves 
lifting arms embargo. 
  He criticised Benazir Bhutto for not giving a warm reception 
to the Bosnian Prime Minister on his visit to Pakistan and said 
that Government showed a lack of commitment on the issues of 
Bosnia and Kashmir which were experiencing through similar 
circumstances. 
  On the Afghanistan situation, Mian Nawaz Sharif said that 
the 
present Government did not help Afghanistan in its 
reconstruction whereas "our Government created an atmosphere of 
accommodation and goodwill among the warring factions following 
the Islamabad Accord". 

