Chemical Interior. A Couple of Questions for the 
Military-Chemical Complex"] 
<F P=103> Article </F>
<F P=104>  by Doctor of Economic Sciences Lev Fedorov under the 
rubric "Victims of Lawlessness": "National Security </F>

<F P=105>  the </F>
BFN 

  [Text] The State Duma is preparing to consider the 
question of ratification of the 1993 Paris Convention on 
chemical disarmament. But should we be in a hurry with this when 
the military-chemical complex, "covered" by the directive of the 
Council of Ministers of 30 March 1993, has no intention of 
revealing its secrets, when the authors of the program for the 
destruction of chemical weapons are proceeding, as before, not 
from the interests of the people but from departmental 
self-interest, when "binary" weapons are not included in the 
convention at all? In this connection we are continuing to 
publish articles on the problem raised in issue No. 8 with the 
article "A Military-Chemical Romance." Today we are turning the 
floor over to an independent expert in this area, a scholar and 
a publicist, Lev Fedorov. 
  The stockpiles of chemical weapons are a heavy millstone 
hanging on Russia's neck. It is so impossible to lift that it is 
making us take a closer look and the military-chemical complex, 
with whose concerns we have been rewarded. 
<H5>  Work </H5>
  V-gas is the most poisonous toxic substance of the 20th 
century. It began to be produced industrially and loaded into 
ammunition in 1972 in shop No. 83 of an especially constructed 
production facility (today it is called the Chuvash Production 
Association Khimprom imeni Leninskiy Komsomol) in an especially 
built city -- a satellite of the capital of Chuvashia. This was 
done in Novocheboksarsk on three shifts for 15 long years while 
the American military were fighting with Congress, and they 
still did not receive permission for such an amusement. 
  Information about the extreme toxicity of V-gas was 
available 
by the time of the beginning of the planning and construction of 
the plant (just as was preliminary information about the 
long-term toxicity of small doses of this toxic substance) -- 
and it promised nothing good. All this required not only modern 
technology during production but also absolute safety during the 
shipment along the Cheboksary-Kanash railroad of hundreds of 
thousands of units of chemical munitions, each of which was to 
have been sufficient for all of Russia in case something 
happened. It was suggested that protective suits be worn while 
the work was being done -- a pardonable notion when discussing 
the anticipated landing on the moon. Women could not be enlisted 
for this work -- according to data from experimental production 
of V-gas in shop No. 22 at the old plant in Volgograd. In real 
life everything proceeded in purely Soviet style--they did not 
ensure that the equipment was sealed and on the real railroad 
they simply worried about saving money. They did not manage to 
make a protective suit (not for the moon; for Chuvashia) so they 
had to work in makeshift "protective" suits that had been 
permeated with all kinds of chemical agents. Women made up 
two-thirds of the collective of 1,000. I will not give the norm 
for the permissible content of V-gas in the work zone since I 
saw it in a letter that was stamped "secret" (with arguments why 
simple mortals are not supposed to know this). What is important 
is not the norm itself, which almost nobody ever adhered to, but 
the fact that, under the assumption that people were working in 
protective suits, our most humane leaders relaxed it 100-fold, 
and the patient residents of Chuvashia, who were breaking their 
backs to pay for their apartments and add a little to their 
earnings with the thirteenth wage, were not told this. 
  Thousands of people consider themselves to be victims, and 
they are insulted when they have to bow and scrape for the right 
to say they have an occupational disease or an occupational 
disability so that they can receive treatment without question 
and the benefits they have earned -- for example, the right to 
free medicine, food, and rest in a sanatorium. Let us not 
begrudge them these rights. Do reports on testing go from St. 
Petersburg only to Moscow, to the Defense Ministry, or do they 
also go to the Ministry of Health? 
<H5>  Tests </H5>
  There is a reluctance in all countries to publish data from 
tests of chemical agents and highly toxic substances in general. 
But few would doubt that testing toxic substances with the 
participation of human beings and even on human beings was a 
common thing for our army and industry, not to mention the NKVD 
[People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs]. In prewar years the 
practice of conducting tests directly on human beings involved 
thousands of people; there was testing of the blistering agents 
-- mustard gas and lewisite. During 1930-1935 in the Chemical 
Scientific Research Institute of the RKKA [Worker-Peasant Red 
Army] about 6,000 tests were done to study the effects of 
various toxic substances on human skin. This practice was 
suspended and then later resumed. 
  Many naval training sessions were conducted using toxic 
substances. During a training mission in the Baltic, in August 
1934, the destroyer Karl Marx was contaminated with mustard gas 
from an aircraft. At that time several Red Navy members were 
directly affected by the toxic substance -- cuts were made in 
their protective clothing at various parts of their body, so 
that everything was as it would be in a real chemical war. 
  The practice of testing toxic substances directly on humans 
continued into the postwar years. During the sixties the toxic 
properties of minute quantities of V-gas were studied this way. 
At the beginning of the eighties, in order to test samples of 
the latest toxic substance, they again singled out not only mice 
and rabbits but also military servicemen. And God save them if 
they were to blab about it. One of the officers involved in the 
experiment was kicked out of the army without a pension because 
of his big mouth, which was not documented until the end of 
1993. And were the tests of toxic substances conducted on human 
beings at the Central Scientific Research and Testing Institute 
of the Soviet Army in Shikhany supervised by its chief, General 
Anatoliy Kuntsevich -- now an academician, Hero of Socialist 
Labor, and Lenin Prize winner? 
Footnote 
  1) (Kuntsevich, Anatoliy Demyanovich, was born in 1934; 
1975-83 -- chief of the Central Scientific Research and Testing 
Institute of the Chemical Troops Chief's Directorate of the 
Soviet Army; 1981 -- corresponding member of the USSR Academy of 
Science; 1981 -- Hero of Socialist Labor; 1983-1992 -- deputy 
chief of chemical forces of the Soviet Army; 1987 -- academician 
of the USSR Academy of Sciences; 1987 -- lieutenant general in 
the Soviet Army; 1988 -- USSR representative in the group of 
consultants to the UN Secretary General; 1991 -- winner of the 
Lenin Prize; 1992 -- chairman of the Committee on Conventional 
Problems of Chemical and Bacteriological Weapons under the 
president of the Russian Federation.) Or was someone else in 
charge? 
<H5>  A Glance Back to Yesterday </H5>
  A book was published in the United States recently -- a 
survey of in-depth studies of the effects of mustard gas and 
lewisite on the health of veterans of many countries who in the 
past had participated in one way or another in operations 
involving chemical weapons. It includes data on the 1,097 
residents of the United States who during years before the war 
produced mustard gas at the Edgewood Arsenal, and about the 495 
residents of Japan who worked at a plant for producing mustard 
gas during 1929-1945, and about the 511 residents of Great 
Britain who worked on producing mustard gas during 1939-1945, 
etc. The only country for which information is not included is 
the Soviet Union. The USSR Ministry of Health was in charge of 
the health of producers of chemical weapons before the 1960's. 
Its sanitary-epidemiological administration was responsible for 
organizing protection of the workers' health before the 
beginning of the production of any toxic substance and during 
its production. It is now the State Committee on Sanitation and 
Epidemiological Oversight of the Russian Federation. 
  The Third Main Administration under the USSR Ministry of 
Health, which had been in charge of this since the end of the 
sixties, would have something to say about past damage to human 
health and to nature during the production of chemical weapons. 
Now it is called the Federal Administration for 
Medical-Biological Problems and Problems of Extreme Environments 
under the Ministry of Health of Russia. The only thing is that 
the society cannot get hold of the medical and ecological 
information accumulated here, which was gathered in connection 
with the production of subsequent generations of chemical 
weapons. And what about the laws--which are supposed to protect 
our right to this information, which cannot be secret? 
<H5>  Accidents and Disasters </H5>
  The chief of the radiation-chemical-biological (RKhB) 
forces, 
General Stanislav Petrov, says: "At enterprises for producing 
chemical weapons there was not a single case of discharging of 
toxic substance outside the work zones." But there were... 
  A special place among the documented accidents and disasters 
is occupied by the fire that broke out on 28 April 1974 in the 
V-gas production facility in Novocheboksarsk. According to 
information published only 18-19 years later (with fierce 
resistance from the leadership), its cause was a short in the 
electrical network related to incomplete construction work. 
During the fire aerial bombs filled with the "product" became 
unsealed and the latter got out of control. This is simply 
incredible: The incompleteness of the construction work 
manifested itself two years after the beginning series 
production of chemical munitions filled with V-gas, which is 
highly toxic and extremely dangerous to personnel. Information 
on the extent of the fire's impact on the life and health of the 
city's residents has not been made public yet. 
  There was another event at this production facility that has 
not yet been confirmed by anybody. About five years ago a 
container of V-gas burned there. They say that the toxic 
substance burned, but nobody will say how much of it. The 
discharges of toxic substance "outside the work zone" was 
obvious, but nobody will say how much of it moved over the city. 
The more so since it is all over. So was there a second fire or 
not? And will they tell us about other accidents without 
prompting? 
<H5>  Elimination </H5>
  A little about state secrets -- from the recollections of 
veterans and eyewitnesses. 
  At one time at the base for storing chemical weapons in the 
village of Maradykovskiy (Kirov Oblast) munitions containing the 
most potent phosphorus toxic substances were destroyed by 
submerging them in the swamps. 
  The chemical base in Chapayevsk at the beginning of the 
sixties stored mustard gas in containers (at least 1,200 tonnes) 
and lewisite in aerial bombs. By a decision from Moscow, the 
mustard gas was destroyed at the site but the lewisite was sunk 
in the northern seas. 
  At the chemical arsenal in the village of Gornyy (Saratov 
Oblast) at the end of the fifties mustard gas and lewisite were 
eliminated on a large scale on the basis of government 
decisions. Some of the chemical munitions were sent to be sunk 
in the Sea of Okhotsk. 
  The village of Kizner (Udmurtia) is linked to an accident 
that occurred at the beginning of 1993 at a railroad stage not 
far from the site of a large warehouse for storing both chemical 
and other munitions. 
  The stream of recollections is endless. Thousands of our 
compatriots -- former military chemists, military and civilian 
sailors -- participated in secret operations for burying, 
burning, and submerging Soviet chemical weapons (the submersion, 
incidentally, they camouflaged as getting rid of captured German 
material). Yet there have been no official reports about this so 
far. 
  In order to get rid of toxic substances the Soviet Army 
submerged, buried, and burned them, practices now condemned and 
forbidden by the world community. Massive amounts of them were 
submerged in no less than 12 large areas of the seas that wash 
the shores of Russia. Massive amounts were buried at no less 
than 10 points in the former Soviet Union. 
  Legally and ecologically speaking, the "missing" chemical 
weapons still must be found and presented to Russian society, 
even if the munitions have been buried or submerged. The 
international community must also be informed about these 
weapons since, according to the International Convention on 
Chemical Disarmament, even munitions buried since 1976 and 
submerged since 1984 are still considered to be weapons. And 
ecologically speaking, any chemical weapon is dangerous, 
including those that have been buried or submerged in any year. 
  Yet at the military-chemical test site in Shikhany these 
weapons continue to be destroyed by the open explosion method. 
That was the case during the winter of 1992-1993 and the summer 
and autumn of 1993. So is the Army indifferent to all this? 
Including the Convention that was signed? 
<H5>  International Life </H5>
  In the interests of the immediate policy, during the winter 
of 1992-1993 leakage of information about the "possibility" of 
the spread of Soviet chemical weapons throughout the world was 
organized. But claiming that it was no longer crucial, the 
organizers of the "leakage" forgot to notify us of how things 
really were. 
  The military contacts of the "brothers forever" during the 
fifties, which ended with the USSR turning over to the PRC 
technological secrets regarding the production of nuclear and 
missile weapons, are no secret to anyone. Nothing has been 
reported yet about chemical weapons. The departments that hold 
this information -- the Russian Committee on the Chemical and 
Petrochemical Industry and the Defense Ministry of Russia -- are 
remaining silent. Can we wait for them? 
  The same thing pertains to the transfer to former socialist 
countries of chemical munitions to be owned or simply kept by 
them. Did that happen or not? 
  In their day the former GDR and Czechoslovakia did not 
conceal from anyone their aspiration to create territories free 
of chemical weapons on their lands. This is not consistent with 
Mikhail Gorbachev's statement in 1987 that the Soviet Union had 
never turned over and had never stored its chemical weapons in 
other countries, and as a confirmation of that he even cited 
data from "expert assessments." 
  The Defense Ministry remains silent -- no documents 
supporting one version or the other have been published. What is 
the matter? 
<H5>  Inventory </H5>
  At the beginning of October 1987 at the military-chemical 
test site in Shikhany the Soviet Union presented to the world 
community models of chemical munitions as though they were a 
part of the army's arsenal. To the question: "Have all the 
munitions available to be used by the army been shown here?" 
General Kuntsevich gave "an affirmative answer." Later, in a 
document sent to Geneva to the Conference on Chemical 
Disarmament, the same figures on the inventory of chemical 
munitions were confirmed. 
  What was presented to the world community? There were 19 
models of munitions containing toxic substances. Among them, 
along with the grenades filled with the "police" gas CS (they 
were the ones put to use in Tbilisi), there were four kinds of 
munitions filled with toxic substances of the VX type from 
Chuvashia. They were included, however, only in the cannon and 
rocket artillery and also tactical missiles. In fact at that 
time there were many other kinds of chemical munitions available 
to the military. An accident in 1974 caused the existence of 
series-produced aerial bombs filled with V-gas to be revealed 
inadvertently. They were the ones, which were not included on 
the official list, that burned and exploded in the fire. In 
Novocheboksarsk several types of aerial bombs filled with V-gas 
were mass produced -- parachute, fragmentation, cassette, etc. 
On the whole, according to the recollections of workers, in 
Novocheboksarsk they used V-gas to fill not four but at least 14 
kinds of chemical munitions, and it was series production, on a 
conveyor, in large batches, 24 hours a day. 
  In January 1994 one of General Kuntsevich's assistants wrote 
in a newspaper that we have chemical weapons stored here in the 
Urals. It was surprising to read this confession if you consider 
that the Ural area has never been mentioned once before. And one 
could not but recall the discussion of the workers from 
Chuvashia concerning the fact that they produced two versions of 
rockets containing toxic substances -- with a single load of two 
tonnes of V-gas (they did not send a dispatch to Geneva about 
this) and one for multiple individually targetable reentry 
vehicles with toxic substances in each warhead. These missiles 
were apparently on combat alert in the Urals. I do not know 
whether or not this is actually true, but when I asked the 
experts what these multiple reentry tactical missiles were, I 
was justifiably embarrassed. It turns out that the warheads do 
not detach from the tactical missiles about which the letters to 
Geneva were written. They were called strategic. 
  In the autumn of 1993 General Kuntsevich wrote a thoughtful 
letter in one newspaper saying that it was time to report 
information about our chemical munitions to our partners in the 
negotiations. Perhaps it would have been easier not to lie? 
<H5>  Binary Weapons </H5>
  During 1954-1960 the United States Army began to develop the 
most sophisticated kind of chemical weapon -- binary. The 
subsequent policy for chemical weapons in the United States 
developed precisely in this direction. But since 1969 the United 
States has had no series production of chemical weapons -- 
neither binary nor traditional. Nonetheless our accusations 
against the Americans of producing components and even entire 
binary weapons continued until quite recently. The United States 
was even accused of beginning industrial production of binary 
weapons in 1987. As for the Soviet Union, in 1982 General 
Kuntsevich, at that time deputy chief of chemical forces of the 
Soviet Army, told the magazine SPIEGEL (not of his own accord, 
of course, but by a decision of the CPSU Central Committee) that 
the Soviet Union would not be responsible for the escalation of 
chemical weapons (he had in mind the "binary spiral"). In that 
same year of 1982 they began it, this very expansion. And during 
the five-year period the generals basically moved ahead. 
  General Ivan Yevstafyev 10 years later responded 
unequivocally to a question about the existence of binary 
weapons in the Soviet Union: "We have no stockpiles, but any 
country that has chemical production could have the potential 
for producing them." The statement from the new deputy chief of 
chemical forces that the Soviet Union "could" have it was never 
officially explained in any other way than by what followed from 
it -- the Soviet Union thought it had the right to create its 
own production potential for a chemical attack using binary 
weapons. At the present time the public has the following 
information on the efforts made to exercise this "right": the 
fact of the actual development of a domestic binary weapon and 
in two versions -- based on V-gas and based on a so-called "new 
toxic substance," the location of its possible production which 
makes it possible to conceal it from international control, the 
deceased developer, and, finally, the honoring of the generals 
in 1991 with bonuses for the creation of a binary weapon 
(Kuntsevich -- the Lenin Prize, and Yevstafyev -- the State 
Prize). And so the "right" has been exercised, and in 1989 
Foreign Affairs Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, speaking in the 
UN, announced that the USSR and the United States were prepared 
to make mutual commitments to halt the production of chemical 
weapons, including the binary types. There were still questions 
to be answered. No, not about how to stop doing something that 
was not being done. And not about national security, the 
understanding of which, it seems, does not originate in just any 
high-ranking military head. The question is a different one: It 
seems that the military-chemical complex "could" have, but did 
they ask us if we "should" have done all this. 
<H5>  Potential </H5>
  So, what do we have left now? 
  We used to have a potential for producing chemical weapons, 
whose maintenance turned out to be unnecessary under the 
conditions of disarmament, and at the end of the preparation of 
the Convention on Chemical Disarmament, this potential was 
destroyed--in Dzerzhinsk, Volgograd, and Chapayevsk. 
  But here in Novocheboksarsk everything having to do with the 
output of munitions with the latest V-gas has been preserved. 
And there has been no mention of a "balance of forces" -- the 
United States does not have such a potential; in principle since 
1969 the United States has been unable to produce chemical 
weapons at all and it cannot have a modern potential. The most 
probable reason for resistance of Russia's military-chemical 
complex is that it wants to maintain military-chemical 
superiority over its partners in the negotiations for as long as 
possible. 
  In order to mask the preservation of our potential, our 
military-chemical complex hints at "preserving trade secrets in 
the event that an inspection is conducted." 
  But this problem seems contrived. It cannot be ruled out 
that 
termination of the production of modern phosphorus toxic 
substances (and its inevitable "conversion" 
companions--phosphorus and chloride pesticides, whose commercial 
value is fairly questionable in our day) will completely 
eliminate the problem of "trade secrets" of these and 
accompanying processes. Moreover, the part of the experience of 
the Iran-Iraq war which involved Iraq's chemical aggression and 
the death of 3,500 peaceful residents of Iran shows that secrets 
of the production of toxic substances do not exist for that 
country. In any case the existence in Iraq of stockpiles of 
mustard gas, tabun, and sarin is no secret either to the chief 
of the radiation-biological-chemical forces, Petrov, or to the 
international community. 
<H5>  Are the People and the Army United? </H5>
  In the United States long before the beginning of the 
practical work the legislative groundwork was done, which 
provides for the ecologically comfortable existence of the 
population under the conditions of chemical disarmament. The 
laws that were adopted were multipurpose in nature -- they not 
only provided for ecologically safe destruction of chemical 
weapons but also protected the population from any other 
ecotoxicants generated by technology. 
  In 1984 the United States adopted a law which made it 
incumbent on the Pentagon to destroy the accumulated stockpiles 
of chemical weapons. Let us emphasize three points. The 
implementation of the decision was not made dependent on the 
"aggressive designs" of the USSR or Iraq -- the only imperative 
was the well-being of the population. Further, the military 
powers of the United States responsible for destroying the 
chemical weapons engaged for approximately 20 years in an 
intense dialogue with the population living near the eight 
storage bases on the continent before reaching an agreement that 
would allow them to start the work. Finally, it is the U.S. Army 
that financed alternative ecological studies near each storage 
facility where chemical weapons were to be destroyed and 
organized public hearings and meetings with the local residents 
and representatives of federal and local organs of power. 
  In the Soviet Union preparations for the agreed-upon 
destruction of chemical weapons were not begun until the end of 
the eighties. No legislative acts were adopted either before or 
after. 
  From the psychological standpoint the time that has passed 
since the declaration in 1987 of the termination of the 
production of chemical weapons has been spent in vain -- the 
attitude of the authorities toward the population has not 
changed. The chairman of the Committee on Conventional Problems 
of Chemical and Biological Warfare under the president of the 
Russian Federation, General Kuntsevich, once noted that 
"Russia's authority in the national arena depends on the 
population's readiness to cooperate" with the committee. This is 
a purely Soviet mistake. The representative of the authorities, 
unconsciously associating himself with Russia, is forgetting 
about the bilateral nature of any interaction. Legal entities 
and individuals (the Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee, 
the military-industrial complex, the Ministry of the Chemical 
Industry, General Kuntsevich) never intended to take the 
interests of the population into account and, well, the 
population had the corresponding attitude toward them 
  The first alarm went off in 1989 in Chapayevsk where, by a 
decision of the military-industrial complex and the Politburo of 
the CPSU Central Committee, a secret facility began to be 
constructed in 1986. When the population learned from Eduard 
Shevardnadze's speech, delivered in a remote foreign city, that 
chemical weapons which they thought would be taken far away were 
to be destroyed at the facility that was located 12 kilometers 
from the city, there was a social explosion. 
  The residents demanded the information from an ecological 
expert appraisal and...they did not receive it. They formulated 
their own requirements for the plan based on its obvious 
shortcomings and...they were not deemed worthy of any answer. In 
general the government saw the merit of announcing that the 
facility would be mothballed and refraining from destroying 
chemical weapons there. 
  Subsequently there were many reproaches, particularly 
against 
the intractable population. But the reason is plain to see. As 
usual, they bossed the people around and lied to them. And it is 
quite surprising that it never occurred to anybody to apologize 
to the people for the hell of the past years related to the 
production of mustard gas and lewisite. In any case, the bigwigs 
who came to Chapayevsk in 1989, including the establishment of 
the military-chemical complex, made it their first order of 
business to go to the club to persuade the population not to 
protest and not to the cemetery to place wreathes on the graves 
of their mothers and fathers who died during the war and the 
first years after the war because of participating in the 
production of mustard gas and lewisite. 
  The discussion by the authorities in the autumn of 1992, 
when 
residents of Chuvashia were told about the construction in 
Novocheboksarsk of the main facility for destroying phosphorous 
toxic substances, planned by a decision of the 
military-industrial complex, did not begin with an accounting 
for the past either. There had been no chemical weapons in this 
republic for a long time and they intended to bring them in from 
far away, particularly from the city of Shuchye in Kurgan Oblast 
(across eight or nine regions). The final stage of the shipment 
was the Kanash-Cheboksary section, on which, I recall, at one 
time they saved money when chemical weapons first began to be 
produced. Again there were no apologies for the past nor any 
suggestions about paying for it. Again there was no ecological 
expert appraisal (the Ministry of Ecology okayed the plan 
without considering it). Again there was a conspiracy on the 
part of the authorities behind the backs of the residents of 
Chuvashia. And again social resistance that ended with the 
destruction of the idea. 
  When will they start talking to the population while taking 
their interests into account? 
<H5>  Secrecy </H5>
  The surge of publicity after Chernobyl, which broke open the 
floodgates of the nuclear branch, bypassed military chemists, to 
their great elation. It was simply that they had not yet had 
such a large scale disaster, which, incidentally, did not make 
things any easier for society. 
  Last summer in Novocheboksarsk the local state security 
caught a Moscow Greenpeace member outside Khimprom. And recently 
a camera crew from NTV was not allowed on its grounds (right 
after some rich uncles from the Japanese Asaki had visited there 
without any trouble). This is one more indicator of the 
psychological unpreparedness of our authorities for anything at 
all. But the greatest evidence is their unwillingness to begin 
the process of declassification of old papers that are doing 
nobody any good. 
  One can give at least three reasons for the slowness in 
declassifying information about chemical weapons of the Soviet 
Union. 
  In the first place, Russia's withdrawal from the chemical 
standoff after signing the International Convention on Chemical 
Disarmament (January, 1993) leaves no room for any 
military-chemical secrets. Today they are especially protecting 
the dirty "secrets" related to direct violations of the law and 
human rights, and up to this day in this sphere there are 
special courts, special procurators, special advocates, etc. It 
is necessary to purge such secrets because this will give Russia 
confidence and respect from the world community. 
  Second, the existence of the law banning secrecy of 
absolutely all ecological and medical information regardless of 
its present "secret keeper," unfortunately, is too multifaceted. 
  Third, the appearance in 1993 of the law on state secrets, 
which makes it possible to maintain secrecy only with respect to 
documents from 1964-1993, if there is a need for it, that is, if 
they contain state (in this case, defense) secrets, and not 
departmental secrets that nobody needs. 
  As we can see, even the present imperfect legal base 
requires 
concessions from the military-chemical complex. In order to make 
my point I will give not only the basic composition of the 
chemical branch of the military-industrial complex but also its 
"reservists" -- the Defense Ministry of the Russian Federation 
(represented by its numerous "mini-ministries" -- 
radiation-chemical-biological forces, the Navy, the Air Force, 
the Main Missile and Artillery Directorate, the 
military-ecological administrations of the general staff, etc.), 
Roskomkhimnefteprom, the Federal Administration of 
Medical-Biological Problems and Problems of Extreme Environment 
under the Ministry of Health and the Medical Industry of Russia 
(and in general all of the Ministry of Health and the Medical 
Industry), the Federal Counterintelligence Service, the Ministry 
of Agriculture, the Agrokhim Association, the Ministry of 
Foreign Economic Relations, and many other ministries and 
departments. The beginning of the disclosure of information 
could provide a start for preparing a program for surmounting 
the ecological and medical consequences of past preparations for 
chemical war. Without declassification this is impossible in 
principle, just as it is impossible in principle to promptly 
destroy stockpiles of chemical weapons, regardless of how much 
our foreign partners may insist upon it. The population will not 
allow it. 
  So what are we waiting for, gentlemen? 
<H5>  Advantage </H5>
  Everything would seem to be clear regarding the advantage to 
the state. 
  There are also more mercantile aspects. Initially the 
residents of the Soviet Union in general were not kept abreast 
of the possible costs. During the era of "chemical glasnost" in 
the press they tried to promote two notions: false "incomes" 
from chemical disarmament ("the destruction of chemical weapons 
could make Russia richer") and the "participation" of the United 
States in covering Russia's costs ("the Americans will pay for 
the destruction of chemical weapons in Russia"). 
  As soon as there began to appear a possibility of obtaining 
from the state allocations for future advantage (this was in 
1991-1992) many individuals holding legal positions decided to 
venture into commerce. Here are just a couple of examples. 
During the brief existence of the joint-stock Scientific 
Production Association Kristall, General Kuntsevich decided to 
participate in its work (as the chief of the Center for 
Ecotoximetry under the Chemical Physics Institute imeni N.N. 
Semenov of the Russian Academy of Sciences), as did General 
Yevstafyev (from the Military-Chemical Institute with the 
designation Military Union 64518) and the director of the State 
Union Scientific Research Institute for Organic Chemistry and 
Technology, Vladimir Petrunin (Ministry of the Chemical 
Industry). Within the framework of Arsin, a joint-stock company 
of the closed type, the chief of the military Central Scientific 
Research and Testing Institute in Shikhany, Danilkin, and the 
director of the Volsk branch of the State Union Scientific 
Research Institute for Organic Chemistry and Technology, 
Kochergin, tested their strength. The chiefs of the chemical 
forces (the former one, Pikalov, and the present one, Petrov) 
could not resist the temptation to participate either. The acted 
on behalf of the Association for Business Cooperation with 
Foreign Countries in the area of the utilization and protection 
from the effects of dangerous substances and materials, and the 
omnipresent General Kuntsevich gave them a recommendation as 
well. No traces of this commercial activity remain. 
  At the basis of all the activity lay a seriously discussed 
economic advantage that was expected to be derived from 
transforming lewisite into especially pure arsenic for 
radioelectronics: From 6,000 tonnes of lewisite it was possible 
to obtain 2,000 tonnes of arsenic. There are even computations 
that take into account the future gain from the sale of arsenic 
at world prices: The price of one kilogram of metallic arsenic 
is from $3,000 to $5,000. But these plans could be left hanging 
in air if it suddenly turned out that the world market will not 
wait for this arsenic. Then we will discover that the expected 
large quantities of highly pure arsenic will significantly 
exceed Russia's own needs, which are from 15 to 30 tonnes per 
year. 
<H5>  Is It Not Time To Quit Pulling the Wool Over Our Eyes </H5>
  From an ecological standpoint one can speak of the danger of 
the long-term pollution with chemical weapons of approximately 
300 places in Russia. The number of such places in the United 
States has already been documented -- there are 215 of them. 
Thus the problem of withdrawing from the chemical confrontation 
is an all-Russian one and therefore it is above and beyond 
departments. The edict of the president of the Russian 
Federation of 25 May 1992 was seen as an adequate measure. It 
established the Committee on Conventional Problems of Chemical 
and Biological Weapons under the President of the Russian 
Federation (the Kuntsevich Committee). It was assigned the job 
of coordinating the activity of organs of state administration 
for development and implementation of a unified state policy for 
Russia in the area of providing for the fulfillment of 
international commitments regarding chemical weapons. 
  Among the tasks pertaining to the destruction of chemical 
weapons (the tasks of the army and the army alone -- the others 
are only co-performers), the Temporary Statute on the Committee 
included this: The Committee "shall conduct an analysis of 
information on discovered places of burial of old chemical 
weapons, a determination of the degree and scope of the danger 
in these place, and the development of measures for eliminating 
possible sources of danger." As we can see, again this has to do 
with information which only the army has at its disposal. It 
turns out that the Kuntsevich Committee will have to solve only 
army problems, and it is not surprising that his staff included 
"15 military servicemen from among officers in the Armed Forces 
assigned to the Committee according to the procedure and under 
the conditions envisioned by current legislation." The other 
potential dangers that could be determined by nonmilitary 
structures will remain outside the realm of the Kuntsevich 
Committee and in general beyond the purview of any state organ 
of Russia. In particular, the committee's tasks did not include 
searching for and determining the danger of places of past 
production, testing, storage, and burning of chemical weapons, 
not to mention the health of the population. 
  The complex task of cleaning up after the preparation for 
chemical warfare has not been assigned to any state organ of 
Russia. From the standpoint of ensuring ecological safety this 
circumstance could lead to numerous negative, sometimes 
catastrophic, consequences for the country. Nonetheless the 
Kuntsevich Committee for some reason has not turned either to 
the Defense Ministry or to the president. 
  All that is left is to recall the aforementioned thesis 
"America will help us." They will not help us. Very many foreign 
official initiatives, mainly monetary ones, have been frozen 
simply because they do not want to have anything to do with 
General Kuntsevich, and their reasons are apparent. But here is 
the sad thing: They fire at Kuntsevich but they hit Russia. 
During the years of "democracy" our president has purged all the 
democrats in his inner circle with whom he started. But the 
full-fledged, completely canonical militarist Kuntsevich for 
some reason remains. We have already seen something like this 
with a different president in the winter of 1990-1991. 
  There is no point in asking any more questions. As Lavrentiy 
Pavlovich used to say (may this not apply to us), anyone who is 
not blind will see. 


