Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Dmitriy Kholodov report: "President Yeltsin's Mobile </F>
Soldiers. Army Will Deal With Terrorism"] 
  [Text] MOSKOVSKIY KOMSOMOLETS has learned from government 
sources that the Defense Ministry's elaboration of a statute on 
mobile forces is going full blast. To be created within the 
ministry's structure is a Mobile Forces directorate to be headed 
by a commander in chief of the Mobile Forces of Russia. He will 
probably be subordinated directly to the president. 
  This step would at least probably enable the Russian Army to 
come closer to the combat readiness standard of the Soviet Army, 
which as little as five years ago was capable of simultaneously 
landing two airborne divisions with all their equipment at any 
point on the globe. 
  The idea for the creation of mobile forces was first 
proposed 
by Colonel General Achalov, who commanded the airborne troops 
and who now is a Lefortovo prisoner. Gen. Achalov came forward 
with sensational proposals at a closed-door military-scientific 
conference in summer 1991, taking stock of the Persian Gulf war. 
It was also then that he was appointed to what was at the time 
a new position in the army -- deputy defense minister for 
emergency situations and special tasks. After a brief hiatus 
owing to the activities of Yevgeniy Shaposhnikov, the last 
defense minister of the USSR, the mobile forces concept began to 
be carried out as a strategic direction of organizational 
development of the Russian Army. 
  Airborne Troops Commander Yevgeniy Podkolzin said in a 
MOSKOVSKIY KOMSOMOLETS interview last summer that the mobile 
forces would consist of immediate reaction forces and rapid 
deployment forces. The former are supposed to react inside 24 
hours, while the latter are allowed three days to get their act 
together. 
  After the New Year, the organizational development of Mobile 
Forces started to pick up pace. To be completely absorbed by 
the Mobile Forces are the Airborne Troops and the Military 
Transport Aviation, whose main headquarters are located a 
stone's throw away from each other on Matrosskaya Tishina. 
Attached to the airborne troops were a number of more battle 
worthy units including the brigade from Teplyy Stan [a Moscow 
neighborhood] that was in the past belonged to the KGB. Being 
transferred from military districts are units and formations 
that are capable of getting ready to move within 24 hours. 
  The tasks of the new troops consist in carrying out 
subversion and peacemaking operations, providing cover for 
nuclear facilities, preventing the use of nuclear weapons, and 
even the carrying out of special operations to combat terrorism, 
organized crime, and nonconventional armed structures. 
  The importance of the Airborne Troops in the army has 
sharply 
increased. The Airborne Troops command actually is already now 
a high command. Yevgeniy Podkolzin was one of the few people 
invited to Boris Yeltsin's birthday party. No Airborne Troops 
subunit can be alerted without the president's personal 
directive. 
  Direct training of crews will begin in summer 1994. In fall 
1994, the first serious exercises of the new troops may be held. 
At any rate, all depends on the spring draft that will man the 
subunits. If there are no soldiers, there is no army. 

