BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Michal Kovac by Milan Rusko; place </F>
and date not given: "An Opportunity To Present Slovakia"] 
  [Text] Slovak President Michal Kovac, accompanied by his 
wife, returned home yesterday. He had been in Great Britain and 
France to take part in the 50th anniversary commemorations of 
the Allied landings in Normandy. He gave us an interview before 
his return, from which we have selected the following: 
  [Rusko] Mr. President, what is your view of the significance 
of the visits you have just made? 
  [Kovac] This was an excellent opportunity for us Slovaks, an 
opportunity for us to feel proud that our citizens also took 
part in the historic battles and that Slovakia--of course, along 
with the citizens of the Czech Republic--also contributed in 
this way to defeating fascism. It was also an opportunity to 
draw attention to Slovakia not only in the eyes of the European 
public because, apart from the European countries, 
representatives from the United States, Canada, Australia, and 
New Zealand were there. The opportunity to meet so many 
presidents, prime ministers, and members of royal families at 
the same time crops up, perhaps, once in 50 years; therefore, I 
believe that this event will help to create a favorable image of 
Slovakia. It was also a great opportunity for me to meet with 
our citizens, veterans, in England and Normandy and to thank 
them for the sacrifices they made. There was plenty of time to 
talk with those present, and it was pleasant for me to find out 
from them that they are following the situation in our Republic 
and that they view our future with hope. 
  [Rusko] Did you have talks with French Prime Minister 
Edouard Balladur? Did you touch upon the issues involved in the 
Stability Pact initiated by him? 
  [Kovac] I made use of the fact that I was Mr. Balladur's 
first guest, and I followed up on the talks that Prime Minister 
Moravcik had with him during his visit to France. We also 
discussed the breakup of Czechoslovakia and the Stability Pact. 
I praised the proposal as a significant French contribution to 
extending the zone of stability in Europe. Mr. Balladur was 
obviously aware that the Slovak Republic and the Central 
European region, in general, plays and will play a major role in 
the European situation. He said that the French Government's 
policy is oriented toward helping the countries of this region 
become incorporated into European structures. 
  [Rusko] A very favorable atmosphere prevailed among the 
representatives of the participating states. Did you make use 
of this to intensify your contacts? 
  [Kovac] I made use of each contact to acquaint people with 
Slovakia and its policy. During my conversation with President 
Mitterrand, I expressed my delight that he has accepted my 
invitation to visit in September. He confirmed that he will 
come to visit because he realizes that it is necessary to 
support the Slovak Republic's democratic forces. Britain's 
Queen Elizabeth II, the Canadian prime minister, and others also 
spoke positively about Slovakia. 
  [Rusko] In the televised relay from the royal yacht 
Britannia, we saw you talking with President Bill Clinton. 
During the voyage, did you also have an opportunity to discuss 
your forthcoming visit to the United States? 
  [Kovac] Yes, I informed Mr. Clinton that President Goncz and 
I will be receiving an award in the United States from the 
Institute for East-West Studies in New York and that we will be 
in the United States at the end of June. He promised that he 
would find time for us. We also discussed our domestic 
political situation. He is also among those who have noticed 
certain changes, and he spoke about them with understanding. He 
expressed his conviction that we will continue to bolster 
domestic political stability and carry on in our course of 
transformation. 
  [Rusko] You saw how the commemorations held to mark the 50th 
anniversary of the Allied landings were organized. What is your 
view, on the basis of this experience, of the coming 50th 
anniversary commemorations of the Slovak National Uprising? 
  [Kovac] I also observed everything from the point of view 
that I am the main host and that it is very much up to me to 
ensure that it all turns out well. I think that something of 
what we have seen here could also be implemented in the scenario 
for our commemorations. I realized that we have a unique 
opportunity to present Slovakia in a favorable light. 

