BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by United Nations Secretary General Butrus </F>
Butrus-Ghali at the Presidency in Pretoria--live] 
  [Text] President Nelson Mandela, Your Majesties, Your 
Excellencies, distinguished guests. On behalf of the United 
Nations I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your inauguration 
today as state president of the Republic of South Africa 
[applause]. I congratulate Deputy President Mbeki and Deputy 
President de Klerk. Today we have been privileged to witness a 
turning point in the history of a nation. Today South Africa 
regains its rightful place in Africa, in the United Nations, and 
in the family of nations [applause]. 
  The United Nations raised its flag against the evil of 
apartheid. The world joined against it. Repeatedly the nations 
and peoples of the international community expressed their 
solidarity and support for the people of South Africa. We 
demonstrate that solidarity again by our presence, by your 
presence today. Today's celebrations really belong to all South 
Africans, whatever their party or affiliation. I pay tribute to 
all who had the vision to lead. I pay tribute to all who had 
the courage to join in this undertaking. I pay tribute to the 
international organizations and the member states who 
contributed, and who stood together with you. Guided by wise 
and able leaders, South Africa has earned the respect and the 
admiration of all. Tireless in the search of understanding and 
vigorous in the pursuit of peace, you have refused to let the 
difference defeat you. You, Mr. President, you have worked long 
and suffered greatly to see this day. The firmness of your 
resolve to build a new nonracial society in South Africa is not 
in doubt. Your resolve will be needed, your political will will 
be tested, but I'm confident that through your courage and 
determination you and South Africa will prevail. [applause] 
  Deputy President de Klerk, your vision and courage has 
contributed to this great day. You have won the lasting respect 
of all who yearned for justice. 
  I call on all nations and institutions and the programs and 
the agencies of the international community to support the new 
democracy in South Africa. I appeal to all South Africans to 
support the principles of tolerance and reconciliation, 
principles that provide the only sure foundation for peace, 
security and progress. The people of South Africa have spoken. 
You assume office, Mr. President, with a historic mandate, and 
supported by great goodwill. We welcome you with happiness. We 
embrace you with pride. 
  On behalf of the United Nations, and the agencies and the 
programs of the United Nations, I pledge our continued support 
for the achievements of dignity, equal rights, and social 
progress for all the people of this great country. [applause] 

