Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hans-Hermann Kotte and Uli Exner: "Looking for </F>
the Protest Voters--New Parties Trying to Siphon Off Voters 
Between CDU and Republicans"] 
  [Text] Berlin--Former FDP [Free Democratic Party] member 
Manfred Brunner, 46, says he will found his "Association of Free 
Citizens" on 25 January at a "secret location" in western 
Germany and not in the symbol-laden city of Weimar. The protest 
party to the right of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) is 
structurally similar to Austria's Free Democratic Party (FPOe) 
with whose head Joerg Haider Brunner will be making appearances 
both in the European and the Bundestag election campaign. 
  On 18 January, the Weimar Hilton canceled the reservations 
for Brunner and his roughly 50 partisans for security reasons. 
In addition, Thuringia's CDU interior minister called the 
Association of Free Citizens "a more dangerous organization than 
the Reps [Republicans] or the NPD [National Democratic Party]" 
and said he would have the Office for the Protection of the 
Constitution keep an eye on the proposed Weimar meeting. For his 
part, "National liberal" Brunner who is not only good friends 
with Haider but also with Peter Gauweiler termed this "a 
scandal." 
  The statements by Thuringia's interior minister may well 
turn 
out to provide unintentional campaign assistance by the worried 
CDU/CSU (Christian Social Union) which is getting increasingly 
concerned about the emergence of more and more protest parties. 
After all, both the Association of Free Citizens and other 
right-wing one-man parties depend on media attention and 
"misunderstandings" in the gray area between the "breaking of 
taboos" and maintaining half-hearted distance from the 
right-wing extremists as they try to tap into as many voter 
reservoirs as possible. 
  Brunner is good at neatly packaging his nationalist slogans, 
emphasizing Germany's "median position," saying that he would 
like to see German interests in "Central and East Europe" 
safeguarded, voicing concern about the threats to Germany's 
"equal rights" in the European Union and citing his preference 
for Europe as a "confederation" rather than a "federal state." 
He does not wish to give up the German mark in favor of the ECU 
and tries to tempt the business sector by proposing an 
"unfettered market economy," the abolition of government social 
insurance programs and comprehensive collective bargaining. 
  Brunner also calls for a "normal evaluation of German 
history" as he put it this week in a presentation of his program 
before a discussion group centering on right-wing historians 
Rainer Zitelmann and Ernst Nolte. 
  Brunner, who aims to campaign with his party in the European 
and the Bundestag elections, was fired by the chef de cabinet of 
Chancellor Kohl's EC Commissioner Martin Bangemann in 1992 
because of his opposition to the Maastricht Treaty. After his 
suit against the Treaty before the Constitutional Court was 
quashed, Brunner quit the FDP and initially flirted with joining 
the CSU. Subsequently, the conceited, eloquent orator started 
his own political party. 
  While Brunner is already talking about sharing the podium 
with Joerg Haider (whom he calls a "sensible man"), Czech 
Minister President Vaclav Havel, and Margaret Thatcher at 
campaign rallies, the Association of Free Citizens still lacks a 
broad base. Brunner told DER SPIEGEL that "several thousand 
interested individuals" have come forward. For the time being, 
the Right has adopted a wait-and-see attitude as Brunner's 
appearance in Berlin has demonstrated. The "Euro rebel" is not 
emotional enough and too wishy-washy for former Rep and DVU 
[German People's Union] members while the CDU and right-wing 
liberals are afraid of a further fragmentation of the political 
spectrum. But right-wing and right-wing radical intellectuals 
associated with magazines such as EUROPA VORN [European 
Vanguard] and NATION UND EUROPA [The Nation and Europe] could 
well imagine a German "Haider model." 
  The party's 38-member founding committee includes staunch 
conservatives such as Roland Vaubel, a Mannheim professor of 
economics; Guenter Steckhan, the chief of police of the city of 
Hagen; and Erwin Wickert, the former German ambassador to China. 
Others include Karl Albrecht Schachtschneider, a law professor, 
and Hans Heinrich Rupp, who pleaded Brunner's case before the 
Constitutional Court. 
  Brunner told TAGESZEITUNG that his campaign issues will 
include "internal security" and immigration policy, saying that 
he would like to see the right of asylum "totally abolished" as 
a "subjective right." Immigration is acceptable only, if it is 
"in the specifically German interest," he added. "Germany is not 
a nation of immigrants. One must not overestimate the 
population's potential for integration. Reticence in immigration 
is the prerequisite for a friendly attitude toward foreigners." 
So much for a policy statement of the "Rep-light" variety, as 
Albert Schmid, the SPD caucus chairman in the Bavarian assembly 
has characterized the Brunner party. 

