BFN 

<F P=106> [Arkadiy Nikiforov report in the "Kremlin" column: "Boris </F>
Yeltsin Has Met With Yuriy Skokov. Consultations Between the 
Russian Federation President and the Leader of the Commodity 
Producers Federation Will Be Regular"] 
  [Text] On 22 April a meeting took place in the Kremlin 
between Boris Yeltsin and Yuriy Skokov, which lasted more than 
an hour. 
  As NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA reported earlier, the Russian 
Commodity Producers Federation [RCPF], led by Skokov, has worked 
out a number of proposals aimed at taking immediate measures to 
salvage domestic industrial and agricultural production. The 
RCPF initiatives have found a response not only in Russia but 
also abroad. During Yuriy Skokov's visits to Germany and France 
representatives of the government and the business community of 
those countries accepted the RCPF's proposal to conclude 
agreements with major employers associations in these states. 
The agreements should become the basis for a system of 
nongovernment interaction between Russian and foreign 
manufacturers. 
  In its report NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA wrote about the message 
sent by Yuriy Skokov to the president of Russia. In it, the 
RCPF chairman presented proposals for organizing a system of 
interaction between the federation and the government to 
elaborate and implement concrete joint projects. After studying 
the message, Boris Yeltsin tasked Viktor Chernomyrdin with 
setting up cooperation with the RCPF in order to overcome the 
catastrophic production decline and to slow down the growth of 
unemployment. 
  In addition to the RCPF's proposals to defend the interests 
of domestic commodity producers, the meeting between Boris 
Yeltsin and Yuriy Skokov last Friday also discussed a broad 
range of socioeconomic problems. Yeltsin related with 
understanding to Skokov's concern over the position of Russia's 
commodity producers. Accord was reached about regular 
consultations between the president of the Russian Federation 
and the RCPF leader and their collaboration in addressing 
Russia's economic problems. 
  It is noteworthy that at the request of Boris Yeltsin's 
press 
service the meeting was filmed by a TV crew. Footage of it, 
however, only appeared in an NTV news program. Neither 
Ostankino nor Russian TV reported the meeting. 

