BFN 

  [Excerpts] Evidently, our economic relations with Russia 
are of key importance. It is therefore paradoxical that, until 
last week, we had not had one of the basic economic agreements, 
which is the agreement on double taxation with this country. 
[passage omitted] However, the media were more interested in 
the signing of another agreement--on solving the former Soviet 
Union and Russia's debt to the Slovak Republic. Our colleague 
Milan Velecky discusses this subject with Deputy Prime Minister 
Brigita Snegnerova. 
  [Begin recording] [Velecky] Madam deputy prime minister, on 
22 June, the government disagreed with the agreement on solving 
the former Soviet Union and Russia's debts to the Slovak 
Republic. (Subsequently) the state secretary at the Finance 
Ministry signed the agreement in Moscow. You headed the Slovak 
delegation at the Moscow talks. What had changed within those 
48 hours? 
  [Snegnerova] I think that we have achieved a very acceptable 
solution after our negotiations. The Russian side made a 
commitment to resolve the question of the total amount of $385 
million, representing the overall amount owed by Russian 
companies to the former Czechoslovak enterprises, meaning Czech 
and Slovak companies, only after commitments toward Czech and 
Slovak companies are clarified. This means that the part of the 
agreement signed by the Czech side concerning the amounts owed 
by Russian companies to Czech companies will not be applied for 
the time being. 
  At the same time, Slovak Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik is 
sending a note to Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin 
drawing his attention to the method of signing the agreement 
with the Czech Republic and stating that the amount of $330 
million represents the alleged debts of Russian companies to 
Czech ones. 
  [Velecky] The Czech side claims this amount is inserted for 
guidance purposes only and does not exclude further negotiations 
about the overall amount. Will there be similar negotiations 
between the Czech and Slovak sides? 
  [Snegnerova] Of course, it is inevitable. On the basis of 
the way we reached this agreement, both the Slovak and the Czech 
sides will be equally interested in starting these negotiations 
as soon as possible. 
  [Velecky] We should have already received more than $1.5 
billion.. This is the amount the Russian side acknowledged as 
its debt to Slovakia. How realistic is the hope that we will 
get it, and in what form is this debt going to be paid? 
  [Snegnerova] On the bais of the decision of the Paris Club, 
Russia can postpone paying the capital of its loan till the end 
of this millennium. [passage omitted] 
  However, Russia will be paying its interest obligations, and 
that is why we tried to speed up the signing of this agreement. 
Part of this payment of interest will begin to be counted only 
after the signing of this agreement. [passage omitted] [end 
recording] 

