Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Sixto Duran-Ballen; date and place not </F>
given -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] Good evening, compatriots. When I accepted 
leadership of the country, I made a promise to you: to govern 
with a sense of nation, to govern without any political 
calculations. I promised to lead the country with the clearest 
vision of the future without thinking of immediate results 
[cojunturas] and easy achievements. 
  I have acted with determination to tackle and solve the main 
problems of Ecuador, of our Ecuador, to establish a modern 
structure that will allow us to achieve social, economic, and 
political development. In other words, to create a better 
Ecuador for our children. 
  Over the past years, the democracy that allowed a 
reencounter 
of all Ecuadoreans -- in which I have been a major player and 
defender -- has shown huge institutional and juridical voids, 
contradictions, and weaknesses that have undermined national 
unity and dramatically limited the state's ability to face 
changes, challenges, and the just demands of our society. 
  The entire nation has been the victim of the errors and 
distortions of a policy that seeks to benefit personal and party 
interests and fails to serve the Ecuadoran people. It suffices 
to remember the distressing and repeated episodes of power 
struggles and useless discussions that have impeded the 
strengthening of our country's democratic institutions. 
  I deserved your votes because it is clear that I am not 
moved 
by any ambition other than restructuring and reorienting our 
future. On the occasion of the analysis and debate of the issues 
that I am placing for your consideration this evening, opinions 
that are contrary to its goals and interests [conveniencias] 
will emerge. You must, however, know that we are seeking to 
recover for Ecuadoreans the ability and right to make decisions 
on very important issues for our future. 
  It will be said that the president of the Republic is 
seeking 
to hide behind the referendum to divert attention from the 
elections. The country knows me. I have served you many years 
and would not speak to you insincerely. The only thing that 
inspires and moves me is the need to construct a new society 
because it has been impossible for our institutions to solve 
these serious problems. 
  I cannot, in my capacity as chief of state, remain 
indifferent and aloof. Thus, I think that it is my unavoidable 
duty to resort to you, to the people's unappealable will, 
through this referendum, which will field very important issues 
that have already deserved ample nationwide debate. These 
issues I am submitting for your decision today. 
  It is indispensable that you, compatriots, as supreme bosses 
of democracy, indicate clearly to rulers and the ruled, to 
political parties, and to legislators the path that our country 
must follow to correct structural and legal voids that are 
drowning our progress. An authentic and honest referendum would 
force the government to avoid championing theories [tesis] or 
proposals. The Ecuadoran people must be sufficiently free to 
issue a clear and determinant opinion on aspects in which their 
political representatives have failed to achieve positive 
results. 
  In this consultation, the government, my government will 
neither influence nor lead [conducir] the opinions of 
Ecuadoreans. The state, through the appropriate organizations, 
must limit itself to informing about the content and scope of 
the proposal. The media must participate actively and 
responsibly in this task. The organizations and people who 
shape public opinion in our country, the political parties, the 
community organizations, the unions, and all Ecuadoreans who 
care about peace must also participate. 
  The 1 May elections constitute a valuable opportunity to 
propose this consultation to the country. 
  The system, which was developed by the Supreme Electoral 
Tribunal with significant human and economic effort for the 1 
May election, must be used so that all Ecuadoreans can speak out 
on the essential issues I will now submit for your 
consideration. The questions, my fellow Ecuadoreans, are the 
following: 
  1. Should voting be voluntary or mandatory? 
  2. Should the National Congress comprise one chamber; the 
Chamber of Deputies? Should it comprise two chambers; the 
Senate and the Chamber of Deputies? 
  3. Should the legislators serve for two years or four? 
  4. Should the election for legislators be carried out at 
the same time as the presidential election or at the same time 
as the run off election? 
  5. Should the president of the congress serve for one 
year or two? 
  6. Should legislators approve and administrate budget 
funds? Yes or no. 
  7. Should all elected officials be subject to reelection, 
including the president and deputies? Yes or no. 
  8. Should the Constitution recognize dual nationality for 
those Ecuadoreans who live abroad and have been forced to accept 
another nationality? You must answer yes or no. 
  My fellow citizens, let us focus on the greater national 
goals. Let us leave behind the small differences that separate 
us; the individual and local interests that prevent us from 
walking side by side. The essential issues I have just 
described clearly demonstrate my unbending will to govern the 
nation looking toward tomorrow's horizon and preparing for the 
future. My administration will not benefit from the reforms 
this general referendum will require. Future governments, 
however, will enjoy them. They will have better tools to work 
with and greater guarantees for their efforts. My fellow 
citizens, with God's help, let us decide our future together. 
Good night. 

