Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Xie Liangjun: "Date Set for Latest </F>
Cross- Straits Economics Talks"] 
  [Text] Mainland and Taiwan negotiators are to meet in 
Beijing on January 31 to discuss cross-straits economic and 
other non- political issues, it was revealed yesterday. 
  Chiao Jen-ho, Vice-Chairman of the Straits Exchange 
Foundation (Sef) is expected to lead a delegation to hold talks 
with Tang Shubei, Vice-Chairman of the Association for Relations 
Across the Taiwan Straits (Arats). 
  They will be the highest-level talks the semi-official 
bodies 
have had since last April's landmark "Wang-Koo" meeting in 
Singapore between Arats and Sef heads Wang Daohan and Koo 
Chen-fu. 
  Tang Shubei told a press conference in Beijing that the 
five-day talks are expected to clear the way for the second 
"summit" between Wang and Koo. 
  They will also talk about ways the two bodies can 
co-operate. 
  Tang hoped his meeting with Chiao would settle matters 
concerning the second Wang-Koo meeting and set the starting date 
for talks on economics, science and technology. 
  He said there was no need to set a precondition that the two 
sides reach and sign an agreement. 
  Tang's planned trip to Taiwan late last month had to be 
cancelled, as mainland and Taiwan negotiators failed to agree on 
repatriation of mainland hijackers in a round of working talks 
in Taibei. 
  Also at yesterday's news conference, Arats Chairman Wang 
Daohan told journalists he hoped to meet Koo Chen-fu soon, 
adding that topIevel meetings between the two organizations will 
benefit cross- straits relations. 
  The second meeting will probably take place in Beijing. 
  Arats and Sef officials agreed in Singapore last April that 
their meetings should be regular and frequent. 
  Both believed high-level contacts would increase exchanges 
and mutual trust. 
  Wang also said there was no need for his association to set 
up a liaison office in Hong Kong or Taibei, but he said that 
ways to strengthen contacts between Arats and Sef could be 
discussed. 
  Yesterday's news conference came shortly after Arats closed 
a 
two-day meeting in Beijing. 
  Participants outlined the organization's tasks in 1994 and 
discussed ways to improve its work, so that it can play a 
greater role in boosting cross-straits contracts and relations, 
and promoting peaceful reunification. 
  Arats has decided to establish a new economic department to 
respond to rapid indirect economic and trade relations between 
the mainland and Taiwan. 
  Also Jing Shuping, now Chairman of the All-China Federation 
of Industry and Commerce, will give up his post as an Arats 
vice- chairman and become an adviser. 

