BFN 

<F P=106> [By Willy Wo-Lap Lam and Zhang Yuan] </F>
  [Text] Beijing has given planning-oriented bureaucrats 
more power in working out ways to achieve the contradictory 
goals of curbing inflation and propping up the money-losing 
state enterprises. 
  Informed sources said the State Planning Commission (SPC) 
had 
been empowered to take over the research and planning functions 
of up to eight ministries and commissions. 
  They said the bulk of the research units of these 
departments 
had been dissolved and taken over by an enlarged research centre 
in the SPC, which has an establishment of more than 700 
academics and officials. 
  "The SPC Research Centre will have formidable authority and 
resources in making long-range forecasts and recommending the 
`macrolevel' controls the state must exercise," an economic 
source said. 
  The source added that recent problems in the economy had 
prompted the leadership to give more emphasis to both direct and 
nonmandatory state control. 
  It is understood the leadership hopes that with strengthened 
research and forecasts, executive orders will be free from the 
kinds of mistakes underlying such disasters as the Great Leap 
Forward. 
  Liberal cadres and academics have criticised the apparent 
increase in the power of the SPC, deemed a creation of Stalinist 
state planning. 
  Analysts said in 1992 and last year, the authorities 
seriously considered scrapping the SPC and replacing it with a 
much less powerful State Commission for Social and Economic 
Development. 
  However, given the need for Beijing to walk the high wire of 
containing inflation and cutting unemployment, the planners are 
again required to provide recommendations for comprehensive 
government intervention. 
  In a recent speech, the senior economist with the State 
Statistical Bureau, Qiu Xiaohua, underscored the importance of 
striking a balance between conflicting goals. 
  "If we are too anxious about reducing inflation to within 10 
percent and continuing a tight policy, the market will become 
flaccid, state enterprises will face more difficulties and the 
contradictions in employment will become more acute," Mr Qiu 
said. 

