Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Igor Anishchenko] </F>
  [Text] Last year, we broke the European record in the 
incidence of diphtheria: 120 of our countrymen died from this 
disease. Compared to the same period last year, today the number 
of diphtheria patients has increased further by 2.5 times. 
  Reports about other infections are equally as troubling. One 
of the principal reasons for this situation is a tenfold 
increase in the number of citizens refusing preventive 
vaccination. 
  Speaking at a physicians' seminar at the Information and 
Analytical Center of Russia's Sanitary Oversight a year ago, one 
of the world luminaries in the field of epidemiology, Artur 
Galasko, noted with alarm that the antivaccination campaign had 
already inflicted serious harm on children vaccination efforts: 
60% of our adolescent generation has dropped out of the 
vaccination schedule to which all civilized world strictly 
adheres. 
  One should not be surprised by this. In medical 
cooperatives, 
``kind Dr. Doolittles'' guarantee that the toddlers will be 
immune to any infection without any painful procedures with the 
help of drawing up a certain genetic chart. And whose mother 
would refuse such an offer?! We should acknowledge that the 
well-wishers do admit that sometimes vaccination is necessary 
and in this case promise to use not the poisonous ``Soviet 
vaccine'' but pure foreign stuff, even if purchased for hard 
currency. 
  For example, it is often mentioned that domestic 
antidiphtheria vaccine has a harmful substance--mertiolate. 
Indeed, the word mertiolate does not appear in the note to the 
French antidiphtheria vaccine by the Pasteur-Millet Company. The 
reason is simple: the same compound and in the same 
concentration as here figures in the French preparation under 
another name--thiomersale. Scientists have attempted to identify 
the harmful effect of this substance under experimental 
conditions, yet even when laboratory animals were injected with 
a dose exceeding that given to humans during vaccination by 
4,000 times, no deviation from the norm was detected. 
  People who indeed have serious immunity deficiencies and for 
whom standard vaccine is fraught with complications number 
approximately 1.5-2% of the total population. In order to 
identify them among the rest, reliable criteria are available: 
certain external symptoms, data on the child development 
history, or disease of a certain organ. All these ``alarm 
signals'' are recorded in a special list of contraindications to 
vaccination which each epidemiologist and every district 
pediatrician must follow as faithfully as a faithful Muslim 
follows the teachings of the prophet. If someone displays at 
least one symptom of partial immune deficiency, this person is 
directed to a cytologic blood analysis and is given a special 
mild inoculation which does not cause complications under any 
circumstances. 
  History attests how in the 1970s the British gave up for a 
time mandatory whooping cough vaccination, and an epidemic broke 
out in the country. In order to remediate the consequences of 
this omission, the British Government was forced to allocate 
considerable amounts of money. Today, financial stimuli exist in 
the United Kingdom for physicians who have achieved complete 
vaccination of population in areas where they practice. Here, we 
have not yet reached an epidemic stage. Yet a dangerous growth 
of infectious morbidity and mortality is already underway. And 
if the system of mandatory population vaccination finally breaks 
down, the Russians will be deprived of one of the few remaining 
social guarantees--protection from wholesale epidemics. 


