BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 17 May (NA) -- Foreign Minister Guido 
Di Tella stated today that he is "pessimistic" over a possible 
agreement with Great Britain for joint exploitation of oil on 
the Malvinas Islands. He admitted that the problems with the 
islanders are currently "the same as those of 160 years ago." 
  The foreign minister thus referred to reports that indicate 
that the Kelpers [Falklands Islanders] could negotiate the 
exploration for oil with Chile, and that in no way will they 
accept a joint venture with Argentina. 
  Di Tella said that this topic "is in no way new" because 
"the 
British do not want Argentines on the islands, but they do not 
have the same reserve for the Chileans." 
  In remarks to a radio station, the foreign minister termed 
the position of the islanders as "lamentable," and warned that 
the lack of contact with the continent "will in time become a 
ridiculous whim." 
  Regarding the July 1994 meeting between Argentine and 
British 
delegations to evaluate possible bilateral cooperation in the 
extraction of oil in the area, Di Tella highlighted his 
"pessimism" on the probability of reaching an agreement. 
  "We have said we are willing to cooperate on the oil topic 
before seeking a definite solution to the problem of 
sovereignty," he explained. 
  The foreign minister said the results of the negotiations 
are 
negative, adding that Argentina "will legally oppose oil 
exploitation." 
  Although he acknowledged that "until now the Kelpers have 
been willing to evaluate the topic of cooperation," Di Tella 
believes "this could or could not imply Argentina's presence on 
the islands." 
  "With respect to the Malvinas Islands, I believe our overall 
relations suffer the same problems as 160 years ago," the 
foreign minister admitted, adding that the government "is 
treating the situation with much greater importance than before." 
  The foreign minister acknowledged that "very important 
progress has been made in communication with the islanders, 
despite official resistance." 
  "I have written letters, sent them presents, spoken over the 
radio, and publicly acknowledged that we believe it is important 
to recognize their way of life. But we are still far from a 
normal relationship," the foreign minister said about the 
Kelpers. 
  Di Tella did not reject the possibility that Great Britain 
may contract enterprises from other countries to extract oil, 
although he added: "This invitation will be difficult for them 
because no one will want to participate in a zone that is in 
litigation and where Argentina can proceed legally against 
anyone who cooperates in the exploitation." 
  Asked to name the organizations before which Argentina could 
submit its complaints, the foreign minister replied: "The United 
Nations and the courts of the countries that import the oil." 
  With respect to the participation of YPF [Government Oil 
Deposits] in the bid to exploit oil through the Romano Houston 
enterprise, which apparently bought plans of the areas where oil 
presumably exists on the islands, Di Tella stated that he did 
not know if the area is rich in oil. 
  Regarding the purchase of plans, Di Tella explained that "it 
was simply a way for YPF to obtain information," adding that 
"some very serious people believe there is no oil on the 
islands." 
  Finally, the foreign minister stated that the agenda for the 
July summit "does not contain the topic of a possible visit of 
President Carlos Menem to Great Britain." 

