BFN 

  [Text] Please listen to a report we have just received. 
Following the difficulties created by the Saudi Arabian 
Government for the esteemed leader's mission office at Mecca 
concerning the performance of the Disavowal of Polytheists 
ceremony, Hojjat ol-Eslam val-Moslemin Mohammadi-Reyshahri wrote 
a letter today to the leader of the Islamic revolution. 
  Referring to the provocations of Saudi security officials 
and 
military forces who, using war equipment and resorting to 
provocative actions, prevented Iranian pilgrims from going to 
the esteemed leader's mission office to perform the Disavowal of 
Polytheists rites, he asked the esteemed leader to cancel the 
ritual. 
  The texts of Hojjat ol-Eslam Mohammadi-Reyshahri's letter 
and 
the esteemed leader's reply are as follows: 
  With greetings to the esteemed leader of the Islamic 
revolution, His Eminence Ayatollah Khamene'i. As you are aware, 
this year, as in previous years, the committed and vigilant 
pilgrims to the Holy House of God -- inspired by the guidances 
of the late imam, the reviver of the Abrahamite pilgrimage, and 
his competent successor and the continuer of his path -- are 
once again ready to raise the sacred banner of the disavowal of 
polytheism, blasphemy, and arrogance in the land of divine 
inspiration. However, Saudi security officials and military 
forces, using war equipment, in an irresponsible and provocative 
act, have besieged the mission building since three days before 
the ceremony, and by restricting the traffic of pilgrims are in 
effect preventing the performance of the divine ceremony. 
  It is astonishing that right next to the House of 
Monotheism, 
Muslims cannot disavow polytheists and express their hatred and 
disgust for the ringleaders of polytheism, headed by America and 
usurper Israel. 
  The Saudi authorities must answer to the vigilant Muslims of 
the world as to why the cry of disavowal of polytheists and the 
call of Muslims to unity against enemies of Islam are so 
unpalatable to them. 
  Under the present circumstances, guided by the instructions 
of your eminence, to deprive the Saudi authorities of any excuse 
to desecrate the Holy House of God, the Disavowal ceremony has 
been cancelled. 
  I should point out, although military forces have prevented 
the performance of the Disavowal rites, and have not let the cry 
of disavowal of committed pilgrims to the House of God rise from 
the center of monotheism and echo in the world, undoubtedly 
their innocent silence, more than any cry, will shake the 
fortresses of polytheists and the arrogant, and deliver the 
message of the Islamic revolution to the people of the world. 
  I deem it necessary to thank and praise the dear pilgrim 
brothers and sisters, especially the committed clergy, the war 
disabled, freed POWs, and families of martyrs, who have 
constantly demonstrated their competence and political maturity 
to defend dear Islam and the Islamic revolution and to follow 
the goals of the esteemed leader, for their dutifulness and 
alertness. 
  May God make the Islamic revolution of Iran a prelude to the 
global rule of Islam and continue casting your eminence's 
auspicious shadow upon the world Muslims. 
  [signed] Mohammad Mohammadi-Reyshahri, representative of the 
Supreme Jurisconsult and supervisor of pilgrims, 16 May 
  The text of the reply by His Eminence Ayatollah Khamene'i, 
the esteemed leader of the Islamic revolution, to Mr Mohammadi- 
Reyshahri's letter is as follows: 
  In his exalted name. With greetings to your excellency 
Hojjat ol-Eslam val-Moslemin Mohammadi-Reyshahri, may your 
shadow continue. I received your message. Considering the 
situation that you have reported, I endorse the cancelling of 
the Disavowal of Polytheists ceremony. 
  May God cover your excellency and all pilgrims to the Holy 
House of God, especially the dear Iranian pilgrims, with His 
blessings and guidance and accept their pilgrimage. 
  Peace and God's mercy be upon you. 
  [signed] Seyyed 'Ali Khamene'i. 

