BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondent Valeriy Demidetskiy] </F>
  [Text] Kishinev [Chisinau] 18 April, TASS -- The economic 
crisis in Moldavia [Moldova] has resulted in the considerable 
drop in living standards in the Republic. The state statistic 
department announced today that the monetary incomes of the 
population in the first quarter of this year were about one half 
those of the same period last year. 
  In March, the average wage was 70 lei, (16 USD), ten times 
more than at the beginning of last year. The prices, however, 
rose seventeen times during the same period. 
  Experts believe that the worsening of the situation in 
Moldavia was caused not only by the crisis triggered off by 
economic reform, but also by the mistakes made by the old 
parliament over the past three years and the first two 
governments. The conflicts in Trans-Dniester and the Gagauz 
region, as well as the uncertain stance on membership of the 
Commonwealth of Independent States have resulted in the loss of 
almost one-third of the Republic's production potential. 
Moldavia has broken up into three parts and has begun to lose 
its traditional market in the east. 
  Pressed for time, the preceding government signed a 
memorandum with International Monetary Fund which promised loans 
on certain conditions. The first part of these conditions has 
been met -- after the introduction of Moldovan currency, the 
national bank succeeded in curbing inflation by regulating the 
issue of money and credits and reducing the budget deficit. But 
the second part of the memorandum, relating to economic 
restructuring, investment activity, and the development of 
entrepreneurship and a market infrastructure has yet to be 
handled. 
  The unwieldy state sector has begun to choke without the 
customary credit infusions from the government. Redundant 
people have been unable to find employment in the private 
sector, which is in its embryonic state. As a result the 
production slump and hidden unemployment have reached a 
dangerous line. 
  The new government approved last week is facing a difficult 
mission of telling the bitter truth to the people: there are no 
miracles and time has come to pay for the mistakes made in the 
first years of independence. It will take not a couple of 
months but years of hard work to correct the errors, pull the 
country out of the crisis and reach the pre-perestroika standard 
of living. 

