Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] Solar batteries, the energy of which is being used 
to operate 
air conditioners, have been installed in a building at Sanyo 
Electric enterprise (Island of Avadzi [transliterated], Western 
Japan). 
  Utilization of solar energy as an ecologically clean source 
is becoming increasingly attractive as a result of growing alarm 
due to the harmful aftereffects for the planet's ecology of the 
combustion of fossil fuels. The volume of world production of 
solar batteries have dramatically increased recently, although 
their share in the overall production of energy remains quite 
insignificant. The total output of solar batteries in 1991 
increased to 55 MVt (which is equivalent to the output of a 
small generator plant), in contrast to practically zero in 1977. 
  Japan's share in world production of solar batteries has 
increased in the last several years and totaled 36% in 
1991. 
The U.S.' share totals 30% and the EEC countries' share 
is 24%. 
  So far, solar batteries have been employed in a quite 
limited 
assortment of items. They are primarily used in calculators and 
watches, devices with low energy consumption, and the 
utilization of solar batteries in them was dictated by 
convenience rather than economic or ecological considerations. 
  The main problem preventing the broader introduction of 
solar 
batteries is their high cost. Although the installation of solar 
batteries permits a dramatic reduction of expenditures for 
electrical energy, the user must initially spend 1.5 million yen 
($12,000) on that system. 
  Sanyo is cooperating with Misawa Homes design home-building 
company in the construction of homes equipped with solar 
batteries. According to the calculations of Sanyo experts, 
expenditures on the installation of solar batteries in the 
amount of 6 million yen ($49,000) will be recouped in just 10 
years. They need to increase the batteries' efficiency 
(depending on the type of element) and reduce their cost in 
order to expand the sales market for these batteries. 
  Elements produced by Kiosera, the second largest 
manufacturer 
of solar batteries, based on semicrystallized silica, have the 
greatest efficiency (16%). These elements are expensive to 
produce (the energy expended in their manufacture is recovered 
in two years) and must be subjected to temperatures of 
1,500C in the manufacturing process. 
  Sanyo's elements are made from amorphous silica and are more 
efficient: A temperature of approximately 300C is required 
for their manufacture, the energy transformation coefficient is 
more than 10%, and the expended energy is recovered 
within a 
year. Sanyo stated that expenditures for the production of 
elements made from amorphous silica do not exceed $5 per kVt. 
Expenditures should significantly decrease in mass production: 
up to $1 per kVt by the year 2000, based on the firm's plans. 
  Firms that manufacture solar batteries hope to expand their 
sphere of employment--from autonomous devices like outside 
spotlights, which are recharged during the day for operation at 
night, to electromobiles with hybrid engines, to building 
electrical supplies. 
  Looking to the future, Sanyo experts have promoted Project 
GENESIS (a global energy network based on solar batteries and 
international superconductor transmission lines), in accordance 
with which deserts in various countries of the world will be 
covered by a network of solar stations, the energy of which will 
flow into populated areas through a network of superconducting 
cables. So far, implementation of this project is impossible due 
to economic considerations, however, the situation will change 
with time. 
  SUMOTO (Reuters), 14 September 1992. 

