Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Bombs Over Bosnia?"] </F>
  [Text] Bombing the Serbs is back on the international 
agenda -- but is it more than words? And should it be? The 
history of this proposal does not inspire much confidence. The 
threat of aerial action against Serb forces in Bosnia may have 
toned down some of their more extreme actions and could possibly 
have a similar effect again. But the tactical wisdom of 
actually doing it has never been argued through. On the last 
occasion the proposal was aired, it seemed more a substitute for 
serious steps to end the war than a commitment to take them, and 
soon got mired in transatlantic bickering. It has now 
resurfaced at the NATO summit in an equally unconvincing way. 
  Last summer the idea was energetically pushed from 
Washington 
against a chorus of European doubts, particularly from Britain 
and France as the two NATO powers with most forces in the field. 
This time the initiative has come, rather oddly from France 
(supported by Belgium), while Washington plays the reluctant 
role. Mr Clinton no longer has the domestic political space in 
which to play heroes on foreign fields and has enough anyhow on 
his external menu. In Europe there is even less commitment to 
intervene actively in Bosnia than before. All the nudges and 
hints these days (particularly from British ministers) point 
instead towards eventual disengagement. Yet the devastation of 
Serb guns in the streets of Sarajevo still has the power to 
shock, and it would look particularly bad if the NATO summit had 
nothing to say. 
  NATO had already agreed in August, after a couple of months 
of haggling with Washington, to undertake air strikes -- if need 
be, and with the prior approval of the UN Secretary-General. 
The Security Council has long authorised all necessary means to 
protect the "safe areas" and ensure the flow of humanitarian 
aid. On paper, therefore, no new decision is required. There 
is no shortage of issues over which an air strike, if thought 
likely to be effective, might be launched. The airfield at 
Tuzla remains obstinately closed, mocking the UN's attempts to 
provide minimum humanitarian supplies. Mr Clinton had a point 
yesterday when he taxed his European allies with lack of 
credibility -- though since the last abortive effort he has 
switched off too. 
  Like so much else in the Bosnian crisis, it might have been 
well if it had been done quickly. By now, when the 
international community has conceded the division of Bosnia more 
or less on Serb terms, air strikes would be an unpredictable 
diversion. They would also be irrelevant to the growing 
Muslim-Croat conflict, and they are opposed by nearly all UN 
workers and soldiers in Bosnia. More effective policing of the 
no-fly-zone is a less provocative policy (which might help 
re-open Tuzla). But, truly, the Bosnians need real help -- more 
aid, more peacekeepers, more political commitment -- on the 
ground rather than in the air. 

