Language: <F P=105> Hungarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["S.I."-signed report: "SZDSZ Criticism to Boross"] </F>
  [Text] The Federation of Young Democrats [Fidesz] is 
thinking in terms of a new government, as opposed to the general 
view according to which Fidesz is ready, as an ally, to help the 
Hungarian Democratic Forum [MDF] remain in government. Talking 
about the party's foreign policy ideas at a consultation on 15 
February, Jozsef Szajer, an Fidesz leader and the party's main 
foreign policy expert, used the term "in case of a government 
change." In addition to Szajer, the Foreign Affairs Association 
on 15 February also heard Istvan Szent-Ivanyi, foreign affairs 
spokesman of the Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ]. 
  According to Szent-Ivanyi, Prime Minister Peter Boross went 
too far when he announced that NATO's AWACS flying radar 
stations will not be able to use Hungarian airspace during 
NATO's aerial attacks on Bosnia. Szent-Ivanyi approved of the 
prime minister's efforts to prevent Hungary from getting 
involved in the issue but, in his view, it would have been more 
appropriate to simply remind NATO of the Hungarian permit given 
to the AWACS planes (according to which they cannot be used for 
military activities) and he claimed that the possible withdrawal 
of the mandate of the AWACS places would have required 
parliamentary consent. 
  In connection with the Balkan crisis, Szajer said that 
Hungary's scope for maneuver is small, and an open debate on 
Hungarian policy has not developed. Szajer supported Budapest's 
restrained policy, "maintaining that we formerly supported more 
radical solutions," but he did not explain what kind of radical 
solutions he meant. Szajer said that Foreign Minister Geza 
Jeszenszky's January visit to Belgrade -- which has previously 
been criticized by Szent-Ivanyi and again in the Foreign Affairs 
Association on 15 February -- "was a step in the right direction 
but at the worst possible time," and he objected that no 
coordination had taken place before the visit. 
  The Foreign Affairs Association wanted to learn about the 
foreign policy concept of the two parties. It emerged from 
Szent-Ivanyi's and Szajer's report that Fidesz considers 
European integration as the main goal, while the SZDSZ's main 
goal is to improve relations with the neighboring countries. 
Szajer did not appear to be as unequivocal as Szent-Ivanyi in 
the issue that Hungary does not have territorial demands from 
its neighbors. Szajer revealed that if the situation had not 
been so acute at the time, then Fidesz possibly would not have 
voted in favor of the Hungarian-Ukrainian basic agreement (which 
states that the two countries will not have territorial demands 
against each other in the future either), because Fidesz was not 
fully satisfied with the passages on the protection of national 
minorities. 
  Talking about the foreign policy consensus, Szajer said that 
Fidesz does not intend to form a consensus with the extreme 
parties, and he mentioned the Hungarian Justice and Life Party. 

