BFN 

  [Text] Hefei, May 23 (XINHUA) -- Five provinces in central 
and east China have made gratifying headway in controlling and 
treating malaria, the fever conveyed by mosquitoes, through 
20-year efforts. 
  According to a recent meeting in Chuzhou city, Anhui 
Province, the incidence of malaria in Jiangsu, Shandong, Henan, 
Anhui and Hubei provinces has dropped greatly, and 93 percent of 
the people in malaria-prevalent areas are basically free from 
the threat of the disease. 
  Malaria, a symbol of poverty, was rampant in those five 
provinces. For centuries it affected the health of millions of 
people. 
  According to surveys, the number of malaria cases reached 
21.98 million in 473 counties and cities in these five provinces 
in 1970, and 21.74 million in 1971, accounting for at least 90 
percent of China's total of malaria cases. 
  Anhui was worst-hit by the disease and had 11.52 million 
cases in 1970. 
  Its Fuyang and Suxian prefectures had an incidence as high 
as 
50 percent in those days. 
  As many people were ill, some factories had to close down 
and 
crops were left in the fields unharvested due to shortage of 
labor forces. 
  With approval of the State Council in 1974, Jiangsu, Henan, 
Shandong, Hubei and Anhui provinces began to cooperate in 
controlling and treating malaria. 
  While positively treating malaria cases, these areas have 
strengthened studies for the prevention and treatment of the 
disease and sent professors, experts and scientific workers to 
the grass-root units to tackle key technical problems. 
  They have also trained 400,000 specialists in malaria 
treatment and control. 
  As a result, the incidence of the disease in the five 
provinces reduced to 1.078 million in 1984 and 10,395 last year. 
Now, their incidence rate accounts for 17.75 percent of the 
country's total. 
  A survey shows that 316 counties, accounting for more than 
70 
percent of the total number of the cases for the five provinces, 
have reached the government-set standard of being basically free 
from malaria. 
  As early as 1988, east China's Shandong Province took the 
lead in the country in eliminating this scourge. 
  Last year saw only 24 counties and cities have an incidence 
rate of one per ten thousand, compared with 473 counties and 
cities in 1973. 
  To control the disease, Jiangsu, Henan and Anhui provinces 
have enhanced the treatment and study of malaria and eliminated 
the sources of mosquitoes. 
  As a result, no malignant malaria case has been reported in 
Jiangsu and Henan provinces for six years and in Anhui Province 
for three years. 
  The experience in making joint efforts to control and treat 
the disease has been highly commended by the World Health 
Organization (WHO), which organized China, Thailand, Myanmar 
[Burma], Vietnam and Laos to jointly treat and prevent the 
disease in the border areas last year. 

