BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 22 (XINHUA) -- China cracked more than 
4,900 narcotics-related criminal cases in the first quarter this 
year, seizing some 1,000 kilograms of heroin and 476 kilograms 
of opium. 
  This was revealed by Bai Jingfu, vice-minister of public 
security, here today at a working conference of the National 
Commission of Narcotics Control (NCNC). 
  "Narcotics-related crimes, especially transnational drug 
smuggling, were effectively curbed in the country as police and 
customs officers joined efforts to combat them," Bai told the 
conference. 
  China's anti-drug campaign has been centered on the Guangxi 
Zhuang Autonomous Region and Yunnan Province, both bordering the 
"Golden Triangle" in Myanmar [Burma] which are ravaged the most 
by deadly crimes as smugglers choose to transport narcotics 
through these areas to other parts of the world. 
  The border provinces accounted for 82 percent of the heroin 
and 70 percent of the opium seized in the country in the first 
three months this year, said the vice-minister, who is also 
deputy director of the NCNC. 
  Bai said China's cooperation with the international 
community 
in its fight against drug crimes has been "effective." 
  The narcotics control program of China, Myanmar and the UN 
is 
"being carried out smoothly," he said, adding that China's 
cooperation with Thailand and Laos in this field has also been 
strengthened. 
  Meanwhile, Bai noted that China has also made remarkable 
achievements in drug rehabilitation programs. 
  "The rising trend of new addicts has been slowed and the 
country has begun to see an annual decrease in the new addict 
population," he said. 
  Some 50,000 of the country's drug addicts received training 
courses to quit drugs in 1993, he said. 
  Minister of Public Security and NCNC Director Tao Siju also 
told the conference that China will continue its cooperation 
with the international community, especially bordering 
countries, in combating drug-related crime. 
  "With rampant international narcotics crimes, China still 
faces a harsh challenge from traffickers and it will continue to 
intensify the crackdown on these crimes with cooperation from 
its customs, and organizations in other countries and regions, 
so as to reduce the impact of drug trafficking to the minimum," 
Tao said. 

