BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Gentlemen: U.S. circles in Washington close to the 
U.S. State Department have been talking about the possibility of 
Warren Christopher making a new tour of the Middle East mid-June 
in an effort to pull the Syrian-Israeli track out of its current 
stalemate and push the peace process forward. These circles 
indicate that a wide gap separates the Syrian and Israeli 
positions, that much effort should be exerted to narrow that 
gap, that there is no alternative to serious work on the 
Syrian-Israeli track in view of Syria's key role in the peace 
process, and that any progress on this track will reflect on the 
other negotiating tracks. 
  It has become clear that if the United States wants to push 
the peace process forward and achieve a just and real solution 
in the region, it should, in its capacity as the principal 
sponsor of the peace process, direct its efforts toward Israel. 
Israel's rulers, however, do not want a just, comprehensive, 
and stable peace because such a peace will put an end to their 
expansionist plans and will draw borders for their entity at a 
time when they want Israel to remain open without definite 
borders, and to expand. 
  Hence, they bargain over the occupied Arab territories, 
stressing the need to subject Palestinians to a prolonged 
self-rule and to test the Arabs' peaceful intentions by keeping 
their territories under occupation. The Israeli prime minister 
yesterday urged Syria to bypass the Washington talks that 
stemmed from the Madrid conference, pointing out that the 
distinguished relationship between the United States and Israel 
prevents U.S. pressure on Tel Aviv's policy. 
  Syria has always rejected such calls and consider them an 
escape from the requirements of the peace process and an 
encroachment on Security Council resolutions, the bases of the 
Madrid conference, and the principle of land for peace. Secret 
negotiations not only constitute an exposed maneuver to 
undermine the U.S. initiative and a just and comprehensive peace 
formula, but also relieve the United States of its obvious 
commitment to achieving a just, lasting, and comprehensive 
solution based on the international legitimacy's resolutions and 
the principle of land for peace. 
  The secret Palestinian-Israeli negotiations in Oslo and 
their 
resulting distorted, lame agreement is best evidence of Israel's 
intentions and maneuvers. The said agreement has entrenched the 
Israeli occupation, given Israel a free hand in security and 
sovereignty affairs, and placed the Palestinians under 
trusteeship. No noticeable change has occurred in the life of 
Palestinians, except for big names such as self-rule that has no 
more power than the previous municipalities. The occupied 
Palestinian territories have remained under tight military siege. 
  This is Israel's goal from the secret negotiations. It wants 
to split Arab ranks, draw each Arab side into a fragmented 
agreement in isolation of other sides, and blackmail Arab 
parties in general. The Arabs and the cause of peace will be the 
losers because lame agreements do not bring the region closer to 
peace but increase tension and may lead to an explosion. Hence, 
Syria sticks to the Madrid conference formula, the Washington 
talks framework, and the Security Council resolutions. 
  The international community shares this position with Syria 
because it views it as positive and constructive. No agreement 
will be worthy if it does not win the support of the region's 
peoples and lay the groundwork for true peace and a real 
stability. There is nothing so far to indicate any change in 
Israel's policy or shift in the position of Rabin's government. 
  While Syria does not expect any decisive shift from Israel, 
it expects the United States to adopt a more serious and 
effective stand twoard the implementation of Security Council 
resolutions. The special relationship between the United States 
and Israel, on which the Tel Aviv rulers are wagering, should 
not block the international community's authority, principles, 
and laws. 
  The United States committed itself before the entire world 
to 
achieving a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. 
U.S. credibility depends on translating that commitment into a 
fact on the ground, especially since many countries, as well as 
the Americans themselves, are posing urgent questions regarding 
the effectiveness of the U.S. foreign policy. 
  The United States also knows well that total Israeli 
withdrawal from the Golan and the occupied territories is the 
key to peace in the Middle East, and that without such a total 
withdrawal, Syria cannot enter into serious talks on peace. 
Without Syria, the peace process cannot achieve any progress. 
  Syria has always announced its readiness to bring about a 
real, honorable peace and has honestly supported every effort in 
this direction. But such a peace depends on Israel and requires 
the United States and Russia to exercise decisive pressure. 
Peace prospects diminish day after day, and the U.S. initiative 
has been exposed to many shocks and much erosion as a result of 
Israel's intransigence and procrastination. 

