Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Communique on text of Note D.M. No. 158/94 dated 11 </F>
February signed by Panamanian Foreign Minister Jose Raul Mulino 
and addressed to U.S. Ambassador Deane R. Hinton] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Communique </H5>
  Regarding publications by local and international news media 
on statements issued by a State Department official pronouncing 
the national government has not made efforts to fight the 
laundering of drug-trafficking money, the Foreign Ministry would 
like to make public the note sent to the U.S. ambassador by 
Foreign Minister Jose Raul Mulino, as follows: 
  "Note D.M. No. 158/94 
  11 February 1994 
  Mr. Ambassador: 
  I have the honor of addressing Your Excellency in reference 
to public statements by a State Department official named Robert 
Gelbard to the effect that our government has not made any 
efforts to fight the laundering of drug-trafficking money. Our 
government rejects strongly these statements in view that 
serious and decided actions to fight these crimes have been 
taken since 1990. 
  I list hereunder the main actions our government has taken 
regarding the fight against drug trafficking. 
  1. The Executive Branch on 23 September 1993 presented to 
the Republic of Panama's Legislative Assembly the draft bill to 
approve the UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic 
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances adopted in Vienna on 28 
December 1988, which was approved as Law No. 20 dated 7 December 
1993 and was published in Official Publication No. 22,429, dated 
9 December 1993. 
  2. The Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty on Drug Trafficking 
signed between the Republic of Panama and the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland on 1 March 1993 was discussed 
by the Legislative Assembly's Foreign Relations Commission 
during a first debate. It is pending approval in the next 
session that is due to begin on 1 March. 
  3. On the occasion of the 14th Meeting of Central American 
Presidents held in Guatemala City between 28 to 29 October 1993, 
the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty for Penal Affairs between 
Central American countries and Panama was signed. In addition, 
the Constitutive Agreement of the Permanent Central American 
Commission for the Eradication of the Production, Traffic, 
Consumption, and Illicit Use of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances was also signed. 
  4. The Republic of Panama and the Republic of Colombia 
signed the following bilateral agreements on 19 November 1993. 
  4.1 Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance and Judicial 
Cooperation. 
  4.2 Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance With Relation to 
the Illegal Trafficking of Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances. 
  4.3 Agreement on Measures to Prevent Diversion of Chemical 
Precursors and Essential Substances. 
  5. From 31 January to 4 February, Panamanian and Canadian 
delegations held talks on the projected mutual legal assistance 
treaties on drug trafficking and related crimes, treaties that 
are to be signed between the two countries. 
  6. Now that the Governments of Panama and Mexico have 
expressed their intent to conclude a mutual legal assistance 
treaty, it remains for the two governments to set a date for 
opening negotiations leading to the signing of such a treaty. 
  7. As part of the actions and goals that the Panamanian 
Government has outlined to combat drug trafficking and related 
crimes, strategies have been devised to reduce the risk of our 
economy and banking center being used for money laundering. 
National strategies have been devised for general prevention 
policies through the community, specifically, through the mass 
training of primary, secondary, and university students. In 
addition, a National Documentation Center, attached to the 
Attorney General's Office, has been created to coordinate 
general meetings on the rate and prevention of drug use. 
Specialized training programs aimed at government employees, 
civic club members, and private enterprise personnel have also 
been developed. 
  8. More and more prevention programs have been developed 
through the National Commission for the Study and Prevention of 
Drug-Related Crimes, Conapred, an interinstitutional commission 
created by Law No. 23, dated 20 December 1986. This law, better 
known as the Drug Law, also provides the necessary juridical 
structure to punish anyone who one way or another participates 
in money laundering. 
  Of a similar nature is Decree No. 41 of 1990, which 
stipulates the banks' duty to properly identify their clients 
and require that they make any necessary statements to certify 
the origin of their deposits or the destination of cash 
withdrawals exceeding $10,000. This decree has been augmented by 
National Banking Commission rulings aimed at checking the use of 
our banking center for activities related to drug trafficking. 
Furthermore, important meetings with high-level representatives 
of your government were held in our country in 1993 to devise 
joint strategies that make it possible to expand our working 
capability in this important sphere of our economic activities. 
High-level officials of the Panamanian Government have 
participated in these meetings as evidenced by our willingness 
and interest as a government. 
  9. The Attorney General's Office, in an effort to 
strengthen actions executed by the Specialized Secretariat for 
Drug Related Crimes, investigation agencies, and the Technical 
Judicial Police (PTJ), has established an office specializing in 
drug related crimes in every district. The assistant secretariat 
offices carry out raids and other proceedings as part of 
investigating drug related crimes. Their work is evident from 
one end of the country to the other. 
  10. The Attorney General's Office has also organized an 
Information and Audiovisual Resource Center for drug related 
problems; it operates under the Attorney General's Office. The 
center has the latest information on drug addiction, which 
negatively affects elementary, high school, and university 
students throughout the country. The center also offers aid and 
support, with specialized audiovisual and technical material, to 
the Catholic Church and other churches established in the 
Republic of Panama that have plans for the prevention and 
eradication of drugs in our country. 
  11. Within the policy to strengthen the fight against drugs 
and drug trafficking, the Attorney General has submitted a bill 
with reforms to current legislation on drugs to the Legislative 
Assembly. The Attorney General has said the bill reorganizes 
crimes dealing with international drug trafficking; incoporates 
aggravating circumstances concerning the purchase, sale, or 
transfer of drugs; regulates surveillance procedures during drug 
deliveries and covert operations; and creates two district 
attorney's offices specialized in drug related crimes, with 
authority and jurisdiction throughout the country. 
  12. The actions carried out by government authorities in 
charge of preventing drug related crimes have resulted in the 
seizure of many thousands of kilograms of cocaine, marijuana, 
methamphetamines, and bazuko, and over $7 million in cash, 
presumably for laundering through our banking center. As a 
result of these actions, more than 400 persons of different 
nationalities have been arrested and legal action has been taken 
against them. 
  In addition, our government has agreed to continue working 
with Your Excellency's government in everything relating to 
cooperation by U.S. Government agencies to our national 
authorities so that, based on Panamanian legal procedures, the 
latter can successfully carry out operations to confiscate drugs 
in different sectors of our country. We also hope to strengthen 
our National Air Service so it can work to destroy alleged coca 
plantations in the Darien area -- a necessary effort to prevent 
cocaine production in our territory. 
  I reiterate my concern for the inexplicable delay which 
your country's Senate has suffered in ratifying the Mutual Legal 
Assistance Treaty for Criminal Affairs signed by the two 
countries in April 1991 and approved by our Legislative Assembly 
in Law 20 on 22 June 1991. All these years of delay by the U.S. 
Senate in ratifying this important legal instrument, undermines 
the authority of your government officials to criticize the 
collaboration that the Government of the Republic of Panama 
undertakes with your and other countries to fight drug 
trafficking. 
  The fact that the limitations we face in fighting this 
deadly 
scourge are real and, oftentimes, affect the results surely does 
not escape Your Excellency's enlightened criteria. It is 
unacceptable, however, for U.S. officials to express criticisms 
that do not seriously reflect the real attitude and will of the 
Panamanian Government in fighting this powerful, international 
criminal network. Not even in the United States, despite all its 
resources, has the enormous consumption of drugs been 
effectively controlled; however, this real impossibility is not 
an excuse for merrily saying that the U.S. Government is not 
tirelessly working to fight the consumption and traffic of 
narcotics. 
  I hope and trust, Mr. Ambassador, that the entire contents 
of 
this letter will be conveyed to the corresponding authorities of 
your country with the aim of clarifying our position and 
expressing our strong rejection of such irresponsible statements 
which undermine the good name of our country. 
  I take advantage of this opportunity to reiterate to Your 
Excellency my highest esteem. 
  [Signed] Jose Raul Mulino, foreign relations minister 
  To Your Excellency Deane R. Hinton, ambassador of the United 
States of America. 

