CSO 

<F P=106> [BNS release: "Russian Customs Barrier Puts a Squeeze on </F>
Estonia's Economy"] 
  [Text] 
  The high import tariffs imposed by Russia last month 
have forced many Estonian companies to reduce their labor force 
and curb their production considerably. 
  It is understandable that Russia, like any other state, uses 
customs restrictions to protect the interests of its domestic 
producers. "Only Estonia goes marching into Europe, with its 
chest exposed, without supporting its producers," deplored Ain 
Talts, foreign trade consultant at the Ministry of Agriculture. 
"Estonia's government thinks that the quality of Estonian butter 
can be improved without imposing any tariffs and by bringing in 
`mixes' and `moxes.' The fact is, Estonia's butter has been 
known for its high quality for a hundred years," Talts said. 
  Talts thinks that export to Russia will soon open up through 
Belarus or Ukraine. "The flow of trade cannot be enforced at 
state level and, even now, there are many Russian businessmen 
who use other states for their exports," he remarked. Russia's 
step did, however, deal a blow to some of the biggest suppliers 
(like the Tallinn Meat Processing Plant and the Refrigeration 
Plant of Tartu)," Talts commented. 
  "Out of all the companies in Estonia, the state-owned 
Tallinn 
Meat Processing Plant suffered most from the tariff hike," said 
Anatoli Deelinson, director of the plant's marketing department. 
  Deelinson remarked that all other producers can export their 
production to Russia through a third country. Tallinn Meat 
Processing Plant's main export article to Russia was the cooking 
sausage whose short shelf life (72 hours) does not allow any 
time for that. This is why, as of March 15, the company stopped 
its exports of cooking sausage to Russia entirely. 
  Deelinson said that 14 percent of the plant's January 
production, and 25 percent of its February production of cooking 
sausages was sold to Russia (primarily St. Petersburg). Losing 
the market due to the 40-percent tariff, however, caused the 
company to make major cutbacks and give its employees vacations 
without pay. Right now, the plant is running on reduced hours 
and, should that continue, the situation will become even more 
serious. 
  Urmas Sannik, deputy director of the processing plant, saw a 
solution in either finding a new market for the cooking sausage, 
or in concentrating on the export of some other meat products. 
  Russia's increase of custom tariffs has also had an adverse 
effect on the state-owned Kalev corporation. "We have lost most 
of the Russian market whereas, last year, 40 percent of Kalev's 
production was sold to Russia," said the firm's executive 
director Mati Peekma. Kalev was forced to close down some of its 
production lines and is currently operating at half of its 
capacity. 
  "Russia has started to use international tariff codes, 
according to which some of the goods could be exported at lower 
rates, but Russian customs do not always go along with that," 
Peekma said. He added that looking for `holes' in the Russian 
customs barrier continues. 
  Estonia's neighboring states, however, have established 
tariffs so high that Kalev, which produces more than the 
domestic market can absorb, has a tough time staying alive. On 
our exports to Latvia, sugar products are subjected to a tariff 
of 30 percent, and chocolate products to a 50 percent tariff. On 
our exports to Finland, there is a 35 percent tariff on 
confectionery products, Peekma explained. 
  The search is on for new markets, but countries closest to 
us 
have established high tariffs, while safe transport becomes an 
issue for reaching those further away, Peekma said. Foreign 
markets, however, cannot be reached that soon. 
  Increasing our exports to Belarus and Ukraine is being 
considered but, in the case of Belarus, for example, there is a 
danger that the state will revert to the ruble zone and 
establish tariffs just as high as those of Russia. 
  Andres Varik, acting director of the Central Alliance of 
Agricultural Producers, said he is not aware of the tariff 
increase having a catastrophic effect on agricultural producers. 
The level of agriculture has dropped so much already that it 
could not drop any further because of that, Varik added. In his 
opinion not enough time had lapsed since the tariffs were 
increased to gather any meaningful data. 
  Ain Talts, consultant at the Ministry of Agriculture, thinks 
that increased customs restrictions for Estonia will remain in 
effect until the president, or the foreign minister, makes peace 
with Russia. 

