Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Doctor of Technical Sciences Professor V. </F>
Senkevich, chief of the division for comprehensive analysis of 
space hardware of TsNIIMASh [Central Scientific-Research 
Institute of Machine Building and Metalworking], under the 
rubric "Problems of the Sector": "The Horizons of Russian Space 
Science"] 
  [Text] Contemporary space science is a new form of human 
activity. It has unique capabilities to resolve practical tasks 
on a planetary scale efficiently, and to have an appreciable 
impact on many aspects of the life of society. 
  Thanks to the global nature of the operations, space 
hardware 
has a level of promptness and informativeness that is not 
available to ground systems. Only these systems make it possible 
to use properties of the environment beyond the Earth (vacuum, 
weightlessness etc.) for applied and scientific purposes, 
conduct research on surrounding space across the whole range of 
wavelengths and study the heavenly bodies that populate them, as 
well as make use of their natural resources in the future for 
the needs of mankind. 
  It is entirely likely that it will be deemed expedient to 
remove radioactive wastes with the aid of spacecraft, taking 
them to remote orbits in special containers until such time as 
we find ways of reprocessing and using those harmful substances. 
The guaranteed safe burial of radioactive wastes on Earth is 
impossible in practice, after all, at the contemporary level of 
development of science and technology. 
  The scope and level of worldwide space activity, at the same 
time, has now led to the appearance of specific problems that 
must be resolved without delay. "Space trash," for example 
(spent stages of launch vehicles, satellites, their constituent 
elements and parts and other "wastes"), has come to pose a real 
threat of collision with functioning spacecraft. The steady 
growth in the number of launches of launch vehicles requires the 
creation of ecologically clean methods of launch, and a 
reduction in the areas where the separated portions fall. 
  Domestic space science, as all of our country, is going 
through a difficult period today. A breakdown is occurring in 
cooperation that had taken shape over decades (more than a 
thousand organizations were directly active in it, and more than 
two thousand indirectly, in the former Union, although about 85 
percent of the space potential was concentrated right in 
Russia). The former command-administrative system of command and 
control and the state financial and resource support of space 
science, with all of its merits and drawbacks, has been 
destroyed, and a renewed organizational structure is being 
created in its place. The government of Russia has already made 
concrete decisions in this area, the basis of which is the 
prospect of preserving space science as a sector that performs 
important state functions. The Russian Space Agency in 
particular was formed at the beginning of 1992, and was given 
the task by presidential edict of "developing and implementing 
state policy in the realm of the study and utilization of outer 
space." 
  The problem of the right of ownership of elements of the 
space infrastructure located on their territories by the 
republics of the former Union--which never arose 
before--requires immediate settlement. 
  The financial and economic crisis and the drop in production 
in all sectors of industry are appreciably lowering the level of 
space activity. Spending declined by 35 percent in 1991 compared 
to the prior year. The work of the missile and space sector was 
effectively "frozen" for several months at the beginning of 
1992, before the confirmation of the state order. Cutbacks and 
stoppages of theoretical and experimental work (whole areas are 
threatened in some cases) are occurring as a result, highly 
skilled professionals are leaving and the system of personnel 
training is being destroyed; it will be exceedingly difficult to 
restore our "space school," which is world class. The scientific 
and experimental physical plant is in grave condition owing to 
insufficient financing. Further strengthening of these negative 
elements could lead to Russia's loss of its position as one of 
the leading space powers, which is intolerable. 
  The contemporary situation, at the same time, brings new 
opportunities as well. The change in the socio-political 
situation in the world and reduction in the level of military 
confrontation are opening up broad prospects for international 
collaboration. 
  The processes of integration that are typical of all sectors 
of the economies of developed nations are now taking place at a 
worldwide level in space activity as well. There are 
opportunities to accomplish space projects that even the 
wealthiest country is in principle not able to carry out from a 
technical standpoint, and in the realization of which all of 
mankind has a vested interest. Virtually all large-scale 
programs at the beginning of the 21st century will now be 
accomplished on the basis of international financing, and joint 
plans for their fulfillment and utilization of the results. 
There are opportunities therein for collaboration for more than 
scientific and national-economic purposes alone. Prospects are 
already being discerned, for example, for the creation of a 
space echelon of international systems of missile and space 
defense, intended for monitoring arms and ensuring global 
security under the aegis of the United Nations. 
  Intensive commercialization is being observed in 
international space science, a market for hardware, technology 
and services is forming and the initial distribution of spheres 
of influence is proceeding. It is exceptionally important for 
Russia to take its place in this process right now. Its 
participation in the world space market, unfortunately, is still 
not large. The rapid and correct determination of which elements 
of domestic engineering and services have any demand, the 
finding of customers and the development of an intelligent 
pricing policy are essential in order to win a proper place in 
that market. The concept of "profit" in the sector of space 
science should become just as common as in any other. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-003C-02A>           Predicted Tasks and Amounts of Space Activity... </FIG>

  What awaits us in the future? The Russian Space Agency, RF 
Ministry of Defense and Ukraine Academy of Sciences, in 
conjunction with other ministries and agencies, in 1992 prepared 
a series of documents on a new space policy, and in particular 
the "State Space Program of Russia to the Year 2000." It 
envisages measures providing for the development of our 
potential, its utilization for the resolution of scientific and 
national-economic tasks and basic research, the development of 
commercial entrepreneurship in various areas of space activity 
and the receipt of a real economic impact via the creation of 
new technologies, products and services and their offering to 
other sectors. 
  The concrete forms for realizing the directions of that 
activity depend on many factors, including on predicted 
technical development trends. Three principal ones may be 
singled out. Constant expansion of the sphere of application of 
missile and space engineering should lead to the creation of 
multipurpose orbital platforms, and their use to perform a large 
number of various tasks. It would be expedient therein to begin 
the interproject standardization and modular-unit execution of 
satellites and their constituent parts. Such an approach would 
permit a 20--30 percent reduction in spending on space science. 
  The second promising trend is the development of the 
principle of reusability. The operation of not only multiple-use 
systems such as the Buran and Space Shuttle manned spacecraft, 
but also the realization of new ideas such as the recovery of 
launch vehicles and their constituent parts using an aircraft 
configuration or using parachute descent, with their repeated 
launching, is being predicted for the future. The return from 
space of individual replaceable modules and units, apparatus or 
a spacecraft as a whole that would be put back into orbit after 
ground restoration is a matter for the near future. 
  Third, an essential element of the space science of the 
future is a system of transport and technical support and repair 
in space. Hangars, warehouses and other structures located in 
orbit are needed. Automatic robotic systems fitted with 
manipulators, mobile rocket trolleys for movements in space, 
truss elements and equipment for the assembly and repair of 
large structural elements, as well as the replacement of 
individual modules and instruments on satellite platforms, 
should be of assistance. Orbital stations of the Mir type or the 
American Freedom could become the bases for accommodating such 
facilities. 
  The cost recovery and profitability of space science will be 
achieved through the direct national-economic impact (including 
from the use of dual-purpose satellites), the organization of 
commercial activity, the transfer of promising space 
technologies to other sectors and the production of consumer 
goods by the enterprises in the missile and space complex. 
  The space programs themselves, however, will become more and 
more expensive, and the formation of a system that guarantees 
objective and full information for the public on the work in the 
principal areas of space activity of Russia and provides the 
opportunity to influence public opinion on its scope and the 
choice of ways of development is thus essential. The creation 
and active work of such independent and extrabudgetary 
organizations as the Academy of Space Science imeni K.E. 
Tsiolkovskiy, the International Engineering Academy, the 
Federation of Space Science of Russia and the Moscow Space Club, 
among others, could be considered the start of that. 




    The process of assimilating and utilizing outer space is 
proceeding, and will proceed, at an increasing pace. Both the 
preservation and the development of the directions of space 
activity that have already become traditional, along with the 
appearance of new ones, is being predicted after the year 2000. 
These are, first and foremost, the development of the space 
industry in near-Earth orbits, the creation of space solar 
electric-power plants and a space echelon of the international 
system of antimissile and space defense. The building of manned 
base stations on the moon will lay the foundation for the 
practical assimilation of its natural resources, and will be the 
first step in the realization of even more large-scale projects 
for manned flights to Mars and other planets. 
  Society's need for such programs seems obvious, and will be 
satisfied only with sufficient financial and resource support 
from the state. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

