BFN 

  [Text] Shanghai, April 9 (XINHUA) -- The Shanghai Stock 
Exchange in this largest economic center of China has mounted a 
sophisticated operating system that combines computers, 
satellite telecommunications and other modern high-tech means. 
  The exchange began its business with a super micro-computer 
network soon after its founding in 1990. 
  By the end of 1992, the exchange had replaced all its 
computer terminals with HP-900 series of 827-type computers, 
which can handle 1,800 transactions per second as against six by 
the old system. 
  The Shanghai Stock Exchange has continuously improved its 
distance telecommunications system. 
  Last year the exchange invested about eight million U.S. 
dollars in laying a fiber optic cable which is the world's most 
advanced in the world in terms of technology. 
  "The use of the sophisticated technology has doubled and 
redoubled its handling capacities," an official in charge of the 
exchange said. 
  At present, the exchange has more than 500 members as 
against 
25 in 1990. The number of registered investors has risen from 
25,000 to over five million, and the daily transactions jumped 
from 105,000 yuan in 1990 to three million yuan in 1991, 17.5 
million yuan in 1992, and about 900 million yuan last year. 
  The application of modern science and technology has created 
the conditions to set up a unified national stock exchange, 
according to the official. 
  So far the Shanghai Stock Exchange has linked its computer 
network with that of stock exchanges in six cities including 
Fuzhou, capital of Southeast China's Fujian Province, Shenyang, 
capital of Liaoning Province in Northeast China, and Haikou, 
capital of Hainan Province in South China. 
  "This has made it convenient for local stock investors, and 
paved the way for establishing a national securities exchange," 
the official noted. 
  With an advanced operational system, the Shanghai Stock 
Exchange has displayed its due role in selling the state 
treasury bonds. 
  The exchange contracted for 75 billion yuan of state 
treasury 
bonds and within 12 days, it sold 15 billion. 
  It was estimated that the Shanghai Stock Exchange has helped 
the state reduce the cost of issuing treasury bonds by 700 
million yuan. 
  The Shanghai Stock Exchange plans to purchase a special 
purpose satellite in the near future in order to elevate its 
operations to a higher plane. 

