BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Nadein report: "Washington Fears North Korea </F>
Because It Does Not Understand Kim Il-song"] 
  [Text] Washington -- U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry 
has called the decision to prepare for war with the DPRK a 
"sensible precaution." 
  The DPRK, which has the oldest of the totalitarian Communist 
regimes still existing on the planet, says that it is prepared 
to return to the negotiating table, but it is flexing its 
muscles. According to U.S. intelligence information, leave has 
been canceled in the North Korean Army. Large units have been 
moved up to the border. Combat readiness is being reinforced by 
a propaganda campaign portraying war (provoked by U.S. 
imperialists, of course) as inevitable and victorious. 
  The U.S. defense secretary said that the bellicose speeches 
in Pyongyang do not signify an immediate danger of war. He 
announced a series of measures designed to discourage Pyongyang 
from attacking. Dictatorial regimes have their own logic, 
however. If Kim Il-song, North Korea's aged sovereign, takes it 
into his head that his autocratic rule is in danger, he might 
resort to any measures. U.S. officials have admitted that 
Pyongyang's logic is beyond them. "We have an extremely limited 
idea of what guides the North Korean Government in 
decisionmaking," the U.S. defense secretary said at a news 
conference. 
  Some analysts believe that on the threshold of a blockade 
Pyongyang might decide on a massive offensive by its army of 
more than 1 million men. Last week the official DPRK agency 
warned that UN sanctions would trigger a war. 
  U.S. troops have been based in the south of the peninsula 
since the early fifties, when the Korean war ended. There have 
been no substantial personnel reductions there, as distinct from 
all other operational large units abroad. Total personnel 
strength is equal to 37,000. The ROK Army has 650,000 men. 
  Neither Washington nor Seoul intends to increase the size of 
its armed forces in the immediate future. But the Pentagon has 
put on red alert its air forces designed for destroying tanks. 
It has been proposed that the ROK, a wealthy country with a 
positive trade balance with the United States, urgently acquire 
combat helicopters, radar trailers for artillery, and ABM 
systems from America. 
  The U.S. defense secretary said that none of the steps being 
taken by Washington and Seoul is dramatic in itself. Taken as a 
whole, however, they will make it possible to place tactical 
deterrents in a full state of readiness within a few days. The 
secretary plans to visit South Korea in mid-April, i.e. at 
approximately the time the Patriot missiles will be deployed 
there. 
  The Patriots made a name for themselves when they downed 
Scuds, Iraqi intermediate-range missiles, during the war in the 
Persian Gulf in 1990. The Scuds were based on obsolete Soviet 
models. North Korean specialists and enterprises were involved 
in modernizing them. 
  Russia is participating in the international inspection 
being 
conducted under UN auspices, and its special ties with the DPRK 
have vanished into the remote past. The recent expulsion from 
Moscow of several North Korean diplomats for attempts to entice 
Russian nuclear scientists has worsened relations. 
  China, which was the mainstay of the DPRK's ground forces at 
the time of the Korean war, now takes a cautious stand. To all 
appearances, Beijing, which is rigidly opposed to U.S. pressure 
on the question of human rights, does not intend to complicate 
still further its relations with Washington over Kim Il-song's 
nuclear ambitions, which are alien to it. 

