Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Peter Scherer report: "Kurds in the German Underground"] </F>
  [Text] Frankfurt/Main -- So far, the ban on the militant 
Workers Party of Kurdistan (PKK) has not had any effect on the 
illegal activities of the Kurdish extremist organization in 
Germany. According to findings by the security authorities, 
party activities on German territory "have been continued 
without any restrictions" -- again also with the use of force. 
Thus, the PKK has, for instance, once again tried to put 
massive pressure on its compatriots in Germany to extort support 
money and membership fees from them. 
  In addition, the PKK has meanwhile managed to establish 
successor organizations at the regional and local level for the 
35 "workers and cultural associations," "Kurdistan committees," 
and "solidarity centers" that were banned by FRG Interior 
Minister Manfred Kanther (Christian Democratic Union) last 
November. 
  Yesterday, Kanther announced a tough course against those 
Kurds who "variously and brutally abused" the German hospitality 
at the severe riots on the weekend. They must be expelled 
quickly. Even though in each individual case it must be 
investigated whether a foreigner is threatened with the death 
penalty in his homeland, one cannot "say at all that in Turkey 
all Kurds are persecuted." Yesterday, too, demonstrating Kurds 
blocked highways near Berlin, Bremen, Cologne, Giessen, and 
Frankfurt with burning car tires. Two Kurds sustained injuries 
when they drenched themselves with gasoline and set fire to 
themselves. 
  According to the security authorities, there are still about 
6,000 PKK followers operating in the FRG. Of the Kurds who live 
in Germany, a total of 40,000 are considered sympathizers of the 
Marxist-Leninist cadre party. Their goal: "Getting rid of 
foreign rule and reestablishing an independent Kurdish state" 
under the leadership of the PKK. 
  The Chief Federal Prosecutor's Office holds the PKK 
responsible for most serious crimes, including murder, attempted 
murder, serious bodily injury, and kidnapping. The leading 
functionaries of the PKK, including the entire Central 
Committee, the European Central Committee, the Executive 
Committee, and the "PKK killer commandos," are members of a 
terrorist association, in the view of the Karlsruhe office. 
  The ideological justification of the many violent crimes 
committed on German territory is provided by the "People's 
Liberation Army" (ARGK) of the PKK, which accuses the FRG of 
being responsible for the persecution of the Kurds because of 
its arms deliveries to Turkey. The "National Liberation Front 
of Kurdistan" (ERNK) has declared Germany to be "war enemy 
number two," just after Turkey. 

