Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by 'Atif al-Ghamri: "The West and Its New Enemy"] </F>
  [Text] The Muslims are coming! 
  This is the expression that is being re-used, with some 
variations, to take the place of the ones that used to dangle in 
front of the public in the West like "commandments" at the peak 
of the Cold War. These expressions used to say that the 
Russians are coming. 
  Although this warning has been spread a little bit here and 
a 
little bit there, what is very noticeable about it is that many 
of its aspects originate from the United States. For example, 
Dan Quayle, the former U.S. vice president, used to speak about 
what he called the danger of extremist Islamic fundamentalism. 
He placed it in the same basket as Nazism and communism. There 
were many articles and analyses written in various papers 
discussing the war of the Muslims against the West. These 
articles used the words terrorism, fundamentalism, and Islam 
interchangeably and synonymously. 
  This is the meaning Professor Bernard Lewis used in a 
lecture 
entitled "Islamic Fundamentalism" in which he reiterated the 
notion of the expected clash between the Islamic and Western 
civilizations. 
  The famous American magazine ATLANTIC dedicated a large 
amount of space to an article headlined "The Roots of Islamic 
Hatred." 
  There is need for reflection when a writer like Professor 
John Esposito, one of the respected intellectuals taking part in 
the activities of Oxford University and the Royal British 
Academy for International Affairs, attacks this trend, which has 
created a general wave of fear of Islam. He recently published 
a book entitled The Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality. 
He is renowned for his objective interest in Islamic studies 
and he has numerous earlier publications and studies, including 
his book Islam, the Right Way. 
  In his new and valuable book, he observes a number of 
phenomena in this campaign, which concentrates on what it calls 
the Islamic threats to the West. 
  He notes that there is a great deal of exaggeration, bias, 
and ignorance of reality. He also claims that incitement of 
Western societies toward a danger that is threatening them is 
the method previously used in an exaggerated way with the Soviet 
Union, thus molding it as the evil empire. 
  This policy served the purpose of, and to a certain extent 
justified the allocation of resources to immense military 
expenditure and support for the giant American military 
industries in the United States. 
  This concentration on, and highlighting of the threat, at 
the 
expense of other perspectives of the elements of interaction 
inside the Soviet Union used to lead many of the government's 
agencies and departments, intellectuals, and political studies' 
centers to make the wrong deductions. It destroyed their 
ability to foresee the collapse of the Soviet Union, which had 
already deteriorated internally economically and socially. The 
threats that gripped the West in the pre-Soviet collapse years 
did not depict the reality in its absolute picture. 
  Confronting the campaign on Islamic threats constitutes a 
challenge to whoever accepts such a role, because there are two 
ways to approach the truth about Islam. One of them is the easy 
way: Present Islam as a historic enemy with a doctrine and 
agenda for natural hostility to the West. The difficult 
approach is to move away from ready-made cliches and delve into 
an in-depth analysis of the actual situation. 
  Adopting the second approach provides the evidence for the 
shortcomings of adopting the first approach, because Islam is 
not Khomeyni or al-Qadhdhafi, and those among the Muslim leaders 
who adopt terrorism are not necessarily the ones who portray the 
real Islam. 
  Many of those who now bear the banner of Islam are 
performing 
political actions. Their objective is political. For them, 
Islam is the guaranteed method to attract the largest number of 
people to their ranks because it is the most effective call 
under the current political circumstances where the masses do 
not respond to the calls of political doctrines that recently 
lost their effectiveness. 
  Every one of these leaders expresses a political state that 
evolved within the framework of its particular society and not 
the general Islamic world. 
  Therefore, it is a mistake not to consider each condition 
separately within the boundaries of its historic political, 
social, and psychological components, and to resort to 
generalizations. 
  For example, it is wrong to explain what has happened and is 
happening in Sudan, Lebanon, and Yugoslavia religiously and to 
view it from the perspective of a Christian-Muslim 
confrontation. This view simplifies things drastically and 
reveals the mistakes in making certain deductions because the 
political reason is the initial and prime mover and force behind 
these events. The religious reasons followed later as a natural 
result and not an original component. 
  The same thing emerges from the confrontations and civil war 
in northern Ireland between the Catholics and Protestants. The 
roots of the problem are political more than religious, such as 
ethnic nationalism, autonomy, independence, as well as economic 
and social considerations, but not religious. 
  Esposito has objectively diagnosed the campaign for arousing 
fears from Islam among the public in the West. This campaign 
started directly after the collapse and absence of the Soviet 
enemy and the emergence of a wave to replace it with the Muslim 
enemy. 
  This is a policy governed by wider political reasons. The 
presence of an enemy for some societies such as the United 
States is in some ways an economic necessity because military 
industry prospered during the conflict with the Soviet enemy. 
One of the tools of this conflict was to inflame conflicts and 
civil wars in the Third World. This made these industries 
experience one of their most prosperous ages in production. In 
the years preceding the end of the Cold War in 1989, there were 
around 40 regional conflicts and civil wars taking place in 
Third World countries of which we had a very large share in 
Lebanon, Chad, the Iraqi-Iranian war, and the Gulf War. 
  The presence of an enemy is necessarily followed by 
mobilization, national motivation, supervision of defense 
budgets, production of weapons, and military intervention 
operations abroad. Currently, some of these are intervention in 
Somalia, and previously intervention in the defenseless areas of 
Iraq. Now, the ghost is hovering over Sudan. 
  In addition, the West, the United States in particular, know 
very well that terrorism is not Islam and that the terrorists we 
are complaining about had some official and covert relations 
with the United States. These are facts proven through some 
U.S. documents such as the Central Intelligence Agency's 
cooperation circle in Afghanistan during the eighties with 
Hekmatyar and the group called the Afghan Arabs through funding 
and support. Information was also leaked about coordination in 
joint terrorist activities between the Abu-Nidal group and the 
Israeli intelligence, Mosad. 
  Therefore, the campaign that claims the Muslims are coming 
and that there is going to be a cultural clash and Islamic war 
against the West have their own political reasons. Terrorism is 
not characteristic of Islam, nor is it characteristic of the 
Muslims. 

