BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The New World Disorder"] </F>
  [Text] What have been happening in Bosnia-Herzegovina since 
its independence a couple of years ago is a clear picture 
depicting the so-called new world order. A defenseless and 
innocent nation is being butchered by the brutal and 
armed-to-the-teeth Serbs, while the international organizations 
and the so-called free world are watching and sucking their 
thumbs! 
  There are big lessons in this for other developing countries 
of the world, specially those which want to preserve and 
safeguard their cultural and religious integrity against imposed 
foreign cultural values. They should be ready since after 
Gorazde and after the fall of other so-called safe havens in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina it might be their turn. Of course, gradually 
and one by one, they will become the victims of the new world 
order or better yet disorder. 
  With situation the way it is, at the turn of the century the 
world is moving towards a chaotic era in its history. The 
United Nations, which at least as a matter of face-saving, used 
to defend the victims of aggression, has turned into an 
instrument in the hands of Western countries to preserve their 
interest when and where necessary. 
  A look at the recent conflicts in the world, like what 
happened in Somalia or the ongoing Bosnian crisis, would reveal 
that the world is moving towards a new world disorder instead of 
order. Under such circumstances, a weak nation will be a victim 
of aggression, either directly by the powerful countries or 
indirectly through these powerful countries' allies. Two clear 
examples of this fact is Washington's direct intervention in 
Somalia and Russian backed Serbian aggression against the 
innocent people of Bosnia. 
  Former colonial powers are dreaming about their "golden 
ages" 
of 17th, 18th and 19th centuries when they had colonies all over 
the globe. Gorazde is a visible example of colonization of an 
independent and free country by another nation. While the 
Western powers are united, unfortunately, the developing 
countries and in particular the Islamic nations, despite their 
economic potentials and vast natural resources, are so divided 
that, for instance, they are unable to use their natural 
resources as a weapon to exert pressure on Serbia to halt its 
aggression. 

