Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Brussels, Dec 30 (AFP) -- Belgium "accomplished its 
mission" during its six-month presidency of the European 
Community, especially by seeing through the Maastricht Treaty 
and the adoption of a battle plan against unemployment, Prime 
Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene said Thursday [30 December]. 
  Belgium, which passes the rotating EC Presidency to Greece 
on 
January 1, also helped to unblock negotiations on several 
technical issues such as the structural fund, the budget and 
steel, he said during a press conference attended by Foreign 
Minister Willy Claes and Finance Minister Phillipe Maystadt. 
  The Maastricht Treaty on closer European union, which 
provides for the establishment of a single currency by the end 
of the century, has now come into force after ratification by 
all EC states. 
  The European Monetary Institute, precursor of a future 
European central bank, will be established on New Year's Day. 
  Dehaene called on the Executive Commission to give "total 
priority" to the Community's white paper recommendations on 
competitivity, growth and employment adopted in December by 
member states. Thanks to this document, "the Community knows 
which path to take to get out of the crisis," he said. 
  The premier emphasised the importance of trans-European 
networks in transport, energy and telecommunications. 
  December's summit had agreed an annual investment of ECU20 
billion ($22.8 billion) over six years for such projects, but 
left a question-mark over funding for an ECU8 billion ($9.12 
billion) section of the budget. 
  Claes expressed satisfaction with the conclusion of the GATT 
trade talks during the term of Belgium's presidency and said 
that a series of meetings had allowed "greater cohesion" at the 
heart of the Community. 
  He also felt it would be possible to conclude talks on 
enlarging the Community by the end of February and in principle 
Austria, Norway, Finland and Sweden could join by the start of 
1995. 
  The ministers regretted that they had not been able to 
convince their EC partners to adopt a tax on carbon dioxide 
emissions. Belgium and the Commission wanted to make the tax an 
integral part of a European employment strategy by providing new 
sources of income to relieve social burdens. 
  They also referred to the August exchange crisis which 
forced 
Community members to widen the European Exchange Rate Mechanim 
bands from 2.5 to 15 percent, but Maystadt was satisfied with 
the ERM's hold on currencies. 
  "Since August 2, member states have resisted the temptation 
to follow lax policies. We have returned to a situation of 
rather great stability," he declared. 
  The Community should be defining "new rules of the game" 
during 1994 to ensure a better division of responsibility for 
intervention by central banks during periods of tension, Dehaene 
added. 

