Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lev Markovich Portnoy, Doctor of Medical </F>
Sciences, Professor, Head of the Roentgenological Department of 
the M. F. Vladimirsky Moscow Oblast Clinical Scientific Research 
Institute; under the title: The Second Coming of Tuberculous] 
  [Text] A relatively quiet tuberculosis situation with 
periodic outbursts of this disease, which were being 
successfully handled by the previously created powerful 
anti-tuberculosis service, with its fine staffs and network of 
regional, city, and oblast (kray) anti-tuberculosis 
dispensaries, characterizes recent years. And we had become 
accustomed to this situation. 
  But today, suddenly, but perhaps not so unexpectedly, taking 
the difficult situation in the country into account, the 
tuberculosis situation has become acute. Not for nothing; after 
all it is, as we have emphasized, a social disease. And even the 
mass media, with the whipping up that is characteristic of them, 
exaggerate the danger of the new incursion of tuberculosis, the 
possibility of its causing trouble in the very new future cannot 
in any way be excluded. There are, to a certain degree, 
additional preconditions for it in the person of a clearly 
weakening state medicine. 
  Without in any way disputing the situation in the country 
that predisposes to tuberculosis, I believe that the simple 
repetition of measures, proven in the past, directed to the 
campaign against this malady, must not be permitted. Times today 
are different, medicine has different possibilities, and the 
general situational background is not what it was after the war. 
  By the way, observing the away in which our organizational 
structures are beginning to act, it is difficult to get away 
from the impression of a patent duplication of the methods of 
fighting against tuberculosis that were used in the remote 
postwar years. To substantiate what I am saying, I would like to 
cite the fluorography situation in our public health system as 
an example. 
  Certainly, no one will dispute the fact that in the campaign 
against the tuberculosis epidemic in the war-turn country, 
fluorography did in fact have great significance. A fairly good 
material and technological base for those years was created. The 
service worked in close contact with the phthisiatric 
(anti-tuberculosis) service. In essence, the former was 
organizationally subordinate to the latter. It can be stated 
that in those years fluorography was one of the principal actors 
among the RparticipantsS in the successful attack on 
tuberculosis. 
  Years past; tuberculosis took up its usual place in the 
overall structure of morbidity. But, the powerful 
anti-tuberculosis and fluorographic services continued to 
operate, without changing their habits, under conditions of 
Ractive combat situation. 
  And meanwhile, the overall medical situation changed, 
including the tuberculosis situation. And tuberculosis itself 
learned how to oppose the forces acting on it more stubbornly, 
and its geography changed sharply. But the main thing was that 
scientific and technical progress provided medicine with many 
new technologies, making it possible to look differently on the 
possibilities of diagnosis overall, and the diagnosis of 
pulmonary tuberculosis in particular. 
  Entirely new views appeared on the problem of the 
fundamental 
improvement of the campaign against the so-called mass diseases, 
by means of the formation of risk groups, first of all, and by 
the development of the corresponding diagnostic models for their 
early identification, in the second place. Finally, the same 
scientific and technical progress forced a change in the 
attitude toward the problems of radiation burdens in the case of 
the so-called prophylactic examinations by means of radiographic 
diagnosis, and, of fluorography, in the first place. It is 
entirely natural that against this background as a whole, the 
anti-tuberculosis medical organizational structures of today 
require obligatory correction. And this relates above all to the 
fluorographic service. 
  Formed nearly half a century ago, it has remained today in 
essence in the same organizational-methodological positions of 
half a century back. The first of these is the constant striving 
to cover the entire healthy population by mass prophylactic 
fluorographic examinations. Orders and various normative 
documents, new rules of the Ministry of Health regarding the 
conduct of such examinations are constantly coming out. But they 
all in essence fail to take into account the true state of 
affairs, and have been produced clearly simply to take away the 
acuteness of the problem and to preserve the old organizational 
forms of the entire anti-tuberculosis organizational complex. 
  Fluorographic technology, at the same time, which now 
literally saturates the polyclinic network, also requires its 
own improvement. The method of examination in which the 
physician of the fluorographic office in essence knows nothing 
about the patient, since communication with him is precluded, 
today clearly does not respond to the new criteria. Nothing, 
practically, has been decided about the questions of the 
completing of the examination, if the physician considers it 
necessary to carry out a number of supplementary procedures. Of 
course, in the post-war years such an organizational plan 
corresponded to the Rspirit of the times; today it is simply 
morally obsolete. In this way a lousy situation has been 
created; subsequently it has been expanding in the form of 
today's system of mass prophylactic examinations of the 
populations. 
  Specialists in radiation safety see in this one of the 
causes 
of the general increase in radiation exposure of the healthy 
population. Oncologists, believing that such a system of 
examination is one of the factors influencing the increase in 
the frequency of oncological diseases, join them in this 
opinion. But, the antituberculosis service which, as we have 
stated, is very powerful, remains as unshakable as a rock, 
arguing the necessity of such examinations. Of course, we can 
understand it, since it is very difficult to part with a 
habitual stance, which such indices as mass scope, convenient 
for reporting, underlie. And this means, large figures, millions 
of patients - consequently, a high volume of work accomplished... 
  Today, I dare say, the structure of the fluorographic 
service 
does not meet the requirements for screening, mass diagnostic 
examinations. Under no circumstances should, I believe, 
fluorography be made a principal participant of the planned 
antituberculosis campaign. Otherwise we risk loosing it. Why? 
First, the existing system for carrying out mass prophylactic 
examinations is impracticable. Second, even after it is 
corrected, it will be effective only if all of the structures of 
the anti-tuberculosis service are changed concurrently. If we 
take into account that some of the serious sources of 
tuberculosis are places of incarceration. If we take into 
account pharmaceutical shortages. If we don't forget about the 
appearance of a new class in this country, persons of no fixed 
address [bomzhi]. And about many other factors. It is these in 
particular which make the activation of tuberculosis possible. 
  To make todays mass fluorographic examinations with coverage 
the main prop in the campaign against tuberculosis means, in our 
opinion, throwing wide the gates of our life to tuberculosis. 
  Well, then what shall we do with fluorography? Completely 
excluded from the campaign methods? Not at all. Just the 
opposite. We must make use of the quite abundant polyclinic 
network of fluorographic machines and the organizational 
structure of this service. But, to eliminate as much as possible 
all of todays RnegativesS relating to fluorography, its 
efficiency must be increased. And this means that it is 
literally necessary to combine fluorography as a part of 
roentgenology with it in all respects. And not so 
formalistically as today. Freeing the office physicians from 
worrying about RcoverageS is the job of the directors of the 
organizational-methodological divisions of the dispensaries. In 
the process, the mere description of those disastrous one-plate 
fluorograms of the lungs must not fall within the duties of the 
fluorographic office physicians. Today they cannot remain simply 
picture-takers. We should think seriously about increasing the 
size of the fluorographic frame to 100 mm. Our experience tells 
us that the resolving capacity of fluorography in general is 
sharply increased in the process. 
  And if one is to think seriously about a new approach, then 
it is also necessary to switch over in practical public health 
to digital fluorography. The leading firms that are 
manufacturing apparatuses for radiological diagnosis are now 
moving precisely in that direction. In that case, incidentally, 
the accusations of the threat of radiation burdens on the 
patient will no longer be valid. 
  But this is for the future; at the moment, first and 
foremost, it is necessary to shift to differentiated 
fluorographic diagnostic examinations of tuberculosis risk 
groups; the contemporary approach to their formation should be 
taken as their basis. This is also important in connection with 
calls for the prohibition of fluorography altogether because of 
radiation burdens on the population. 
  Our proposals are not the fruit of theoretical reflections, 
but the product of many years of experience of the M. F. 
Vladimirsky Moscow Oblast Clinical Scientific Research Institute 
[MONIKI] in carrying out the differentiated comprehensive 
fluorographic diagnostic examination of risk groups for a number 
of the principal pulmonary diseases, including tuberculosis. Our 
data attest to the effectiveness of this approach, such as, for 
example, in differentiated fluorography among detected cases of 
pulmonary tuberculosis (and there are no small number of them), 
the majority of the patients had undergone preliminary 
fluorographic examination through the existing system and the 
so-called prophylactic fluorography, under which tuberculosis 
had not been detected. 
  All the considerations presented in this article flow from 
many years of experience of exclusively professional dealings 
with patients ill with various lung diseases, including 
tuberculosis. Perhaps our public health organizers will also 
discover what is useful in them. Although I can very well 
imagine that the reaction to todayUs printed word will be very 
insubstantial. 
  From the editors.Lev Markovich Portnoy, 
Doctor of Medical Sciences, Professor, Head of the 
Roentgenological Department of the M. F. Vladimirsky Moscow 
Oblast Clinical Scientific Research Institute. 


