Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by Colombian President Cesar Gaviria with </F>
unidentified moderator and domestic reporters at Narino 
Presidential Palace in Santa Fe de Bogota; broadcast in progress 
-- live] 
  [Text] [Gaviria] ...that allow military members of other 
countries to undertake joint exercises with the Colombian 
military in the implementation of old practices that are backed 
by international agreements. Unfortunately, in response to a 
well-founded legal document that I sent to that judicial body 
some days ago with the utmost respect, a press communique was 
released that lacked legal arguments. I learned of the 
communique through the media, not through proper channels, as if 
it were more important to generate a particular climate of 
public opinion than to strictly carry out a legal procedure. 
  This attitude contrasts with the one I assumed with the 
State 
Council, to which I gave detailed and confidential explanations, 
aware of the implications that this debate has for our country 
in the national and international arenas. I received the news 
with the peace of mind of knowing that these types of operations 
are necessary, useful, and opportune for Colombia, as well as 
with the confidence that the legal arguments that the State 
Council rejected are solid and that the decisions that were made 
do not violate the Constitution, which, under the leadership of 
this administration, embodies the great changes that Colombian 
society had demanded for years for its political organization. 
  I continue to believe that we had to strengthen the 
institutions that exert control and give Congress the means to 
exercise its oversight function of the actions of the executive 
branch. That is why we will be ready to provide Congress, the 
body to which the State Council decided to remit the issue, with 
the explanations that it considers relevant with the assurance 
that they will not be rejected with the stroke of a pen but 
analyzed strictly and calmly. 
  From what is inferred from the brief statement of the 
judicial institution, it seems that the State Council has given 
a constitutional provision a scope that it obviously does not 
have. They are trying to claim that the duty of requesting 
Senate or State Council permission for foreign troops to 
temporarily enter our country means that it is necessary to 
request such permission for any foreign military man to enter 
Colombia, regardless of the purpose of his visit. Such an 
interpretation has led to the absurdity of asserting that to 
allow the entry of the military attaches, which dozens of 
countries have in Colombia, just as we have in as many 
countries, would require that permission, or that a joint 
intelligence operation to pursue a criminal would require the 
prior meeting and pronouncement of the Senate. It would also 
mean that valid international agreements with long-standing 
traditions, such as the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal 
Assistance and the 1952 Military Assistance Agreement, have 
somehow magically lost their effectiveness and that Colombia 
should therefore fail to fulfill all their clauses. It is clear 
that this is not the spirit of this Constitution nor of the 
constitutions that have governed us since 1821, which have 
invariably established a similar policy. 
  What the political Constitution seeks is to establish a 
procedure for granting permission for the transit or stationing 
of foreign troops that have warlike objectives against a third 
country. It does not in any way seek to regulate joint training 
operations, the operation of advanced technological equipment, 
the maintenance of equipment, or technical assistance, all of 
which are part of valid international treaties. If this issue of 
such importance had been studied very carefully, it would not 
have been difficult to conclude that this norm was established 
for situations in which foreign armies are confronting other 
nations, a situation in which the nation's neutrality would be 
compromised and which would obviously demand a pronouncement 
from the Senate, which is also empowered to declare war. 
  The State Council should remember that the drafters of the 
Constitution of 1886 had in mind the Isthmus of Panama, which we 
then held, which explains the reference to the docking of 
foreign war vessels. Since 1926, the State Council has very 
clearly identified the cases in which prior authorization by 
that body was unnecessary. These statements should still be 
completely valid. The State Council has said that acts 
befitting brotherhood and international courtesy and all those 
the Constitution endows on the president as the supreme 
administrative authority do not compel the government to consult 
the State Council. 
  Can a judicial body say that we are responsible for certain 
things because we abided by previous rulings? 
  About 17 months ago, days after the escape of Escobar, in 
response to a concern publicly voiced by the then State Council 
president, I forwarded to that body a statement where I made the 
same arguments I am reiterating now. At that time, the State 
Council, the same State Council that today is changing 
Colombia's traditional legal interpretation of this matter, did 
not refute the arguments in my letter but seemed instead to 
agree with and accept them. We are facing an unusual 
cirucumstance, where the president is being held responsible, 
not for making a decision but for sharing and supporting the 
legal reasons on which it was based and that the State Council 
had traditionally accepted. 
  The State Council's statement is not a legal decision. It 
simply apprises Congress of its action, and, I must point out, 
the government has provided all the documents, and the Judicial 
Branch has only said it does not find the State Council 
statement convincing. 
  The consequence of this decision is no other than the 
acknowledgment by the selfsame State Council that it lacks the 
authority to review the alleged violation of the Constitution 
and order the appropriate sanctions, all of which falls within 
the purview of the Congress. The State Council's statement is 
not legal but political. The vagueness of the statements of 
that body, and even the fact that its president is arguing over 
the radio that Colombian artisans can build a little school, do 
not constitue a legal argument worthy of response. Until a 
competent organization makes a decision, we will continue to 
pursue international cooperation and any joint exercises the 
government may consider essential to improve the training of our 
military forces. This cooperation, which is most advisable for 
the country, is based on international treaties ratified by the 
Congress. These exercises merely constitute the implementation 
of these treaties and not a de facto situation. Cooperation in 
intelligence, advisory services, and maintenance is vital in the 
struggle against criminal drug trafficking organizations. 
  The radical interpretation expressed in the State Council's 
press statement may benefit drug traffickers and will, 
undoubtedly, weaken our capability to deal with crime. 
  Colombians, I understand there may be those who disagree 
with 
the joint exercises conducted along Colombia's Pacific coast. I 
cannot ignore a shallow legal interpretation that may make us 
renounce operations that are indispensable to defend ourselves 
from crime and drug trafficking. As a matter of fact, the 
government has admitted there have been flaws in keeping the 
public informed. Perhaps this has prompted different people 
from speaking out against military cooperation with the United 
States. I am certain that once people hear my explanations 
today that many will change their opinions. We have conducted 
different joint actions with the U.S. Government to improve and 
increase the efficiency of our police operations. 
  We have received technology in the form of radar equipment 
that is directed and operated by Colombians and for which U.S. 
personnel provide us with advice and maintenance. We have 
conducted joint engineering exercises for the construction of 
various projects. Almost 100 Colombian soldiers are currently 
in the United States participating in operations similar to 
those that have come under fire in Colombia, and it has never 
even crossed anyone's mind that those soldiers might pose a 
threat to the sovereignty of the United States. 
  In all this debate there are at least two contradictions. 
The first is the belief that these efforts to improve the 
Colombian public force's training and efficiency constitutes a 
violation of our sovereignty when, in reality, these efforts are 
aimed at guaranteeing our sovereignty. 
  Sovereignty is much more at risk with a nation in the hands 
of criminals and drug traffickers, with a nation lacking the 
capacity to react to criminal activity, with a state baffled in 
the face of thousands of clandestine flights by foreign and 
local aircraft that are trafficking drugs, than with a state 
apparatus that appeals to international cooperation to guarantee 
the rule of law and the legitimate exercise of the rights of its 
citizens. 
  It is also surprising that we demanded the international 
community's support for the Colombian people's brave struggle 
against the major drug trafficking organizations, and now we are 
saying that this support is a threat to our sovereignty. As 
someone said some time ago, international cooperation is not a 
few pats on the back. It is, among other things, training and 
logistic support. 
  Sovereignty is not a rhetorical concept that is defended 
with 
speeches on the public square, during electoral campaigns, or by 
simply ranting anti-American chauvinist statements based on 
opportunistic nationalism or populism. Our independence in the 
sphere of international relations is open to everyone's 
scrutiny. Let everyone see how we have conducted ourselves at 
the various international forums; how our representatives have 
voted at the United Nations, OAS, and other multilateral 
organizations; how we have played an active role in the 
Nonaligned Movement and the Group of 77; how we have resumed 
relations with Cuba. In short, let everyone see the daily, 
permanent dynamism that has placed Colombia in a position of 
leadership in Latin America. 
  Citizens, sovereignty is defended when one bravely confronts 
the fatherland's enemies; when one confronts those who threaten 
the people's security and take advantage of and violate our 
territory, rivers, seas, and airspace to conduct criminal 
activities. Sovereignty is not an abstract value, a simple dead 
letter in the law or Constitution. We are more sovereign when 
we are able to exercise greater control. We are more sovereign 
when we strengthen the Colombian Armed Forces' capability to do 
their duty of defending the country's security and integrity. 
We are more sovereign when we acquire allies that support us in 
our battle against stateless individuals who murder our women 
and children [words indistinct]. This constitutes the defense of 
our sovereignty. 
  Those who wrap themselves in the Colombian flag and tear 
their hair over the alleged violation of our sovereignty because 
we allowed technicians and military engineers from other 
countries into Colombia are mistaken. Our enemies are powerful. 
To defeat them it is not enough for us to employ technology, 
ability, or sacrifices. We need solidarity and support. 
  What would have happened to Europe if its leaders had not 
had 
the vision to form an alliance to combat the specter of Hitler? 
What would have happened to Colombia if we had relinquished 
international cooperation in our battle against the then 
self-styled Medellin Cartel? 
  Would we perhaps be freer, more sovereign, or more 
independent living under the tyranny of Escobar's 
narcoterrorism? Would we be freer, more sovereign, or more 
independent by letting criminals from all countries and of all 
ilk violate our airspace? Would we be freer and more 
independent by letting drug traffickers have every technological 
advance at their disposal while we take shelter in our modest 
technical capabilities, renouncing international aid? 
  Until 7 August, when my mandate ends, I will continue my 
efforts to expand our democracy, modernize our country, diminish 
poverty and injustice, and face without hesitation those who sow 
destabilization and fear until we prevail over them. Fear of 
debate will not make me hesitate to make or support decisions 
such as the one being discussed -- within the framework of the 
Constitution, which this government knows well -- whenever I 
feel it is for the good of the Republic or to fight crime, 
purposes which the majority of Colombians share who prefer to 
open themselves to the future and not cling to the past. Thank 
you. 
  [First unidentified reporter, in progress] ... the exercises 
of U.S. servicemen with Colombian servicemen. The opinion 
issued by the State Council talked of troops. What legal 
arguments are you defending and why? 
  [Gaviria] I will try to summarize those legal arguments that 
are contained in the letter I sent to the State Council, with 
which I believe all of you are familiar and which unfortunately 
the State Council answered with a brief statement. 
Fundamentally, those arguments are the following: 
  Colombia has several international treaties that are 
currently in effect. They include agreements stemming from the 
[word indistinct] international treaty, as well as other 
international agreements, such as the 1958 Geneva Convention, 
the Chicago convention that regulates air traffic, and a number 
of agreements derived from those treaties. 
  The Juanchaco operations personnel, as well as the 
personnel in other operations being held in the national 
territory -- the naval, army, and police missions in the 
country; the exchange of military personnel and military 
students; and the support personnel for maintenance and 
assistance of our radar operations -- are not military troops. 
Why do I say this? In the message I sent to the State Council, 
I clearly established the legal antecedents for the 
constitutional norm. 
  The antecedents always refer to the time when military 
troops 
passed through Colombia and when Panama was part of Colombia. 
They mention belligerent troops that are participating in a 
war against another country or going to another country. This 
has nothing to do with military cooperation activities. All 
countries accept and want such cooperation. We have been 
developing this military cooperation for the past 50 years. We 
have had military personnel from the United States and other 
countries come to our country for the past 50 years. This 
exchange began around 1952. Thus, for almost 50 years we have 
had foreign military personnel and missions here, we have signed 
agreements and memorandums, and we have carried out military 
exercises. Based on this tradition, which has never been 
questioned over the past 40 years, the Defense Ministry has 
continued to make those decisions in accordance with this 
interpretation. 
  Now the State Council says it does not agree with that 
interpretation and has submitted this matter to the Congress of 
the Republic, which we agree is the competent body for rendering 
interpretations. 
  Unfortunately, as a result of the State Council's ambiguous 
and short statement, or opinion, it may be inferred -- this is 
not specifically stated -- that all military personnel must 
leave Colombia. I imagine they are referring to military 
personnel of Colombia and other countries. Under this absurd 
interpretation, one could even go so far as to expel all 
military attaches from Colombia, which would be followed with 
the expulsion of our military attaches from other countries. 
Therefore, this is what has placed the government in this 
situation, because [words indistinct] judicial but the opinion 
of State Council members. There is no ruling, no cause, no 
resolution. The State Council is not settling anything. It is 
only expressing a doubt that the government does not share about 
a juridical interpretation . 
  What has the president of the Republic done in this case? I 
have defended the legal arguments with which the country has 
worked for nearly 40 years and which had never before been 
called into question. 
  [Moderator] Diana Mateos, representing radio newscasts. 
  [Mateos] Good afternoon, Mr. President. All Colombians are 
wondering why these U.S. soldiers arrived in the country amid so 
much secrecy and why they arrived armed. The people wonder why 
the country didn't hire the unemployed to undertake these 
projects. This endangers national sovereignty, given that there 
are so many unemployed in Colombia. 
  [Gaviria] Look, these people arrived to implement a 
cooperation treaty or agreement we had with the United States. 
That was the decision the defense minister made. That has been 
done in the past in Colombia on many occasions. Joint exercises 
are conducted every year. As the military engineers' exercises 
continued, they decided to give the community where they were 
operating something that helped that community. That is 
obviously being done at the expense of the foreign government, 
the U.S. Government. It does not take away job oportunities 
from Colombians, and it does not affect the resources of 
Colombians. 
  In some of these operations, these people -- this is also a 
long tradition to which Colombian soldiers are also entitled -- 
are authorized to carry personal weapons, not weapons of war. 
There is a long tradition in all countries and within 
international law that permits this. 
  I obviously respect those who think that this is not 
convenient or who oppose these exercises, which is not the same 
as the exercises being unconstitutional or us not acting in 
accordance with the Constitution, treaties, and agreements. 
This can also be argued. I am not saying it cannot be 
discussed, but we must bear in mind the government has acted in 
keeping with a long juridical tradition for which there are many 
antecedents. 
  [Moderator] Francisco Solis of EL TIEMPO representing the 
print media is next. Astid Legarda will follow. 
  [Solis] Good afternoon, Mr. President. Do you believe that 
all Colombians who fear this presence of U.S. soldiers in civil 
cooperation activities, as you said, are perhaps remembering the 
incidents that led to Panama's separation? Do you think all 
these people are mistaken? 
  [Gaviria] No, I understand there may be fears. In Latin 
America there are always fears about this type of presence. 
However, with a small, limited presence to conduct exercises, 
when dozens of similar exercises have been carried out in the 
last 40 years, I frankly do not think these fears are justified. 
I might acknowledge that there may be some opposing views or 
some people opposed to these exercises, but to go from that to 
saying that we have acted unconstitutionally or outside of 
strict compliance with treaties or implementation of said 
treaties is a big difference. 
  Another thing I would like to point out is that some of 
these 
operations are very much needed, almost indispensable, while 
others are not. The operation in Juanchaco is not 
indispensable. We could have done without it in the long run. 
It was an operation, an exercise of engineers that we could 
have done without. 
  Unfortunately, the opinion or judgment of the State Council 
would involve not just that exercise but all kinds of military 
cooperation, radar assistance, intelligence cooperation. All 
international cooperation that helps us in the drug struggle 
would end, according to the State Council's opinion. We would 
have to violate international treaties and agreements to satisfy 
that opinion. That is what the president of the Republic cannot 
do under these circumstances, without failing to comply with his 
duties or the very constitution, which establishes international 
commitments with which we must comply. For instance, the Geneva 
Convention establishes the safe passage of warships; we are 
signatories to that Convention. We can neither violate nor 
ignore it because of a judgment issued by a Colombian judicial 
body. We cannot do that. 
  We have a commitment in airspace matters and a decree 
regulating such commitments. We cannot abandon those 
commitments overnight. I go back to the point I made in my 
statement: How is Colombia's sovereignty defended? By trying to 
prevent planes working for drug trafficking groups and without 
flight plans from endangering our air security, and by seeking 
international cooperation to prevent this. Are there Colombians 
who think that we must tolerate these risks to air security and 
this violation of our sovereignty instead of resorting to 
certain international cooperation? No, I don't think so. I 
don't think many Colombians feel that way. 
  [Moderator] Astid Legarda representing regional media; next 
Fabio Calleja. 
  [Legarda] Good afternoon, Mr. President. Your first comments 
seem to indicate that you admit these U.S. troops are in the 
country to help combat drug trafficking and, more specifically... 
  [Radio Caracol announcer, interrupting, from the studio] 
Excuse me for interrupting you, dear reporter. We will ask the 
president a question, considering that we are broadcasting this 
national newscast live. Mr. President, 10 days ago you said 
that if the State Council's statement proved adverse, you would 
see to it that the U.S. troops would leave our country. Will 
you do this? 
  [Gaviria] Look, I have with me a copy of all the questions I 
answered during that news conference. I did not say what you 
mentioned. I did not know what the State Council statement 
would be. The State Council said it would study the matter. 
Nevertheless, we did not know whether the Council would make a 
statement. We did not even know what subject it would consider. 
In addition, the State Council's statement does not have legal 
import. The Council has expressed an opinion, which it has 
forwarded to the Congress. I have already explained why I 
cannot accept this opinion -- among other reasons, because the 
State Council's opinion, apparently very brief and laconical, 
does not deal exclusively with this military engineers' 
exercise, but with any and all military presence in the country. 
Such a position could become absurd, to the point of causing 
the expulsion from Colombia of military attaches from all 
countries. This is why it is so difficult for the government to 
accept this opinion, concept, or statement. 
  [Legarda] Thanks, Mr. President. 
  [Radio Caracol announcer, from the studio] Excuse me, Mr. 
President, for having interrupted the previous question. Betsy 
Legarda, will you please repeat your question? 
  [Legarda] Mr. President, I was saying your first remarks 
seem 
to indicate that you admit U.S. soldiers came to Colombia to 
help fight drug trafficking, not just to build a small school. 
  [Gaviria] No, my friend. Pardon me, but you seem to be 
misinformed. U.S. soldiers participate in several activities in 
Colombia. Some are conducting engineering exercises in 
Juanchaco. Others are training in engineering by building river 
outposts so our Marines can fight drug trafficking. This is 
true. In addition, we are being advised in the operation of 
radar sites, which have been set up so our airspace cannot be 
violated and so drug traffickers' planes cannot fly over our 
territory with impunity. Still other activities deal with our 
Armed Forces' training programs. All this is part of the 
military cooperation maintained since 1958, when a military 
agreement was signed. There are many other activities, not 
necessarily linked to drug trafficking. 
  The problem with the Council's statement is that it 
questions 
not only the Juanchaco operation but every other form of 
military cooperation. Here I have a statement by President 
Alfonso Lopez Michelsen, which brings up precedents, even from 
the recent past. His statement shows why this interpretation 
cannot be stretched so far as to become absurd. Historically, 
the interpretation in Colombia has applied to troops with 
warlike intentions, not troops that are part of a cooperation 
agreement. The troops now in Colombia are not troops for war 
but troops participating in a military cooperation program. 
Troops like this have been here for more than 40 years, yet no 
one ever questioned their presence, and virtually no statements 
on this matter have been made in all these years. 
  This is what I meant in this particular instance. 
President Lopez says that when he was president the king of 
Spain visited the country aboard a Spanish Navy frigate. The 
Senate was not asked permission because the ship was not here 
for war-related purposes. Everyone here knows that when we were 
looking for Escobar we accepted cooperation from many countries, 
including surveillance aircraft that flew over Colombian 
territory. There was even disagreement with the president of 
the State Council on this issue. I do not regret having done 
this. I accepted international cooperation because I thought -- 
and still think -- it was legal to go after Escobar and 
dismantle the Medellin Cartel. And I also believe that our 
sovereignty is better served through this cooperation than by 
saying no, we cannot accept any international cooperation 
because it would harm Colombia's sovereignty, even though 
criminal organizations may take over the country and we run the 
risk of having to live in a country run by narcoterrorism. 
  [Moderator] Fabio Callejas, Caracol Radio, on behalf of the 
radio stations. 
  [Callejas] Good afternoon, Mr. President. Since you say the 
State Council's statement is political rather than legal, you do 
not think the ruling is valid or significant [words indistinct]. 
How much longer will the U.S. personnel remain here? When will 
they leave? 
  [Gaviria] [Words indistinct] First, there must be... 
[pauses] 
There is an operation under way [words indistinct] and it will 
conclude in February. They will finish it and leave in 
February. There is another group of people who participate in 
training, preparation, and qualification in various areas -- the 
radar, for example. The government has not considered doing 
without this, not for a single minute, except in case of an 
incontrovertible judicial decision. I cannot give up all 
international cooperation in the struggle against drug 
trafficking simply because the State Council has issued its 
opinion, which has no legal authority. This is an 
interpretation I do not share, and I hope to prove my point in 
the Congress of the Republic. 
  [Moderator] Margarita Gil, Colprensa, on behalf of the 
press, 
and then Ignacio Santiago. 
  [Gil] Mr. President, what would happen if the foreign troops 
in Juanchaco are attacked by the Colombian guerrilla forces? 
  [Gaviria] Well, there are no guerrilla forces there right 
now. I understand there are some questions about what would 
happen if they have to defend themselves. Well, what happens if 
they are attacked? I imagine they will defend themselves if 
they are attacked. There is no legislation or constitution in 
the world which says that if a foreign citizen is attacked he 
can do nothing to prevent it. If someone does it [words 
indistinct]. If someone attacks them they will defend 
themselves -- it is that simple. If someone attacks any 
military personnel, or non-military personnel, or even 
civilians, they will defend themselves as long as they can 
defend themselves. This is called legitimate defense. This is 
what would happen. I do not think this will happen because... 
[pauses] but if it does happen, that's what will occur. This 
does not apply only to foreigners; it also applies to Colombians 
-- either civilians or military. Everyone who is attacked and 
can defend himself will do so. 
  [Moderator] Ignacio Santiago, on behalf of the regional 
media, and then Antonio Jose Cabrera. 
  [Santiago] Good afternoon, Mr. President. Certain political 
analysts assert this phenomenon, meaning the decision adopted by 
the State Council last night, is trying to undermine your 
popularity. How will you resolve this situation with the public? 
  [Gaviria] Just like I am doing here -- explaining, answering 
questions, participating in open discussion instead of avoiding 
it. I have never avoided discussion; I have always faced all the 
problems. This is not the worst problem I've had. I am not 
surprised by this, and I am not the first president who has had 
problems over legal rulings and decisions which question his 
decisions. I will handle the situation this way -- explaining 
what I believe in, explaining to Congress why I made this 
decision, defending our legal position. That is what I shall do. 
  Furthermore, the State Council forwarded this case to 
Congress, but it was not over a decision, because the State 
Council knows I did not make the decision. What I did was 
defend a legal position. It is a sin of opinion. The president 
will be summoned by Congress because he defends a legal thesis 
-- the same one endorsed by all our courts and which they have 
now challenged. No! I will continue to defend my beliefs. I 
obviously have to abide by any judiciary and congressional 
decisions -- and I will defend them! In fact, if I have to tour 
the country defending them I will do so, because I do not feel I 
have undermined national sovereignty! 
  I feel I have defended national sovereignty, first of all 
before international organizations, where I constantly say: 
Watch how Colombia votes, and you will realize it is an 
autonomous country -- and here in Colombia, by recovering the 
state's control, fighting guerrilla groups and drug traffickers, 
strengthening the enforcement of justice, supporting the public 
forces, endorsing judicial cooperation processes, and 
encouraging military cooperation processes -- that is how you 
defend sovereignty! Sovereignty is not defended by letting 
criminals seize control of the country! That is not the way to 
defend sovereignty! And that is how I understand it! As long as 
I can I shall work to defend our sovereignty as I understand it, 
meaning assuming control, making sure the laws and legal 
organizations and public forces exercise control! I have not 
stopped doing that, and this is not the first controversial 
decision I have had to adopt! I have adopted many others in the 
past and I do not regret them -- and neither will I regret them! 
  [Moderator] Antonio Jose Caballero, on behalf of the radio 
services, and then Cesar Mauricio Velasquez. 
  [Caballero] Mr. President, good afternoon. You say you will 
defend, regardless of the consequences, your decision to defend 
sovereignty as you see it. Do you think someone is manipulating 
the situation and trying to stir up troubled waters -- for 
example, the guerrilla groups and the drug traffickers? Who is 
taking advantage of this decision, electorally speaking? 
  [Gaviria] Oh, I would not say everyone who has expressed his 
views on the issue did it thinking that it was appropriate to do 
so or with that goal in mind. A lot of information has been 
circulated to misconstrue what has been done and to misrepresent 
it to the public. Yes, it has certainly been done. All of us 
who are here know one of the great fears which has prevailed 
about men engaged in an engineering operation is that they are 
really engaged in an operation against Valle del Cauca 
Department drug traffickers. They are not and they will not, 
but we all know the Valle del Cauca drug traffickers have pulled 
all available strings and resources to convey their terrible 
indignation. That is not the case; that is not what is really 
happening. I am sure that's not what's happening, but there is 
no doubt about the Valle del Cauca drug traffickers' actions. 
  I also know drug traffickers in the new departments, the 
former eastern flatlands, are quite uncomfortable because we 
have built some posts [words indistinct]. What for? So the 
Navy's infantry forces may operate. What for? So the Navy's 
infantry forces may control the rivers and counter the drug 
traffickers' activities. These are the facts, and you all know 
about them. You know I am not reporting this for the first 
time; you know this is true. 
  [Caballero] What about the possibility that the issue is 
being manipulated for electoral purposes? 
  [Gaviria] Of course. The guerrillas still live amid the 
rhetoric of a bipolar world and of the Cold War that is now 
over, in the days when Marxism was a doctrine, in the days of 
the now extinct Soviet Union. They cling to that doctrine, and 
they view anything that is anti-United States as wonderful. 
  No! Colombia must have a policy of sovereignty and autonomy, 
and this must be reflected in its international relations. This 
policy means Colombia will tolerate pressure, Colombia will vote 
as it sees fit in international forums, Colombia will establish 
relations with Cuba when it pleases. It means Colombia will 
make its own decisions. Sovereignty is not defended simply by 
delivering anti- gringo speeches. This is obsolete. 
  Cooperation is the in thing. We are working for a free trade 
zone. We are working for a modern country. Countries are 
increasingly relinquishing their sovereignty in some areas. 
Does the Andean Group's agreement on integration with Venezuela 
and Ecuador mean they are relinquishing sovereignty? We have 
relinquished our court's authority in favor of the Andean Court 
of Justice. We have renounced to our right to make certain 
decisions, in favor of adopting them in conjunction with other 
countries. Every time we come to an agreement in judicial 
cooperation we relinquish some of our sovereignty, if we 
continue to think of sovereignty the way we once did. 
  No! The concept of sovereignty has changed a lot. I insist 
on what I said here earlier: From the public order perspective, 
sovereignty means exerting control, being in command, knowing 
what is happening in one's territory, fighting criminal 
organizations. This is what exercising sovereignty means. It 
does not mean digging into the Constitution to see if according 
to some old prejudice there is something that can be contested. 
This does not mean exercising sovereignty. Exercising 
sovereignty means fighting drug traffickers with whatever 
international cooperation we can -- not with foreign troops, 
that would do no good -- but with foreign intelligence, all they 
can give us, all the equipment, all the information. We have 
accepted this, and we will continue to accept it. I don't 
believe Congress or any judicial organization will tell us that 
we are wrong because we are doing this! 
  [Moderator] Cesar Mauricio Velasquez, representing 
television newscasts, is next. He is followed by Indira Vega. 
  [Velasquez] President, what's aggravating you? Is it the 
form or the essence of the concept? 
  [Gaviria] This does not aggravate me, but I was taken by 
surprise. I was amazed because we had gone through a legal 
process, and we had asked that the defense minister and the 
military commanders be received in audience. Logically, we were 
expecting some specific response, some memorandum from a 
strictly legal point of view. Instead, the response has been 
some sort of opinion or statement. I don't know how important 
the press communique is, but it has questioned all the 
cooperation Colombia receives in this field. This is obviously 
not keeping us from making decisions. If the communique were a 
judicial ruling I would abide by it, but it is not a judicial 
ruling. The communique simply has questioned all the 
cooperation we receive. No one can expect me to react to this 
by throwing out all that cooperation, giving the country away, 
weakening our ability to fight crime, and weakening our military 
forces, simply because some citizens, eminent members of the 
State Council, believe this is not the way. No way! 
  Whenever there is a ruling, I will abide by it. I have to, 
even if I don't agree, but I am not now facing a ruling. I am 
facing an opinion. Since this opinion is that of the State 
Council or of its advisers, it has some weight and has created 
some commotion, and there is the impression that the government 
could be paralyzed. No! The government is not going to be 
paralyzed! The government has the constitutional mission to 
safeguard public order and fight crime, and the government will 
safeguard this. It will not fail in its mission. 
  [Moderator] Indira Vega, representing the print media. 
  [Vega] Good afternoon, Mr. President. Why so much 
misinformation? Why so many different versions being presented 
to the public? This gives the impression that lies have been 
told. 
  [Gaviria] No. The Armed Forces and the Defense Ministry 
have participated in this exercise many times. There have been 
many such exercises here. Every year there are military and 
naval exercises in Colombia. Every year! They simply saw the 
arguments as one more political debate and since political 
debates are not their affair, they chose not to participate in 
the debate. This is what happened. Information began trickling 
out as people became aware of the debate. There has been no 
attempt to hide anything. The Armed Forces and the acting 
defense minister simply believed that if they joined the debate, 
they would end up in a political debate, taking sides with 
presidential candidates. They decided that this was not 
suitable. Perhaps the acting defense minister and I did not 
realize that this was going to be an ongoing controversy and 
that it was going to become a political campaign issue. 
  [Moderator] Next is Clemens Torres of Radio Colmundo. Manuel 
Teodori will follow him. 
  [Torres] Good afternoon, Mr. President. You have an 
outstanding political record. Some of your critics say that you 
could resolve this problem by inviting some people over to the 
Presidential Palace. 
  [Gaviria, chuckling, while audience laughs out loud] No. 
Look, though, you can be sure that I will do whatever I can 
within the law and my principles to make my legal and political 
convictions prevail. This is who I am. Some say: The president 
is pragmatic. No. That's not it. Some say I have no 
principles, that I'm pragmatic. No, but when I believe in 
something I do all I can to get it through. You have seen how I 
function in Congress. That's because standing on my record is 
not enough for me; I want to get things done! I have tried to 
strengthen this country's public forces; I have tried to 
strengthen international cooperation and the struggle against 
drug trafficking, the military struggle, and the judiciary 
branch. I have fought hard to succeed! Hard! I have also 
worked hard to get the EC to give us preferential status, and it 
did! The U.S. Congress gave us trade preferences because of our 
struggle against drug trafficking. You can be certain that I 
will continue to struggle. I am going to fight, and I am going 
to win. 
  [Moderator] Manuel Teodori of Telemundo, representing the 
international media. He will be followed by Dario Hoyo. 
  [Teodori] Good afternoon Mr. President. Understandably, 
during an electoral period, there are people who [words 
indistinct]. The accusation about the presence of the U.S. 
soldiers could be used as a political banner to attract votes 
and to obtain the votes of members of your party. Unitl what 
point might this be true in this particular case? 
  [Gaviria] People get very passionate during electoral 
campaigns in Colombia and in all countries. The campaigns 
increasingly assume a populist tinge. You see people [words 
indistinct] who suddenly start endorsing a populist position. 
People tend to get too passionate, and sometimes they lose 
their objectivity somewhat. 
  But I would not like to base this debate on politics. Why? 
Among other reasons, the State Council is not involved in 
politics and has no part in politics. I believe the State 
Council's opinion is its own. I frankly do not believe the 
State Council took the time to carefully study all our arguments 
in detail and to examine all the consequences of its opinion. I 
don't think the State Council did this. I regret that it did 
not, and I also regret to say this -- but I firmly believe it is 
true. 
  Of course, this issue could be used by the people in the 
political campaigns. I have tried to avoid being a counterpart 
to the presidential candidates or to those who are campaigning. 
  [Moderator] Dario Hoyos of EL NUEVO SIGLO will ask the last 
question. 
  [Hoyos] I won't keep you long. I see that you are very angry 
with the State Council. Don't you think it is inconvenient for 
the country to be facing a possible confrontation between the 
executive, legislative, and judicial branches in the midst of a 
political campaign? Also, is it possible that you are being 
driven by your desire to get to the OAS? 
  [Gaviria] [Words indistinct] I was not referring to this. I 
know the State Council is not motivated by such intentions. No. 
We presented this issue. I am concerned because the State 
Council has said that there is a lack of legal precedent and 
there are irregularities with the way in which the decision was 
made. If [words indistinct] it would have been easier to decide 
and see what would happen. But we are confronted with an 
opinion or a simple declaration. 
  I am not quarrelsome, but I do defend what I believe. I am 
not intimidated by any decision or argument. I fight for the 
things in which I firmly believe. I am not angry. I don't 
usually get mad, but I do have firm convictions and what you are 
hearing from me right here is just that: my firm convictions. 
  I believe the legal arguments we forwarded to the State 
Council are valid. I continue to believe they are valid. The 
State Council's communique did not deny those arguments. I will 
continue to fight for our legal arguments and for the national 
interest. Many things are at risk here: all international 
cooperation received by Colombia designed to strengthen its 
public forces and to help in its struggle against drug 
trafficking. All this is in jeopardy. I believe this is 
serious and dangerous for the country, and I am not willing -- 
simply so that I can look fresh and at ease -- not to fight for 
this. I will fight. I will struggle. I will defend my 
arguments. I will contest this, and I will leave no question 
unanswered. I will continue this legal and political struggle 
until the end. I will do so peacefully and convinced that our 
position will prevail. 

