Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wolfgang Engelhardt: "ESA Budget Shrinks Still </F>
Further"first paragraph is FLUG REVUE introduction] 
  [TEXT] During his visit to Jena-Optronik, European Space 
Agency (ESA) Director General Jean-Marie Luton announced the 
latest developments regarding the ESA budget. The extent of ESA 
participation in a space station project will not be decided 
until 1995. 
  Primarily in response to pressure by Germany and Italy, the 
ESA will further reduce its already curtailed plans for manned 
space projects. The budget proposal recently submitted by ESA 
Director General Jean-Marie Luton, which would have totaled 
approximately 35 billion German marks [DM] by the year 2000, 
will be subjected to further cuts. This latest budget estimate 
already incorporated the elimination of DM7.5 billion from the 
long-term budget agreed upon in Grenada only a year ago. Now it 
appears that the DM5.3 billion ceiling placed on the 1994 ESA 
budget was too high. The worldwide recession has hit the ESA 
member states as well; furthermore, Germany is struggling with 
the cost of unification. Further reductions in the research 
budget and in the German contributions to the ESA are inevitable. 
  Luton plans to submit a new budget proposal in mid-December. 
This is likely to include additional cutbacks in manned space 
projects in particular. For example, it is doubtful whether the 
recently announced projects for a scaled down space station 
module, the astronaut capsule, and a transport vehicle will be 
able to be developed simultaneously, as was planned. 
  It will be impossible to determine what is important 
technologically until the negotiations between the National 
Space Agency (NASA) and Russia concerning the space station are 
closer to being finalized. Given the Russian surplus in space 
station components, the construction of a European laboratory 
module for the Alpha Station, as it is presently called, may no 
longer make as much sense. 
  This could revive plans by the ESA for a new astronaut 
capsule with high load capacity. This capsule would be capable 
of placing American and Russian as well as European astronauts, 
together with their equipment, into orbit around the Earth. This 
"Crew Transport Vehicle" could also serve as a rescue vehicle. 
  Europe could also provide a strong, reliable carrier in the 
form of the Ariane-5 rocket, the development of which is near 
completion. The Ariane 5 can transport a capsule carrying four 
pilots and a 400 kg payload into orbit, even at an equatorial 
axis of 52 degrees, as is currently being considered for the 
international space station. By no means is the ESA willing to 
relinquish its long-term objective of participating in the space 
station project. According to Luton, the organization is still 
hoping for a substantial German contribution. 
  The ESA Council will continue its discussion of future ESA 
participation in the European space station project in 
mid-December, taking in account the most recent results of the 
American-Russian talks. However, the final decision on the 
construction of a space station module and/or the astronaut 
capsule will not be made until the executive council meeting, 
which is to take place in the spring of 1995. 
  While in Jena, Luton checked into the productivity of the 
local optoelectronic firms, which would like to play a larger 
role in European space projects. He indicated that he was 
impressed by the technical caliber of Jena Optronik as well as 
by the commitment and skill of its approximately 100 workers. 
Luton will attempt to see to it that the newly organized 
aerospace plants in the new laender, with their experienced 
personnel, receive more ESA contracts. 
  This is extremely important, as the few research contracts 
awarded by the ESA to eastern German firms in 1993 totaled only 
DM1 million. This figure could reach as high as DM25 million in 
1994 if all the bids from Jena to produce optoelectronics 
components for several ESA satellite projects are accepted. 
These include the so-called Omos Ozone Telescope for the Envisat 
Environmental Satellite (DM6 million) as well as various 
components for the planned European XMM X-ray Satellite. 
  In the past, the technicians and scientists of the "VEB Carl 
Zeiss Jena" produced their cameras and sensors exclusively for 
Russian space projects, but with the breakup of the Soviet 
Union, this market has dried up. New the four reorganized and 
drastically "trimmed" parts firms with their high-quality 
products must find new markets and customers. Both the German 
Space Agency (DARA) and Deutsche Aerospace have jumped on the 
bandwagon and invested heavily in Jena. 

