Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] 
<H5>  Policy Discussed </H5>
  Writing in the 20 February Athens daily I KATHIMERINI, K.I. 
Angelopoulos focuses on the U.S. recognition of The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia [FYROM]. It is difficult to 
believe that Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou and the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs failed to understand the U.S. diplomatic 
language in recent months and were surprised when Washington 
established diplomatic relations with Skopje, Angelopoulos 
contends. It is equally difficult to accept that U.S. policy 
could suddenly change in a few days. The United States "never 
promised Athens anything," he continues, and the only element in 
doubt was the timing of the formal recognition, which had been 
rumored in Athens diplomatic circles to occur "within a matter 
of weeks at most." The Papandreou government's 18 February 
statement that the U.S. State Department had assured Athens on 1 
February that recognition would not take place is a "timid" 
attempt at projecting an image of a Greek Government "deceived" 
by U.S. diplomacy and "fails to convince anyone," Angelopoulos 
asserts. 
  The "Athens-Washington big love-in" has surely been 
interrupted, Angelopoulos continues, for U.S. positions on the 
FYROM issue are "clearly aggressive toward and critical of 
Greece." Despite official attempts by U.S. Ambassador Thomas 
Niles to preserve good relations between the two countries, a 
large segment of the Greek population believes the United States 
is responsible for recent developments. However, Papandreou does 
not want relations to worsen in view of his scheduled April 
visit to the United States. Meanwhile, there are good reasons to 
think that following the "break" caused by Papandreou's 
announcement of the embargo against FYROM, initiatives aimed at 
an Athens-Skopje dialogue will "fatefully" emerge, perhaps 
leading to lifting the Greek embargo, as the Americans are 
requesting, Angelopoulos notes. While this is the most 
optimistic scenario, developments related to other Balkan 
problems may still complicate matters for a Greek foreign policy 
"not noted for long-term, cool-headed planning," as well as for 
Greece's European Union partners and Washington diplmats, whose 
Balkan policies have thus far "lacked accuracy and stability," 
Angelopoulos concludes. 
  The issue of U.S.-Greek relations is also discussed by 
Alexis 
Papakhelas, I KATHIMERINI's Washington correspondent, in the 20 
February issue of the newspaper. Papakhelas concludes that 
Greece can no longer expect from the United States a positive 
attitude in the FYROM issue for the following reasons: 
  l. As good as President Clinton's personal intentions may 
be, 
he does not conduct President George Bush's kind of personal 
diplomacy. 
  2. The U.S. State Department bureaucracy has a "negative" 
view of Greek policy because of past difficulties in 
Greek-American relations during the 1981-89 Papandreou 
administration, as well as because of its "obvious" sympathy and 
concern about Turkey and FYROM. 
  3. Arguing that ethnic groups cannot determine U.S. policy, 
professional diplomats "abhor" interventions by the 
Greek-American lobby, which has mobilized on behalf of Greece. 
  While the United States supports Greece as a friend and 
ally, 
"it does so only on issues not involving a third country," 
Papakhelas concludes. 
<H5>  Poll Results </H5>
  As late as 13 February, but before U.S. recognition of The 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, I KATHIMERINI published 
the results of a 26-27 January poll conducted by the ALKO-MARTEL 
polling organization, with a commentary by Yiannis Loulis [no 
further information]. Respondents were asked their opinion on 
continuing a dialogue with FYROM in the United Nations. 
According to Loulis, results showed an "impressive" turn in 
public opinion in favor of a more measured attitude toward the 
FYROM issue. In fact, the number of partisans of a dialogue in 
the United Nations increased from 77.2 percent last December to 
the present 80.9 percent, while those who opposed it decreased 
from 19.5 percent in December to 14.2 percent in January. 
Respondents were also asked what could "realistically" be 
expected from such a dialogue. Some 31.8 percent thought that 
80-90 percent of Greece's expectations could be met, 27.3 
percent thought that 60-70 percent of Greek expectations could 
be satisfied, 10.3 percent that success would be total, 14.9 
percent that few expectations could be met, and 7.5 percent did 
not know. 
<H5>  Economic Repercussions </H5>
  An article by Athina Kalaitzoglou in the 20 February I 
KATHIMERINI reviews commercial relations between Greece and 
FYROM and comments on economic losses FYROM will sustain from 
the Athens-imposed embargo. Forty percent of basic goods, 
including food items, enter FYROM from Greece and 70 percent of 
imports-exports transit through the port of Salonica. In 1993, 
FYROM imported through Greece 1.5 million tons of hydrocarbons, 
487,000 tons of raw materials (zinc, manganese, and various 
alloys), 101,000 tons of phosphates, and 118,000 tons of 
coal--also, 8,500 tons of coffee, 5,000 tons of leather goods, 
and 473 tons of cigarettes. Exports from FYROM to third 
countries through Salonica amounted to 471,000 tons of various 
goods. Provided governmental measures are respected by private 
and public entities alike, FYROM problems will quickly mount, 
Kalaitzoglou contends. She quotes Salonica economic circles as 
stating that "unless there are leaks, this is a golden 
opportunity to put our money where our mouth is." In addition, 
the essentially agricultural FYROM economy has been unable to 
attract foreign investments, she continues, the only possible 
exception being minerals. On the other hand, the embargo will 
affect around 25 Greek-FYROM companies created in recent years 
near the common border in the areas of textiles, ready-to-wear 
articles, food, and chemicals, Kalaitzoglou notes. Already, it 
is estimated that Greek trade, notably in Northern Greece, has 
already suffered losses of 3 billion drachmas. 
<H5>  Relations With Serbia </H5>
  According to Nikos Marakis writing in the 13 February Athens 
weekly TO VIMA TIS KIRIAKIS, Greek-Serbian relations have 
entered a "trying" period. Citing "reliable" diplomatic sources, 
Marakis quotes Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic as saying 
"Athens is no longer a trustworthy conduit for communication 
with Belgrade." Marakis lists a number of reasons for the 
falling out: 
  1. The refusal of the Greek Government to invite Milosevic 
to 
Athens following the October elections. 
  2. The absence of a reply from Prime Minister Papandreou to 
an invitation to visit Belgrade before the NATO summit. 
  3. The rejection of Serbian proposals for a Greek initiative 
within the EU framework aimed at diluting the pressure from the 
military threat. 
  4. Foreign Minister Karolos Papoulias' low-key reaction to 
the decision of EU foreign ministers regarding NATO air strikes 
against Bosnian Serbs. 
  According to a brief article in the 16 February I 
KATHIMERINI, relations between Papandreou and Milosevic are 
"even worse" than was thought. Belgrade is very "disappointed" 
with Greek policy on the former Yugoslavia, the article reports, 
citing Milan Milutinovic, the Serbian ambassador to Athens, as 
having said that a lack of understanding exists between his 
government, the Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Prime 
Minister Papandreou. The article cites diplomatic sources as 
noting that difficulties started when Papandreou, thinking that 
a visit to Belgrade on his return from Brussels was "too 
daring," ignored Milosevic's invitation. 

