BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Anatoliy Yurkin] </F>
  [Text] Moscow April 22 TASS -- ``Russia has absolutely 
unique technologies for the complex reprocessing of chemical 
warfare agents and nuclear wastes, which have no match in the 
world,'' member of the Engineering Academy Mikhail Sviderskiy 
said on Thursday, addressing a plenary meeting of the second 
international conference for chemical disarmament -- ``Moskon 
'94.'' 
  According to Sviderskiy, Russian scientists have developed 
and experimentally tested several production cycles for the 
complex reprocessing of chemical warfare agents and nuclear 
wastes. This allowed them to obtain new materials with quite 
unusual characteristics which, in the opinion of the expert, may 
be used in 21st-century technologies. 
  Sviderskiy said that the simultaneous reprocessing of 
chemical warfare agents and nuclear wastes would allow 
scientists not only to obtain materials with unique properties, 
but also to utilise huge quantities of depleted uranium 
accumulating on the planet. In order to process it into 
valuable products, Sviderskiy believes, ``we need an 
international programme involving all the advanced countries. 
Excessive amounts of nuclear wastes have been accumulated in the 
United States, France, Britain, Germany, and also Russia. They 
are just as dangerous for the planet's ecology as the existing 
stockpiles of chemical warfare agents.'' 
  ITAR-TASS was told by Academician Valentin Fedorov, who is 
also attending the conference, that chemical disarmament should 
not only make up for the spendings made on the production of 
chemical warfare agents, but should also yield profits to the 
Russian treasury. In his opinion, only the reprocessing of 
lewisite into extra-pure arsenic will yield Russia profits 
running into many billions and will provide top-quality raw 
materials for new technologies in the most advanced sectors of 
industry. ``We must not forget,'' the scientist stressed, ``that 
Georgia, our traditional supplier of arsenic, has stopped 
selling it to Russia. In the meantime, the need for pure 
materials of this group is growing. For instance, the United 
States will need more than 100 tonnes of extra-pure arsenic by 
the end of this century only for its electronic industry. Other 
countries are also badly in need of arsenic.'' 
  Chemical disarmament, based on technologies proposed by 
Russian scientists, Fedorov believes, meet the national 
interests of Russia. ``We must rely on our own forces, and we 
have no right to wait for somebody else to resolve our Russian 
problems,'' he stated. 

