BFN 

  [Excerpts] On the afternoon of 1 April, the provincial 
party committee and the provincial government cosponsored the 
family planning work conference. The conference urged the party 
committees and governments at various levels keep forging ahead, 
work arduously, ensure the fulfillment of various birth control 
tasks at the time of grasping the economic construction, realize 
all population control targets, and make contributions to 
promoting reform and opening up, economic development, and 
social stability. 
  Cheng Weigao, secretary of the provincial party committee, 
chaired the conference. At the conference, Li Bingliang, deputy 
secretary of the provincial party committee, relayed the 
guidelines of the national family planning forum. Gu Erxiong, 
vice governor of the provincial government, made specific 
opinions on further achieving the 1994 family planning work. Li 
Zhangshu, standing committee member and secretary general of the 
provincial party committee, read the provincial party committee 
and government's decision on honoring the 1993 "letters of 
responsibility for management of fixed population and birth 
control quotas" and on commending and awarding Boye County and 
criticizing and issuing yellow-card warnings to Xianxian County. 
The provincial party committee and government respectively 
signed letters of responsibility for management of fixed family 
planning quotas with various city and prefectural party 
committees. 
  The conference pointed out: At the time of vigorously 
promoting reform and opening up and accelerating the 
construction of the province into an economically powerful 
province, in the past year, the province persistently put the 
family planning work in an important position, expanded the 
dynamics of the work, and satisfactorily fulfilled the 
state-assigned population control plan. In the banner period for 
child births, the province better fulfilled the state-assigned 
population control plans for three consecutive years running. 
  In his speech, Cheng Weigao first affirmed the province's 
family planning work achievements. He said: The 1993 birth 
control targets were better fulfilled and the birth control 
rates were lower than the state-fixed targets. The grass-roots 
and basic work was further strengthened. The backward 
prefectures, cities, and counties conscientiously attended to 
the family planning work and changed their appearances. All 
levels were able to accurately accept investigations and 
criticisms. Through the investigations, the state discovered 
that some localities in our province made false reports. We 
earnestly accepted and accurately treated criticisms and 
actively adopted measures to firmly seek truth and punish false 
reports in an effort to turn criticisms into motivation. 
  Cheng Weigao pointed out: Birth control is extremely 
important. Particularly under the current circumstances where 
the managerial mechanism is not perfect, the vast rural areas' 
economic development level is not high, the quality of laborers 
is comparatively low, and the people have comparatively old 
ideas and lack the sense of legal system, it is more prominently 
important to strengthen the leadership of party committees and 
administrative management. We must never, in the slightest 
degree, be paralyzed or slackened. 
  He stressed: First, we should continue to carry out the 
system of responsibility for management of fixed population 
targets, persist in the method that top party and government 
leaders should assume sole responsibility for the management of 
birth control and personally engage in the work, strictly assess 
the implementation of the letters of responsibility, commend the 
good, criticize the bad, and sternly investigate and handle the 
activities that the birth rates are not well controlled due to 
leaders' negligence of duties. Second, we should be sure to 
strengthen the day-to-day work relating to family planning and 
the setup of the birth control system and unswervingly turn the 
focus of the family planning work from launching activities to 
regularizing and systemizing the family planning work so as to 
form systems, habits, and practice; to consolidate achievements; 
and realize targets. Third, in line with the building of 
well-to-do villages, we should vigorously grasp the grass-roots 
work, vigorously popularize advanced experiences, and 
particularly sum up and popularize the advanced experiences of 
the plain areas. Fourth, we should violently eliminate three 
long-standing problems, such as "falsehood, loopholes, and 
wantonness." Falsehood means false situation and false figures. 
We should exert great efforts to solve the problems in this 
regard. Loopholes mean that there are many loopholes, including 
earlier marriage and earlier births, management of floating 
population, and unlawful upbringing of children. We should 
firmly formulate measures to eliminate the problems in this 
regard. Wantonness means wantonly enforcing policies and 
wantonly assigning quotas, and abusing power for selfish gains. 
The problems in this regard should resolutely be ended. Fifth, 
we should strengthen the construction of the family planning 
workers contingents, strictly enforce various systems, and 
upgrade the management levels. Sixth, we should pay attention 
to studying the new conditions cropping up in the new situation. 
  Ye Liansong, deputy secretary of the provincial party 
committee and governor of the provincial government, made a 
speech at the conference. [passage omitted] 
  Zhao Jinduo, standing committee member of the provincial 
party committee and secretary of the Shijiazhuang city party 
committee; and Zhou Xin, vice chairman of the provincial 
people's congress standing committee, attended the conference. 
  Present at the conference were secretaries of the city and 
prefectural party committees, mayors, prefectural commissioners, 
prefectural and city leaders in charge of family planning work, 
chairmen of the prefectural and city family planning committees, 
heads of the population survey teams, members of the family 
planning leading groups, party committee secretaries and family 
planning commission directors of the 20 key family planning 
management counties as defined in 1994. 

