Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Orlando Farias from Manaus] </F>
  [Text] The major gold fields in the Amazon region have been 
depleted and for the first time in nearly 20 years, the amount 
of gold produced by mining companies will be greater than that 
tapped by gold prospectors. The director of the National 
Department of Mineral Production (DNPM), Elmer Prata Salomao, 
stated on 12 December in Manaus: "This is a cycle that is 
coming to an end." He reported that the most important gold 
fields in southern Para, northern Mato Grosso, and along the 
Madeira River (AM) [Amazonas] have been exhausted. 
  According to DNPM data, mining companies will produce 40 
metric tons of gold in 1993, whereas gold fields will produce 30 
metric tons. According to Salomao, prospecting for gold in the 
Amazon region has been, for all practical purposes, reduced to 
tapping scrap gold, which is a low-grade ore. 
  Besides exhaustion, gold fields also have come under 
pressure 
from Brazilian society due to environmental considerations. 
This has brought about the temporary deactivation of some of 
them. The expansion of mining companies is a new and positive 
thing. Salomao said gold mining is better organized -- it pays 
taxes, respects workers' rights, and has greater respect for the 
environment. 
  The DNPM also has another reason for being optimistic. 
Smuggling was considerably curbed in 1993 and at present only 
represents 5 percent of the country's gold production. "And 
that percentage constitutes a police case that must be fought," 
stated the DNPM director, who came to Manaus to attend a seminar 
on Gold Prospecting Policies. He exonerated gold prospectors 
from all responsibility for smuggling and explained that it was 
practiced along the Rio de Janeiro-Sao Paulo axis through the 
dollar black market. He said: "Now everybody is selling his 
gold to the Central Bank, which charges a much lower percentage 
than dealers in dollars." He underscored that industrial 
production of gold in our country is quite insignificant: 
"While Italy's annual production of gold jewelry totals 400 
metric tons, Brazil's production does not even amount to five 
metric tons." Salomao believes the establishment of a jewelry 
factory in our country will be instrumental in exporting some $1 
billion annually and in creating 2 million new jobs. 

