Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Geoff Crothall in Beijing, Simon Beck in Washington, and </F>
agencies] 
  [Excerpts] Beijing police yesterday released China's most 
famous dissident, Wei Jingsheng, after taking him in for 
questioning on Friday morning. But his detention provoked 
strong condemnation from the United States and further put at 
risk the renewal of China's Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trading 
status. Wei, 44, was held overnight at a Public Security Bureau 
guesthouse in the northern suburbs of Beijing before being freed 
yesterday afternoon. 
  It is understood Wei has been warned to keep a low profile 
or 
preferably leave the city altogether during the upcoming 
National People's Congress and the visit to Beijing of US 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher. Wei has been under 
constant surveillance since his release on parole from more than 
14 years in jail last September and has already received several 
warnings to keep away from other dissidents and foreign 
journalists. But these are warnings he has consistently 
ignored, and most analysts were not surprised when he was picked 
up. 
  Wei, commonly accepted as the founder of China's fledgling 
democracy movement, called an associate yesterday from the 
Beijing suburb of Changping to say he was now free and expected 
to be home later in the day. "He called to say he is free, his 
detainment is finished. He will have dinner and return to 
Beijing," the friend said. [passage omitted] 
  In addition to Wei, at least four other dissidents in 
Beijing 
were arrested or were missing from their homes. Half a dozen 
activists in Shanghai were also rounded up to keep them from 
talking to Mr Clinton's top human rights official, John 
Shattuck, who was in China last week to prepare for the 
Christopher visit, dissidents said. 
  Wei, who became a potent symbol of China's lack of freedom 
of 
expression during his time in prison, had bluntly told Mr 
Shattuck, assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and 
Humanitarian Affairs, that the US had to be tough on China to 
get progress. Friends of the democracy wall activist say, 
however, it is very unlikely that Wei will agree to leave 
Beijing voluntarily or stay out of view during the NPC. "He is 
a very strong willed person and very committed to the cause of 
democracy," a friend said. "He will not bow to the demands of 
the authorities without a fight. 
  Despite the release of Wei, three other dissidents arrested 
last week were still behind bars. Zhou Guoqiang, the 
Beijing-based lawyer of former labour leader Han Dongfang, law 
professor and editor Yuan Hongbing, and one of his students Wang 
Jiaqi were detained in the early hours of Thursday [3 March] 
morning and face serious charges which could result in lengthy 
prison terms. Zhou, a member of the "Peace Charter" group, was 
accused of "colluding with hostile foreign forces" and 
"disturbing social order". Yuan and Wang were accused by the 
Chinese Foreign Ministry of unspecified "criminal" activities. 
  Shanghai's most prominent dissident Yang Zhou and at least 
five other local activists were rounded up by police during Mr 
Shattuck's stay in the city, Mr Yang revealed yesterday. Other 
activists fled the city before the US envoy arrived, he said. 
  Mr Yang, a veteran of China's pro-democracy movement and a 
founding member of the Shanghai-based Association for Human 
Rights, said his home was surrounded by plain-clothes Public 
Security officials on Thursday, when he was due to see Mr 
Shattuck in a meeting arranged by the US consulate in Shanghai. 
"I didn't dare to go out. I knew that if I did I wouldn't get 
anywhere," he said. Uniformed police later entered his home and 
took him into detention for 24 hours before freeing him on 
Friday. They warned him of harsher action unless he changed his 
ways. 
  Mr Yang said at least five other dissidents, who had been 
involved in the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and an earlier 
round of pro-democracy ferment in 1978, were also detained. 
They were Yang Qingheng, Dai Xuezhong, Bao Ge, Ma Wei and Gong 
Xingnan. Bao Ge, who is leading a battle for compensation from 
Japan for its atrocities against the Chinese during World War 
II, said he was held for two days. 
  Meanwhile, five reporters from US-based news organisations 
taken on a government-arranged trip to a remote prison in 
China's northeast were not allowed to speak to a prisoner jailed 
there for being a leader of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, 
they said yesterday. While prison officials denied Liu Gang, 
33, or any other prisoners were tortured, as alleged by human 
rights groups, the reporters could not verify that for 
themselves. 
  The journalists who went to the Lingyuan Number Two Labour 
Reform Detachment in Liaoning Province were shown videotapes of 
Liu, who was number three on the list of most wanted students 
after the army crushed the pro-democracy protests on June 4, 
1989. At one point, officials told them to go to a window where 
they could see Liu, sentenced to six years in jail in 1991, 
walking with guards. They were then shown Liu smoking a 
cigarette and talking to guards on a closed-circuit television 
link that had no sound. 

