BFN 

  [Text] Pretoria, 9 May (PL) -- Cuban President Fidel Castro 
arrived today in this beautiful capital, in which Afrikaners 
have kept themselves segregated for decades from natives, to 
attend the inauguration of Nelson Mandela, the first black 
president of South Africa. 
  The Cuban delegation, headed by Castro, was one of the most 
eagerly awaited here. The African people believe that Cuba, 
particularly Fidel, had to participate in the celebration of 
Mandela's victory, according to opinions expressed yesterday 
during Castro's brief stopover in Accra, the capital of Ghana. 
  During his brief visit, Castro had a friendly meeting that 
lasted until the late hours with President Jerry John Rawlings, 
who welcomed Castro at the international airport in this capital 
and invited him to the presidential residence, where they 
discussed matters of common interest, particularly within the 
African context. 
  Tomorrow both Rawlings and Castro will participate in the 
ceremony during which outgoing South African President Frederik 
de Klerk will transfer the government to President-elect Nelson 
Mandela. It will be a momentous ceremony not only in the 
history of this country but for the entire black continent as it 
marks the end of apartheid. 
  "We have a moral and historical commitment to South Africa," 
Fidel Castro said before traveling to Pretoria accompanied by a 
high-level delegation that includes Foreign Minister Roberto 
Robaina; National Assembly President Ricardo Alarcon; and Rosa 
Elena Simeon, minister of environment, science, and technology. 
  "Fidel Castro's presence at Mandela's inauguration is not 
merely a matter of protocol," Foreign Minister Robaina told 
PRENSA LATINA today. "We want to show that Cuba's ties with the 
people of South Africa and of this continent were forged in the 
struggle for independence and strengthened by the blood shed by 
hundreds of Cubans who fell fighting against the same forces 
that the ANC now defeated at the polls," he added. 
  Mandela's ANC won the 27 April elections and will create a 
government of national unity in which de Klerk will be the 
second vice president. 
  In Fidel Castro's opinion, "the most difficult task for 
South 
Africa begins now, but Mandela is the perfect man for the job 
because he has the wisdom and talent that the political climate 
demands." 

