CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Elvira Sabadash: "Why Are People Dying Younger?"] </F>
  [Text] I can remember when I was a little girl, how happy I 
was upon seeing in a newspaper a report about somebody with a 
long life span, either in our country or in another country. 
Nowadays there are almost no such reports here. On the contrary, 
our scientists issue such disturbing forecasts as the following: 
Unless the economic situation is stabilized, the people's 
prosperity rises, and the ecology is improved, by the year 2005 
the average life span in Ukraine will be as follows: for 
men--69.5 years; for women--75.8 years. 
  The Social Gerontology Laboratory within the Gerontology 
Institute of the Ukrainian Academy of Medical Sciences is 
studying many matters pertaining to the able-bodied, working 
population, as well as to persons of pension age: developing a 
system of medical-social assistance, granting social support, 
problems of hygiene and nutrition, along with analyzing the 
death rate and its cause at the present time in relation to the 
development of our society. As noted by Yevheniya Cherkaska, a 
prominent scientific staff associate at this laboratory, the 
pace of a civilization's development is in and of itself the 
greatest influence on the increase or decrease of the death rate 
of its population. The developed countries--for example, the 
United States, Canada, Switzerland, Spain, Iceland, Hong 
Kong--have growth coefficients in their death rates that are 
less than those in the countries that were engaged in building 
socialism over the course of many years. 
  The following conclusion suggests itself: The so-called 
planned economic system is not interested in maintaining the 
health of its able-bodied population at the proper level, 
whereas, in the case of a market-type system, just the opposite 
is true. Private ownership of the means of production accords 
people the possibility of working normally, as well as being 
morally and materially dependent not on society, but rather on a 
specific person--the director of an enterprise. The latter 
endeavors to do everything possible to make sure that those 
persons subordinate to him work diligently, but without harm or 
injury to their health. 
  Our society, unfortunately, actively endeavors to take 
advantage of cheap manpower at its production facilities. It 
operates in accordance with the following principle: Healthy 
persons can and should work at the hard jobs, while absolutely 
everybody else should work at the easy ones. There is, in 
effect, the so-called selection by level of health: A person 
must conform and adjust to his production facility, and it seems 
that it is cheaper for the state to pay for prescriptions than 
to provide normal working conditions. As a result of this, 
persons who have worked at harmful production facilities for 
approximately 10 years remain ill for the entire remainder of 
their lives; and such persons also have diseased children.... 
The age indicator of the labor force is likewise particularly 
important here. Let us bear in mind that harmful production 
facilities require young, strong, and healthy persons; 
otherwise, they could not endure such conditions. Nowadays, the 
younger generation's quality of health is becoming worse, while 
the requirements of our production facilities are becoming 
continually harsher. Healthy, strong persons are frequently 
lured to ecologically dirty production facilities with the aid 
of all kinds of privileges. Because of this, the best examples 
of the population are artificially winnowed out, and the number 
of the healthiest members of our population is decreasing. 
Incidentally, the probability of death among Ukrainians is 1.5 
times as high as it is among Frenchmen, and almost twice that 
among Japanese. 
  According to data provided by the Ministry of Statistics, 
the 
birth rate in Ukraine during the years 1991 through 1992 alone 
declined by 5 percent. One of the reasons for this was a 
decrease in the number of marriages and an increase in the 
number of divorces. But the chief cause was the rise in the 
death rate. Beginning in 1980, the overall death rate of our 
population has grown continually. Whereas in the year mentioned 
it equalled 11.4 percent of deaths per 1,000 of population, in 
1992 this figure amounted to 13.14 percent. The rise in the 
death rate is occurring in virtually all age groups, including 
among children up to four years of age. During the years 
1991-1992 the death rate increased with particular rapidity, due 
to diseases of the blood and those of the blood-producing 
organs, as well as from serious mental disorders. Does this not 
provide grounds for the spreading opinion that Ukraine's human 
population is beginning to die out? But the scientists argue 
convincingly that this is not the case at all. To a certain 
extent, this is a result of the fact that during the 1960's, the 
level of the birth rate was very low, and, therefore, now that 
20 or 30 years have elapsed, the number of persons in their 
child-bearing years is somewhat smaller than normal. 
  Be that as it may, the demographic situation is extremely 
unfavorable. Moreover, this is aggravated by economic 
instability and by uncertainty regarding the future. In 
1991--for the first time in recent decades--a negative 
population growth was registered here. Our country's population 
declined by 39,000, and in 1992 it declined by another 100,000 
persons. According to the data provided by the Social 
Gerontology Laboratory, the causes of changes in the death rate 
are diverse and varied: Such factors as place of residence, 
occupation, age, level of social security, and ecology are all 
important in this matter. 
  Ecology is so important that it is worthwhile dwelling on it 
in greater detail here. It has an essential influence on the 
death rate and the incidence of disease among the population. It 
is difficult to find anywhere at all such enclosed, ecologically 
harmful production facilities as are present in Ukraine. They 
include chemical and coal-tar chemical production facilities, 
construction, metallurgical, and machine-building industries, 
the excessive use of chemicals in agriculture, and--in addition 
to all that--there is Chernobyl. Especially characteristic in 
this regard is the southern region, where the lifespan is 
shorter as compared with other localities (it is shortest in 
Odessa Oblast, where it amounts to 67 years). To a considerable 
extent, this is a consequence of polluting the Dnieper River 
with chemicals and with the salts of heavy metals. This water is 
utilized for drinking and for irrigating the fields, thus 
adding--time and time again--a new portion of fats and 
pesticides. The inhabitants of Ternopol Oblast are the 
longest-lived in our country (with a span of almost 71 years), 
and--on the whole--life is the longest in our country's western 
regions. The death rate rises as one moves from West to East and 
from North to South; but it should be noted that in the midst of 
certain regions the variations are quite great among the 
different oblasts. 
  Moreover, Chernobyl is far from being insignificant in its 
contribution to this matter. According to the computations made 
by specialists in those localities that were marked by intensive 
contamination by radiation, the death rate from cancer-type 
diseases will be on the rise during the next 15-20 years.... And 
so the forecasts by specialists--medical personnel and 
scientists--who have been studying the problems of the lifespan 
and the causes of death among Ukraine's population are 
disturbing. Present-day living conditions, including 
socioeconomic, climatic, geographical, and ecological factors, 
as well as the state of medical assistance benefits, does not 
enable us to term our people healthy. Specific forecasts as to 
the development of this situation in the future are simply 
impossible. Ukraine's economic indicators are almost unknown, 
and nobody has undertaken the task of predicting the state of 
the economy for the immediate future. However, taking into 
account the inertia in the development of demographic 
processes--along with certain domestic principles--it may be 
assumed that the decrease in the lifespan and the increase in 
the death rate of the population will be maintained for another 
two or three years, even provided that the socioeconomic 
situation is stabilized. The situation could appear to be stable 
but actually be getting worse, unless measures are implemented 
with regard to enhancing the people's well-being, providing 
normal medical treatment to cure people, and improving the 
ecological situation. 
  But meanwhile, according to the scientists' forecasts, in 
Ukraine the average lifespan in the year 2010 will be 67.1 years 
for men and 76 years for women, despite the fact that in the 
developed countries--for example, in Japan--it had already 
amounted to the following figures during the years 1989-1990: 76 
years for men and 82 years for women. This too will give the 
deputies to our newly formed parliament something to think about. 

