BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Lothar Ruehl: "A Future for Kim"] </F>
  [Text] There is no doubt that Jimmy Carter is the 
appropriate man to support the cause of his late successor, 
current President Bill Clinton. His spectacular meeting with 
North Korea's dictator Kim Il-song, however, gives rise to 
questions about Washington's inner workings, about the "Friends 
of Bill" ("FOBs") in Clinton's White House. 
  First: Did Carter travel without a mandate as a private 
scout or did he have an assignment to mediate if he were 
successful? And second: What role does the current President 
play in U.S. foreign policy, among whose most urgent tasks today 
is coping with the North Korean challenge with covert or 
simulated nuclear armament? Does Clinton prefer being 
represented by his congenial predecessor in difficult situations 
over being represented by his secretary of state? 
  The use of high-ranking unofficial emissaries, in particular 
of the "elder statesmen," is a trick of high-level politics. 
Again and again they are stepping onto the international stage 
when it is necessary to signal interest in an arrangement or to 
get involved. Carter has a reputation as the protector of peace 
between Israel and Egypt. 
  During the Gulf conflict in 1990, he went to Iraq without 
George Bush's approval to personally ask Saddam Husayn to 
release his hostages, just as Brandt, Waldheim, and Heath did. 
At that time, Carter and his colleagues rather contributed to 
confusion and, with his trip to Baghdad, Carter confirmed the 
Iraqi dictator's intention to refuse to withdraw from Kuwait. 
  Undertakings such as the latest talks serve to satisfy the 
needs for prestige of those who rule by force, to preserve face 
for withdrawing from untenable positions -- but also to 
gradually lift the international isolation of an opponent. In 
any case, however, they are useful for not letting former 
statesmen be forgotten. Kim Il-song, too, may see a future for 
himself -- perhaps offering his good services to Baghdad or 
Tripoli? 

