Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Viktor Rikhardovich Vaaks, director of </F>
Belarusian Research Center "Ecology," by nonstaff reporter 
Mikhail Magnitskiy; place and date not given: "Ecology Is the 
Privilege of the Rich. So, What Should We Do?" -- first 
paragraph is DOBRY VECHAR introduction] 
  [Text] In May 1991, the Cabinet of Ministers set up the 
Belarusian Research Center "Ecology" [BelNITS]. BelNITS 
Director Viktor Rikhardovich Vaaks agreed to meet with our 
nonstaff reporter Mikhail Magnitskiy. 
  Magnitskiy: Viktor Rikhardovich, what are the aims 
of this new research center? What difficulties have you 
encountered in your work? 
  Vaaks: At the beginning, BelNITS was a key 
research center which coordinated the protection of the 
environment and rational use of our Republic's natural 
resources. The BelNITS was entrusted with too many duties, 
which, to my regret, were not adequately supported financially. 
Our state orders stood at 20 percent of our true work 
potential. So, we had to rack our brains over our chances to 
survive in the future. We concluded contracts for conducting 
research. Some state institutions and associations were 
unwilling to support us with information on the current state of 
various environmental sectors. We must analyze it for the State 
Committee for Ecology [Goskomekologiya]. It was incredible when 
one state institution received a state grant to collect 
information on a certain subject and demanded additional 
payments from another state institution which had to analyze 
their data. In my mind, this is how people misinterpret market 
relations. 
  Magnitskiy: As far as I have understood you, the 
BelNITS was hardly set up when it began to face these 
difficulties.... 
  Vaaks: Yes, you are absolutely correct. We began 
to learn the art of survival from the very beginning.... More 
than 160 people -- among them some 40 candidates of sciences -- 
are employed with us. Our center is staffed with unique experts 
in 36 branches of science. They are experts in geography, 
geology, hydrology, agrochemical science, hydraulic engineering, 
land surveying, technology, waste processing, energy 
engineering, sociology, economics, law, and others disciplines. 
This allows us -- contrary to other research institutions -- to 
analyze every facet of an environmental problem. We were the 
first to draft the Procedures for Comprehensive Territorial 
Environmental Protection Programs [TerKSOP) for Rechitsa, Gomel, 
Zhlobin, Mozyr and their rayons. Besides, we began drafting a 
similar TerKSOP for Gomel Oblast, and beginning in 1994, we are 
planning to draft a TerKSOP for Mogilev Oblast. Procedures for 
drafting these programs have been forwarded to the 
Goskomekologiya for its approval. This will allow the Republic 
to have comprehensive environmental protection programs, which 
could provide a proper basis for analyzing and adopting relevant 
decisions. These procedures will allow local soviets, the 
Goskomekologiya, and the government to realize the ecological 
situation on the territory of the Republic, to have a list of 
key ecology-oriented measures based not on the departmental 
approach to the environment but on the analysis of the entire 
environmental situation. Eventually, this will allow us to 
properly distribute small financial grants issued by the state 
for environmental purposes. 
  Magnitskiy: What other research does your center 
conduct? 
  Vaaks: Goskomekologiya commissioned us to draft 
expert ecological conclusions, procedures, plans, and programs 
which could effect the environment. In addition, we draft 
resolutions on the state of ecological sites; prepare 
environmental reports on industrial enterprises and waste dumps 
for state institutions carrying out environmental controls; 
draft specifications foreseeing ultimate norms for discharging 
and preserving waste, thermal and electrical energy, and so on. 
I want to emphasize that in 1993, BelNITS worked on some 50 
contracts (in 1992, there were only 14 contracts). 
  Magnitskiy: Viktor Rikhardovich, currently, many 
people and organizations have begun to deal with the 
environment. In your opinion, are the qualifications and 
analyses of experts always adequate? 
  Vaaks: We should hail this tendency. Only man can 
help nature and himself. In my mind, we have highly qualified 
experts. However, I believe that we should not only have 
specialized experts in, for example, soil or water protection. 
We require both experts with an ecological knowledge in one 
particular environmental sphere (water, soil, air, biosphere, 
and etc.) and experts in various spheres of knowledge, who are 
also competent in the legal field. Beginning in March 1992, we 
began running nationwide programs to improve environmental 
qualifications: In 1993, we trained 187 people in eight groups, 
while in 1994, we are planning to train ten groups of 
specialists. We rank high in the opinions of our students. In 
my mind, our environmental experts should also train abroad. 
  Magnitskiy: By the way, do you cooperate with 
foreign partners? 
  Vaaks: Under the Goskomekologiya umbrella, we 
participate in international conventions. I could name such 
programs as "On Biological Divergency," "On International Trade 
With Disappearing Wild Fauna and Flora Species," "On Protection 
of the Ozone Layer," and "Green Lungs of Europe." 
  The BelNITS has also served as host for international 
conferences and meetings on various directions in environmental 
protection, not to mention a Belarusian seminar on water 
problems. 
  BelNITS cooperates with firms such as "Volksbilding und 
Kultur," the "Carl Duisberg Centrum," and "Utecon" from Germany, 
"Construzioni Dondi" from Italy; we established contacts with 
"Lahmeyer International," "GKW Consult," and "Alberatungs 
Gesellschaft" from Germany, "PA Consulting Group" from England, 
"Viaten Tapiola" and "The Finnish Foreign Trade Association" 
from Finland, "Cowiconsult" from Denmark, and "OBGRT" from 
Poland, among others. 
  We are eager to participate in the International Program for 
Studying Contamination of the Baltic Sea with superficial and 
underground water. This work is coordinated by the State 
Institute for Geology and Vilnius University in Lithuania. 
  Magnitskiy: With which Belarusian organizations 
and firms do you cooperate? 
  Vaaks: I acknowledge that it is difficult to 
enumerate all our partners. First of all, we cooperate with 
academic and research institutions, ecological committees, 
public organizations, the State Committees for Statistics and 
Meteorology, and the Defense Ministry. Our center organized such 
public organizations as International Ecologic Academy, its 
Belarusian branch and Soligorsk filial, and the Independent 
Belarusian Ecological Research Association. In addition, we 
organized comparatively small state ecological organizations 
BelEKOINFOR, NITS "Energo," "EOS," "SEKOP," "MGEP," and "KBIAS" 
[expansions unknown]. I will be self critical: We have an 
enormous amount of environmental information but have not 
published very much. 
  Magnitskiy: In what direction are you going to 
work in the immediate future? 
  Vaaks: The Belarusian Cabinet of Ministers deemed 
BelNITS as the key center in conducting research on the ozone 
layer, drafting unified procedures for environmental monitoring 
and surveying of natural resources. In addition, the Belarusian 
National Center "Infoterra" is operating under our auspices. We 
will continue to draft not only normative ecological documents 
-- which the nature conservation organizations consistently lack 
-- but also proposals to update waste processing technologies, 
energy saving measures, and waste utilization. 
  Magnitskiy: In the past, the phrase "If I were a 
director, I would do this and that" was very popular. I would 
like to paraphrase this the following way: What would you do in 
the sphere of ecology if you were a politician? 
  Vaaks: In Belarus, much has been done recently to 
upgrade our environmental legislation. However, this work 
should be continued, new legislative acts should be drafted. It 
should be taken into consideration that Belarus is extremely 
contaminated with radiation due to the Chernobyl accident; our 
territory is used to transit international communications; we 
have an extensive program to eliminate and privatize military 
sites. In my opinion, an "Ecological Bank" should be set up to 
ease the drafting and implementation of nature-saving 
projects.... 
  Magnitskiy: Viktor Rikhardovich, I wish success to 
you and your collective. The "Ecology" center must help resolve 
the most acute ecological problems in our Republic and its 
capital. 

