BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Geng Jun (5105 6511)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 3 Jun (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--State Council 
Vice Premier Zou Jiahua stressed at a national work meeting on 
large-scale commodity price inspections, which ended yesterday, 
that curbing inflation and bringing price rises under control is 
a policy which the government must uphold for a long time to 
come and involves the current overall situation of the country. 
  Zou Jiahua said: Stable commodity prices are an important 
condition of economic and social stability. Although the trend 
of rising prices has tended to slow down recently, curbing 
inflation, keeping the market stable, and holding down commodity 
prices is still a key link in properly handling the relationship 
between reform, development, and stability. 
  When talking about how to handle the relationship between 
deepening price reform and strengthening price administration, 
Zou Jiahua said: The question is how to comprehend price 
reform. Some people say that to reform prices is precisely to 
lift restrictions on prices, and once restrictions are lifted, 
the task of reform is fulfilled, the government need not 
regulate prices, and producers and traders can set prices at 
will. This is a misunderstanding of price reform. Price reform 
has a clear definition and demands. In brief, it is precisely 
to transform the mechanism of price formation and establish a 
price mechanism with market prices at the core, straighten out 
the price system and establish price relations which can 
distribute resources in a rational manner, and reform the 
traditional system of price administration and establish and 
perfect a system of price regulation with indirect governmental 
administration at the core. All these are interrelated and 
complement each other. They constitute the overall objective of 
price reform and are also the main contents of price reform. In 
order to realize this objective, we must uphold the policy of 
integrating "regulation, lifting restrictions, and control" into 
a single whole. We must maintain price controls while 
regulating prices and lifting restrictions on prices in such a 
way that lifting restrictions will not bring about chaos and 
price control will not be too rigid. In regulating prices and 
lifting restrictions on prices, we must also take different 
reform measures according to different commodities and the 
nature of different services and conditions. Even if the task 
of price reform is fulfilled, the state must still administer, 
in different forms, prices of monopolistic and welfare-oriented 
commodities and services rather than let things slide. In 
reality, this is also the case in many developed countries who 
pursue a market economy. 
  In order to implement the massive inspection of commodity 
prices in a more profound way, members of the State Council 
Commodity Price Inspection Working Group will again go 
separately to various provinces (autonomous regions and 
municipalities) in the middle of June to supervise and direct 
work and to bring the plans set out at this meeting into effect. 

