BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by 'Amiram Kohen] </F>
  [Text] "If the salinization and pollution of the coastal 
aquifer continues at the present rate, the level of water 
salinity and pollution will by the year 2018 be such as to 
render 25 percent of the aquifer water impotable, while the 
salinity rate of over 50 percent of the water will be above the 
maximum recommended level." This is one of the findings of a 
report prepared by the Water Commission's Hydrological Service, 
due to be submitted to the Knesset's State Audit Committee today. 
  The coastal aquifer is Israel's largest reservoir containing 
about 400 million cubic meters of water -- about one-fifth of 
the entire water quantity produced annually in Israel. In 
recent years, annual pumping from that reservoir stood at some 
360 million cubic meters. The anticipated deterioration is the 
result of a rising nitrate concentration and from the 
salinization rate. 
  The report indicates that the coastal aquifer has been 
undergoing gradual salinization, and even today, about one-tenth 
of the water pumped from the reservoir (about 32 million cubic 
meters) comes from drillings ("cells") whose salinity rate 
exceeds 250 milligrams of chlorine to a liter, which is the 
maximum recommended by official standards. 
  The coastal aquifer's rate of increase of nitrates 
concentration is about one milligram to a liter per year. Any 
nitrate concentration exceeding 90 milligrams to a liter 
disqualifies the water immediately, because it causes cyanosis 
in babies. 
  The report shows that even today, about one-fifth of the 
entire quantity of water pumped from the aquifer (about 64 
million cubic meters) is produced from wells whose water has a 
nitrate concentration above the allowable norm, while about 60 
percent of the water is pumped from drillings which have 
exceeded the recommended maximum of 45 milligrams per liter. 
  The report notes that the pollution rate is liable to be 
much 
more rapid because the estimates do not account for future 
changes in groundwater quality. 

