Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Manki Ponomarev article under "Over to an Observer" rubric: </F>
"The West Pretends..."] 
  [Text] If we were to gather together all the Western 
statesmen's assurances of support for the reforms in Russia and 
of assistance in restructuring and stabilizing its economy, we 
would get maybe not just one but several fat volumes. Really. 
Here is U.S. President Bill Clinton saying in his keynote 
statement to Congress: "The best way to ensure lasting peace is 
to promote the development of democracy in the world. This is 
why we support the reforming democrats in Russia and other 
states of the former Soviet bloc." Here is Warren Christopher, 
leader of the U.S. foreign policy department, solemnly 
proclaiming: "We believe that the aid programs for Russia must 
continue to be implemented. We will urge international 
financial institutions to give it warranted and expedient 
support." Here is an official statement by Richard Dyuke 
[surname as transliterated], spokesman for the French Foreign 
Ministry: "Nobody in the West casts any doubt on the further 
granting of economic aid and the allocation of credits to 
Russia." Here is.... 
  But it is obviously pointless to continue listing such 
statements. They are innumerable. Just as there are 
innumerable alluring promises of financial and other aid. 
According to the estimates of the authoritative OECD, Russia 
was promised $24 billion in 1992 and even $43 billion in 1993! 
  These promises were recorded in very serious documents -- 
the 
decisions of the G-7 (the leaders of the world's seven most 
developed states), the IMF, the World Bank, and the European 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development and Russia's bilateral 
agreements with a number of states. In fact, however, most of 
these -- let us be frank -- highly impressive promises have 
remained just declarations not backed up by deeds. For example, 
of the aid package to the tune of $28 billion which the G-7 
countries alone intended to give to Russia in 1993, in fact 
just...$4 billion was allocated. The IMF, whose share in the 
Western aid for Russia was to have amounted to $14 billion, in 
practice gave just $2.5 billion. 
  This policy made the well known U.S. commentator J. Hoagland 
resort to the following comparison in one of his articles. 
"Soviet workers," he wrote, "used to joke that the government 
pretends to pay them, while they pretend to work. Today the 
West pretends to give aid to Yeltsin in Russia, who in turn 
pretends to implement reforms." 
  Let us leave on Hoagland's conscience the claim that reforms 
are not being implemented in Russia. But it is true that the 
West is pretending more than helping. It is sufficient to 
recall that in 1992, for example, the volume of aid from the 
United States and Japan in respect of all the countries of the 
former Soviet bloc did not exceed one-hundredth of 1 percent of 
the U.S. and Japanese GNP. France and Britain also confined 
themselves to scraps. Germany alone stands out. It granted 
Russia $3.9 billion -- over five times as much as the United 
States. These are data for 1992. The final results have not yet 
been summed up for 1993. But it is already known that there 
will be no fundamental differences compared with the preceding 
period. 
  It would not be out of place to take a look at what the 
funds 
which actually have been allocated give to Russia. Take the 
following fact. In 1993 the United States extended to our 
country credit of $700 million to buy grain over 15 years. But 
at the same time it stipulated that 75 percent of the shipments 
of this grain across the ocean had to be made on U.S. ships and, 
moreover, at highly inflated tariffs (whereas it costs 
$15,000-17,000 a day to charter a Liberian ship, a U.S. one 
costs $25,000-30,000). Thus, in fact almost all the $700 
million goes to U.S. grain producers and shipowners. Russia 
gets the debt (and the interest on the debt). 
  It should also be emphasized that credit is frequently 
hedged about with all kinds of conditions which quite often go 
beyond the generally accepted framework of relations between 
equal partners. These conditions can be divided into several 
groups. 
  The first group is political. The lenders (for it is not 
usually a question of funds provided gratis but precisely of 
loans for a particular term and at a particular, sometimes very 
high, rate of interest) advance demands that Russia implement 
its reforms from a certain standpoint and at a certain pace, 
sometimes disregarding internal conditions and the country's 
national interests. Moreover, although people in the West like 
to say that aid is given in the hope of continuing the policy of 
democratic reforms and not with a view to individual 
personalities, in practice it is frequently possible to hear 
"recommendations" as to who must and who must not be a member of 
the government, for instance. The political conditions also 
include attempts to tell Russia how to deal with close neighbors 
and what it can and cannot reach agreement with them about. 
  The second group of conditions is exclusively economic. The 
IMF is particularly bad in this regard. The IMF makes the 
allocation of funds conditional on permissible -- in its view -- 
levels of inflation, pace of privatization, and other criteria 
which undoubtedly relate to the internal competence of sovereign 
states. Naturally, the IMF takes no responsibility for the 
consequences of fulfilling its conditions, which it prefers to 
call recommendations. 
  The third group of conditions relates to the desire to 
hinder 
Russia's access to world markets and to undermine the 
competitiveness of its exports. There are more than enough 
facts here. There is a mass of artificial obstacles to exports 
of Russian uranium, although you would think that all the 
agreements on this had been reached long ago. There is the 
demand to reduce Russian aluminum exports by half a million 
tonnes. There are the obstacles to Russia's involvement in 
commercial launches of spacecraft. And much, much more besides. 
  When speaking of all these conditions, finally I cannot fail 
to mention the direct blackmail to which Western countries 
sometimes resort. I have already spoken of the numerous 
assurances that Russia will be given very broad assistance and 
support. But I could also cite many statements threatening to 
end all assistance. "The United States could revise its policy 
of giving aid to Moscow if the Russian Government embarks on a 
path of slowing the process of economic reforms," the CHRISTIAN 
SCIENCE MONITOR pointed out, citing officials in the Washington 
administration. The Japanese Foreign Ministry has disseminated 
a report that the G-7 countries might not agree to the proposal 
to include Russia among the full participants in their annual 
meetings, although only recently this idea was being discussed 
actively. 
  Such a policy toward present-day Russia can only be called 
shortsighted. What our country needs is not mythical "aid" -- 
hedged about, moreover, with a mass of conditions -- but 
equitable cooperation with Western states and broad access to 
world markets, where in an honest competitive struggle Russian 
producers would be able both to show and to see for themselves 
what they are worth. Precisely this idea was championed by 
Russia's representatives at the recent World Economic Forum in 
Davos. 
  With or without the support of Western countries Russia 
will, 
all the same, go its own way. But in the former case this path 
would be easier and less painful. And not only for us. For 
Western countries too. They would not need to fear 
unpredictable turns in Russian politics. 
  Instead of just pretending to help us, it is in the 
interests 
of the West itself to go over to full cooperation with Russia. 
It is in our interests to continue our reforms still more 
consistently, only far more sensibly than hitherto. Not 
rejecting assistance from elsewhere, but not putting too much 
trust in it either. 

