BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "National News Hookup" program] </F>
  [Text] [Reporter] This reporter has learned from the 
department concerned that since China promulgated its Patent Law 
10 years ago, the legitimate rights and interests of 
patent-holders of all countries have been effectively protected 
in this country. According to Supreme People's Court President 
Ren Jianxin, China's courts at various levels have handled some 
1,900 cases of patent disputes and some 1,600 have been settled 
as of the end of 1993. At the same time, the patent 
administrative organs at various levels handled more than 2,200 
patent dispute cases and settled some 1,700 of them. The 
serious handling of a large number of patent cases has protected 
the legitimate rights and interests of patent-holders, yielding 
a good effect at home and abroad. Some patent-holders involved 
in patent disputes have the following to say: 
  [Wang Yongmin, identified by screen caption as inventor of 
the five-stroke Chinese character identifier] It has been 10 
years since the Patent Law promulgation. The law has protected 
the patent of the five-stroke Chinese character identifier. 
Many factories have signed agreements with me. One or two 
factories that did not and violated my patent rights have been 
fined by the court. 
  [Zhang Li, identified by screen caption as inventor of the 
Lunar Vehicle brand magnetic massager] In my view, we must not 
tolerate patent violators. We should use the law as a weapon to 
effectively protect patent right and sternly deal with the 
violators. However, the Patent Law's implementation is not yet 
fully satisfactory. Many people do not understand the Patent 
Law. It is necessary to step up the publicity for it and make 
it known to everyone. 
  [Reporter] Director China Patent Office Gao Lulin believes 
that the increase of patent disputes indicates both an enhanced 
awareness of self-protection on the part of the patent-holders 
and the ignorance of many people with respect to patent. For 
this reason, the number of patent dispute cases will continue to 
rise. 

