Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Roman Hofbauer, minister of transport, </F>
communications, and public works, by Ivan Vaclavik; place and 
date not given: "Do We Need Radio Free Europe Until the 
Elections?"] 
  [Excerpts] Certain groups find the termination of the Radio 
Free Europe [RFE] broadcast on the AM band via the Slovak 
telecommunications transmitter a hard morsel to swallow. We 
asked Roman Hofbauer, minister of transport, communications, and 
public works, what led to this decision. [passage omitted] 
  [Vaclavik] Have some reasons arisen for abrogating the 
contract before 1995? 
  [Hofbauer] A lot has changed since 1990. The state 
guarantees political plurality, democracy, and freedom of 
expression. A dual broadcast is enshrined in Slovak law. That is 
something that even Austria and Hungary do not have. The 
configuration of the RFE broadcast has also fundamentally 
changed, and this was not approved by the participating partners 
in the contract. 
  [Vaclavik] What is the essence of the dual broadcast in 
Slovakia? 
  [Hofbauer] It is, among other things, projected in the great 
demand for private and commercial broadcasts. The wavelengths 
and broadcast frequencies of each state are very strictly and 
precisely regulated and coordinated by the so-called Geneva 
plan. Otherwise, chaos would fill the air. Therefore, each state 
protects its broadcast possibilities as part of its national 
wealth. Given these circumstances, it is surprising that 
Slovakia has not sufficiently covered its own territory by the 
Slovak radio signal. The chances of possibly receiving Slovak 
radio abroad, as we hear from our countrymen, are even worse. It 
is, to a large extent, a result of the Slovak radio transferring 
its broadcast to FM frequencies, the reception of which is 
diminished by the varied land surface. A good, statewide 
reception from our transmitters is possible, particularly on the 
AM band. On the 1287 kHz frequency, however, you will not 
receive the broadcast of a Slovak radio station but rather that 
of RFE. 
  [Vaclavik] In a recent interview with RFE Director Robert 
Gilett, a possible reduction of the RFE broadcast was discussed. 
Nevertheless, the station allegedly maintains the full extent of 
the broadcast. 
  [Hofbauer] No, it has substantially reduced the broadcast, 
which confirms that the political climate in Europe has changed. 
The original funding of $208 million has been reduced to 
one-third, and the staff is being reduced just as drastically, 
allegedly to one-half. [sentence as published] As part of the 
reduction, the section for broadcasts to the Czech Republic, 
Poland, and Hungary is closing, while the broadcasts for 
Slovakia, Bulgaria, and Romania are allegedly being maintained. 
The Slovak side cannot view this other than as a certain form of 
classification of European states, which, with respect to 
Slovakia, we can only denote as unfortunate. It is also 
necessary to assess the alleged claim of "maintaining the RFE 
Slovak broadcast until the early parliamentary elections...." 
The Slovak Republic Council for Radio and Television Broadcast 
is a better place to look for comments on the content and 
structure of the RFE Slovak broadcast. It is well informed 
regarding the completely biased depiction of Slovakia by people 
who failed in democratic elections. Of course, there is nothing 
to prevent Radio Free Europe from broadcasting for Slovakia, as 
long as it is done outside the Slovak territory and as long as 
they will finance it. 

