BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by ANC candidate Jay Naidoo with </F>
international and domestic correspondents at ANC Headquarters in 
Johannesburg -- live] 
  [Text] [Naidoo] Thank you. The ANC wants to reiterate its 
demand that every person in South Africa must be given the right 
to vote if they want to do so. It is in this context we have 
said that certain areas of our country, particularly the 
Northern Transvaal and Eastern Cape, where because of no fault 
of the voter, many people have not been able to vote and have 
only got the ballots late this afternoon, but the voting period 
should be extended for these areas till tomorrow afternoon. We 
believe that this is important because we don't want to be seen 
to disenfranchise anyone in South Africa. We welcome the 
announcement by Judge Kriegler that the IEC is recommending the 
extension of voting in these areas, including Natal. We believe 
that there is no political party in South Africa that will want 
to deny the opportunity to any South African to participate in 
this very important and historic election. 
  We, therefore, call on our people in these areas to go to 
the 
ballot stations in their millions and cast their votes for the 
new South Africa. It is also in this context that we...[pauses] 
our president, earlier this morning, expressed deep concerns at 
the missing ballots and the IEC as we understand has now 
instructed the South African Police to investigate what has 
happened to the missing ballots and Judge Kriegler himself, both 
yesterday and today, has not ruled out the question of sabotage 
in relation to certain specified incidents. We want to also 
take this opportunity to reiterate our concern about the 
disturbing reports coming out of certain areas of Natal and 
KwaZulu, particularly those that are under control of the 
KwaZulu Police and the KwaZulu administration. 
  In these areas we reiterate that we have evidence now of 
party agents of the ANC being expelled from certain voting 
stations, in other cases of KwaZulu, administration officials 
and KwaZulu Police intimidating people into voting for the IFP, 
displaying weapons, and displaying party propaganda material, 
and in a number of incidents we have identified what we call 
pirate polling stations, polling stations not approved by the 
IEC, that are now controlled by the Inkatha Freedom Party, and 
we are appealing to the IEC, to whom we have reported these 
incidents, to take stern action against these incidents. We 
want to, however, conclude by saying that the overwhelming 
evidence has shown that the vast majority of people in South 
Africa have participated in this historic event in a remarkably 
disciplined and calm way, and we welcome that, and we believe 
that the people of our country, both black and white, are now 
united in their desire to build a new South Africa, a desire and 
a wish that the ANC itself is committed to, and one can just say 
that today and over the last two days, we've had the dark cloud 
of apartheid removed and we can now concentrate on the task of 
rebuilding our country, rebuilding our economy, and repairing 
the irreparable damage that apartheid has caused to this country 
in the past and we, therefore, as the ANC, want to call on all 
our people, from the security forces to the government officials 
in civil service, to ordinary workers and businessmen and people 
throughout the country, to come together in a joint effort to 
build a better South Africa for all of us in the future. Thank 
you. 
  [Correspondent Callie Long] Apparently the state president 
is not in favor of the possibility of an extension. Your 
reaction to this? 
  [Naidoo] We would think that this is a gross injustice. The 
fact that there would be, in our calculations between a million 
and two million people in these areas that would be denied the 
opportunity to vote. We also are concerned that because these 
are areas that historically have been supporters of the ANC and 
our struggle against apartheid, and we cannot understand why a 
political party and the state president should support any 
action that denies a South African population that has 
historically been denied the right to vote by apartheid not to 
have that right, particularly if one sees that this has been 
caused by the inefficiencies, not in the part of people who were 
there in their millions to cast their votes, but by the fact 
that there were no ballot papers or sufficient supplies to 
ensure that these people had their right to exercise their 
ballot. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] This morning ANC President 
Nelson Mandela used the word sabotage to describe some of the 
incidents that have taken place. Now that's quite a strong 
word. Does this mean the ANC is casting doubt on the freeness 
and fairness of the electoral process as a whole? 
  [Naidoo] Absolutely not. We have said that there are certain 
specified incidents that have happened, and these have not just 
been said by the ANC itself, it's been said by the judge himself 
-- Judge Kriegler of the IEC. That should not however be used 
to cast any doubt on the bone fides of the electoral process as 
a whole. What we do have alongside those specified incidents 
would have denied large numbers of people in the northern 
Transvaal, and particularly in the Ciskei and the Transkei the 
right to vote, is the fact that millions of other people in our 
country have had that right to vote, and one cannot therefore 
disqualify the election on the basis that some people may have 
used sabotage to prevent certain parts of our country's people 
participating in this election. 
  [Correspondent Neil Lewis] If an extension is granted, it 
would cast a lot of pressure on the counting process. Won't this 
affect perceptions on the ground because people are expectant? 
  [Naidoo] Well, I believe that it would cause more problems 
for us if we deny people the right to vote. That is the bottom 
line that we have to understand. The expectations of people are 
enormous, but as we saw over the last three days, those 
expectations have been understood of our people, internalized by 
our people and they have displayed the most remarkable calmness 
and discipline which no one can dispute because it's there on 
our television screens. I think that our people expect that 
their fellow countrymen and women who had been denied the right 
to vote in certain areas are given that right and they will be 
prepared to wait, as many people have said, hours or days or 
even weeks, so that those people have that right to participate 
in the transformation of this country of ours. 
  [Correspondent] What is the ANC's view of the IEC's 
performance? 
  [Naidoo] Well, we believe that the IEC has been given a 
tremendous challenge and task to complete in a very short period 
of time. They had to do it under circumstances like the late 
entry of Inkatha in a way that created complications that could 
not have been foreseen. I do believe there have been many areas 
where we could have avoided the inefficiencies we saw; and 
therefore one must accept that overall, while there have been 
obstacles, we cannot go into the future on the basis of 
complaints, we cannot go into the future saying there have been 
administrative obstacles. Therefore our task, and all of us, 
our task is to commit ourselves, to put our resources together, 
to address the problems together with the IFP, and for all of us 
to go forward to that new South Africa. I don't believe that 
one can expect that there are people who have laid complaints, 
and complaints that may have been legitimate in many 
circumstances, but now say on the basis of that, that this 
election was not free and fair. We will not accept that. 
  [Correspondent] The PAC [Pan-Africanist Congress], I think 
in 
the Western Cape, has already indicated that they will not 
accept the election is free and fair until the IEC solved all 
their problems. 
  [Naidoo] I have no evidence, or the ANC has no evidence 
before hand of any of these complaints that are alleged to have 
been committed by other political parties including ourselves. 
The second thing is that it is not the PAC or any other 
political party that decides whether this election is free or 
fair. It is the Independent Electoral Commission that has been 
set up in terms of the interim constitution to decide that 
matter. For anyone to argue that there has been any substantive 
evidence of intimidation across the spectrum of our country, in 
the glare of international publicity, the fact that we have 
international journalists, international monitors, the fact that 
this election is being conducted in our living rooms through our 
television screens, with the security forces present, I think 
that type of claim is absurd, and therefore should be treated 
with the attention it deserves. So we are concerned at the ANC 
that in relation to certain areas, there had been very definite 
problems that the IEC needs to resolve, but overwhelmingly we 
believe that the election has gone well in spite of the 
administrative problems that have happened because of the IEC. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Naidoo, the chances of the ANC's call 
being heeded, that ballot boxes which have allegedly been 
tampered with be disregarded, do you think the chances are good? 
  [Naidoo] Well, we are reiterating our demand. In those 
polling stations which have not been approved by the IEC, that 
we regard as pirate polling stations, that vote must be 
completely disqualified. In relation to other problems, we 
believe that, for example, the fact that there are ballots 
without the Inkatha sticker on, that we have agreed should be 
set aside and there should be a separate process to decide what 
to do about that, in conjunction with the IEC and the political 
parties. But that is what we are asking -- the votes in those 
pirate polling stations must be definitely disqualified, and the 
IEC must now come up with the evidence that we believe they have 
of where these polling stations are, who is running these 
polling stations, and what is happening in those polling 
stations. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Naidoo, how do you intend to get this 
message across to your supporters that if the extension is 
granted, that they should go and vote, because most of these 
areas are rural where they don't have televisions, radios, and 
probably don't read the newspapers? 
  [Naidoo] We have taken a number of steps already to ensure 
that these areas are reached. We are putting enormous resources 
of our own in terms of transport and people into these rural 
areas. We do believe that the media and the SABC [South African 
Broadcasting Corporation] in particular have a responsibility to 
regularly announce that these polling stations are now open 
tomorrow, that there will be material there, and people must go 
and cast their vote. I think this requires a collective effort 
on the part of all our people and all the political parties and 
institutions in our country. 
  [Correspondent Leo Louis] Mr. Naidoo, Leo Louis from 
(Southwick). It seems the state of emergency has failed if it 
is unable to deal with the question of intimidation, or alleged 
intimidation on the part of the KwaZulu Police? 
  [Naidoo] Well, let me reiterate again, that the intimidation 
we are (?arguing) has taken place in very specific areas of 
KwaZulu-Natal. We've got a list of incidents that cover certain 
of these polling booths and we are not arguing, in this case, 
that across Natal this has happened. We are saying there are 
very specific incidents in certain polling stations where 
inspite of the agreement we've had with the South African Police 
and the South African Defense Force, that there will be no 
polling stations where the KwaZulu Police and the KwaZulu 
Administration were left alone, we have found that there were 
several polling stations where this has happened, and the bottom 
reason and the root cause of this problem is the fact that 
Inkatha and the KwaZulu Administration and the KwaZulu Police 
have been in many instances allowed to do what they want in 
these polling stations, completely disregarding the party agents 
that come from other parties and even the IEC itself. 
  [Correspondent Sefako Nyaka] Mr. Naidoo, Sefako Nyaka from 
the SABC. Apparently there is a high level delegation meeting 
going on between the ANC and the IEC at the moment. Can you 
just give an indication of what is actually being discussed, and 
whether any concrete decisions have been taken so far? 
  [Naidoo] The meeting taking place this afternoon is a 
meeting between high officials of all political parties and the 
IEC. The main issues under discussion this afternoon have been 
the extension of voting time to the areas that I've disclosed 
already where people have not had the opportunity to vote, the 
question of security and intimidation that we are arguing is 
taking place in terms of certain polling booths in KwaZulu, and 
those have been the substantive issues. And we believe that 
through that meeting we have come to some sort of agreement 
around how to address these issues. It is in the interests, we 
believe, of the whole of South Africa that the agreements that 
have already been reached in this afternoon's meeting is now 
accepted by the parties' principals, and particularly in this 
case by the National Party. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Naidoo, how are international observers 
viewing the process at the moment? Any idea? 
  [Naidoo] Yes. Well, the reports that we have seen and this 
interview that we are hearing, and the interaction we have with 
the international monitors convinces us that the majority of 
those observers in the majority of polling stations across South 
Africa accept that this has been a remarkably calm and 
disciplined election. 
  [Correspondent] What is the extent of the pirate stations 
problem? Are there four, or five, or 10 or 12? 
  [Naidoo] We are arguing that there are 10 pirate polling 
stations in operation. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Naidoo, the allegations seem to be 
focussing on Inkatha alone. Have you heard any irregularities 
reported in areas that are controlled largely by the rightwing, 
like the Western Transvaal and so forth? 
  [Naidoo] Well, there have been other incidents and we are 
recording hundreds of incidents over the period of the last few 
days. We have chosen only to highlight the most important ones, 
where the most substantive intimidation is taking place that is 
preventing, we believe, thousands and thousands of members who 
want to vote -- we are not even arguing voting for the ANC -- 
who want to just exercise their right to vote, the secret vote, 
they have been prevented from doing that, and that is only 
taking place, in our minds, in certain areas controlled by the 
KwaZulu Government. 
  [Correspondent] The voting booths in the PWV [Pretoria, 
Witwatersrand, Vereeniging] will be closing at 7 o'clock, that's 
approximately in an hour's time. Will the process of 
reconciliating all those votes start? Will the ANC be assisting 
the IEC with that? 
  [Naidoo] No, we will not be. There are counters identified 
and agreed...[break in transmission] particular advantage. We 
now have substantive evidence of gross intimidation in those 
areas, use of weapons, people being assaulted, people from the 
ANC being expelled, of chiefs taking the polling booths and 
relocating them to areas that they control -- and that is what 
we have always argued, and that is why we believed [words 
indistinct] that the South African Police and the South African 
Defense Force should have been present at every polling booth, 
and that was the agreement that was made, and we cannot 
understand why it was not implemented. 
  [Correspondent] Is the ANC in a difficult position regarding 
this whole question of free and fair, because if you complain 
too much about irregularities, could that not then be used by 
those who don't regard it as being free and fair? At the same 
time, you obviously want irregularities to be addressed? 
  [Naidoo] Certainly, and it is a dilemma which we must 
accept. 
But we do believe that there are certain irregularities that we 
cannot brush under the carpet. Where someone is denied their 
fundamental right to vote, that needs to be exposed, and action 
needs to be taken against any political party that does deny any 
individual in South Africa that right to vote. That is our 
position. But arguably, we can say today, and I am sure I speak 
with the majority of people in this country, and the majority of 
even party political leaders, that we've gone through the most 
remarkably calm and disciplined transition, and that what we 
have seen is a dark cloud lifted from South Africa, and a new 
spirit emerging that is uniting black and white, rich and poor, 
young and old around a new vision of a new South Africa. Thank 
you. 

