BFN 

  [Text] According to a political statement issued in Mexico, 
the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG) general 
command charged last night, that President Ramiro de Leon Carpio 
and the top National Army commanders are the ones most 
interested in blocking the negotiations to achieve peace in 
Guatemala. 
  The guerrilla bases its charges on three fundamental points 
which are included in the statement sent to our offices. The 
statement says the Guatemalan Government's Peace Commission is 
"strong and untruthful" and describes it as: 
  1. "Deceitful, because it has attempted to describe its 
position as humanitarian. However, it has ignored the most 
salient aspects of the displaced people's plight -- the 
magnitude of the problem and the social trauma it causes -- and 
reduced it to the ridiculous, insignificant, and precarious 
government policy it has started to implement." 
  2. "Incoherent, because it rejects the calls of society and 
the demands of justice on this important issue as expressed both 
by the Civilian Society Assembly and the URNG at the 
negotiations table." 
  3. "Obstructionist, because it places conditions, such as a 
cease-fire in the area assigned to the returning displaced 
people, when this is totally out of place," the rebel 
organization statement asserts. 
  Regarding the last point, the URNG stated that the 
cease-fire 
condition does not correspond to the issue or to the validity of 
the agreement. It explained that the resettlement areas are not 
combat zones and added that "faithful compliance with the Global 
Agreement on Human Rights and its immediate verification include 
and guarantee the situation of the civilian population who are 
not combatants." 
  The URNG also charged that the National Army started an 
offensive in the Ixcan zone yesterday. According to the 
document, the Army has concentrated six elite troops, including 
paratroopers and battalions with orders to act against the 
Communities of Resistant People (CPR.) 
  The URNG demanded that the government end its national 
campaign on the development of the negotiations as it considered 
the campaign should present the situation to Guatemalan society 
in an impartial manner and with a political will to end the 
conflict. 
  Also, the URNG pointed out that there is no excuse for 
evading the commitment to negotiate, on the scheduled dates, the 
issues related to the integration of a commission to investigate 
human rights violations, without ending the discussions on the 
displaced population, as stipulated by the 29 March declaration 
when the Global Agreement on Human Rights was signed. 

