Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 7 Feb (MTI) -- Addressing an 
international press conference tonight, Hungarian Foreign 
Minister Geza Jeszenszky stressed that there was no bargain 
between Budapest and Belgrade, and Hungary would not ease 
sanctions in return for a more tolerant policy toward Serbia's 
ethnic Hungarian minority. "Such a policy will never occur as 
long as I am in this job," the minister said. 
  Jeszenszky welcomed President Milosevic's overtures toward 
the Hungarian minority, but added that "only time can tell what 
the result will be." 
  The minister rejected the view that either his recent trip 
to 
Belgrade or Hungary's general conduct towards Yugoslavia 
endangers the policy of international sanctions against 
Yugoslavia. He also found it strange that a week after his 
visit some forces at home tried to reassess the modest success 
of his Belgrade visit as a failure. 
  Jeszenszky said that while his visit was followed with keen 
attention in Belgrade, it created little stir in Hungary. 
Almost a week passed before Istvan Szent-Ivanyi, the foreign 
affairs spokesman for the Alliance of Free Democrats, criticized 
the visit. 
  "It is particularly regretful that the Vienna correspondent 
of THE WASHINGTON POST wrote an article which corresponded to 
the belated criticism within Hungary," Jeszenszky said. He 
termed as surprising the conclusion of the newspaper that the 
normalization of Hungarian-Yugoslav ties could severely undercut 
the effectiveness of sanctions against Belgrade. 
  "It is in our fundamental national interest that ethnic 
Hungarians living outside of Hungary should be able to remain in 
their native land, and they should not be forced to leave 
Vojvodina either," Jeszenszky said. 
  "Of course, it is quite difficult to support the endeavours 
of these minorities and to simultaneously foster good ties with 
neighbouring nations which have large Hungarian communities. 
This, however, is the Hungarian Government's policy," 
Jeszenszky said. 
  "Some other players in Hungarian political life 
overemphasize 
one of these two elements. For instance, Istvan Csurka's Party 
of Hungarian Justice and Life presses only for minority 
protection. It raises unrealistic demands and ignores 
possibilities," the minister said. "In turn, the Hungarian 
Socialist Party criticizes Hungarian diplomacy for making 
inappropriate moves towards Hungary's neighbours," he added. 
  Concerning the Free Democrats, Jeszenszky said, "they fail 
to 
notice that Yugoslavia did make certain moves, and not only 
towards the Hungarian minority." 

