Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Maxie Cuffie] </F>
  [Text] A Trinidadian drug cartel involving hundreds of 
millions of dollars worth of cocaine in monthly shipments 
between Colombia and the United States and Britain via Trinidad 
has been broken in Venezuela with the arrest of its leader on a 
beach in the mainland republic. 
  George Simeon, leader of a cartel called "Los Trinitarios" 
(The Trinidadians), was captured on the beach in Sucre State as 
he received samples of what General Julio C. Pena Sanchez of the 
Venezuelan Guardia Nacional described as a future shipment of 
high quality cocaine. 
  The cartel was said to have been shipping between 500 and 
1,000 kilos of cocaine, worth between TT$175 and TT$350 million, 
monthly from Colombia through Venezuela via Trinidad to points 
in the Caribbean and North Atlantic. 
  The arrest of the group was the leading item in Venezuela's 
largest-selling newspaper, EL NACIONAL last Wednesday. Simeon, a 
Trindadian, was arrested along with other members of the cartel 
who were held simultaneously in other parts of the country in a 
massive Guardia Nacional exercise which also resulted in the 
seizure of six vehicles. 
  General Pena Sanchez, Operations Commander of the Guardia 
Nacional, announced the arrests last Tuesday, following the 
events which occurred on Saturday, November 6. 
  He said the arrests had been the result of seven months of 
investigations and surveillance by the joint armed forces aimed 
at breaking the cartel, which was based in Maracaibo in Zulia 
state and had a network which spread across several states in 
Venezuela. 
  A total of 165 officers of the Guardia Nacional took part in 
the raid which captured Simeon and a Venezuelan national on the 
Sucre beach. Other members of the drug network were captured in 
Maracaibo, Zulia, Acarigua, Portuguesa and Rio Caribe. The 
Guardia Nacional has traced the drug route from Cali, Cucuta, 
Colombia; to Urena, Tachira, Acarigua, Carupano, Sucre and Rio 
Caribe in Venezuela, and then to Trinidad. 
  Since then, in an apparently unrelated case, another 
Trinidadian, Wharfe Ashton, Alton, has been arrested on drug 
trafficking charges after the intelligence arm of the police 
service monitored a drug shipment bound for Miami. Alton was 
shot in the leg as he tried to escape. 
  The big Venezuelan drug bust is the second major report in a 
week involving the discovery of multi-million drug operations in 
which Trinidadians were implicated. 
  Grenada Coast Guard intercepted an inter-island vessel on 
November 5, the same day of the Venezuelan operations, and 
found 60 kilos of cocaine hidden in a cargo of furniture. The 
boat had left Port of Spain the afternoon before. An Arima man, 
Sylvon Liverpool, was arrested together with five others. 

