BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 16 KYODO -- The ruling coalition 
parties hope to hammer out an accord Monday [18 April] on 
fundamental policies for a new coalition government to succeed 
the one led by Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, coalition 
officials said Saturday. 
  At a meeting of their executives, the ruling parties started 
efforts to synchronize policies on such key issues as political 
reform, Tokyo's stand to be taken toward North Korea's alleged 
nuclear arms program, its international contributions and tax 
reform, the officials said. 
  New party Sakigake, one of the coalition parties which 
declared Friday that it will not take a post in a new cabinet, 
did not send its representative to the meeting. 
  The senior coalition officials confirmed the ruling parties 
will stick with a policy accord reached before the startup of 
the Hosokawa administration last August, Social Democratic Party 
(SDP) secretary general Wataru Kubo told a news conference. 
  Kubo also said the parties should reach an agreement calling 
for early Diet approval of the already overdue fiscal 1994 
budget as the next government's "urgent and most important task." 
  If a broad agreement is reached on basic policies at the 
secretary general-level of coalition executives at their next 
meeting Monday afternoon, leaders of the coalition parties will 
hold a summit to give a stamp of approval, said Kubo of the SDP, 
the largest coalition contingent. 
  The policy discussions followed a week of political turmoil 
triggered by Hosokawa's abrupt decision to call it quits on 
April 8. Hosokawa, who shot to power last August, will remain on 
board until his successor is chosen. 
  On the stance Japan will take toward North Korea's suspected 
nuclear arms program, the SDP, which has traditionally 
maintained close ties with the (North) Korean Workers' Party, 
will not face difficulties in working out a common policy, Kubo 
said. 
  "We will honor a UN decision and strive to do all we can 
within the bounds of the constitution," he said, in a reference 
to the SDP's readiness to respect the possibility of UN 
sanctions against the communist country. 
  At Saturday's meeting, the ruling party representatives 
concurred on the need to solve the question of how to define the 
role of Japan-U.S. security arrangements, Kubo and other 
coalition officials said. 
  They also reaffirmed that the ruling parties will continue 
their talks on tax system reform, a topic on which the coalition 
parties' policies are way apart, the officials said. 
  After the coalition chiefs decide on the final shape of a 
policy agreement, the ruling parties will move to nominate 
Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata as a candidate to succeed Hosokawa. 
  Hata, concurrently serving as deputy prime minister, will 
return to Japan on Sunday from Marrakech, Morocco, where he 
represented Japan at a ministerial meeting of the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to sign a new global trade pact. 
  Meanwhile, Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) president Yohei 
Kono and veteran faction leader Michio Watanabe will hold a 
second round of talks on Monday to compare notes on who should 
be the main opposition's candidate in an upcoming Diet vote for 
the premiership, LDP officials said. 
  LDP Secretary General Yoshiro Mori and Masaaki Nakayama, 
secretary general of Watanabe's faction, the LDP's third largest 
power bloc, reached the agreement in a Saturday morning meeting, 
the officials said. 
  The accord came one day after Kono and Watanabe failed to 
reach a compromise on the LDP's candidate for premier. 
  During Friday's session, Kono asked Watanabe not to break 
with the LDP but to help maintain the unity of the once-dominant 
party. 
  Watanabe, however, expressed his willingness to form a new 
alliance with Shinseito (Japan Renewal Party) and Komeito, the 
two key forces in the ruling coalition, in order to "surmount 
the crises now confronting this country." 
  The LDP, toppled from power last August after 38 years of 
unbroken rule, is currently Japan's largest opposition party and 
is still the single biggest party. It controls 214 members in 
the 511- member House of Representatives. 
  In a related move, Nakayama told reporters the Watanabe 
faction will retract its demand for an LDP endorsement of their 
chief as the prime ministerial candidate if the governing 
coalition decides to sweep Hata to the premiership. 

