Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gabi Shefer] </F>
  [Text] During Israel's first three decades, national 
leaders molded our political culture and forced it on society. 
In the past decade, the politicians, and all of society as well, 
have been stuck in the quaqmire of the "old politics" created 
back then. Too many times, what occurs in this arena resembles 
what we mockingly call (not always justifiably) the legacy of 
the shtetl, the traditional Jewish village, or events in 
developing countries racked by the forces of fundamentalism. 
  On the other hand, large segments of Israeli society are 
open 
to new ideas and points of view. Above all else, they are ahead 
of the politicians, laying the foundation for a new political 
culture. It is this development, and not switching Labor and 
Likud governments, that marks the political revolution now 
taking place in Israel. This revolution will affect the future 
of Israeli society and politics more than will replacing prime 
ministers, particularly given the obstacles that fundamentalist 
groups are raising before us on the path to peace with the 
Palestinians and the Arab states. 
  David Ben-Gurion and the MAPAI [Israel Workers Party] 
leadership, Menachem Begin and the "fighting family," and all 
the religious and ultraorthodox politicians, too, internalized 
the political ideas and outlooks of most Israelis. These leaders 
fixed the boundaries of what was permissible and what was not in 
society, politics, defense, foreign, and economic policy. They 
formulated the ideologies and political platforms on which 
Israelis grew up and joined the main political blocs. 
  Our passive social habits enabled Israel's founding fathers 
to create three traditional blocs that divided up Israeli 
society and politics, make the political arrangements and rules 
on which these blocs operated and institutionalize the relations 
among them. The heirs of the founding fathers have preserved 
these arrangements. Many have labored to assure their legitimacy 
by establishing powerful economic and political mechanisms, 
which supported the state's educational and communications 
systems. To preserve "the national agreement in light of the 
danger facing Israel," most Israelis have accepted the 
arrangements that the politicians have managed and preserved as 
something beyond question. 
  Ben-Gurion imposed on society the concepts of "statehood" 
and 
"state activism"; Menachem Begin strengthened Israel's national 
foundations, our alienation from non-Jews and the legitimacy of 
Israeli colonization of the territories; and religious and 
ultraorthodox leaders have fortified the hold that religion 
keeps on a number of important spheres of life here, preparing 
the ground for marginal and demented groups such as "Kach" to 
take root. 
  Mobilization of society was accomplished for goals that the 
leaders set and the concessions required of Israelis in matters 
of personal freedom and political rights. This mobilization was 
achieved by developing dependence on the state, by political and 
economic bribes, by "party discipline" and by enforcing 
"movement and national law." From that to the formation of a 
civic political culture was a short step. 
  The civic, political customs, and background of most 
residents of Israel, the continuing political isolation and the 
shaky economic situation have bolstered another foundation that 
has ensured the ability of leaders to continue to shape 
Israelis' outlook and behavior: most of them have been busy 
trying to make sure that they, their families, and their 
community get by. The result has been a narrowing of horizons 
and preparation of the ground for extreme religious and national 
ideas. 
  The connection between the mobilization and discipline 
necessary to ensure achievements in the "struggle for 
existence," and the shrinking of horizons that to a large degree 
was forced on Israelis, have brought about a political passivity 
and a willingness to obey the dictates of any religious or 
secular rabbi. Most Israelis have been content to go to the 
ballot box every four years and cast their votes for leaders who 
will guide the state down a safe and productive path. Most 
Israelis have supported the leaders and their ability to lead 
society almost exactly as they wish. They have left it to the 
leaders to determine nearly every policy they saw fit, to direct 
the public wealth as though it were their own, to launch wars of 
choice, to strip the Arabs of Israel of their property, to allow 
the colonization of the territories, to permit radical groups to 
thrive there, and to engage in wasteful and conflicting economic 
actions. 
  The revolution in Israeli society began, we know, after the 
Yom Kippur war. That war caused many Israelis to reconsider: 
they began putting question marks over many accepted political 
practices, questioning what politicians said and did and taking 
answers with a grain of salt. But the important revolution began 
only at the start of the current decade. Reactions to the events 
of "Black Purim" illustrate this revolution. On the one hand, it 
is creating a new and significant polarization in Israeli 
society itself; on the other, it is creating a gap between 
enlightened groups in society and the politicians. This gap and 
the polarization are unrelated to relations between Ashkenazis 
[European Jews] and eastern Jews or between religious and 
secular, or to the Arab-Israeli dispute. It has been awakened 
between those breaking free of the dark and horizon-narrowing 
civic, national, religious culture that characterized Israeli 
society in the past--and those devoted to that culture. 
  Many indications of progressive viewpoints demonstrate that 
the number of those ready to ask tough questions of themselves, 
others around them and the politicians, and not be satisfied 
with the cliched answers they get, is growing. Here are some 
notable examples of the new positions taken by the Israeli 
public--they indicate the directions that the changes in Israeli 
political culture will take, and that most politicians of the 
old school are finding hard to digest: 
  The reluctance to give carte blanche to a single political 
party; a readiness shown by many voters to change horses during 
the national elections; opposition to allocating unjustified 
resources, such as "special funds"; extensive support for 
privatization of the economy; insistence on a reduction in 
government involvement in economics and society; faith in the 
judicial system and especially in the Supreme Court; demanding 
assistance for weaker groups and readiness to recognize the 
right to strike and protest in order to obtain that assistance; 
an inclination to organize interest groups to protect the rights 
of various social groups and to advance their interests; demands 
of women for equality and full rights; the readiness of minority 
groups, such as battered women, homosexuals, progressive 
religious groups and activists among the Arabs of Israel, to 
organize and aggressively demand their rights; the final death 
of the myth that the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] and the 
security services are all-powerful and that their commanders 
never make mistakes; harsh criticism of public officials and 
state employees who have betrayed their trust; much closer 
attention to issues of quality of life; and much greater 
recognition of the legitimacy of pluralism in modern Israeli 
society. These trends can be seen not only among well-off and 
highly educated "northern" Askenazis; they can also be seen 
among eastern Jews, new immigrants, some groups of religious 
Jews, and the ethnic groups in Israel. 
  As the events in Hebron have shown, alongside the growing 
tendencies to adopt the classic characteristics of liberal 
democracy and lay the foundation stones for "civic society," we 
must realize that we still harbor large groups loyal to the old 
ways of Israeli politics. There are still groups, among both 
Ashkenzis and non-Ashkenazis, religious and secular, Jews and 
Israeli Arabs, who prostrate themselves before the powers that 
be. In their eyes, the IDF and the security services are sacred 
cows. They loathe any group that differs from them, examine 
every incident from a narrow national and local point of view, 
prefer to maintain the status quo and oppose any liberal reform. 
These groups receive encouragement from the positions held by 
most politicians. 
  The political elite of Israel's right, left and religious, 
ultraorthodox camp behave very conservatively, all the more so 
in comparison to more progressive groups in Israeli society. 
This can also be seen among the leaders of the Labor Party; 
true, they have decided, halfheartedly, to advance the peace 
process, a decision essential for creation of an infrastructure 
for change in Israeli society and politics--yet they, and, a 
fortiori, the leaders of the Likud and religious and haredi 
Judaism, still cling to the old political ways in all other 
spheres. Most high-ranking politicians are driven by concepts of 
nationalism and force, and have only contempt for anyone who 
does not think and act as they do. Most of them ignore moral 
considerations when making decisions, and that includes 
relations and negotiations with the Arabs. They still resist the 
final efforts to create a written constitution. They are not 
promoting final enactment of basic laws that will guarantee 
individual rights. They oppose separation of religion and state. 
They are conducting privitization as though it has been forced 
down their throats. They scorn the judicial system, particularly 
the Supreme Court's justified intervention in matters that the 
government has neglected. They are not impressed by the 
criticism heard in Israeli society and attempt to influence the 
state-run media. Issues of quality of life and the environment 
stand very low on their list of priorities. They withhold 
resources from institutions of higher learning and hold academia 
in contempt. They do not undertake initiatives and avoid serious 
dialogue with intellectuals and the Israeli intelligentsia. They 
do not understand the pressing need for reforms in public 
administration. Despite revelations about acts of corruption, 
they either still do not realize that new winds are blowing 
around the world and in Israeli society or are willfully closing 
their eyes to it. 
  Relations among the highest political echelons also reveal 
the hoary diaspora culture that prevails at that level: the 
narrowmindedness and obstruction of adversaries and their 
supporters, open and unrestrained personal rivalries, 
self-indulgence, persistent courting of the media, tireless 
readiness to engage in shady deals and a willingness to cover up 
blunders and transgressions on the basis of personal friendship 
and short-term political coalitions--these are only some further 
signs of a power-based, political culture that does not 
encourage change. 
  Such political conservatism is not the monopoly of veteran 
politicians. Political conservatism also characterizes our 
younger politicians. A young politician who calls for the 
elimination of institutions that seem archaic to him and, in the 
same breath, opposes the possibility that elected political 
bodies will violate decisions made by the government--he is to 
be considered a conservative. Most of the young politicians, 
even if they often look and sound like yuppies, act according to 
the ways of the "old politics." 
  By itself, peace with the Arabs will not work a change in 
Israeli politics. The processes of genuine liberalization will 
occur only when pushed by additional impulses emanating from 
society rather than a leadership bound to a time-worn ethos. 
Thus, only when the gap between groups influenced by liberal 
democratic ideals and Israeli politicians widens will the chance 
for change in Israeli political culture grow. Only then will we 
see the death of the dinosaurs who refuse to allow Israeli 
society and politics to prepare for the 21st century. But the 
old-time politicians and the new alike will not surrender their 
positions, their posts and the benefits that those stations 
provide. Therefore, more progressive groups must struggle with 
firm resolve for a new civilian leadership within Israel's "new 
politics", one that also will be able to deal with the extremist 
movements that gave birth to the murderer from Hebron. 


