Table     of Contents 
   FEATURE: 
   France: National Debate On Research Policy 
   POLICY ISSUES 
   Germany Launches New Laser Research Program 
   French Report on Critical Defense Technologies 
   Finnish Support for R&amp;D 
   CORPORATE STRATEGIES 
   DASA, China Sign Telecommunications Satellite Agreement 
   Swedish Research on Hybrid Vehicles 
   Honda Reacts to Sale of Rover 
   SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS 
   FRANCE: NATIONAL DEBATE ON RESEARCH POLICY 
   In recent statements to the press Minister of Higher Education 
and Research Francois Fillon confirmed that the French Government 
intends to make research a national priority and that it is relying 
heavily on major debates now taking place to define the broad 
outlines of a national policy by June 1994. 
   The national debate on research policy officially got under way 
on 1 February, when Robert Daulray of the Atomic Energy Commission 
(CEA) presented to Fillon the "Report on the Trends in Major Aims of 
French Research."  The 60-page document, which the research minister 
commissioned last September, will be circulated to about 30,000 
members of the research community, who will use it as the basis for 
a  major national consultation. "  The consultation exercise will be 
based on six thematic conferences to be held in different regions of 
the country through mid-March.  The results of these conferences 
will be included in a national debate in Paris on 9 April, to be 
followed by the drafting in May of a final summary document, which 
will serve as the framework for parliamentary discussions on the 
future of French research in June (LE FIGARO).  The conferences will 
address topics such as research and innovation in small and medium- 
sized enterprises, competitiveness-oriented research and the private 
sector, basic research, advanced education and research 
organizations, and international research (AFS SCIENCES). 
   Fillon told LE FIGARO on 2 February that he considers a thorough 
assessment of the French scientific community indispensable   This 
has not been done for 10 years despite the major changes that have 
occurred during that time.  Fillon considers it important for France 
to have a more accurate perception of its scientific resources and 
of the steps it needs to take during the next few years to remain a 
major player in the global S&amp;T arena. 
   According to Fillon, French research policy over the past five 
years has failed to define the kind of strong priorities that would 
encourage "pump-priming" programs to stimulate research in a changed 
national and international context or that would launch basic 
research programs today to lay the groundwork for the applied 
research companies will need tomorrow.  AFP SCIENCES has quoted 
Fillon as saying that France is the only European country whose 
research budget is increasing, but Fillon asserted in LE FIGARO 
that, having relinquished much of its leadership role to become 
merely a source of funding, the French' Government now needs to find 
a way to target research instead of being satisfied to finance it 
without having any authority over it.  The government needs to be 
able to make selective decisions, such as supporting a particular 
laboratory that has achieved a major breakthrough in a field 
important to France, Fillon said.  He hopes the current national 
debate will result in a policy that will allow researchers the 
flexibility to assess needs accurately and allocate efforts 
appropriately.  Fillon told AFP SCIENCES he supports proposal5 for a 
five-year plan or a programming law like that of the Ministry of 
Defense. (AFP SCIENCES 6 Jan 94; LE FIGARO 2 Feb 94) SW 
   POLICY ISSUES 
   Germany Launches New Laser Research Program--According to 
FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE, the German Ministry of Research is launching 
the "Laser 2000" program to promote the development of semiconductor 
lasers.  A total of 270 million marks ($159 million) is to be made 
available by 1997.  The program is open to small and medium-sized 
companies and includes the newly created laser institutes in Berlin- 
Adlershof and Dresden, as well as existing research institutes in 
Dresden, Jena, Halle, and Rostock. 
   The program is Particularly aimed at aiding the transition from 
tube lasers to modern Semiconductor lasers.  Germany is two years 
behind Japan and the United States in building more powerful 
Semiconductor lasers.  For example, one can already buy 100 watt 
diode lasers in the United States, whereas in Germany only 
laboratory samples exist.  Applications are seen especially in 
medicine, for destroying kidney stones and gallstones, or in the 
diagnosis and treatment of tumors.  (Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER 
ALLGEMEINE in German 26 Jan 94) BC 
   French Report on Critical Defense Technologies--Faced with 
shrinking markets and major job cuts in the defense sector, the 
French Government has published a report on "the future of defenses 
related industries" that prioritizes 24 technologies considered 
critical, according to ELECTRONIQUE INTERNATIONAL HEBDO.  The report 
states that France will not be able to remain Self-Sufficient in all 
areas of equipmens development and will have to enter into 
cooperative agreements with its European partners but it 
specifically recommends that funding for basic defense research be 
maintained at present levels or even increased. The report also 
suggests that a special budget be created for evaluation and 
acquisition of foreign technologies 
   The 24 technologies identified in the report are divided into 
three categories: those that need to be totally independent at a 
French or European level and whose Proliferation would constitute a 
risk, those that have intermediate Priority, and those whose 
specifically dual-use nature makes them "less sensitive."  The first 
category includes nuclear technology, microelectronic and 
nanoelectronic components for equipment and Subassemblies, 
navigation equipment, Sensors and signal Processing equipment, 
Signature-recogniion expertise, and Stealth-related technologies 
The second category consists of technologie5 such as modular 
electronic architectures, optical and optronic devices, 
telecommunications hardware and networks, advanced computer 
hardware, artificial intelligence and neural networks, sof tware 
engineering, and advanced computational codes.  The technologies 
identified as dual-use include production software and industrial 
production systems as well as hardware and software used for 
security of equipment and weapons systems. (ELECTRONIQUE 
INTERNATIONAL HEBDO 13 Jan 94) SW 
   Finnish Support for R&amp;D--TEKES, the Technology Development 
Center,  distributed 1.4 billion markkas ($254 million) in 1993 to 
firms for 108 research and development projects.  The total sum in 
grants and loans was the largest amount ever given in one year. 
TEKES, which operates with government funding, distributed more than 
half of the grants to small and medium-sized companies.  Projects 
receiving the most support were those dealing with information 
technology, process technology, manufacturing automation, 
construction and Space technology.  Many of the technological 
development projects dealt Specifically with improving the 
environment. (Helsinki HELSINGIN SANOMAT 10 Feb 94) RB 
   CORPORATE STRATEGIES 
   DASA, China Sign Telecommunications Satellite Agreement--In 
November 1993, Germany's Deutsche Aerospace (DASA) signed a 
cooperation treaty with the China Aerospace Corporation (CASC) for 
the development, manufacture, and sale of telecommunications, 
meteorological, and earth-observation Satellites and ground 
stations.  The agreement calls for development of an estimated 20 
telecommunications Satellites over 8 to 10 years for a total worth 
of about 1 billion marks ($580 million).  Initial projects will 
include: (1) development of new modules for China's DFH-3 
telecommunications satellite (which DASA helped build as part of a 
previous agreement), scheduled for launch in mid-1994, and (2) 
design of a new-generation telecommunications Satellite (DFH-4) 
during 1994 for launch in 1997.  In addition, a jointly owned (50-50 
percent) company with capital assets of DM 20 million ($11.6 
million) will be established, with headquarters in Munich and a 
liaison office in Peking.  Finally, a study will examine the 
feasibility of setting up a joint Satellite-operations service 
agency.  The DASA/China treaty will be in direct competition with 
the Alliance--the industrial association formed in 1992 by DASA, 
France's Aerospatiale and Alcatel Espace, and Italy's Alenia Spazio 
for the construction of civil and military Satellites, in particular 
telecommunications Satellites--and may deal it a fatal blow, since 
China can manufacture satellites and launchers at prices lower than 
those of its European competitors. (Paris AIR &amp; COSMOS/AVIATION 
INTERNATIONAL 22/28 Nov 93) AM 
   Swedish Research on Hybrid Vehicles--The Swedish Government 
intends to spend a total of 120 million kronor ($15 million) on 
research concerning electric and hybrid (electric and gas powered) 
vehicles.  The project will last until 1997 and cover more than 120 
vehicles.  Research will be concentrated on hybrid vehicles. 
(Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER 11 Jan 94) RB 
   Honda Reacts to Sale of Rover--On 31 January, British Aerospace 
announced the sale of Rover to BMW for close to $1.2 billion, 
although Honda, which held a 20 percent share of Rover, was 
considered to have been the most likely Purchaser.  After the failed 
Renault-Volvo merger, the deal marked a new stage in the effort to 
restructure the European automobile industry, according to LE MONDE. 
   The Honda-Rover alliance was concluded in 1979.  The Japanese 
side Specifically aimed at using this relationship to get Honda 
automobiles into the European markets. Subsequently, most Rover 
models became Simply "Europeanized" Hondas, while the British 
company acquired 20 percent capital of Honda U.K., the Japanese 
company's manufacturing subsidiary in Great Britain. The Honda CEO, 
who was informed about the deal only on January 28, expressed his 
disappointment, saying that this alliance "will negate both Honda's 
and Rover's efforts to provide a solid future for Rover as a 
British--and independent--company", according to LE MONDE.  By 
affirming that the deal with BMW should not adversely affect Honda's 
policies in Europe, Mr. Kawamoto, in fact, expressed his 
reservations on the future of his company's collaboration with 
Rover, according to LE MONDE. Honda apparently intends to continue 
its participati0n in the British company unchanged, with the goal of 
establishing a viable foothold in Europe. However, the attitude of 
BMW may well determine either the Success or failure of the Japanese 
plans. (Paris LE MONDE 2 Feb 94) IM 
   SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS 
   Copies of the annual reports listed below are available upon 
request for a period of six months from the date of this Foreign 
Media Note from  Cathy Grant at (703) 482-4182. 
   *Aerospatiale 1992 annual report, 90 pages, in English. 
   *ASEA Brown Boveri 1992 annual report, 68 pages in English. 
   *Bofors 1992 annual report, 44 pages, in English. 
   *BT 1992/93 annual review, 28 pages, in English. 
   *Bull 1992 annual report, 40 pages, in French. 
   *Carl Zeiss 1991/92 annual report, 87 pages, in English. 
   *CASA 1992 annual report, 51 pages, in English. 
   *CEA 1992 annual report, 72 pages, in French. 
   *Daimler-Benz 1992 annual report, 90 pages, in English. 
   *Dassault Aviation 1992 annual report, 67 pages, in French. 
   *Delft Instruments 1992 annual report, 46 pages, in Dutch. 
   *Dornier (Deutsche Aerospace) 1992 annual report, 59 pages, 
in English. 
   *Ericsson 1992 annual report, 65 pages, in English. 
   *IFREMER 1992 annual report, 80 pages, in English. 
   *Incentive 1992 annual report, 80 pages, in English. 
   *Intertechnique 1992 annual report, 85 pages, in French. 
   *Kockums Group 1992 annual report, 23 pages, in English. 
   *Olivetti Group 1992 consolidated financial Statements, 
110 pages, in English. 
   *Philips 1992 annual report, 76 pages, in English. 
   *Rheinmetall 1992 annual report, 78 pages, in English. 
   *S.A.B.C.A. 1992 annual report, 24 pages, in French and Dutch. 
   *SAT (Societe Anonyme de Telecommuncations) 1992 annual report, 
in French. 
   *Simrad Optronics 1992 annual report, in Norwegian/Engli5h. 
   *SNECMA 1992 annual report, 71 pages, in French. 
   *SNPE 1992 annual report, 49 pages, in French. 
   *Teldix GmbH, 1992 annual report, 11 pages, in English. 
   *Volvo 1992 annual report, 69 pages, in English. 
   (AUTHOR:  COX.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
EUROPE BRANCH AT (703) 733-6337) 
GIG/22MAR/ECONF/TID  cka 23/0141z  mar 

