BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ernst Schreyer: "Bundestag Running Out of Time"] </F>
  [Text] Bonn -- Bundestag deputies must expect to be called 
to Bonn once or twice during the parliament's summer recess in 
July and August. The reason is that additional sessions will be 
necessary to handle the giant agenda that has built up and can 
hardly be tackled after the recess, as the election campaign 
will be in full swing then. Also, the SPD [Social Democratic 
Party]-dominated Bundesrat, which will meet for another two 
sessions before the summer recess, is expected to return several 
important and controversial bills to the Bundestag. 
  Thus, on 10 June the Bundesrat will have to deal with the 
act 
on compensations for victims of the Soviet land reform in 
eastern Germany, and with a package of laws allowing for a more 
effective crime prevention. Both bills were rejected by the SPD 
in the Bundestag. Now it wants to fight them in the Bundesrat. 
The Bundestag will also have to deal with other controversial 
issues, such as the revision of the abortion law, the postal 
reform, and the rebate law, if these laws are to come into force 
before the end of this parliamentary term. 
  Other important proposals are still with the Bundestag and 
Bundesrat mediating committees -- such as the 1994 employment 
promotion law, the law on Trust Agency succession, or the 
insolvency regulations. 
  The Bundestag is planning to deal with the postal reform, 
the 
rebate law, and laws on small joint-stock companies, the mergers 
and reorganization tax act, and the act on the magnetic 
levitation vehicle. In addition, parliament will have to vote 
on the constitutional amendments that were agreed upon by the 
Bundestag and Bundesrat constitutional committees following 
reunification, and it also has to discuss the ratification acts 
on the enlargement of the European Union. Also on the agenda: 
Bundeswehr planning and possible consequences resulting from 
outstanding Federal Constitutional Court rulings on German UN 
missions. 
  The Bundestag will not meet for its next session before 
mid-June. It will then have three weeks left for debates before 
breaking up for the summer recess. And there will only be two 
weeks available for debates in September before the 16 October 
Bundestag elections. One week will be spent on the first 
reading of the 1995 budget, which will then be adopted by the 
new Bundestag. The remaining week is already in the final phase 
of the election campaign. Previous experience has shown that 
that week will only allow the passing of undisputed projects. 

