Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Shanghai, March 24 (CNS) -- Shanghai has opened to 
the outside world in a broad way in recent years and has seen 
great investment in infrastructural construction resulting in a 
notable improvement of its investment environment, attracting 
many foreign businessmen to invest there. 
  First, well-known multinational corporations have come to 
Shanghai to invest in big items with 44 such corporations 
investing there last year alone. To date, 128 such corporations 
have invested in 206 items with contracted investment of 
U.S.$2.5 billion. Of these, American, Japanese and European 
corporations make up over 90 percent of the total. Thirty-five 
of the world's 200 biggest industrial multinational companies 
have investments in Shanghai and items invested by another 15 
are now under examination for approval. 
  Second, three type foreign-funded industrial enterprises are 
playing an important role in the renovation of old enterprises, 
the structural adjustment of industries and the development of 
new and high-tech industries. Foreign-funded items including 
large-scale integrated circuits, optical fibre materials, air 
compressors, digitally-controlled computers, mobile phone bases 
and terminals have become rising pillar industries in the city. 
  Third, tertiary industry has become a new keen sector 
invested by foreign businessmen with 1,037 items introduced in 
Shanghai last year with contracted foreign capital of U.S.$4.44 
billion, making up 28 percent and 68 percent of all 
foreign-funded items and total contracted foreign capital there 
respectively. Foreign business have also made fast progress in 
investment in real estate, the setting up of foreign-funded 
banks and in infrastructural construction. 
  Fourth, Pudong has become the key place for foreign 
investment with 50 complexes already under construction in the 
Lujiazui district. 
  Fifth, three type foreign-funded entrprises in the outer 
suburbs of Shanghai have also developed rapidly with good 
results. 
  Sixth, foreign-funded enterprises there are virtually all 
running well. Among the 7,000 three type foreign-funded 
enterprises approved in Shanghai, some two-thirds of them have 
started production with industrial enterprises among them 
reaching an output value increase of 80 percent last year, far 
more than the average in the municipality of 18.3 percent. Such 
enterprises have also achieved a favourable balance between 
their foreign currency spending and earnings with total foreign 
currency earnings of U.S.$4.254 billion and total spending of 
US$3.988 billion. 

