BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 15 KYODO -- Japan welcomed South 
Korea's decision Friday [15 April] to seek dialogue with North 
Korea to implement a 1992 declaration to denuclearize the Korean 
peninsula. 
  Japan gave high marks to the decision because it clarifies 
Seoul's policy to seek dialogue to solve the problem of North 
Korea's alleged nuclear development. The move is in line with 
the UN Security Council's presidential statement last month, 
Foreign Ministry spokesman Terusuke Terada said. 
  The announcement also made clear Seoul's policy to promote 
dialogue with Pyongyang to implement an inter-Korean declaration 
aimed at denuclearizing the Korean peninsula, the spokesman said. 
  Japan will continue its close contact with the United 
States, 
South Korea and other countries, and urge North Korea to accept 
full inspections of its nuclear facilities by the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and to respond to Seoul's calls for 
dialogue, he said. 
  South Korea's Deputy Prime Minister Yi Yong-tok said Friday 
that Seoul will no longer hold Pyongyang to an exchange of 
envoys as a precondition for a third round of high-level talks 
between North Korea and the U.S. 
  Yi, who also serves as national unification minister, said 
Seoul no longer believes the stance will help resolve the 
stalemate over the north's reluctance to permit international 
inspections of its nuclear facilities. 
  The exchange of envoys, along with full nuclear inspections, 
had been key preconditions to holding high-level talks between 
Washington and Pyongyang. 
  North Korea allowed IAEA experts to inspect its facilities 
in 
March but blocked access to a key facility suspected of 
producing plutonium, which can be used to make nuclear bombs. 
Pyongyang says its nuclear program is peaceful. 
  North Korea has insisted on talking only with the U.S., 
refusing to discuss the issue with Seoul. It also rejected the 
UN Security Council statement. 
  Talks between Seoul and Pyongyang broke down last month when 
North Korean delegates stormed out of a meeting after 
threatening to turn South Korea into "a sea of fire." 

