BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 6, (XINHUA) -- China will take 
tougher action against conduct severely violating the laws and 
regulations on environmental protection and will mete out stern 
punishment to those involved in violations that result in grave 
consequences. 
  This was outlined by senior officials from the National 
People's Congress (NPC) and the State Council here today. 
  Speaking at a conference of the NPC's Environment and 
Resources Protection Committee, NPC Vice-President Wang Bingqian 
said that new pollution sources have joined old ones to compound 
the country's deteriorating environment, due to local 
environment protection violations in the process of launching 
new construction projects. 
  He said rampant poaching, killing, selling and buying of 
endangered and rare animals which are under national protection 
are still going on in some places, adding that small and poorly 
equipped cement plants, paper mills, petrochemical works and 
smelting furnaces, though strictly forbidden by law, have staged 
a comeback in parts of China. 
  Such cases of violating environment protection laws must not 
be ducked but rather be resolutely and promptly dealt with, the 
official noted. 
  Song Jian, state councillor and director of the State 
Council 
Environment Protection Committee, said that China's environment 
protection laws need to be modified to include criminal 
penalties. Violators should be punished as severely as smugglers 
and drug traffickers. He added that detention and sentences 
must be meted out to those who deserve them. 
  According to a summary report delivered to the meeting by 
Xie 
Zhenhua, director of the State Environment Protection Bureau, 
illegal poaching, killing, smuggling, selling and buying of 
protected wild animals have survived repeated government sweeps, 
and hotels and restaurants in some areas are still making a 
fortune out of dishes based on rare animals. 
  The report pointed out that some places have introduced from 
abroad projects that fall short of Chinese environment 
protection requirements, while other places have even imported 
from outside China harmful waste. 
  Xie said that technologically poor equipment and a lack of 
counter-pollution measures in many rural enterprises account for 
severe environmental pollution and ecological disturbance in a 
wide range of areas. 
  He said that one of the major problems most complained of by 
urban residents is the pollution caused by waste water, waste 
gas, rubbish and noise, which, along with the boom in the 
service industry, have emerged as a hard nut to crack. 
  Some localities have eagerly launched high energy-consuming 
and pollution-prone projects at the cost of environment 
deterioration to pursue short-term economic benefits, the 
official said. 
  According to the Chinese official, the air quality in only a 
few of the country's 500 major cities has reached the state-set 
first-grade standard. He said that South China has been plagued 
by the pollution of acid rain, adding that economic losses from 
acid rain can add up to more than 14 billion yuan in Guangdong 
and Sichuan Provinces. 
  Official sources said that relevant departments with the NPC 
and State Council this year will organize ten environment 
inspection teams, which will travel to Hebei, Jilin, Zhejiang, 
Fujian, Henan, Hunan, Sichuan and Guizhou Provinces and Inner 
Mongolia and Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Regions to handle cases 
of environment violations. 

