BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel at the </F>
Graf-Stauffenberg barracks in Sigmaringen on 29 April] 
  [Text] I am pleased to take up the invitation to visit the 
Graf-Stauffenberg barracks. Its name reminds us of the good 
part of our tradition as soldiers. On 20 July this year, we 
will commemorate the 50th anniversary of the resistance and the 
failed attack against Hitler. Claus von Stauffenberg represents 
those values for which the Bundeswehr, together with our 
partners, stands in the Western defense alliance: freedom, law 
and human dignity, and peace! 
  The ability to defend ourselves is the basic precondition 
for 
protecting these values, which are anchored in our Basic Law. 
This protection is, however, the business of our entire people, 
not just of the Bundeswehr. It needs the understanding and 
support of society, just as the Bundeswehr is keeping and must 
keep itself open for the great questions that concern our 
society and our state. 
  Here, in this place, my thanks go to all our soldiers. An 
hour ago, I met with soldiers who participated in the UN mission 
in Somalia. I expressed my special thanks to them for their 
dedicated and exemplary work. I was also able to convey to them 
the great appreciation their work has met with among the people 
in Somalia, among our partners and friends, in the United 
Nations, and by UN Secretary General Butrus-Ghali. 
  Our soldiers have made an outstanding contribution to our 
country's reputation in the world. In a society that is used to 
thinking more in terms of claims than of obligations, the 
service of peace, which our soldiers and our conscripts do, is 
something special. Compulsory military service ensures that our 
citizens and our armed forces are connected by a live link. And 
this must remain so! 
  We also owe it to our Bundeswehr that we were able to 
overcome the East-West conflict and German division. The 
Bundeswehr and the NVA [National People's Army], formerly 
hostile armies, have now become an army of unity. Yesterday's 
enemies are now fellow citizens and comrades. This has made an 
essential contribution to German unity. 
  Now, however, the Bundeswehr is facing new, difficult 
challenges. This entails a sometimes painful process of profound 
restructuring, which has not yet been concluded. For the 
individual soldier -- and also for his family! -- this means 
much uncertainty. Therefore, we need the highest possible 
degree of long-term planning security. Necessary savings and 
restructurings must not be implemented at the cost of the 
people. Therefore, we need calm, profound, and cool-headed 
planning. The Bundeswehr certainly needs modern training and 
up-to-date equipment for its new tasks. However, the most 
important thing must be the precise definition of its assignment 
-- everything else is derived from that. 
  In a rule-of-law democracy like the FRG, the Bundeswehr is 
subject to political leadership. It is the Federal Government 
that, in cooperation with the parliament, has to determine the 
assignment of the Bundeswehr. Let me draw up a brief balance 
sheet of our policy and explain our central tasks of the future. 
  Today, half a century after the end of World War II, Germany 
has achieved the basic goals of its foreign policy: 
  -- Our country is unified in peace and freedom. We live in 
peace and friendship with all our neighbors. 
  -- Germany is firmly rooted in the European Union [EU] and 
in 
NATO. These communities of values ensure our peace and 
prosperity. 
  -- Germany is a respected member of the community of 
peoples; 
our voice is heard in the world. 
  We owe this excellent balance sheet to a persistent and 
flexible policy. However, we cannot stop at what we have 
achieved; we must consolidate the result of our foreign policy 
every day anew. 
  In Europe, we are confronted with three fateful questions: 
  -- How can we consolidate peace? 
  -- How can we secure the prosperity of our peoples? 
  -- How can we hold our own in the global framework? 
  For Germany the answer is clear: Only in and together with 
the EU, only together with our partners in the Western alliance, 
can we master these challenges. This basic decision determines 
German foreign policy in a world that has become far more 
complicated, in Europe, which is gradually growing together 
despite all the problems. 
  What is happened today in East Europe, in Prague, Kiev, and 
Moscow, also has consequences for us. Therefore, it is in our 
very own interest to expand the Euro-Atlantic stability 
structures to the east. 
  In the multipolar world that has developed after the end of 
the East-West conflict, security must be understood as 
"expanded" in a threefold sense: 
  -- geographically expanded -- more remote events can also 
have an effect on our security in an increasingly interdependent 
world; 
  -- functionally expanded -- early recognition and prevention 
are becoming more important; and 
  -- conceptually expanded -- poverty, hunger, overpopulation, 
the neglect of human and minority rights, and environmental 
destruction are new threats to our security. 
  Our foreign policy is facing up to such great challenges. 
The following are our goals: 
  First: We want to bring the states in Central and East 
Europe close to the EU. 
  Germany is not to be the easternmost state in West Europe. 
Rather, our place is in the center of a politically and 
economically unifying Europe. 
  In dramatic negotiations, the EU has initiated its expansion 
by the Nordic states and Austria. I myself have advocated this 
with all my strength. However, Europe is only at the beginning 
of the second half of its political and economic unification. 
The most difficult part -- the expansion of the EU as an anchor 
of stability also for Central and East Europe -- is still ahead 
of us. We must open the door to the EU for our East and 
southeast European neighbors and for the Baltic states -- as 
fast as this is possible in economic terms and in terms of 
integration policy. 
  One goal of our EU presidency during the second half of 
1994 will be to bring about association agreements with 
prospects for membership also with Latvia, Lithuania, and 
Estonia. At the same time, the EU must strengthen its 
decisionmaking mechanisms in such a way that it also remains 
able to act if the number of members continues to grow. We have 
agreed with France to join our two consecutive presidencies in 
the EU into one common program that will primarily deal with 
ostpolitik. 
  Our support goes to all states in East Europe, also to the 
states of the former Soviet Union. German aid to these 
countries has, however, meanwhile reached the limit of what we 
can provide. Now the other Western partners are also called upon 
to act. What we are doing for stability in Central and East 
Europe as well as in the CIS states also fully benefits our own 
security. In this respect, this, too, is an enormous 
contribution to defense in the broadest sense of the word, since 
defense cannot be defined by the category of military 
expenditure alone anymore. 
  Recently, a report by the Canadian Government listed the per 
capita expenditures of the seven largest industrial nations, the 
G-7 states, for the Soviet Union and its successor states since 
1989. The result was the following: Germany $341, Canada $67, 
France $34, Italy $31, the United States $30, Japan $5, and 
Great Britain $1. I think these figures speak clearly! 
  Second: With [French Foreign Minister] Alain Juppe, I have 
initiated the association of the Central European and Baltic 
states with the Western European Union [WEU]. It would be a 
contradiction if we brought our eastern neighbors closer to the 
EU in political and economic terms, but excluded them from the 
security dimension. Before thy join the EU, we want the 
Visegrad states and the Baltic states to have close security 
policy consultations with us and to be able to participate in 
humanitarian and peacekeeping WEU operations. 
  Third: The defense alliance of NATO and the transatlantic 
security alliance should remain the foundation of our security. 
  Peace has by no means become a matter of course for all 
time. 
In the future, too, we need NATO as the supporting pillar of 
the European security architecture. The central function of the 
alliance, the collective defense of its members, remains 
indispensable for us, in particular since we are a nonnuclear 
power in a world in which other powers possess nuclear weapons. 
  In addition, the alliance has expressly agreed to the 
development of the European security and defense identity on the 
basis of the WEU. In the future, too, the WEU can take over 
greater responsibility for humanitarian missions, peacekeeping 
measures, and crisis management in coordination with NATO. 
  After all, the alliance wants to consolidate stability in 
Central and East Europe. At the Brussels summit in January, 
NATO presented the offer of a partnership for peace to the young 
democracies in eastern Germany. Fourteen states have already 
accepted this offer. We also offer this partnership to Russia. 
Now it is Russia's turn to decide whether it will accept this 
offer. 
  After all, the Atlantic alliance wants to be ready for 
action 
to cope with international crises, if all other means fail. The 
example of Sarajevo shows: Diplomatic efforts for mediation 
make progress only if they are supported by military power. The 
vicious circle of violence and counterviolence cannot be broken 
with economic sanctions alone. 
  Germany has a considerable share in he international efforts 
to solve the conflict in the former Yugoslavia. Almost every 
night, German cargo planes are flying humanitarian missions in 
Bosnia. We have taken in more than 400,000 refugees from this 
war in our country, far more than all other states together. 
  The rapprochement between Muslims and Croats, the demand for 
an acceptable territorial solution in Bosnia, the modus vivendi 
in the Croatian territories occupied by Serbs -- this concept 
was worked out by the EU on the basis of an initiative, which I 
started together with my French colleague Juppe. 
  In Sarajevo, the international community managed to bring 
about a cease-fire, and now this has finally also been achieved 
for Gorazde. Nevertheless: There is no alternative to 
continuing the international efforts for peace! Russia must sit 
at the same table in this. 
  Basically, I agree with the idea of holding a foreign 
ministers' meeting to settle this terrible conflict. Any 
serious attempt to put an end to the war by negotiations is 
supported by us without any reservations. Such a meeting should 
take place if there are at least some prospects for success. I 
agree on this with my Russian colleague Kozyrev, who visited me 
in Bonn yesterday. 
  Fourth: We want to strengthen the CSCE. 
  The CSCE stands for the concept of cooperative security. Its 
main task lies in the prevention of conflicts and the early 
recognition of political crises. 
  The point is to energetically expand the culture of 
nonviolence and understanding, which has been established in the 
CSCE, and to expand it also in terms of institutions. In the 
future, the CSCE should also politically include the mission of 
Russian troops in the areas of conflict in the CIS. In addition 
to the United Nations, the CSCE provides the international 
framework to call on Russia to observe the international code of 
behavior in Europe. 
  In the long run, the CSCE member states should commit 
themselves to common action against those who disturb the peace, 
should jointly call on the UN Security Council, and, at the same 
time, commit themselves to jointly implement the decisions of 
the Security Council. 
  Fifth: The expansion of the EU's relations with Russia plays 
a key role. 
  Russia remains a first-class actor on the international 
political stage: This is proved by its permanent seat on the UN 
Security Council. However, the old thinking in terms of spheres 
of influence is outdated now. The term of "near abroad," which 
we now occasionally hear from Moscow, can be misunderstood; it 
does not fit at all in a time of global interdependence. 
  Russia's economic integration is even more important than 
the security policy dimension. Russia must be fully integrated 
into the international economy with a division of labor. The EU 
is negotiating a partnership and cooperation agreement with 
Russia. Russia must be able to grow into the G-7, first 
politically and then also economically! 
  Sixth: Unreserved German participation in the United Nations 
for safeguarding world peace. 
  Despite all weaknesses, the United Nations is the only 
global 
instrument of collective security. The known difficulties of 
the United Nations, e.g. in Bosnia, cannot be a reason to throw 
in the towel. Thus, it was important that the United Nations 
got involved in Somalia -- its mission saved the lives of 
hundreds of thousands of people. And it was right that we 
Germans were there, too! 
  The number of UN missions has skyrocketed over the past 
years. Currently, more than 70,000 soldiers from 68 countries 
are serving in 16 crisis regions in the world, and this almost 
always under very dangerous conditions. 
  However, there is no alternative to the international 
organization if one wants to prevent a return to the right of 
might. However, we also know that the rule of law in the world 
cannot be established with the stroke of a pen. We are facing a 
long way, at the end of which the United Nations can become what 
its founding fathers hoped for: The central guardian of peace 
in the world. 
  Not least because of our historical past, Germany is morally 
obliged to participate in defending peace. Without the 
readiness to do so, Germany would be unable to be in the 
alliance and to act. Our vital interests as an economic, trade, 
and cultural nation in the world would also be hurt. Therefore, 
it is important that our Federal Constitutional Court soon 
brings about the constitutional clarification of this central 
issue, which I have long been striving for. 
  Already, in 1992, I made our desire for a permanent seat on 
the UN Security Council clear at the UN General Assembly -- not 
out of megalomania but because I am convinced that the 
unavoidable greater responsibility makes Germany's corresponding 
say and participation in decisionmaking necessary. 
  Seventh: Our interests have become global; this gives rise 
to new focuses in our foreign and security policy. 
  The upheavals of the present go far beyond Europe. Problems 
such as global environmental protection or the growth of the 
world's population are moving right to the head of the 
international agenda. In Asia, new actors are stepping on the 
stage of international policy and international economy. The 
new industrial states in Asia are challenging us; at the same 
time they offer our companies new great opportunities on their 
growing markets. It is necessary to be present in these regions 
of the future. 
  Generally, it holds true today: Conflicts that are taking 
place thousands of kilometers from us directly affect our 
country and our people. North Korea is an example of a remote 
conflict with global consequences. It is rightly feared that a 
North Korea that has nuclear arms might start a nuclear arms 
race in eastern Asia. North Korea must be dissuaded from its 
efforts to get nuclear weapons. 
  Germany, as a nonnuclear state, has a central interest in 
the 
success of nonproliferation. One of our main goals is to have 
the Nonproliferation Treaty as a central element of the 
international nonproliferation policy extended next year without 
a time limit and unconditionally. Therefore, last December, I 
presented a "10-point plan" for nuclear nonproliferation. 
  Because of the profound changes over the past years, Germany 
has achieved a key position for Europe's future. However, we 
must not misunderstand our increased political weight as a call 
for national solo actions. On the contrary: Today -- far more 
than in the past and far more than others -- we are responsible 
for all of Europe. 
  Our national interest is identical with all-European 
responsibility. We do not evade this responsible, we accept it 
with reason and determination. In this we let ourselves be 
guided by a statement made by Thomas Mann. As early as 1953, he 
advised striving for "a Germany as a self-confidently serving 
link in a Europe united by self-confidence." This is what we 
want to be! 

