Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] There is no getting away from the fact that Russia 
plays a special role in the former Soviet Republics and feels 
responsibility toward them, said Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev 
on Tuesday during his visit to the 12th frontier station of the 
Pyandzh unit of border guards protecting Tajikistan's border 
with Afghanistan. 
  Addressing a group of Russian journalists accompanying him, 
he said that if Russia leaves Tajikistan, the republic may come 
to face the fate of neighboring Afghanistan. "Afghanistan was 
invaded by the former USSR. It's a different matter here. 
Relationships, ethnic and historic traditions, are quite 
different in Tajikistan. We must not go away from there. If 
this frontier is exposed, chaos will begin," the foreign 
minister said. 
  Russia, he pointed out, "has no other option than to 
continue 
strengthening the border between Tajikistan and Afghanistan." 
"Our frontier guards do their job while some people discourse on 
Russian "neo-imperialism" or, on the contrary, on "total 
withdrawal." They seal the border with risk to their lives. 
Sometime they resort to arms, and rightly. When you are 
attacked, you must retaliate. To leave and abandon everything 
here would be disgraceful and irresponsible," Kozyrev stressed. 
  In answer to a question from Interfax's correspondent the 
head of Russian diplomacy said that he is "cautiously optimistic 
about the future of the Tajik-Afghan border." "This optimism is 
based primarily on the endeavors to consolidate Tajikistan's 
statehood and expand its social base. The border will be 
strengthened accordingly," Kozyrev said. 
  With reference to the dialog between Tajik factions, the 
Russian foreign minister said that "in fact it has already 
begun, with Russia's mediation too." "Formulas for this dialog 
will be readjusted yet. Maybe a general conference or forum 
will take place some time and gather everyone; maybe the dialog 
will continue on bilateral basis," he said. 
  According to Kozyrev, "it's essential to understand what the 
Tajik opposition is like, since it is extremely diverse." "The 
main thing is that the dialog between Tajik factions should 
contribute to resolving the situation; whether it is a general 
forum or separate consultations is of minor importance," he 
said. 

