BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Prawit Rotchanaphruk: "Using Evil in the Fight </F>
for Freedom"] 
  [Text] Being responsible for [a] nation's political and 
external affairs is no easy task. It's even more difficult when 
that country not recognized by world communities, when one third 
of its land is under foreign occupation, and when that country 
has been at war for most [of] the last four decades. 
  The situation becomes even more complicated when the 
president of that country is on the US Drug Enforcement 
Administration's (DEA) most wanted list for narcotics-relate 
charges, and when the president's nickname is the "Opium King" 
or "Prince of Darkness". 
  It's a daunting task for anyone. However 46-year-old Khunsai 
Chaiyen, top political aide to Khun Sa, the self-proclaimed 
leader of the Shan State, takes it all in his stride. His pride 
in his state is visible in his bespectacled eyes. 
  "We Thai Yai (also known as Tai, the major ethnic group in 
the Shan State and a close relative of the Thai people) fought 
alongside the Burmese for independence from the British colonial 
masters. But in 1952 (four years after Burma gained 
independence) the Rangoon government sent its troops to invade 
and occupy the Shan State. And I grew up under the Burmese 
occupation." 
  Now as secretary of external affairs for the Shan State 
Restoration Council (SSRC), Khunsai is an old hand at local and 
external affairs. 
  It's been 25 years now since Khunsai first became involved 
with the revolutionary activities that eventually led to the 
unofficial independence in 1958 of the 160,000 square kilometres 
of land that make up Shan State, just north of Thailand. 
  Born to a merchant family in 1948 in the Nam San 
principality 
of Shan State, Khunsai was better off than the average Shan 
family. When the time came, he managed to pursue a university 
education in chemistry at the Mandalay Arts and Science 
University. But growing up under foreign occupation eventually 
raised many questions in the mind of the young student. 
  "I asked myself why the Thai Yai had to learn the Burmese 
language? Why the Burmese didn't like us to wear traditional 
Thai Yai pants? Why the Burmese enjoyed more civil rights than 
we did? Why many able Thai Yai people had to work under Burmese 
who were not as competent? And why we had to obey them?" 
  These many whys haunted him, and eventually Khunsai decided 
to become involved with anti-Burmese activities. However, it 
was not long before the authorities found out. 
  "I had to leave university after my third year of 
education," 
Khunsai recalled. His dreams of becoming a scientist were 
shattered. But a higher dream brought him to work for the Shan 
United Revolutionary Army (Sura). 
  Though he didn't excel in the military field, Khunsai was a 
witty, intelligent person, able to converse in English, Burmese, 
Thai Yai and Thai. He chose political work and soon the young 
Khunsai proved his pen was mightier than many men's swords as he 
speedily climbed the Sura ladder. 
  In the mid seventies, on the eastern side of the Shan State, 
another powerful Shan army, with money funded by heroin and 
opium trade, was growing under the control of Khun Sa. But 
soon, the uncontested Opium King who claimed to be a freedom 
fighter was pushed out of Ban Hin Taek in Mae Chan District of 
Chiang Rai province by the Royal Thai Army for being the US 
DEA's enemy number one. 
  Then in 1985 Khun Sa decided to join forces with Sura and 
make the little village of Ho Mong, just north of Mae Hong Son 
province, the new army base. Eventually Khun Sa became 
president of the SSRC and commander in chief of the Muang Tai 
Army [MTA] or the Army of the Tai Nation. 
  In the years that followed Khunsai became associated with 
Khun Sa and soon became his top political aide. He also saw Ho 
Mong, a sleepy village embraced on all sides by green mountain 
ranges, grow into a relatively modern town with 20,000 
civilians, electricity, a high school, dozens of shops, a 
karaoke bar, a 60-bed hospital and gem emporium. The village is 
also the base of the MTA, which, according to Khun Sa, boasts 
some 47,000 members, some armed with advanced Soviet-made 
weapons. The prosperous town has become the centre of Khunsai's 
hopes for independence. 
  But most of the town's wealth is not "clean" money. Despite 
recent attempts to capitalize on the Shan State's abundance of 
jade, rubies and blue sapphires, much of the state's wealth 
comes from the notorious opium plant. 
  "There are two things we do with opium and heroin," Khunsai 
said matter-of-factly. "First, we allow opium caravans or 
heroin refineries to be set up under our protection. Second, we 
collect taxes from them. We could have set up these refineries 
ourselves, but then they would be state owned, and that wouldn't 
be proper. So the private sector is taking care of it." 
  Khun Sa, according to critics, is--at least in 
part--responsible for the millions of people in the United 
States, Europe and Asia for whom drug addiction has ruined their 
lives. The Shan State is the world's major site for opium 
cultivation and heroin production. The top quality white powder 
heroin the state produces fetches up to US$200,000 (Bt [baht] 5 
million) per kilogram once it reaches the United States. That's 
20 times what the drug is worth on the streets of Bangkok. With 
such profits to be made, each year hundreds of million of 
dollars changes hands. 
  "Nobody wants to see opium and heroin, not even the growers 
themselves," said Khunsai defending his raison d'etre. "If 
there was peace in my country I would rather do something else. 
But we have to fight the Burmese, so who can we go to for 
money? Nobody is helping us, so what can we do? Please help me 
think about it too," he asked seriously. 
  "If the Bangkok Bank would loan me some money I would surely 
apply for it." 
  If opium is to be eliminated, said Khunsai, people must 
first 
know where it comes from. The secretary claimed that at one 
time, the Thai Yai grew one seventh of the total amount of opium 
produced in Shan State. But now, he said, almost all the ethnic 
groups in the state are involved with growing the deadly plant. 
  He pointed to three major reasons behind the surge in opium 
production. "The first and second reasons are that the now 
defunct Kuomintang (KMT) and the former Communist Party of Burma 
(CPB) encouraged local people to grow (opium). Third, the 
Rangoon government wanted to lay blame on us. They forced us in 
every way they could. So we had no choice but to depend on 
opium money. 
  "The KMT and CPB are now defunct, but the Burmese are still 
there. As long as they are still around (in the Shan State), it 
will be impossible to solve this issue. We must drive them 
out," he concluded. 
  But even if they succeed, Khun Sa's reputation may never 
change in the eyes of the world. While Khunsai regards his 
president as a man who can cope under all circumstances, Khun Sa 
can not evade the world's condemnation for his narcotic related 
activities. 
  "Making Khun Sa the Opium King is a political game," said 
Khunsai, defending his boss. We were unlucky that the DEA was 
formed with the least credible police the United States has 
known. They (the DEA) did it (put Khun Sa on their most wanted 
list) for their own benefit. 
  "Do you think they really want to arrest Khun Sa? If so, why 
is the prize for his head just Bt500.000? The sum... would not 
even cover a rich man's expenses for a year. All this means 
that the DEA wants Khun Sa to live so the DEA can get a bigger 
budget and hold on to their jobs." 
  Meanwhile, as the war with the Burmese drags on, Khunsai is 
attempting to change the world's attitude toward Khun Sa and the 
struggle for Shan independence. Khunsai said he was well aware 
that the longer the war continues, the more tears will be shed. 
  After four decades of war, thousands and thousands of young 
men have gone to the front line. Many never return. The MTA, 
in need of new recruits, will enlist another 4,000 soldiers this 
year, many as young as 16 and many of them conscripts. All 
families with a son are obliged to send at least one of their 
sons to serve in the MTA. 
  "Those under 16 are not eligible to be soldiers but they 
must 
undergo years of military preparation," he explained. "If they 
are 10 years old, they are ready to receive training, and they 
are strong enough to carry guns. 
  "These kids have strong hearts, they have always wanted to 
go 
to war. Once there was an order for these youngsters to march 
to the Salween River. 
  These kids thought they were finally going to fight, but 
they 
were disappointed once they realized they were only sent to 
carry wounded soldiers back on stretchers." 
  But through political maneuvering, Khunsai hopes speedy 
victory or independence will be achieved. "We are negotiating 
with different ethnic groups. The Wa (another large ethnic 
group situated on the northeastern side of the Shan State along 
the Shan-Chinese border) army will soon forge an alliance with 
us. The Burmese have used the Wa to attack us in the past. But 
that ploy is dwindling along with the strength of the Wa army. 
  "But it (the Burmese-Wa alliance) will not last long. The 
Burmese lack dollars so they hired the Wa to burn opium fields 
as a ploy to ploy to get money from the West and the Wa received 
rice in return. The Chinese government no longer wants to 
support the Wa. Over the past two or three months, the Burmese 
have cut down their supply of rice to the Wa army to 1,500 sacks 
per month, down from 4,000. 
  It's not enough and the Wa also know they are being used as 
a 
tool to earn Slorc (Burma's State Law and Order Restoration 
Council) some hard currency." Khunsai is also optimistic about 
the possibility of economic forging ties with Thailand. 
  "If businessmen come to trade with and develop the Shan 
State, all they will think about will be the profits. They 
won't think about the political issues, they just want to make 
money. So we forwarded a letter to His Majesty [HM] the King of 
Thailand saying it would best for His Majesty to initiate trade 
relations, as he is the symbol of unity not just for Thais, but 
for the greater Tai race. 
  "Aside from logging and fishing concessions, what will the 
Thais get from the Burmese? Nothing," he continued. "But 
gemstones and teak wood, are all in the Shan State. But our 
state is a landlocked nation. So if we want to find a sea 
route, which would be the best way? Through Thailand. The 
proposed Salween Dam and quadrangular economic sphere is also in 
the Shan State. Our two nations are of the same Tai race. 
Chinese trade with Chinese, so Thai should trade with Thai 
(Yai). We have all the raw materials, cheap labour and we can 
absorb small and medium scale industries from Thailand." 
  To date, no reply from HM the King has been received, 
however 
Khunsai still waits in hope. 
  At present, nearly 10,000 Burmese troops are also waiting on 
the west side of the Salween River. They are waiting to begin a 
major offensive drive before the rainy season arrives. The 
independence of the Shan State and its 8 million people is still 
far from being recognized by the United Nations and the price on 
the president's head remains in place. 
  But while the rain clouds will soon loom over Ho Mong, 
Khunsai holds tight to his faith. "I want to see Shan 
independence" he said. "But it won't come fast. Every day, I 
hear more and more cases of human rights violations committed by 
the Burmese. Many people in Burma are suffering. They were 
used (by Slorc) as vehicles to attain absolute power and then 
they were discarded and killed. I really want the ordeal to be 
over now." 
  Khunsai believes independence of the Shan State will happen 
during his lifetime. "It's 99 per cent certain," Khunsai 
predicted with an air of confidence. 
  But what about the remaining 1 per cent? 
  "The last 1 per cent," Khunsai replied, "depends on karma, 
on 
the good and bad deeds that all of the Thai Yai have committed. 
  "Lord Buddha must have lied to me if what I did was wrong," 
he said. "For all these 25 long years, all I have done was for 
my country." 

