Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Oleksandr Pilat: "Where Crimea Is `Drifting.' </F>
Today Marks 40 Years Since the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium 
Decided to Incorporate Crimea Oblast Into Ukraine"] 
  [Text] And it was not by chance. The USSR's top party 
and state leadership saw how impoverished the peninsula was 
getting, with not enough water and power, and the people's 
wretched standard of living. The hard-working Crimean Tatar 
nation was deported in 1944. Practically no one was left to till 
the fields. 
  Ukraine brought the arid land back around. After the 
North Crimean Canal was built, water from the Dnieper came to 
the peninsula. Grape and grain crop yields increased greatly, 
and a crop new to Crimea appeared--rice. Today 83.7 percent of 
the Crimeans' water needs come from the Dnieper. Crimea provides 
only 15 percent of its own electricity; the rest comes from 
Ukraine. All of the peninsula's coal needs (1.65 million tonnes 
yearly) and sugar are also supplied by Ukraine. Moreover, the 
Republic of Crimea imports over twice the amount of consumer 
goods than it exports. 
  These are the figures, these are the facts. Even the 
most rabid Russian chauvinists cannot refute them. 
  Recently, especially since the election of President Yu. 
Meshkov, who hews to a pronounced pro-Moscow orientation, 
pro-Russian forces have done everything they can to belittle 
Ukraine's role in the Crimea, indulging in all kinds of 
falsifications and absurd fabrications. Typically, at Yu. 
Meshkov's press conference that took place immediately after he 
returned from a six-day trip to Moscow, he praised Russia to the 
skies for "granting Crimea most-favored status." To be sure, 
journalists never learned just whom Meshkov met and talked to, 
though he did say it was on the top level--"only the Lord God is 
higher." But what kind of summit could it be if Crimea's 
President met with neither B. Yeltsin or V. Chernomyrdin? 
  The Crimean Tatars are skeptical to Meshkov's announcement 
that Russia has appropriated 50 billion rubles to repatriate the 
deported nation. Anyway, they don't believe it, because for long 
years, despite endless talks, our neighbors have refused to help 
this unfortunate nation in any way. 
  At the press conference, Yu. Meshkov said in particular: 
"The 
journalist's job is to report the news, not to express his own 
point of view and urge people who support it to take part in 
transmitting it." Local observers' fears that the new regime 
might harass dissidents are proving true. In fact, the "first 
fruits" are already apparent. On 6 February Borys Kyyashko, the 
vice president of the Krym TV-Radio Company, took a 15-minute 
Ukrainian TV broadcast off the air (it was supposed to air a few 
hours after Meshkov's press conference). Incidentally, it was 
just a few months ago that Viktor Khomenko (Ukrainian TV's 
correspondent in the Republic of Crimea) literally begged Krym's 
administration for those 15 minutes a week. Now, evidently, the 
15 minutes are no more. 
  We have reported how the forces that brought Meshkov to 
power 
are hasseling Ukrainian journalists, and at rallies you hear 
calls for immediate reprisals against the "khokhols" 
["topknots"; a pejorative Russian term for Ukrainians], calls 
for firing and deporting journalists whose writings advocate the 
idea of reviving the Ukrainian state and national dignity of 
Ukrainians and Crimea's deported peoples. Well, there was a 
deportation in Crimea once. I wonder who now will assume the 
political roles of the comrades-in-arms of Stalin and Beriya? 
  Meanwhile, the local press is opposing possible Crimean 
Tatar 
statehood and a Medzhlis [muslim parliament] to serve as their 
representative body of authority, on grounds that the Republic 
of Crimea was restored on the territorial (?) principle and 
supposedly was never created on the principle of nationality. 
This is false. We know that the Crimean Autonomous Soviet 
Socialist Republic existed while Crimean Tatars lived there. A 
year after they were deported, the republic was converted to an 
oblast. This is just one of many pieces of evidence that the 
republic has the status of the Crimean Tatars' 
national-territorial autonomy. 
  Sad to say, neither Ukraine's President nor its Supreme 
Council are willing to see that the problem of the peninsula can 
be solved only by recognizing the Crimean Tatar nation's 
Medzhlis, and by granting that nation the right to territorial 
self-determination in accordance with international practice. 
Our country does not have the right (future generations will not 
forgive us) to allow the long-suffering Crimean Tatar nation to 
be an exile in its own land. 

