Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Jacques Fleury report: "Mitterrand Remonstrates With </F>
Government"] 
  [Excerpt] The impressive procession which crossed Paris on 
Sunday [16 January] to defend state schools is still prompting 
reaction in political circles. At the cabinet meeting, Edouard 
Balladur once again tried appeasement confirming, that he would 
meet with the trade unions and parents federations on 27 
January. But Francois Mitterrand seized the opportunity to 
rebuke the government, a government that was also the subject of 
criticism in majority ranks. 
  Francois Mitterrand readily played the role of professor of 
applied politics to the government gathered for the cabinet 
meeting. Boosted by the success of Sunday's demonstration, he 
carefully lectured the "national education minister" who thought 
he could disregard the French people's convictions. The head of 
state took great pleasure in reaffirming the reservations which 
he expressed when the Falloux bill was presented to him. By 
refusing to include the continuation of the debate in the 
extraordinary session of Parliament, he had hoped, he explained, 
that the government would consider the consequences of such a 
law. But the "national education minister" preferred to fan the 
flames of an education war. The French people have answered him. 
  This presidential rebuke was aimed at the government in 
general and the prime minister in particular. This is the first 
time since the start of cohabitation that Mitterrand has been 
able to give the representatives of the new majority a good 
"telling off" in this way. He did not waste such a golden 
opportunity. Nobody replied to his cutting statement. 
Moreover, there was nothing else to say because the prime 
minister himself had previously drawn the necessary conclusions 
from this demonstration. 
  It was a demonstration which, according to Edouard Balladur, 
"was a large-scale mobilization and bore the stamp of the 
anxiety which has been displayed with regard to state education. 
The government has acted accordingly," because consultation has 
begun with the trade unions and parents federations. [passage 
omitted] 

