Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Moscow Mayak Radio Network in Russian at 
2300 GMT on 23 January carries a commentary by Viktor Levin on a 
report that the Japanese Government, in a reply to the Russian 
Foreign Ministry, has stated it cannot recognize the legitimacy 
of calling Japanese fishermen violators of Russian state borders. 
  Levin recalls the facts that provoked the Russian Foreign 
Ministry: the intrusion by Japanese fishing vessels into Russian 
territorial waters in the area of the South Kurils. 
  Levin says: "The Japanese authorities are effectively trying 
to justify the actions of the fishermen and are even trying to 
place a juridical foundation under this, making out that there 
was no violation of the borders." 
  He says Japan is hinting heavily that it does not recognize 
the South Kurils as Russian territory. "But this, in my view, 
is more than laying claim to the islands," Levin says. "This is 
pressure. And the actions ensuing from it look simply 
provocative." 
  Levin continues: "To talk about who the disputed islands 
belong to is one thing, but to try without prior arrangement to 
affirm their position in any shape on the spot, so to speak, is 
something quite different. 
  "In such an event Russia's reply can be one thing: resolute 
thwarting of border violations by every means. Russia is not a 
state with whom one can speak in the language of ultimatums and 
provocative actions. In my view, Japan, in taking the aforesaid 
position, is committing a crude political error. 
  "The question of who the disputed islands belong to is by no 
means unambiguous. The islands form part of Russia, and Russia 
is not only within its rights but also obliged to use all means 
to prevent intrusion into its territorial waters. Any testing 
of Russian borders for strength will bring forth the appropriate 
reaction." 
  Levin concludes, saying: "Tokyo says it wants to develop 
normal relations and discuss thorny questions at the negotiating 
table. But its actions cast a cloud over these relations and at 
the very least do not help the success of the talks." 

