Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "War Secrets"] </F>
  [Text] SEMANA reveals unknown details about the 
increasingly obvious two-month-long confrontation between the 
Prosecutor General's Office and the government. 
  At 0830 Saturday morning, Julio Fabio Urdinola Grajales, a 
member of the Cauca Valley drug trafficking organization, 
appeared at the Palmira jail to turn himself in. The surrender 
came at a precise time when relations between the government and 
Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff had reached their most 
critical point. This was not only true because of the flexible, 
accommodating position which the government thinks De Greiff has 
taken on the surrender of the Cali cartel kingpins, but also 
because of explosive revelations made the preceding week at a 
Special Security Council meeting on the criminal activities of 
members of the Medellin Cartel being held at La Picota and La 
Modelo prisons in the capital whom the prosecutor general wanted 
to move to Itagui once again. 
  The situation has reached such a point that the prosecutor 
general has in recent days given serious consideration to the 
possibility of accusing Minister of Justice Andres Gonzalez of 
malfeasance before the Supreme Court. The government promptly 
considered the possibility of accusing De Greiff of 
"collaborating with drug trafficking," SEMANA was told by one 
well-placed source at Casa de Narino. Things were made even 
worse, observers say, by the legal and personal controversy 
involving the prosecutor general and top-ranking government 
officials which is doing serious damage to the image and 
credibility of the institution he represents. 
<H5>  Problem With Cali </H5>
  The wrangling between the prosecutor general and the 
government began even as talks began for the surrender of the 
Cali Cartel organization. De Greiff cast the first stone in the 
United States when speaking at a seminar in Baltimore. He stated 
that the war on drug trafficking had been lost and that 
consequently, the drug business should be legalized. By that 
time, the prosecutor general's talks with the attorneys for the 
Cali Cartel were already off the ground. 
  De Greiff also stated his intention of allowing house arrest 
for members of the cartel, to which the minister of justice 
immediately responded that house arrest was not part of the 
surrender policy. However, the straw that broke the camel's back 
was the meeting which De Greiff held with three recognized drug 
traffickers in the Valley: Helmer Herrera, better known as 
"Pacho Herrera," Jose Olmedo Ocampo, and Juan Carlos Ramirez, 
whom he certified based on Article 369E of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure. 
  The confrontation became so obvious that no one is even 
trying to conceal it any longer. When rumors circulated in the 
past concerning such differences, the prosecutor general, 
ministers, attorney general, and president himself hastily 
denied them. When SEMANA divulged these differences for the 
first time a month and a half ago, the prosecutor general sent 
an indignant letter to this periodical and Gaviria told the 
daily newspaper EL TIEMPO that "there are no differences with De 
Greiff." This time, however, not only did the same personages 
not deny the dispute, but they made no effort whatsoever to hide 
it. 
<H5>  Itagui Problem </H5>
  The final break between the prosecutor general and the 
government started at a special Security Council meeting on 
Monday, the 7th, when, based on intelligence reports from DAS 
[Administrative Department of Security], DIJIN [Judicial and 
Investigative Police Directorate], and the National Penitentiary 
Institute (INPEC), an order from De Greiff to transfer Carlos 
Mario Alzate Urquijo, alias "Arete," Luis Carlos Aguilar 
Gallego, alias "El Mugre," Gustavo Adolfo Gutierrez Arrubla, 
alias "Maxwell," Jose Fernando Posada Fierro, and Jorge Pizano 
Santamaria from Bogota to Itagui was rescinded. The Council 
deemed that the transfer of the prisoners to Itagui was highly 
improper in terms of the policy of the surrender to justice 
inasmuch as allowing it meant opening the doors for the 
reunification of the so-called Medellin Cartel. 
  Once the government had decided not to allow the return of 
the five prisoners to Medellin, the prosecutor general went 
after the Security Council. "The inmates have neither the 
intention nor the means to revert to criminal activities," De 
Greiff said, adding that "I do not believe in those intelligence 
reports." The intelligence reports do in fact exist, however, 
saying precisely the opposite of what the prosecutor general 
thinks. 
  During a night inspection in November, INPEC and Police 
officials discovered a jacuzzi in the maximum security block of 
La Picota prison where "Arete" and "El Mugre" were caught at 
2300 by the officials performing the inspection and whom they 
tried to bribe. INPEC ordered another inspection a week later 
and found the prisoners partying. Bottles of liquor and 
marijuana papers were found in their cells. DIJIN and DAS had 
also detected a series of calls between La Picota inmates and 
their contacts in Medellin ordering them to continue their drug 
trafficking. 
  It was also learned that some 40 wardens had been forced to 
resign from INPEC because of threats against their lives. Every 
time they left the maximum security blocks in Bogota or 
Medellin, they encountered signs bearing their names saying "You 
are dead meat!" 
  As if this were not enough, La Modelo prison security 
intercepted a letter apparently addressed to "the Pepes" or the 
Cali Cartel people stating the following: "I want you to know 
that a guy is kidnapping people and dealing from here. He is 
doing it along with the guerrilla Francisco Galan and his 
fiancee. The guerrilla asked all of us to go with a bunch of 
people to kidnap her. The only one that called a halt to it was 
Otto and on 20 January, they kidnapped one Tomas Uribe. Jessica 
was the one who informed Galan in jail." 
<H5>  Permits </H5>
  At the two-hour-long Security Council meeting on Monday, not 
only were the intelligence reports analyzed, but a detailed 
study was made of authorizations issued to private parties by 
the prosecutor general to visit prisoners in the security blocks 
of La Picota and La Modelo prisons in Bogota. 
  The Security Council was struck by the many permits issued 
to 
Pablo Escobar's family to visit John Jairo Velasquez Vasquez, 
alias "Popeye," at La Modelo prison. Escobar's wife visited 
Popeye five days later. On that same day, she also received 
authorization to see "Arete" at La Picota. Two days later, the 
prosecutor general signed an authorization allowing Juan Pablo 
Escobar to enter La Modelo to meet with Popeye, and Escobar's 
son visited Arete that same day. On 3 February, the prosecutor 
general once again issued an authorization allowing Maria 
Victoria de Escobar to enter the maximum security block at La 
Picota prison to meet with Arete. 
  Another authorization that troubled the Security Council 
members was the one which the prosecutor general issued to 
Dagoberto Arturo Recio Chavez. On 14 January, the latter 
appeared at the La Picota administrative office with a permit 
from the prosecutor general allowing him to visit inmates Jose 
Fernando Posada Fierro and Jorge Pizano Santamaria in the 
maximum security section. A subsequent investigation by security 
organizations established that Recio Chavez is an investigator 
for the Prosecutor General's Office who gained admittance to La 
Picota in order to write a report on conditions in the block. It 
was also discovered that the official from the Prosecutor 
General's Office had been arrested on 14 February 1985 and 
charged with forgery. He became inmate number 205593 at Model 
Prison. 
  Among the countless permits issued by the prosecutor general 
is one granted to a former beauty queen for regular visits to 
Roberto Escobar when he was a patient at the Military Hospital 
after the letter bomb incident. 
  Finally, the Security Council took up the matter of 
prosecutor Cruz Helena Aguilar's meeting with Carlos Mario 
Alzate Urquijo, Luis Carlos Aguilar, Gustavo Adolfo Gutierrez, 
and Jose Fernando Posada. It became evident that it was no mere 
legal proceeding, but a meeting between a representative of the 
Cali Cartel named Luis Guillermo Angel Restrepo and the Medellin 
people aimed at clearing up the death of Antioquia Governor 
Antonio Roldan Betancur. 
<H5>  What the Future Holds </H5>
  There are those who thought that Julio Fabio Urdinola's 
presentation on Saturday would be followed by a truce in the war 
between the government and the Prosecutor General's Office. 
However, early statements by the prosecutor general and the 
president made it quite clear that such would not be the case. 
De Greiff hastened to say he hoped that what had happened would 
end "the government's hysteria," while Gaviria said Urdinola's 
surrender was a very good thing to consolidate the policy of 
surrender, but that it would in no way fix things with the 
prosecutor general. 
  Whatever the case, the country can learn several lessons 
from 
what has happened. The first of these is that these things occur 
when legislation is drafted that gives rise to ambiguity, as was 
the case last year with the Code of Criminal Procedure, a matter 
on which both the Prosecutor General's Office and the government 
were in agreement. Ambiguous legislation gives rise to 
interpretations as contradictory as those now made by both the 
Executive Branch and the prosecutor general on standards to be 
applied in the case of the surrender of the Cali Cartel. 
  The second great lesson is that in a country that has 
suffered from drug trafficking for so many years, cooperation 
between government and legal authorities is not only desirable, 
but absolutely necessary, however much the prosecutor general 
may claim that the agency under his tutelage is autonomous and 
that Colombia has a separation of powers. Article 113 of the 
1991 Constitution states that "the different organs of 
government have separate functions, but will cooperate 
harmoniously to achieve their goals." If this must be so in any 
one field, it is in the fight against drug trafficking, where 
victories have been obtained only when the different organs of 
government have worked shoulder to shoulder. That is why, in 
addition to being indispensable, cooperation between the 
government and the Prosecutor General's Office is vital. Two 
entities detached from the government: the Police and DAS, must 
do the work of security and intelligence and the Prosecutor 
General's Office must use that information and make it 
judicially useful. 
  Through INPEC, which falls under the Ministry of Justice, 
the 
government must guarantee that those arrested and convicted must 
go to prison. Other agencies of government are involved in the 
process, however: the Armed Forces as a whole in the seizure of 
shipments; the FAC [Colombian Air Force] and Aerocivil with 
respect to planes used in trafficking; and the Superintendency 
of Banking and Exchange with respect to drug trafficking money 
laundering. 
  For all of these reasons, entrenchment such as that of 
Gustavo de Greiff with respect to the autonomy of the Prosecutor 
General's Office can be valid from the legal standpoint, but 
mistaken in practice. Something similar can be said about 
cooperation with the government of the United States. However 
much it may displease many nationalistic Colombians, Washington 
is Colombia's main partner in the fight against drugs and to 
break with that country can be as costly as doing so in the 
commercial or political fields. 
  Whatever the case, as confirmed by statements made following 
Urdinola's surrender, the confrontation has apparently reached 
the point of no return. It is too early to say which of the two 
camps is ahead in the public opinion polls. The Prosecutor 
General's Office has lost much of the prestige it enjoyed 
several months ago, as shown by recent polls. Even so, however, 
De Greiff continues to enjoy great credibility. If he does not 
want to lose it, he will have to demonstrate that the business 
he proposes with the people of Cali is not only good for that 
city, but right for society. The Prosecutor General's office 
will have to compile proof and reconstruct solid cases against 
those newly surrendering. If it does not do so, not only will 
the prosecutor general and his office lose respectability, but 
the greatest judicial reform of contemporary Colombia, 
establishment of the accusatory system, will be on the verge of 
collapse. 

