Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Random Talk on Rural Economy" column by staff reporter Xia </F>
Jun (1115 8823): "Significance of the Reform of Residence 
Registration System in Small Cities and Towns--Departments 
Concerned Are Working Out Specific Methods of Operation"] 
  [Text] The following remarks were in the "Decision on Some 
Issues Concerning the Establishment of a Socialist Market 
Economic Structure," which was approved by the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th Central Party Committee: "We 
should...gradually reform the residence registration system in 
small cities and towns, allow peasants to work in factories or 
do business in small cities and towns, develop rural tertiary 
industries, and promote the transfer of a rural surplus labor 
force to other fields of endeavor." These few words are of 
vital strategic significance to accelerating the process of 
urbanization in rural areas in our country. 
  As indicated by the history of the development of modern 
society, urbanization is a worldwide historical trend. In the 
early 19th century, the urban population merely accounted for 
three percent of the total population of the world, and the 
figure was elevated to over 14 percent in the early 20th century 
and to 42 percent in the 1980's. According to the forecast of 
concerned UN organizations, by the end of this century, 50 
percent of the world population will live in cities. However, 
the level of urbanization in our country (merely 28 percent or 
so) is relatively low in the world; it is not only lower than 
that of developed countries (80 to 90 percent) but also lower 
than that of developing countries (40 percent). 
  Compared with non-agricultural industrial development, the 
development of cities and towns in our country is also quite 
backward. As far as the GNP of our country is concerned, the 
proportion of non-agricultural industries increased from around 
40 percent in the early days after our country's founding to 
around 75 percent in 1992, but basically 80 percent of the 
population still lived in rural areas and there was hardly any 
change in this pattern. As far as rural areas are concerned, 
the proportion of non-agricultural output value to the gross 
output value of rural society increased from 30 percent in 1978 
to 60 percent in 1992. However, the scattered rural population 
did not decrease, rather more and more people live in rural 
areas. 
  Concerned experts point out that backwardness of the process 
of urbanization in our country had caused three adverse effects. 
  First, it is impossible to have normal development of 
tertiary industry and to have economic benefits on a large scale 
which should be brought about by a large scale of economic 
development. In other words, it is impossible to merely promote 
the development of tertiary industry while leaving aside the 
process of accelerated urbanization because such a move will 
cause even more new problems. 
  Second, apart from bringing prosperity and wealth to the 
rural economy, the rise of township and town enterprises also 
causes new "rural diseases," which is markedly reflected by 
over-scattered distribution of township and town industries. In 
1992, there were 2,079 township and town enterprises throughout 
the country with more than 1,900 of them scattered in natural 
villages. Due to over-scattered distribution of township and 
town enterprises, there are three kinds of uneconomic phenomena, 
that is, uneconomic use of land, uneconomic scale of production, 
and uneconomic freight, and it is unfavorable to devoting every 
effort to tackling pollution and repetitive low-quality 
construction, thus causing great waste of resources and funds. 
The greater the development of township and town industries 
under the condition of backward urbanization, the greater the 
waste. 
  Third, the ability of our industrial structure, in the 
process of readjustment, to absorb surplus agricultural labor is 
weakened. Data indicate that with rapid development of township 
and town enterprises in our country in recent years, the ability 
to absorb surplus agricultural labor has declined rather than 
improved. 
  The pace of construction of small cities and towns has been 
accelerating since we started implementing the policy of reform 
and opening up more than a decade ago. Peasants in many places 
who have become rich set off an upsurge of "urban construction," 
thus leading to the emergence of a number of "peasant cities" 
which resemble the one built up by peasants in Longgang Town, 
Cangnan County, Zhejiang. A large number of peasants have gone 
to cities and towns to work and run businesses there. Up to 
1993, a total of 116 million peasants worked in township and 
town enterprises. However, due to the restrictions of the 
residence registration system, peasants who have gone to towns 
and cities for work and business still belong to the category of 
"agricultural residence," thus forming a marginal strata who 
live in both cities and townships, but are "neither city 
dwellers nor peasants." Their registered residence is in 
villages, which are their ancestral homes, and they contract 
rural land, but they work and spend their daily life in cities 
and towns. They have means of production and daily necessities 
in villages as well as in cities and towns. On the one hand, 
they are not in the mode of or not capable of engaging in 
agricultural production; but, on the other hand, they cannot 
have the same identity and enjoy the same treatment granted to 
residents in cities and towns. 
  We originally divided people's registered residences into 
two categories, that is, "agricultural residence" and "non- 
agricultural residence." The main purpose was to control the 
size of large cities and tried to decrease the number of people 
eating commodity grain. Hence, "non-agricultural residence" 
became the first gate of controlling the influx of peasants into 
cities and towns. In the past, this gate really played a role 
of control because even if you entered a city or town, you could 
not buy food, find a job, rent a house, and your children could 
not enroll in any nursery or school if you did not have 
registered residence in cities and towns. Once you were 
discovered, you would be repatriated to your village. At that 
time, apart from taking risks in daily life, peasants who went 
to cities had to take political risks and bear the pressure of 
the media. However, this kind of situation has changed a lot 
since we started implementing the policy of reform and opening 
up more than a decade ago. Peasants without registered 
residences in cities and towns can also buy food, find jobs, 
rent houses in cities. As long as they pay a certain amount of 
"support fees," their children can also enroll in nurseries and 
schools. Moreover, the media is more and more lenient towards 
peasants entering cities. In reality, under the present social 
and economic circumstances, the residence registration system 
must be revised accordingly. 
  It is better to dredge a river than to block it. The defects 
of the current residence registration system, which are more and 
more clearly exposed, have become a severe barrier hindering 
reasonable mobility of talent and labor. The fact that people 
cannot select their places of residence according to their own 
needs of production and management has, for a long time, 
hindered development of many small cities and towns with 
superiority in location, and this is one of the reasons why our 
country lags behind in the process of urbanization. At present, 
most of the provinces and municipalities have abolished the 
system of state monopoly for the marketing of grain for city 
dwellers, thus creating extremely important conditions for 
reforming the existing residence registration system. The 
"Decision" of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th Central 
Party Committee addressed the issue of "gradual reform of the 
residence registration system in small cities and towns" and it 
was a timely move which seized the opportunity. "Gradual reform 
of the residence registration system in small cities and towns" 
will help smash the old system which broke up cities and 
townships, arouse peasants' enthusiasm for living and running 
business in cities, and converge it with the potential of funds 
owned by peasants to build a new style of small cities and 
towns, develop tertiary industry, and accelerate the process of 
urbanization in accordance with the pattern of a market economy. 
  The ministries of public security, construction, and 
agriculture, and the State Commission for Restructuring the 
Economy are investigating and studying the concrete method of 
reforming the residence registration system in small cities and 
towns, and certain concrete issues are being discussed. 
However, they already have a consensus on major principles, 
that is, they should take the method of vigorously implementing 
the reform and achieving goals step by step. The final 
objective is to wipe out the difference between "agricultural 
residence" and "non-agricultural residence" and to remove the 
barrier which hinders reasonable mobility for people in cities 
and in townships. However, this is a relatively long process of 
social and economic development, we cannot be impatient for 
success. As proved by historical lessons, no matter what 
undertakings we engage in, it does not work if there is only a 
sense of urgency. We must also have a down-to-earth style of 
work, otherwise haste will make waste. 

