CSO 

<F P=106> [Statement signed by Gela Kvlividze, Guram Ustiashvili, and </F>
Shalva Iashagashvili in the name of the National Committee of 
the Democratic Party, Tbilisi, March 1994: "Statement of the 
Democratic Party Concerning the Economic, Social, and Political 
Situation in Georgia"] 
  [Text] The economic crisis and social and political tension 
continue to worsen, the economy is fragmenting and falling 
apart, and economic violence prevails instead of free 
competition--in the form of illegal business and economic 
bureaucracy, resulting in the flourishing of economic 
parasitism. The population's social decline and economic 
impoverishment are worsening day by day. There is a real danger 
that the criminal world will achieve virtual statehood. The 
economic system's crisis has brought the state close to the 
limit beyond which society's degradation begins, due to many 
objective and subjective factors, which include: 
  --the conditions resulting from the disintegration of the 
Soviet Union, and the impact thereof; 
  --corruption and the looting of the nation's property by 
various legal and illegal means. 
  This situation has been greatly impacted by the conflicts in 
the Tskhinvali region and Abkhazia--especially the tragedy 
resulting from the Abkhazian war. It was clear from the outset 
that the Abkhazian conflict stemmed from a massive international 
conspiracy, and that various outside forces prepared to take 
part in it. But neither society nor our leadership managed to 
manifest Georgians' characteristic foresight, vigilance, wisdom, 
and ability to correctly assess their own capabilities; they 
fell into our enemy's trap, fell prey to illusion, and we have 
not escaped the historical punishment.... 
  A way needs to be found out of this grave social, economic, 
political, and energy crisis, and efforts to find one are 
underway. 
  We believe that society's development crucially depends not 
only on forms of property ownership but also on social, 
economic, and overall state policies founded on the social 
harmony of all segments of society. Prosperity for all! That is 
our aim. Hence, it is essential to work out and swiftly 
implement a realistic, effective plan to stabilize the economy 
and balance the budget on a concrete economic level whose basic 
principles are these: 
  --putting a halt to the decline in production and reforming 
the economy; 
  --preserving the scientific-technical and production 
potential; 
  --easing social tensions; 
  --stopping the decline in the standard of living; 
  --substantially relieving the burden of inflation; 
  --stabilizing the money exchange rate. 
  The necessary foundation for implementing these processes is 
the gradual transformation of the republic's economy to a social 
market economic system. In carrying out these measures an 
essential role is played by the national movement's strategy and 
tactics. The national movement is the kind of social-political 
movement which, at any given historical stage, must ensure more 
spiritual, physical, material, economic, cultural, and overall 
development-fostering conditions and possibilities in the life 
of the nation. It is an ongoing historical process which 
sometimes slows down and sometimes speeds up. Any movement which 
does not have these attributes cannot be considered a healthy 
national movement. A national movement is born spontaneously in 
the midst of the people and then takes on an organized 
character. It is united and indivisible. In the life of some 
peoples it may also happen that those in power, especially if 
they are imperialistic, themselves create a false national 
movement from the top in order to discredit the real national 
movement or as a screen for some action that is against the 
people's interests. This results in a historical paradox. 
Honesty is replaced by greed, beauty by ugliness, good by evil, 
light by darkness, all of this being passed off as historical 
values. Forces and processes like these can do more harm to any 
people than even the most savage invader. 
  National movement, national figure, and Man of the People 
are 
all merely words, and they ought not to be overused. It is the 
people who must acknowledge and confirm a national movement, and 
it is the age that must give any person the title Man of the 
People. History's demon laughs out loud! If any nation in whose 
life this kind of thing happens fails to form into a fist of 
fury and send them all back where they came from, that nation 
may truly become the victim of historical fate. 
  "God is with us," they cried.... But the mention of God in 
mouths of sin only angers Him and invites punishment. And that's 
what happened! We also must mention those who five or six years 
ago were praising to the skies that which they today are cursing 
to the skies, a grave sin. That's what it is. Let history judge 
everything. 
  In the matter of stabilizing the country, political 
stability 
occupies a special place, but political stability cannot be 
fostered by the notion, advanced by certain circles and taken up 
by certain segments of society, of scheduling early 
parliamentary elections. We know who those political forces are 
who are in favor of this notion, and their aims. We cannot share 
those views, for the following reason: First, a new Georgian 
Constitution has to be adopted; second, a law on local 
government and Georgia's territorial layout; third, a new law on 
elections must be worked out and passed; fourth, criminal gangs 
need to be crushed and the social situation needs to be 
stabilized. Only after that can we speak of new elections; 
otherwise what will happen is that armed gangs and mafia outfits 
will win the elections, and the people will wish they had 
today's Parliament back. 
  We agree that the work of Parliament is in need of 
substantial improvement, but we cannot go along with any insults 
to the Parliament, because insulting Parliament is the same as 
insulting the Georgian state. 
  We believe, at the same time, that all the members of 
Parliament will soon unite their efforts to work out and 
implement the organizational, legislative, and other measures 
which will give a worthy form to the first Georgian Parliament 
in Georgia's history. 
  [signed] GELA KVLIVIDZE, GURAM USTIASHVILI, SHALVA 
IASHAGASHVILI in the name of the National Committee of the 
Democratic Party, Tbilisi, March 1994 

