BFN 

  [Text] Aden, May 20 (AFP)--Two ground-to-ground SCUD 
missiles ripped into the southern Yemeni capital Aden late 
Thursday [19 May], injuring four people, according to hospital 
sources, in the first missile strike on the city since civil war 
broke out on May 5. 
  One of the missiles hit the airport and the other landed in 
a 
residential area in the northeast of the city. 
  A spokesman for the city's main al-Thawrah hospital said the 
four casualties it had received had been hurt in the attack on 
the airport, adding that the injured from the other attack had 
not yet been brought in for treatment. 
  The attacks triggered panic in the southern suburbs, as 
residents took shelter on the lower floors and in the stairwells 
of apartment blocks, an AFP correspondent on the scene said. 
  Deputy tourism Minister Yahya 'Abd-al-Qawi, a senior 
official 
of the Yemeni Socialist Party, the main political force in the 
south, told AFP a missile had hit the hulk of a Soviet-era 
Antonov transport plane standing well away from the main runways. 
  'Abd-al-Qawi, who had visited the scene, said he was not 
sure 
if anybody had been injured in the strike. 
  Fire broke out in the area, and the plume of smoke could be 
seen from the nearby hotel where most of the Western journalists 
covering the civil war are staying. Soldiers turned backed 
journalists who tried to get to the scene. 
  Witnesses said the al-Badr barracks, where Aden's 
anti-aircraft battery crews are garrisoned, as well as the Aden 
peninsula, where the officers club is situated, had been hit, 
although it was not known if the club itself had been damaged. 
  The second missile slammed into the Jabal Shams residential 
district, 'Abd-al-Qawi said, without giving further details. 
  Ambulances and fire engines were still coming and going one 
hour after the attacks. 
  Northern troops consolidated their positions to the north of 
the city with firefights and hand-to-hand fighting Thursday, 
casualties said. 
  They have been tightening the noose around the city since 
they took the main al-'Anad airbase some 50 kilometres (30 
miles) to the north on Monday. 
  On the eastern front, mortar shells fell Thursday on the 
first control post on the outskirts of the city, some 10 
kilometres (six miles) from the city centre, journalists said. 
  A southern source said the policy-making bodies of the 
Yemeni 
Socialist Party were meeting Thursday evening to finalise plans 
to set up a High Council of National Salvation, which he said 
would function as a kind of government. 
  The idea was floated after the fall of al-'Anad on Monday, 
when 'Abd-al-Rahman al-Jifri, who heads a bloc of five 
opposition parties, said the council would function wherever it 
had influence, and would not constitute a government of South 
Yemen. 
  Conservative North Yemen and the formerly Marxist South 
Yemen 
merged in May 1990 to form a new republic, but their armies were 
never integrated, and Vice-President Salim al-Bid, a southerner, 
left the joint capital Sanaa last August for Aden, complaining 
of inadequate power-sharing. 
  A well-informed southern source said Thursday that al-Bid 
left Aden two days ago for Hadramut province near the Omani 
border, some 600 kilometres (372 miles). 
  The northerners have demanded that al-Bid surrender and 
stand 
trial for treason. 

