BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "EU/Macedonia: EU Hands Greece Final </F>
Deadline"; as released by EUROPEAN REPORT] 
  [Text] Hans Van Den Broek, the European Commissioner for 
External Relations, on March 28 gave the Greek Government a 
final deadline for ending its embargo against The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) before proceeding to the 
Court of Justice of the European Union. Following talks with 
Greek Prime Minister, Andreas Papandreou, and Foreign Minister 
Karolos Papoulias in Athens, Mr. Van Den Broek indicated that 
the European Commission would make a decision in the matter 
after the Easter recess. The Greek Government thus has until 
April 6 to respond to the Commission. 
  Mr. Van Den Broek, making available his good offices for 
talks between Greece and the FYROM, travelled to Athens after 
the informal Council of Foreign Affairs Ministers, meeting in 
Ioannina, Greece on March 26 and 27, asked Greece to lift its 
embargo against FYROM. The Commission, which is responsible for 
enforcing the EU Treaties, must ensure that Community law is 
upheld, Mr. Van Den Broek commented. He added that the 
Commission will use its political influence to find a permanent 
and satisfactory solution to the controversy. He went on to say 
that he would join forces with Cyrus Vance, the UN negotiator, 
and Matthew Nimetz, President Clinton's special envoy, who are 
working on the same issue. Mr. Papoulias is expected to meet 
with Mr Vance in New York shortly. 
<H5>  Greek Outrage </H5>
  A spokesman for the Greek Government, Evangelos Venizelos, 
dismissed the informal Council's criticisms of Greece, which 
were made by the other European Union Member States, remarking 
that such criticisms will only encourage FYROM to harden its 
position and will not help Mr. Vance's cause. Greece found 
itself isolated from the other eleven Member States, which 
rejected the claims of an "external danger" which it uses to 
justify the embargo begun on February 16. The Greek Government 
cited Article 224 of the Treaty, which concerns problems of 
public order or external security . 
  Klaus Kinkel, the German Foreign Minister, commented 
following the meeting that Greece's arguments had no valid 
basis. He added that it is clear that a solution must be found 
if legal consequences are to be avoided. He gave the Greeks 
some friendly advice: To settle their political and semantic 
quarrels with the FYROM before the end of their Presidency of 
the EU. Greece could find itself before the Court of Justice of 
the European Union if it continues to ignore its EU partners' 
warnings. 
<H5>  Appeal by the FYROM </H5>
  Macedonia President Kiro Gligorov has written to [EC 
Commission President] Jacques Delors outlining the political and 
economic dangers to his country, seven weeks after the Greek 
embargo began. While reiterating his willingness to negotiate 
with the Greek authorities, Mr. Gligorov remarked in his letter 
that it is inconceivable that a small, democratic country and a 
member of the United Nations, which managed not to be drawn into 
the war in the former Yugoslavia, could be subjected to economic 
strangulation. Who should take responsibility for this 
situation, if not the European Union? Is the EU ready to face 
another Bosnia? he asked. 
  Greece moved on February 16 to block all trade with the 
FYROM, particularly through the port of Thessalonika, through 
which 80 percent of the country's oil and 70 percent of its 
other imports and exports must transit. Greece wants the FYROM 
to give up the name of Macedonia, amend certain articles of its 
Constitution and change the symbols on its flag. 

