Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] On 1 March at a news conference, Foreign Minister 
Marithza Ruiz Vielman said Guatemala has decided to send a 
formal note to UN Secretary General Butrus-Ghali in order to 
protect Guatemala's rights regarding Belize. She explained that 
the note will contain relevant considerations regarding 
territorial waters, the economic exclusive zone, and the 
continental shelf, with the goal of being distributed as an 
official UN document. 
  Vielman said that reference is made in the note to 
Guatemala's unrestricted compliance to UN Charter principles 
and, consequently, to Guatemala's interest in resolving the 
dispute with Belize. Vielman noted that the solution would be 
attained through negotiation or international jurisdictional 
procedures when she announced that the letter will be sent soon 
and that it will be disclosed to the media as soon as it is. 
  Regarding Guatemalan families' complaints of threats and a 
Belizean military ultimatum to make them leave their lands, 
which are allegedly in Belizean territory, she said the presence 
of settlers has been confirmed "to the east of the historic 
monuments that are being used as a reference point with Belize." 
She pointed out that "in case they prove the settlement is 
located in the protected Mayan biosphere area and that it was 
established illegally, the settlers will have to leave the area, 
but the Guatemalan Government will see to it that their rights 
are respected and that they are able to take the products of 
their harvest and their personal goods." 
  Vielman also clarified that Guatemala's interest in seeking 
a 
solution causing the least possible damage to the settlers 
should not be viewed as a renunciation of its rights in the 
territorial claim. She said that Guatemala and Belize have not 
recognized the mentioned monuments as a demarcation line, which 
was confirmed by the 31 July 1992 Joint Declaration. Vielman 
stated that "while the territorial dispute has not been resolved 
and with the sole purpose of avoiding a confrontation, the 
monuments have been used as a reference point by authorities 
from both countries." 
  Vielman added that if the settlers must be removed, no 
deadline will be stipulated because, with the protection of 
Guatemalan authorities, they will determine the time they need 
to prevent losing their crops. She refused to accept that this 
is a threat by the Belizean Government, and instead called the 
Belizean statement "a message to withdraw from there," in 
accordance with the Guatemalan ambassador in Belize. 
  The official argument for the removal of the settlers from 
the place is that it pertains to the Mayan biosphere, and this 
is why, when de Vielman was asked about the reasons why this 
policy is not followed with other people in similar conditions, 
she only replied that it concerns the organizations in charge. 
Finally, Vielman said the Belizean Commission will be in charge 
of drafting the mechanisms to be followed in the territorial 
claim case, and she could not venture to express her view in 
that regard. 

