Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Teilo Colley and Keith Manning, PRESS ASSOCIATION] </F>
  [Excerpts] Terrorists tonight launched five mortars in an 
attack on Heathrow Airport -- but they all apparently failed to 
go off. The devices were in a Datsun car in a hotel car park 
close to the airport in West Drayton, West London, and there 
were no reports of any injuries, Scotland Yard said. 
  News of the attack was announced by Home Secretary Michael 
Howard in the Commons as MPs were discussing renewing the 
contentious Prevention of Terrorism Act. He later said the IRA 
had to be the prime suspect for the attack. 
  Eyewitnesses spoke of bangs and blazing cars in the car park 
of the Excelsior Hotel which is on the perimeter of the airport. 
  Anti-terrorist officers were on the scene and an intensive 
search of the airport was under way. Heathrow confirmed that 
the northern runway, which is the closest to the the hotel, was 
operating at the time of the attack. It was only closed 
afterwards. 
  "It is used by landing aircraft, but there can be quite a 
gap 
between landings at this time of night. It's very unlikely that 
aircraft would have been landing at the time," said an airport 
spokeswoman. 
  A Scotland Yard spokeswoman said: "Police are investigating 
what appears to be a mortar attack at Heathrow airport. It is 
believed that the mortar attack was fired at approximately 1757 
from a Datsun motor vehicle in a car park at the Excelsior Hotel 
on the perimeter of the airport near the junction with Sipson 
Road and Bath Road. It appears five mortars were fired. There 
are no reports of detonations. It's believed the mortars were 
targeted towards the airport. There are no reports of injuries. 
Anti-terrorist branch officers are in attendance and an 
extensive search of the airport is currently being conducted for 
the unexploded mortars." 
  In an apparent misleading warning, Sky News received a 
telephone call from a man with an Irish accent saying that there 
would be explosions inside the airport about 50 minutes before 
the mortar attack was fired from outside the perimeter fence. 
[passage omitted] 
  Mr Howard told Channel 4 News: "If it was meant to send a 
signal to the House of Commons, I think it is a pity that the 
House of Commons was unable to give a united response because 
the Labour Party did not come into the lobby with us to support 
the renewal of the Prevention of Terrorism Act. But the 
majority in favour of the renewal of those powers was a big 
majority. So if this was a signal from the terrorists, they got 
their answer from the House of Commons." 
  Mr Howard did not accuse the IRA of the mortar attack, but 
indicated it had to be the prime suspect given the timing 
coinciding with the terrorism debate in Parliament. [passage 
omitted] 
  Tonight's attack is the first major terrorist incident on 
the 
British mainland since the Anglo-Irish declaration on peace in 
Northern Ireland was signed in December. 

