BFN 

<F P=106> [Valeriy Rudnev article: "Aleksey Ilyushenko's Powers Have </F>
Been Terminated, but He Is Continuing To Perform the Duties of 
General Prosecutor"] 
  [Text] As we know, on 25 April the Federation Council 
rejected the nomination of Aleksey Ilyushenko for the post of 
general prosecutor as put forward by the president, and 
suggested to Boris Yeltsin that he should submit a new candidate 
for this high office within two weeks. Since then a month has 
passed. A. Ilyushenko's powers, as instructed by the upper 
chamber of our parliament, have been terminated, but he is 
continuing to perform the duties of general prosecutor. 
  The issue of the general prosecutor's position would not 
have 
been the focus of such intense public interest if A. 
Ilyushenko's duties been restricted to administrative, economic, 
and cadre issues. Ultimately, however, somebody must administer 
the complex prosecutor's office: Sign reports, hire and fire 
personnel, distribute responsibilities, and mete out punishment 
and encouragement. 
  But this is precisely where the problem lies, the fact that 
the general prosecutor is not just the director of a department, 
but first and foremost a procedural figure whose rights and 
responsibilities are strictly regulated by the Constitution and 
the law. The slightest deviation from the procedure for 
appointing a general prosecutor and installing him in office 
casts doubt on the legality of his decisions and could paralyze 
the activity not only of the Prosecutor's Office but of other 
legal departments as well. 
  Strictly speaking, the law does not recognize the position 
of 
acting general prosecutor. There is a general prosecutor 
appointed in compliance with all the formalities. It is clear 
that a quick decision was needed in the acute political 
situation which developed after the sudden resignation of A. 
Kazannik. Only the president could make such a decision. And 
he made the following decision: A temporary, acting director 
was appointed to the Prosecutor's Office. Let us assume that 
during the two-week period stipulated by the Federation Council, 
A. Ilyushenko's stint in the job of general prosecutor was 
entirely proper and correct. And then what? 
  What would happen, for example, if A. Ilyushenko were to 
turn 
up at a session of the Russian Federation Supreme Court 
Presidium and deliver a judgment on some question or other, for 
example on the practice of applying the death penalty? How 
should the highest legal office respond to this? Should it take 
account of A. Ilyushenko's opinion as the judgment of the fully 
empowered general prosecutor? Or should it regard him as an 
ordinary legal officer, despite the fact that he happens to be 
acting general prosecutor? 
  But let us not bog ourselves down with rhetorical questions 
of this kind -- for the time being A. Ilyushenko is not daring 
to come to Supreme Court sessions. On the other hand, having 
gotten a feel for cadre reshuffles (his most recent involved the 
replacement of practically all the general prosecutor's 
deputies), he has started to make procedural decisions like a 
real constitutional general prosecutor. For example, the length 
of time defendants can be remanded in custody has been extended 
to 18 months. 
  One of the first such decisions he made concerned the case 
of 
Dmitriy Fedorov. This is a fairly well-known case which has 
attracted considerable press attention, including information 
provided by the militia. For a year now specialists from the 
investigation department of the Moscow Internal Affairs Main 
Administration have been trying to prove the successful 
businessman guilty. Admittedly, they are acting in accordance 
with the old procedures: First of all they take the suspect 
into custody, then they begin to look for evidence against him. 
But the indications are that all has not gone smoothly in the 
investigation's quest for evidence: Fedorov has been in custody 
for a year, he has not been presented with any evidence, and the 
case has not been sent to court. And there is no sign of its 
coming to court in the near future either, because over the year 
the investigation has visited Fedorov just twice, and that was 
for formal reasons. 
  However, the issue is ultimately nothing to do with the 
investigation and evidence in the Fedorov case -- it is about 
the position of Russia's acting general prosecutor. He signed 
the decree extending the length of custody. The die is cast, so 
to speak. And now the question arises: Is Aleksey Ilyushenko 
empowered to make procedural decisions which have legal 
consequences when the only person empowered to do this is the 
constitutionally appointed general prosecutor? 
  We will soon get an answer -- following a complaint by 
Fedorov's lawyer, the legality of extending the length of time 
Fedorov may be held in custody will be checked by a court. 

