Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Paris, Jan 27 (AFP) -- A row between France and 
the United States on Bosnia strategy intensified Thursday [27 
January] with the French Foreign Ministry accusing U.S. 
officials of being ill-informed and standing back on the 
sidelines as war raged. 
  French Foreign Ministry spokesman Richard Duque dropped 
diplomatic niceties on Thursday to accuse the State Department 
of being "ill-informed" about France's stance after Paris urged 
the United States to take an active part in pressurising the 
belligerants to agree to a peace treaty. 
  In an allusion to the United States, he said: "If we take 
this from a moral point of view, the choice is between being 
happy to observe the fighting or to try everything to stop it." 
  He was reacting to equally sharp criticisms by the State 
Department that French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe had engaged 
in "a strange moral calculus" by urging a peace settlement on 
the "aggrieved party" -- the Bosnia Moslems -- although they 
have suffered the most from Serbian aggression. [passage 
omitted] 
  France is the biggest contributor with 6,000 men to the 
United Nations peacekeeping force in former Yugoslavia and there 
have been increasing calls for a pullout in the spring, after 
the failure of Geneva peace talks. 
  Duque said the 11 other states of the European Union shared 
the French view on the Bosnia situation and that consultations 
among Europeans would intensify in the coming days. 
  Juppe told the NEW YORK TIMES Tuesday that if the United 
States did not join in European efforts to force through a peace 
plan dividing Bosnia into three ethnically based mini-states, 
they would be responsible for a "catastrophe." 
  He said: "If the Americans do not convince the Bosnian 
Moslems that they must stop fighting and that there is no chance 
that the United States would come to their rescue, then the 
United States will give them incentives to pursue the fighting 
on the ground." 
  On Wednesday, France called for the implementation "if 
necessary with the use of force" of recent NATO decisions on 
Bosnia-Herzegovina to use air strikes if necessary to relieve UN 
forces in the Moslem enclave of Srebrenica and open up Tuzla 
airport for relief supplies." 
  In a joint communique issued by President Francois 
Mitterrand 
and Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, France urged the United 
Nations to "secure the necessary means as soon as possible" to 
achieve these objectives. 
  The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation resolved at a summit 
in Brussels earlier this month to authorise the use of strikes 
by NATO warplanes to open up the two beseiged Moslem-controlled 
centres. 

