Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Right-Wing Extremists"] </F>
  [Text] More than 70 neo-Nazi and right-wing extremist 
organizations and splinter groups with a total of about 41,500 
members are haunting Germany. While so far authorities have 
assumed that the right-wing extremist scene is largely torn by 
strife, now constitutional protectors admit that they have 
underestimated the interlacement of the groups. 
  The slogan of "Marching separately, striking together," 
which 
was issued by the late neo-Nazi leader Michael Kuehnen, is 
increasingly being followed. Controlled by the supra-regional 
cadre organization "New Front Association of Like-Minded 
People," individual groups at home and abroad are coordinating 
their activities through magazines, information telephones, and 
mailbox systems. 
  The militant nature of the scene is also alarming: By the 
end of 1993 the Federal Office of Criminal Investigations had 
reported 1,814 acts of violence with right-wing extremist 
motives. Eight people were killed; in 1992 there were 17 deaths. 
<H5>  The Right-Wing Extremist Scene in Germany </H5>
  Parties: 
  The Republikaner (REP): Founded in Munich in 1983. 
[Chairman Franz] Schoenhuber tries to draw a line between the 
party and militant neo-Nazis. Many ex-Republikaner have good 
contacts with the neo-Nazi scene. About 25,000 members. 
  German League for People and Homeland (DL): Collection point 
for former members of the Republikaner and the NPD [National 
Democratic Party]. Ex-Republikaner [and DL Chairman Harald] 
Neubauer has a seat in the European Parliament and is 
establishing Europe-wide contacts. The DL has 1,000 members. 
  National Democratic Party of Germany (NPD): In terms of 
personnel it is closely linked to the neo-Nazi scene. It took 
in members of the German Alternative, cooperates with the Viking 
Youth, and has contacts with Worch (National List, New Front of 
Like-Minded People). About 5,000 members. Its chairman is 
Guenter Deckert. 
  German People's Union (DVU): With 26,000 members it is one 
of the largest right-wing extremist organizations. Publisher 
[Gerhard] Frey (DEUTSCHE NATIONAL-ZEITUNG) cooperates with the 
Russian fascist Zhirinovskiy. It has contacts with the DL. 
  Liberal German Workers Party (FAP): The only openly national 
socialist party. Has taken in many activists of the National 
Offensive, the German Alternative, and the Nationalist Front. 
Attracts attention by marches and militant actions. About 220 
members. Its chairman is Friedhelm Busse. 
  Umbrella Organization: 
  New Front of Like-Minded People (GdNF): The GdNF considers 
itself as the cadre organization of the right-wing movement in 
Germany. Its goal is the new establishment of the NSDAP 
[National Socialist German Workers' Party, or Nazi party]. The 
GdNF coordinates nationwide actions and has contact with foreign 
right- wing extremists. All leading German neo-Nazis belong to 
it. The head of the GdNF is Christian Worch. 
  Banned Organizations: 
  German Alternative (DA): The strongest militant neo-Nazi 
group in the new laender: 350 members. Active in particular in 
Saxony and Brandenburg. Banned on 10 December 1992. Many of its 
members have joined the NPD. Its chairman was Frank Huebner. 
  Nationalist Front (NF): A militant organization headed by 
ex-NPD member [Meinolf] Schoenborn, it had weapons and 
ammunition. It was banned on 27 November 1992. A large number 
of its 130 activists gathered in the Central German Youth 
Promotion Project. 
  National Offensive (NO): This is a collection point for 
disillusioned FAP members in Bavaria, Saxony, and Brandenburg. 
It intended to form "autonomous structures." It was banned on 
22 December 1992; it had 150 members at the last count. Its 
chairman was Michael Swierczek. 
  Organizations: 
  National List (NL): Founded by Kuehnen followers in Hamburg 
in 1989. The NL considers itself as a "spearhead" and often 
appears as the organizer of rightist meetings. The NL has about 
30 members, and its leader is Christian Worch. 
  German Hesse (DH): It is a small but striking group. The 
leaders belong to the inner circle of the German neo-Nazi scene. 
It cultivates contacts with the Viking Youth, the FAP, and the 
banned DA. It has about 60 members. Heinz Reisz is the group's 
leader. 
  Viking Youth (WJ): The oldest right-wing extremist 
organization in Germany, it was founded in 1952. In tent camps 
young people get paramilitary training. It has contacts with 
the NPD and has about 400 members. Its leader is Wolfgang 
Nahrath. 
  Central German Youth Promotion Project (FMJ): This is 
considered to be the successor organization of the banned DA and 
NF. It is primarily active in Brandenburg. It publishes the 
agitating brochure ANGRIFF [Attack], and has 100 members. The 
founder of the FMJ is Andreas Pohl. 
  Votan's People (WV): Its leader, Arnulf Priem, was the NPD's 
landtag candidate in 1974. The military sports group WV 
developed in 1987 as a sidekick of the Germanic-racist "Asgard 
League." It has about 40 members. 
  Right-Wing Extremist International 
  United States: The NSDAP/AO [National Socialist Workers' 
Party/Foreign Organization] is the most important supplier of 
material to the German neo-Nazis. It maintains good contacts 
with the GdNF. Worldwide it has 5,000 members. Its leader is 
Gary Lauck. 
  Austria: Gottfried Kuessel, the imprisoned leader of the 
Extraparliamentary Opposition Loyal to the People [VAPO] was a 
speaker at rightist rallies in Germany. 
  Russia: Vladimir Zhirinovskiy demands a German-Russian 
alliance in the "struggle for white Europe." It has good 
contacts with DVU and DL. 
  Alliances: 
  Sweden: White Aryan Resistance -- 50-100 militant members; 
  Denmark: Danish National Socialist Movement -- several 
hundred members; 
  Latvia: Movement of National Independence -- 1,600 members; 
  The Netherlands: Nederlandse Blok [Dutch Block] -- several 
hundred members; 
  Great Britain: British National Party -- 2,000 members; 
Blood and Honour -- several thousand followers all over the 
world; 
  Belgium: Vlaams Blok [Flemish Bloc] -- about 3,000 members; 
  Italy: Movimento Sociale Italiano/Destra Nazionale [Italian 
Social Movement/National Right] -- 60,000 members; 
  France: Front National [National Front] -- 80,000 members; 
Parti Nationaliste Francais et Europeen [French and European 
Nationalist Party] -- several hundred militant members; 
  Ex-Yugoslavia: HVO (Croatian Defense Council) -- German 
neo-Nazis fight there; 
  Spain: Cedade [Circulo Espanol de Amigos de Europa -- 
Spanish Circle of Friends of Europe] -- 2,000 members; 
  Greece: Chrisy Avghi (Golden Dawn) -- about 500 militant 
members. 
<H5>  High Readiness for Violence </H5>
  -- Right-wing extremists in Germany: 41,500 (of that 26,000 
DVU members, but without the 30,000 members of the Republikaner); 
  -- Militant right-wing extremists (mainly skinheads): 5,600; 
  -- Total number of acts of violence with right-wing 
extremist 
motives in 1993: 1,814; 
  -- Total number of acts of violence with right-wing 
extremist 
motives against foreigners in 1993: 1,320. 

