Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Addis Ababa, 31 Jan (PANA) -- Ethiopia added its 
voice Monday [31 January] to the increasing calls for the 
revitalisation of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) to 
meet the various challenges facing Africa. 
  "The effort to increase the effectiveness and the 
administrative capacity of the organisation is an issue which 
should always be given top priority," Ethiopia President Meles 
Zenawi said. He was addressing the 59th ordinary session of the 
OAU Council of Ministers which opened Monday in the Ethiopian 
capital, Addis Ababa. 
  Revitalisation of the organisation, he said, would remain 
elusive unless member states made a greater effort to support it 
financially. Member states owe the organisation at least 69 
million US dollars in arrears of contributions, as at the end of 
December 1993. 
  Out of an assessed contribution of 24.76 million dollars for 
the 1993/94 financial year, only 3.93 million dollars, 
representing 16 per cent, was received by the secretariat by the 
end of 1993. 
  "The gravity of this rather gloomy picture of the financial 
situation," the OAU said, "should be viewed in the context of 
the ever mounting responsibilities that are being entrusted to 
the organisation." 
  Virtually all the member states owe the OAU large sums of 
money. However, Algeria, Botswana, Egypt, Lesotho, Mauritius, 
Mauritania, Namibia, Nigeria, Senegal, Swaziland, Tanzania and 
Zimbabwe are up to date with their contributions. 
  Meles said that Africa had little hope of achieving peace 
and 
development without enhanced cooperation among African 
countries. He said the OAU was the only vehicle Africa had "to 
ensure greater cooperation in both the political and economic 
areas among our countries." He lamented on the conflicts in a 
number of African countries and said these had been among major 
factors behind Africa's economic difficulties and poverty. "It 
is also the prime reason for the growing marginalisation of our 
continent and for the image of hopelessness that we have 
projected in the world," he said. 
  An estimated 7 million Africans have died, in the last three 
decades, as a result of the civil strife and political crises. 
Another 20 million Africans are today refugees and displaced 
persons. There is political and military insecurity in Angola, 
Congo, Burundi, South Africa, Mozambique, Liberia, Sudan, 
Somalia, Liberia, Zaire. 
  Meles said if Africa, through the OAU, did not take 
responsibility for the resolution of conflicts in the continent, 
"the possibility for others to do it for us, and to do it in a 
way that is not always constructive, was one of the major 
dangers we face". The OAU and its central organ for conflict 
resolution, he added, have a number of potential and actual 
conflict situation which they need to monitor closely. "But no 
where will the ability of the OAU to be a decisive factor for 
peace more tested that in South Africa," he said. 
  That country's first multiracial elections are scheduled for 
27 April. He said members states had a historic responsibility 
to ensure that South Africa's inevitable emergence as a 
non-racial and democratic society was not marred by violence 
threatened by those not willing to participate in the elections. 
That reference is the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party led by 
Mangosuthu Buthelezi. 
  The OAU has an observer mission in South Africa, but the 
mission needs to be expanded for it to monitor effectively the 
elections. 

