CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vitaliy Mashkov, representative of the president </F>
of the Russian Federation in Sverdlovsk, under the rubric 
"Between Us": "A Ural Republic: In Whose Interest?"] 
  [Text] Although the project "Ural Republic" was 
rejected by federal authorities, it has not yet been relegated 
to the archives. As before, it is still being debated--in both 
Yekaterinburg and Moscow. It happens that the public essentially 
knows the point of view of the authors of the "Sverdlovsk 
initiative." Nevertheless, they have serious opponents; for 
example, Vitaliy Mashkov, representative of the president of the 
Russian Federation in Sverdlovsk Oblast. Inasmuch as OBSHCHAYA 
GAZETA has given the floor more than once to those who are "for" 
the initiative, we do not think it possible to refuse this right 
to a person who is resolutely "against" it. Especially since 
Mashkov was not allowed to speak at recent parliamentary 
hearings "on the Ural Republic problem." 
  As I was already convinced, the driving force behind the 
autonomization of Russian-speaking regions of the Russian 
Federation are local elite groups that were organized by the 
former Soviet party-administrative nomenklatura and the leaders 
of criminal business. They created regional mafiosi-monopolistic 
clans that dominate the localities in both the economy and 
sociopolitical life. It is these clans that are attempting to 
exploit the difficult transition period and the weakness of the 
federal authorities by inciting the separatism of the regions in 
order to acquire the maximum amount of freedom in the 
disposition of regional resources. 
  As is known, the infrastructure of the Middle Urals was 
formed during wartime on the basis of industrial enterprises 
that were evacuated from the European part of the USSR, which 
made it something of a model for all of Russia in the postwar 
period, where all the political-economic processes are 
transpiring sooner and quicker. In view of this, Sverdlovsk 
Oblast was also prepared for the initiation of separatist 
actions earlier than other Russian regions. In addition, the 
dissolution of the Supreme Soviet of Russia and the absence of a 
State Duma in this period created what was already known by the 
Bolsheviks to be the precondition of revolution--"it was too 
early yesterday, but it will be too late tomorrow"--for the 
active appearance of Sverdlovsk authorities in November of last 
year. The federal authorities at that time did not clash with 
deluded provincial politicians, who went to extremes in their 
sincere zeal to improve the state structure of Russia, but with 
prudent businessmen who were out to snatch their own firebird 
from the sleeping guards. 
  At the end of last year the Control Directorate of the 
president's staff, and not so long ago a commission of the 
Security Council of Russia, conducted short-term audits on the 
use of Sverdlovsk Oblast resources by local authorities and the 
state of affairs in the law enforcement sphere. As far as I 
know, both commissions left in a panic, inasmuch as they 
encountered prototypes of mafiosi power, which is threatening 
the country more and more openly. Local "authorities" are not 
averse to using various provocations even against me, an 
official of rather substantial rank. 
  And there is something for them to fear. Literally in the 
last few days I learned about another scandalous fact: It is not 
known in whose interests 20 billion rubles [R] that were 
transferred abroad were "circulating" for more than a half year, 
but it was certainly not in the interests of the oblast or the 
country. I think that there is scant hope that all the 
violations of the law of the last year will become the subject 
of criminal proceedings--the list of players in these affairs is 
too long. 
  Another fact is also vexing: Those local democrats who just 
yesterday railed at abuses are suddenly coming out in unison 
today for the people against whom they fought energetically. 
What is this--a lack of principles, bribability, or something 
else that I do not understand? But, after all, the role of these 
people in the truly stupefying, massive propaganda idea of a 
"Ural Republic" is very great. People listened to their opinion 
for several years and believed in them as fighters for a new 
Russia. As a result, with the help of a number of democrats and 
scientists who are prepared for a position and promises to serve 
anybody and propagandize anything, the idea of revising the 
Bolshevist national-territorial division of Russia was replaced 
by the idea of a "Ural Republic." The result of the oblast 
referendum, when 84 percent of residents expressed themselves 
for equalizing the rights of components of the Federation, was 
exploited very cleverly. Entirely correctly, the bulk of the 
people understand very well that the inequality of the 
components is ruinous for the Federation, and that this 
situation has to be corrected. The whole question is how. It is 
here that the trump card was pulled out of the sleeve--they said 
that the people want a "Ural Republic." But what are we, worse 
than the Tatars, or what? An element of nationalism was 
introduced immediately--for certain purposes, it is also good. 
But further there were shouts: They are looting us! Ural 
residents pay enormous sums of money into the budget, but the 
Russian republics are outright spongers. 
  And the propaganda machine went to work! Relieved from his 
position, Governor Rossel almost became a national hero whom 
grateful countrymen encouraged with two deputy seats--to the 
oblast senate and duma. The nonparty association "Transformation 
of the Urals," created by Rossel, which has purely party charter 
objectives--the formation of a political elite of the region--is 
functioning actively. It is interesting to note that all the 
documents for the organization of this association were 
submitted on the same day the edict was published on the removal 
of Rossel from the position of governor. It seems that 
preparations were carefully made for an earnest struggle a long 
time ago. 

