CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Oldrich Zabojnik: "Doubts Are Growing </F>
Regarding the Customs Union"] 
  [Text] Notions that any kind of Slovak government other 
than that of Meciar would be an easier partner for the Czech 
Republic are proving erroneous in the first month of activity on 
the part of the Moravcik cabinet. While Meciar was frequently a 
partner who was difficult to figure out, given a little 
patience, when it was always necessary to wait awhile before he 
would cool off over a problem, in the end it was generally 
possible to come to agreement with him. That was also made 
simpler by the fact that Meciar's basic disposition is expressly 
political, which makes it possible to find compromises not 
always immediately measurable in terms of money. Although the 
seemingly softer Moravcik does display a willingness to exercise 
more restraint in listening to the views of the Czech partners, 
he unequivocally stresses Slovak commercial and economic 
interests in relationships with the Czech Republic, interests 
which, even in his opinion, are not now being met with equality. 
His economics ministers go still further and openly state that 
they will be more difficult partners for Prague than were their 
Meciar predecessors. 
  Above all, the Moravcik government is currently concerned 
with the customs union which ideologically divides Slovakia into 
its opponents and defenders, the latter of which seem to be 
diminishing with the passage of time. It would appear that the 
number of defenders is diminishing, even despite warnings 
sounded by leading Slovak economists. For example, Prof. Jozef 
Kosnar, who is considered to be the principal economics expert 
at the SDL [expansion unknown], when responding to a question by 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY as to what he thinks of the contribution made 
to Slovakia by the customs union stated: "Elimination of the 
customs union would be a greater economic blow for Slovakia than 
was the elimination of the federation in the political sense." 
However, there are only a few public officials in Bratislava who 
would be willing to publicize such a view. Following the advent 
of the Moravcik government, however, there was an express 
increase in the number of those who publicly made no secret of 
the fact that they consider the customs union as something which 
not only makes no contribution, but as something which even 
harms Slovakia. One of the members of the government who shares 
in formulating the financial policies of the Slovak Republic 
even believes that the very origin of the customs union was a 
mistake for Slovakia. He adds that a small state which is 
beginning its existence should primarily provide opportunities 
for its manufacturers even at the price that their products are 
more expensive and possibly even of a lower quality than 
imported products. 
  Given the growing criticism of the current content of the 
customs union, it is interesting to monitor the Slovak media. 
Even those who had subjected Meciar's economic policies to 
crushing criticism and had favored an understanding with the 
Czech Republic are now stressing the need for a consistent 
approach by Moravcik toward Prague in bringing about "more just 
conditions" for trading for Slovaks with Czechs. The Slovak 
approach in matters of the customs union is visibly 
accelerating. It is passing from those realized technical 
barriers in the image of attestations, certificates, and import 
tariffs toward manifesting demands that changes be effected in 
the clearing accounting procedures as well as in the customs 
union itself. This type of activation which, in Bratislava, is 
already slowly exceeding the limits of a campaign, even has its 
political motivations: Under opposition criticism, Moravcik 
cannot afford to be clearly less of a patriot in the eyes of the 
public prior to the elections. But the matter is primarily more 
pragmatic. The efficiency of the Slovak economy is approximately 
one-third less than that of the Czech Republic and Slovakia must 
come to terms with a lower standard of living than the one it 
was accustomed to in the federation. That finding is leaked to 
the public because no one within the coalition or the opposition 
has the political courage to fully admit it. That is why all 
potential sources that could slow down the currently continuing 
economic failure of the country are being sought out all the 
more tenaciously. 

