BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Chancellor Helmut Kohl by Gerhard Fuchs and </F>
Sigmund Gottlieb in Bad Hofgastein; date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Fuchs] Mr. Chancellor, last Sunday's opinion 
polls showed that approval for the Christian Democratic Union 
[CDU]/Christian Social Union [CSU] was at 36 percent. This is 
the worst result since 1949. Heiner Geissler said: I, as former 
secretary general, feel sick when I look at these figures. How 
will you go about winning the Bundestag elections? 
  [Kohl] I do not know why Heiner Geissler feels sick. As 
former secretary general he should know that polls and election 
results are two completely different things. We are entering 
the so-called marathon election year. It will be a very 
difficult year. There will be a number of municipal and diet 
elections, as well as the European and the Bundestag elections. 
I am convinced that we will win the Bundestag elections. All 
the signs I see indicate that. Why should I discuss today's 
polls if the election result.... 
  [Fuchs] [words indistinct] 
  [Kohl] Let me give you an example. One cannot ignore the 
fact that the economy is slowly recovering. It is obvious that 
exports are rising. Industrial nations worldwide are getting 
out of the trough, the recession. Due to German unity we 
entered the recession two years later, and we will also get to 
leave it later. But the figures are clear. It will not be a 
super upward movement, but the mood in industry is just like 
spring. Nature is waking up, there is an upward trend. This 
applies to western Germany, and to a much greater extent to 
eastern Germany. 
  [Gottlieb] At the CDU party conference you said clearly that 
a grand coalition is out of the question for you. You stated 
just as clearly that a coalition with the Free Democratic Party 
[FDP] continues to be desirable, not out of love, but out of 
reason. Now, the FDP is quite weak at the moment, it stands at 
about 5 percent, and they are duly avoiding making a clear 
coalition statement. When will you tell Mr. Kinkel to make up 
his mind? 
  [Kohl] First, I think that it is a preelection tradition to 
downgrade the FDP. We want to -- I want to continue the 
coalition with the FDP; mainly because we worked together very 
well and because I do not see an alternative. A Social 
Democratic Party of Germany [SPD]/Greens coalition would 
certainly lead the country into isolation. 
  [Gottlieb] But Mr. Kinkel does not make a statement. 
  [Kohl] Second, I have no doubt that the FDP will make a 
statement. 
  [Gottlieb] When? 
  [Kohl] They will certainly do this in due course. There is 
no hurry. The FDP is much too clever to ignore the fact that 
you cannot work well for four years, say in the election 
campaign: we have worked well for four years, and then not take 
a clear position. This means, we have European elections in a 
few weeks' time, in June, and there are municipal and diet 
elections. It is clear that the FDP will say what it has to say 
before that. I do not have a problem, and I have a lot of 
patience. The FDP knows what is good for it. And everything 
else is certainly bad for it. I am warning against a premature 
conclusion, as we have often had it in the past: The FDP now 
holds at 5 percent, it will probably not make it. This was a 
popular thing when Genscher was chairman. First the situation 
was depicted as unfavorable, and then there are a lot of people 
who say: we want the FDP all the same. I do not doubt that the 
FDP will get over the 5-percent hurdle. It will achieve a 
better result. 
  [Fuchs] Mr. Chancellor, you have had a strong partner in 
the south, the Bavarian CSU. Now the CSU has been making 
negative headlines for weeks. How will you make it in Bonn if 
the CSU does not make a major contribution? 
  [Kohl] It is no coincidence that what is going on in Bavaria 
is happening a few weeks before the elections. I would like to 
take this opportunity to say a few clear words on the attacks 
that are now being made on [late CSU chairman] Franz Josef 
Strauss. Franz Josef Strauss is one of the great architects of 
the FRG. He achieved great things for Germany and for Bavaria. 
Today's Bavaria is his achievement to a great extent. I can 
say this without reservations, because I am one of those who had 
a lot of conflicts with him when he was still alive. This is 
the first thing I would like to say about this. The second 
thing is that I trust that my friends in the CSU will do what is 
necessary to explain the recent incidents. Accusations have 
been made by people who are in very ambiguous positions 
themselves. This must be explained. But the CSU's 
achievements, the achievements of Franz Josef Strauss, are 
undisputed, and I think we will be able to express this clearly 
to Bavarian voters. 
  [Gottlieb] Let me come back to another point, Mr. 
Chancellor. It is undisputed that the Liberals are getting 
weaker right now -- this may change again -- and the Greens have 
become stronger. At the moment, a lot points toward an 
SPD/Greens coalition. Such an alliance is no longer feared by 
the people, they have become respectable. Should Helmut Kohl 
not be afraid of such a coalition? 
  [Kohl] How do you know that SPD/Greens would be accepted by 
the people in Bundestag elections? This has not been tried. We 
had an election this year -- SPD/Greens -- in Lower Saxony. Let 
me tell you, in view of the fact that Lower Saxony's minister 
president had all the means of power and the media at his 
disposal, the result was not all that overwhelming. He repeated 
his previous result. If I had had such a result in Rhineland 
Palatinate in 1975 before I was candidate for chancellor, people 
would have said, and they did say: This is not enough. 
  [Gottlieb] The CDU's election result in Lower Saxony was 
worse. 
  [Kohl] Excuse me, the CDU was in a difficult starting 
position. A young, new man achieved an acceptable result. This 
is my opinion. I cannot see the voters seeing it that way. It 
is a matter of dramatic change, the future of Germany is at 
stake. We have to stop and see what we can improve, where we 
have to rethink. I do not think that the SPD/Greens are the 
right choice in a period when we are beginning a slow economic 
recovery -- with more bureaucracy, punishment of hard work, with 
all the social envy, and everything else. I do not think that 
the majority of voters think so either. And I think that this 
is not a very sensible discussion. We will know for sure in 
October, and I am sure of my ground. 
  [Fuchs] There is a famous definition of the political 
center. The CDU says it wants to win the elections at the 
center. Your partner Theo Waigel, the CSU chairman, says: we 
have to win the elections to the right of center. What is the 
center, what is to the right of it, and what are the issues in 
the election campaign? 
  [Kohl] If you want to know precisely: For the CDU it is 
obvious, the center is where I am. That is undisputed. I have 
never thought much of moving to the left. I do not think much 
of going to the right either. 
  [Fuchs] But Waigel says: we have to win voters who are 
moving to the right. This means toward the Republikaner, for 
instance. 
  [Kohl] I think that there is a difference between the FRG as 
a whole and Bavaria. There has always been a difference. I 
have nothing against winning as many voters to the left and to 
the right of center as possible. But the basis of our party, 
its history, its tradition, is at the center, and we do not 
intend to let anyone else take that ground. 
  [Gottlieb] Your secretary general, Mr. Hintze, recently said 
very dramatically that the situation for the CDU is of 
particular concern in the new laender. It is below 30 percent 
everywhere except Saxony. Have you miscalculated the situation 
in the new laender? Have you underestimated the inherited 
burdens? 
  [Kohl] I think that we have all miscalculated on a few 
points, including myself. I miscalculated one particular point, 
or judged the situation incorrectly. In 1990, on the day of 
German unity, I expected economic cooperation, which I had 
developed with Gorbachev over the previous years, to continue. 
I did not think -- nor did anybody else -- that a few months 
later, less than a year later, the Soviet Union would no longer 
exist; that this giant would collapse, with successor states 
forming. That its successor states would deteriorate so badly 
economically, and that instead of 25-30 billion German marks 
[DM] in exports from the new laender to these states, we are 
achieving just DM5 billion this year. We lack the opportunity 
to export our products from the new laender, the former GDR, to 
these countries. We need a transition period to adjust the 
companies of the former GDR to the completely different 
standards of the world market. This has had drastic 
consequences. I miscalculated this point. But -- and this must 
also be acknowledged -- in the meantime things have stabilized, 
and there is a clear upward trend. GNP growth rates in the new 
laender will be between 6 and 8 percent this year. We can see 
that the labor market is stabilizing. There has been enormous 
progress. Just go to the new laender; wherever you go you will 
see progress in road construction and in other fields. This 
year we will grant just under 100,000 building permits in the 
new laender. This is an absolute record figure; permits have 
quadrupled over 1992. In just under three years, 1.8 million 
telephone connections have increased to over 4 million. Insofar 
as the people themselves, I would also like to give you a 
specific figure: On the day of German unity a pensioner in the 
former GDR got between 450 and 550 East German marks. Today he 
gets about DM1,300. This means the social situation, 
particularly that of the older generation, has improved 
enormously. We managed last year to get positions for all the 
young people who want to train for a job. I am quite sure of my 
ground, I am sticking to the flowering landscapes. I was wrong 
when I talked of four to five years. Now it might be double 
that. But let me say this: I was the one who believed in 
German unity and helped effect it, while others were 
fainthearted, and another group had long betrayed and abandoned 
the idea of German unity. 
  [Fuchs] But it is a fact of this German unity that we had 
3.9 million of unemployed in March; this is 100,000 fewer than 
in the previous month, due to seasonal improvement in the east. 
But this is still more than 16 percent unemployment. Jobs, 
jobs, jobs, an American presidential candidate entitled his 
election campaign. Could this also be an issue for you -- jobs? 
Could your message be that until October there might not be a 
lot to achieve in this respect? But what sort of timeframe do 
you envision to achieve a basic change in trends? 
  [Kohl] First, it would be lying to the voters if we said 
that unemployment could be overcome quickly. This is not 
possible anywhere. Experience has shown that when we leave a 
recession behind it takes about one year for things to 
stabilize. But -- and this is the focal point of your question 
-- I am not saying: jobs, jobs, jobs. We have to ask ourselves 
what can we do to improve our economic situation to create 
permanent jobs. It is not a matter of creating air bubbles, it 
is a matter of rethinking. Our society, our economy --and I am 
saying this without blaming anyone, we all have had our share in 
this -- we waited too long regarding a few important points over 
the past 30 years. We failed to enforce a few necessary 
reforms. Take the labor market. We waited far too long and 
accepted the fact that we have the shortest machine operating 
hours in the European Union [EU]. This means machines are 
becoming more and more expensive and they are used less and 
less. Together with the Japanese, we are the no. 1 export 
country. We have become increasingly expensive, and it cannot 
be our aim to move jobs to Hong Kong. 
  [Fuchs] Are you sticking with the label of Germany as a 
public recreation park? 
  [Kohl] No, this is not a label, and I did not say it this 
way. I said that one cannot secure a future with a public 
recreation park. This is something completely different. For 
me, the important thing now is that we must secure our future; 
we must be competitive. When I look at a European company that 
produces in Germany and in the neighboring Czech Republic, and 
workers working on the same product a few hundred kilometers 
apart earn DM3 there and DM43 here, I do not want to cut wages 
here. Wages are going up in the Czech Republic, but competition 
is at our doorstep. We must wake up now. A country that has 30 
days annual leave, plus 12-14 days of public holidays -- that 
makes eight weeks of holidays -- has to ask itself whether it 
does not have to do a bit more to secure its future. 
  [Gottlieb] Can I be somewhat more specific? At the party 
congress and afterwards you repeatedly mentioned flexibility, 
innovation, and said that the future concept must be part-time 
jobs. Is this something you want to make a central issue now? 
  [Kohl] Yes, among other things. There is no doubt about 
this. We know that in Germany there are about 2.5 million people 
who would like to have part-time jobs -- not just women, but 
also men. And there is another comparison: In the Netherlands, 
a country that can truly be compared with Germany, 34 out of 100 
jobs are part-time jobs. In Germany the percentage is 16. I 
cannot believe that the Dutch are stupider than we are. If 
people's wishes are so sensible, these jobs must be created. I 
am very pleased that my appeal has brought about positive 
reactions from employers and trade unions. We will get together 
after my return to Bonn, and we want to start a massive 
campaign. It is quite clear that I do not consider this a 
panacea. But if we can create a couple of hundred thousand 
part-time jobs, this is a great thing -- for example for young 
people. Take the situation in firms where apprentices have 
finished their training and the firm says: I no longer need you 
in this position. If they can find a solution where the 
apprentice gets a part-time job for two or three years, this 
would be a really good thing that is worth our intensive efforts. 
  [Gottlieb] But much of what you are saying is what Mr. 
Scharping is also saying. The question is to what extent the 
voter can distinguish the platforms of the two major parties on 
polling day. 
  [Kohl] I do not share this fear. The SPD is completely 
isolated internationally. If Mr. Scharping presents his views 
on Bundeswehr missions to the Socialist International he will 
only cause a general shaking of the heads. 
  [Gottlieb] We do not want to talk about the Socialist 
International. 
  [Kohl] Yes, we are talking about the elections. Let me tell 
you again, the Social Democrats have nothing to offer on an 
international level. Nothing whatsoever. In the fields of 
German unity, ostpolitik, they have always been in tow behind 
us. The same goes for western policy. In European policy they 
have not made any important new contribution. In economic 
policy.... Just compare tax policies. What are they doing now? 
It is the old socialist ideas that are dragged out again. 
  [Fuchs] According to the chairman of the medium-sized 
companies association, your solidarity surcharge is also poison 
for the economy. 
  [Kohl] This may well be the case. But I am not at all 
interested in what the chairman of the medium-sized companies 
association says. He says that on the one hand we have to cut 
public costs, and on the other hand cut taxes even further. But 
he does not tell me how I am going to balance the budget in view 
of requirements in the new laender. 
  [Fuchs] But you want the solidarity surcharge from 
everyone. [Words indistinct] 
  [Kohl] This is a completely different example. But the way 
you have put it is quite interesting. When I announced the 
introduction of the solidarity surcharge -- indicating the date 
and percentage -- at the last party conference, there were 
outcries such as: why don't you introduce it immediately? These 
voices were also coming from industry. If we had done it then, 
your first question today would have been: Was it not a grave 
mistake to introduce the solidarity surcharge so early? Back 
then I said this will be poison for the economy. It is not 
ideal for the economy now either. I know that. But I have to 
weigh things. And what I am saying now is even more important 
for the economy: I can only balance the German budget to some 
extent if I increase revenue in this situation. We cannot 
further increase debts. There is a point where we have to say 
stop, and we have reached this, and it is necessary to stabilize 
our currency. Another quite important social issue depends on 
the currency, namely the inflation rate. If we have reached 
below the 4-percent mark -- and there are quite a few people who 
say that we will have one or two months this year with average 
inflation rates of, say, 2.9 percent -- this is a No. 1 social 
achievement, as it mainly concerns lower incomes. 
  [Fuchs] Mr. Chancellor, let me pin you down more clearly. 
The solidarity surcharge for 1995 has been fixed, there is no 
doubt about that. The citizens are most allergic, most 
sensitive to discussions of taxes; they want to be told clearly 
what is going to happen. Let me ask you: Can you exclude 
further tax increases for 1995? 
  [Kohl] As regards the tax just mentioned -- of course. I 
want to have this tax, and.... 
  [Fuchs] Apart from that? 
  [Kohl] I am not saying that this can be limited timewise. I 
do not see a chance for this at the moment. How we are going to 
solve the traffic problem is a completely different question. I 
am quite consciously separating these two issues. I have not 
reached a definitive view on this issue yet. I only know that 
after 30 years we are finally privatizing the railroads, that we 
are finally getting an ecologically sensible development in 
transport by having roads and railroads parallel to each other. 
That this costs a lot of money.... I do not need to tell you; 
you have come from Munich. If you have heard the lamenting on 
the radio -- 40 km, 50 km of traffic jams -- you will know just 
as well as I do that we will have to reconsider transport 
policy. Everybody agrees on that. And I am now making a 
conscious division between general taxes and transport. As far 
as general taxes are concerned, I stick to what I said earlier. 
  [Fuchs] Mr. Chancellor, there is another controversial 
issue within the coalition: The deportation of Kurds; Kurds who 
have rioted here, if I may put it that simply. The Bavarian 
government says that anybody who does not respect his host 
country will be deported. Your justice minister says this 
deportation is against the law. What is your position? 
  [Kohl] This is not easy to say. But let me state first that 
there is no conflict in the coalition. I do not know why you 
think so. Mrs. Leutheusser has given her view. It is by no 
means certain that this is the view of the FDP. 
  [Fuchs] But she is a member of the government. 
  [Kohl] No doubt. And she does not represent the opinion of 
the Federal Government in this matter, not to mention my own. 
You want to know my opinion on the problem. We should talk 
about the problem first, then about the deportations. What has 
happened in Germany is totally unacceptable. This is not 
possible in any civilized country in the world. None at all. 
Neither in France, nor in Switzerland, nor in Great Britain 
would it be possible for people who are here as guests -- and we 
are a hospitable country, we want to remain a country that is 
friendly toward foreigners -- that these people block highways 
and cause trouble, threaten people living in the vicinity of 
their demonstrations, that police officers who do their jobs for 
us have to do so risking their lives -- this is unacceptable. I 
am not willing to bow to the terror of any group in the streets 
of Germany. And if it is Kurds who came to us with Turkish 
passports they must be aware of the consequences. We do not 
have anything at all against our Turkish friends who work here. 
But what is unacceptable is for domestic policy conflicts to be 
carried out here in our streets. 
  [Fuchs] Does this mean anybody violating our hospitality is 
to be deported? 
  [Kohl] Let me give you an example from my home: A couple of 
days ago there was this big demonstration in Mannheim. I was 
not there that day. But I am not willing to allow cities to be 
made into fortresses for demonstrations. And if there is such a 
potential of violence among the 300,000 Turkish Kurds living 
here -- there may be 3,000 to 5,000 -- they must expect the full 
force of the law to hit them. And, second, I am for deporting 
people. Third, I am for deporting people only to places -- for 
instance to Turkey -- where it is clear that the necessary 
points have been ensured from the viewpoint of human rights, 
such as protection against torture, death penalty, and all the 
rest. We do not have to discuss this. But it is unacceptable 
for our internal security and state welfare to be destroyed or 
obstructed by such forces. This is not conceivable in any 
country in the world. And I have no inhibitions about saying 
this very clearly. We will have to discuss this, also with the 
laender, whose responsibility this is. Of course, this has to 
be done observing the law. But that I am first of all thinking 
about the rights of Kurds who carry out terror scenes in our 
streets and not think about the rights of peaceloving Germans 
first -- this is a clear statement for me.... 
  [Fuchs] Thank you for the interview. 

