Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Muhammad 'Ali al-Qulaybi report: "'Abd-al-Shafi Tells </F>
AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT: 'Arafat Still Monopolizing Decisions, and 
the Executive Committee Is Facilitating That"] 
  [Excerpt] Tunis -- Dr. Haydar 'Abd-al-Shafi, head of the 
"reform delegation," has criticized the PLO and its chairman, 
Yasir 'Arafat. In a statement to AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT made after 
the conclusion of the meetings he and his delegation held with 
the Executive Committee and before leaving Tunis for Jordan 
yesterday, he said that "'Arafat is still monopolizing the 
decisionmaking, and I believe that the Executive Committee 
members are making it easy for him to continue to do so by 
accepting that he is the decisionmaker." 
  Reacting to the fact that some committee members had 
reaffirmed opposition to 'Arafat's decisionmaking monopoly, 
'Abd-al-Shafi said that "in practical terms they are all in the 
same boat and do not dare to reveal their positions." 
  Palestinian sources in Tunis had said yesterday that 'Arafat 
and the PLO Executive Committee made some concessions regarding 
some of the reform demands submitted in writing by the 
delegation to the Executive Committee at dawn yesterday. 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Shafi warned, however, that if 'Arafat did not 
carry out what was outlined in the reform memorandum then there 
would again be recourse to the PLO's legitimate institutions, 
"and after that we would seek the verdict of the masses." He 
added that there was an inclination to submit that memorandum to 
the Palestine Central Council. 
  In his statement to AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT 'Abd-al-Shafi said 
that 
he expected 'Arafat to appeal to the Palestinian opposition for 
the start of a broad national dialogue and then, subsequent to 
the appeal, make incessant efforts to persuade the opposition to 
participate in that broad dialogue. 
  He added: "At any rate, we have clearly conveyed to 
President 'Arafat and the Executive Committee the Palestinian 
masses' insistence on and expectation of democratic decisions. 
The leadership must give this matter the necessary 
consideration if we do not want to face more problems, because 
in the absence of democratic practices and a democratic approach 
partisan and ideological disputes would intensify and could 
develop into armed conflicts. Such disputes can only be 
eliminated through commitment to the principle of democracy." 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Shafi underlined the need for a new mechanism 
within the PLO to help the Executive Committee apply the rules 
of democratic action in the future. [passage omitted] 

