Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Set up forum to boost ties with Cambodia"] </F>
  [Text] The sea battle last week in the Gulf of Thailand 
between Thai and Cambodian navies was the latest and probably 
the most serious in a series of conflicts which flared up this 
year between the two countries. The brief skirmish led to the 
sinking of two Thai fishing boats and a Cambodian vessel and the 
capture of 14 Cambodian sailors. It also prompted Cambodia's 
Koh Kong provincial administration to close the border opposite 
Thailand's Trat Province. 
  Shortly before Prime Minister Chuan Likphai's historic visit 
to Cambodia last month, the Cambodian Information Ministry 
accused some "bad seeds" in the Thai military of assisting Khmer 
Rouge guerrillas -- a charge that was categorically denied by 
the military and the Government. Thai businessmen in Cambodia 
were also accused by Finance Minister Sam Rangsi of behaving 
like "cowboys" because of their alleged exploitative business 
practices. 
  Although limited in scale and gravity, the armed conflict 
and 
exchange of acrimonious rhetoric between the two countries 
reflects the deep-seated mutual distrust between Thais and 
Cambodians which dates back to history. In the minds of many 
Cambodians, there is a negative attitude and suspicion that 
Thailand is a bully attempting to carve up their country in 
unwitting concert with the Vietnamese on the other side of the 
border. There is also a feeling that Thailand is ready to 
exploit Cambodia's wealth whenever an opportunity arises for 
that country to become strong, particularly at a time when 
nationalistic pride is being revived and reconstruction is under 
way. On the other side of the coin, several Thais still regard 
themselves in a "Big Brother" light vis-a-vis their Cambodian 
neighbours and expect the latter to show their respect. On 
occasion Cambodians have been branded as ungrateful and 
untrustworthy for their attempts to break free and be treated as 
equals. 
  Mutual distrust was cast aside to pave the way for mutual 
interest when the Thais supported the anti-Vietnamese Cambodian 
factions in their liberation struggle against the Vietnamese and 
their puppet regime in Phnom Penh during the 80's. And when 
mutual interest is no longer the case, suspicion and racial 
animosity rear their ugly heads as was witnessed in the recent 
flare-up between the two countries. Yet, this destructive 
attitude which seems to lie dormant in the subconsciousness of 
the two peoples waiting for a time to be reactivated is not 
insurmountable if the two parties are just prepared to sit down 
together to talk matters over in a sincere manner rather than 
trading bullets or exchanging angry rhetoric. 
  The undemarcated land border between Thailand and Cambodia 
and the overlapping territorial waters claimed by both sides are 
triggers for potential conflict -- and a flare-up in fighting in 
a worst case scenario -- between the two countries. The sea 
battle in the Gulf last week which was reported to have been 
provoked by an incident involving one Cambodian vessel and two 
Thai fishing trawlers in an area still contested by the two 
countries represents a glaring example of the kind of hostile 
situation that Thailand and Cambodia will find themselves in. 
And given the notorious reputation of Thai fishermen for 
opportunism, the risk of such confrontations will undoubtedly 
increase. 
  The latest armed conflict underscores the need for the two 
countries to quickly set up a joint border committee similar to 
the ones that exist between Thailand and Burma, Thailand and 
Laos and also between Thailand and Malaysia to resolve border 
disputes across the negotiating table. 
  It is true that there were bad times in the past when 
Thailand was viewed as the aggressor and Cambodia the victim or 
when the two countries saw themselves as racial enemies. These 
bitter experiences should now be put behind us so that the two 
countries can cultivate a new relationship based on mutual 
respect of territorial integrity, common interests, mutual 
prosperity, equality and non-interference in each other's 
internal affairs. 

