BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Mia Doornaert: "No Special Status in PFP for </F>
Russia"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] There was unanimous agreement 
among the 16 foreign ministers on the utmost importance of 
maximum Russian involvement in European security. NATO hopes 
that Russia will soon sign the Partnership for Peace [PFP] 
Agreement, without any pre-conditions. 
  For the 16 it is clear that the contents of this Partnership 
for Peace agreement must include a dimension which reflects 
Russia's status as a major power. In addition, the alliance is 
also seeking a "broad dialogue" with Russia "in areas where 
Russia can make a unique and/or particularly important 
contribution." 
  One of these areas, in addition to peacekeeping, is the 
prevention of the spread of nuclear and other weapons of mass 
destruction, on the subject of which NATO ministers yesterday 
issued a separate policy document. 
  Equally unanimously, the 16 also sent out the signal that 
wide-ranging dialogue with Russia would not be allowed to 
compromise the freedom to maneuver of either NATO or the 
countries of Central and East Europe. 
  A number of "parameters" which Russian Defense Minister 
Pavel 
Grachev proposed to NATO at the end of last month have therefore 
been cast aside. There is no question of Russia's automatic 
participation in NATO consultations. Neither -- as German 
Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel expressly stated -- can there be 
any question of Russia's right to veto NATO decisions, including 
any possible NATO enlargement, or of a NATO and Russian 
"directorate" on European security. The Russian proposal to 
render NATO subject to the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe was also firmly rejected. 
<H5>  Bosnia </H5>
  As for Bosnia -- the second major item on the agenda -- the 
NATO countries called for an "immediate and general stop to the 
fighting," the placing of UN troops between the warring parties, 
and a political settlement which "gives the Bosnian-Croatian 
federation a sustainable, realistic and fair territorial area." 
The alliance also wants Bosnia-Herzegovina to continue to exist 
as a "Union with internationally recognized borders," and thus 
no annexation of the Bosnian Serbs within a Greater Serbia. 
  The fact that the communique attaches "special importance" 
to 
respect for all disarmament accords, and in particular the 
"complete implementation" of the CFE [Conventional Armed Forces 
in Europe] Treaty is in accordance with Turkish concerns. 
  Signed in 1990, the CFE Treaty provides for a major 
reduction 
in conventional weapons by both NATO countries and former Warsaw 
pact countries. When the Soviet Union collapsed, Russia had to 
negotiate with the other republics on how to divide the agreed 
upon quotas and zones. Russia now wants to review agreements 
with the Caucasian republics of Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan, 
allowing Russia more troops and weapons in the region and the 
republics fewer. 
  Turkey will not hear of such a strengthening of Russian 
military strength in the region. Seen from Brussels, the 
nearest Russian division may now be four times further away than 
a few years ago, but the constant passage of Russian ships 
through the Bosporus is a reminder that for Turkey -- as for 
Norway, also located on NATO's flank -- the distance has changed 
much less dramatically. 
  It was not for nothing that a senior Turkish diplomat here 
warned that NATO should not be too quick to take Russia on board 
with a special relationship. "That would be like taking an 
elephant on board a boat. You either have to totally 
redistribute the weight or it will immediately capsize and sink." 

