BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by President Boris Yeltsin at the signing of the </F>
Treaty on Social Accord in St. George's Hall in the Kremlin -- 
live] 
  [Text] Esteemed participants in the assembly of civic 
accord: 
  On 26 April Andrey Daynisovich Ayzderdzis, State Duma and 
Federal Assembly deputy, died in tragic circumstances. Let 
common grief become another warning against violence. Let 
common grief join us in a quest for accord and peace for the 
whole of Russia and all Russian people. Before the beginning of 
the solemn ceremony for the signing of the Treaty on Social 
[obshchestvennyy] Accord I regard it as our common duty to pay 
our respects to the fallen deputy with a minute of silence. 
  Please be seated. 
  Esteemed participants in the assembly of civil accord, dear 
compatriots: Today a historic event is taking place in St. 
George's Hall in the Kremlin. Leaders of the Russian 
Government, Federation Council, and State Duma, leaders of the 
Constitutional, Supreme, and Arbitration Courts, and 
representatives of the State Duma factions are gathered here. 
Leaders of Russia's republics and regions, leaders of trade 
unions, parties, movements, and public associations and heads of 
religious confessions are among us. Representatives of the 
Public Chamber, deputies, and Russia's well-known public figures 
are present at the assembly. 
  We have different convictions and views as to what Russia 
should be, but we have a single, most important goal, which has 
managed to unite us -- ensuring civil peace in Russia. This is 
the most important thing today. 
  Almost eight decades ago our country suffered a terrible 
tragedy. Russia was thrown into the bottomless abyss of civil 
war. Brother fought against brother, sons against fathers, and 
a bloody boundary divided people up into Whites and Reds, into 
us and them, and into enemies of each other. 
  From that time onward the curse of that war has been hanging 
over Russia. It is reflected in the genocide of the Cossacks, 
in the enforced collectivization which destroyed the flower of 
the peasantry. It is reflected in the repressions and 
deportations of peoples, in the punishment of the deprivation of 
citizenship and banishment from one's homeland. 
  The curse of civil war is reflected in the Novocherkassk 
shooting of 1962 [shooting of participants in peaceful workers 
demonstration], and in the events of August 1991 and of May and 
October 1993. 
  The bloody sequence of such events must be brought to a 
halt. 
This was not done by our grandfathers or fathers and we must do 
it ourselves. We are duty bound to do it, so as to hand a 
peaceful Russia on to our children, so as to draw the shadow of 
civil war away from Russia, a shadow that has been cast upon it 
for all these years. 
  We must turn over the tragic page of history and put a final 
stop to civil confrontation. I believe that we have enough will 
and wisdom to achieve this. 
  The Treaty on Social Accord is being signed in St. George's 
Hall in the Kremlin today. Any party, any organization, and any 
public movement may join the treaty. All those who are ready to 
take upon themselves the responsibility for civic peace and 
stability in Russia can join the treaty. The chief idea of this 
document is to refrain from using force to achieve political 
aims. All those who sign the Treaty on Social Accord pledge not 
to violate this ban. 
  Today we are all united in the view that there is not and 
cannot be any goal which could be achieved at the expense of 
blood and human life. By signing the treaty we confirm that 
only peaceful and only constitutional methods are permissible in 
Russia's policy. This is the basis of the accord, the basis of 
the state's normal work, and the basis of people's calm life. 
We are creating it through joint efforts, and I hope that our 
efforts will be supported by others. 
  The Treaty on Social Accord is being concluded for two years 
-- for the period of most complicated and painful 
transformations. We have satisfied ourselves that while there 
is a confrontation, no matter who is in power, there will be no 
real results. A fruitless and exhausting struggle will not 
allow anyone to work, it will not allow the resolution of a 
single problem. The price of it is too high for the state and 
every citizen. We need to put an end to it. 
  Today we are taking a decisive step toward this. We want 
peace in Russia. We want our democratic, united Russian state 
to be strengthened. The treaty will make it possible to unite 
the efforts of the whole of society around the most important 
problems. We will resolve them if we manage to counter disunity 
and mutual antagonism with cooperation based on dialogue. 
Russia is in acute need of this. The preparation of the treaty 
is the best evidence that cooperation is not a fruitless dream 
but a real possibility. 
  This document came into being as a result of strenuous, 
creative work in which representatives of the president, groups 
in parliament, the government, leading parties, organizations, 
and public movements played an equal part. They expressed the 
interests of virtually all sections of the Russian population. 
They reached accord during their work. Every clause of the 
treaty, every line was entered only if it met with no 
objections, no matter from whom. Every voice carried identical 
weight and was of identical significance. I have said, and let 
me repeat, that what has been done demonstrates that Russia does 
have an alternative to confrontation. We are duty-bound to 
defend this, duty-bound to continue the tireless search for 
accord, in order to emerge from the crisis, to revive the 
economy, and to restore order in the country. 
  In accordance with the Treaty on Social Accord a 
coordination 
commission is being set up. For the first time Russia will have 
a mechanism which will ensure that political contradictions do 
not reach extremes of acuteness, but can be resolved at an early 
stage. Russia is tired of the stream of mutual insults from 
various rostrums, of endless clashes in the media. We no longer 
want wars of words to turn into clashes on the streets and mass 
disturbances. Therefore, we say today that there is another way 
-- civilized rather than destructive -- of settling issues. 
  This is the search for accord and it should be the only one 
in Russia. The treaty to be signed today is only a beginning. 
It is hardly on all the points that we have managed to work out 
a common position and much work is yet ahead. In developing the 
treaty, appendices will be drawn up, protocols which will be 
more specific on separate aspects of it. I think that the 
general, strategic policies guiding the work are set out in the 
message from the president to the Federal Assembly. Our common 
task is to give these more substance and to implement them 
consistently. 
  Respected assembly participants, it took us many years to 
get 
to the Treaty on Social Accord. Several generations of people 
have come and gone. Hardly any of those who lived through the 
tragedy of the civil war are still alive. There was no 
reconciliation throughout this entire period. So, a deep wound 
has remained in our people and in our state. 
  A historic chance came to us to start a process of 
reconciliation and to restore consensus in the country. It will 
not be easy to do it. Confrontation still lives in our souls. 
Let us help one another to rid ourselves of it. Let us help 
Russia to cure itself once and for all of civil war, in the name 
of preserving the Fatherland and in the name of preserving peace 
for our children. May our combined efforts meet with success. I 
declare the ceremony for the signing of the Treaty on Social 
Accord open. 

