SUMMARY 
                                In what may be another example of growing Russian mistrust of 
U.S. motives in bilateral negotiations with former Soviet 
republics, a senior Russian military official has voiced 
objections to planned U.S. participation in the dismantlement of 
formerly Soviet SS-18 ICBM silos in Kazakhstan.  The official's 
protestation thus challenges not only U.S.-Kazakhstani 
dismantlement agreements but also, by inference, similar accords 
between the United States and Ukraine. 
                           END SUMMARY 
   In a statement carried by ITAR-TASS (17 May), Aleksandr Volkov, 
first deputy commander-in-chief of the Russian Strategic Missile 
Forces, said that the reported plan for involvement of U.S. 
specialists in the dismantlement of SS-18 silos in Kazakhstan 
"contradicts the Russian-Kazakh agreement on strategic nuclear 
forces and the treaty on military cooperation."  ITAR-TASS added 
that the "idea" for U.S.-Kazakhstani cooperation in this field 
"emerged after the visit of [Kazakhstani] President Nursultan 
Nazarbayev to the United States" in February.  The news agency 
also quoted Aleksandr Piskunov, deputy chairman of the State Duma 
Committee on Defense and a member of the centrist New Regional 
Policy faction, as saying that the planned U.S. involvement 
ignores "the right to intellectual property" of the builders of 
the missile complexes and thus "contradicts international norms." 
   Although the text of the Russian-Kazakhstani agreement, signed on 
28 March by Presidents Boris Yeltsin and Nursultan Nazarbayev, 
has not been observed to have been published, Colonel-General 
Igor Sergeyev, commander-in-chief of the Russian Strategic 
Missile Forces, said in a televised briefing of foreign military 
attaches that the accord "gives Russian status to the formations 
and units of the [formerly Soviet] strategic missile forces 
stationed temporarily on Kazakhstani territory" (Moscow NTV, 28 
April).  NTV's commentator added that under the agreement, once 
the warheads and missiles are removed from Kazakhstan, the silos 
will be dismantled "apparently by Russian specialists." 
Izvestiya (4 May) and Segodnya (6 May) also reported that the 
agreement recognizes the missile forces in Kazakhstan as being 
Russian. 
   Increasing Mistrust? 
   Although the Russian Government has not been reported to have 
issued a formal protest of the U.S.-Kazakhstani silo- 
dismantlement plans, Volkov's objections may reflect a broader 
suspicion of U.S. motives in negotiations with former Soviet 
republics that involve Russian military-security interests, as 
exemplified in the following: 
   -- In June 1993, Russia, apparently concerned about the integrity 
of its nuclear secrets, reacted coolly to a proposal by then-U.S. 
Defense Secretary Les Aspin that nuclear weapons in Ukraine 
slated for dismantlement be temporarily stored there under 
international supervision.  Russian Defense Minister Pavel 
Grachev openly dismissed the idea, and the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs stressed in a public statement that the weapons in 
Ukraine "belong to the Russian Federation" and that Russia has an 
"obligation" under the Nuclear Nonpoliferation Treaty "not to 
transfer the nuclear weapons and control over nuclear weapons to 
any third party" (ITAR-TASS, 6 June 1993; Interfax, 17 June 
1993).  In a subsequent commentary, veteran Izvestiya military- 
affairs correspondent Viktor Litovkin (See Note 1) claimed, 
without attribution, that "Moscow" assessed the Aspin proposal 
"as a thinly disguised attempt by America to gain official access 
to Russian nuclear secrets" (Izvestiya, 29 June 1993). 
   -- In March, a television news commentary questioned the 
"maneuvering" of U.S. diplomacy in Ukraine and Georgia, 
suggesting that U.S. bilateral talks with leaders of Georgia on 
introducing international peacekeepers to Abkhazia and with 
Ukraine on nuclear disarmament had undermined previous agreements 
arrived at with Russia's participation (Russian TV, 9 March). 
   -- Russian officials reportedly have reacted negatively to 
prospective U.S. involvement in Kazakhstan's Baykonur space 
center.  For example, the reformist Moskovskiy Komsomolets (30 
March) reported that an offer by U.S. Defense Secretary William 
Perry to act as a mediator between Russia and Kazakhstan on the 
fate of the space center "has elicited a certain distrust from 
Russian leaders."  The article also questioned whether Secretary 
Perry had "actually agreed on something behind the Kremlin's 
back" during his March visit to Almaty.  Suggesting that the 
United States was seeking a larger role in the fate of Baykonur, 
the Russian Defense Ministry newspaper, Krasnaya Zvezda (29 
March), cited proposals to create an "international consortium" 
to run Baykonur and suggested that "other space powers headed by 
the United States" would gain "advantages" over Russia under such 
a scheme.  The article also hinted darkly that during 
Nazarbayev's visit to the United States, "some kind of agreement 
on the joint use of Baykonur was signed--although the details are 
not being made public." 
   (Note 1)  Litovkin often appears to use his articles to provide a 
platform for the views of top Russian and CIS military officials. 
In an indication of the favor in which he is held by military 
officials, Litovkin was among the first group of journalists 
invited to visit and write about a Typhoon-class ballistic 
missile submarine, the world's largest and Russia's newest class 
of missile submarines (Izvestiya, 28 February 1992). 
   Outlook 
   Russian officials--particularly those associated with the 
military--are clearly wary of bilateral security or space-related 
negotiations between the United States and former Soviet 
Republics.  These officials apparently fear that Russian military 
secrets could be compromised and perceive Washington's increasing 
involvement with countries on Russia's periphery as a threat to 
traditional Russian dominance in the region.  (Regarding the 
latter concern, an article in the 30 March Moskovskiye Novosti 
alleged that the United States was partly responsible for 
lessening Moscow's ability to use "the language of stern demands" 
to deal with its neighbors.)  With Yeltsin under continuing 
pressure from nationalistic critics to backtrack from policies of 
cooperation with the West, Russia can be expected to continue to 
view with suspicion any security-related dialogue between the 
United States and Russia's neighbors in which it is not included. 
   (AUTHOR:  ROBERTON.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, ANALYSIS BRANCH, RUSSIA DIVISION, (703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/PINKASOVIC/PF 01/1637z Jun 

