BFN 

  [Text] Burma will attend the 27th Asean Meeting to be 
held in Bangkok in July as the guest of Thailand, the Foreign 
Ministry said yesterday. 
  A ministry press release said Burmese military junta leaders 
Gen Than Shwe and Lt Gen Khin Nyunt had informed Thai Foreign 
Minister Prasong Sunsiri that Burma would attend the meeting. 
  Prasong yesterday completed an official two-day visit to 
Rangoon in his capacity as Thai foreign minister and chairman of 
Asean's standing committee. 
  During the visit, Prasong paid a courtesy call on the two 
generals. Gen Than Shwe is chairman and Lt Gen Khin Nyunt is 
secretary general of Burma's State Law and Order Restoration 
Council (Slorc). 
  According to the press release, Gen Than Shwe informed 
Prasong that Burma was willing to join the activities of the 
six-member Asean grouping but it would require a period of time 
to become familiar with how the organization works. 
  "Burma's participation in Asean will certainly be good for 
the country," he said Burmese Foreign Minister U Ong Gyaw will 
represent Rangoon in the annual meeting during which Asean 
members will hold discussions with their dialogue partners, 
including the United States, Canada and South Korea. 
  On his return to Bangkok, Prasong said he told the Burmese 
leaders their country's participation in the meeting would mark 
the first time all ten countries in the Southeast Asia region 
had joined the forum. Laos and Vietnam will join as observers 
and Cambodia as the guest of Asean. 
  Prasong told reporters in Bangkok that Burma had agreed to 
show leniency to Thais jailed there by allowing those jailed in 
other provinces to be transferred to a Rangoon prison. The 
consolidation of the Thais into one central prison will 
facilitate visits and care provided by Thai embassy officials. 
  "Khin Nyunt informed me that Burmese authorities would 
consider sentence reductions and provide pardons on a 
case-by-case basis. At present there are about 3,000 Thais in 
Burmese prisons," Prasong said. 
  The two countries also agreed to cooperate more closely in 
the suppression of drug trafficking, he said. 

