Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] The ceremony for setting up the remaining 
broad-based transitional institutions, which were scheduled to 
take place this morning at the National Development Council 
[CND] has not taken place. [passage omitted] 
  As we have already stressed, no single part of the ceremony 
has yet taken place. President Habyarimana requested that the 
Islamic Democratic Party [PDI]-appointed deputy (Omar Ali) be 
replaced by his protege, Mr. Juma Kibata, and that candidate 
deputy Kamali of the Republican Democratic Movement [MDR] power 
[as heard] be among the 11 MDR deputies and, finally, that the 
Coalition for the Defense of the Republic [CDR] be allowed to 
sit in the broad-based Transitional National Assembly. 
  These conditions put forward by President Habyarimana, with 
a 
view to setting up the broad-based Transitional National 
Assembly, emerge in a letter which President Habyarimana 
addressed last night to Prime Minister Madame Agathe 
Uwilingiyimana. But it is worth noting that madame prime 
minister issued a list of deputies on 19 March, which President 
Habyarimana approved. President Habyarimana has therefore used 
double talk. That is why at the CND, where the swearing-in 
ceremonies were to have taken place, one could find two PDI 
candidate deputies for just one seat, one MDR candidate deputy, 
who was not mentioned on the list of deputies, and finally a 
representative of the CDR, whose name is Jean Bosco Barayagwiza. 
  Following these unexpected, last-minute problems, the 
institutions were not set up as scheduled. So, those who signed 
the Arusha Peace Accord: The Rwandan Government and the Rwandan 
Patriotic Front [RPF] assisted by representatives of the United 
Nations Assistance Mission in Rwanda and friendly countries 
which helped in the Arusha peace talks, deemed it appropriate to 
hold a meeting to examine these three cases. 
  At the end of this meeting, Prime Minister Madame Agathe 
Uwilingiyimana stressed that after having examined the cases of 
the PDI and of candidate deputy Kamali of the MDR power [as 
heard], candidate deputies Mr. Juma Kibata and Kamali were 
advised to submit their cases to the relevant authorities, that 
is to say the judiciary, and await its decision. 
  Regarding the case of the CDR, the latter requests that it 
be 
given a seat in the broad-based Transitional National Assembly, 
which the RPF does not reject, however the peace accord should 
not be violated. Indeed, according to Article 51 of the 
protocol agreement on power-sharing, I quote: All political 
parties legally recognized in Rwanda on the date of the signing 
of the present protocol agreement, and the RPF, will be 
represented in the Transitional National Assembly, provided that 
they adhere to and respect the provisions of the peace accord. 
[passage omitted] 
  The CDR is far from meeting this preliminary condition, or 
from showing commitment to respecting the path defined by the 
Arusha Accord. This is demonstrated particularly by its 
sectarian practices. In this regard, the RPF thinks that it is 
still too early for the CDR to join the Transitional National 
Assembly. [passage omitted] 

