BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on economic developments monitored through 17 May. 
  The 1993-94 coffee harvest recently ended in Nicaragua. It 
produced 920,180 quintals of coffee, which will generate exports 
of more than $58 million, the National Coffee Commission 
reported today. It represents a 27.6 percent increase over the 
previous year's harvest. (Panama City ACAN in Spanish 1526 GMT 4 
May 94) 
  The Nicaraguan Government, through Social Action Minister 
William Baez, has approved the "open regionalism" proposal for 
the creation of a free trade zone in the hemisphere. The 
proposal was made at a Latin American Economic Commission 
meeting in Colombia 20-27 April. Meeting participants agreed 
that economic policies need to be changed to help the poor. 
(Managua BARRICADA in Spanish 5 May 94 p 4) 
  The Nicaraguan Government cannot lower interest rates on 
bank 
loans by decree, according to the president of the Central Bank 
of Nicaragua, Dr. Jose Evenor Taboada. Taboada said that only 
by way of efficiency and productivity can the country combat 
prevailing high interest rates. (Managua Radio Nicaragua 
Network in Spanish 1200 GMT 10 May 94) 
  A total of 95 percent of the Nicaraguan population is 
unemployed. Most of these people have joined the underground 
economy, while a small percentage of them work for short periods 
of time in various occupations, according to a joint report 
issued by the private sector and the Permanent Workers Congress. 
(Managua Radio Nicaragua Network in Spanish 1200 GMT 10 May 94) 
  On 12 May, the National Assembly passed an anti-usury law 
empowering any civil judge to void any loan granted at an 
interest rate 50 percent above the rate established by the 
Central Bank. (Managua BARRICADA in Spanish 13 May 94 p 10) 
  On 13 May, the National Assembly voted unanimously to ratify 
the Guatemala Protocol, which will regulate free commerce among 
Central American countries. This agreement does not contain the 
specific rules of the Central American Free Trade Agreement but 
does reflect the political commitment of the Nicaraguan State to 
participate, even with the restrictions imposed on it by its 
unequal development. Deputy Economy Minister Eduardo Belli said 
the protocol represents a new development strategy based on 
economic openness. (Managua BARRICADA in Spanish 14 May 94 p 5) 
  On 16 May, the Nicaraguan Government asked the international 
community for an additional $180 million in aid for the next 
three years. Presidency Minister Antonio Lacayo made the 
request at the opening of the meeting between the Nicaraguan 
Government, donor countries, and nongovernmental institutions 
that provide economic assistance to the country. According to 
government predictions, the GDP will grow 2 percent. (Managua 
Radio Nicaragua Network in Spanish 1200 GMT 16 May 94) 

