Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Virginia Silveira: "Resumption of Space Program"] </F>
  [Text] Sao Jose dos Campos--The Brazilian space program has 
received incentives this year [1993] for speeding its 
development of satellites through the use of funds from the 
Federal Government's privatization program. The China-Brazil 
Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS) project and the Complete 
Brazilian Space Mission (MECB) have a guaranteed appropriation 
of $85 million for the coming two years. 
  Of that total, about $21 million is already available this 
year for the Chinese-Brazilian project, and another $15 million 
will be available for the period from 1994 to 1996. The first 
portion of the money was advanced by the Bank of Brazil at the 
end of October. The funds were obtained from an agreement signed 
between the Bank of Brazil, the Ministry of Science and 
Technology, and the Funding Authority for Studies and Projects 
(Finep). 
  According to Carlos Santana, manager of the CBERS, release 
of 
the $21 million will make it possible to resume the program by 
contracting with firms to supply the electronic and mechanical 
equipment for the satellites. The National Institute of Space 
Research (INPE), which is developing one-third of the project in 
cooperation with China, has already issued seven invitations to 
bid in order to put together the group of firms that will 
participate in the program. 
  At present, eight firms are working with the INPE on the 
Chinese-Brazilian project. They are: Tecnasa Professional 
Electronics, Elebra Defense and Control Systems, Esca 
Telecommunications, Composite Technology, Aeroelectronics, 
Brazilian Nuclear Industries, Digicon, and Embraer. 
  According to Santana, the new contracts being worked out 
with 
the other firms are concerned with electronic and mechanical 
equipment for the following satellite subsystems: power supply, 
mechanical structure, image transmitter, data collection 
transmitter, antennas, and UHF transmitter. 
  According to manager Santana, Brazilian countertrade in 
connection with the Chinese-Brazilian program this year has made 
it easier to expand the space agreement with China. In the first 
week of November, the two countries signed a new memorandum of 
intent to carry out a joint study of the feasibility of 
communications satellites. 
  According to Santana, the new technological cooperation 
agreement with China also calls for launching a scientific 
satellite, to be built by the INPE, in conjunction with the 
first satellite in the CBERS series in October 1996. The 
Brazilian share of the launching is budgeted at $15 million. 
  The launch contract was signed early this month between the 
INPE, Finep, and China's Great Wall firm. It also includes an 
offset agreement ensuring Brazil of exports in the same amount 
as the deal reached with China. The remote sensing satellites 
will be launched using Great Wall's Long March IV rocket. The 
satellite weighs 1,500 kg and has an estimated useful life of 10 
years. 
  Construction of the scientific satellite, which will be 
carried on board SSR-1, will be financed by Finep and will cost 
a total of $4 million. According to Santana, the satellite will 
use the same technology as that developed for the data 
collection satellite, and its mission will be to conduct 
research in the electromagnetic field of the ionosphere and 
X-rays and gamma rays. 
  Under the terms of the agreement signed with China in 1988, 
Brazil's share of the CBERS program amounts to $50 million, or 
30 percent of the project. It will be up to the INPE to develop 
one of the cameras for the satellite's observation system, the 
flight structure, the mechanical model, and the telemetry and 
communications transponder. 
  The mission of the remote sensing satellites will be to 
photograph the planet for the purpose of observing land use and 
mapping the soil's natural and mineral resources and also to 
sense climatic changes in specific areas. The satellites will 
also make it possible to improve agricultural activities by the 
use of space technology to forecast harvests and planting. 
  The INPE's program to develop satellites is also supported 
by 
a $24.7 million line of credit extended by Finep. That financing 
will be used to pay the firms participating in the satellite 
program, with the funds to be released over the next two years, 
according to Marcio Nogueira Barbosa, director of the INPE. 
  The INPE expects at least 13 contracts to be covered by 
Finep 
financing. According to the timetable for releasing funds from 
that line of credit, the firms already hired and those approved 
in future bidding will receive $7.5 million this year. Another 
$11.1 million is expected in 1994, followed by $6 million in 
1995. 
  According to Barbosa, the funds from Finep will make it 
possible to complete part of the work planned in connection with 
the MECB and the CBERS, which have experienced constant setbacks 
because of delays in paying the firms involved. 

