CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by GOLOS ARMENII special correspondent in </F>
Nagorno-Karabakh Republic A. Beglaryan: "On the Bishkek Meeting 
Results"] 
  [Text] NKR [Nagorno-Karabakh Republic] Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Arkadiy Gukasyan held a briefing on the results of the 
Bishkek meeting. The minister appraised as positive the 
following points: First, the realization that a political 
solution to the Karabakh problem is impossible without a 
guaranteed cease-fire; second, that it is simply impossible to 
stop the bloodshed without bringing in peacekeeping forces; and 
third, that there will be no progress in the resolution of the 
problem until Nagorno-Karabakh is recognized as a party to the 
conflict. A. Gukasyan noted that declarations should now give 
way to concrete cease-fire mechanisms and a guarantee of the 
nonresumption of military actions. In the opinion of the NKR 
head of foreign affairs, this mechanism should include the 
following components: the signing of a cease-fire agreement 
between Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh (preferably with the 
participation of Russia and the CSCE Minsk Group); the fixing of 
the contiguity line; the symmetric withdrawal of conflicting 
parties' forces; maintenance on the front line of a minimal 
armed contingent necessary for defense but insufficient for an 
offensive; and so on. 
  The following steps are necessary in the political sphere: 
lift the communications blockade and provide guarantees that new 
ones will not be possible, and discuss the issue of political 
status, which should be resolved within the framework of a CSCE 
conference. According to A. Gukasyan, it could be foreseen from 
the very beginning that Azerbaijan would not sign the document, 
because it sent the second-ranking person in its parliament to 
the meeting. As is known, a few days ago the Republic of 
Azerbaijan leadership did indeed sign a protocol after making 
two changes to it: replacing the expressions "occupied 
territories" with "seized," and "bringing in observers" with 
"bringing in international observers." However, despite the NKR 
Ministry of Foreign Affair's requests to get a copy of the 
signed protocol from Kazimirov, it still has not been received. 
  "I cannot preclude the possibility that Guliyev has indeed 
signed the protocol;" said the minister, "however, we should not 
draw far-reaching conclusions. The Bishkek protocol calls for 
actions but does not go into detail on the implementation of the 
points it contains," continued A. Gukasyan. The minister did not 
preclude the possibility that the signed document may be another 
tactical move on the part of Azerbaijan. In the minister's 
opinion, now is the right moment to bring the Russian and CSCE 
initiatives closer together. 

