Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "No Way But Up for Sabahans"] </F>
  [Text] The people of Sabah have now received by unorthodox 
means what they failed to obtain with their votes four weeks 
ago: a right to a more promising future. This has to be the 
most positive outcome of the week's bewildering rash of 
decamping, betrayal, party-hatching, and the rise and demise of 
personalities that was remarkable even for a state known for 
political abandon. When Parti Bersatu Sabah [PBS or Sabah 
United Party] won last month's election a fourth time with a 
small majority, we wrote that only by improving its bad 
relations with Kuala Lumpur could Datuk Joseph Pairin Kitingan's 
government set about doing something about the state's economy. 
At stake was a better life for the 1.8 million Sabahans whose 
lot has been about the least attractive among the states of the 
Malaysian Federation. Datuk Kitingan did apparently try to come 
to some accommodation with the centre, but the National Front's 
operatives were past talking. They calculated correctly that 
the PBS would fall in short order over the Achilles heel of East 
Malaysian governments -- the revolving-door loyalty of elected 
representatives. The front was only two seats shy of PBS's 
25-23 majority before Datuk Kitingan padded the numbers with six 
appointees to make it 31-23. 
  Now the front is unshakeable: from 23-31 down, it had at 
last 
count (the switching and party-go-round have not subsided) 49 
seats against PBS's five, a solid enough guarantee that Sabah 
could begin to emerge from the wilderness. The 49 seats include 
18 held by three PBS breakaway parties which have received 
assurances that their applications to join the national ruling 
coalition would be accepted. Since PBS could not bring progress 
to Sabah after nine years in power, its passing would be little 
mourned even as the manner of its having been done in by mass 
desertions, including that of Datuk Kitingan's brother, Jeffrey, 
must give power-seekers pause. But Datuk Kitingan knew that was 
the nature of the game. Note that his resignation remarks had 
been free of rancour. 
  Can Sabahans now look with hope to a new beginning? For 
almost 30 years, a new generation of Sabahans has come of age 
that has not known how a hot economic streak could change their 
lives as it has in the peninsula in 15 short years. Sabah's per 
capita GDP [gross domestic product] is M [Malaysian] $3,600, a 
lifetime's work away from the national average of M $12,500. 
That was largely because of an antagonistic relationship with 
the federal government. Except for Datuk Harris Salleh's 
Berjaya Party tenure from 1976 to 1985, the two previous 
governments of Tun Mustapha Harun's USNO [United Sabah National 
Organization] party (1967-1976) and Datuk Kitingan (1985-1994) 
had had stormy relations with Kuala Lumpur. Now that the front 
is in undisputed control, it has no cause to be deflected from 
its campaign promise of development funds and jobs. Pumping M 
$700 million into low-cost housing over the next seven years as 
promised will begin to fix a serious social problem. A 
university and television station, which PBS could not deliver, 
seem at hand. For the masses, public works such as roads, 
schools, and health clinics will mean more. 
  The front can expect to camp itself in Sabah for a long 
while 
if it is mindful of two facts. The first is the 40-40-20 race 
division of Malays, Kadazans and minority groups, and the 
Chinese. The parties that are coalescing around UMNO [United 
Malays National Organization] -- the Chinese-based parties and 
the Kadazan-dominant ones of Datuk Bernard Dompok and Dr. 
Jeffrey Kitingan -- show the clear ethnic division. Unless the 
front is even-handed in its treatment of constituent races, it 
would be sorrow anew for Sabah and probably another round of 
floor crossings. What brought down PBS can happen to any 
sitting government. The other factor is that residual 
anti-Kuala Lumpur feelings could recede only upon proof produced 
that the Front means what it says about helping the people. 
That, fortunately, is also the party's guarantee of longevity. 
It just has to produce results. 

