BFN 

<F P=106> [By Darren Goodsir] </F>
  [Text] Police have seized more high-grade heroin in the 
past three months than the total amount seized in 1993, causing 
wholesale drug prices to climb slightly for the first time in 
six months. 
  The Narcotics Bureau says the local drug market is now 
choked 
with heroin that is about 35 percent pure. Last month alone, 
police confiscated 128 kilograms of the drug. The total amount 
for 1993 was 223 kilograms. 
  The increase was indicative of a continuing flood of heroin 
into the territory and more intensive police operations. Last 
month, police recovered 96 blocks of heroin worth $50 million 
from the seabed near Lamma Island. The 67-kilogram haul was the 
biggest for two years. Despite a month-long nautical 
surveillance operation no arrests have been made. 
  In early March, 33 kilograms of heroin were discovered in a 
hut at Yuen Long. 
  There has also been an increase in the prevalence of the 
drug 
"ice," a synthetic crystalline methamphetamine. 
  So far this year, 22 kilograms of "ice" has been seized, 
more 
than the total taken by police in the past two years. Last 
year, drug-related arrests rose by 44 percent to 9,246. Deaths 
linked to the abuse of narcotics jumped by 34 percent to 92. 
  Narcotics Bureau chief staff officer, Acting Chief 
Superintendent Iain Grant, said the extra drugs seized did not 
give police any reason for complacency. "Obviously, if one 
measures success by seizures and arrests, then we can say both 
figures are up," Mr Grant said. "But the other side is that 
there appear to be more drugs on the streets. There is always 
an element of luck in getting these results but a lot of it 
boils down to good, old-fashioned police work." 
  Mr Grant said police intelligence suggested Hong Kong was no 
longer as popular a transit centre for drug deals but many 
transactions were still locally brokered or financed. He said 
he was particularly pleased with recent police efforts to 
destroy drug-cutting centres where pure heroin is diluted for 
extra profits and ease of consumption by addicts. In 1993, 30 
such facilities were located and shut down. This year seven 
have been identified. 

