BFN 

  [Text] In the view of President Martti Ahtisaari, Finland 
and Sweden can best promote European security by jointly 
developing the European Union's [EU] foreign and security 
policy. Ahtisaari, who spoke during his official state visit to 
Stockholm, also thought that relations between the Nordic 
countries and northwestern Russia can best be developed with the 
help of the EU's security policy. Kimmo Henriksson reports from 
Stockholm: 
  [Henriksson] The forum for Ahtisaari's speech, which has 
just 
ended, was the Foreign Policy Institute of Sweden, which has 
also heard Urho Kekkonen's and Mauno Koivisto's thoughts on 
foreign and security policy. Then it was the turn of the new 
president to voice his own views. Ahtisaari clearly agreed with 
Swedish Prime Minister Carl Bildt, who a few years ago, on the 
anniversary of Finnish Marshal Mannerheim's birth, thought that 
the premises and prerequisites of Finland's and Sweden's 
security policy were now closer than ever before in our time. 
  According to Ahtisaari, there are three central factors in 
both the Finnish and Swedish security policy thinking today: 
Political influence so that peace will be preserved in Europe 
and nearby areas, secondly, maintenance of a credible national 
defense capability and thirdly, work for the CSCE and other 
regional security arrangements. 
  In other words, no mention any longer of neutrality, nor now 
of military nonalliance that the government has emphasized for 
some time. The official interpretation is, however, that a 
credible national defense capability includes nonalliance 
without it being mentioned, but it is not underlined. 
  In his speech, Ahtisaari noted that Finland and Sweden both 
set out from the premise that participation in the development 
of the EU's joint foreign and security policy would best promote 
the cooperation between the Nordic countries and northwestern 
Russia. Ahtisaari's aim is that, with the development of the 
EU, Europe will become a security region, another new term, 
which will make war and threatening to wage war impossible. The 
Nordic countries' membership in the EU would underline the 
significance of northern issues in the EU's foreign policy. 
  Ahtisaari did, however, point out that geopolitics will not 
change as quickly as many people believe; in other words, Russia 
will remain in its old place and so will the Gulf of Bothnia. 
Despite that, with his speech Ahtisaari strengthened his image 
as a frontline representative of those fighting for Finnish EU 
membership, now also on foreign and security policy grounds. 

