Project 

<F P=102>   947Q0090A Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in Russian 1 Mar 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 947Q0090A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Boris Konovalov: "Golden Mirrors Will Help in </F>
Seeing the Youth of the Universe"] 
  [Text] One of the principal achievements in cosmonautics 
was the birth of exoatmospheric astronomy. During the forty 
years of the space era this very ancient science has received 
more new information than during all the preceding centuries of 
development. The new Spectrum-X- Gamma Astronomy Project 
promises the world community the largest and most modern 
automatic exoatmospheric observatory for studying those 
radiations in the universe which cannot reach the surface due to 
the planetary atmospheric envelope. Today this project looks so 
attractive that 15 countries with the most different levels of 
scientific development -- from the United States to Turkey -- 
are participating in its implementation. 
  In order for it to be understood how important this 
exoatmospheric observatory will be for the world, we will state 
that such countries as Denmark, Finland and Israel are 
contributing to the instruments of the satellite to be developed 
sums relative to their gross national product which are 
comparable to those which Russia allocated for the entire space 
research program in 1993. 
  The total cost of the project for the Western participants 
alone is more than 150 million dollars. The satellite itself is 
being designed and fabricated in the well-known "space berth" of 
the NPO Lavochkin. The Space Research Institute, Russian Academy 
of Sciences, is in charge of coordination of all the work and 
its general scientific oversight. 
  The "heart" of the new exoatmospheric observatory is two 
X-ray telescopes -- JET-X and SODART. The combined European 
(including Russia) JET-X telescope has the highest "keenness of 
vision" today. The SODART, a joint creation of Russia, Denmark 
and the United States, is a still larger instrument, 11 meters 
in length. It collects far more X-radiation and will make it 
possible to carry out more detailed research than was possible 
before. Working in tandem, these two telescopes will make it 
possible to make a new, highly important breakthrough in X-ray 
astronomy. 
  Better modern technologies were used in constructing these 
telescopes. Russia surprised the group of creators of the 
exoatmospheric observatory with the mechanical components and 
housing of the JET-X telescope. Its 5-m "tube," like the entire 
mechanical system, was supplied by the Central Scientific 
Research Institute for Special Machine Building in the Moscow 
area. The housing was made of carbon plastic, which is very 
light and strong and which virtually does not change its shape 
in a wide temperature range, which is very important for 
accuracy in the focusing of radiation. The British, for example, 
did not believe that such a large housing of carbon plastic 
could be made sufficiently reliable. But after rigorous and 
completely thorough tests carried out in the famed 
Rutherford-Appleton laboratory doubts were replaced by delighted 
comments. 
  X-rays are attractive to researchers because the entire 
universe is transparent for them. They go right through it. But 
at the same time this also gives rise to serious difficulties. 
It is very difficult to fabricate focusing systems similar to 
ordinary optical mirrors. Although theoretically this also 
seemed possible. 
  It was found that X-ray radiation is beautifully reflected 
by 
mirrors covered by very thin (several layers of atoms) gold 
films. So that X-ray telescopes will be "golden" in the literal 
sense of the word. The SODARt will have 124 square meters of 
golden mirrors, fitted one into the other. But the gold itself 
was only one-tenth of a percent of the cost of fabricating these 
mirrors and bringing them up to the required quality. 
  The best modern technologies and materials were used for the 
observatory in order to obtain new information on the universe. 
One of the principal mysteries of the sky is quasars, already 
discovered in the 1960's, which emit like 100 trillion suns and 
"blink" with a characteristic period of about one month and 
whose size is comparable to that of our solar system. Thousands 
of quasars have already been studied. Most of them are at the 
edge of the universe observable by terrestrial instruments, that 
is, we see objects which are tens of times younger than the star 
world surrounding us. The X-ray telescopes of the new 
observatory can glance still farther and see the "birthplace" of 
the universe and register the birth of galaxies and quasars. 
  Today it is necessary to understand how these compact and 
powerful energy sources were formed and why in the past they 
were much larger. Indeed, now in the neighborhoods closest to us 
they have died out, like the dinosaurs, and have been 
transformed into "black holes," not sending any radiation 
outward. But since theoretically "black holes" cannot be 
destroyed, this means that these invisible objects should exist 
somewhere around us, concentrating in themselves a considerable 
part of the mass of the universe. Scientists must detect these 
"graveyards of black holes." In theory this is possible from the 
curvature of rays passing near such an invisible object and this 
is one of the tasks of modern science. 
  "The Spectrum-X-Gamma Project will be the first national 
Russian orbital observatory," I was told by Academician Rashid 
Syunyayev, scientific director of the project. "Every specialist 
in any scientific institution in Russia will be able to send in 
an application for research to be carried out and if the project 
committee deems it interesting, at no cost it will be allocated 
observation time from the Russian quota. Such a specialist has 
one obligation: the results must be processed and published 
within a year." 
  We will note still another feature of the project. After 
three years of flight the Russian observation quota will be 
opened for American scientists. But not without cost. For this 
NASA even prior to the launch must deliver to the Space Research 
Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, a system for archival 
storage of data received from the satellite. It will be supplied 
with optical storage disks, robots and high-capacity computers 
giving rapid access to information for hundreds of users. It 
must be said that the archives must be organized extremely 
complexly. After all, approximately 8 gigabits of information 
will be received daily from the satellite, or to put in ordinary 
terms, about a million pages of text. 
  As was noted, the project should begin in late 1995. Russian 
space science is still retaining its very strong potential and 
if it is reasonable to use it, even with minimum support of the 
Russian government, it will be capable of carrying out 
first-class scientific projects attractive to the entire world 
community. 

