Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Wolf Gunter Bruegmann report: "Estonia As An East-West </F>
Bridge"] 
  [Text] Frankfurt a. M., 1 February -- Estonian Prime 
Minister Mart Laar sees his country as an example that shows how 
"radical reforms" can be effected successfully in the East. 
More attention as well as investments from western Europe could 
result in an "obvious effect" and bring about more security in 
Europe, said Laar, who is 33 and the youngest head of government 
in Europe, at the opening event of Estonian Week at the 
Frankfurt Union International Club. 
  Talking about security, history teacher Laar reminded the 
audience that Estonia -- located at the climatic divide between 
the Gulf Stream and Siberia --was already an outpost of Western 
culture during the days of the Roman Empire. In the last 
century, Estonian intellectuals already said that only an 
integration of Europe could keep Russia at bay. What was utopia 
then is very topical now, Laar said. European integration is 
the only guarantee for a democratic future in Russia. With its 
proximity to St. Petersburg, Estonia exerts some influence on 
the entire northwest of Russia, he said. 
  And this is Laar's success story of Estonia, which has 1.6 
million inhabitants (including 500,000 Russians): Estonia has 
had its own currency, oriented toward the German mark, since 
1992. The inflation rate was cut from 1,000 to 32 percent. The 
budget is balanced. It has been possible to build up some 
foreign currency reserves. The country offers "qualified and 
cheap labor." Foreign trade with Russia has declined from 90 
percent in 1990 to 20 percent today; Finland now ranks first, 
followed by Sweden and Great Britain, with Germany in fourth 
place. 
  Yet, other reports say the radical changes in Estonia have 
led not only to a doubling of average monthly incomes, but also 
to a dramatic increase in Mafia-like crimes, with murders, bomb 
attacks, theft, and corruption. The largest portion of these 
are illegal trading in weapons, drugs, and metals that originate 
from Asia and are sold to the Scandinavian black market. 

