Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Camilo Chaparro] </F>
  [Text] A week before Juan David Ochoa Vasquez is to work 
out a settlement with the Prosecutor General's Office, EL TIEMPO 
obtained exclusive access to Fabio Ochoa Vasquez's confession. 
  In this confession the youngest of the Ochoa Vasquez 
brothers 
gave the Prosecutor General's Office new details on how the 
Medellin drug traffickers operated. 
  Ochoa's statement revealed routes, the modus 
operandi, drug destinations, money laundering, and their 
ties with the owners of "Tranquilandia." 
  Based on this confession, which was supported and confirmed 
by testimony from two other drug traffickers who have confessed, 
Jaime Mejia Sanin and Jorge Luis Ochoa Vasquez, and by 
statements given to U.S. Justice Department officials by Max 
Mermelstein and Carlos Lehder, the state on 20 December 1993 
sentenced Fabio Ochoa to eight and one-half years in prison, 
without reductions. 
  As an example, Mermelstein--considered one of the Medellin 
Cartel's principal contacts in the United States--said that 
between 1981 and 1983 he worked with the cartel and helped bring 
56 tons of cocaine to the United States. 
  Speaking of the youngest of the Ochoa brothers involved in 
drug trafficking, Mermelstein said he first met him in 1978 and 
received from him "a kilo of cocaine in Miami; later he [Ochoa] 
showed me another 100 kilos in an apartment." 
  He added that on a number of occasions he met with members 
of 
the Medellin Cartel--among whom he mentioned Fabio Ochoa--in 
Panama, Miami, and the capital of Antioquia, to discuss drug 
trafficking deals. He also said he had visited the 
"Tranquilandia" lab, set up by the cartel between 1983 and 1984 
in the Yari forests (Caqueta department). 
<H5>  The "Stake" System </H5>
  Fabio Ochoa confessed to being involved in drug trafficking 
for 16 years, starting in 1974 and leaving the business, he 
said, in mid-1990, when he turned himself in. 
  Ochoa's testimony, obtained exclusively by EL TIEMPO, says 
that "he primarily sold drugs, periodically exporting varying 
amounts of cocaine, which increased over time, to the United 
States." 
  According to this confessed trafficker, his first shipment 
consisted of a half kilo of drugs; over the years he sent tons 
of drugs to the United States. 
  Of these amounts, Ochoa said that only part belonged to him, 
as they were sent through a system the drug traffickers called 
"a stake," meaning that the shipment did not come from a single 
person, but from several people. 
  Although Ochoa gave details on some of the shipments, the 
Prosecutor General's Office and the special judge of Medellin, 
who endorsed the settlement between the state and this criminal, 
said that because of the passage of time and the informal and 
clandestine way in which those operations were conducted, no 
further information is available on each of the drug shipments 
in which the youngest of the Ochoa clan participated. 
  Ochoa said that in 1988 he participated "as a stake-holder 
in 
shipping cocaine to the United States." The special Medellin 
judge revealed in his sentence that the cocaine was shipped on a 
route that started in Bolivia and went through Argentina. 
  On this shipment, the document reveals that Ochoa faked the 
import of salted anchovies to New York to conceal 1,124 kilos of 
cocaine. 
  In late 1989 and early 1990, he was also involved in sending 
cocaine to Spain, but the final destination of this shipment was 
the United States. 
  The youngest of the Ochoa family, the first of the family to 
turn himself in, also confessed to the crime of conspiring to 
commit a crime, as he set up and ran a drug trafficking 
organization. 
<H5>  Failure in Darien </H5>
  He also stated that there were links with some drug 
processing labs and that he had lent approximately $250,000 to 
the owners of "Tranquilandia," possibly so they would complete 
the construction of that laboratory in the Colombian forests. 
  Ochoa added that they paid that money back with "cheaper and 
better quality merchandise." 
  In 1984, according to his confession, he again provided 
money 
to finance a large drug processing lab in the Darien region near 
the Panamanian border, but according to Ochoa, this facility 
never operated because it was discovered by the authorities. 
  According to Ochoa, on "one occasion in 1986, he rented land 
and had a runway developed near the banks of the Middle 
Magdalena River. This runway was to be used for transporting 
drugs." 
  This clandestine runway, he added, was a failure because it 
was in an area with strong guerrilla influence. 
  The drug trafficker also confessed to illicit enrichment, 
"acquiring horses, livestock, cars, and ranches." These assets 
came to an approximate total value of $2 million. "He is 
prepared to turn over the equivalent of this amount, since this 
property has been converted into other assets, both personal and 
real estate property," said the special judge in confirming the 
negotiated settlement reached between the Prosecutor General's 
Office and the accused. 
  Ochoa also confessed that he had used various persons from 
his organization in financial and commercial operations to 
launder the dollars he received from drug trafficking. These 
operations took place in Panama and in Medellin. 

