Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vijaya Pushkarna: "Living Death"] </F>
  [Text] Srinagar is a city sedated, groggy and gangrenous, a 
city where laughter has been ripped off the lips of its 
children. At six in the evening it looks like a sick man curled 
up under thick dark blankets, the shops have their shutters 
rolled down, the unlit streets have fallen silent and empty. "It 
is the first time in years that I am switching on the lights of 
my car," says Aijaz Ahmed, one of the lucky businessmen who has 
not yet been knocked into the pits of despair by the chaos that 
reigns in the valley. 
  Aijaz, 38, recently took his family from the sub-zero 
temperatures of Srinagar to Jammu, the sunny winter capital of 
the state. There their greatest source of joy was Tamil director 
Mani Ratnam's Roja, a film about the efforts of a 
woman to save her husband held hostage by Kashmiri militants. 
  The film is widely known in Srinagar, but not many have seen 
it thanks to the militants who have imposed a ban on cinemas and 
video libraries. They have also banned cultural programmes, 
clubs, beauty parlours and bars. Even a game of cards is sinful. 
During a house-to-house search by the security forces in 
downtown Srinagar, a Kashmir University lecturer has only one 
frantic plea to the officer. "Don't let anyone know that you 
have found video-cassettes in my house," she begs in tears. 
  It is mirthless life for the young and the growing. They 
live 
without fun, there is no entertainment, and even school day 
celebrations are a thing of the past. A bureaucrat, who paid 
heavily for openly sympathising with the militant movement, 
pities his children. "They are growing up in a well," he says. 
"They have no non-Muslims friends, they don't know what evening 
life is, what evening light is. My young son, most likely, will 
get killed looking for azadi." 
  A lot of things that the Kashmiris cherished have already 
died. Houseboat hospitality is foundering, shikaras 
have disappeared from the weed-grown Dal Lake, the tourist 
industry has collapsed, the economy has a huge hole in its 
heart. Yet Mohammad Amin Mir, owner of two houseboats, smiles. 
Offering tea and the warmth of the kangri to beat the 
biting cold, he says, "You have come here and spoken to us in 
English and Hindustani. For the first time in years, I almost 
feel as if a tourist is back." 
  The "years" that Aijaz and Mir are talking about is the 
period beginning December 1989, more specifically the day Rubiya 
Sayeed, the daughter of the then Union home minister, Mufti 
Mohammad Sayeed, was kidnapped by the militants. The owner of 
Welcome Hotel on the famed boulevard across the Dal Lake 
remembers how life began to deteriorate for him and others in 
the city from that day. "All our guests fled, even though they 
had booked the rooms for a week or more," he recalls. The next 
day, he closed shop. 
  Till then, he had thought that elections would be held and 
the situation would improve in the state that had been under 
President's rule ever since an angry Farooq Abdullah tendered 
his resignation over the appointment of Jagmohan as the 
Governor. In the next five days, the half a dozen three-star 
hotels on the boulevard were closed down. Many hotels all over 
the valley have met with the same fate. 
  The owner of Welcome Hotel entered the highly competitive 
carpet business, lost his money and has let rust eat his 
factory. Many other owners have rented out their hotels, earning 
handsome returns from the security forces--and death threats and 
ransom notes from the militants. Sandbag bunkers and 
gun-wielding men in olive greens and khaki--not camera-toting 
tourists in bright colours--mark hotels like Centaur. 
  Mohammed Amin Mir, the young houseboat owner who used to 
give 
tourists the Kashmir experience and earn Rs 1 lakh a season, 
today digs up the banks of the Jhelum for daily wages of Rs 30. 
There is no work on rainy and snowy days, and not all sunny days 
are productive. Firings and grenade-lobbing, which lead to 
hartals, often rob him of income and even if everything is fine 
he would not go far looking for work for fear of the bunkers 
along the way. 
  "We are able to survive on our savings and the meagre 
earnings. But how will I maintain the houseboats?" he asks. He 
has to spend Rs 6,000 to 8,000 for the maintenance of each boat 
every year. "Earlier it used to be six months work and six 
months rest. Now it is crackdown, curfew and hartal, at least 
three days a week," he says. 
  His uncle Ghulam Ahmad Khan hawks rubber slippers on the 
pavements on safe days. "Tonight is Shabbi Barat, a big day for 
us Muslims, when we go to the mosque and be there all night. But 
now nobody leaves the house, and every time I get back home, I 
think it is a rebirth," he says though he has never been picked 
up by the security forces. 
  A hundred of the 2,000 houseboat owners at Dal Lake have 
travel agencies to fall back on, the others have fallen flat. It 
is hard times even for Mohammad Iqbal Chapri, 79, the founder 
president of the Houseboat Owners' Association--his brother is 
the present president--and one of his sons and a grandson work 
as domestic help for some Swede engineers at Uri. The Chapri 
family did not turn to the carpet and handicrafts industry 
because they have been houseboat people for the last 250 years. 
Says Chapri: "A shawl person cannot manage a houseboat or 
trekking, and I cannot make and sell shawls." 
  It has been a road to despair for taxicabs, too. In 1989 
there were 4,000 of them in Srinagar and Badgam districts. Now 
there are only 1,700. "The television says the Mujahdeen do not 
let us accept the relief that the government is giving us. But 
the fact is that the government is not giving us anything, we 
have not even been exempted from paying the tax on the cabs," 
says G.M. Kundroo, general secretary of Tourist Taxi Stand 
Drivers Union. 
  While Kundroo blames the presence of the security forces for 
the poor tourist traffic and claims that the militants do 
nothing that hits tourism, many others think otherwise. Rashid, 
a houseboat-owner-turned-cabbie, was kidnapped by the militants 
along with two American botanists from whom they demanded Rs 5 
lakh. "but to our good luck, another group of militants 
intervened and we were let off," says Rashid, who has found the 
security forces more considerate than many militant groups. 
  The worst affected in the city seem to be the 
shikarawalas who used to ferry people down the Jhelum 
to houseboats in the Dal Lake. There are only a dozen 
shikaras at the Dal Gate Ghats which means most of 
the 1,800 workers are out of jobs. Their union secretary, Khazar 
Mohammad Kalu, a hunter of daily wages now, says many in his 
trade have migrated to Jammu, Goa and Delhi and that 400 
shikaras have been abandoned for want of money to 
repair them. 
  It is not only those in the tourism trade who have lost out. 
The bleakness has invaded everyone's bone-marrows. Tailor 
Mohammad Ayub Khan is out of work not because his Hindu 
customers fled the area, but because his shop is next to a BSF 
bunker. Khan, who had eight employees in the good old days, has 
no more [than] two uniforms to mend. The commanding officer of 
the BSF unit had recommended that Khan's daughter Yasimjan be 
employed by the district administration but, after many visits, 
he is a disillusioned man. "If I had the money to buy her a job, 
would I not have got her married?" he asks. The militants have 
not helped him either. "They are collecting money for 
themselves," he says. 
  Baskets woven by Ghulam Rasool Shaksaz, who lives near the 
Hazratbal mosque, used to be taken to Calcutta and other far off 
places by traders. Now the traders just don't come. Till a few 
months ago, he carried on making kangris for visitors 
to the mosque, which is now virtually closed. Yet he thanks 
Allah and cheerfully says: "The crisis has shown what a goldmine 
Kashmir is. People are carrying on without income. That shows 
the potential of the place." 
  Most business establishments in Srinagar don't open, and the 
businessmen have forgotten what credit, bilti, or LOC 
[line of control] means. The carry-and-forward agents of all the 
major companies have shifted to Jammu. Credit cards are of no 
use, most banks have closed down their branches. The few that 
have not, have massive security and endless queues. Indian 
Airlines does not sell tickets directly, STD [Subscriber Trunk 
Dialing (telephone)] and ISD [International Subscriber Dialing] 
booths are non-existent. Courier services deliver packets, but 
they cannot airfreight packets from Srinagar. 
  From sunset to eight in the morning, there is no movement of 
people, no light on the streets, and even the paramilitary 
vehicles do not turn on lights for fear of attacks. There is 
chronic power shutdown but even those who can afford generators 
do not go for them, for that would invite unnecessary attention, 
possibly dangerous, to the buyer. 
  The Dak Bungalow in Jammu had some visitors from the valley, 
who had come not to see Roja, but to play at cards! A 
good hand of rummy with four packs seem to be a favourite of a 
number of middle-aged Kashmiris, but they seldom play in the 
valley for fear of the son and his gun. "The militants have 
banned card games, and nobody knows whether his son is with this 
group or that. We play only behind closed doors in Srinagar and 
if there is a knock, we will hide the cards before opening the 
door," said a card game enthusiast. 
  The lack of trust, the lurking suspicion between sons and 
fathers, the young and the old, is part of the tragedy that is 
Kashmir. The old seem to be afraid of the young who are 
fascinated by the gun. They also fear for them. "If we send them 
out for work, the men in uniform may beat them to death; if they 
stay home, they are easily tempted by militancy. That is the 
problem of a father, the government just does not care," says 
Chapri, whose son Ibrahim was kept blindfolded by the security 
forces for 16 days in 1990. "As a freedom fighter, I have taught 
him that violence must be met with violence. My Quran has taught 
me that. If it is non-violence that I am faced with, I must 
submit. That is the way all of us here have been educated," he 
explains why militancy has captured the imagination of the youth. 
  But there are father who attribute the trend more to the 
prevailing political atmosphere than any kind of indoctrination, 
formal or otherwise. "Perhaps the new generation will be more 
violent. My son was six when militancy erupted. His life has 
been in the atmosphere of guns, rockets, and there has been a 
reduction in educational facilities and interaction with human 
beings. Only a psychotherapist can say what damage it has done," 
says a father who is anguished that the militants are using 
12-year-olds to throw grenades at their targets. Raised in such 
a deadly atmosphere such boys will find happiness only in the 
rattle of Kalashnikovs. 
  The boys seem to love it, proud of their self-image as 
freedom fighters. "I don't know how I got into this movement. 
Yes, it was in my blood," says Shefat Ahmed, a former student of 
the reputed Burn Hall boys school. He had been neither trained 
nor armed, but when "everyone rose, I was chased out into the 
movement by my family members, who asked me to be a man." He 
also notes that many top leaders of the Jammu and Kashmir 
Liberation Front [JKLF] were bright students. 
  There are bad eggs, everyone admits, the types that rape, 
loot and run wild. But most of the militants burn with the 
vengeful fury against security forces. For, many militants have 
been created by them, by roughing up an innocent man or 
misbehaving with a woman. Such humiliation makes all the boys in 
the family turn militants. 
  The crackdowns and house-to-house searches too have turned 
people against the government. A young man of Nawath, who has 
been arrested at least four times in the last one month, 
believes that it is only because he wears jeans and sneakers 
that the security forces think that he is a militant. Ghulam 
Amad Khan says his mentally retarded nephew was detained for 
three weeks. The alienation is growing, with 3,000 people in 
jail without trial for more than three years. 
  "It would have taken us 60 years to get the movement to this 
stage, but thanks to Jagmohan and the security forces, we have 
done it in three years," says a lawyer. Another militant mocks 
at Union Minister Rajesh Pilot's assurance that the relatives 
will be informed of arrests within 24 hours: "They are now 
producing bodies in the police stations within three hours. The 
number of custodial deaths is unimaginable." 
  The presence of the uniformed forces has hardly instilled 
confidence in anyone. A woman, who was initially happy that 
midnight knocks had ceased when the BSF set up a bunker near her 
house, fears that she would be caught in the crossfire. Army 
convoys on the streets are a regular sight even when there is no 
emergency. Recently there was a panic at a market where a row of 
jeeps screeched to a halt. In this case the fear was absolutely 
misplaced: the convoy was merely accompanying a major who had 
come to collect his clothes. 
  But no one takes chances, particularly after sunset. "If the 
security forces are ruthless during daytime, they are worse in 
the evenings when most of them are drunk," says a shopkeeper on 
Residency Road. The excesses by the militants are either brushed 
off as canards or ascribed to "guest militants"--Pakistani 
agents, PLO guerrillas, Afghan killers and the like. A newspaper 
report that the guest militants are spreading AIDS is read out 
by militants groups along with warnings about criminals 
masquerading as great revolutionaries. 
  The writ of the militants runs in the society despite the 
jawans crawling all over. "Their parallel courts matter much 
more than the courts of law," says Sheikh Mukhtiar Ahmed, who 
had won a case involving Rs 12 lakh. But then the militants 
backed the other party, and so the verdict is yet to be enforced. 
  The High Court Bar Association president Mian Abdul Quayoom, 
a member of the Huriyat Conference, says that there is 
accountability in the militant outfits. He gives an example: at 
Arwani near Bijbehara, a Hizbul Mujahdeen militant killed two 
people making love. The parents went to the Hizbul 
commander-in-chief, who then ordered the militant's execution. 
  Not everyone sees the militants in that glorious light. Says 
a bureaucrat: "We have a gun in front of us, a gun behind us. 
Anyone with a gun is supreme in Kashmir, whether he is in 
uniform or not. They are exempted from all rules, laws and 
civility." 
  The High Court has 8,000 habeas corpus petitions pending 
before it. In 1990-91, such petitions formed 85 per cent of all 
cases, 60 per cent the next year and 40 per cent now. "I don't 
say that the arrests have stopped, it is just that the interest 
of lawyers has swung back to more profitable cases. Most of them 
were handling these habeas corpus writs free," says an official. 
Quayoom alleges that the judges have been instructed to go slow 
on habeas corpus petitions. Says he: "In the normal course, a 
judge would write out the order on the toilet tissue if he got 
such a petition while sitting on the pot." 
  The collapse of all branches of government is complete, yet 
the valley seems very much like the giant chinar tres, waiting 
for the long and bleak winter in its history to be over, for new 
leaves to sprout and bring colour and life back. But the present 
is crushing, abject and hopeless, as the youth growing up in a 
traumatised land fondle grenades and the tense troops in sandbag 
bunkers flash terror. 
<H5>  YASEEN AHMED MALIK: PRESIDENT OF THE JKLF </H5>
  Yaseen Ahmad Malik, 26, has been in jail since 1990. But the 
incarceration has hardly weakened his will. During his college 
days, Yaseen founded the Student's League. "He was always an 
admirer of Maqbool Butt (hanged in 1984), though I don't know 
what exactly attracted him to the movement," says his sister 
Amina. 
  He was first arrested for taking out a procession to protest 
the dismissal of the Farooq Abdullah government. Released a year 
later, he was again arrested for reactivating the JKLF. When let 
off, Yaseen crossed over to Pakistan. He was netted again in 
August 1990. He can play a major role in shaping Kashmir's 
future but his health is feeble. He has had open-heart surgery 
while in custody. 
<H5>  SHABIR SHAH: PEOPLE'S LEAGUE </H5>
  Shabir Shah, 40, has spent almost half his life in different 
jails. He was arrested for the first time when he was 14: he had 
organised a demonstration against the visit of Jayaprakash 
Narayan to the valley. The J&amp;K [Jammu &amp; Kashmir] People's 
League, of which he is chairman, was formed a little before the 
Indira-Abdullah accord which brought the Sheikh back to power in 
1975. 
  Shabir traces his inclination towards secessionist movement 
to 1968, when "Balraj Madhok came and instigated us, but this 
feeling really grew in the 70s." He does not concede that the 
movement for self-determination is inspired by Pakistan. Now, 
the mainstream parties want the government to hold talks with 
him. 
<H5>  MIRWAIZ UMAR FAROOQ: AWAMI ACTION COMMITTEE </H5>
  Umar, 20, became the spiritual leader of the Muslims in the 
valley after the assassination of his father, Mirwaiz Maulvi 
Farooq, in May 1990. He is also the chairman of the Huriyat 
composed of 34 political and militant groups. "It was my idea to 
form the Huriyat," he says. 
  He addresses large crowds every week at the Jama Masjid in 
Srinagar, where two lakh people gather on the last Friday of the 
Ramzan month. Every Wednesday a professor comes to his house to 
help him prepare the speech. And every day three other 
professors come to teach him Arabic, Islamic Law, Persian and 
other subjects in his fazilat degree course. He is 
also studying for graduation in political science. 
<H5>  JAVIED AHMAD MIR: ACTING CHIEF, JKLF </H5>
  A hat and a pair of tinted glasses are part of Javied Ahmed 
Mir's camouflage. Being on the run has become a way of life for 
him. He manages to address public meetings without attracting 
the attention of the security forces. 
  Javied set up the Islamic Students' League in 1982 and later 
found a job in the public health engineering department. He has 
been in and out of the jails for the last four years. The last 
stint, which was eight months long, was in the Jammu jail with 
Shabir Shah of the People's League, and his own party chief 
Yaseen Ahmed Malik. 
  Javied, 33, claims he has never held a gun. "I belong to the 
political wing of the movement, not the military wing," he says. 
* 

