BFN 

  [Text] Foreign Minister Antonio Aranibar announced 
yesterday that the government will firmly promote the 
resolutions issued by the International Decade of the World's 
Indigenous People preparatory meeting held in Cochabamba. This 
meeting was attended by 120 representatives from Latin America 
and the Caribbean. 
  Aranibar asserted that these resolutions will play a 
relevant 
part in Bolivia's foreign policy. He said that the indigenous 
issue has become a stable and constant issue of discussion in 
Bolivia. Aranibar added that this reflects the important changes 
that have taken place in our country, and how much Bolivia can 
contribute at the Latin American and world level. 
  The resolutions approved at the meeting in Cochabamba are 
the 
result of a consensus achieved between government 
representatives, delegates from the various indigenous groups, 
and nongovernmental organization delegates. 
  According to Aranibar the document is based on the need to 
build a new order of relations between governments and 
indigenous peoples of the Americas. 
  Bolivia will raise the issue at both the OAS Assembly 
meeting, to be attended by the foreign minister; and at the 
Cartagena Ibero-American Summit to be attended by President 
Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada. 
  The meeting in Cochabamba also decided to request those 
governments of the Americas that signed the agreement 
establishing the Indigenous Fund to expeditiously approve this 
agreement, so that it may implemented as soon as possible. 
  Aranibar said: "On behalf of President Sanchez de Lozada, I 
expressly request the cooperation of government delegates and 
indigenous group representatives so that the Indigenous Fund 
might become a reality. This agreement is a victory by the 
indigenous peoples of the Americas, and Bolivia is interested in 
implementing it." 
  The preparatory meeting sought to unify the criteria of 
Latin 
American and Caribbean countries on the issue before presenting 
it to the United Nations. The meeting was closed on 1 June by 
Vice President Victor Hugo Cardenas and Foreign Minister 
Aranibar. 

