BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Zhang Tingyan, PRC ambassador to the ROK, in </F>
his office in Myongdong, Seoul, by Pyon Chang-sop -- date not 
given, first paragraph is editor's note] 
  [Text] Zhang Tingyan (58), Chinese ambassador to the ROK, 
who speaks fluent Korean, recently received many requests from 
universities and public organizations throughout the country to 
give a lecture on ROK-PRC relations. Thus, he is in high 
spirits. Such requests reflect the Korean people's increasing 
interest in China, although it has only been one year and nine 
months since the ROK and China established diplomatic relations. 
Moreover, with the North Korean threat in March 1993 that it 
will withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty [NPT], 
the North Korean nuclear problem has been the focus of the 
people's attention. As a result, Ambassador Zhang has a busier 
schedule than any other ambassador in Seoul. With his 34 years 
of diplomatic service, he is known to be one of the outstanding 
professional diplomats within the Chinese Foreign Ministry. In 
particular, he served in the Chinese Embassy in North Korea for 
a total of 17 years from 1960 to 1969; from 1976 to 1981, and 
from 1986 to 1989. Thus, he is known as an expert in North 
Korean affairs. He came to Seoul as the first Chinese ambassador 
to the ROK in September 1992. The reporter met him in his office 
in Myongdong, Seoul and asked him about current issues 
surrounding the North Korean nuclear problem. 
  [Pyon Chang-sop] What efforts did the Chinese Government 
make to solve the North Korean nuclear problem in the past? 
  [Ambassador Zhang Tingyan] The position of the Chinese 
Government is to support the denuclearization of the Korean 
peninsula. When the North Korean nuclear problem broke out in 
March 1993, the Chinese Government made all possible efforts for 
a solution to this problem. In other words, the Chinese 
Government held consultations with nations concerned, including 
the ROK and the United States. The Chinese Government hopes that 
the problem will be solved through dialogue, not pressure. 
Although China is not the nation directly concerned, it made 
efforts to solve this problem, and will make such efforts in the 
future, too. Certain progress has been made in solving the 
North Korean nuclear problem. The United States and North Korea 
made contacts in New York for a third round of talks and 
negotiations are ongoing between North Korea and the 
International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA]. Many parties 
concerned have been working recently in a very flexible manner. 
This is what we are hoping for. We think that holding talks by 
maintaining flexibility is better than holding talks under a 
strained situation. 
  [Pyon] Will China join UN sanctions if the nuclear problem 
is not solved through dialogue? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] When we recall the North Korean nuclear 
problem during the past one year, we note that there were many 
difficult crises. However, the crises were resolved each time 
through dialogue, not by pressure. If my memory is correct, the 
ROK Government, from the outset, also chose resolution of the 
nuclear problem through dialogue. In March last year, Foreign 
Minister Han Sung-chu said at a reception that the nuclear 
problem should be resolved through dialogue. I understand that 
his remarks represent the ROK Government position. The Chinese 
Government position is the same as the ROK. It is important to 
solve the nuclear problem in a peaceful manner. When President 
Kim Yong-sam visited China and held a summit with President 
Jiang Zemin last March, they reached an agreement to resolve the 
North Korean nuclear problem through dialogue. There were many 
cases of international disputes throughout the world. However, 
most of the problems were resolved by dialogue, not by means of 
pressure. In particular, a solution to disputes through dialogue 
has become the trend of the time since the end of the Cold War. 
  [Pyon] Has China acted as a mediator for direct dialogue 
between the United States and North Korea? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] There is an official high-level dialogue 
channel between the United States and North Korea. China has 
never played the role of mediator, nor is there such a necessity. 
  [Pyon] It was learned that when the ROK and China 
established diplomatic relations in August 1992, China put 
forward the establishment of North Korean-U.S. diplomatic 
relations as a precondition for ROK-China diplomatic relations. 
Is this true? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] China's establishment of diplomatic 
relations with the ROK is entirely for normalization of 
relations between the two countries. China has never put forward 
any condition. 
  [Pyon] Do you think there is the possibility of 
establishment of diplomatic relations between the United States 
and North Korea? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] I think that peace and stability on the 
Korean peninsula are hoped for not only by the Korean people but 
also by many nations of the world. Therefore, I think that for 
peace and stability to exist on the Korean peninsula, the United 
States must establish diplomatic relations with North Korea. 
Although I am not certain about actual establishment of 
U.S.-North Korean diplomatic relations, I believe that there 
will undoubtedly be progress in their relations. 
  [Pyon] A rumor on a crisis on the Korean peninsula 
surrounding the North Korean nuclear issue has recently been 
spread. What is your view on this, Mr. Ambassador? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] I do not think it is a crisis. crisis 
means that the Korean peninsula is in a danger of war and the 
present situation is not a crisis. If a war breaks out, it would 
not be favorable for either side. It appears that the rumor on 
such a crisis was prompted by incorrect judgment of the 
situation. As the judgment is erroneous, expressions of the 
crisis would have possibly been exaggerated. 
  [Pyon] Does the Chinese Government know if North Korea 
possesses nuclear weapons? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] The Chinese Government does not know if 
North Korea has nuclear weapons. We do not agree that the North 
or the South has nuclear weapons. 
  [Pyon] Many people believe that China has influence over 
North Korea, and it is true even now... 
  [Ambassador Zhang] China is engaged in large-scale trade 
with 
North Korea. We offer not only oil, but also coal to North 
Korea. However, this is aimed at developing relations with North 
Korea, not at securing influence. China pursues relations with 
other countries based on equality, mutual respect, and trust. 
Chinese relations with North Korea have been realized on the 
basis of this principle. North Korea is a sovereign state. 
North Korea does not necessarily discuss with China when it 
formulates and implements a policy. China does not make such a 
demand nor expect such discussions because such an act is 
regarded as interference in others' domestic affairs. We never 
force any other country to follow our will. 
  [Pyon] Does China convey the position of the ROK or the 
United States pertaining to the North Korean nuclear problem to 
North Korea, or has China done so before? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] I think that the possibility of doing 
this will increase in the future. It can be regarded as part of 
normal diplomatic negotiations to convey one's will to the 
other. China has done so in the past. 
  [Pyon] Relations between the North and the South have been 
deadlocked due to the North Korean nuclear problem. What is your 
view on this, Mr. Ambassador? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] The Chinese Government hopes that 
North-South relations will improve. However, North-South 
relations are a problem that should be resolved between the 
parties concerned in the North and the South. 
  [Pyon] Some time ago, there was a report that the Chinese 
Government invited President Kim Il-song to visit. Can you 
confirm this? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] It is true that the Chinese Government 
invited him early this year. However, there was no reply. I am 
not sure when his visit will be realized. 
  [Pyon] There was also a report that China acted as a 
mediator for realization of North-South summit talks between 
Presidents Kim Yong-sam and Kim Il-song. In addition, some 
people believed that the recent visit of Wu Xueqian, former 
Chinese vice premier and foreign minister, to Seoul was intended 
to mediate the North-South summit. Is this true? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] Such a report is also totally groundless. 
The visit of Wu Xueqian, former Chinese vice premier and foreign 
minister, was aimed at consolidating friendship with the ROK. 
When former vice premier Wu served as foreign minister, he got 
acquainted with many Korean friends in Seoul. Yi Se-ki, national 
assemblyman from the Democratic Liberal Party, is one of them. 
The Chinese Government has not played the role of mediator nor 
is there such a necessity. Besides, the ROK Government has not 
asked China to play such a role, nor will it ask in the future. 
  [Pyon] Is it possible that President Jiang Zemin will 
visit the ROK within this year? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] I cannot be positive at present. Even 
though President Jiang himself said "Now, it is my turn to visit 
the ROK," he has been so busy with Chinese domestic issues that 
he has hardly had time to fix a date. As for myself as an 
ambassador, I hope he will come to Seoul as soon as possible. 
(In this connection, TONG-A ILBO has recently reported by 
quoting a diplomatic source in Beijing that President Jiang is 
scheduled to visit the ROK in November. However, (Chin Chi), 
first secretary at the Chinese Embassy in the ROK who is 
responsible for public information, held that "The embassy has 
not received any notice from the home government on this 
matter." A working-level official at the Foreign Ministry also 
denied the report by saying that "We are pushing ahead with a 
plan to realize President Jiang's visit to the ROK within this 
year." 
  [Pyon] Recently, North Korea is holding that the present 
Armistice Agreement should be replaced with a peace agreement. 
What is the Chinese Government's stance on this matter? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] The U.S. Government has not yet clarified 
its stance on this matter. This is an issue that needs to be 
resolved among the North and South, and the United States. I 
think it is imperative to review the issue of substituting the 
armistice state for the peace state and this is the right time 
to do so. The replacement of a peace agreement should be 
reexamined for the sake of peace and security on the Korean 
peninsula. 
  [Pyon] What do you think about the notion on `the threat 
from 
China' which is prevailing now in Asia? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] Those who talk about such a thing do not 
know about our policy or the real situation. Maybe they have 
other purposes for saying that. With the collapse of the Soviet 
Union, many people believed that China would also follow that 
path. However, not only did China not collapse, but it is 
becoming more stable. Even if China becomes powerful, it would 
not pursue hegemonism nor high-handed policies. By 2049, the 
year when China greets the 100th anniversary of the foundation 
of the PRC, China will reach the middle stage in the course of 
economic development. This is our goal at this moment. Even now 
in China, 80 million people among the 1.16 billion population 
suffer from poverty. 
  [Pyon] As the first Chinese ambassador to the ROK, how do 
you 
evaluate present ROK-Chinese relations? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] Even though it has only been one year and 
nine months since China and the ROK established diplomatic 
relations, the two countries have accumulated remarkable 
achievements during this period. Above all, the leaders of the 
two countries found common ground at their summit in Seattle and 
Beijing. To put it in a Korean way, they have established deep 
rapport. In the economic sector, the volume of trade increased 
a great deal, reaching $9.1 billion last year. Now, China has 
become the third largest trade partner. 
  [Pyon] What was the most worthwhile job you have done while 
in office? 
  [Ambassador Zhang] During my short term of office, I am most 
pleased with the fact that I was able to accomplish many things. 
I deem it as a great honor to have played a role of promoting 
the relations between the ROK and China. As the relations 
between the two countries are getting better, trust between the 
peoples of the two countries are deepened all the more. 
Recently, I have received many lecture requests from 
universities and social organizations. This reflects the Korean 
people's increased interest in China. 

