BFN 

<F P=106> ["Straight Talk" program by host Osvaldo Rodriguez of </F>
JUVENTUD REBELDE and guest Eloy Concepcion of the weekly 
newspaper TRABAJADORES -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] [Rodriguez] Over the past few days, Cuba has once 
again experienced difficulties stemming mostly from the energy 
problem. We have especially been experiencing the effects of new 
blackouts, an increasing number of blackouts. This could perhaps 
create the false notion that the economy is regressing again, 
that we are doomed to a recessive situation. 
  I think our listeners deserve an explanation of our economic 
situation, that our economy is still going through the stages of 
a downward trend, but which can now be considered over. There 
are signs that the recovery process can begin at any moment. 
  Today I invited Eloy Concepcion of the weekly nespaper 
TRABAJADOES to discuss this subject with me. Eloy, take the 
floor, please. 
  [Concepcion] Well, you painted one situation. I think the 
visible face of an economic situation in a given country is 
often reflected in those things that affect us more directly. 
Unquestionably, the energy crisis is the essential point here 
and can reflect the country's situation, whether we are well or 
not economically, because of the implications it might have on 
our technological development, on our social and economic 
infrastructure, et cetera. 
  Now, independent of some details concerning the blackouts 
you 
mentioned, we must insist on some ideas that can somehow explain 
the current situation. I am one of those who have always 
expressed -- and last year when the situation was very serious 
and spiraling, especially in 1993 when the economic situation 
was very difficult -- I expressed a super optimism. And today I 
want to ratify this optimism based on some elements and facts 
showing that our economy is beginning a slight and slow recovery 
process. 
  As everyone knows, for instance, sugar is our main source of 
currency. The sugar harvest for a long time will be our main 
source of currency. And the current harvest, Osvaldo, is being 
carried out under very difficult circumstances. We are all aware 
that there are no spare parts, no rubber belts for tractors and 
harvesters, but that the workers have been very creative and 
have made tremendous efforts to fulfill our harvest goals. 
  A sugarcane recovery plan was also established, but was not 
fully concluded due to logical problems, such as the lack of 
fertilizers that are necessary for increasing the production 
levels. Fertilizers are necessary and they must be paid for in 
hard currency. We must also have fuel to run the pumps to 
irrigate the areas equipped with irrigation systems, et cetera. 
But I do have an idea that this year's harvest will be a bit 
better than last year's. This gives us another example of the 
resistance of our people and of the country under adverse 
situations, in the wake of the collapse of the socialist bloc, 
namely the USSR, and especially because of the Torricelli Law 
which seeks to torment and humiliate us. This is the first 
element we must consider. 
  [Rodriguez] I think it is also important to consider the 
viewpoint of the common citizen who has no access to the 
macroeconomic data and who is not informed about economic 
issues. The economy is improving or worsening to the extent that 
the situation also improves or worsens in his house, in his 
homelife. Society will experience the same with those phenomena 
we encounter on the streets called service, transport, and 
commerce. The common citizen will consider that those things are 
improving or worsening in accordance with the quality of those 
services. For this reason, many believe that the increased 
number of blackouts is a sign of a deteriorating economy. 
  Eloy, you also wanted to talk about sugarcane and the sugar 
harvest situation. Well, everyone is aware of the material 
difficulties we are experiencing because last year we had the 
same problem. Next year I do not think the situation will be the 
same. But I think there are other aspects to consider positive 
within the Cuban economy. We must mention, for instance, the 
prospects in the sugar industry, and without talking about 
triumphalism, without saying that we have solved the problem, or 
that we have found the formula to solve this problem, we must 
first reach a consensus that we are on a path that will lead us 
to an improving situation. 
  [Concepcion] Yes, upon conclusion of the harvest, or even 
before concluding the harvest throughout the country, more 
sugarcane is being planted in clean areas, and I would say that 
in this special period, the efforts being made are yielding very 
encouraging results. 
  Osvaldo, there is another element that is likewise 
important: 
Tobacco harvest this year was the best in years. This is a point 
to be considered because it will also give us the possibility of 
obtaining currency at levels higher than last year when the 
harvest was affected by the Storm of the Century and by other 
adverse weather conditions. 
  [Rodriguez] We have to clarify that the profits from this 
tobacco, which still needs to be processed, will be seen by the 
end of 1995 or perhaps the beginning of 1996, due to tobacco's 
manufacturing requirements -- either made into cigars, or sold 
in bulk. This crop's profit will be seen in 1995 or 1996. 
  [Concepcion] Yes. However, these are realities, rather than 
prospects. 
  Within these prospects we have tourism, which, as everyone 
knows, has experienced an increase of more than 30 percent in 
hard currency earnings. We can also mention the creation of the 
Basic Cooperative Production Units, which are quickly solving, 
more than only the food needs of 4 or 5 million Cubans linked to 
them -- 1 million direct workers and 3 or 4 million relatives. 
We can also mention the issue of the decriminalization of 
dollars [as heard], which, however, creates the well-known 
problems of privilege and inequitable situations. However, we 
cannot deny that the decriminalization of the dollar has also 
been an element that has helped reactivate certain elements of 
the economy. There are also the joint enterprises. There are 
over 130 of these contracts, which are reactivating our economy. 
  [Rodriguez] Allow me to interrupt. I believe you have 
forgotten certain things that represent significant 
developments: One is oil extraction in Cuba. Last year, we 
attained a record level of 1.1 million tons. This year, oil 
workers began January with a very high level which might 
forecast the breaking of last year's production record. Also, 
the price of nickel on the international market has improved. We 
have to add that biotechnology has been consolidating certain 
products and above all, has been gaining a space in the market. 
Recently, there have been reports about Cuban vaccines in 
certain Latin American countries and the welcome they have 
received in certain countries. 
  Eloy, we already discussed power outages as a symptom some 
people -- I believe many people -- see as a new deterioration of 
the national economic situation. I believe we have to discuss 
this further. 
  [Concepcion] My personal opinion is that in the case of 
power 
outages, there is a lack of information, or there is not enough 
information. 
  [Rodriguez] I agree. 
  [Concepcion] Those dry, brief notes from the Electric 
Enterprise regarding a situation that affects and hurts the 
entire population, are unacceptable. I believe our people are 
capable -- they have proven so -- of undertaking the greatest 
risks and difficulties so long as they are for independence, the 
preservation of the fatherland, and the accomplishments of 
socialism. I believe the people deserve everyday more, better, 
and more detailed information. As far as I know, there are 
breakdowns at electric plants due to the use of Cuban oil. Our 
oil is rather heavy and loaded with sulfur and this damages the 
entire national electric system. This is one factor. 
  The other is that many times the people complain that the 
power is turned off in some regions and not in others. Yet, no 
explanations are given. There are places where the power is 
maintained because there is a hospital or neurology center which 
needs the power to continue to operate and so their equipment is 
not damaged. There are also certain neighborhoods where we find 
this happening and this irritates the people. This can very well 
be solved by an explanation of the problem to the people. I do 
not believe the Electric Enterprise should be happy with a stark 
three- line note once a week saying the outages will occur here 
and there and there. Our people are not sheep. Our people are a 
revolutionary people who have proven themselves for years, who 
are capable of resisting and enduring the worst limitations so 
long as they save the Revolution and the fatherland. However, 
the people have to be kept well informed. They need to receive 
all the details and information so they are able to understand 
and better resist. 
  [Rodriguez] I believe that you have expressed the 
irritation of the people. 
  If he has been excessive, it is because of that. He is 
expressing the feelings of the Cuban people. I agree with you. I 
have discussed this with comrades from the Electric Enterprise. 
One of the excuses given is the highly technical details of the 
explanation. I believe that we ought to find a clear way of 
explaining to the people the difficulties at the electric 
plants, which are not always a lack of fuel. There is also lack 
of maintenance due to material difficulties. Last year, the 
electric plants should have received investments or undergone 
maintenance that requires investments of approximately $60 
million. However, I believe that what was invested was minimal. 
Therefore, the problems accumulate. 
  [Concepcion] We also need to know that the outages are going 
to continue to a greater or lesser degree. The outages recently 
increased because of a known situation, not sufficiently 
explained, but known -- difficulties with fuel supplies from 
Russia. Russia is now saying that the fuel accords might be 
fulfilled. We hope so. 
  I believe that this situation will undoubtedly improve in 
the 
coming months. However, we need to clearly understand, and I 
believe the people do, that outages will continue -- perhaps for 
four hours, perhaps five -- until the Cuban economy becomes 
stabilized, so that we can restructure the entire national 
economy including all technological resources, which are high 
consumers of fuel. This will take years. 
  [Rodriguez] To this, we must add that what has been stated 
about Colombia's offer to sell oil to Cuba is on the basis of 
world market trading, on the basis of liquid payment, or simply 
a barter by which we sell to Colombia and buy oil from Colombia. 
However, this does not mean that great amounts of Colombian oil 
are going to be received, nor will it arrive on credit. 
  We need to understand that in Colombia we are going to have 
the advantage of not having middlemen between the Cuban 
Government and Colombia's oil company. Nowadays, when purchasing 
oil on the international market, one needs otherwise to resort 
to middlemen. 

