CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Gennadiy Tretyakov, chairman of the </F>
Commission on International Relations and Contacts with Public 
and State Organizations of the Republic of the Communist Party 
of Azerbaijan, by Nair Aliyev, ZERKALO correspondent; place and 
date not given: "'Only the Russian Plan for a Peaceful 
Settlement Appears To Be the Most Realistic Today.'"] 
  [Text] Responding to questions of a ZERKALO correspondent, 
G. Tretyakov said that this was his personal point of view, and 
that it might not coincide with the opinion of the party. 
  [Aliyev] What do you think of the signing of the oil 
contract 
with Western countries? After all, this actually denotes 
investments of the so-called capitalist countries in the 
Azerbaijani economy? 
  [Tretyakov] Not long ago I was asked almost the same 
question 
by Mr. Thomas Young, ambassador extraordinary and 
plenipotentiary of Great Britain to Azerbaijan. I answered him, 
and I answer you now, that I am for investment in the 
Azerbaijani economy both on the part of the so-called 
capitalistic England, and on the part of Communist China. But, 
at the same time, any contracts that are being signed must be 
mutually beneficial so that their fruits can be enjoyed by 
workers, peasants, and the intelligentsia, the present and 
future generations, and not by a small group of highly placed 
officials who already have their foreign currency accounts in 
Western banks. 
  [Aliyev] You said that "the contracts must be mutually 
beneficial"--does this mean that you think the current 
conditions of the contract are not beneficial? 
  [Tretyakov] I am not familiar with the draft of this 
contract, inasmuch as, to all appearances, it is a well-kept 
secret. I think that questions that are of such importance to 
the republic should be widely publicized in order not to cause 
unnecessary false rumors. 
  [Aliyev] What do you think of the convocation of the 
National 
Assembly of the Azerbaijani Republic and the dissolution of the 
Milli Majlis? 
  [Tretyakov] The creation of the Milli Majlis at the October 
session of the Supreme Soviet of Azerbaijan in 1991 was a gross 
violation of the existing Constitution of the Azerbaijani 
Republic and the Constitutional Act on the State Independence of 
Azerbaijan. 
  I thought then and I think now that the Milli Majlis was an 
illegitimate organ. The activity of the National Assembly only 
compromises the idea of parliamentary government. The parliament 
elected by the people (about 360 deputies), whatever its 
composition might be, but recognized by the world community, was 
actually removed from work, and 50 deputy members of the Milli 
Majlis are making fateful decisions for the people that 
frequently contradict each other and sometimes do not respond at 
all to the interests of Azerbaijan. For example, without 
conducting a referendum and without finding out about the 
opinions of the people, the Milli Majlis is making a decision on 
calling the Azerbaijani language and the nation Turkish. The 
Azerbaijani people have their own ancient culture that occupies 
a place of dignity in world culture. It is necessary to take 
pride in it, and to propagate it, and not to rename the language 
and the nation. 
  I think that it will be necessary in the near future to 
convene a session of the National Assembly and to make a 
decision on the conduct of early elections of a new parliament 
of the republic, both according to the majority and the 
proportional system. 
  [Aliyev] Does your party support relations with other 
parties 
of a leftist orientation? 
  [Tretyakov] We support relations and we contact all parties 
of a leftist orientation, with trade unions, public 
associations, and charitable societies. I cannot say that our 
positions are similar on all questions, but we can find a common 
language on some of them. 
  [Aliyev] And nevertheless, name a party of a leftist 
orientation with which you maintain relations. 
  [Tretyakov] We maintain relations with all of them. 
  [Aliyev] How does the Communist Party see the resolution of 
the Karabakh conflict? 
  [Tretyakov] A meeting between the leadership of the 
Communist 
Party of Azerbaijan (R. Akhmedov) and the leadership of the 
Communist Party of Armenia (S. Badalyan) was held in Moscow 
recently under the aegis of the Central Executive Committee of 
the Communist Party of the Russian Federation (G. Zyuganov). One 
of the questions discussed at the meeting was the question 
concerning Nagornyy Karabakh, about which we approved a joint 
trilateral communique. The Communist Party of Azerbaijan 
declared that it has stood and will stand on the positions of 
territorial integrity of the Azerbaijani Republic and on the 
positions of the rights and freedoms of every citizen regardless 
of nationality and place of residence--Khankendi, Baku, or 
Yerevan. In the communique we supported the signing of the 
Bishkek Protocol and the principle of peaceful negotiations. In 
supporting the signing of the Bishkek Protocol, I believe that 
all three stages of this plan must be fulfilled. Many of the 
current high-standing officials and part of the opposition came 
out against the signing of the protocol. But they are not 
thinking of the fact that the gene pool is being destroyed, that 
young, untrained soldiers are perishing by the hour, who leave 
behind orphaned children, widowed wives, and aged parents. Of 
course, they do not think about this; after all, their children 
are not at war, and many of them are abroad, leading a sweet 
life. 
  There are more than 1 million refugees in the republic who 
are living under dreadful conditions--let the politicians ponder 
what awaits our people after this bloody war. 
  [Aliyev] Does this mean that you see a resolution of the 
conflict only within the scope of the Russian plan for a 
peaceful settlement? 
  [Tretyakov] I see only the Russian plan for a peaceful 
settlement of the conflict as the most realistic today, inasmuch 
as other forces that could stop this war do not exist now. Any 
introduction of peacekeeping forces of the CIS and their 
presence on the territory of Azerbaijan should occur in 
compliance with norms that are generally accepted by the 
international community. 

