Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Yang Qing (2799 7230), and Zhang Huanli (1728 </F>
3562 0448)] 
  [Text] Tokyo, 18 Mar (XINHUA) -- Japanese Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa said here today that Japan and China share a 
common understanding that the two countries should strengthen 
their cooperation in the future on the basis of the already 
matured Sino- Japanese relations, and with the wish to 
contribute to the future and the world. 
  Hosokawa made this statement while receiving members of a 
Chinese press delegation at the prime minister's residence on 
the eve of his visit to China. 
  Hosokawa said: "During my visit, I hope the heads of the two 
countries' governments will reaffirm this understanding so 
friendly relations will continue to develop and broaden. I 
believe the two sides will have very meaningful talks and will 
exchange views candidly [tan shuai di 0982 3764 0966]." 
  On the two countries' economic and trade ties, he said: "The 
volume of Sino-Japanese trade last year (according to Japan's 
statistics) reached $37.8 billion, or 33 fold that of 1972. If 
calculated according to the annual 10 percent growth registered 
in the last decade, the two countries' trade volume will exceed 
$70 billion in 2000 and reach $190 billion in 2010. As of the 
end of September 1993, Japanese investment in China reached 
$5.17 billion." Hosokawa maintained that Sino-Japanese economic 
exchanges not only increased quantitatively, but also changed 
qualitatively. He said: Prospects for cooperation will be very 
bright for Japan and China as partners shouldering heavy 
responsibilities in the world's economic sphere. 
  Hosokawa said he will visit Shanghai. He said people within 
economic circles in Japan and other countries are watching 
Shanghai's development very closely. He believed that Japan's 
nongovernment enterprises will continue to invest in the Pudong 
New District. Hosokawa maintained that Shanghai will play the 
leading role in China's reform and opening up. He said: "As 
far as I am concerned, being able to see the development there 
with my own eyes is of far-reaching significance." 
  In response to a reporter's question, Hosokawa said that 
northeast China is one of the key regions of Sino-Japanese 
economic cooperation because it is closely related to Japan both 
historically and geographically. He said that Dalian and other 
areas in northeast China are actively accepting Japanese 
investment, adding that he hopes northeast China will further 
strengthen its exchange and cooperation with Japan. 
  Hosokawa said: The situation in the Asia-Pacific region is 
gratifying. The rapid economic growth in this region has 
contributed to world peace and prosperity. Although it still 
has worrisome elements of instability, Japan and China can 
contribute significantly to the region's peace and prosperity 
through bilateral and multilateral cooperation. 
  Commenting on the world situation, Hosokawa noted: "In a 
sentence, there are still places where the situation is unclear 
and in a state of unrest. On the whole, the world economy is 
stagnant. Although the economic situation in the United States 
and some European countries is improving, Japan is still in an 
economic recession. China may be the only place in the world 
enjoying high growth." With respect to the political situation 
and security, he noted: There are still conflicts in the former 
Yugoslavia and Somalia. We can say that problems requiring 
solutions are piling up. Japan plans to give economic support 
to the solution of these problems. He stressed: "Within the 
scope defined by the Constitution of Peace, Japan will 
contribute more to developing multilateral international 
cooperation. Meanwhile, Japan will make greater efforts to 
ensure that diversity is respected and the world becomes a more 
stable and prosperous place." 
  Hosokawa also described his family life at reporters' 
request. He said that the five members of his family are keenly 
interested in China, his wife has visited China nearly 10 times, 
and his youngest daughter is now touring Shanghai. He said he 
likes sports, but he has been too busy for sparetime activities 
since he became prime minister eight months ago. He joked: "I 
want to become a free man as early as possible!" 

