BFN 

  [Text] Brasilia, 21 Jun (AE) -- By 10 votes to one, the 
Federal Supreme Court (STF) has suspended Provisional Measure 
[MP] No. 524 on the conversion of school fees. Presidential 
Press Secretary Fernando Costa said that the government will 
respect the decision made by the STF, which declared 
unconstitutional the MP establishing the criteria by which 
school fees should be converted into URV's [real value units]. 
"The STF decision will be obeyed," he said. "But the government 
reserves its right to comment until the decree is published, in 
order to learn what led the STF justices to making this 
decision." 
  The STF decision, which upholds the petition for an 
injunction filed by the schools, shows that the objections made 
by Finance Ministry special adviser Jose Milton Dallari were 
correct. He was against the MP, which converted school fees 
based on the average of the previous four months' fees in real 
cruzeiros. Dallari recommended that the conversion be made 
based on the average fees in URV's, a criterion that is endorsed 
by the schools. His stance may cost him his post following the 
implementation of the real. 
  Dallari believed the text of the MP would generate a legal 
dispute that would end up favoring the schools, as it breaks the 
economic and financial balance of contracts. The STF decision 
demonstrates that he was right, despite the threats made by 
President Itamar Franco. Soon after the MP was issued, Dallari 
said that it would perhaps need some changes. Itamar became 
irritated and sent him a message through the newspapers: "Is 
Dallari the president?" 
  Dallari remained in his post only thanks to mediation by 
Finance Minister Rubens Ricupero in his favor before the 
president. All the same, Dallari is in a vulnerable position. 
The PSDB [Brazilian Social Democracy Party] presidential 
candidate and former finance minister, Fernando Henrique 
Cardoso, who appointed Dallari to his present post, was 
consulted on the subject. Cardoso recommended that Dallari 
remain, at least for the time being. 
  Following the conflict with Franco (the second one, as the 
first clash they had was over the conversion of rents), Dallari 
stopped talking with the media. He decided not to grant 
interviews, and his closest aides surrounded him to prevent him 
from being approached by reporters. From his isolation Dallari 
can celebrate the STF's decision, which confirmed his arguments 
against the MP. 

