Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Muhammad Sa'id al-Hasan report on interview with Dr. Ghazi </F>
Salah-al-Din, Sudanese minister of state for presidential 
affairs, in London; date not given] 
  [Text] Dr. Ghazi Salah-al-Din, Sudan's minister of state 
for presidential affairs, has revealed that his country has 
informed the presidents of the IGADD [Intergovernmental 
Authority on Drought and Development] states (Kenya, Uganda, 
Eritrea, and Ethiopia) that "hostile quarters" are making moves 
to prevent the Garang movement from negotiating with Khartoum. 
  In an interview with AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT, Salah-al-Din accused 
the Garang movement of turning into a separatist movement. In 
this connection he cited the Washington seminar held in October, 
which resulted in an agreement between the two wings of the 
Sudanese People's Liberation Movement on the demand for 
self-determination. 
  Salah-al-Din added that Sudanese President Lieutenant 
General 
'Umar al-Bashir had told leaders of the IGADD states that, 
despite his government's commitment to finding a peaceful 
solution to the southern Sudan problem, "there can be no talk of 
favorable conditions for peace talks in light of the rebel 
factions' adherence to the Washington document. Because it is a 
hostile document talking about pooling efforts not for the sake 
of peace, but for the sake of resisting the government and 
fighting it in the north. It also mentions the south's 
separation from the north, especially as this document assumes 
importance through a document backed by the United States, as 
the U.S. Administration participated in all debates and 
discussions between the two rebel factions, sometimes at the 
highest level and in the presence of U.S. Assistant Secretary of 
State George Moose. Besides, some of the two rebel factions' 
meetings were held inside the U.S. Department of State premises." 
  Asked about the chances of success for any future 
negotiations between the government and the Garang movement, 
Salah-al-Din said: "We believe that the factors pushing the 
peace process forward are stronger than the factors delaying 
peace, and that external factors are strong. 
  "At present peace prospects are better than before. First, 
because of all the parties' strong conviction. Second, because 
the rebels' dreams of liberating Sudan and establishing their 
imaginary state have collapsed." 
  Asked whether the government had proof of foreign 
intervention to obstruct peace efforts in southern Sudan, he 
said: We have clear evidence and proof. If we take the 
Washington seminar as an example, we will realize that the 
Washington document is hostile and conspiratorial toward Sudan. 
However, it has succeeded in one thing, namely shaking the 
cohesion of the so-called national [opposition] alliance or 
grouping. Immediately after the Washington seminar we saw that 
there were conflicting interpretations of the Washington 
document from the grouping's leaders. I also believe that the 
seminar has succeeded in sowing the seeds of suspicion and 
spreading confusion inside this group. 
  On the statement issued by the United States and in which it 
denied its intervention at official level in the Washington 
seminar, saying that it favors a cease-fire in order to 
alleviate the suffering in the south, Dr. Ghazi Salah-al-Din 
said: "We have been accustomed to the clarification of U.S. 
positions recently. In anything, it proves the confusion in U.S. 
foreign policy, not only with regard to Sudan, but to Somalia, 
Bosnia, and others as well. Our reply to these statements is 
that the attempt to give the impression that the U.S. Congress 
operates in complete isolation from the U.S. Administration is 
merely a U.S. theatrical show which cannot fool anyone. We know 
that Congress derives its stands and views from U.S. Department 
of State reports. This separation among U.S. institutions is 
designed to fool the simple and naive, but this trick cannot 
fool people." 
  He pointed out that the U.S. Administration had 
acknowledged that a representative of the U.S. Department of 
State had attended all negotiation sessions between the two 
factions of the Garang movement in Washington. And that Reik 
Mashar, leader of one of the two factions, issued a statement on 
the circumstances surrounding the nonsigning of the document, in 
which he said that a meeting was held in the U.S. Department of 
State premises on 22 October 1993 to persuade the two sides to 
sign the document. Salah-al-Din said that all this proves "the 
U.S. Department of State's involvement in the seminar and its 
results." 
  He added: "We believe that it is more useful for the U.S. 
Administration to correct its intentions and actions toward 
Sudan, because the march of history is stronger than us all." 
  On Sudanese-Egyptian relations, Salah-al-Din pointed to the 
distinctiveness of these relations. He said that "Sudan has 
spared no efforts to talk about this special characteristic. 
And when we talk about this special characteristic, we mean the 
inevitable improvement in relations with regard to the final 
outcome, regardless of the side effects here or there. It is 
known that a meeting was held between President Lt. Gen. 'Umar 
al-Bashir and President Husni Mubarak, during which they reached 
agreements, some of which have been implemented. The 
implementation of the other agreements has been delayed, but not 
because of us. This includes a meeting between the two foreign 
ministers in Sudan. It has been postponed three times, and we 
hope it will take place because, for our part, we have never 
hesitated to express good intentions. Over a period of a few 
months our foreign minister visited Cairo five times. And Lt. 
Gen. 'Umar al-Bashir too visited Cairo, and his deputy Major 
General al-Zubayr Muhammad Salih visited Cairo twice last year. 
This alone is sufficient to prove our intentions. And recently 
cordial statements were made by Egyptian officials regarding the 
Washington document, proving the Egyptian Government's interest 
in Sudanese territorial integrity -- which is good and positive. 
But we need more goodwill assurances vis-a-vis the Hala'ib 
issue, because the good statements concerning the Washington 
seminar tend to coincide with worrying statements on Hala'ib and 
its annexation as an electoral constituency and the 
establishment of construction projects in it." 
  As for relations with Libya, Salah-al-Din admitted that "the 
integration process has been hampered by some events and 
developments, not on our part or that of the jamahiriyah, but on 
the part of Western states which were unhappy to see a sensible 
experiment not based on slogans but, rather, on practical 
foundations. So they declared their embargo against the 
jamahiriyah, and they are toughening this embargo -- which has 
affected Libya's and Sudan's ability to communicate, even though 
our contacts with the brothers in Libya and the attempts to 
advance relations with it have not been interrupted. 
  And in this context, President al-Bashir visited Libya after 
the embargo was imposed, crossing deserts and seas. And Maj. 
Gen. al-Zubayr visited Libya twice. And the ministerial 
committee headed by Cabinet Affairs Minister Dr. 'Awad al-Jaz 
went to the joint ministerial committee's meetings in October. 

