BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed talk: "A Flunkeyist Nation-Selling Regime </F>
Following Its Master's Aggressive Policy"] 
  [Text] South Korea's Kim Yong-sam puppet regime is a 
flunkeyist nation-selling regime following the aggressive policy 
of the United States. As is known, recently traitor Kim 
Yong-sam talked about the prerogative of the supreme command of 
the military and so-called decisive power and babbled as if he 
was exercising some kind of sovereign rights. This is truly 
ridiculous. 
  The world officially recognizes the fact that the Kim 
Yong-sam puppet traitor pledged to serve the United States and 
is actively following in the master's aggressive and war policy 
while dancing according to their interest. 
  South Korea's HANGYORE SINMUN wrote that without protection 
from the United States, the Kim Yong-sam puppet ruling bunch 
cannot maintain their lives forever. That is so. The Kim 
Yong-sam puppet regime is a flunkeyist nation-selling regime 
which cannot exist even for a moment without the aggression, war 
policy, and protection of the United States. 
  The Kim Yong-sam ring, which entrusted its life to the U.S. 
master, is earnestly requesting their protection and begging for 
the perpetual occupation of South Korea by the U.S. Forces. 
Whenever they had the opportunity, the South Korean puppets 
beautified the U.S. Forces occupying South Korea as a deterrent 
power of war and as an apostle of peace. They are also 
unhesitatingly devoting billions of dollars every year for 
maintenance to hold on to the U.S. Forces. This is a treacherous 
act that can be conducted only by the pro-U.S. flunkeyist 
nation-sellers. 
  Moreover, the Kim Yong-sam puppet traitor recently even 
entrusted South Korea as a test place of a new U.S. military 
strategy and as a military spy base for espionage activities 
against the North. 
  As is well shown in the process of bringing in the Apache 
helicopter for offensive use and Patriot missiles into South 
Korea, the Kim Yong-sam puppets are all the more degrading South 
Korea into an exhibition hall and sales market of old and new 
war equipment, and are even playing to fill the stomachs of the 
complexes of the U.S. munitions industry. 
  As is such the case of the South Korean puppet regime, since 
it is a flunkeyist nation-selling regime in which its lifeline 
is in the hands of the United States, the tyranny by the 
aggressors is being all the more promoted. This all the more 
only brings about the result of degrading South Korea into a 
dangerous hotbed of a new war and nuclear war. 
  In South Korea, which has been under the exclusive military 
control of the U.S. imperialist aggressors, there is only an 
aggravated tense situation and a smell of a strong 
powder-reeking war. 
  Currently, the Kim Yong-sam puppet regime is running amok 
crazily to harm the fellow countrymen by borrowing the knives of 
outside forces. Under the manipulation of the U.S. 
imperialists, the South Korean puppets are all the more 
viciously carrying out commotion of confrontation opposing us by 
finding fault with our nuclear issue. The so-called North's 
nuclear issue is a product of the antisocialist and 
anti-Republic oppressive maneuver which is being persistently 
pursued by the U.S. imperialists. 
  The Kim Yong-sam puppet traitor is running amok to plot to 
harm and crush [apsal] us by advancing as a shock brigade of the 
nuclear commotion of the imperialist reactionaries. The Kim 
Yong-sam puppet traitor is begging to the U.S. master to no 
longer make compromises and is maneuvering in all directions to 
achieve the international cooperative system opposing us and 
realize sanctions. 
  One of the examples is that in November of last year, the 
Kim 
Yong-sam puppet visited the U.S. master and even devoted South 
Korea's rice market to the United States and begged to maintain 
the international cooperative system opposing us. Under the 
assumption of taking sanctions and carrying out a military 
attack against us, the Kim Yong-sam puppet traitor committed 
forces to the Rimpac joint war exercise from late May, in which 
the United States and Japan also participated. Also, for two 
weeks beginning 22 August Ulchi-Focus Lens, a joint military 
exercise of the U.S. imperialist aggressive forces and South 
Korean puppet forces, and in November, the Team Spirit joint 
military exercise, are scheduled to take place again. 
  All facts prove how much the Kim Yong-sam ring is running 
amok to commit military adventure opposing us by following the 
U.S. imperialists' aggression and war policy. Even though there 
were many nation-sellers in South Korea, there were by no means 
nation-sellers like traitor Kim Yong-sam who are running amok 
frantically to harm us by borrowing the power of outside forces. 
  The Kim Yong-sam puppet regime is truly a flunkeyist nation- 
selling treacherous group of the times, more so than the 
military dictators before him. If the Kim Yong-sam flunkeyist 
nation-selling regime remains in South Korea, which is trying to 
maintain the remainder of its dirty doomed life by depending on 
outside forces, the South Korean people will not be able to free 
themselves from the position of a colonial slave and the whole 
nation will not be able to avoid being covered with the calamity 
of a nuclear war as well. 
  The Kim Yong-sam flunkeyist nation-selling regime, which is 
bringing about a dark cloud of a nuclear war in the sacred 
territory of our fatherland by following the outside aggression 
and war policy, must be overthrown without fail. 

