BFN 

<F P=106> ["Full text" of speech delivered by Zhao Ziyang, then </F>
General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, at Fourth 
Plenary Session of the 13th CPC Central Committee in "late June 
1989" in Beijing] 
  [Text] Editor's note: On the eve of the fifth anniversary 
of the 4 June Incident, a source provided us with the full text 
of former CPC general secretary Zhao Ziyang's speech to the 
Fourth Plenary Session of the 13th CPC Central Committee in late 
June 1989 after he lost power. The speech was Zhao's 
self-criticism and defense of his behavior in handling the 
student unrest. We cannot seek official confirmation of the 
authenticity of the text; however, based on the reliability of 
the source and according to the conclusion of experienced 
experts on Chinese information, we think that the text is highly 
credible. 
  The text reveals the opinions of the top CPC authorities at 
the time on the mass demonstrations in Tiananmen Square as well 
as the mutual disagreements between party officials on the 
handling of the events. The impact of the 1989 pro-democracy 
movement on China can be seen in many areas, and the text can be 
taken as a footnote on the political storm's impact on the 
Beijing superstructure. [end editor's note] 
  The current Fourth Plenary Session of the 13th CPC Central 
Committee has taken disciplinary measures regarding my case. I 
welcome this criticism from my comrades. Over the past few 
years, there have been many shortcomings, mistakes, errors, and 
instances of incompetence in my work. I have failed to live up 
to the party, the people, and the comrades. Now, I just want to 
explain some of the facts surrounding my mistakes and make a 
self-criticism. 
<H5>  I </H5>
  First I would like to mention some facts concerning the 
student unrest and the turmoil and my state of mind at that time. 
  Ever since mid-April, as the student demonstrations grew 
ever 
larger, all I and everyone else wanted was to calm the situation 
as soon as possible. I have already said that I never agreed 
with the students' taking to the streets to stage demonstrations 
without making applications according to the stipulations of the 
laws; still less did I approve of class strikes or hunger 
strikes. I repeatedly called for solving the problems on the 
basis of democracy and the legal system. I also said that, even 
though demonstrations can be approved according to the law, 
school leaders and party organizations should still actively 
dissuade students from doing this and should try their best to 
guide them to express their opinions through regular channels or 
in other forms. My attitude in this regard was always explicit. 
  However, I also noticed two noteworthy characteristics in 
the 
student unrest. First, the students put forward slogans, such 
as supporting the Constitution, promoting democracy, and 
opposing corruption. These demands were basically in line with 
the position of the party and the government, and we could 
hardly turn them down. Second, a large number of people took 
part in the demonstrations or expressed support for the 
demonstrators, and they included people from all walks of life. 
Huge crowds of people took to the streets in Beijing. Under 
these circumstances, I thought that, in order to calm the 
situation, the first thing was to appease the vast majority of 
the people and affirm the mainstream. The enthusiasm of the 
broad masses of the students demanding reform and opposing 
corruption is a precious thing which should be fully affirmed. 
At the same time, we should accept the reasonable opinions of 
the masses and adopt positive rectification and correction 
measures. In this way we would calm the feelings of most people 
and enable the majority of the masses to understand and support 
the practice of the party and the government. It would then be 
easier to deal with the small number of evil people. 
  In connection with this idea, I also felt that there were 
some problems with the 26 April [RENMIN RIBAO] editorial. That 
is, the editorial did not affirm the mainstream formed by the 
vast majority of the people; instead, it concluded in general 
terms that the nature of the entire event was a contradiction 
between the enemy and ourselves, a conclusion which the majority 
of people could not accept. It was true that a very small 
number of people who opposed the four cardinal principles tried 
to fish in troubled waters. However, it is hard to justify the 
conclusion that the actions of hundreds of thousands of people 
were manipulated by a small number of people. The students 
maintained that the 26 April editorial attached a label to them, 
and they became rather emotional. Therefore, I proposed that 
some changes be made in the editorial to soften it a little. 
  My views were only expressed at the meetings of the central 
Standing Committee, and I only exchanged opinions with a small 
number of central leading comrades within this circle. At that 
moment, I thought that whether my views were correct was one 
thing, but whether I should express them was a different matter 
altogether. In any case, I thought that my views should be 
expressed at the Standing Committee meeting, and just expressing 
them would not be a problem. Of course, everyone else became 
aware of this issue later, and they gradually changed the 
wording and tone of their speeches and also made statements to 
affirm the patriotic enthusiasm of the students. I felt that, 
if these words had been written into the 26 April editorial and 
if the editorial had not branded the entire event as a 
contradiction between the enemy and ourselves, then most people 
would not have been so infuriated. With our additional efforts, 
the event might not have become as serious as it did. This was 
my thinking at the time. 
  In short, I thought that the actions of the broad masses 
of young students and their many sympathizers in society should 
be strictly distinguished from those of an extremely small 
number of people who tried to use the student unrest to fish in 
troubled waters, create disturbances, and attack the party and 
socialism. I thought that the student unrest as a whole should 
not be regarded in general terms as an antagonistic 
contradiction between the enemy and ourselves ("a premeditated 
plot," "in essence, it was aimed at thoroughly negating the 
party's leadership and the socialist system.") [quotations from 
the 26 April RENMIN RIBAO editorial] I thought that we should 
have primarily used the methods of persuasion and guidance to 
avoid intensifying the contradiction and calm the situation as 
soon as possible. This was the main point of my different 
opinion. 
  I would like to explain one more thing. I never objected to 
using the term "turmoil." I thought, however, that "turmoil" 
should only refer to the scale of the student unrest and its 
impact on the public order, not to the character of the event, 
which could have been either spontaneous or antagonistic. I 
touched on this point at the Standing Committee meeting on 16 
May. 
<H5>  II </H5>
  I have carefully reviewed my actions during the student 
unrest and turmoil in order to find out what I did correctly and 
what I did improperly or incorrectly. 
  First, before the memorial ceremony to mourn the death of 
Comrade Hu Yaobang, there were no differences within the 
Standing Committee -- or at least there were no major 
differences. Of course, with tens of thousands of students 
gathering in Tiananmen Square, everybody felt rather nervous and 
anxious. At the time, I thought that the crowds probably fell 
into three categories. The vast majority of the people just 
wanted to mourn the death of Comrade Yaobang; some people were 
expressing their unhappiness with our work; and only a small 
number of people were trying to aggravate the situation in order 
to oppose the party and socialism. I said that the party 
central body is in charge of the funeral arrangements, and the 
students also wanted to express their sorrow over the death, so 
we could not prohibit them from mourning as well. Therefore, I 
said: Only those who engaged in illegal activities such as 
beating, smashing, looting, arson, and storming government 
buildings should be punished according to law, and mild and 
moderate methods should be used to deal with the majority of the 
people. I remember that, at that time, nobody raised any 
objection to this idea. The only thing that happened before the 
memorial meeting was on the evening of 19 April, when Comrade Li 
Peng telephoned me, saying that students were storming the 
Xinhua Gate [where the party center and government are located] 
and asking why nothing was being done. I said that Comrade Qiao 
Shi was in charge on the front lines, and he would cope with any 
contingency, as he had taken precautionary measures. Then I 
called Comrade Qiao Shi and told him. Aside from this, I do not 
recall hearing any disagreement from the Standing Committee 
members. 
  Second, after the end of the memorial meeting, I expressed a 
three-point opinion: 1) As the memorial activities have come to 
an end, social life should return to normal. The students 
should be resolutely dissuaded from staging any demonstrations 
and should be urged to return to their studies. 2) The method 
of persuasion and guidance should be used toward the students. 
We should open dialogue with them at various levels, in various 
forms, and through various channels in order to increase 
communications and mutual understanding. 3) Bloodshed must be 
avoided at all costs. If any instances of beating, smashing, 
looting, arson, or storming take place, those involved should be 
brought to justice according to the law. Comrade Li Peng and 
other members of the Standing Committee expressed their 
agreement. I was later told that Comrade Li Peng reported the 
three-point opinion to Comrade Xiaoping, and Comrade Xiaoping 
also expressed his approval. On the afternoon of 23 April, I 
left Beijing and began my visit to Korea. When seeing me off at 
the railway station, Comrade Li Peng asked me whether I had any 
other ideas, and I simply reaffirmed the three points. 
  Third, as I was not in Beijing between 24 April and the 
morning of 30 April, I am not very clear about what actually 
happened during this period. On the morning of 26 April, in 
Korea, I read the telexed texts of Comrade Xiaoping's talk and 
the minutes of the Standing Committee meeting (The RENMIN RIBAO 
editorial of 26 April was not telexed to me at that time). I 
immediately sent a reply, saying that "I completely agree with 
Comrade Xiaoping's decision on dealing with the current 
turmoil." As I understood it, the general spirit of Comrade 
Xiaoping's decision was to maintain stability and stop the 
turmoil. This is extremely important for our country. We 
should do our utmost to ensure this at any time, whether in the 
past, at present, or in the future. 
  Fourth, when the speech I delivered on 3 May at the rally 
in commemoration of the 4 May Movement was vetted by members of 
the Political Bureau and the Central Secretariat, many comrades 
expressed their opinions on revising the draft. We then revised 
the speech script in some places according to these views. In 
my memory, only two comrades proposed that "opposing bourgeois 
liberalization" be added to the speech, and one comrade proposed 
that the speech should mention "opposing spiritual pollution." 
At that time, I thought that, as the speech fully expounded the 
need to adhere to the four cardinal principles, it was 
unnecessary to add the phrase of "opposing bourgeois 
liberalization," as the term itself meant opposing the four 
cardinal principles. Stylistically speaking, the speech was 
aimed at positively expounding the significance of the 4 May 
Movement, and adding the phrase of "opposing bourgeois 
liberalization" to the speech would make the text less coherent 
and smooth. Therefore, the suggestion of the two comrades was 
not included. In the process of revising drafts of speeches, we 
have never been able to incorporate everybody's opinions. 
  Fifth, my speech on 4 May to the people attending the annual 
meeting of the Asian Development Bank [ADB] sought to promote 
the subsiding of the student unrest and strengthen foreign 
investors' confidence in China's stability. After the speech, 
the initial reactions were favorable, and, at the time, I was 
not aware of any problem. Comrade Li Peng also told me that me 
speech was good. He would make similar remarks when he later 
met the delegates to the ADB meeting. The tone of the speech 
was mild, and I did not think that this contradicted our 
previous position. Before I returned home from Korea, the 
second RENMIN RIBAO editorial (on 29 April) approved by Comrade 
Li Peng had already adopted a milder tone. During the dialogue 
authorized by the State Council, the spokesman also made it 
clear that the first editorial (on 26 April) was not aimed at 
the vast majority of the students. He repeatedly affirmed that 
99.9 percent of the students were good, and said that some of 
the problems pointed out by the students were things that the 
government wants to resolve. My speech on 4 May just made 
special reference to these points and its tone was completely 
consistent with the authorities' earlier statements. As I 
already mentioned some other points in my speech on 3 May (such 
as the issue of opposing turmoil), I did not repeat them on 4 
May. There were only two new points in my speech on 4 May. 
First, I said that the masses were satisfied with some aspects 
of the party and the government but were dissatisfied with some 
other aspects. I still think that this analysis was in line 
with the actual situation at that time. Second, I said that the 
problems should be resolved in a calm, sensible, restrained, and 
orderly atmosphere and on the basis of democracy and the legal 
system, and I still think that we should strive to solve 
problems in this way when we encounter any problems like this in 
the future. According to the response from all quarters, the 
effect of my speech was rather positive at the time. It is true, 
as some comrades later criticized, that my speech was not 
discussed by the Standing Committee in advance. However, our 
general practice was that speeches made by central leaders when 
meeting foreign visitors (except those concerning any official 
agreements) were not necessarily discussed by the Standing 
Committee beforehand. In general, we prepare these remarks 
ourselves in accordance with the established policies. When 
Comrade Li Peng met with the delegates attending the ADB meeting 
next day (on 5 May), his speech was not be discussed by the 
Standing Committee beforehand either, and the tone of his speech 
was quite similar to mine. In any case, my speech caused 
certain speculation which went beyond my expectations. If I had 
been more prudent and anticipated such problems, I might not 
have made that speech. 
  Sixth, I would like to talk about the 8 May Standing 
Committee meeting and the 10 May Political Bureau meeting. 
After the student demonstrations on 27 April, the students 
insisted that we change the conclusion about the nature of their 
activities as laid down in the 26 April editorial. I felt 
rather embarrassed. At the time, I tried to dodge that issue 
and first accomplish a number of good things to counter 
corruption and promote democracy so that the masses might see 
that we were actually making efforts as they hoped. In this way 
we could have gradually calmed down the situation. After 
everybody's tempers had cooled, it would be easier to achieve a 
consensus. Therefore, at the two meetings, I proposed that we 
submit a report on screening business companies to the Standing 
Committee of the National People's Congress [NPC], make public 
the personal property and income of senior cadres, to only 
provide special supplies for retired leaders aged over 80 years 
(or 75 years), and let the NPC Standing Committee organize a 
special committee to carry out independent investigations of 
complaints against senior cadres or their family members. 
(Comrade Wan Li, being more careful than I was in considering 
this issue, proposed that an authoritative Anticorruption 
Committee be set up within the NPC Standing Committee). On the 
basis of extensive discussion, it was decided that the press law 
and the demonstrations law could be enacted. My proposal was 
only mentioned briefly at the meetings of the Standing Committee 
and the Political Bureau so that it might be discussed in detail 
in the future. No official decision was made at that time. My 
basic purpose was to take anticorruption as an important element 
in our political structural reform and link anticorruption 
closely with democracy, the legal system, openness, 
transparency, mass supervision, and mass participation. On the 
morning of 13 May, when Comrade Shangkun and I went to see 
Comrade Xiaoping and report to him about our work, I told him 
about my idea. Comrade Xiaoping expressed his agreement and said 
that this opportunity should be used to properly solve the 
problem of corruption and that it is necessary to increase 
transparency. 
  Seventh, I would like to address the issue of my talks 
with Gorbachev. After the 13th party congress, on many 
occasions when meeting principal leaders of foreign parties, I 
told them that the First Plenary Session of the 13th CPC Central 
Committee had made a decision reaffirming that Comrade 
Xiaoping's status as the primary decisionmaker in our party did 
not change. My purpose was to make the world more clearly 
understand that Comrade Xiaoping's status in our party had not 
changed since his withdrawal from the Standing Committee. This 
was legal according to the organizational rules. During my visit 
to Korea, I also said this to Chairman Kim Il-sung. Thus, what I 
told Gorbachev was in keeping with the usual practice; however, 
the problem was that, this time, my statements were reported 
publicly. After returning from Korea, I was told that, after 
Comrade Xiaoping's remarks on the student unrest had received 
broad dissemination, there was much discussion in society. 
People said that the Standing Committee members's report to 
Comrade Xiaoping was not in keeping with the organizational 
rules, and even harsher criticisms were expressed. I felt that 
it was necessary for me to clarify and explain this. 
  Some people also mentioned this issue at a discussion 
meeting 
with some trade union cadres two days before Gorbachev's visit. 
At that time, I made an explanation according to the decision 
made by the First Plenary Session of the 13th CPC Central 
Committee, and this achieved good results. They said that we 
were not aware of this in the past, and it was good that the 
issue had been clarified. (Comrades Qiao Shi, Hu Qili, and Yan 
Mingfu were all present). Before that, in view of some people's 
mistaken comments about "holding court from behind a screen," 
Comrade Chen Xitong also gave an explanation on the comrades 
responsible for the work in universities and colleges. The 
explanation of the decision solemnly made by the First Plenary 
Session of the 13th CPC Central Committee always achieved 
positive results. Comrade Chen Xitong also mentioned this when 
delivering a work report to the Standing Committee meeting on 28 
April. Therefore, I thought that, if this was reported 
publicly, the masses would learn about it, and this might reduce 
people's uncalled-for criticisms. At that time, I told Comrade 
Gorbachev that the First Plenum of the 13th CPC Central 
Committee had made a solemn decision that Comrade Deng Xiaoping 
would still be at the helm for the most important issues. After 
the 13th party congress, when handling the most important 
issues, we always reported to Comrade Deng Xiaoping and asked 
for his instructions. (I purposefully did not mention that he 
could call meetings and have the final say.) Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping also always gave full support to our work and supported 
our collective decisions. In my view, these words would not 
give people the idea that everything was decided by Deng 
Xiaoping. I really could not imagine that such remarks would in 
turn harm Comrade Xiaoping. I am willing to bear all 
responsibility for this. 
  Eighth, I would like to discuss the meeting the Standing 
Committee held on the evening of 16 May. After returning from 
Korea, I heard strong reactions against the 26 April editorial 
from various quarters, and this had become a thorny problem 
affecting the feelings of the students. At that time, I 
considered whether we could untie the knot in order to calm the 
students' emotions. On 4 May, I told Comrade Li Peng about my 
views on the editorial. Comrade Li Peng expressed his 
disagreement, so I felt that it would be very very difficult to 
make any change. Then I spoke with Comrade Shangkun. I thought 
that we might first sidestep this thorny problem and play down 
the seriousness of the issue. At that time, Comrade Xiaoping 
was concentrating on the upcoming meeting with Gorbachev, and I 
could not disturb him with this issue. So I first told some 
comrades who were working with Comrade Xiaoping. I also 
exchanged opinions separately with other comrades in the 
Standing Committee in order to slowly make the change. On 13 
May, however, several hundred students began their hunger 
strike, and one of their major demands was to change the 
conclusion of the editorial. I felt that things were getting 
more serious, and it was then impossible to sidestep that issue 
any more. So I mention the matter at the meeting of the 
Standing Committee on the evening of 16 May (which was the first 
time I mentioned it at an official meeting). Comrade Li Peng 
said that such words as "this was a premeditated plot," "a round 
of turmoil," "in essence, it was aimed at thoroughly negating 
the leadership of the CPC and the socialist system," and "this 
is a round of serious political struggle that the whole party 
and the entire people of the whole nation are facing" were all 
the remarks uttered by Comrade Xiaoping, so they must not be 
changed. At that time, I did not agree with this argument, 
because I thought that the editorial should be written primarily 
according to the spirit of the meeting of the Standing Committee 
on 24 April. Comrade Xiaoping's words were made after listening 
to the report of the Standing Committee chaired by Comrade Li 
Peng. As Comrade Xiaoping always gave full support to the 
Standing Committee's work, as long as the decision was made 
collectively by the Standing Committee, he would certainly 
support it. Therefore, this responsibility should primarily be 
borne by ourselves. At the Standing Committee meeting on the 
evening of 16 May, I also said that, as I had sent a telegram 
from Korea to express my agreement with Comrade Xiaoping's 
decision, I should also bear responsibility for the 26 April 
editorial. At that time, I only asked the other Standing 
Committee members to consider my opinion, and did not require 
that a decision be made. As it was then too late, the issue was 
not further discussed. 
  Ninth, on 17 May, at a Standing Committee meeting held at 
Comrade Xiaoping's place, I was criticized by Comrade Li Peng 
and Comrade Yao Yilin, who put all the blame on my speech at the 
ADB annual meeting on 4 May for the escalation of the student 
unrest. The severeness of their criticisms went beyond my 
expectations. That meeting also reaffirmed the conclusion of the 
26 April editorial on the character of the events, and the 
decision to transfer troops to Beijing to enforce martial law. 
I said that it was better to make a decision than make no 
decision, but I was extremely worried that serious consequences 
might be caused. It would be extremely difficult for me to 
effectively organize the implementation of this decision. I 
expressed my concern frankly at a party meeting. After the 
meeting, I repeatedly considered this, and feared that because 
of the limitation of my consciousness and the condition of my 
thoughts, the resolute implementation of the Standing 
Committee's decision would be affected. When I was rather 
impatient and emotional, I expressed my hope to resign. After 
Comrade Shangkun learned about this, he immediately dissuaded 
me, and said that if I resigned, the sentiments of the masses 
would be further aroused. He said that members of the Standing 
Committee should still be able to continue to work together. I 
repeatedly considered Comrade Shangkun's sincere advice and felt 
that his words were correct. In those circumstances, no matter 
what happened, I must not do anything embarrassing to the party. 
So my resignation letter was not issued. However, the 
development of events still seriously upset me. On 18 May, I 
wrote a letter to Comrade Xiaoping, asking him to reconsider my 
opinion. I also telephoned Comrade Shangkun, asking him to give 
some explanation to Comrade Xiaoping. I felt that no matter 
what happened, it was still permissible to express my dissenting 
opinion inside the party. Being general secretary, if I did not 
express my dissenting opinion, it would just be irresponsible. 
In retrospect, although I did not issue the resignation letter, 
I actually had an idea about resignation. Against the 
background then, this was incorrect and improper. 
  Tenth, about calling on the hunger striking students in 
Tiananmen Square on the early morning of 19 May. On the third 
day after the students began their hunger strike, I planned to 
see them, but I failed to do so for various reasons after that, 
although I expressed this wish many times. On 19 May, the 
hunger strike entered its seventh day, and deaths might have 
occurred among the hunger strikers. The event came to a 
critical moment. People inside and outside the party required 
that Comrade Li Peng and I go to the square to persuade the 
students, and such petitions poured into our offices like 
snowflakes. The masses also expressed strong discontent at the 
fact that we had not gone to do this persuading for a long time. 
Some comrades said that if Premier Zhou was still alive, he 
would have certainly gone among the masses. I felt that if we 
still did not go out, we would not be able to justify ourselves 
before the people. At that time, I was very sick, but I still 
made up my mind to go to see the students. Their hunger strike 
had lasted seven days. In those circumstances, what else could 
we do if we did not personally persuade them to stop the hunger 
strike by showing our true feelings toward them? After we 
called on them, the students became less emotional, and 
announced the end of their hunger strike at 2100 that same day. 
I cannot say that what I said to them played any great role, 
but at least this did not produce any negative effects. After 
returning from the trip to see the students, I felt that my 
illness became more serious. 
  Eleventh, about my absence from the meeting on the evening 
of 
19 May. I want to explain here about that night I asked for 
sick leave from the Standing Committee. Comrade Qiao Shi also 
announced this at the meeting. My letter asking for sick leave 
was issued before the notice to hold the meeting was issued. 
That is, I asked for sick leave before I received notice of the 
meeting. That day, I felt dizzy at first, suffered headaches, 
and found it hard to stand firmly; in the evening, I suffered a 
heart attack. This was a fact. I asked for three days of sick 
leave. After my sick leave expired, I no longer had any work to 
do. I was no longer allowed to attend any meetings. And I did 
not know about anything later. 
  What I have mentioned above shows that I just tried to ease 
the confrontation with the students during the unrest and the 
turmoil in order to win over the vast majority of the students 
and to gradually calm down the student unrest. I was deeply 
worried about adopting tough measures before the contradiction 
with most people had been mitigated, and especially about the 
use of force, which would inevitably cause conflict and 
blood-letting and would lead to the aggravation of events. Even 
though the student unrest had calmed down, major effects would 
remain. Now, it seemed that this was just my wishful thinking, 
which was not realistic enough. Even if any concession was made 
with regard to the conclusion of the 26 April editorial, the 
contradiction might not be mitigated, and new troubles and 
problems might still arise one after another. Eventually, the 
intensification of the contradiction would still be inevitable. 
  Recently, Comrade Xiaoping made a very important speech, 
which profoundly enlightened me. He said: The occurrence of 
the storm was not determined by any people's wishes, and was the 
inevitable result of the international macroclimate and the 
domestic microclimate. He also said that it was better that it 
happened earlier than later. If we view things from this high 
plain, my thoughts and worry were certainly uncalled for. In 
those days, I really did not reach such a high plain of thinking 
and did not have such insight. I am willing to further give 
consideration to this issue through studying Comrade Xiaoping's 
speech. 
  III 
  As far as mistakes and shortcomings in economic work and 
responsibilities for these are concerned, Comrade Xiaoping has 
talked about the issue, and Comrade Li Peng has touched on it 
too. 
  My attitude is that all the shortcomings in economic work 
from my assuming office at the State Council until the Third 
Plenary Session of the 13th CPC Central Committee, should mainly 
be placed on me. Before the draft of the report to be delivered 
at the 1989 NPC session was submitted to the Political Bureau 
for discussion, Comrade Li Peng had sent a copy to me to solicit 
my opinion. I noticed that this draft report had repeatedly 
used the wording "for many years" when referring to the causes 
of faults. So I proposed applying an analytical approach to 
evaluating the issues which had arisen over the past few years. 
For example, the scale of capital construction projects covered 
by the budget had been brought under control by 1985, but what 
were not under control were those not covered by the budget. It 
does not tally with the facts if we blame everything on our 
being too anxious for success in reform. Having heard what I 
said, Comrade Li Peng said: Then let us place the focus on the 
issues we faced in 1988. Since this is an annual work report by 
the present government, he said it was acceptable that these 
issues from previous years should not be mentioned in it. I had 
no objection to this. Some comrades criticized me for not 
allowing Comrade Li Peng to talk in the report about the 
mistakes made in the past few years, and they said I was 
shirking the blame for mistakes in the past few years by blaming 
Comrade Li Peng. I must say that this is not true. Never have 
I had such intentions. 
  The economic situation had been generally good and the 
economy had been full of vigor before 1987, which was due to 
reform and opening up. We have achieved a great success in the 
economic work over the past few years, but we have committed 
quite a few mistakes and faults as well. As the principal 
person-in-charge of working on the front line, I should take the 
responsibility for such faults. We have failed to bring the 
scale of capital construction under control over the past few 
years, and so far we have not yet found any way to keep the 
scale of extra-budgetary capital construction projects and the 
amount of consumption funds, which are growing at too high a 
speed, under effective control. Comrades Xiaoping, Chen, 
Xiannian, and Peng Zhen have all reminded us of the agriculture 
problem. But for quite a long time, we have not really taken 
any effective measures to deal with it until the meeting on 
agriculture last year. The responsibility for all these faults 
should be laid on me. 
  Before 1988, our country had never experienced any 
substantial inflation. Of course, some factors that could have 
possibly aggravated inflation had been growing during that 
period. The direct cause of the remarkable inflation last year 
was that our evaluation of the situation the year before last 
had been too optimistic. So, while commodity prices were 
tending to become unstable, we planned to initiate another round 
of commodity price reform, publicizing the price reform and 
propagandizing the price decontrol plan. This in turn caused 
panic among the public and encouraged a strong psychological 
expectation of price hikes among consumers. Every country which 
has had experience with the commodity economy has set great 
store by this sort of issue. Unfortunately, we were not well 
aware of it at that time. People have had too high a 
psychological expectation of price increases, whereas we, on our 
part, did not raise interest rates on deposits in good time to 
ensure the preservation of the value of savings. Consequently, a 
tide of panic purchases resulted. What was particularly 
dreadful was that this resulted in a drastic decrease in savings 
and thus a shortage of funds at bank's disposal. So banks were 
forced to issue more banknotes. I now focus on these things, 
which occurred in 1988, because I am trying to make a correct 
analysis of the factors contributing to them. Never did I mean 
to shift the blame. Anyway, I should bear the principal 
responsibility for these mistakes made in 1988. 
  By the way, I would like to mention another issue. In the 
report he delivered on behalf of the four standing committee 
members, Comrade Li Peng criticized me for encouraging party and 
government organs and service units to strive to "earn more 
income," without giving any analysis and without considering the 
objective possibility. His criticism does not tally with the 
facts. Back in the first half of last year, I did phone Comrade 
Jiang Zemin, urging Shanghai to stop the practice of allowing 
party and government organs to set up companies with a view to 
"earning more income." The report also criticized me for 
repeatedly stating that "corruption is inevitable at the initial 
stage of socialism." I just cannot remember where I made such a 
statement. Since I raised the point in Guangdong early last 
year that "party and government organs must be honest in 
performing official duties," I began to realize the importance 
of curbing corruption and promoting honesty. Since then, I have 
talked many times about the prevention of corruption and the 
promotion of honesty. I said that many countries' experience 
shows that corrupt phenomena can easily arise in the early 
period of the development of a commodity economy. But our 
country, as a socialist country, should and can minimize 
corruption to the minimum. Therefore I put forth the principle 
of "keeping the economy prosperous and promoting honesty among 
party and government organs." Of course, how to prevent 
corruption and maintain honesty is a complicated issue. 
Although the secretariat did call special meetings and forums 
to study the issue and to sum up experiences gained in some 
areas, so far we have not yet found any effective method to 
check corruption under the conditions of reform and opening up. 
If someone should be blamed for this, then, again, I should be 
the one to bear the blame. 
  IV 
  Comrades have now criticized me a lot on the issue of 
opposing bourgeois liberalization. Here, I want to tell you 
about my thoughts on this issue. 
  Since the beginning of opening, some intellectuals have 
begun 
to doubt the superiority of the socialist system and have tried 
to copy the Western system of democracy. In particular, such 
ideological trends spread among some young teachers and 
students. The seriousness of the recent student unrest is 
inseparable from such ideological trends. Over the past few 
years, the work of opposing bourgeois liberalization has not 
been effective. Efforts in party building and 
ideological-political work were relaxed. I bear a major 
responsibility for the existence of all of these problems. 
  I often considered this issue and felt that this was not a 
simple issue. We actually need to seriously study and solve the 
issue of how to effectively resist and oppose the ideological 
trend of bourgeois liberalization. It is of great importance to 
oppose the ideology of bourgeois liberalization, to strengthen 
education in the four cardinal principles, and to strengthen 
ideological and political work. I have often stressed this 
point in the past. In particular, before this, I made some 
speeches on strengthening party building, strengthening 
ideological-political work, strengthening situation education, 
and strengthening theoretical research. I also called for the 
need to use both hands to grasp work on many occasions in 
accordance with the spirit of Comrade Xiaoping's speeches. That 
is, while using one hand to grasp the work of developing the 
socialist planned commodity economy, we should also use the 
other hand to grasp work in the ideological and political 
realms. Of course, generally speaking, I still did not make 
sufficient efforts in this regard. In particular, the work did 
not achieve solid results. As Comrade Xiaoping pointed out, one 
hand was tough, but the other hand was soft. I should bear 
major responsibility for this. 
  In this period, I felt that a rather complicated issue was 
how to conduct ideological-political work and how to achieve 
more satisfactory results in this regard. I often heard that 
the old methods of education would not achieve marked results, 
and might even arouse people's repugnance. I gave much 
consideration to this issue, but failed to properly solve it. 
At the same time, I also felt that ideological education alone 
was not enough. In order to make people thoroughly understand 
which is superior, socialism or capitalism, in the final 
analysis, people should draw their own conclusions from their 
own experiences and personally feel the superiority of 
socialism. Therefore, we need to successfully carry out reform 
and rapidly develop socialist democracy according to our 
national conditions. After April 1987, Comrade Xiaoping said 
many times: "The struggle against bourgeois liberalization is a 
long-term struggle and is also a prolonged process of education. 
We cannot launch political movement, but should successfully 
carry out reform and develop the economy, thus demonstrating the 
superiority of the socialist system. Practice will convince 
people who doubt the socialist system." I completely agree with 
these viewpoints of Comrade Xiaoping. 
  Reform includes reform of the economic structure and reform 
of the political structure, which are interrelated and interact. 
It now seems that, apart from economic structural reform and 
economic development, socialism should also demonstrates its 
superiority in the political structure and in the aspect of 
democracy. In practice, I have more and more deeply realized 
that reform of the political structure can neither surpass nor 
lag economic structural reform; instead, they should basically 
advance at the same pace. If political reform lags behind, it 
is hard to carry on economic reform and various social and 
political contradictions will arise. In the past, I thought 
that as long as economic structural reform was successful and 
the economy developed, then the people's living standards would 
be enhanced and the people would be satisfied and society would 
be stable. I later found that this was not the case in reality. 
With the enhancement of the people's living standards and 
cultural attainments, they will have a stronger sense of 
political participation and will long for democracy more 
strongly. If ideological education cannot keep pace and if the 
construction of democracy and the legal system cannot keep pace, 
social stability will still not be guaranteed. Last December, I 
said at a meeting of the armed forces that facts in many 
countries show that economic development did not automatically 
make people satisfied and contented and did not automatically 
bring about social stability. I think that this raises two 
questions for us: First, it is necessary to constantly use both 
hands to grasp work and we must not neglect work in the 
ideological and political fields. Second, reform of the 
political structure must keep pace, and, in particular, 
construction of socialist democracy and the socialist legal 
system must keep pace. 
  V 
  I have no objection to the proposal to relieve me of all 
offices, as mentioned by Comrade Li Peng in his report, but I 
have reservations on the two charges of "supporting turmoil" and 
"splitting the party." 
  Actually, I expressed my different opinion on the method of 
handling the student unrest at a party meetings within the scope 
allowed by the party constitution. No matter whether my opinion 
was feasible and effective or not, my opinion was aimed at 
calming down the turmoil. I never expressed any opinion 
supporting the turmoil. 
  In reality, the expansion of the student unrest and turmoil 
could not be attributed to support from me. In fact, the 
student unrest and turmoil continued to worsen and escalate 
rapidly between 23 and 30 April. During this period, I was not 
at home. Comrade Li Peng said in his report that it was my 
speech at the ADB annual meeting which caused the turmoil to 
escalate. In fact, after my speech, colleges reported the 
resumption of classes one after another. This shows that the 
charge against me was untrue. At that time, all newspapers in 
the capital carried the same report. At least, this shows that 
my speech did not cause the escalation of student unrest. After 
martial law was enforced on 19 May, I did not perform any 
official functions and did not make any speeches. It is more 
than unreasonable to put the blame for the escalation of the 
turmoil on me. It is also unjustifiable to say that the 
development of events was caused by my absence from the meeting 
on 19 May because I asked for sick leave. 
  As for the issue of splitting the party, what is behavior of 
splitting the party? There have been precedents in the history 
of the party, and there is also a definition in the "Norms on 
Inner-Party Political Life." Our party has never regarded the 
expression of different opinions at party meetings or even the 
reservation of different opinions as behavior of splitting the 
party. 
  In their opening speeches, leaders sometimes stress 
different 
points or use different tones. This causes various comments 
among the people. Such phenomena arise frequently, and also 
cannot be called an action of splitting the party. In his 
report, Comrade Li Peng accused me of not mentioning the 26 
April editorial in my speech at the ADB meeting and also accused 
me of saying that "no major turmoil will arise in China" when 
turmoil had occurred. However, Comrade Li Peng himself also did 
not mention the 26 April editorial in his speech to the ADB the 
next day, and he also said that China would strive to "prevent 
turmoil." In my view, on different occasions, speeches may 
stress different points and use different wording. Thus, there 
may be some variance in the means of expression, and some 
improper or even erroneous way of expression may occur. 
However, all this cannot be exaggerated as "splitting the 
party." Still less can my absence from the meeting on 19 May 
after asking for sick leave be regarded as "splitting the party." 
  In addition, some institutions were called my "brain 
trusters" or my "brain trust." Because some people in these 
institutions took to the streets and took part in the 
demonstrations or gave public speeches, it seems they had 
certain relations with me. I must make it clear that there were 
no such "brain trusters" or "brain trusts." When I was working 
with the State Council, I sometimes discussed some theoretical 
economic issues with some people. People attending the 
discussion came from various institutions, and sometimes also 
from those institutions mentioned. Apart from those 
discussions, I had no connection with those institutions at all, 
and they were not directly managed by me. They had their own 
subordinate relations. It is false to call them my "brain 
trusts." This would also add unnecessary burdens to those 
institutions. 
  Since the party constitution stipulates that party members 
have the right to express their opinions on disciplinary 
measures against them, today I mainly express my appeal against 
the above-mentioned two charges against me and hope that my 
opinion will be properly considered. 

