Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Zhu Baoxia: "State Plans for a Green China"] </F>
  [Text] The government will implement a five-year 
environmental clean-up plan in pursuit of a "Green China", the 
National Environmental Protection Work Conference was told 
yesterday. 
  Industrial waste treatment will be improved and biological 
diversity will be protected. 
  Legislation will be hurried through to oversee the 
production 
of materials which deplete the ozone layer and control the trade 
in poisonous chemicals. 
  And international environmental conventions will be 
respected 
by the plan. 
  The measures for cleaning up an ever more polluted China are 
part of a National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) 
programme which will run up to 1998. 
  The World Bank, the Asia Development Bank and global 
environmental foundations will be asked to help finance domestic 
waste control projects. 
  And legislation for the control of waste transfer across 
borders will be introduced. 
  Nature reserves will be expanded to cover 8 per cent of 
China's total land area under NEPA plans to protect biological 
diversity. 
  About 80 per cent of the country's industrial waste water 
will be treated by 1998. At the moment only about 68 per cent 
is being treated. 
  And five year targets have been set for the treatment of 
industrial waste gas and solid refuse. 
  Nearly 88 per cent of gas will be treated, compared to the 
current 79 per cent. And 45 per cent of solid waste will be 
processed by 1998, compared to 1993's figure of just under 40 
per cent. 
  A pilot project to develop environment-friendly agriculture 
in 50 counties will be run by NEPA in co-ordination with seven 
State departments. 
  Local governments will use a carrot and stick approach to 
tighten up on the treatment of industrial pollutants. 
  Waste discharge licences will be necessary, and 
"environmental symbols" will be awarded to pollution-free 
products. 
  The country's environment has become a lot worse over the 
last few years, especially in the mushrooming cities, according 
to the Nepa report. 
  It is hoped that implementation of the programme will 
prevent 
further environmental deterioration and lead to a clean, 
beautiful and pollution-free China. 
  Environmental pollution and ecological damage have impeded 
China's reforms and hindered its foreign relations. 
  Products and facilities that consume excessive energy or 
poison the environment will be banned. 
  Nepa will regularly update the public on the environment. 
And 10 model ecology projects will be built. 
  The central government also plans to launch a "Green China" 
programme to crack down on industrial and urban pollution. 
  China's environment has suffered from the economic boom. In 
some places, energy and raw material have been consumed with 
complete disregard for environmental damage. 
  And there is widespread ignorance of State laws and 
regulations on environmental protection. 
  Some local governments just don't have the clout to enforce 
the current safeguards, according to Nepa. 
  NEPA warned that the coming five ears are crucial for the 
country if it is to establish adequate environmental protection 
for the 21st century. 

