Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS analyst Andrey Palaria] </F>
  [Text] Moscow March 2 TASS -- The recent arrest of a 
British secret agent, who held a high-ranking position in 
Russia's military industrial complex, clearly indicated that 
Western special services did not intend to scale down their 
intelligence activities in Russia. 
  Not many details are available so far for obvious reasons. 
Thus, the name of the exposed spy is not given, the same as the 
duration of his work for MI-6. But even the smallest pieces of 
information available show that a serious damage could be caused 
to Russia, because the data conveyed by the SIS agent concerned 
the latest developments in building various arms systems, their 
tactical technical parameters, funding of defence-related 
activities, the present condition and prospects for military 
technical cooperation between Russia and foreign countries. 
  Last year, 20 foreign special agents were brought to trial 
in 
Russia. The arrest of another spy spotlit an extremely thorny 
problem, that of reliable protection of our secrets. This 
problem is not new, but it calls for serious consideration and 
solution, taking into account the increasing shift towards 
industrial espionage in activities of special services, 
according to Russia's Federal Counterintelligence Service. This 
holds true not only about the U.S., British and German secret 
services, but also to major Western corporations seeking to 
obtain, by any possible means, information about plans of their 
rivals, of which Russia [is] a key one. For this reason, 
experts note, our country needs a mechanism for reliable 
protection of its priorities in the fields of science, 
technology and know-how, let alone other specific activities. 
Otherwise, it would be more profitable for Russian specialists 
to sell their developments to the West, and shortly afterwards 
the state would have to use them on a license basis. 
  The arrest of a British secret agent, who was caught 
red-handed on January 15, is not the only case in a series of 
spy exposures in russia. Many of them were much spoken about, 
the others did not receive such a wide public response. All 
this testifies to a continuous confrontation between the Soviet 
and the Russian special services and foreign ones, which has 
quite a long history. Some events in this history are as 
follows. 
  In the United States: 1978 -- three diplomats were expelled 
from the country, 1986 -- the number of expulsions made up 80 
diplomats. 1987 -- Marine Sergeant Clayton Lonetree was 
sentenced to 30 years in prison for espionage for the soviet 
intelligence service. 1989 -- Soviet military diplomat Yuriy 
Pakhtusov was declared persona non grata. Last February 1994 -- 
Russian Embassy counsellor Aleksandr Lysenko was expelled from 
the United States. 
  As for the Soviet Union and Russia, the facts are as 
follows: 
March 7, 1983 -- U.S. Embassy First Secretary Richard Osborne 
was expelled from the country. September 11, 1983 -- U.S. 
Consul in Leningrad London Davin Augustenborg were declared 
personas non grata. [as received] June 2, 1983 -- U.S. Embassy 
attache Lewis Thomas was caught red-handed in Moscow. June 13, 
1985 -- U.S. Embassy Second Secretary Paul Stonebough was 
declared persona non grata. 1986 -- Over 10 U.S. diplomats were 
declared personas non grata. September 7, 1986 -- Charges were 
brought against U.S. Citizen Nicholas Daniloff who was detained 
on August 30, 1986, during a secret spy action. He was expelled 
from the country on September 29. March 1989 -- Aide to the 
military attache Daniel F. van Ghandi was declared persona non 
grata. February 1994 -- U.S. Embassy counsellor James Morris 
was declared persona non grata. 
  In Great Britain: 1972-1984 -- nine Soviet diplomats were 
expelled from the country. 1985 -- former KGB secret police 
officer Oleg Gordiyevsky, who was recruited by britain's MI-6 in 
1974, was illegally taken from the Soviet Union. September 1985 
-- 25 Soviet representatives were expelled from Great Britain. 
The Soviet side retaliated by expelling six British 
representatives from the country on September 18, 1985. 1989 -- 
the British Government expelled from the country 11 Soviet 
officials and declared another three Soviet officials, who left 
the country earlier, personas non grata. 
  May 1989 -- the Soviet Government expelled 11 British 
officials from the country. Three British citizens, who earlier 
worked in Moscow, were declared personas non grata. 
  In France: 1977 -- a Soviet official at UNESCO was expelled. 
1980 -- the Soviet consul in Marseilles was expelled. Late 
March 1983 -- French authorities expelled from the country, 
without any grounds, 47 staffers of the Soviet embassy and other 
offices. March 16, 1987 -- seven men were arrested in Rouen on 
charges of industrial espionage for the Soviet Union. Failing 
to prove their guilt, court had to release the suspects. 
  This is how the special services of Russia, the United 
States, Great Britain and France had been working for the past 
several years. And this work is most likely to be continued in 
future. 

