BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with King Husayn by Marc Guillet in </F>
Amman; date not given: "Husayn Concerned About Peace in the 
Middle East -- Says `Hope Has Faded'"] 
  [Excerpts] Amman -- "The extremists will gain successes if 
we fail," according to King Husayn of Jordan. The king, who 
always picks his words carefully and talks cautiously, could not 
be clearer. 
  He is concerned, pessimistic, and bitter about the slow 
progress of the peace negotiations. The Hashemite monarch no 
longer intends to gloss over things using polite diplomatic 
language. 
  On the day when Palestinian autonomy should have started and 
Muslim terrorists from Hamas had caused another bloodbath in a 
bomb attack in Israel, the king predicted "a disaster for 
everyone unless we make progress quickly." 
  He warned of serious consequences if the violence of Jewish 
and Palestinian extremists continued and the peace process 
continued to not deliver results. 
  [Husayn] At the start there was so much optimism and hope 
that the roots of the instability in the whole region would 
finally be tackled quickly and efficiently. I believe that too 
much time has been wasted without concrete results being 
achieved. [Husayn ends] [passage omitted] 
  While Circassians, armed with swords and dressed in their 
traditional black clothing, guard the doors of the meeting room, 
King Husayn said that we were unfortunately witnessing a 
"worrying" development. 
  [Husayn] A new mood of hope which was created with the start 
of the peace conference in Madrid resulted in a new large-scale 
movement for peace. Of course there were opponents, but at that 
time they were in the minority. 
  The hopes for peace have faded due to a lack of progress and 
the tragic events which have claimed many lives. I believe that 
the bloodbath in Hebron for example was an attempt to kill off 
the peace process. The violence and the counter-violence are 
tragic. To stop that, I would suggest moving forward as quickly 
as possible to reach a peace which future generations can also 
live with. I regret and condemn all the violence from whatever 
side, but I hope that the causes of despair will disappear and 
that hope will be reborn again as quickly as possible. [Husayn 
ends] [passage omitted] 
  When asked about the major cause of the lack of progress in 
the peace process, he lit another cigarette. After a marked 
pause, he started his answer hesitantly. "There are various 
causes," he said. "We have seen that attention is constantly 
shifting from one subject to another. Of course the 
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians are the most 
important, but there is less attention on the other questions 
than there should be. That is not the right approach. Due to 
the fact that we must work toward an all-inclusive peace, 
progress should be made on all fronts." 
  King Husayn stressed that it nevertheless makes little 
sense, 
as Israel wants, to make a peace agreement while negotiations on 
the content of the agreement were continuing and little progress 
was being made. "Peace comes to crown agreements which have 
been made about every aspect on the agenda," he said. 
  On the Jordanian side, there is clearly less enthusiasm for 
continuing along the present road as long as Israel refuses to 
talk about its borders and the allocation of the scarce water 
sources and as long as the blockade of 'Aqaba harbor by the U.S. 
Navy continues. 
  "We do not understand why we are treated differently," the 
king said about the blockade, which is the result of the 
international trade embargo against Iraq after the Gulf War. 
"The special treatment gives the impression that we are not 
following the Security Council's resolutions with regard to 
Iraq. If people want to pressure us, we wonder what their goal 
is. We are implementing the resolutions. Are we being punished 
because we did not send soldiers for the war against Iraq? Or 
do some people in the region want us to end up in a situation 
where we can hardly survive? Is itan attempt to make us fall? 
Is it an attempt to seriously damage our relations with the 
people of Iraq? Why Jordan? Because Jordan is the only country 
which borders Iraq? This situation is unacceptable. We act 
against attempts to evade the UN embargo. Pressure on us will 
achieve nothing." 
  [Guillet] Do you think that extremists on both sides have 
enough support to derail the peace process? 
  [Husayn] There are extremists who do not understand what is 
at stake if peace is impossible. Extremism is fed by 
frustration, anger, and a lack of hope. If we do not change 
that very quickly, then the consequences will be very serious. 
The overwhelming majority of the people must regain hope by 
concrete progress. 
  [Guillet] PLO Chairman 'Arafat refused personally to condemn 
the bloodbath in 'Afula. What advice would you give to him 
after the latest attack in Israel? 
  [Husayn] I do not want to give him any advice. I hope he 
realizes the importance of what he is doing. 

