BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundup:" "Historic Poll Peaceful, Logistical Problems </F>
Exist"] 
  [Text] Johannesburg, April 27 (XINHUA) -- The second day of 
South Africa's historic elections has been peaceful, but 
logistical problems delayed voting at various polling stations 
in the country. 
  Millions of voters flooded into the 9,000 polling stations 
today in the country's first all-race elections which marks the 
end of 350 years of white domination and the beginning of a new 
era. 
  Most of the 22.7 million South African voters are voting 
today and tomorrow to elect a 400-seat national assembly and 
provincial legislatures. 
  About 16 million voters, or 72 percent of the total, are 
blacks who are casting their bollats for the first time in their 
life to exercise their political rights. 
  At 07:15, 15 minutes after the opening of the polling 
stations, a car bomb exploded at Jan Smuts Airport in 
Johannesburg, injuring 18 people. Police were questioning a 
suspect who matched the description of a white man seen running 
away from a car shortly before the blast. 
  But in other parts of South Africa, no death related to 
political violence or terrorist acts has been reported. 
  About 10,000 policemen and 67 companies of the defense force 
have been depolyed at and around the polling stations. The 
heavy presence of security forces have deterred rightwingers 
from disrupting the elections. 
  Political leaders in South Africa joined South African 
voters 
in the polls today. 
  African National Congress (ANC) leader Nelson Mandela cast 
his vote at a polling station at Ohlange High School, north of 
Durban, at 07:05. He is the first to cast votes today at the 
polling station. 
  After casting his vote, Mandela said, "this is for all South 
Africans, an unforgettable occasion. It is the realization of 
hopes and dreams that we have carried over decades. 
  "The dream of a South Africa which represents all South 
Africans. 
  "It is the beginning of a new era. We have moved from an era 
of pessimism, division, limited opportunities, turmoil, and 
conflict," he said. 
  Mandela said: "We are starting a new era of hope, 
reconciliation and nation building." 
  President F.W. de Klerk cast his vote at the Arcadia Primary 
School in Pretoria. 
  After voting, De Klerk told reporters that the country is on 
the eve of a golden era. 
  De Klerk said that he is enthusiastic about the many people 
flooding to the polls. 
  "it's a great day for South Africa. We have worked for this 
for more than five years," he said. 
  He described the event as "a wonderful day to vote for the 
new South Africa." 
  Due to logistical problems, voting at some polling stations 
were delayed. Supplies of ballot papers ran out at a number of 
polling stations in Eastern Cape before lunch. Security force's 
helicopters were placed on standby to ferry voting materials to 
the stations in the Eastern Cape once they had arrived from the 
headquarters of the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC). 
  Voters in East Rand townships, eastern Johannesburg, were 
among the most frustrated as 10 of Thokoza's polling stations 
failed to open at all, while similar problems were experienced 
in other stations in the region. 
  Facing the problems, President De Klerk declared tomorrow a 
public holiday in favor of the voting. 
  The IEC also decided to extend the voting period today and 
tomorrow to enable all voters to cast their ballots. 
  According to the IEC decision, polling stations will stay 
open after the 19:00 (17:00 GMT) closing time today and tomorrow. 
  The IEC also decided to order the urgent printing of four 
million extra ballot papers for Eastern Cape, where several 
polling stations were shut down because of lack of ballot papers. 
  Meanwhile, the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) threatened to 
pull 
out of the elections, saying that IFP stickers have not been 
attached to the ballot papers fefore they were issued. 
  The IFP's name failed to appear on the ballot papers because 
its late entry into the election process, and an IFP sticker has 
to be attached to each of the ballot papers. 
  President De Klerk said the IFP should not make such threat 
at this stage and the problems are being solved. 
  Twenty-seven political parties are contesting the elections 
with eight of them only contesting at the regional level. 
  The elections are expected to produce a government of 
national unity led by the African National Congress and its 
President Nelson Mandela is likely to become the country's next 
president. 
  Yesterday was the special voting day for the disabled, the 
pregnant, the infirm and members of the defense force, police 
force and national peacekeeping force, and certain classes of 
prisoners. South African citizens living abroad also cast their 
votes yesterday. 
  The special voters who did not vote also voted today. 

