INTRODUCTION 

        This guide is intended to help users of Foreign Broadcast 
Information Service (FBIS) translations assess the value and 
reliability of Israeli media sources.  Characterizations of the 
sources identified in this guide, where provided, are based on 
FBIS analysis of media content.  The "sourcelines" cited at the 
beginning of each entry are the descriptors used by FBIS to 
identify media sources of FBIS translations.  Sourcelines are 
composed of three elements--the place of origin of the medium, 
its name, and the language it uses. 

   PRINT MEDIA 

   Israel possesses an extensive, lively, and often outspoken 
press that spans a broad political spectrum on international, as 
well as national issues.  While subject to state control on 
matters affecting national security, Israeli newspapers have 
managed to exercise considerable freedom in both reporting and 
editorial comment.  A number of publications are formally 
affiliated with political parties or interest groups, while 
others are published independently.  Taken together, they provide 
a wide range of reporting and editorial opinion.  Israeli papers 
are vulnerable to market forces--particularly the smaller 
newspapers--as illustrated in recent months by the demise of two 
longtime publications, the daily HADASHOT and the weekly HA'OLAM 
HAZE. 

   In terms of political ideology, the mainstream press can be 
divided generally as follows:  'AL HAMISHMAR and DAVAR are left- 
leaning, tending to support socialist economic principles; both 
they and HA'ARETZ are conciliatory on peace process issues; 
MA'ARIV, HATZOFE, and THE JERUSALEM POST are right-leaning, 
tending toward a harder line on both national defense and peace 
process issues; while YEDI'OT AHARONOT is centrist.  A given 
newspaper's coverage of national security affairs often coincides 
with its political ideology.  Thus, the views of conservative 
military commentator Gerald Steinberg are carried in the 
nationalist dailies HATZOFE and THE JERUSALEM POST, while 
moderate Ze'ev Schiff writes for the liberal HA'ARETZ.  In 
addition to divergent political views, individual newspapers are 
also distinguished by their varying views on religion, economics, 
and military affairs.  For example, the daily HATZOFE, published 
by the National Religious Party (MAFDAL), advocates its own 
approach to orthodox religious affairs. 
   There is also a distinct Palestinian press, published mostly 
in East Jerusalem and catering primarily to the interests of 
Palestinians in the occupied territories.  While generally 
representing mainstream Palestinian views, several leading 
Palestinian papers have in recent years demonstrated a growing 
independence in their editorial commentary and occasionally 
criticize Palestinian leaders from both the territories and the 
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).  At the same time, the 
Palestinian press remains subject to censorship by the Israeli 
authorities and has also experienced turbulence as a result of 
the Palestinian uprising and the Palestinian movement's political 
and financial difficulties.  Several publications have been 
forced to cease operations either by Israeli order or due to 
inadequate funds. 


   ISRAELI PUBLICATIONS 

'AL HAMISHMAR 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv 'AL HAMISHMAR in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     On Guard 

Type of publication:     Newspaper 

Days of publication:     Daily except Saturday 

Address:                 P.O. Box 61999, 2 Rehov Homa U'migdal, 
                         Tel Aviv 67771 

Editor in chief:         Tzvi Timor 

Managing editor:         Yisra'el Zamir 

Major writers:           Betzal'el 'Amiqam, Yoram Bar, Arye 
                         Palgi, Yitzhaq Shor (military), Moti 
                         Bassok (political), 'Eran Klein, Yo'av 
                         Kaspi, Yehuda Tzur 

Foreign Correspondents:  Pe'erli Shahar, Oerem Neubach (United 
                         States) 

Op-Ed:                   Pinhas 'Inbari (Arab affairs), Yisra'el 
                         Zamir, Avner Regev (political) 

Circulation:             16,500 daily; 17,500 Friday 

   Organ of United Workers' Party (MAPAM); owned by MAPAM's 
United Kibbutz Movement (Hakibbutz Hameuhad) and read mostly by 
kibbutz members; intellectual, left-wing.  The newspaper 
traditionally has strongly opposed the religious establishment 
and the concept of a national unity government; has generally 
sympathized with U.S. policies.  Advocates Palestinian rights; 
outspoken critic of Israeli policies in the territories. 
Relatively good standing among Israeli Arabs, who consider it the 
best "Jewish" daily.  Has little obvious political influence, but 
reflects the left-wing opinion of MAPAM, which is one of the 
three components of the Meretz bloc. 

BAMAHANE 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv BAMAHANE in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     In the Camp 
Type of publication:     Weekly magazine 

Address:                 IDF P.O. Box 01013, 29 David Elazer 
                         Street Haqirya, Tel Aviv 

Editor in chief:         Colonel Orli Lahat-Eshkol 

Circulation:             70,000 

   Organ of the Israel Defense Forces; deals with all aspects of 
military life; carries interviews with key military officers. 
BITA'ON HEYL HA'AVIR 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv BITA'ON HEYL HA'AVIR in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     Air Force Organ 

Type of publication:     Monthly magazine 

Publisher:               Air Force Command 

Address:                 IDF P.O. Box 01560, Tel Aviv 

Editor in chief:         Merav Halperin 

Major writers:           Daniyel Molad (deputy editor), Sharon 
                         Geva', Gil Arbel, Li'ora Schuster, 
                         Sharon Sade, Enar Govrin, Qobi Marinko 

Circulation:             30,000 

   Contains technical and military information pertaining to air 
warfare, in general, and Israel's air force in particular. 

DAVAR 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv DAVAR in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     Word 

Type of publication:     Newspaper 

Days of publication:     Daily except Saturday 

Address:                 P.O. Box 199, 45 Sheinkin Street, Tel 
                         Aviv 

Editor in chief:         Yoram Peri 

Executive editor:        Daniyel Bloch 

Major writers:           Daniyel Bloch, Amir Oren, Natan Ro'i, 
                         Shlomo Ginossar (Knesset), Daniyel Ben- 
                         Simon, Tova Tzimuqi, 'Aliza Wallach 
                         (party politics), Onn Levi (defense), 
                         Dan Avidan (Arab affairs), Teddy Preuss 
                         (economic columnist), Yosi Melman 
                         (diplomatic) 

Foreign correspondents:  Miryam Fuchs (New York), Gid'on Kouts 
                         (Paris), Drora Perl (Washington) 

Circulation:             21,200 daily; 24,000 Friday 

   Davar is owned and subsidized by Histadrut (General Federation 
of Labor); supports Labor Party line; strongly anti-Likud. 
GLOBES 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv GLOBES in Hebrew 

Type of publication:     Evening newspaper 

Days of publication:     Daily except Saturday 

Publisher:               Globes Group 

Address:                 P.O. Box 18041 127 Yigal Alon Street, 
                         Tel Aviv 61180 

Editor in chief:         Adam Barukh 

Major writer:            Ze'ev Klein, Itamar Levin (diplomatic 
                         and foreign affairs) 

Circulation:             25,000 subscribers 

   Business publication. 

HA' ARETZ 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     The Land 

Type of publication:     Newspaper 

Days of publication:     Daily except Saturday 

Publisher/Owner:         'Amos Schocken 

Address:                 21 Zalman Schocken Street, Tel Aviv 

Editor in chief:         Hanokh Marmari 

Managing editor:         Tzvi Bar-El 

Major writers:           'Aqiva Eldar and Hemi Shalev (politics), 
                         Dov Alfon (editor of weekend 
                         supplement), Aluf Ben, Eytan Rabin, 
                         Yerah Tal (defense), Yizhar Be'er (Arab 
                         affairs), Ilan Shehori (party politics), 
                         Gid'on Alon, Dan Margalit (Knesset), 
                         Nehemya Stressler (economics editor), 
                         'Uzi Benziman, Ran Kislev, Dani 
                         Rubinstein, Yosi Torpstein (territories) 

Op-Ed:                   Ze'ev Schiff: highly respected "dean" of 
                         Israel's military commentators, somewhat 
                         dovish in outlook 

                         Yo'el Marcus: influential commentator, 
                         close friend of Yitzhaq Rabin 

                         Dr. Shlomo Gross (pseudonym "Poles"): 
                         senior member of editorial board, wields 
                         strong influence over paper's editorial 
                         line and  coverage; writes weekly Friday 
                         column;  serious, in-depth analyst, with 
                         reliable sources 

                         Gid'on Samet: keen observer of local 
                         political scene, U.S.-Israeli relations 
                         Eliyahu Salpeter: member of editorial 
                         board, noted for analytical articles on 
                         social and international topics 

                         Dan Margalit: political commentator, 
                         returned to HA'ARETZ after short stint 
                         as MA'ARIV editor 

                         'Uzi Benziman, Ran Kislev: political 
                         commentators 

Foreign correspondents:  Ori Nir (Washington), Shlomo Shamir (New 
                         York), Nitzan Horowitz (Paris), 'Amos 
                         Ben-Vered (London), Yehuda Lahav 
                         (Central Europe), Hulda Liberanoma 
                         (Rome) 

Circulation:             52,000 

   Independent, liberal, intellectual daily.  Favors the Labor 
Party, free enterprise, and a pragmatic foreign policy. 
Generally sympathetic to U.S. policy.  Editorial line is dovish, 
secular, and strongly anti-trade union.  Read by policymakers, 
especially for reports by its parliamentary and diplomatic 
correspondents.  Owner, Schocken publishing house, also publishes 
books and several Jerusalem and Tel Aviv local magazines. 
Approximately 80 percent of circulation is derived from 
subscriptions. 

HATZOFE 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv HATZOFE in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     The Observer 

Type of publication:     Newspaper 

Days of publication:     Daily except Saturday 

Address:                 66 Hamasger Street, Tel Aviv 

Editor:                  Moshe Ishon 

Major writers:           Ya'aqov Edelstein (politics), Sha'ul 
                         Schiff (political parties), Yona Kohen 
                         (Jerusalem bureau chief, Knesset), Arye 
                         Nafshi (Arab affairs), Barukh Adler 
                         (military, science, finance) 

Circulation:             7,000 daily; 8,000 Friday 

   Organ of National Religious Party (NRP), owned by the World 
Mizrahi Movement.  Serious, right-of-center, pragmatic.  Has 
small circulation and little apparent influence in Israel, but 
enjoys wide circulation among orthodox Jewish religious 
communities in the United States and Europe.  Extensive coverage 
of religious parties and related orthodox groups. 

THE ISRAEL ECONOMIST 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem THE ISRAEL ECONOMIST in 
                         English 

Type of publication:     Monthly magazine 

Publisher:               Israel Kelman 
Address:                 6 Hazanowitz St., P.O. Box 7052, 
                         Jerusalem 91070 

Editor:                  Ben Mollov 

   Independent political-economic publication. 

AL-ITTIHAD 

Sourceline:              Haifa AL-ITTIHAD in Arabic 

Translation of name:     The Union 

Masthead caption:        "Workers of the World Unite!" 

Type of publication:     Newspaper 

Days of publication:     Daily except Saturday 

Address:                 P.O. Box 104, Haifa 31000, 9 al-Hariri 
                         St. 

Editor in chief:         Nazir Majali 

Managing editor:         Tawfiq Tubi 

Major writers:           Antoine Shalhat (deputy editor), Yusuf 
                         Farah, Mahmud Abu-Shanab, 'Abd-al-Majid 
                         Hamdan, Fayiz Zu'bi, Nisim Abu-Khayt, 
                         Marzuq Halabi, Dr. Halim Salim 'Azzam 

Op-Ed:   Nazir Majali 

   Organ of the Israeli Communist Party, RAKAH (New Communist 
List), which is part of HADASH (Democratic Front for Peace and 
Equality). 

THE JERUSALEM POST 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM POST in English 

Type of publication:     Newspaper 

Days of publication:     Daily except Saturday 

Publisher:               Yehuda Levi 

Address:                 P.O. Box 81 Romema, 91000 Jerusalem 

Executive editor:        David Bar-Ilan 

Major writers:           Michael Rotem (defense), Yig'al Kotzer 
                         (south Lebanon), Ilan Barzel (editor, 
                         economics), Alisa Odenheimer and Evelyn 
                         Gordon (economics), Asher Wallfish and 
                         Dan Izenberg (Knesset affairs), David 
                         Makovsky (politics), Judy Siegel 
                         (science), Jon Imanuel (Arab affairs) 

Op-Ed:                   Yosef Goell, Joel Rebibo, Asher Wallfish 

Foreign correspondents:  Allison Kaplan (Washington), Jonathan 
                         Schachter (New York), Tom Tugend (Los 
                         Angeles), Walter Ruby (Moscow) 

Circulation:             30,000 daily, 50,000 Friday; 50,000 
                         international edition to 90 countries, 
                         mainly the United States 

   THE JERUSALEM POST took a right-wing, pro-religious, and 
nationalist orientation following its purchase by Canadian 
newspaper magnate Conrad Black in 1989.  The change prompted the 
mass resignation of many of the paper's most important editors 
and journalists, who protested what they described as a heavy- 
handed intervention by the new publishers in the editorial 
management of the newspaper.  Prior to its sale, THE JERUSALEM 
POST, which was inaugurated as THE PALESTINE POST during the 
period of the British Mandate over Palestine, pursued a liberal, 
independent line and was traditionally supportive of Labor Party 
policies.  The paper enjoys wide readership among the diplomatic 
community, as well as among other English-language readers in 
both Israel and the United States. 

THE JERUSALEM REPORT 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM REPORT in 
                         English 

Type of publication:     Biweekly magazine 

Publisher:               Sam Lipsky 

Address:                 P.O. Box 1805 Jerusalem 91017, 22 Yosef 
                         Rivlin St. 

Editor in chief:         Hirsh Goodman (former JERUSALEM POST 
                         defense correspondent) 

Managing editor:         David Horovitz 

Major writers:           Hanan Sher (senior editor), Natan 
                         Sharansky (Jewish world), Ehud Ya'ari 
                         (Arab world), Khalid Abu-Tu'amah 
                         (Palestinian affairs), Ze'ev Hafetz 
                         (former Shamir government press office 
                         director), Ze'ev Schiff (HA'ARETZ 
                         defense commentator) 

Circulation:             13,000 

   Covers Israeli political, social, and economic scene, as well 
as the Jewish world, in feature-style articles directed mainly at 
foreign readers who want an overview of developments.  Format 
similar to U.S. news weeklies.  Founded by journalists who broke 
with JERUSALEM POST after its change in ownership. 

MA' ARAKHOT 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv MA'ARAKHOT in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     Military Campaigns 

Type of publication:     Bimonthly magazine 

Publisher:               Israel Defense Force Publishing 

Address:                 P.O. Box 7026 Tel Aviv 

Editorial Staff:         Lt. Col Rahel Rojanski (editor in 
                         chief), Avitar Ben-Tzedef (editor) 

   Doctrine and history of the Israel Defense Force (IDF). 
MA'ARIV 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv MA'ARIV in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     Of the Evening (also name of evening 
                         prayer) 

Type of publication:     Evening newspaper 

Days of publication:     Daily except Saturday 

Publisher:               'Ofer Nimrodi 

Address:                 2 Carlebach Street, Tel Aviv 61200 

Editorial staff:         'Ofer Nimrodi (editor in chief), Ya'aqov 
                         Erez (editor) 

Major writers:           Avino'am Bar-Yosef (politics), 'Imanu'el 
                         Rosen (defense), Tzvi Levi and Menahem 
                         Rahat (Knesset affairs), Gabi Kessler 
                         (economics), David Lipkin and Shmu'el 
                         Nehushtan (economics), Shefi Gabay 
                         (Middle East), Hanan Schlein 
                         (territories) 

Op-Ed:                   Shalom Rosenfeld, Avraham Tirosh, Yosef 
                         Lapid, 'Oded Granot, Yosef Harif, 
                         Shmu'el Segev (security issues, U.S.- 
                         Israel relations), Shmu'el Schnitzer, 
                         Rafi Mann, David Landau 

Foreign correspondents:  Ben Kaspit (New York), 'Oded Shorer 
                         (Washington), Tamar Golan (Paris), 
                         Yehi'el Limor (London), Gad Shomron 
                         (Bonn), Alexander Lesser (Moscow) 

Circulation:             170,000 daily, 280,000 Friday 

   Formed in 1947 by a group of journalists who broke away from 
the evening paper YEDI'OT AHARONOT.  Paper is independent and 
secular, describes itself as having a "nationalistic, hawkish 
line in matters of foreign policy and security, and liberal views 
in social and economic affairs."  Second highest circulation of 
the Israeli press.  MA'ARIV was sold to the late British 
newspaper magnate Robert Maxwell in 1990; following Maxwell's 
death, it was bought by Israeli businessman Ya'aqov Nimrodi. 

MONITIN 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv MONITIN in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     Reputation 

Type of publication:     Biweekly magazine 

Publisher:               Carmel Publishing 

Address:                 37 Nahal Ayalon, 42 Pinat Yitzhaq Sade, 
                         Tel Aviv 67771 

Editorial staff:         Giyora Schmiss (editor in chief), Sharon 
                         Qimhi (editorial assistant) 

Major writers:           Ya'aqov Ahime'ir, Avi Raz, Nave Sanders 

   Investigative journalism, racy entertainment; often carries 
interviews with political figures. 

NEQUDA 

Sourceline:              'Ofra NEQUDA in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     Point or Settlement 

Masthead caption:        "Publication of Settlements in Judaea, 
                         Samaria, and Gaza" 

Type of publication:     Monthly magazine 

Publisher:               Society for the Advancement of 
                         Settlement and Absorption in Judaea, 
                         Samaria, the Gaza Strip, and the Jordan 
                         Valley 

Address:                 'Ofra, M.P. Mizrah Binyamin, 90906 

Editor in Chief:         Yisra'el Har'el 

Major writers:           Mikha'el Eytan, Jay Shapiro, Elyaqim 
                         Ha' etzni 

   Organ of the settler movement. 

NEW OUTLOOK 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv NEW OUTLOOK in English 

Masthead caption:        "Middle East Magazine" 

Type of publication:     Bimonthly magazine 

Publisher:               Hashqafa Hadasha, Tel Aviv 

Address:                 9 Gordon St., Tel Aviv 63458 

Editorial staff:         Hayim Shur (editor in chief), Dan Leon 
                         (senior editor) 

Circulation:             10,000 

   Established by MAPAM members and other left-wing Israeli Jews 
and Arabs dedicated to the promotion of Palestinian-Arab-Israeli 
peace; covers Middle Eastern affairs.  The magazine recently shut 
down after 35 years of publication, with the January-February 
1994 issue being its last.  Hayim Shur will now edit a new 
magazine tentatively named MIDDLE EAST magazine that replaces NEW 
OUTLOOK.  The new magazine will be a monthly with its pilot issue 
expected in the spring of 1994.  The publishers are promoting it 
as "the first Arab-Israeli magazine." 

SHISHI 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv SHISHI in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     Friday 

Masthead caption:        "SHISHI: Your Second Newspaper for the 
                         Weekend" 

Type of publication:     Weekly newspaper 

Day of publication:      Friday 

Publisher:               Globes Group 

Address:                 127 Yig'al Alon Street, Tel Aviv 

Editorial staff:         Rino Tzror, Dani Dror, 'Irit Elqabetz, 
                         Tamar Shani 

Major writers:           'Uzi Mahanaymi and Yehuda Litani (Arab 
                         affairs), Yo'av Qarni (formerly of 
                         HA'ARETZ), Moshe Zaq and Dov Goldstein 
                         (formerly of MA'ARIV) 

   The newest, independent, Hebrew-language weekly, inaugurated 
on 10 December 1993; replaces HA'OLAM HAZE, which closed on 7 
December 1993 after 47 years of publication.  Editor Rino Tzror 
and the other members of the SHISHI editorial staff formerly 
managed HA'OLAM HAZE.  The publisher, the Globes Group, also 
issues the business daily GLOBES. 

AL- SINNARAH 

Sourceline:              Nazareth AL-SINNARAH in Arabic 

Translation of name:     The Fishhook 

Masthead caption:        "Largest Circulating Arabic Newspaper in 
                         the Country" 

Type of publication:     Weekly newspaper 

Day of publication:      Friday 

Publisher:               AL-SINNARAH Corporation 

Address:                 P.O. Box 148, Nazareth 16101 

Editor in chief:         Lutfi Mash'ur 

Managing editor:         Vida Mash'ur 

Major writers:           Ahmad Darwish, Munqidh al-Zu'bi, 
                         'Atallah Mansur, Salibah Khamis 

Op-Ed:                   Ahmad Hazim, Clovis Maqsud, and Hisham 
                         Shirabi (Guest columnists--Maqsud is a 
                         former Arab League representative to the 
                         United Nations, now a university 
                         instructor in Washington; Shirabi is a 
                         history professor at Georgetown 
                         University) 

Foreign correspondents:  Fawzi al-Asmar (Washington), Ahmad Hazim 
                         (Berlin) 

Supplements:             Weekend, women's (translation of the 
                         Hebrew magazine Na'amat) 

   Widest circulating Arabic-language newspaper within Israel's 
Arab community; Arab-Christian, Palestinian-nationalist. 

YEDI'OT AHARONOT 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARONOT in Hebrew 

Translation of name:     Latest Information (News) 

Type of publication:     Evening newspaper 

Days of publication:     Daily except Saturday 

Publisher:               Arnon Moses 

Address:                 2 Moses Street, Tel Aviv 61000 

Editor in chief:         Arnon Moses 

Mangaging editor:        Moshe Vardi 

Major writers:           Dani Sade (defense), Ron Ben-Yishay 
                         (defense commentator), Shim'on Schiffer 
                         (political), Sever Plotzker (editor, 
                         economics), Beni Baraq and Gid'on 'Eshet 
                         (economics), Hayim Shibi (Knesset 
                         affairs), Roni Shaqed (Arab affairs), 
                         Bina Barzel, Ronit Vardi, and Orli 
                         Azulay-Katz (political parties), Smadar 
                         Peri (Arab affairs), 'Uzi Mahanaymi 
                         (Middle East) 

Op-Ed:                   Yesha'yahu Ben-Porat, Nahum Barne'a, Dov 
                         Genachowsky (politics, economics), 
                         Avi'ezer Golan, David Witzthum, No'omi 
                         Levitsky 

Foreign correspondents:  Tzadoq Yehezqeli (New York), Rami Dromi 
                         (Los Angeles), Yohanan Lahav (London), 
                         Edwin Eytan (Paris), Yosi Bar (Rome), 
                         Amnon Kapeliuk (Moscow), Shlomo Shlanger 
                         (Bonn) 

Circulation:             300,000 daily, 600,000 Friday 

   Israel's largest circulation daily; the Friday edition sells 
more than all the other newspapers combined.  Independent, 
center-right editorial line.  Serious, popular, easy-to-read 
style.  Offers readers a full spectrum of views on wide-ranging 
topics in regular op-ed columns spanning pro-Palestinian to far- 
right expansionist views. 

   EAST JERUSALEM, WEST BANK PUBLICATIONS 

AL-BAYADIR AL-SIYASI 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem AL-BAYADIR AL-SIYASI in Arabic 

Translation of name:     The Political Threshing Floor 

Masthead caption:        "Magazine of the Palestinian Masses" 

Type of publication:     Weekly magazine 

Day of publication:      Saturday 

Publisher:               Jack Khazmu 

Address:                 P.O. Box 21445 Bayt Hanina, Jerusalem 
                         91213 

Major writers:           Ghazi Sa'di, Mashhur al-Hijazi, 'Awwad 
                         al-Astal 
   Pro-PLO magazine. 

THE JERUSALEM TIMES 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem THE JERUSALEM TIMES in English 

Masthead caption:        "Independent Palestinian Weekly" 

Type of publication:     Weekly newspaper 

Day of publication:      Friday 

Ownership/affiliation:   Biladi Publishing Company 

Address:                 19 Nabulus Road, P.O. Box 20815, East 
                         Jerusalem 

Publisher and 
Editor in chief:         Hanna Sinyurah 

Managing editor:         'Ali Khalili 

   A new Palestinian weekly that debuted on 11 February 1994. 
Editors Hanna Sinyurah and 'Ali Khalili formerly managed the now 
defunct AL-FAJR.  The successor to the weekly AL-FAJR English 
edition, the paper declared its editorial policy "will be similar 
to its predecessor AL-FAJR, although the ownership is different." 
Pro-PLO and supportive of the peace process.  Currently, it is 
the only Palestinian English-language newspaper published in the 
occupied territories. 

AL-MANAR 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem AL-MANAR in Arabic 

Translation of name:     The Lighthouse 

Type of publication:     Newspaper 

Days of publication:     Monday and Friday 

Address:                 P.O. Box 20772 Al-Mas'udi St. 23, 
                         Jerusalem 

Editor in chief:         Isma'il 'Ajwah 

   Moderate, pro-PLO and  pro-Egyptian paper. 

AL-NAHAR 

Sourceline:               Jerusalem AL-NAHAR in Arabic 

Translation of name:      The Day 

Type of publication:      Daily newspaper 

Address:                 P.O. Box 17183 Al-Rashid St. 23, 
                         Jerusalem 

Editor in chief:         'Uthman al-Hallaq 

   A moderate, pro-Jordanian and pro-PLO paper, launched on 7 
March 1986 as a weekly but appearing as a daily since April 1987. 

AL-QUDS 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem AL-QUDS in Arabic 

Translation of name:     Jerusalem 

Type of publication:     Daily newspaper 

Publisher:               Mahmud Abu-al-Zalaf 

Address:                 P.O. Box 19788 Salah-al-Din St., 
                         Jerusalem 

Editor in chief:          Marwan Abu-al-Zalaf 

Circulation:              30,000 

   Moderate pro-PLO daily established in 1951; has the largest 
circulation in the territories. 

AL-TALI'AH 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem AL-TALI'AH in Arabic 

Translation of name:     The Vanguard 

Type of publication:     Weekly newspaper 

Day of publication:      Thursday 

Address:                 P.O. Box 20628 Al-Shaykh Jarrah St. 7, 
                         Jerusalem 

Editor in chief:         Bashir al-Barghuthi (senior official in 
                         People's Party) 

   Established in 1978 as mouthpiece of the Palestinian Communist 
Party, now called the People's Party. 

   RADIO AND TELEVISION 

   The state-owned Israel Broadcasting Authority, IBA, (Rashut 
Hashidur) is the primary radio and television broadcasting 
organization in Israel.  IBA falls under the Ministry of 
Education and Culture and determines what will be broadcast by 
radio and television.  It is an autonomous public body charged by 
law with providing educational and entertainment programming and 
supplying information in the areas of politics, society, 
economics, culture, and the arts to domestic and foreign 
audiences, including neighboring Arabs and Diaspora Jewry, in 
Hebrew, Arabic, and other languages. 

   IBA operates Qol Yisra'el (The Voice of Israel) and Israel 
Television (ITV), but not New Channel 2, an independent 
commercial station.  IBA controls the stations with a minimum of 
censorship regarding sensitive security and military matters.  As 
in the case of print media, this censorship applies to all 
electronic media, domestic and foreign.  There are also legal 
limitations on the coverage of candidates' speeches prior to 
Knesset elections.  Nevertheless, like Israeli print media, the 
content of Israeli broadcast media is varied and wide-ranging, 
with reporting and commentary spanning a broad political spectrum 
in both domestic and international affairs. 

   The Israel Defense Forces radio station, Galey Tzahal, falls 
under the jurisdiction of the Army's chief education corps 
officer with regard to its content.  As a national radio, it also 
falls under the IBA's jurisdiction in the spheres of broadcast 
timetables and technical operations.  The radio is funded by the 
Defense Ministry. 

   Transmission of programming is the responsibility of the 
Communications Ministry, which sets policy, advances legislation, 
supervises communications and licensing, encourages industrial 
development and research in the communications field, sets 
standards for the cable television industry, grants 
authorizations for Bezeq--the Israeli telecommunications 
corporation, and directs satellite transmissions.  Private 
companies have started to enter the field of international data 
communications, which until recently had been under Bezeq's 
monopoly.  Bezeq, a government-owned corporation with a board of 
directors nominated by the government, was formed in 1984, 
pursuant to the telecommunications law adopted in 1982 by the 
Knesset.  The law separated regulatory activities, which remain 
the responsibility of the Communications Ministry, from 
operational activities, now performed by Bezeq.  Bezeq operates 
all transmitters, although the equipment is the property of the 
Communications Ministry, which funds technical improvements. 
Maintenance and upkeep are funded by the IBA. 

   The transmission times provided below are one hour earlier 
during daylight savings time in the summer months. 

   QOL YISRA'EL (THE VOICE OF ISRAEL) 

   Qol Yisra'el is controlled and funded by the Israel 
Broadcasting Authority.  Mordekhay Kirshenbaum is the current 
director general of the IBA.  Qol Yisra'el's programs are 
broadcast in a number of different languages over its domestic 
networks and the international service.  FBIS monitors several of 
the Hebrew, Arabic, and English-language broadcasts. 

   Qol Yisra'el's domestic service consists of a number of 
networks, including the following: 

   Network "A" features programs on religion, music, education, 
and agriculture, as well as children's programs.  News is carried 
in French, English, and Hebrew. 

   Network "B" broadcasts only in Hebrew and its programming 
emphasizes features and news.  Newscasts are carried on the hour 
and most are paralleled on networks "A" and "C," the "Voice of 
Music," "IDF Radio," Gush Emunim's "Radio 7," and "Radio 10." 
News updates are carried on the half hour accept at 0030, 0130, 
0230, 1130, 1730, 2230, and 2330 GMT on Sunday through Thursday 
and after 1030 GMT on Friday.  There are no updates on the half 
hour on Saturday.  News flashes covering crises, important 
events, and emergency situations are broadcast as warranted. 

   Network "C" carries popular music and human interest 
programming directed at young audiences. 

   Network "D" programming is entirely in Arabic to Israel and 
the Arab world.  Broadcasts consist of general interest programs 
such as music, entertainment, religious programs, features, 
commentaries, and news. 

   The "Immigrant Absorption Network" (Reshet Qlitat 'Aliya, 
REQA'), which broadcasts in a variety of languages, is targeted 
at newly arrived immigrants.  It offers news, Jewish and Israeli 
history and cultural programs, Hebrew lessons, and various 
orientation talks shows. 

   Qol Yisra'el's international service currently broadcasts in 
15 languages over shortwave and mediumwave frequencies.  Many of 
the international programs are relays from Qol Yisra'el's 
domestic networks.  The entire Arabic-language portion of the 
international service is a relay of Qol Yisra'el's network "D." 
Arabic-language programs are also relayed by Voice of Israel's 
international service over shortwave and mediumwave to Central 
and Southeast Asia, Australia, New Zealand, Africa, and Central 
and South America on 738, 5900, 5915, 9815, 15095, and 15480 kHz. 
Network "B" programs are relayed by the international service via 
shortwave to North America, Europe, Russia, and Asia on 
frequencies that change semiannually.  Current frequencies 
include 9388, 11585, 11590, 13750, 15615, and 17545 kHz. 

   English-language programs are broadcast by Qol Yisra'el over 
its international service and on two of its domestic networks. 
The international service's 0500-0515 and 1100-1130 GMT programs 
are paralleled on domestic network "A," which also broadcasts a 
daily two-minute news brief in English at 1500 GMT.  The director 
of Israel Radio International is Shmu'el Ben-Tzvi. 

   DOMESTIC HEBREW-LANGUAGE PROGRAMMING 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Hebrew 

Station identification:  "Qol Yisra'el Miyerushalayim" (Voice of 
                         Israel from Jerusalem) 

Transmission span:       0000-2400  GMT Sunday through Thursday; 
                         0100-2305  GMT Friday; 
                         0458-0100  GMT Saturday 

Frequencies:             Tel Aviv (657 kHz, 95.5 MHz FM); 
                         Jerusalem (1080 kHz, 95.5 MHz FM); 
                         Haifa (1206 kHz, 103.2 MHz FM); 
                         Galilee (882 kHz, 100.5 MHz FM); 
                         Northern border (882 kHz); 
                         Beersheba (103.8 MHz FM); 
                         Elat (927 kHz, 90.7 MHz FM); 
                         Zefat (846 kHz, 92.0 MHz FM); 
                         Bet She'an Valley area (102.0 MHz FM); 
                         Negev area (93.9 MHz FM); 
                         'Arava area (95.6 MHz FM) 

Address:                 Main Studios -- Heleni Hamalka 21 
                         P.O. Box 1082 
                         Jerusalem 91010 

Personnel:               Director, Qol Yisra'el's Hebrew 
                         programming:  Amnon Nadav 

   DOMESTIC ARABIC-LANGUAGE PROGRAMMING 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Arabic 

Station identification:  "Huna Sawt Isra'il Min Urshalim al-Quds" 
                         (This is the Voice of Israel from 
                         Jerusalem) 

Transmission span:       0358-2215 GMT daily 

Frequencies:             Central Region (738 kHz, 90.3 MHz FM); 
                         Tel Aviv (1026 kHz, 90.3 MHz FM); 
                         Jerusalem (675 kHz, 90.3 MHz FM); 
                         Haifa, Galilee, Northern Israel (738 
                         kHz); 

Address:                 Main Studios -- Heleni Hamalka 21 
                         P.O. Box 1082 
                         Jerusalem 91010 

Personnel:               Director, Qol Yisra'el's Arabic 
                         programming:  Edmund Sehayek 

   ENGLISH-LANGUAGE PROGRAMMING 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in English 

Station identification:  "Qol Yisra'el -- The Voice of Israel, 
                         Jerusalem" 

Transmission span:       0500-0515 GMT daily, both domestic and 
                         international service; 
                         1100-1130 GMT daily, both domestic and 
                         international service; 
                         1400-1425 GMT daily, international 
                         service on shortwave; 
                         1500-1502 GMT daily, domestic service 
                         only; 
                         1600-1615 GMT daily, both domestic and 
                         international service; 
                         2000-2030 GMT daily, international 
                         service on shortwave; 
                         2230-2300 GMT daily, international 
                         service on shortwave 

Frequencies:             International Service:  7465, 9435, 
                         11603, 11605, 11675, 15640, 15650, 
                         17545, and 17575 kHz; 
                         Domestic Network "A":  Tel Aviv and 
                         central district (576 kHz); Jerusalem 
                         (1458 kHz); Elat (1458 kHz); 
                         Immigrant Absorption Network ("REQA'"): 
                         Tel Aviv, Jerusalem, and central 
                         district (954 kHz); Haifa and the north 
                         (927 kHz) 

Address:                 Main Studios -- Heleni Hamalka 21 
                         P.O. Box 1082 
                         Jerusalem 91010 

Personnel:               Head, Broadcasts to the West, Israel 
                         Radio International:  Moshe Sela' 

IDF RADIO 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv IDF Radio in Hebrew 

Station identification:  "Galey Tzahal" (IDF Radio) 

Transmission span:       0000-2400 daily 

Frequencies:             IDF 1: 
                         Central Israel (1287 kHz); 
                         Haifa and Elat (1305 kHz); 
                         Galilee Panhandle and Negev (1368 kHz); 
                         Jerusalem (1404 kHz); 
                         Beersheba (1224 kHz); 
                         Tel Aviv (92.4 MHz FM); 
                         Haifa region (106.4 MHz FM); 
                         Jerusalem and central Israel (93.9 MHz 
                         FM) 
                         IDF 2: 
                         Central Israel (96.6 MHz FM); 
                         Dan District (91.8 MHz FM); 
                         Haifa and north (102.3 MHz FM); 
                         Galilee Panhandle and Elat (93.9 MHz 
                         FM); 
                         Bet She'an Valley and Beersheba (99.8 
                         MHz FM); 
                         Western Negev (104.1 MHz FM); 
                         Mizpe Ramon (1395 kHz) 

Address:                 Military Post Office Box 01005 
                         Tel Aviv 

Personnel:               Commander:  Moshe Shlonsky 

   IDF (Israel Defense Forces) Radio broadcasts 24 hours a day, 
splitting into "IDF 1" and "IDF 2" between 1200 and 2200 GMT 
Sunday through Thursday, between 1400 and 2400 GMT on Friday, and 
between 0600 and 2200 GMT on Saturday.  During the split, IDF 1 
and IDF 2 carry different programs, but link up for the relay of 
news, news flashes, the 1400 GMT IDF newsreel on Sunday through 
Thursday, and the 1600 GMT "Friday-Saturday" program on Saturday. 

   IDF 1 and IDF 2 both carry hourly newscasts from Qol 
Yisra'el's domestic network "B" with the following exceptions: 
the 0000, 0100, 0200, 0300, 0400, 0600, 0700, 1000, 1100, and 
1400 GMT casts are not relayed Sunday through Friday; the 1500, 
1600, 1700, 1900, and 2200 GMT casts are not relayed Sunday 
through Thursday; and the 0900, 1600, 1700, and 1800 GMT 
newscasts are not relayed on Saturday. 

   Both IDF 1 and IDF 2 provide news flashes on the half-hour 
between 0730-1430 GMT (except at 1130), and 1830-0330 GMT (except 
at 1930 and 2130 Sunday through Thursday).  Friday's flashes on 
the half-hour are 0730-1030 GMT.  On Saturday and holidays news 
flashes are carried every two hours on the half-hour starting at 
0430 GMT.  IDF Radio's non-news programming consists of general 
interest features. 

   ISRAEL TELEVISION CHANNEL 1 NETWORK 

   Jerusalem Israel Television Channel 1 Network falls under the 
jurisdiction of the Israel Broadcasting Authority.  With the 
exception of foreign films, specials, and documentaries, which 
are generally subtitled in Hebrew and/or Arabic, all programming 
is in Hebrew or Arabic.  The prime time Hebrew broadcasts consist 
of general interest programs, family entertainment, religious 
programs, educational and feature films, foreign programs, and 
newscasts.  Arabic programming consists of films, family 
entertainment, educational and children's programs, and 
newscasts.  Programming originates in studios located in 
Jerusalem's Romena District and in Herzliyya. 

   Israel Television utilizes the PAL color systems B and G and 
is received on different channels throughout Israel.  Reception 
in Tel Aviv is best on VHF channel 8 via a 200-kw transmitter 
located at Etanim in the Jerusalem mountain range; on Tel Aviv's 
100-kw UHF transmitter on channel 28; and on UHF channel 46 via a 
200-kw transmitter located in Haifa.  Satellite service is 
carried on the 1.0 West Intelsat; Ku band, video carrier RF 
11.590 MHz VP; audio on subcarrier at 6.6 MHz. 

   HEBREW-LANGUAGE PROGRAMMING 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem Israel Television Channel 1 
                         Network in Hebrew 
Station identification:  "Hatelevizya Hayisre'elit 'Arutz Ehad" 
                         (Israel Television Channel 1) 

Transmission span:       1730-2230  Sunday-Thursday; 
                         1800-2300  Friday; 
                         1800-2230  Saturday; Signoff time varies 
                         each day 

Frequencies:             As described above 

Address:                 Israel Broadcasting Authority 
                         P.O. Box 7139 
                         Jerusalem 91071 

Personnel:               Director, Israel Television's Hebrew 
                         programming:  Ya'ir Stern 

   Principal newscasts are broadcast at 1800-1850 GMT Sunday 
through Thursday, at 1830-1930 GMT on Friday, and at 1900-2000 
GMT on Saturday. 

   ARABIC-LANGUAGE PROGRAMMING 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem Israel Television Channel 1 
                         Network in Arabic 

Station identification:  "Al-Tilifizyun al-Isra'ili al-Qanah al- 
                         Ula" (Israel Television Channel 1) 

Transmission span:       1630-1730  Sunday-Thursday; 
                         1440-1800  Friday; 
                         0800-1800  Saturday 

Frequencies:             As described above 

Address:                 Israel Broadcasting Authority 
                         P.O. Box 7139 
                         Jerusalem 91071 

Personnel:               Director, Israel Television's Arabic 
                         programming:  Yosef Binia 

   The main daily Arabic newscast is broadcast at 1700-1730 GMT 
Sunday through Thursday, at 1700-1800 GMT on Friday, and at 1630- 
1700 GMT on Saturday. 

   ISRAEL TELEVISION CHANNEL 3 NETWORK 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem Israel Television Channel 3 
                         Network in Hebrew 

Station identification:  "Hatelevizya Hayisre'elit 'Arutz 
                         Shalosh" (Israel Television Channel 3) 

Transmission span:       When the Knesset is in session: 
                         Monday, Tuesday: relay of Knesset 
                         committee sessions from approximately 
                         0800 GMT; relay of Knesset plenum 
                         sessions from 1400 GMT; 
                         Wednesday: relay of Knesset plenum 
                         sessions from approximately 0900 GMT; 
                         There is no regular signoff time for the 
                         end of any day's broadcasts 

Frequencies:             Received via cable television system on 
                         Channel 33; 
                         Satellite service on the 1.0 West 
                         Intelsat; Ku band, video carrier RF 
                         11.019 MHz VP; audio on subcarrier at 
                         6.6  MHz 

Studio address:          Channel 3 
                         Israel Television 
                         Romema Jerusalem 91071 

Personnel:               Editorial staff consists of a five- 
                         member steering committee headed by Mr. 
                         Yosef Bar'el 

   This channel, also under the jurisdiction of the IBA, began 
broadcasting in November 1993 and has yet to finalize its 
schedule for news and entertainment programming.  Programming 
currently features relays of the Knesset committee and plenum 
sessions when it is in session, plus ad hoc broadcasts, such as 
the Shamgar commission hearings, which were carried Sunday 
through Thursday from 8 March to 18 April 1994. 

   EDUCATIONAL TELEVISION NETWORK 

Sourceline:              Tel Aviv Educational Television Network 
                         in Hebrew 

Station identification:  "Hatelevizya Hahinukhit Hayisre'elit" 
                         (Israel Educational Television) 

Transmission span:       0600-1530 GMT Sunday through Thursday; 
                         0600-1430 GMT Friday; 
                         No broadcasts on Saturday; 
                         (Note: During the July and August summer 
                         school recess, and on other major school 
                         holidays, the transmission span is 0700- 
                         1530 GMT Sunday through Thursday; 0700- 
                         1430 GMT Friday) 

Frequencies:             Transmitted on Israel Television Channel 
                         1 Network and received on different 
                         channels throughout Israel 

Address:                 14 Klausner Street, Ramat Aviv, 
                         Tel Aviv 

Personnel:               General Manager:  Ya'aqov Lorberbaum 

                         Director of Programs:  Mrs. Y. Prener 

   Programming is controlled by the Educational Television 
Center, which is located in Ramat Aviv and falls under the 
jurisdiction of the Education Ministry.  Programming consists of 
lessons and lectures on various subjects and stories for 
elementary and high school students.  From 1500 to 1530 GMT 
Sunday through Thursday, the network broadcasts "New Evening," a 
live magazine program that deals with topical issues and includes 
interviews, special features, and news headlines.  On Fridays, 
"New Evening" is aired an hour earlier in the form of a Sabbath 
supplement entitled "Supplement of Supplements." 

   NEW CHANNEL 2 TELEVISION NETWORK 

Sourceline:              Jerusalem New Channel 2 Television 
                         Network in Hebrew 

Station identification:  "'Arutz Shnayim Hahadash" (New Channel 
                         2) 

Transmission span:       1200-2300  GMT Sunday through Thursday; 
                         0800-2300  GMT Friday; 
                         0600-2300  GMT Saturday 

Frequencies:             Broadcasts are transmitted on UHF 
                         channel 22 and are currently being 
                         beamed through the 50-kw transmitter at 
                         Etanim on the Jerusalem mountain range. 
                         Satellite service on the 1.0 West 
                         Intelsat; Ku band, video carrier RF 
                         11.174 MHz VP; audio on subcarrier at 
                         6.6 MHz 

Address:                 3 Kanfey Nesharim 
                         Giv'at Sha'ul 
                         Jerusalem 

   This station (formerly government-owned and operated) began 
broadcasting as a commercial enterprise on 1 November 1993. 
Operational oversight is provided by the Second Television and 
Radio Authority, which supervises the broadcasts of five 
concessionaires: Tel'ad Studios, Reshet, Qeshet Communications, 
Educational Television, and The News Company (Hevrat Hahadashot). 
Each concessionaire maintains its own independent editorial 
staff.  Principal newscasts are broadcast at 1800-1830 GMT every 
day but Friday, when a 75-minute news and interview program airs 
at 1800 GMT. 



   Comments and queries regarding this media guide may be 
directed to Chief Analyst, EurAsia/Near East/Africa Group at 
(703) 733-6072.  Comments and queries concerning the World Media 
Report Series can be directed to Media Assessment Branch, Global 
Issues Group at (703) 733-6131. 

   FBIS Media Guides are disseminated electronically to U.S. 
Government offices that are regular FBIS soft-copy customers, and 
as a hard-copy publication to all U.S. Government subscribers who 
regularly receive the corresponding geographic Daily Report. 
Copies of this guide (FBIS MEDIA GUIDE:  ISRAEL, Document Number: 
WMR 94-002, Publication Date: 18 May 1994) and subscriptions to 
FBIS Media Guides are available free of charge to government 
offices from Requirements and Dissemination Branch, Foreign 
Broadcast Information Service, P.O. Box 2604, Washington, D.C. 
20013-2604, Fax: (703) 733-6042.  For additional information or 
assistance, call FBIS at (202) 338-6735.  Electronic customers 
may also request copies or subscriptions to the hard-copy version 
by sending a message to the router RUCWAAB/FBIS RESTON VA//ATTN 
RDB//. 

GIG/24MAY94/OSD/JF 25/0148Z MAY 

