Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Anna Bakina and Vladimir </F>
Rogachev] 
  [Text] Moscow December 16 TASS -- Neither Russia nor the 
United States could carry out such a project alone, head of the 
U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Daniel 
Goldin, told a news conference in Moscow on Thursday. 
  The news conference devoted to the signing of a package of 
bilateral agreements on space cooperation between Russia and the 
United States by Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and 
U.S. Vice-President Al Gore. 
  The documents confirm Russia's participation in the project 
to build an international orbiting station Alpha which is 
expected to go into service in the beginning of the next 
century. The project also involves the European Space Agency, 
Japan and Canada. The 20-year project will provide with jobs 
about 60,000 to 70,000 people and will cost 400 million U.S. 
dollars. 
  This is the largest and most impressive project ever, Goldin 
said. Additionally, Russia's participation will help reduce the 
time needed to bring the first module into orbit by two years, 
he added. 
  Yuriy Koptev, director-general of the Russian Space Agency, 
told ITAR-TASS that the project will also allow Russian 
enterprises to test the most advanced technologies and raise 
international cooperation in space research to a new height. 
Speaking about the content of the project, Koptev said that two 
mission control centres will be engaged to monitor the station 
flight, one in Houston, Texas, U.S., and the other one in the 
city of Kaliningrad outside Moscow. Russian specialists will be 
working in the United States while their American colleagues 
will come to Russia. 
  Koptev also said that a contract has been signed to conduct 
joint work under the project between 1994-1997. He said an 
agreement will be signed next week to determine all basic 
characteristics of technical means to be used within the project 
framework. 

