Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [XINHUA report: "Local Public Security Organs Launch Winter </F>
Offensive Against Crime"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 7 Jan (XINHUA) -- Public security organs 
in various localities have achieved significant phased successes 
in an in-depth and resolute crackdown on specific crimes in the 
"winter offensive," with the theme of "cracking major cases and 
seizing escaped criminals." 
  This winter campaign concentrating on specific crimes was 
launched by public security organs in various localities in 
accordance with the Public Security Ministry's guideline to "do 
a good job in security work during the New Year and Spring 
Festival season and ensure that the broad masses can spend an 
untroubled and harmonious holiday" in light of their respective 
local situation. 
  It has been learned that, since the resolute crackdown 
began, 
through varied forms of cracking down and exercising control, 
Beijing Municipality, Shanghai Municipality, and Hubei Province 
alone have cracked 7,638 various security and criminal cases, 
have arrested 6,472 criminal offenders of all kinds, have 
smashed 781 criminal syndicates, and have seized ill-gotten 
money and goods worth more than 1.6 million yuan. The general 
public's sense of security has been greatly enhanced as a result. 
  The public security organs in various localities quickly 
went 
into action, put in a large amount of manpower, and cracked a 
great number of cases that had caused serious damages, made very 
bad impressions, and incurred the greatest popular indignation. 
Beginning on 12 November last year, the public security bureau 
of Xian City, Shaanxi Province, carried out consecutive 
operations for over 10 days in a row and smashed a syndicate of 
14 criminals, headed by Liu Qiang [0491 1730] and Liu Dongwei 
[0491 2639 0251], who had been robbing taxi drivers with knives. 
The public security bureau of Anshan City, Liaoning Province, 
cracked two unusually large cases within 10 days. In one case 
of robbery and homicide, there were hardly any clues left at the 
scene, but all the detectives took great pains and managed to 
bring the two criminals who were guilty of robbery and murder to 
justice. This bureau also solved an extremely large case of 
stolen gold and prevented state losses of nearly 200,000 yuan. 
The Shanghai Municipal public security bureau solved a heinous 
case of robbery and homicide which had remained unsolved for 
three years by catching the arch-criminals Wang Xiaolong [3769 
1420 7893] and Zhao Guofa [6392 0948 4099]. 

