Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Flexibility Needed in Japan-U.S. Framework </F>
Trade Talks"] 
  [Text] Japan and the United States are in a deadlock over 
individual trade sectors in the bilateral framework trade talks. 
Hardly any progress has been made in talks regarding automobiles 
and auto parts and insurance services. 
  It is still uncertain whether the planned 11 February 
Japan-U.S. summit meeting will be held as scheduled. 
Nevertheless, time is running short. Conseqeuntly, we would 
like to make some suggestions to both Japanese and U.S. 
authorities to help break this deadlock. 
  The issue of setting numerical targets is at the core of 
this 
bilateral trade dispute. Excluding this issue, the trade talks 
have made progress. The United States, however, considers the 
talks unsuccessful if numerical targets are not included in the 
settlement. Likewise, Japan persistently maintains that 
rejection of numerical targets is its bottom line. 
  As we asserted before (in an editorial carried in our 16 
July 
1993 morning edition), it is a mistake for the two nations to 
become dogmatic over this issue. The United States considers 
numerical aims as "targets." Since targets are to be "shot 
through," missing them would result in penalties being imposed. 
  However, Japan would hardly agree to numerical aims with 
penalties attached. In a business world operating under a 
market economy, it is unlikely that government authorities would 
conclude such a suicidal agreement. Should that ever happen, it 
would lead to managed trade. 
  Regarding this point, many noted scholars in the United 
States have expressed opposition to setting numerical targets. 
Both Japan and the United States worked very hard to bring 
GATT's new round of multilateral trade talks (the Uruguay Round) 
to a successful conclusion just recently. Managed trade would 
run counter to this new framework. 
  Meanwhile, there is no reason to reject "goals" if both 
nations can strive together to aim at them. They should try to 
work out a compromise using "benchmarks" with which results can 
be measured objectively. 
  From this viewpoint, it is apparent that the United States 
is 
going to extremes to lay down demands on Japan. It has insisted 
that "market share as in other major industrialized nations" -- 
a figure it has specified regarding access to the 
telecommunications market -- and an increase in "the number of 
dealers to sell foreign automobiles" be specifically written 
down in trade agreements to be concluded. It then plans to 
impose penalties should Japan fail to meet such targets. 
  Another important point is that in the past year, the 
economic environments of both nations have radically changed. 
It has become increasingly clear that the United States has 
gained marked advantage over Japan in competitiveness in the 
fields of electronics and communications. The positions have 
also been reversed in the automobile industry; the United States 
clearly has an advantage over Japan. Remarks that "Japan is of 
little significance" have increasingly been noted in U.S. 
industrial circles. 
  The Japanese Government has a responsibility to increase 
domestic demand in order to reduce the nation's huge trade 
surplus. However, it is not to the advantage of the United 
States for the U.S. Government to act like a bully and try to 
have its way in an area where the nation has already 
strengthened its competitiveness. 
  In any field of business in both nations, there already 
exists a vast network of tie-ups and cooperation linking 
together various firms of both nations as partners. There is a 
limit to the governments' roles in this area. Japanese 
automakers do not call on the Ministry of International Trade 
and Industry [MITI] for counseling when they plan to change 
their trade strategies. What they want is that MITI not make 
any unreasonable commitment to U.S. authorities. 
  Furthermore, some relatively undesirable signs in the 
political foundations of both nations have been noted. Like 
last year, it is still necessary for both nations to continue 
presenting positive proposals, but current circumstances dictate 
that they do not have to continue doing this to the point of 
injuring each other. 
  The administration of U.S. President Bill Clinton has 
carried 
out policies in view of the off-year elections slated for this 
coming fall. However, there is no guarantee that gaining 
visible results from Japan would act favorably in the elections. 
Instead, it should be more important for the United States to 
strive to increase its influence in Asia than Japan. 
  After all, Japan does not have to make excessively strong 
objections against the United States, nor does it have to make 
excessive apologies. 

