Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Following is the text of a statement by the 
presidents of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania issued in Palanga 
March 25 under the headline "Statement of Presidents of Estonia, 
Latvia, Lithuania on the Extension of Mutual and Regional 
Cooperation": 
  [Begin text] We, Presidents of the Baltic States, having met 
in Palanga on 25 March, 1994, state with satisfaction that the 
year 1993 has been effective in institutionalizing the 
cooperation among the Baltic States. This favorable development 
should be extended this year. The Baltic States, harmonizing 
their joint actions and the existing bilateral possibilities 
will seek coordination in their foreign policy, and in 
particular in strengthening of ties with the European political, 
economic, security structures. The Presidents will also 
initiate close cooperation among the embassies and other 
diplomatic missions of the three States as well as support joint 
representation in some States. Our three States strive for 
closer cooperation with the Nordic States and the formula "5+3" 
fully meets the interests of the Baltic States. We also fully 
support the further development of cooperation of the Baltic Sea 
region. 
  We stressed the fact that contacts between the Baltic and 
Visegrad States in the political, economic and security building 
areas can play a greater role in mutually beneficial 
cooperation. We express our readiness to intensify the dialogue 
in all fields and on all levels with a view to facilitating the 
integration of the Visegrad and the Baltic States into European 
political, economic and security structures. An important step 
in this direction will be the conclusion of a free trade 
agreement between the Baltic and Visegrad countries. 
  We welcome the initialed Lithuanian-Polish Treaty on 
Friendly 
Relations and Good Neighbourly Cooperation. We express our 
belief that this Treaty and similar treaties will be a 
politically significant achievement toward establishing 
confidence and promoting integration on the European-South axis 
-- between the Baltic and Visegrad countries. [end text] 

