Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Liu Hsiao-hua (0491 2556 5478): "Jiang Zemin Fosters </F>
High-Ranking Military Officers for Next Century"] 
  [Text] A new military leadership reshuffle was recently 
carried out. 
  Central Military Commission (CMC) Chairman Jiang Zemin was 
in 
charge of the reshuffle and Vice Chairmen Liu Huaqing and Zhang 
Zhen joined him in making personnel arrangements. 
<H5>  Jiang Zemin Reorganized the Army on Deng Xiaoping's Advice </H5>
  Before reorganizing the Army leadership, Jiang asked Deng 
for 
advice. This has been the third major personnel reshuffle 
involving high-ranking officers since Jiang was appointed CMC 
chairman. The first reshuffle took place in late April 1990 and 
the second in November 1992. The current reshuffle, which took 
place two years after the last one, involved the seven military 
regions and all navy and air force branches of the armed 
services. 
  Lieutenant General Zhang Gong, who was in charge of the 
CMC's 
day-to-day work and was promoted very quickly under Yang Baibing 
(former CMC secretary general and General Political Department 
director), was, after the 14th CPC National Congress, 
transferred to Sichuan to the post of political commissar of the 
Chengdu Military Region. Recently, he was appointed political 
commissar of the Academy of Military Sciences and the vacancy 
was filled by Lieutenant General Zhang Zhijian. 
  Lieutenant General Li Laizhu was appointed commander of the 
Beijing Military Region, replacing Wang Chengbin. 
  Lieutenant General Li Xinliang (former deputy political 
commissar of the Guangzhou Military Region) was appointed 
political commissar of the Shenyang Military Region. 
  Lieutenant General Fang Zuqi (former director of the 
political department of the Beijing Military Region) was 
appointed political commissar of the Nanjing Military Region. 
  Lieutenant General Zhou Kunren (former political commissar 
of 
the South China Sea Fleet) was appointed political commissar of 
the navy. 
  Lieutenant General Tao Bojun succeeded Li Xinliang as deputy 
commander of the Guangzhou Military Region. 
  Lieutenant General Zou Yuqi was appointed deputy commander 
of 
the Lanzhou Military Region. 
  Xu Caihou was promoted to deputy director of the General 
Political Department and chief of JIEFANGJUN BAO. 
  Young General Zhou Youliand was promoted to deputy director 
of the General Logistics Department. 
<H5>  Training Successors to Military Leaders Is An Urgent Need </H5>
  It is imperative for China's party and government leaders to 
train young successors and so it is for military leaders. In a 
sense, the latter is more urgent. This is because incumbent 
senior military leaders are a little too old--many of them are 
over 60--and were injured in the War of Liberation and took part 
in the Korean War. CMC Vice Chairmen Liu Huaqing and Zhang 
Zhen, who helped Jiang Zemin (who was born in 1926) in taking 
care of military affairs, are 78 and 79 respectively. Since 
China is set to achieve the four modernizations (including 
modernization of national defense) by the end of this century, 
it has to update its weaponry using modern science and 
technology, including electronics, and try to catch up with the 
world's most advanced countries in terms of military 
professions, equipment, and strategy. The task is impressive 
and competent people, rather than old people, will play a 
decisive role in fulfilling it. For this reason, after the 
recent enlarged CMC meeting, Jiang Zemin, Liu Huaqing, and Zhang 
Zhen resolutely reshuffled the high-level leadership of the Army 
and promoted younger officers in all military regions and in all 
services and arms to leadership positions. It is safe to say 
that this is a farsighted move. 
<H3>  Li Peng Said: "Not All Is Well in Today's World and 
Unpredictable Factors Never Reduce But Increase." </H3>
  Li Peng said: "World politics and economic relations are 
moving in the direction of multipolarization at an ever greater 
pace. The international situation is complicated and ever 
changing and the unpredictable factors never reduce but 
increase. Not all is well in today's world and the questions of 
peace and development remain the two top priorities on the 
international agenda today. We must be prepared for danger in 
times of peace. To maintain China's long rule and stability, 
China's Army must always be prepared against war." 
<H3>  What Is the Reason for the Current Military Leadership 
Reshuffle? </H3>
  Some overseas observers believe that the reason for Jiang 
Zemin's urgent reshuffle of the military leadership was that 
Deng Xiaoping's health has begun to break up. It seems that 
this is not the case. The actual reason is that the CPC 
hierarchy is preparing the Army for the next century by updating 
it. 

