CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ake Ekdahl and Dick Ljungberg: "EU Blurs </F>
Outlines"] 
  [Excerpts] Swedish domestic policy is being forced to grope 
in a vacuum after the election this fall. Regardless of which 
majorities the election on 18 September may create in the 
Riksdag for the next four years, no government will be able to 
submit a definitive government platform until the result of the 
EU [European Union] referendum on 13 November is known. 
  If the voters were to give Carl Bildt the opportunity of 
continuing his coalition government, the government contract 
with the four parties must be renegotiated. The problem is, 
however, that the economic assessments and measures will be 
completely different depending on whether Sweden is an EU 
country or not for the 1994-98 mandate period. Therefore, the 
government cannot supply the principal outlines of its policies. 
<H5>  Economy Will Be Delayed </H5>
  The government's fall proposal for medium-term economic 
policy will be influenced by the same lack of clear 
preconditions and must also be postponed while waiting for the 
EU decision. 
  On the whole, the situation would be identical if the 
parliamentary election were to result in a change of power that 
enabled Ingvar Carlsson to form a government. 
  The government's party composition, the nomination of 
cabinet 
members and their policy programs, with concrete measures for at 
least the first year in the Riksdag, are complicated by waiting 
for over a month for the EU result. 
  In a difficult parliamentary situation it could even become 
difficult for the Riksdag to appoint someone to form a 
government. When New Democracy entered the Riksdag in 1991, Ian 
Wachtmeister first wanted to see the government's platform 
before giving his indirect support to the election of Carl Bildt 
as the new prime minister. [passage omitted] 
  If he gets to stay on, Carl Bildt is prepared for the 
nonsocialist government to write an interim program in which the 
government promises to return with a detailed program platform 
after the decision by the Swedish people on how to deal with the 
EU membership. 
  It could mean that in a multiparty government the 
participating parties must sign a partially blank cooperation 
contract. This could be a point of concern, not least for the 
Center Party, which has already made it clear that the party 
will use the government negotiations after the election to force 
through the inclusion of strong reservations for Swedish 
membership as regards currency cooperation and neutrality. 
  The Center Party also wants to have clear evidence of what 
will happen to the abolition of nuclear power before the party 
agrees to participate in a new Bildt government. Such 
commitments are hardly likely to take place without the 
knowledge regarding EU membership. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Budget Problem </H5>
  Another concern is developing regarding the budget bill. 
After 1996 the budget is to be valid for a calendar year (today 
it runs from the middle of one year to the next). 
  In addition to the fact that in an election year there is 
too 
little time for the government to submit a budget bill for the 
Riksdag no later than 20 September, additional difficulties will 
occur in the transitional period this fall since the fiscal 
period encompasses 18 months, until 31 December 1996. 
  "This is something we have given a great deal of thought," 
says Under Secretary of State Peter Egardt. "It is important for 
the government authorities to be correctly compared with the 
present appropriations period. For this reason we are dividing 
the fiscal year into three half-year periods." 
  With that division Carl Bildt is prepared first to draw up a 
six-month budget from 1 June to 31 December and then a full-year 
budget from 1 January 1996. 

