Development 

<F P=102>   94WS0310A Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ZEITUNG/BLICK DURCH DIE 
WIRTSCHAFT in German 7 Apr 94 pp 1,8 </F>

<F P=103> 94WS0310A </F>
<F P=104>  Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ZEITUNG/BLICK DURCH DIE 
WIRTSCHAFT </F>

<F P=105>  German </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "New Control Systems Yield Measurable </F>
Benefits"; "Preview of Hannover Fair: Emphasis on Automation"] 
  [Text] 
  Hannover. This year's Cebit has already received encouraging 
good notices from exhibitors and connected business 
associations. They make us hope that the economy has definitely 
bottomed out. Also this year's Hannover Fair (20-27 April) is 
expected to receive a positive evaluation. In the foreground of 
this huge industrial fair, its 6600 or so exhibitors detect a 
distinct change in the economic trend and, beyond that, 
indicators of future global technological development. 
  Market economy and technological development are never at a 
standstill. Thus the '94 Hannover Fair continues the tradition 
of displaying the latest industrial developments. One of the 
major items it offers its viewers is automation technology. 
High-tech solutions to problems are not only to realize perhaps 
immediately potential benefits measurable in terms of business 
economics but also to improve decisively such competitiveness 
influencing factors as productivity, flexibility, and quality. 
At the center of it are control systems, including industrial 
bus systems represented, among others, by the Interbus S-Club 
and fabrication routing systems. Great significance is attached 
to various aspects of quality assurance as well as to industrial 
image processing and automation software, because industrial 
control systems form the basis of automation in many areas of 
application. 
  Last year in Germany industrial control systems such as 
Numeric Control (NC), Robotic Control (RC), and Symbolic 
Programming Systems (SPS) had to suffer a DM2.3-billion-large 
drop in sales. Most of the SPS scraped hardly through with an 
only -5 percent sales figure, while NC and RC reported double- 
digit losses. 
  This decline corresponds to the situation affecting the 
customers in those areas where SP systems serve the entire 
capital goods sector, which covers machine manufacturing, the 
chemical industry, and the automobile industry, and in areas 
where the other control systems are used, such as the machine 
tool industry especially. 
  The increased supply of bus-compatible standard products 
furthers unrestricted communication. The increasing demand for 
software lets enterprises in the automation software business 
report the highest growth rates, so much so that even the latest 
developments, such as fuzzy logic and neural networks, are 
rapidly advancing into the limelight position. 
  Assembly and handling are, in terms of cost, often the 
crucial functions in the fabrication process. It may seem, at 
first sight, that the chief component in modern handling and 
assembly systems is the robot. Actually, however, for operation 
it does not rely on its "intelligence" and controls alone but 
also on peripheral equipment and communication with it. 
  The most important support a robot receives is from sensors, 
which today range from simple mechanical tactile feelers through 
proximity switches and photocells to sophisticated image 
processors. A high-resolution image recognition device, 
operating in three dimensions, compares contours precisely down 
to fractions of a millimeter, with a master pattern programmed 
by electronic discrete variable feed-in and then recognizes the 
finest gray grades, as well as color hues. 
  Assembly, handling, industrial robots, and automation must 
more then ever be viewed as forming one meaningful entity. A 
special exhibit under the title service robots serves to 
illustrate the opening of entirely new applications for 
intelligent robot systems. At the 25th International Symposium 
on Industrial Robots on 25-27 April internationally known 
scientists and engineers are dealing with the manifold 
application possibilities for robots. 
  Service Robot Will Be One of the Most Important 
Components in Production Technology 
  Hannover Fair hopes for better times; knowledge-based 
systems will be increasingly used for optimization of 
upper-level operations management 
  Among others there are also to be shown service robots such 
as, for instance: robots which clean, robots which maintain the 
drive box in electric locomotives, asparagus-harvesting robots, 
aviation robots, and robots which inspect vertical above-ground 
structures of buildings. 
  New applications for service robots are opening up also in 
medicine and rehabilitation, in care for the aged and 
handicapped, in bureaus and logistics, in municipal activities, 
in households, in hobbies and recreation. The "Helpmate" 
developed by Engelberger Engineering Enterprises TCR is 
transporting meals and medications in American clinics, not a 
novelty any more. Robots for steering medical instruments, 
especially in surgery, have been tested for several years 
already. 
  For care of the aged and handicapped the Fraunhofer 
Institute 
of Production Technology and Automation (IPA) in Stuttgart, 
under the direction of Prof Dr.-Eng. Rolf Dieter Scraft, has, in 
collaboration with European Industry and Research partners, 
developed an integrated system for steering 
handicapped-assistance devices. 
  Use of robots in the building trades is being pushed 
especially by Japanese manufacturers. The next decade will see a 
robot becoming one of the most important component of production 
technology. German suppliers are well advised to quickly seize 
the opportunity which this development offers. 
  The highlighting material flow technology and logistics 
(CeMAT) exhibit suggests innovations in all sectors of the 
economy, inasmuch as it includes not only material flow control 
systems and logistic service capabilities but also delivery and 
storage techniques along with plant operation facilities. While 
use of unitized systems for all material flow operations is the 
key to product line and plant layout flexibility, this concept 
also leads the way to more cost-effective fabrication. 
  The surface treatment technology covers an enormously wide 
range of processes, such as galvanizing, varnishing, enameling, 
coating, and in each case includes both preliminary and finish 
treatments. The coating technology, especially in vacuum 
metallurgy and thin-film production, applies to a wide range of 
coatings, from functional ones through decorative and protective 
ones to wear-resistant ones, which also decrease friction 
between rubbing bodies. 
  Vacuum metallurgy involves smelting, degassing, and 
remelting 
plants and processes in the alloy and thus principally 
material-making technology. Thin-film techniques, used mainly in 
both electronics and optical industries, continue to advance and 
are now applied to data storage media, mechanical and surgical 
precision instruments, also cutting tools for metal removal, as 
well as other devices for corrosion and wear protection. 
  Coating metal-cutting tools with titanaluminum nitrite 
eliminated the need for coolant-lubricant fluids. Great emphasis 
on thin-film technology is put by the Plasma Technology 
Initiative NRW, also called Pla Tin for short, and the 
registered Thin Films sponsoring company in Dresden, along with 
its member enterprises on company-owned sites in Halle 6. 
  The electrical engineering exhibit in Hannover is always 
active on a high technical level, combining classical products 
and applications with modern system techniques. Thorough 
automation of power plants and intelligent energy distribution 
are self-evident. 
  The most recent developments shown in Hannover indicate that 
the emphasis is more and more shifting on use of knowledge-based 
systems in higher levels of management engineering, i.e., they 
will be used not only as process control support but also 
increasingly for optimization of upper-level operations 
management. 
  Flexible adaptations are also taking place in the building 
industry, where they lead to profiles in installation layout and 
illumination design. Modern market-oriented systems for building 
automation have already been standardized and are available at 
various stages of construction; ideas and stimuli coming from 
various sources are gathered under a common roof in construction 
management engineering. A decisive role is, moreover, played 
here by cost savings in heat, air-conditioning, and ventilation. 
  For illumination, design interest focuses on energy-saving, 
innovative, and durable products. A long life is, for instance, 
ensured by the QL-induction lighting system. For decorative 
illumination, increasing use, besides halogen incandescent 
lamps, is made of much-improved-color high-pressure sodium vapor 
lamps. 
  Now, just as before, the most popular light source is the 
fluorescent lamp, electronic circuits having been developed for 
its operation on direct or alternating current, with significant 
reduction of the otherwise relatively high power losses. 
  In the field of plant construction and modern materials, 
Hannover hosts not only the globally active industrial firms in 
their own pavilions but also many small and medium-sized 
enterprises in the consulting and engineering services business. 
  The open-grounds-type exhibition strongly emphasizes energy 
saving, material recycling, environmental engineering, sewage 
disposal, and pollution abatement. One inquires here about 
know-how in implementing project plans up to the 
ready-for-delivery stage. The exhibition program is supplemented 
with industrial facilities, special-purpose vehicles, rail 
transport vehicles, caterpillars for open-pit mining, roller 
macrobearings, cranes, hoists, and farming equipment. 
  After being absent in Hannover for two successive years, the 
air compressor industry makes its appearance again with broad 
diversity of applications. Compressors in various different 
configurations are shown, as are various compressor plant 
concepts for compressed-air conditioning and distribution, with 
special attention to the attendant electronics. 
  The exhibit includes compressed-air tools for oilless or air 
with oil operation, drilling and milling machines, high-speed 
tools, semiautomatic and fully automatic lathes. Welding smoke 
exhaust facilities, worker protection and safety equipment, 
manual and electrically operated tools complete the exhibit. 
  Ever more attention is paid to certification in accordance 
with the DIN ISO [German industrial standards; International 
Standardization Organization] in delivery of components and 
supplies, where the trend is toward the system approach. 
Independent institutions such as the German Association for 
Quality Assurance (DQS) and the Dekra or facility of 
Associations for Technical Inspection (TUeV) Cert examine and 
evaluate the organization and the procedures in an enterprise. 
Only after a rigorous quality test procedure do they issue 
certificates complying with the DIN ISO 9000. 
  A permanent part of the Hannover Fair has for many years 
been 
the "market before the market," meaning the research and 
technology market. Also the European European Patent Office 
(EPA) participates in the Hannover Fair, to a larger extent than 
has been reported on previous occasions, the aim being to make 
dormant resources disclosed in patents available to qualified 
members of the public. 
  Reports issued by the European Patent Office indicate that 
about DM30 billion are lost annually and that still a 
considerable part of research funds is being poured into 
development of already patented products. At a time when 
hundreds of thousands of jobs are sought in Europe, the Patent 
Office has assumed the task of making knowledge marketable, of 
stimulating ideas, of seizing on development trends, and of 
bringing innovators together with financiers. In collaboration 
with large-scale research institutes, universities, colleges, 
and industrial research departments, the Patent Office paves the 
way for transfer of knowledge into the technical domain. 
  The convention program offers a diverse abundance of 
domestic 
and international seminars and conferences, technoeconimical 
forums, technical high lights, finance of political and market 
strategies. By way of "short cuts" the Hannover Fair compresses 
into eight days the search for new developments, the scanning of 
global engineering trends, and detailed inquiries about the 
various specialty areas. A technology data bank and a reliable 
research forum are the support needed for innovative 
communication. 

