BFN 

<F P=106> ["Windows" column by Diya' Hasan: "The Nation is Strong With </F>
Iraq, Not Without It"] 
  [Text] Hafiz al-Asad's foreign minister Faruq al-Shar' has 
discovered at last that Arab suffering is due to the 
deterioration of Arab solidarity. He cited as examples the 
situation in Somalia, the blockade on Libya, and the conditions 
of the Palestinians under occupation. However, he completely 
ignored the suffering of the Iraqi people, as if he has not 
heard of the criminal blockade on Iraq due to that 
deterioration, for which his regime is largely responsible. 
  The Syrian minister knows very well that his regime has 
never 
stood for the unification of ranks and the building of a base 
for solidarity. On the contrary, his regime has stood against 
everything that is pan-Arab, and its leaders have sided with 
those who covet the nation and their actions have centered on 
foiling all efforts toward Arab solidarity. They imposed a 
blockade on Iraq and its people long before the foreigners did. 
Their ban on the flow of Iraqi oil through Syrian and Lebanese 
territories and ports preceded Washington's blockade of Iraq by 
10 years. Hafiz al-Asad's cooperation with Bush and his 
participation in the 30-state aggression against our people 
explains the nature of his regime, which is against everything 
that is Arab and is hostile to Arab national awakening. 
  What twisted logic is Hafiz al-Asad's minister trying to 
propagate when he insists on ignoring the suffering of the 
Iraqis? What kind of Arab solidarity can he propound in the 
absence of Iraq and amid the involvement of his regime and 
others in the continuation of the blockade on our people? He 
thinks that people are so stupid that they have not realized 
until now that the Syrian regime is playing its role exactly as 
planned, and that a settlement, as desired by Washington and 
with the participation of the Syrian regime of course, can only 
take place in the absence of Arab solidarity and Iraq. But for 
how long will that continue? This is the important question. 
Since the failure of the aggression, events have confirmed 
that no one can overlook lraq's power and ability. It is an 
asset to the nation's continued existence and awakening. Iraq 
is here to stay, O minister of Hafiz! 

