Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Moscow (February 24) TURAN--Azerbaijani President 
Aliyev delivered a speech at London's Royal Institute of 
International Relations, reports TURAN's Moscow's correspondent 
according to the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
  Moscow officials attentively observed several moments of 
President Aliyev's speech. In particular, President Aliyev 
mentioned that Azerbaijan is willing to consider the deployment 
of international peacemaking forces, under the auspices of the 
CSCE, on its territory. This can take place only after a 
complete withdrawal by Armenian troops from Azerbaijani 
territory. 
  A source in the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs reports 
that Russian troops will form the backbone of the peacemaking 
forces. Moscow's observers believe that since NATO and CSCE are 
totally preoccupied with the settlement of the Bosnian problem, 
they are unlikely to have the strength and means to put into 
place a peacemaking mission in the zone of the 
Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict. 
  Russian defense minister mentioned that beginning on March 
1, 
Russia will begin implementation of its peace plan for the 
settlement of the Karabakh conflict. This plan provides for 
bringing Russian peacemaking troops into the zone of the 
Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict. 
  Addressing the Royal Institute, President Aliyev mentioned 
that Armenians of Nagorno Karabakh full rights equal to those of 
Azerbaijani citizens and their security is guaranteed by the 
Constitution of the country. 
  In addition, President Aliyev said that Baku will begin 
discussions over the status of Nagorno-Karabakh. But it is 
connected with the complete withdrawal of Armenian armed forces 
from all occupied territories of Azerbaijan, including 
Nagorno-Karabakh, said President Aliyev. The observers of the 
Russian Defense Ministry noted that Azerbaijan does not exclude 
the possibility of exchange of territory with Armenia. In his 
speech President Aliyev said that issue concerning the exchange 
of "corridors" was repeatedly put forth long ago. But if such a 
necessity arises, we will resume discussion of this matter 
again, mentioned Aliyev. As known, in 1991 American 
politologist, Paul Goble, put forward a proposal concerning the 
exchange of corridors which connects Azerbaijan with Nakhichevan 
and Nagorno-Karabakh. At that time, Armenia and Azerbaijan 
rejected this variant. 

