BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Sergey Knyazkov: "New Deadline -- Three Years </F>
Hence. Moldavia Agrees That Withdrawal of Russian 14th Army in 
1994 Is Unrealistic"] 
  [Text] The ninth round of the Russian-Moldavian talks on 
the status of and deadline for the withdrawal of the Russian 
14th Army from the territory of Moldavia [Moldova] took place in 
Moscow on 7-8 June. Unlike previous rounds, so special envoy 
Vladimir Kitayev, head of the Russian delegation, announced, the 
talks took a more constructive course. The Moldavian side 
abandoned its demand for the withdrawal of the 14th Army by 1 
July 1994 and suggested that it be done over a period of three 
years. Clearly, the more realistic approach to the deadline for 
the withdrawal of Russian forces is connected with the change in 
the political climate in Kishinev [Chisinau] following the 
Moldavian parliamentary elections. 
  The Moldavian delegation included four representatives of 
the 
Dniester region as observers. On 7 June a statement was issued 
in their name to the effect that Tiraspol is totally against the 
withdrawal of the 14th Army. But if it is decided nonetheless 
to withdraw it, the Dniester region intends to insist that all 
the Army's property and armaments remain in the Dniester 
Moldavian Republic. This statement further emphasizes that the 
"Dniester problem" is still as acute as ever, despite the fact 
that confidence has begun to grow of late in relations between 
Kishinev and Tiraspol. But it was pretty obvious at this round 
of the Russian-Moldavian talks too that the withdrawal of 
Russian subunits from the territory of Moldova can be 
implemented only if the safety of civilians on both sides of the 
Dniester is secured. 
  The information from the Russian Federation Ground Forces 
press center (I would point out that Colonel General Eduard 
Vorobyev, deputy commander in chief of the ground forces, heads 
the group of military representatives in the Russian delegation) 
is that progress has been made on a main agreement on the legal 
status, procedure, and deadline for the withdrawal of our forces 
from Moldavia. The delegations discussed agreements on Russian 
military aircraft's flying activities in the Republic of 
Moldavia, on the use of the airfield in Tiraspol by Russian 
Federation Defense Ministry transports, and a number of other 
topics. 
  Seven agreements between Russia and Moldavia have been 
concluded and implemented since 8 August 1992, when the first 
round of talks took place. 
  An agreement on equivalent exchange for the 189th Missile 
Brigade is in the implementation stage: Russia has bought 
transport and loading systems from Moldavia and is supplying 
noncombat military equipment and property in exchange. 

