CSO 

    [Editorial Report] According to a Finnish News Service 
report carried as lead stories in the 8 April editions of 
Helsinki HELSINGIN SANOMAT and HUFVUDSTADSBLADET, a new 
political party has formed from the ranks of defeated 
presidential candidate Keijo Korhonen, and has as its main goal 
the opposition of European Union [EU] membership. As did 
Korhonen in the February election, the movement's leaders are 
directing their appeal largely to Center Party voters 
disaffected with the policies of Prime Minister Aho's 
center-right coalition, especially its drive to establish closer 
economic and security links with West Europe. Choosing the 
title, The New National Center [UKK], the party plans to hold a 
constituting convention "within the next few months," and then 
-- in the words of provisional Chairman Ilkka Hakalehto -- 
select candidates for the March parliamentary election who will 
"work for the independent motherland's best." The party pledges 
to put up a candidate in every electoral district. 
  In statements released to the press, the main plank in the 
party's platform will be to "follow a policy not dependent on EU 
legislation." Foreign and security policy is to be returned more 
toward traditional neutrality, based on a strong national 
defense. Appealing to voters disaffected with establishment 
parties in general, the party vows to go fight white collar 
crime and corruption, as well as to bring a new force into 
parliament to deal with unemployment and recession. 
  Hakalehto, a former city councilman from Helsinki and Center 
Party member is -- like most others in the provisional 
leadership -- a relatively unknown figure previously involved in 
the anti-EU movement. He and Deputy Chairman Pentti Kettunen, a 
businessman and former Rural Party MP from Kajana, were founders 
of the People's Independence Front, which is now directing its 
efforts to defeating EU membership in the referendum planned for 
late summer or early fall. Korhonen has so far not taken a 
leading role and has vowed not to become a candidate. 
  The Center Party, already badly split, now fears entering 
the 
next election even more divided. Many of its leaders have 
denounced the new movement. Party Secretary Erja Tikka took the 
lead in this, claiming the UKK would not get the minimum votes 
needed to enter parliament, but at the same time would hurt 
Center Party candidates. 

