BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by correspondents Salvador Guerrero Chipres and </F>
Jesus Aranda and special correspondent Aurelio Garibay] 
  [Text] Tijuana, Baja California, 15 May -- According to 
estimates made public by the Attorney General's Office (PGR), 
drug trafficking groups operating in Mexico will receive gross 
revenues totalling about $30 billion this year--an amount that 
represents one-sixth of the value of annual cocaine consumption 
in the United States. 
  According to a confidential report prepared by the PGR and 
obtained by LA JORNADA, the annual drug market in the United 
States has expanded from $76 billion to $181 billion. Even the 
U.S. Senate Narcotics Subcommittee has reported that nearly $100 
billion originating from drug trafficking is held in U.S. banks. 
  According to the PGR, "the value of the world's illegal drug 
market is estimated at close to $500 billion," making it the 
underground financial sector with "the highest growth rate in 
the world." 
  Based on figures and documents prepared by the PGR, which 
have been reported to the president of the republic, and based 
on forecasts prepared by organizations such as the Hemispheric 
Information System for Narcotics Control (SHICD), which is "an 
intelligence network" designed to fight drug trafficking on the 
continent, it has been established that Mexico's crude oil and 
non- crude oil export revenues, in addition to the overall value 
of the nation's manufacturing industry, represent "an amount 
comparable" to the total gross revenues earned by domestic drug 
trafficking. 
  However, the portion of these revenues that remains in 
Mexico 
"is unknown, although most of it is thought to go overseas." 
  The previously mentioned amount is equivalent to four times 
the value of 1993 crude oil exports reported by the Bank of 
Mexico, which amounted to $7.418 billion. 
  In 1992, the federal government warned in a document 
entitled 
"Drug Control in Mexico" that resources controlled by narcotics 
traffickers and their gross revenues are capable of infiltrating 
any sector: "This calls for special attention in terms of 
protecting the nation's economy and, more important, the 
regional economy in order to prevent drug trafficking assets 
from becoming the nerve center of economic activity." 
  According to the same document, so far in 1994 the total 
revenues received by criminal organizations amount to nearly 
four times Mexico's total public and private foreign debt. 
Although significant, this amount must also be appreciated in 
terms of the material and human costs associated with operations 
leading to drug seizures. 
  One kilogram of high-grade cocaine in the U.S. retail market 
can be bought for a price ranging between $80,000 and $100,000. 
  Nearly 178 tons of cocaine where seized and destroyed during 
the first four years of this administration. 
  In October 1993, Morelos Governor Jorge Carrilo Olea said: 
"Drug trafficking has created its own culture, its own social 
structure, and its own safety controls, and, in some countries, 
it constitutes an element that influences and weighs heavily on 
society and the state, even threatening to subjugate them." Mr. 
Carrillo was at one time in charge of the PGR's 
Counter-Narcotics Office and also a presidential adviser 
specializing on drug related issues. 
  He also said: "The principle of profitability and capital 
return makes this phenomenon very different from other illegal 
practices. This is a criminal network which, following the 
pattern of an open and free market, assumes the shape of 
multinational corporations with a management, organizational, 
and operational structure that reflect pure business concerns." 
  Carrillo also pointed out that the enormous drive behind 
drug 
trafficking includes access to sizable financial assets and the 
illegal flow of resources that penetrate the economies of 
developing and consumer countries, as well as those nations that 
serve as bridges. In addition, there are the widespread 
international criminal organizations which "in some cases, 
infiltrate and erode government structures responsible for 
controlling them," such as has occurred in Mexico, according to 
a public acknowledgement by PGR authorities. 
  The third element is the constant association between drug 
trafficking and illegal weapons trafficking, "which constitutes 
a formidable threat to stability and regional peace, especially 
in the case of Latin America." 
  It is worth noting that several insurgent movements have 
been 
linked by various South American governments to weapons 
trafficking. 
  Here in Mexico, according to statements by Subcommander 
Marcos, the weapons used by the EZLN [Zapatista National 
Liberation Army] were purchased on the black market and include 
weapons seized by PGR agents from drug traffickers. The PGR has 
not commented on the rebel's statements. 
  In October 1993, General Carrillo Olea, who is also a former 
national security director, indicated: "The struggle waged by 
the police and the military against organized criminal 
organizations has upset society and shaken the political sector 
in a very significant way. Therefore, without denying the value 
of these resources, it is important to examine this carefully 
and to maintain the firm resolve to restrain its progression. 
The objective in this war is not to destroy the enemy, because 
this is impossible. The goal is to keep the enemy under 
control." 
  He added: "Wars against drugs trafficking expose 
institutions 
to ever-increasing risks of corruption. One of the most 
disappointing lessons of the campaigns waged against global drug 
trafficking has been to observe how institutions responsible for 
implementing the law are powerless against internal corruption 
campaigns staged by the drug lords. All contact with 
traffickers, even as enemies, increases the possibility of 
corruption." 

