BFN 

  [Text] Tianjin, June 11 (XINHUA) -- A campaign has been 
launched in this north China port city and industrial center 
against fake goods, an official said here today. 
  The event got started in the downtown area yesterday, and 
over 10,000 fake products worth 300,000 yuan were discovered, 
according to the top official with the municipal industry and 
commerce administration. 
  More than 400 administrators and local officials took part 
in 
yesterday's inspection of electronics products and appliances in 
more than 50 department stores and shops, the official said. 
  "Such fraud violates China's trademark and anti-unfair 
competition laws," said one of the law-enforcement personnel. 
  "In accordance with the law, imitations should be 
confiscated 
and the dealers punished," he said. 
  The French Merlin Gerin Company built a joint venture in 
Tianjin with its own funds in 1987 to produce electronic 
switches. Its sales in 1993 totaled 130 million yuan and its 
products hold a good reputation in both the domestic and world 
markets. 
  "Our products have been imitated since 1990," said Michel 
Collonge, French general manager of the company. "But we are 
still confident in China's efforts to protect intellectual 
property. This is the reason why we have decided to further 
expand our investment in Shanghai." 
  The Tianjin campaign has not been the only one so far, the 
official said. In other big cities across the country, such as 
Shanghai, Shenyang, Chengdu, Xian and Chongqing, efforts also 
have been made to crack down on activities of unfair 
competition, he added. 
  The procuratorial bodies in these parts of China have also 
brought producers and dealers of fraudulent goods to justice, 
the official said. 
  The French general manager spoke highly of the actions the 
Chinese Government has taken to fight against unfair 
competition. "We are feeling safer as China's legal system to 
protect foreign investors' intellectual property matures," he 
said. 

