BFN 

  [Text] Prague, Feb 15 (CTK) -- Czech Parliament today 
passed a government bill on foreign trade with military 
materials, which lays down conditions for such trade and 
determines the powers of state administrative bodies to enforce 
them. 
  Ministry of Trade and Industry Vladimir Dlouhy said the law 
stipulated conditions and procedures for granting permits on 
trade of foreign-made materials, and for granting licenses for 
specific trade deals. 
  According to the law, weapons of mass destruction, that is 
nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons, must not be included 
in any trade of military materials. The understanding of 
military materials includes, apart from technical equipment and 
its components, also services granted in this connection. 
  Trade with military material can now be conducted only by a 
legal entity based in the territory of the Czech Republic, 
following the receipt of a permit issued by the Industry and 
Trade Ministry and approval from the Foreign, Defense, and 
Interior Ministries. 
  "We shall be the first country of the former Eastern bloc to 
adopt independent legislation for this sensitive area, following 
the example of advanced countries," Dlouhy said. 
  The Industry and Trade Ministry will supervise adherence to 
the law. If it finds that a legal entity has broken any 
regulation of the law, it will be entitled to impose on it a 
fine of up to five million Czech crowns. If a breach of the law 
causes damage to the Czech Republic, the fine may be up to six 
times as high. 
  The weapons trade law also amends the Law on Small 
Businesses 
and the Penal Code. The amendment of the Penal Code rests in 
that the Law on Weapons Trade includes regulations prohibiting 
trade with military material. An individual, for instance, who 
engages in a deal with military material without permission or a 
license will receive a prison term of one to eight years, or can 
have further commercial activities prohibited and/or receive a 
fine. 

