Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] His Majesty King Husayn received Egyptian 
Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa at the Royal Hashemite Court today. 
His Highness Crown Prince Hasan attended the meeting. [passage 
omitted] 
  Talal al-Hasan, minister of state for foreign affairs, and 
'Amr Musa praised the results of the Jordanian-Egyptian talks 
held in Amman today. They emphasized the importance of these 
talks in developing bilateral cooperation and bolstering 
bilateral and Arab coordination in order to unite the Arab 
position. 
  This has come in press statements made by the two ministers 
at the Amman Airport before the Egyptian foreign minister left 
Amman today at the end of a short working visit to Jordan. 
  Al-Hasan described the meeting between His Majesty King 
Husayn and the guest minister as cordial and fruitful, and said 
the meeting reviewed bilateral relations in general and ways of 
developing them. The peace process as a whole and each of the 
tracks were also discussed. 
  He said it was agreed during the Jordanian-Egyptian meetings 
to support bilateral coordination and Arab coordination in 
general in order to realize higher Arab interests. The minister 
emphasized the importance of the Arab economic coordination as 
complementary to the political coordination. He said: During 
'Amr Musa's visit to Jordan talks addressed activating bilateral 
economic relations and convening a meeting for the Higher 
Jordanian-Egyptian Joint Committee, led by the prime ministers 
of both countries in order to discuss developing bilateral 
cooperation in all fields as an enhancement to bilateral 
economic cooperation. 
  'Amr Musa described his visit to Amman as fruitful and 
successful. He said: I was honored to meet with His majesty 
King Husayn, and I conveyed to his majesty a message from his 
brother His Excellency President Muhammad Husni Mubarak. The 
meeting was very good and long talks were held on the peace 
process--its past, present, and future--the importance of Arab 
coordination on this issue, and the other tracks of the peace 
process. Talks also dealt with bilateral relations and means of 
developing them, and it was agreed to hold a meeting of the 
Higher Jordanian-Egyptian Joint Committee. [passage omitted] 

