Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "From Chiapas to Huallaga"] </F>
  [Text] The theory that EXPRESO was the first in the world 
to propose that the international drug-trafficking world is 
behind the armed uprising in Chiapas, southern Mexico appears to 
have been confirmed. That is not surprising to us. 
  Of the heroin consumed in the United States, 23 percent 
comes 
from Mexico, particularly from the Chiapas, Oaxaca, and Guerrero 
States, where poppies are cultivated. The plant was also 
cultivated in Sonora, in northern Mexico, until a few months 
ago. But joint operations by Mexican Police and the DEA have 
reportedly destroyed the poppy plantations in the region. Since 
then, the cultivation of this plant has reportedly been 
concentrated in the south, where the armed struggle broke out. 
  It is possible that other elements -- ethnic, ideological, 
or 
social -- influenced the materialization of the revolt, but it 
is already a well-known fact that drug traffickers usually arm 
and finance these types of operations, because in order to 
develop their drug production schemes they must operate in 
territories that are outside the control of national 
governments. Drug trafficking prospers where there is chaos, 
where there is no law, and where the law of the strongest 
prevails. 
  It is a general rule that drug traffickers sponsor the fight 
among local armed groups and finance all parties involved in a 
struggle wherever they go. This is what happened in Huallaga. 
Here drug traffickers financed the operations of the Shining 
Path and the MRTA [Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement], and the 
work of corrupt Armed Forces and police agents. 
  In Huallaga, however, two events placed this game of 
confrontation out of balance: On the one hand, the military, as 
part of a national offensive against terrorism, were able to 
weaken the Shining Path and MRTA movements in the region, 
although without eliminating them. On the other hand, the 
control of airports by the Air Force and the shooting down of 
light airplanes forced many drug traffickers to look for better 
places in the central jungle and in the south of the country. 
  One of these places, for instance, was Palmapampa, in the 
Apurimac River valley, in Ayacucho. Here peasant patrols, or at 
least some of their leaders, who had heroically defeated the 
Shining Path, became the armed guards of drug traffickers. 
These peasant patrols no longer see any advantage to the total 
elimination of the Shining Path. Otherwise, how would they 
justify their operation? Besides, some officers in the Armed 
Forces fell into the hands of the zone's corruption network. 
Here we see again how drug trafficking stirs up internal 
conflicts and corrupt people to create chaos, in the midst of 
which it then reigns. 
  Over the past few years the Army has given weapons to the 
peasant patrols in coca-producing areas -- or potential 
coca-producing areas -- within the framework of the 
antisubversive struggle, creating, as a result, the potential 
for future armed uprisings in the area. Even more so now that 
peasants have begun to cultivate poppies -- the raw material for 
the production of heroin, a product that has a growing market in 
the United States -- in Cajamarca and Amazonas, areas that are 
higher and closer to their potential market. 
  Drug trafficking is very serious for many reasons. But one 
of those reasons -- perhaps the most important one -- is this: 
It sponsors the perpetuation of internal wars and corrupts the 
forces of order in order to keep a large part of the territory 
out of the reach of law and government control. It is, 
therefore, an element that goes essentially against national 
sovereignty and constitutes, without a doubt, a serious 
challenge to our national security. 
  The problem, therefore, is not simple, and the government 
does not always give it the importance it deserves. A few 
months ago we had the impression that the government would give 
priority to the fight against drug trafficking. But in the end, 
and perhaps also due to the DEA's withdrawal, the initiative did 
not materialize. The government also announced a plan to control 
the supply of precursors to producing areas -- which is 
relatively simple -- but which as far as we know was not 
implemented, either. 
  The Armed Forces internal reform program must also be 
implemented, among other things, to be able to increase 
officers' salaries to prevent corruption. 
  In general terms, we need an overall plan that will permit 
us 
to confront the problem from all angles. We also have the 
problem of money laundering, and it should be one of the topics 
in the agenda of the national call for unity announced a few 
days ago. 

