Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed "Special Report" on the Armed Forces] </F>
  [Text] The Brazilian military are once again in the 
limelight. They are demanding a pay increase and new equipment. 
They have a pessimistic view of the frauds discovered by the 
CPI [Congressional Investigating Committee] that delved into the 
budget scandal. This is causing some concern. Now, in this 
presidential election year, the Workers Party [PT] is courting 
the military, promising them a sharp increase in their budget 
and even the possibility of stepping up nuclear research -- 
meaning the atomic bomb. In an appeal to military discipline 
and propriety, President Itamar Franco summoned a retired 
general -- [Federal Secretary] Romildo Canhim -- to manage 
state-owned enterprises. Businessmen and professionals from 
different sectors have been meeting on a monthly basis with 
generals from the Armed Forces' high command. General Benedito 
Leonel, the Army chief of staff noted: "Someone will inevitably 
ask: When will the military return to power?" 
  Nine years have elapsed since Joao Baptista de Oliveira 
Figueiredo [president from 1979 to 1985] left Planalto Palace 
through the back door, and yet the military are still the talk 
of the nation. Whenever a wound is opened within the civilian 
regime, the prospect of a military coup looms large. There has 
not even been the slightest attempt to overthrow the government, 
besides, it is unlikely that such an adventure would be feasible 
in Brazil and in the world in the 1990's, yet the ghost in 
uniform has been invoked time and again. It emerged in the 
recent ravings of Justice Minister Mauricio Correa about a 
possible "self-inflicted coup like that of Peruvian President 
Alberto Fujimori" in Brazil with the support of the military. 
It reappeared during the Budget CPI, when Deputy Aloizio 
Mercadante [PT-SP] [Sao Paulo] deemed that it necessary to seek 
the advice of Army Minister Zenildo Lucena on the progress of 
investigations. Another example took place in Sao Bernardo do 
Campo last June. 
<H5>  The Horse Was Saddled </H5>
  During a ceremony at which hundreds of well-known local 
figures were present, General Gleuber Vieira, the then Army 
deputy chief of staff, was asked clearly and directly by one 
businessman: "General, the only way for Brazil to recapture its 
former splendor is to send all the politicians packing from 
Brasilia and establish the Armed Forces' Party. Shall we do 
this, with the people?" Another asked: "Why do the Armed Forces 
remain silent over this crisis, general?" Yet another chimed in: 
"In our Congress, only personal interests prevail. Is it not 
high time the Armed Forces intervened?" Considered one of the 
best educated and currently influential officers in the 
Brazilian Army, Gen. Gleuber Vieira made a brief statement 
which, in his view, was moderate. He said: "We are neither 
blind nor deaf, and our dumbness may only be temporary." He 
told one of these businessmen: "Never forget, sir, that we have 
taken the blows for 10 years and you never once stood up for us." 
<H5>  The Question and The Answer </H5>
  As Gen. Vieira told VEJA: "They saddled the horse and wanted 
me to found a new Republic from its saddle." 
  He said: "I react in two ways when I see what is happening: 
As a citizen I would like to hit them for what they are doing, 
but as a general I know that would not solve the problem." He 
added: Latin America got rid of the military regimes in the 
1980's, but what I see now is not the same all over. Civilian 
governments have done well in Chile and Argentina. Brazil had 
two consecutive failures: Jose Sarney struggled to finish his 
five-year term under the protection of Army Minister Leonidas 
Pires Goncalves, and Fernando Collor insulted the military as 
part of his campaign but ended up in the hands of the high 
military command. President Itamar Franco has cultivated 
friends among the military since he was a senator. Now he is in 
Planalto Palace he has showed that he likes to hand complicated 
problems to military men under the belief that they have the 
solutions. He appointed a retired colonel as the Federal Police 
chief and an active duty general to head the Sudene [Northeast 
Development Superintendency]. 
  If all civilians are convinced that military interventions 
are history, why then is the IBOPE [Brazilian Public Opinion and 
Statistics Institute] measuring the popularity of the Armed 
Forces? Is it because part of the population says it trusts the 
military more than it trusts Congress? There is ambiguity among 
civilians and also among the military. But there is also 
clearness in the two sectors. This is why there are civilians 
who want to know if [PT presidential candidate] Lula da Silva 
will be installed if he wins the elections, and if he will be 
allowed to govern afterwards. (The answer from the military is 
yes but the problem is not in the answer but in the question). 
In a speech late last year, General Leonel spoke in a 
threatening way about "the rage of the Roman Legions." The 
general was asked what he meant. He put on a mysterious smile 
and employed a phrase commonly used in military schools to force 
students to think at least twice: "Interpretation is part of the 
question." 
  Military affairs experts believe this sort of behavior is 
no secret. Most current active duty generals were at the rank 
of captain in 1964. They have spent the following 20 years 
saluting their superiors who, in fact, assumed the leadership 
under the military regime. It would be stupid to imagine they 
were against what was happening. During a lecture entitled "The 
Shadow of the Generals" at the Brasilia University, Professor 
Luiz Felipe Miguel examined 1,693 articles written and published 
by officers in military publications between 1964 and 1991. He 
came to the following conclusion: "Contrary to what some authors 
contend, Brazilian military officers still believe in their 
tutelage over Brazilian politics." The fact that this ideology 
still prevails does not mean that one day it may be put into 
practice. 
<H5>  The Dog and the Thief </H5>
  With an annual budget of $2.1 billion, the Brazilian Armed 
Forces are facing their worst crisis ever. Salaries are low and 
the equipment is getting rusty. Civilians rather than military 
men need to determine what is essential. Rather than knowing 
what is spent on the Armed Forces, it should be determined why 
-- and how many -- soldiers, generals, tanks, and corvettes are 
needed. During almost half a century of the Cold War, the 
Brazilian Armed Forces mainly focused activities on the struggle 
against the "internal enemy." The situation now is quite 
different. Military colleges are eliminating specific courses 
on so-called revolutionary movements. The focus of attention has 
shifted. Military men are concerned about the Amazon Region 
because they suspect anthropologists and missionaries may be the 
spearheads of foreign interests thirsty for the region's wealth. 
Another subject are the shantytowns of Rio de Janeiro, where 
crime and unrest may lead to what their textbooks call 
"convulsions," which has replaced ideology as the favorite 
doctrine of the textbook of past decades. 
  It is ironical that, following the collapse of the Berlin 
Wall, war has merely changed its status. Minister Zenildo 
Lucena asserts that "what used to be called the new 
international order has become a great disorder." Armed Forces 
commanders are aware that, compared with other world powers, 
Brazilian military inferiority is as great or even greater than 
during the 1950's when Brazilian soldiers trained with mules 
while the United States was studying nuclear war tactics. Navy 
Public Relations Commander Kleber de Assis, describes the 
situation: "The Brazilian Armed Forces should be like a dog in 
the back yard. The dog will do nothing most of the time, but it 
is there, ready to chase away a thief. We do not have anything 
like that now." 
  From the economic viewpoint, the Armed Forces are as badly 
off as Brazil. They are enduring the worse crisis in their 
history. Since Brazil's independence, the portion of the budget 
earmarked for the Armed Forces has never been as small as now -- 
less than 3 percent. Comparing this with the GDP of other 
countries one can see that the Brazilian Army spends, 
relatively, less than Peru or Argentina, let alone the developed 
countries. Although more than 100,000 Brazilians do compulsory 
military service every year, the daily activities of the Armed 
Forces are a mystery to most citizens; but at least one aspect 
is no mystery. 
  The 350,000 military men protest the lack of money, closely 
watch with certain unrest the scandals in the political field, 
discuss the presidential succession and -- wracked by the 5,000 
percent annual inflation like all 150 million Brazilian citizens 
-- can confirm that living conditions are atrocious. The higher 
echelons, which continue to be served decently by their 
subordinates, enjoy their customary comfort although even they 
complain: "In the past I was able to change my car every year, 
now I have something to drive only because my mother-in-law 
helped me buy a second-hand Monza," commented Vice Admiral 
Eugenio Carme Ribeiro, 58, commander of the 6,590-strong Marine 
Corps, one of the most prestigious in the Navy. 
  The situation among the lower ranks is even worse. Of the 
nine FAB [Brazilian Air Force] sergeants at an Air Force base in 
the northern region of the country, six are taking evening 
courses so that they can change their professions. Two are 
studying economics, two are studying accountancy, one is 
studying business management, and the sixth is studying 
medicine. At the end of the afternoon, when he leaves the 
barracks in Sao Gabriel da Cachoeira, 1,000 km from Manaus, an 
Army corporal goes to his second job. Video camera in hand, he 
covers baptisms, birthdays, and weddings. He works on weekends 
as a DJ at a modest but lively local discotheque. At the Rio de 
Janeiro Military Village, which houses the largest number of 
servicemen in the country -- some 25,000 officers and 
noncommissioned officers from the three Armed Forces branches -- 
many houses have signs offering other services such as private 
tutoring, manicure, car and house appliance repairs, home-made 
sweets, and even fortune-telling. 
  The similarities with life outside the barracks end there. 
The Army, Navy and Air Force are part of the Armed Forces, but 
they are quite different from each other. Two thirds of all 
uniformed personnel are assigned to the Army, the rest are 
divided between the Air Force and the Navy, with the Air Force 
having a slight advantage. More numerous, and with troops 
scattered throughout large urban centers, the Army has always 
had greater political importance. The Army proclaimed the 
Republic, supplied the cadres for the 1930 Revolution, organized 
the FEB [Brazilian Expeditionary Force] in World War II, 
supported and ousted Getulio Vargas, and imposed all the 
presidents during the 1964 regime. Today people look to the 
Army to learn the political mood of the military. 
  The military live in a closed and conservative world. They 
agree with the CUT [Sole Workers Center] and the PT in 
criticizing the privatization process, but they do not share the 
same ideology. According to a current military view, the PT's 
acceptance among the military is similar to that which it enjoys 
outside the barracks. The following is a good yardstick: Two 
tickets are disputing the elections at the Military Club which 
groups 22,000 active duty and reserve members; both tickets have 
adopted an anti-Lula stand. Another sign: Nilton Cerqueira, a 
general who headed the Military Club for two consecutive terms 
and who had the backing of the CUT to promote debates on 
state-run companies, is campaigning for PP [Popular Party] 
Deputy Alvaro Dias. The military world tends to safeguard its 
values just as it replaces its servicemen. The large majority 
of those who today follow a military career have a father who 
served in the barracks -- the ratio is six out of every 10 among 
some in the Agulhas Negras Military Academy where the Army 
trains its lieutenants. But because salaries are low, it is not 
the sons of high-ranking officers who follow the military 
career. The majority are sons of sergeants and noncommissioned 
officers who will assume the Armed Forces command in the future. 
  It is true that a military career never enjoyed much 
prestige 
among families with a strong patrimony. During the 19th 
century, the aristocracy looked on military men with disdain. 
Historians allege Emperor Pedro II used a cruel definition when 
referring to the troops parading through Rio de Janeiro on their 
return from the war with Paraguay: "Legal Assassins." But there 
have always been young recruits from well-to-do families, with a 
vast educational background and access to a wider world. This 
situation is disappearing because a military career is less 
appealing. If this trend grows, it will have a fatal effect on 
how the military view themselves, and society. They are already 
living in a very enclosed world of their own without being 
further isolated. 
<H5>  Captain and Confectioner </H5>
  It is a fact that military life is defined by hierarchy. 
Soldiers, corporals, and sergeants do not mix with officers. 
They do not eat the same food, they do not visit the same 
places, or swim in the same pool. Those who enter as recruits 
can only be promoted two ranks, reaching sergeant. They remain 
in that rank for the rest of their service life. Officers 
graduate from military academies, which offer university level 
courses. The first two promotions, to the level of major, are a 
cinch. From there on, the chances narrow. Less than half of a 
group of 100 lieutenants will be promoted to colonel, and only 
five will be promoted to general. Of this number and after 40 
years in the military career, on average, only one will receive 
the four stars that signify the top-ranking post, that of Army 
general. 
  After that tiring race, the great winner, his excellency 
the Army general, will earn less than 1 million real cruzeiros 
per month. His earnings are one quarter of what a Supreme Court 
justice earns and less than half the 2.5 million real cruzeiros 
that senators and deputies earn. As you go down the echelon of 
command the cases become more dramatic: Air Force Captain Mauro 
Pimentel, 35, who took special computer courses in the United 
States, makes extra money by selling candies in a small shop in 
partnership with his brother near the Rio de Janeiro Military 
Village. He said: "If I did not have that business I would be 
living in a shantytown." In the Air Force that captain gets 
500,000 real cruzeiros per month, selling candies he makes twice 
as much. 
  Sergeant Josue Carvalho of the Marine Corps is at the 
garrison from 0800 until 1600. From 1700 until 0100 he repairs 
television sets in the neighborhood. He said: "In the garrison 
I have work for two days per week," adding: "The remaining days 
I just kill time." What is happening with the military is like 
what is happening to public service doctors who, forced to take 
other jobs, see patients waiting in line, and even see patients 
die waiting in line. The same occurs with teachers who are so 
badly paid that state schools are only able to recruit the worst 
of each group. 
  The Armed Forces have the daily routine of bureaucracy like 
any other job. Most wait for a promotion to improve their 
standards of living, make an effort to educate their children, 
and protect their retirement. Then there are talented ones, 
brown-nosers, idiots, and ones with a refined intellect. 
Between these extremes is a majority where mediocrity prevails 
just like in any community. But military men have some traits. 
"Those who chose a military career want job security," said 
Luiz Fernando Peixoto, cabinet chief under Navy Minister Ivan 
Serpa. He added: "They know the country might be burning but 
their salary is guaranteed at the end of the month." Like 
priests enjoy security, echelons of command, and decisions 
within rigid lines, no one joins the Armed Forces with a desire 
for adventure. No one gets rich or famous in the Army. Life 
was always modest and in some cases even hard. Life can even be 
unbearable for many civilians called for mandatory military 
service. 
  Last year the Army called 1,013 students trained in 
medicine, 
133 pharmacists, and 82 veterinarians for temporary service as 
lieutenants in the Training Center for Reserve Officers, CPOR. 
One of them was student Ricardo Migueis who was raised in 
Leblon. He was sent to Querari with an Amazon platoon on the 
border with Colombia. He lived in a wooden barracks with Indian 
huts as neighbors and a reservoir where the soldiers could swim. 
Contact with the outside world was by a plane that came once a 
month. Lieutenant Ricardo Migueis took care of sick soldiers and 
Indians. This is his story: 
  The worse part was the initial phase of the training that 
lasted 45 days. We ate monkey and alligator meat. One 
colleague could not stand the burden. He suffered a crisis, 
burst into tears, and went out of control for 24 hours. He was 
discharged. Another one broke his leg during the hardest 
exercise. He was hospitalized for treatment but escaped from 
the hospital. He was later found in Minas Gerais but was able 
to get his discharge. A border platoon is in the middle of the 
jungle, far from everything. There is no place for fun. He who 
is not married has no way of finding a girlfriend. Soldiers 
suffer a lot. Care should always be taken in the hospital ward. 
They break in at night to steal alcohol. There is also a lot 
of red tape, you must get authorization for everything. If 
there is a patient in serious condition and an urgent trip must 
be made, it cannot be done without authorization. 
<H5>  Colonial Vietnam </H5>
  Researchers believe the Brazilian Army was created in the 
17th Century, during the war to expell the Dutch. These were 
not movie-type attractive battles. The Portuguese Crown troops 
were joined by blacks headed by Henrique Dias and Indians with 
bow and arrows headed by Felipe Camarao, and this is how, like 
in a colonial Vietnam, the main world power of that time was 
defeated. Without money and unequipped, the Brazilian troops 
sustained a harsh blow from [Paraguayan President Marshal 
Francisco] Solano Lopez' soldiers at the beginning of the war 
with Paraguay. They represented the country in World War I, 
with tragic consequences. The lack of medical assistance was 
such that soldiers sent to the battle fields did not die from 
being shot in the trenches but rather on their way there due to 
the Spanish flu epidemic. The Brazilian Armed Forces have made 
a lot of progress but are still far from what the leadership 
aspires. Money is their biggest problem. 
  Defense rather than combat strategies are currently 
discussed 
at the Brazilian military academies where the great ally of the 
past is regarded as the possible enemy for the future. Many 
military men believe the wealth of the Amazon attracts the greed 
of great powers such as the United States. Under an extreme 
situation, those countries may promote an intervention under the 
pretext of fighting drug trafficking and defending the 
indigenous reservations. This is why Brazilian military men 
regard with suspicion the U.S. military maneuvers on the border. 
The truth is that if one of those attacks which foreigners like 
to plan were to materialize -- attacks which are in reality only 
imaginary -- the frail Brazilian defense system would be unable 
to even leave its post. Modestly speaking, Brazil is just one 
of several countries in a similar, or even worse, situation. 
Mexico, for example, whose Armed Forces only have strategies to 
confront the ragged Zapatists or an unlikely conflict with its 
southern neighbor, the minute Guatemala. As for its? northern 
neighbor, it has come to a hard but realistic conclusion. The 
difference is so great that, in the case of a more and more 
unlikely U.S. invasion following NAFTA, the Mexican Army would 
just wait and see what it can do. Military men, naturally aware 
of a Third, or even Fourth World apparatus, use this negative 
aspect as the great excuse to demand a bit more from the Federal 
Treasury, at least to keep up appearances. 
<H5>  Lead Pellets </H5>
  The problem in Brazil today is that, if everything continues 
unchanged, the country must be told that the Armed Forces have 
become the Disarmed Forces. The state of the equipment is 
pitiful, although nobody expects to find Tomahawk missiles -- 
the great attraction of the Persian Gulf War -- on a Brazilian 
ship. Not just because they are not available locally but also 
because each missile costs $15 million. Neither can one expect 
the rifles to be fitted overnight with infra-red equipment that 
enables enemy targets to be hit in complete darkness. British 
soldiers had these during the Malvinas War, which helped them 
hit Argentine soldiers who did not even know where the shots 
came from. 
  Brazilian military men believe, however, that some urgent 
improvements must be made. The Army would be much better off if 
it had a group of well-trained and equipped troops capable of 
immediate action anywhere in the country that has a 7,400 km 
borderline and 10 neighboring countries. Of the 235,000 Army 
troops, only some 20,000 to 25,000 are capable of this. Not 
much more is necessary. Some 50,000 men would be better but 
40,000 would do. Minister Zenildo Lucena explains: "Nobody 
considers having an expensive Army under the present situation 
in the country." There could be more resources for training 
purposes: The artillery for its cannon training uses the same 
lead pellets used for the compressed-air rifles at fun fairs. 
This is not so bad because they are excellent for training the 
soldiers to improve their aim. They are also cheap. A single 
real cannon shot costs some $5,000. One must pretend that it is 
the genuine thing. 
  The other Armed Forces branches are no better off because 
they are paying the price of a common heritage. They were 
prepared for the Cold War years when it was thought the 
Brazilian Armed Forces would mainly be used to assist the United 
States in an eventual conflict with the USSR. This theory has 
disappeared and we are facing a situation of men and equipment 
trained to fight a nonexistent enemy. But now they are not even 
equipped to fight any adversaries that may (eventually) 
materialize. 
<H5>  Solo Flights </H5>
  The Navy's problems start with its main ship, the aircraft 
carrier Minas Gerais. A relic of the British Navy, this 
aircraft carrier was refurbished upon its arrival at the 
Brazilian shipyards to fulfill a specific mission: To defend the 
Brazilian coast from an eventual attack by the Soviet submarine 
fleet. In view of this, the Minas Gerais only carries slow and 
heavy planes, those used to search and hit underwater targets. 
The Minas Gerais is equipped with missiles to attack 
approaching planes, but it is unable to transport light planes 
capable of confronting an enemy squadron at a safe distance so 
that the ship may not be damaged. 
  Former Navy Minister Admiral Maximiano da Fonseca said: "The 
Minas Gerais is in no condition to enter war, because it would 
have to be defended." The other ships are in a similar 
situation. Six frigates acquired 20 years ago from England were 
also outfitted to combat Russian submarines in the Cold War navy 
battle, but today they would be unable to defend themselves from 
bombs dropped from a small plane. They were already old when 
they were bought in 1973. The majority are 50 years old. The 
useful life of a vessel of this kind does not surpass two or 
three decades. 
  The Air Force is facing similar problems, but more centered 
on volume. The Navy is at least able to place its entire fleet 
at sea to conduct exercises. Like the Army it has sufficient 
resources to feed its troops. Although far from being a 
five-star meal, a military meal consisting of rice, black beans, 
salad and either beef, fish, or chicken: It would not fair too 
badly in a food tasting contest with factory restaurants. The 
Air Force business hours start at 1300 so as to save money on 
meals. For lack of money for fuel, half of its pilots will not 
fly this year. Those who do will fly museum pieces. The 
Mirages are so old the manufacturer has ceased to produce the 
spare parts essential for their maintenance. The AMX is a good 
plane, but it was also conceived for the Cold War. 
<H5>  Stigmatized </H5>
  The combination of low salaries and outdated equipment 
worthy 
of a scrap yard is a pothole among intense dissatisfactions. 
The most noteworthy fact on the condition of the military today 
is the feeling of loss of prestige, both socially and 
materially. Until recently, military men were entitled to a 
bonus for the number of flight hours they flew, no matter the 
nature of the mission or its priority. They only had to buckle 
their safety belts and wait for the bonus to pay their bills at 
the end of the month. This privilege has been cut. They were 
also able to transform state-run companies into beautiful job 
sources. A colonel went into the reserves, and in addition to 
his retirement pension, received a second salary running in the 
millions. When a general did not receive his fourth star, he 
was appointed vice chairman of an industry as a consolation 
prize. These times are over. 
  Military men view the constitutional revision with 
reservation because they fear the situation will deteriorate 
even further. They fear their pensions will be placed under the 
jurisdiction of the miserable INSS [National Social Security 
Institute]. Although a military man's salary is bad, pensions 
are optimum. They receive their full salaries and a retirement 
bonus. When he goes into the reserves, a military man is 
entitled to the benefits of the next highest rank when he was on 
active duty. A captain becomes a major, a colonel becomes a 
general, and so on. Thus, the average pension of military men 
is about 14 minimum salaries, 10 times more than the pensions a 
common mortal receives from the INSS. 
  Military men feel stigmatized by the press, disdained by a 
good majority of cultured people, and mistreated by the 
administration they serve. The majority feels that if pros and 
cons were placed on the scale, their 20-year period in power was 
positive. They believe the term "military dictatorship" is 
offensive. They think those who use the term "military regime" 
are committing an indiscretion; and when they talk to civilians 
they tolerate as bearable the definition "authoritarian period." 
They detest being reminded of what they did wrong -- the 
suppression of individual freedoms, censorship, and the missing 
-- but love to remember what they did well. In fact, it was an 
Army School, the Engineering Military Institute, that drafted 
the project to establish a more modern telecommunications 
infrastructure in the country, better than that of our 
neighbors. They are proud of the growth rates during the 
miracle period, the low inflation rate that prevailed at the 
time, and job expansion. (Never mention the foreign debt hike, 
please) 
<H5>  Cheaper labor </H5>
  The military men of the 1964 regime may be accused of having 
turned a blind eye to the underworld of civilian deals made 
under their noses. They fought the corruption of their 
political enemies but remained impassive to the dirty money of 
their friends. However, when they retired it was obvious that 
none of them had amassed great amounts of money. Some sectors 
of the Armed Forces reveal an unusual competence in the state 
apparatus. They are capable of establishing and fulfilling 
long-term projects. Compared to the public enterprises that do 
not even inform the president of the Republic about their 
workers's salaries, they are disciplined and have a great 
working capacity. People can say what they like about the 
Brazilian war industry -- it is expensive, subsidized, 
anachronistic -- but the fact is, that when they built this 
industry, the military made it the fifth largest of its kind in 
the world. Some may feel that the research carried out by the 
Navy is a waste of time and money but its laboratories, which 
even produce artificial sweeteners for the admirals' coffee, has 
managed to master the uranium enrichment technology and is now 
working on a nuclear-propelled submarine. 
  The Armed Forces, as if they felt they must justify their 
existence at any cost, currently engage in activities that have 
nothing to do with the military world. In Parana the Army is 
involved in an old railway project, the Ferroeste, to transport 
soybean through the state. A consortium of private enterprises 
wanted $300 million to build a portion of the railway line. It 
was established that two engineering battalions could do the job 
for $200 million and the deal was closed. The project is doing 
well. The price quoted by the construction companies was 
undoubtedly abusive but the project in Parana begs the question: 
Does the country needs the Armed Forces just because there are 
not enough trains to transport soybean. Rio de Janeiro is 
another example. 
  The city loved the tanks and rifles that guaranteed the 
normal development of ECO-92 [UN sponsored environmental 
conference]. The 7,000 inhabitants of the Roquette Pinto 
shantytown now celebrate the presence of 20-men patrols from a 
nearby battalion that several times a day visit the town. The 
shantytown dwellers were registered and those who did not have 
an identity card were given one. A mother care unit that was 
not operating was reformed and a health unit with three military 
physicians and three dentists will be established. Roquette 
Pinto, which in the past was a drug traffickers and consumption 
center, has now become a peaceful area. 
  There was probably no alternative. Last October, shots from 
Roquette Pinto hit the barracks. It is obvious this is not a 
solution because Army soldiers are not trained to deal with the 
civilian population, their idea of discipline cannot be applied 
to the daily activities of a common citizen and experience has 
proven that they can end up involved with local delinquency or 
cause tragedies among well intentioned people. This was the 
case in Volta Redonda when Army troops called to intervene a 
workers' strike ended in the death of three workers of the 
plant. Or, under the 1964 regime, when officers assumed the 
work of Interior Ministry agents and ended up stained by the 
habit of beating up students who were handcuffed. 
  Last week in Rio de Janeiro, members of the Army Police [PE] 
occupied the Rio de Janeiro-Niteroi bridge which had been 
blocked by a demonstration against the constitutional revision. 
Fearing a demonstration that could upset the city, Governor 
Leonel Brizola requested the PE's intervention. Brizola 
withdrew his request when he realized that the PM [Military 
Police] could control a few demonstrators but it was too late. 
General Bayma Denis, the Military Command of the East 
commander, did not withdraw the soldiers. The traffic began to 
circulate a few minutes later but a true political uncertainty 
was experienced: Knowing who is the real boss in the portion of 
the Guanabara Bay between Rio de Janeiro and Niteroi. 
<H5>  Funds and Mentality </H5>
  If the military are not supposed to replace contractors, 
play 
the role of police, or much less, control transit, what should 
they do? That is the question. If they exist to fulfill the 
functions defined by the Constitution, like preserving internal 
and external security -- always "at the request" of one of the 
branches of government -- it is true that the Armed Forces are 
not only poorly paid, they also improperly spend the scarce 
funds that they receive. There is an excessive number of 
personnel at higher levels. In several garrisons, there are 
generals doing the work of colonels. There is an excessive 
number of intermediate officers whose duties are almost 
decorative and who repeat to their subordinates the instructions 
they received from their superiors. A fax machine would be 
cheaper and without the risk of making a mistake. It is a 
closed system in which even a citizen without any devotion or 
capacity for the job can stay, earn some promotions, and after a 
career with job stability, can retire without any shock. If the 
Army needs only 50,000 well-trained men to cope with any 
emergency, why does it keep 235,000 soldiers in the barracks? 
And why are the majority of the troops of the three forces in 
large urban centers, when all three have defined the Amazonas 
region as their main priority? 
  There is a problem involving funds, but there is also a 
problem of mentality. This is a debate that has not been held 
in Brazil for a long time, a debate on a project for Brazil. 
The Armed Forces are not surviving in an empty environment, as 
if they lived alone. They are an instrument of a country that 
has specific objectives and priorities, and established values 
imposed at the various levels of the state. Despite wrongdoings 
in the economy, democracy became mature through the dismissal of 
a corrupt president and the self- purge of the Budget CPI. Now 
is a good moment for a needed debate on what the country expects 
from its Armed Forces. Even they would like very much to see 
the matter clarified. 

