BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Defense Minister Francois Leotard and </F>
Jacques Bihozagara, Rwandan Patriotic Front official in charge 
of international relations, by correspondent Patrick Poivre 
d'Arvor; Leotard is in the studio; Bihozagara's location not 
given--live] 
  [Text] [Poivre d'Arvor] Defense Minister Francois Leotard 
is here with us in the studio. France is trying to appear 
reassuring, but the OAU has said it is not in favor of French 
intervention in Rwanda. The same applies to a number of foreign 
countries, as well as to the Rwandan Patriotic Front [RPF]. We 
have the impression that France is very much alone in this 
initiative. 
  [Leotard] I do not think we can say that. You see, we waited 
for the Security Council resolution, which was just adopted a 
few minutes ago. We, of course, began preparations earlier, but 
we would not have intervened--and this must be quite clear--if 
there had not been a resolution from the United Nations. We are 
not organizing a national, a French, action. We are there to 
apply a resolution--which has just been approved by the United 
Nations and which we had wanted--allowing us to put an end to a 
number of massacres and atrocities. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] Having been given this green light, will 
the 
operation get under way tomorrow morning at dawn? 
  [Leotard] The operation will begin on the morning of 23 
June. 
It will begin--in order to demonstrate what our intentions 
really are--near a small zone that is just across the border on 
the other side of Bukavu, at a place called Cyangugu, where 
several thousand Tutsis are currently threatened. This is to 
show quite clearly that we will save whoever we meet, whatever 
ethnic group they might belong to, whatever nationality they 
are, if they are foreigners. 
  We will continue from this point, having at our disposal the 
most thorough possible information, looking at those places 
where there are children, civilians, possibly religious 
communities--as we learn things little by little--places where 
people are victims of these massacres. This is France's 
intention. A limited action, a humanitarian action. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] The idea being not to go as far as the 
capital, Kigali? 
  [Leotard] We want to act on Rwandan territory as little as 
possible, and we do not want to take part in the current 
conflict in any way. I say this quite clearly to those who are 
currently tearing themselves apart. It is not our intention, 
our aim, to take sides. What we want to do, in the name of the 
United Nations, is to save human lives. So we will see where we 
can do this, in the light of the information we will have as 
early as tomorrow morning, and in what way we can do it--for 
example, by going to a certain place to collect children whose 
lives are threatened. These pictures are so horrific for the 
international community that France feels this is not acceptable. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] So are there geographic and also time 
limits 
to the intervention? 
  [Leotard] There is a time limit. The prime minister this 
afternoon at the National Assembly--after we had discussed the 
issue with the president--very clearly spoke about the end of 
July. We asked the United Nations to accelerate the process of 
the intervention of UNAMIR [UN Assistance Mission in 
Rwanda]--the force the United Nations will deploy on the 
ground--to ensure that it could immediately take over from the 
French operation. If we had just waited for the United Nations, 
we might, alas--as you know-- have waited for several months 
more. That would have meant thousands more deaths. We are, 
therefore, preceding the UN force, in a way, which will wear 
blue helmets and which I hope will intervene during the summer. 
In the meantime, still under the mandate of the Security 
Council resolution, we will intervene in the coming weeks to try 
to save a maximum number of these poor people from the situation 
in which they find themselves. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] You spoke a moment ago about the president 
and the prime minister. Were there not two lines in this 
affair: one which was a hard line from the president and the 
foreign minister, and a more cautious line from the prime 
minister and yourself? 
  [Leotard] We deliberated very carefully on this issue, but I 
always expressed my concern that it be restricted to a very 
limited time frame and to make sure that French forces did not 
end up being considered international policemen who might 
intervene all over the world. This is neither my aim nor the 
concept I have of the use of the French Army. 
  Under this circumstance, however, we have the specific 
demand 
of the United Nations, of Mr. Butrus-Ghali. We have the means 
to do it, since we have troops in the region. We turned to the 
Europeans and the Africans, for it is quite normal that the 
Africans should, first and foremost, take this crisis in hand. 
We have also obtained the agreement of the Senegalese and the 
Guineans, who will intervene with us, and then of a few 
Europeans--too few, alas. I think that you will see, however, 
with the first child that is saved--for this is the issue--then 
you will see international support appearing. Our aim is to save 
children. I do not know who can disagree with this aim. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] You know that this is a high-risk 
operation. 
  [Leotard] Of course, but there is no military operation 
without risks. French soldiers are sufficiently trained, 
sufficiently responsible, equipped, determined, enthusiastic for 
this kind of mission, because they know that they are serving a 
humanitarian cause. There are not many better things than to 
save people whose lives are threatened. 
  I think we must stress that the instructions they have been 
given are that they should not come into contact with the RPF's 
forces, that they should not come into contact with the people 
who are currently tearing each other apart. You will see that 
they will carry out this mission with a great deal of 
responsibility and mastery of the force they have at their 
disposal. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] You are talking about the RPF. We have 
Jacques Bihozagara with us live, who is in charge of 
international relations for the RPF. 
  Having just heard Francois Leotard, having heard Alain 
Juppe--with whom you met just now--are you still convinced of 
the validity of this operation? 
  [Bihozagara] We think that the operation to rescue people in 
danger had been organized and planned at the level of the 
Security Council. To that end, the Security Council had adopted 
a resolution, Resolution 918, which broadened the UNAMIR 
mandate. We cannot see why France should rush in now. So we 
still oppose this, for the reasons we have always given--namely, 
that France was in Rwanda in 1990 allegedly to protect foreign 
and French citizens, but afterwards we saw that France began to 
support the existing government, and it took three years for 
France to leave Rwanda. Now France is returning to Rwanda for, 
it is said, a humanitarian action. Well, we think there are 
reasons other than humanitarian ones. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] You think that the real reason is for Paris 
to try to maintain the current regime at any price? 
  [Bihozagara] Why not? Because France has never shown us 
anything different. So the regime that is carrying out 
massacres today has been aided, supported, and armed by France. 
Now we believe that the current French action is precisely to 
continue its aid to the regime that is retreating in disarray. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] Francois Leotard, you have facing you the 
representative of a ethnic group that you want to save, and he 
is not in agreement. 
  [Leotard] There is no such intention. I would like to say 
this, with all due respect to Mr. Bihozagara. He met Mr. Juppe 
this morning. I think the talks were frank--we explained what 
our aims were. I repeat: The instructions that have been given 
to the French forces is for them never to come into contact with 
the RPF, which Mr. Bihozagara represents. In other words, they 
are not to try at any time to become involved in this conflict. 
  I do not see how we can be reproached for saving people 
who--if I have understood things properly--are Tutsis, in the 
first place, the people in Cyangugu whom we want to protect. I 
really do not see how anyone can doubt our good faith in this 
matter because there are no other intentions. I am telling Mr. 
Bihozagara this very forcefully and with a great deal of 
conviction. Experience will prove it. I hope he will wait for 
the next few days. We will remain in contact with the RPF. In 
fact, we intend to remain in contact in order to inform them 
daily, regularly, hour by hour, of our intentions, of our 
positions--to show clearly that never, at no time, do we have 
any belligerent intentions in this matter. Never. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] Mr. Bihozagara, you are Tutsi, in the 
minority there. Do you, nevertheless, think that all possible 
forms of help must be given to avoid the genocide that is now 
going on? First, can you confirm the preliminary figures that 
have been given. The German foreign ministers has spoken of 
500,000 dead. Are we on that scale of values, if I can put it 
like that? Second, what can be done to stop this genocide, if 
there is no foreign intervention? 
  [Bihozagara] You know, let me repeat that it is wrong to say 
that France is going to help the Tutsis or save the Tutsis. 
This is because in this conflict, in this genocide, it is not 
only the Tutsis who are the target, but everyone who does not 
speak the same language as the regime that France supported for 
reasons that, I repeat, we cannot understand. 
  So now France wants to return to Rwanda, allegedly to save 
the Tutsis. You know very well, however, that Rwanda has, in 
fact, lost more than 500,000 people. Out of the 500,000 people, 
I would say that 95 percent are, of course, of Tutsi origin. 
Two-thirds of the Tutsi population inside the country has been 
wiped out, while the Hutu intellectual elite of the moderate 
opposition has been 80 percent wiped out. Now, I think that if 
France were to return there that first, it is too late, and 
second, we think that the French intervention is more likely to 
complicate the situation and to set the whole region on fire. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] Mr. Leotard, would you like to comment, 
since we were talking just now about the Africans? Marshal 
Mobutu was not a favorite in western capitals. Here he is 
giving you a helping hand with his airports. 
  [Leotard] We asked Zaire to allow the planes to land at 
Zairean airports, so that was a normal contact between one 
government and another in order to use our landing platforms. 
This is completely normal, if you will remember, I repeat, that 
our aim--and I recall the strong feelings you quite rightly 
aroused on your network--our aim is to save human lives. 
  I do not see how it can be that a week ago all the 
nongovernmental organizations and you, quite rightly--and a lot 
of international observers--told us: What are you waiting for? 
You must go in. Now that we have embarked on the process, 
people are saying: Why are you going in? 
  I repeat: It is not we who are going in. It is not the 
French Government. It is the United Nations, which is asking 
the French Government to undertake this humanitarian action 
while waiting for a larger force--of more than 5,000 men, in 
fact--to come in UN uniforms to protect the people. 
  We were not obliged to do it, that is quite true, but we are 
doing it. I can assure you that it is a difficult and 
burdensome operation that, indeed, is not without risk. We are 
doing it, I think, because we have a specific concept of our 
international responsibilities, of France's role with its 
African friends, because France does have a role to play, of 
course, with our African friends. These friends include 
Rwandans of whatever ethnic group. 
  There you are. It is as simple as that. I am sorry that 
people are forgetting today, from what I hear, that there was a 
resolution by the UN Security Council a few moments ago. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] Right. So I will add that France is 
calling on its European and African partners to participate in 
this intervention in Rwanda, an intervention we will follow hour 
by hour and which--as the defense minister has just 
confirmed--should begin tomorrow morning on the frontier of 
Zaire and Rwanda. 
  Thank you, Mr. Leotard. Thank you, Mr. Bihozagara. 

