BFN 

  [Text] Nineteen Muslim organizations have claimed that 
violence in the South was a consequence of the May 1992 turmoil, 
and not the work of separatists, according to a news bulletin. 
  The SAN EKKAPHAP (Solidarity News Bulletin), published by 
southern Muslim MPs, said the organizations believed the 
violence was not created by separatist guerrillas. The violence 
occurred as a result of the May upheavals which culminated in 
the violent suppression of pro-democracy demonstrations. 
  The organizations claimed the government had information 
relevant to the violence. It should reveal the facts in a 
straightforward manner, and improve its working system to 
prevent the situation from deteriorating. 
  "The government has to shoulder responsibility for the 
violent incidents. The government must take decisive action to 
prevent the situation from turning into bloodshed," they said. 
  The organizations said social and political problems had 
affected the South's economy. They claimed the South had lost 
BtlO billion in economic gains in the past year. 
  The bulletin is published by the Solidarity Muslim group of 
Muslim MPs from the five southernmost provinces, led by Deputy 
Interior Minister Den Tomina. 
  Den, a Pattani MP, said in the first issue of the bulletin 
that the publication was aimed at protecting Muslim interests 
and creating better understanding between Muslims and Buddhists. 
  Education Minister Samphan Thongsamak told reporters that 
the 
four Muslims accused of involvement in bomb attacks in the South 
are not preachers but teachers of religion. 
  The four suspects, who were granted bail on Tuesday, have 
been charged with sedition. Muslims have claimed the men were 
scapegoats, and it was speculated that they would rally to 
protest the arrests. 
  However, many senior police officers, including national 
police chief Prathin Santipraphop, have repeated several times 
they have substantive evidence to prove the men guilty. 
  Samphan said individuals suspected of committing crimes 
would 
be prosecuted in accordance with the law, regardless of their 
religion. 
  "It is not that if you are a Muslim, you will not be 
punished 
when you do wrong," he said. 
  Politicians should not intervene in the case because they 
could not change the truth. Police should not be disheartened 
and should proceed according to the law, Samphan said. 
  Some Muslim MPs of the New Aspiration Party, also claiming 
the men were scapegoats, have said they would represent them in 
court. 
  In Songkhla, Police Director General Prathin yesterday said 
police had sufficient evidence to take legal action. The 
suspects had the right to ask that new investigators be 
appointed, but he would have the final say. 
  Assistant police chief Michai Nukunkit said investigators 
would file suits against the suspects next week. Army Commander 
in Chief Wimon Wongwanit said crime suspects must be prosecuted 
with an even hand, regardless of their religion. 

