BFN 

<F P=106> [Viktor Khamrayev report in the "Genesis" column: "The </F>
Gaydar Party Is Preparing an `Economic Miracle.' Russia's 
Choice Will Have Many Platforms"] 
  [Text] Last Saturday 363 delegates to the Moscow city 
founding conference of the Russia's Choice party unanimously 
recognized that confrontation among the democrats in the present 
situation, "balm to the national-communists," is "dangerous." 
Noting the vital need for democratic unity, the delegates 
concentrated their attention on drafting party rules and a 
program whose implementation they linked directly to their own 
"advent to power." 
  Yegor Gaydar made a policy speech. Making a brief digression 
into his premiership, the leader of the faction and the future 
party identified a "fundamental mistake" by his team, which in 
its time gave way to demands from the nomenklatura which 
"subjected it to pressure unprecedented in Russia's history," 
allowing it to restore various "committees and subcommittees." 
Yegor Gaydar sees the natural results of that compromise in 
"the runaway swelling of an overwhelming bureaucratic apparatus" 
and "the interruption of the economic reform in mid-course" by 
the same apparatus. 
  The possibilities that have opened up for the people to 
choose and buy any goods and freely change rubles into dollars, 
according to Mr. Gaydar, "are not yet the market," which will 
really be possible "on the basis of economic growth." The main 
obstacle to growth is the existing "huge corrupt state machine," 
toward reforming which the party founder is directing his 
colleagues' efforts. 
  Assessing the chances for the democrats' success, Yegor 
Gaydar told the delegates, "in the regions as well as in the 
central apparatus people who in no way share our thinking have 
taken over all the key posts.... The threat of hardline 
conservatism and reactionary backlash is great." Under these 
conditions, in Gaydar's opinion, the democrats need not 
"amorphous organizations, like in the period of struggling 
against the sclerotic regime," but effective parties. 
  Party effectiveness was demonstrated by Yuliy Nisnevish: 
Having conducted the conference in rigid compliance with the 
approved schedule and procedures specified by the minute, he 
skillfully dampened emerging disagreements between city and 
district organizing committees over procedures for nominating 
delegates to the constituent congress. In the lobbies this fact 
was assessed as a precursor to "intraparty discord in the 
future." With respect to other issues Russia's Choice members 
had no more complaints to make against each other, approving the 
party's economic course aimed at "a Russian economic miracle 
through domestic economic growth," and a political course aimed 
at "stimulating growth points," and in the very near term, 
"coming to power." 
  After making more than 140 amendments to the program, 
approximately 400 amendments and 19 basic comments to the rules, 
the delegates agreed that their party will be of a parliamentary 
type with an individual fixed membership, an orientation towards 
entrepreneurs and the intelligentsia, and allowing various 
intraparty platforms. The delegates decided that party members 
have no need for weapons. The word "Mister" [Gospodin] has been 
adopted as the party form of address. With time, a youth 
organization will be formed within the party. On the subject of 
upcoming presidential elections the conference decided that it 
would be reasonable for all democrats to unite in a single bloc 
and field one candidate. 

