Term   Plan Revision 
<H4>  Interview: FBR Commercialization &amp; Nuclear Fuel Recycling </H4>

<F P=102> 94FE0274A Tokyo ENERUGI FORAMU in Japanese Oct 93 pp 71-76 </F>
<F P=103> 94FE0274A </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo ENERUGI FORAMU </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview by Tetsuya Ishikawa, ENERUGI FORAMU, with </F>
Sadahiko Washimi, VP, Kansai Electric Power Company and Atsuyuki 
Suzuki, Professor, Faculty of Engineering, University of Tokyo] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Most Significant Course of Nuclear Fuel Recycling </H5>
  EF: Let's begin with Mr. Suzuki. We sincerely 
appreciate your work on the Nuclear Fuel Recycling Expert 
Subcommittee Report issued on 10 July 1991. Since then the 
international trend toward non-proliferation has become more 
dynamic with the problems over what to do with the plutonium 
from dismantled nuclear weapons in the former Soviet Union, the 
transport of plutonium from France to Japan by the Akatsuki 
Maru, and so forth. What do you think? 
  Suzuki: Two years have passed since we issued the 
Nuclear Fuel Recycling Report, and during that time many factors 
for change have arisen. One key point in that report is the fact 
that it shows in numbers the cost of plutonium supply and demand 
over the next 20 years or so. Another point is that the report 
emphasizes we should reveal beforehand, both at home and abroad, 
Japan's plans for plutonium utilization, and in the spirit of 
openness, proceed with those plans. These two issues will be 
important from now on as well. 
  I think we should carefully reconsider the quantitative 
balance of supply and demand in the hearings to revise the 
Nuclear Energy Long-Term Plan. Moreover, as far as openness is 
concerned, I think it will be increasingly important for Japan 
to be as "up front" as possible about her plans for peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy, when we consider the rapid shift 
toward nuclear disarmament accompanying the fall of the Soviet 
Union, the problems with North Korea and so forth. I sincerely 
hope the Long Term Plan subcommittee will consider this 
carefully. And if they do, then the key issue will be what will 
happen to Japan's FBR commercialization plans. 
  EF: It appears that the plan for FBR 
commercialization is "attached by its umbilical cord" to the 
hearings on the Long Term Plan. That means that FBR 
commercialization and plutonium utilization are really two sides 
of the same coin. This relationship became crystal clear when 
the continuous sintering furnace that makes fuel pellets for the 
prototype reactor Monju broke down and delayed criticality for 
the third time. Some people on the Basic Subpanel, which has the 
job of overseeing the Expert Subcommittee working on the Long 
Term Plan, have said that we must decide whether to give 
priority to the balance of plutonium supply and demand or to 
cost effectiveness. 
  Suzuki: Both cost effectiveness and balancing 
plutonium supply and demand are important, but in discussions up 
till now, consistency in government policy has been considered 
more important than cost effectiveness because of the position 
of the Atomic Energy Commission of Japan. So it seems to me that 
the discussion over plutonium supply and demand has received 
more attention. From an international standpoint, however, if we 
try to go ahead with a specific plan in the future, then it is 
important to consider how much it will cost. In that sense, many 
people are now discussing how we should handle the issue of cost 
effectiveness. At least that is my understanding. 
  Everyone associated with nuclear power in Japan believes 
that 
plutonium will surely become an important source of energy in 
the long run, but if we accept the premise that plutonium is 
absolutely necessary, then we also have to say that it does not 
matter how much it will cost. However, in order to master the 
use of plutonium for the future we must make the operation both 
streamlined and cost effective, and an extremely important point 
will be how much we can increase this cost-effective 
streamlining from now on. 
  MOX processing will cost more than uranium processing, but 
if 
we say it is better just because it costs more, that is not the 
true reason. Actually there are two advantages: we can cut down 
on uranium usage if we recycle plutonium in LWRs, and uranium 
enrichment will no longer be necessary. Furthermore, if we make 
plutonium mixed fuels, of course we have to pay the processing 
costs, but in any event we should be able to find a happy 
medium. I think we should make this a goal for technological 
development. 
  In other words, I think it is very important that we should 
attach great importance to the government's approach that we not 
possess "excess plutonium," and at the same time we should also 
pursue cost-effective streamlining of the operation. 
  EF: Mr. Washimi, what is the position of those in 
the electric power industry? 
  Washimi: From a security standpoint I think we 
should clearly adopt the concept of plutonium balance as 
national policy and move in the direction of not possessing 
"excess plutonium." I think the basic path to achieve this is to 
adopt MOX fuels and use plutonium in FBRs. My reason is that we 
cannot acquire energy for the 21st century if we do not utilize 
plutonium. 
  But when we consider cost effectiveness as well, we cannot 
simply say that pursuing a balance in supply and demand should 
be our policy no matter how much it costs. The electric power 
industry collects a fee from everyone who uses electricity, and 
one basis for making decisions is how much of that fee can be 
applied to the cost of preparing future energy supplies. 
  On the other hand, "technological development" takes a very 
long time to bear fruit. When we look at the history of LWR 
development, it has taken about 30 years. We have been told that 
even if we begin development for FBR commercialization today, it 
will be 2030 before the Age of the FBR truly arrives. All the 
people who are alive until that time will be customers of the 
electric power industry, and it is up to us to find out how much 
of their electric bill they will allow us to use to pay for 
technological development. 
  From that standpoint, the electric power industry cannot 
boldly promote FBR commercialization without the consent of the 
populace. Therefore, I believe the electric power industry 
should not act on its own, but should discuss the matter with 
scholars and the government. Then in some form or other we 
should draw a line to indicate how much capital we think we 
ought to invest in the future and strive to work within that 
range. 
  EF: Mr. Suzuki, the idea that plutonium 
utilization and FBRs will be expensive that has been embraced by 
Democratic Party non-proliferation hardliners in the U.S. 
Congress and Mr. Leventhal, the anti-plutonium activist, has 
attained wide acceptance. Most American nuclear weapons have 
plutonium warheads, and Americans' beliefs are strongly rooted 
in a society where peaceful and military uses of nuclear energy 
have been mixed together. 
  Suzuki: When plutonium is not recycled, it is 
commonly called "one-through." In the case of one-through, we 
cannot determine the final stopping point. In other words, can 
we or should we get rid of all our spent fuel? No country has 
tried this yet. Even in discussions in the U.S., comparisons are 
made without clarifying this issue, and so in the true sense of 
the word comparisons of cost effectiveness are not possible. 
  What is important in explaning why recycling is reasonable 
is 
whether spent fuel is considered a "useful resource" or not. I 
believe it is a useful resource, so for me the problem is when 
and how much of it will be recycled as a resource. Rather than 
simply a problem of cost effectiveness, I think this is a nearly 
insolvable problem if we do not consider how we will obtain a 
stable long-term supply of the resource. 
  In the past the rule has been that spent fuel will be 
recycled as a resource as soon as possible, but there is really 
no need to hurry. I think it is important to use the right 
amount of spent fuel at the right time as a resource, and 
definitely not dispose of it as waste. 
  EF: But Japan does not have a lot of land. 
  Washimi: Japan is a small country, but nuclear 
fuel itself is very compact, and we are still debating whether 
we should dispose of spent fuel entirely or keep it for 
processing. Either way, if we can obtain the consensus of the 
majority of the populace, it will not take up a lot of space. 
  On the other hand, by the second half of the 21st century we 
will begin to reach the end of our buried reserves of oil and 
natural gas, and their prices will gradually rise. Even if the 
FBR were developed right away, although it would be more 
expensive than generating electricity from oil-burning plants 
right now, as power producers we must give the highest priority 
to the issue of which path will place the smallest burden on our 
customers in the future, when prices of LNG and oil have gone 
up. I believe that we can acquire adequate cost effectiveness at 
that time by improving and developing our present FBR technology. 
<H5>  Weathering the Mass Media Storm </H5>
  EF: As a former newspaper reporter I was 
disappointed in the reporting of the transport of plutonium by 
the Akatsuki Maru. It took more than six years to complete the 
U.S-Japan Atomic Energy Agreement that places the two countries 
on an equal footing. At that time, near the end of the 
negotiations the U.S. was insisting on transport by air, but 
Japan resisted. However, the state of Alaska and others 
protested because Anchorage Airport would lie along the course, 
so the Murkowski Amendment was passed by Congress to reverse the 
U.S. position. If the newspaper reporters had bothered to learn 
the history behind plutonium transport, they would not have 
reported the event in that way. 
  Washimi: It is necessary to utilize plutonium in 
order to guarantee a future source of nuclear fuel for power 
generation. In accordance with this basic plan, we had the 
reprocessing done overseas, recovered the plutonium and brought 
it back on the Akatsuki Maru. I consider this one step we have 
taken toward the future. At that time we were opposed by 
Greenpeace, but I think that perhaps we did not strive hard 
enough to seek their understanding about plutonium. 
  In addition, we could not reveal absolutely every bit of 
information to the public because of the need to protect nuclear 
material. It is human nature that the more things we keep 
hidden, the more people want to know about them. My 
understanding is that the government is reviewing issues such as 
how to form mutual agreements and how much information can be 
released to the public. These are certainly issues that must be 
considered. 
  Therefore, we must hold firm to our basic plan for 
converting 
"unburnable" uranium 238, which accounts for 99.3 percent of all 
the uranium, into plutonium 239 and using it. 
  Suzuki: What Mr. Washimi said just now illustrates 
a good lesson. From the standpoint of protecting nuclear 
materials, in other words, from the standpoint of security, it 
is only natural that some information is difficult to disclose 
to the public. The government has followed the approach that it 
has responsibilities to the U.S. and to Europe, so information 
disclosed to the public should be kept to an absolute minimum. 
However, many ordinary citizens doubt whether that is the real 
issue or not. Information concerning safety is not for security 
but for safety, and they think that as much information as 
possible concerning safety should be available to the public. On 
the other hand, information that is absolutely necessary for 
security cannot be disclosed to the public. In reality, it is 
difficult to know where to draw the line. Through what we have 
just experienced we have learned that many people in Japan think 
non-disclosure should be kept to a bare minimum, and many people 
in places like France seem to feel the same way. 
  We have learned another important lesson as well. We 
Japanese 
tend to take for granted that because we are clearly limiting 
the use of plutonium to peaceful purposes and are not even 
considering military uses, people in other countries will 
naturally go along with our plans. Our experience has made us 
realize once more that that is not the case. 
  One more point is that because we Japanese tend to think 
about plutonium and atomic energy purely in terms of peaceful 
utilization, we have become somewhat insensitive to the uses of 
atomic energy in other countries. Japanese newspapers and other 
media have paid little attention to the North Korean problem. 
The Foreign Ministry has had several contacts through formal 
diplomatic channels, and that is what we expect. But newspapers 
and public opinion polls show almost no interest. I am sure that 
Americans find this hard to believe. They cannot understand how 
the Japanese can be so nonchalant about a neighboring country 
wanting to go nuclear. I am hoping that this flap about the 
Akatsuki Maru will be an opportunity for Japanese people to gain 
some understanding of the workings of international peace. 
  EF: I watched a special program broadcast on NHK 
on 23 May entitled "Japan, The Plutonium Superpower II: The 
Dream and Reality of Nuclear Fuel Recycling." I felt it was so 
biased that I sent a letter with several questions to their 
Office of Inquiry. They passed my letter on to the head of the 
Reporting Division, but the response I got back did not answer 
my questions. 
  Suzuki: Reporters talked to me too, but it 
appeared that the reporters had just come to me for information, 
and I did not appear on the program at all. When the reporters 
talked to me they made it clear what the program intended to 
say, so I was not too surprised. But when a reporting 
organization tackles the plutonium problem, I guess we can 
expect them to be rather critical. In many instances they did 
not acknowledge the facts, and I wish they were a little more 
enlightened. 
  Regardless of their approach, however, I am happy that they 
spent two evenings of prime time to look at plutonium. It may 
not have been directly effective in opening people's eyes, but a 
reporter from an unrelated magazine publisher visited me after 
watching the program and asked me if what he saw on the program 
was true. After I explained things to him, he wrote an article 
expounding the true facts of the situation, so there has been 
that kind of secondary effect. I like to look at it in a 
positive light. 
  EF: I watched it together with my wife, and after 
it was over my wife said to me, "Why don't you stop working your 
fingers to the bone? The future is so bleak, and developing the 
FBR will be a total waste." 
  Washimi: I agree with Mr. Suzuki that it was good 
for them to report on the plutonium issue. At least after the 
first part of the NHK special that is how we felt, but the 
second part was just too one-sided. 
  For example, the program stated that there are 5 million 
tons 
of uranium resources, so the FBR is totally unnecessary. Right 
now the amount of officially confirmed unmined uranium is 2.1 
million tons, and even if we include all the most probable 
additional estimated resources, it only comes to 3.4 million 
tons. The only way to get 5 million tons is to add in every 
speculation about uranium deposits that have not been confirmed 
and may or may not exist. We still do not know whether they are 
there or not. Not only that, the figures they use together with 
the 5 million tons are based on the premise that the price of 
uranium will go up to $100/lb. Right now it is only $10/lb, so I 
do not think their calculations are realistic. They should show 
more clearly how they arrived at those numbers. 
  Looking at another example, the program reported that 
reprocessing will produce a sixfold increase in nuclear waste. 
Actually, that is true right now, but we have reduced the amount 
of high-level waste with vitrification, and almost all the waste 
is low-level waste. I wish they would have dug a little deeper 
and explained there is a good chance that reprocessing will 
generate much less waste than direct disposal in the future 
thanks to a reduction in the amount of fuel we will use. 
  Finally, I wish they had taken a long-term view and 
addressed 
the basic issue that we were discussing earlier--that plutonium 
is an important energy resource for the future, and looked at 
our present situation in moving toward its application. 
  EF: What about my wife's statement that developing 
the FBR will be a total waste? 
  Washimi: A very long time is needed for 
technological development. Just looking at airplanes, 30 or 40 
years passed between the Wright brothers and jet aircraft. Even 
when we begin full-fledged commercialization of the FBR and work 
very hard at it, the development will take 30 to 40 years. 
Currently we are working very hard on research and development, 
but we should look beyond that and make decisions based on the 
FBR's usefulness as a source of energy. 
<H5>  FBR Commercialization and Domestic MOX Production Far Away </H5>
  EF: The power industry is leaning toward domestic 
production of MOX fuels, and I believe that preparations for 
domestic MOX production are one of the issues in the upcoming 
Long Term Plan review. 
  Suzuki: Construction has begun on the reprocessing 
plant at Rokkasho Village under the premise that it is for the 
utilization of recovered plutonium and uranium. The most 
effective way for utilizing it is in the form of MOX. Naturally, 
we must think about the structure of a domestic MOX fuel 
business. The electric power companies are encouraged by this 
move. 
  Up till now PNC has conducted technological development, 
mainly in the three fields of uranium enrichment, reprocessing, 
and MOX fuels as they relate to the fuel cycle. The mainstream 
of uranium enrichment and reprocessing has already moved to the 
private sector. So that leaves us with MOX fuels. When we look 
at the path of uranium enrichment and reprocessing in their 
transition from technological development to private sector 
commercialization, it appears there are ways to make better use 
of the fruits of technological development. 
  The biggest problem is personnel. I believe it is very 
important how we utilize the people who dealt with development 
of MOX fuel processing technology at PNC and who currently 
possess vital know-how when we make the transition to 
commercialization. I hope that this time, when we decide the 
direction of the business structure, we consider this issue much 
more carefully than we did in the past. 
  EF: I have seen the Plutonium Fuel No. 3 
Development Lab at PNC's Tokai Works. As you look at it from the 
front there is an FBR line on the left and an ATR line on the 
right. Four years have passed since the building for the ATR 
line was completed, but it is still standing empty. One reason 
is the delay at the Oma site for the ATR demonstration reactor, 
of course. I think PNC should bring in people from fuel 
manufacturers and together make MOX fuel both for the Oma 
reactor and for the plutonium thermal reactors for power company 
use. 
  Suzuki: Just as you say, the key point will be how 
well we make use of this opportunity and tie in the PNC experts 
in this field to commercialization. The ATR line is very 
important and it must proceed on schedule from now on. I have a 
feeling that the people involved with MOX fuels are taking a 
rather narrow approach. MOX fuels allow rather flexible designs 
to be made, and if we would do so I think cost-effective 
streamlining with MOX fuels will make a big jump forward. I hope 
this view will be included when decisions are made. 
  The heater on the sintering furnace for making fuel for 
Monju 
broke down recently, delaying criticality. The causes are rather 
complex, but fuel for the Monju has a plutonium content of more 
than 20 percent, with a maximum enrichment of about 25 percent. 
PNC has been making fuel for Fugen for a long time, but that 
fuel has a plutonium content of 1-2 percent, about 3 percent 
maximum. Going from that level to numbers in the 20 
percent-range means a plutonium content 10 times higher. Because 
it is difficult to guarantee the same kind of yield for a fuel 
with 10 times more plutonium, I expect this will become an issue 
from now on. 
  We can use a special campaign to make fuel for the FBR, but 
in the future we must make it on a production line that flows 
continuously in the same way we make fuel for the LWRs today. A 
very important issue will be how we achieve that level, and in 
that sense I would like to see the No. 3 Development Lab be 
actively utilized. 
  EF: When a conversation was held this spring among 
some of the most prominent leaders in this field, it was leaked 
that one issue for study in the Long Term Plan hearings will be, 
considering the present trend, whether the electric power 
industry can actually build a second or third demonstration 
reactor even though the present Long Term Plan states that two 
or three will be built. Judging from the present trend, when we 
look at the most recent hearings in the FBR Development Project 
Expert Subcommittee, some people may propose an international 
project for building the second and third demonstration reactors 
like ITER in which Japan, the U.S., EC and Russia have begun 
engineering designs for an experimental fusion reactor. 
  Washimi: Right now there is a hot debate going on 
about when the first demonstration reactor will be built. The 
present Long Term Plan calls for construction on the first 
demonstration reactor to begin in the latter half of the 1990s, 
but it must be sufficiently based on our experience with Monju, 
and we must still get some kind of yardstick on cost 
effectiveness. Furthermore, there are some technical problems 
that are still at the R&amp;D stage. However, the attitude of the 
electric power industry is that we should forge steadily ahead 
with the development of the first demonstration reactor. 
  As far as the second and third demonstration reactors are 
concerned, we should make our decisions with the belief that 
this technology will make steady progress. We are trying very 
hard to make our first demonstration reactor a large reactor 
like the Super Phenix in France, but it may not turn out that 
way. This is my personal opinion, but the larger the reactor, 
the more time it takes to deal with any kind of trouble. So I 
have a feeling that we may eventually have a small reactor. I 
believe that in addition to our experiences with the first 
demonstration reactor, our concept for the second demonstration 
reactor will be based on research on the various possibilities 
for building it in the future. 
  The third reactor lies even farther down the road, and 
although I am not completely sure, I expect that one important 
standard for making the decision will be how much it will cost. 
I believe it is important to reach a consensus on how much of 
the current fees for electricity should be used to pay for the 
cost of future energy. 
  EF: Mr. Suzuki, you made an excellent comment at 
the last meeting of the Expert Subcommittee. You said that if we 
proceed by focusing on the reactors, the burden will be passed 
on to the fuel cycle, and we will be forced to think about 
reactors in terms of the fuel cycle. 
  Suzuki: I made that statement right after we got 
the news that PNC's continuous sintering furnace that was making 
fuel for Monju had broken down and that Monju criticality would 
suffer a long delay. As we seek higher and higher levels of 
performance in reactor specifications, the burden falls on the 
fuel, and things get very difficult from the standpoint of 
acquiring fuel. Monju fuel has low density, and the rods are 
short and thin. When asked, PNC could not say it was unable to 
make that kind of fuel. Actually, making the fuel a little 
thicker and much denser would have been a lot easier. LWR fuel 
can be made that way. PNC has to make fuel that is harder to 
make than LWR fuel. I think it will be important in the future 
to adopt designs in which the reactor and the cycle are 
technologically in balance. 
  Now we are concerned with the process of making the 
transition to commercialization, so a very important issue will 
be how much we can improve our technology. In that sense, short 
term cost effectiveness and so forth are irrelevant. It is 
important that we think of this as technology linked to the 
future, and in that sense I want to see plans for demonstration 
reactors that take the fuel cycle into account. 
<H5>  Expectations for New Long Term Plan </H5>
  EF: In closing, do you have any requests for the 
Long Term Plan Expert Subcommittee? 
  Washimi: As a basic line of reasoning I hope that 
the Long Term Plan will not place too much emphasis on immediate 
results. Energy technology takes a very long time to develop, so 
it is not wise to make decisions based only on the present. It 
is important to take a long-range view. 
  I also hope the committee looks at things from the 
standpoint 
of the general populace. I am sure that the basic framework of 
the Long Term Plan will be clearly written down, but I am 
wondering whether it could be put in the form of a story that 
average citizens can understand? People concerned with atomic 
energy can understand if you say, "In the year two thousand and 
something-or-other we will do this," but I do not think the 
average citizen understands why. I think we need to publish a 
kind of "Cliff's Notes" to the Long Term Plan. 
  Suzuki: I work at a university and deal with young 
students. I want to think that in the future they will be active 
in the field of atomic energy. In that sense, the Long Term Plan 
is very important, and I think most people are particularly 
interested in what will happen to the FBR project. In the 
Nuclear Fuel Recycling Expert Subcommittee Report we issued two 
years ago, we said that we would need roughly 10-20 tons of 
plutonium for the FBR. I think this time we should express 
quantities more precisely. If we do so I think that people 
involved in reprocessing will be encouraged, and the target for 
MOX manufacturing will also become clear. 
  Of course, cost effectiveness is very important and power 
companies reflect this in electricity rates. Power companies 
cannot proceed on their own if the cost is too high. Therefore, 
the most important problem for the upcoming Long Term Plan 
sessions will be expressing the FBR project in a way that most 
people can go along with. 
  Not only in the field of atomic energy, but in other fields 
as well, Japan is showing her economic and technological 
strength to the rest of the world. We must ask whether Japan 
alone should bear the risks of technological developments that 
will benefit the whole world. As economic burdens continue to 
increase international cooperation often means merely providing 
funds. Atomic energy is different because by pouring both 
economic and technical strength into technological development 
of the FBR, we will benefit other nations as well in the future. 
I believe we have arrived at an age in which that will be our 
goal. If that is the case, there is a possibility the FBR 
project may be considered quite rational, even if the financial 
cost is considerable. 
  Washimi: I agree completely. We must approach this 
from the standpoint that the plutonium recycling FBR is not only 
energy for Japan, but energy for the whole world. We must also 
look at it as something for future generations as well as for 
those alive today. Therefore, cost effectiveness comes into play 
because the money will come from fees paid by today's users of 
electricity in Japan. Basically we must consider the future of 
the world's energy and ask ourselves how much of the burden our 
generation should bear. 

