Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, Feb 5 (AFP)--China, facing sanctions for 
not cracking down on trade in endangered species, seemed to have 
won some breathing space Saturday after a top international 
wildlife protection official said some progress had been made. 
  "We were very encouraged by what we saw," Murray Hosking, 
standing committee chairman of the UN Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) told AFP. 
  However, Hosking, who left here Saturday after a four-day 
visit at the head of a CITES delegation, indicated that while 
the Chinese authorities had taken important steps to counter the 
illegal trade in rhinoceros horns and tiger bones, question 
marks remained over enforcement. 
  "The policing mechanisms they have set up are as good as 
any, 
but the important thing now is that they are seen to work," he 
said. 
  CITES launched a scathing attack on Taiwan and China in 
September for not enforcing restrictions and called on its 120 
members to consider punitive sanctions "up to and including the 
prohibition of trade in wildlife" against both. 
  China reponded in November by issuing a total ban on the 
trade in rhino horns and tiger bones, including their use in 
traditional Chinese medicine. 
  Although Hosking declined to give specific details of the 
delegation's findings, he described the report that he would 
take back to the CITES standing committee as "positive." 
  The committee will study the report before deciding whether 
to go ahead with the sanctions threat. 
  According to Hosking, China has agreed to carry out 
nationwide inspections of pharmaceutical companies and outlets 
this year and in 1995 to ensure the trade ban is being adhered 
to. 
  "The government must make sure that the policing is done 
visibly. Above all, it has to make it clear to the companies 
that it is serious," he said. 
  However, he acknowledged that the use of animal parts in 
Chinese medicine was a deeply ingrained tradition that would 
take time to break. 
  "You cannot change the cultural traditions of 1.2 billion 
people overnight." 

