Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Brasilia -- Congressional leaders will today make a 
new effort to guarantee the amendment of the Constitution. 
Leaders of the parties that endorse the amendment will meet 
this morning with PMDB [Brazilian Democratic Movement Party] 
Senator for Paraiba Humberto Lucena -- the president of the 
Constituent Congress -- in another attempt to design a minimum 
agenda for the debates that will follow the voting on the Social 
Emergency Fund (FSE). The leaders want, as of March, voting 
sessions to be held on weekends. This afternoon they will set 
31 May as the new deadline to conclude the work by the 
Constituent Congress following a request by Federal Supreme 
Court (STF) justices and by Attorney General Aristides Junqueira 
as a precondition for immediate promulgation of the FSE bill. 
  During the meeting, PMDB Deputy for Rio Grande do Sul Nelson 
Jobim, rapporteur of the Constituent Congress, will once again 
call on party leaders to mobilize their blocs. Jobim complained 
that party blocs -- especially his own -- are indifferent toward 
the amendment. He is annoyed with some PMDB sectors who are 
negotiating with the "contras" over a minimum agenda for the 
amendment, which will reportedly exclude modifications in the 
Economic Order chapter. PFL [Liberal Front Party] Deputy for 
Pernambuco Inocencio Oliveira -- the president the Chamber of 
Deputies -- said if this chapter is excluded, the amendment 
process will not take place. "The PFL, PPR [Progressive Renewal 
Party], and the PP [Popular Party] will not participate under 
that condition," he warned. 
  Deputy for Santa Catarina Luiz Henrique, the president of 
the 
PMDB, today will meet with the "contras" -- the PT [Workers 
Party], PDT [Democratic Labor Party], PSB [Brazilian Socialist 
Party], and PC do B [Communist Party of Brazil] -- to agree on a 
minimum agenda that might be endorsed by those parties and by 
the PMDB. Germano Rigotto, the PMDB deputy for Rio Grande do 
Sul -- one of the lawmakers who wants to exclude the Economic 
Order chapter from the minimum agenda -- has said that if there 
is no negotiation, the amendment will remain stalemated. He 
added that the PFL, the PPR, and the PP are wrong when they say 
the amendment will be meaningless without modifications to the 
Economic Order chapter. He stated: "The country's problems are 
not related to monopolies or to restrictions on foreign capital, 
they are related to the tax system, the social security system, 
the electoral system, and the budget." 
  PPR Deputy for Rio Grande do Sul Adylson Motta -- the vice 
president of the Constituent Congress -- who witnessed the PMDB 
preparations, said: "Once the FSE bill is approved, the 
government will leave the amendment process." PFL and PPR 
lawmakers share this feeling of distrust. Jobim is not very 
certain of the participation of the PMDB and the PSDB [Brazilian 
Social Democracy Party] in the amendment work once the second 
phase of Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso's plan has 
been approved. PFL Deputy for Bahia Luis Eduardo Magalhaes -- 
the PFL leader in the Chamber of Deputies -- wants to take 
advantage of today's meeting to make government leaders formally 
promise that they will work for the amendment. 

