BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Don't Blame the Media for MP's Alleged Drug </F>
Dealing"] 
  [Text] There were fireworks in Parliament on Thursday over 
drug allegations against MPs. 
  Several lawmakers have been suspected of involvement in drug 
trafficking. Thanong Siriprichaphong, an opposition Chat Thai 
MP, has been charged by U.S. authorities with smuggling more 
than 45 tonnes of marijuana into the United States between 1977 
and 1987. 
  On Tuesday, it was reported that Foreign Minister Prasong 
Sunsiri told the Cabinet that a further 17 Thai politicians had 
been blacklisted by the United States for suspected involvement 
in drugs. Of the 17 accused, he reportedly said 10 were present 
opposition lawmakers and seven former MP's. 
  Fuelling speculation further were fresh allegations made by 
the Independent Network News [INN] radio that apart from 
opposition MP's, three government lawmakers were also suspected 
of involvement in the drug trade. INN, quoting unnamed 
anti-narcotics officials, identified them only by their initials 
and positions, and said they belonged to a political party whose 
leader is the prime minister, an obvious reference to the 
Democrat Party. 
  While the government was caught offguard, INN also turned 
the 
heat on the opposition by identifying three leading opposition 
MP's alleged to be involved with illegal drugs, through their 
initials, constituencies and party affiliations. 
  Rather than initiate serious action in response to these 
allegations. Lawmakers--both government and opposition--have 
tended to blame the media for the controversy that only appears 
to be getting messier. 
  After angry opposition parties on Wednesday threatened to 
seek his expulsion if he failed to name the 17 suspected MP's, 
Foreign Minister Prasong apparently got cold feet and denied 
ever telling the Cabinet about the 17. Prasong said he had only 
told the Cabinet meeting that Thai people from various fields 
including the military, the police, business and politics are 
involved in drug smuggling, without naming any individuals. 
  "If anybody here wants to talk about the 17 MP's, then go 
and 
ask the media which publicized the issue, he said. 
  When cornered, it is easy to pass the buck and blame the 
messenger for whatever consequences might arise in the pursuit 
to accurately report events to the public. 
  The fact of the matter is that the individuals implicated 
are 
not ordinary Thais. They are the people's representatives in 
Parliament--which is supposed to be the bulwark of democracy. 
  The role of the media in Thailand, unlike in several 
neighboring countries, is to act as the public's watchdog. If 
politicians with backgrounds that indicate they have made 
fortunes illicitly have been elected as MP's, then the public 
has every right to know about it. 
  After the bloody May events in 1992, all politicians have to 
realize that democracy in the country is of the people, by the 
people and for the people, with the media playing the very 
important role safeguarding the people's interests. 
  Recent remarks made by opposition MP's that Foreign Minister 
Prasong as well as the three Democrat lawmakers should sue 
newspapers and radio stations for reporting "lies" are uncalled 
for and show the narrow-mindedness typical of many members of 
parliament. 
  When members of Parliament are implicated in 
drug-trafficking, they cannot just be viewed as isolated 
incidents because the image of the whole country is adversely 
affected. 
  Prime Minister Chuan Likphai told Parliament he would not 
hesitate to get rid of MP's if they were involved in drug 
trafficking. "It's the duty of my government to suppress all 
vice and I believe no party wants to have bad MP's," he added. 
  But these are mere words and mean nothing unless concrete 
action is taken. 
  Money laundering legislation must be introduced without 
delay 
giving authorities the right to investigate the financial status 
of drug suspects. In the world today, hard drugs like heroin 
and cocaine are killing thousands of people every year. 
Unfortunately, in Thailand it appears there are many people 
occupying positions of power who have no compunction whatsoever 
about supplying illegal drugs to foreign markets. Amassing 
wealth through such illegal means does not even prick their 
conscience. 
  For democracy to work, even on the most basic level, the 
public must be kept informed. It is the duty of the media to 
provide the information necessary to help people vote in good 
MPs to the House of Representatives. 
  The media is only trying its best to preserve the dignity of 
the House by reporting what is actually happening. In the 
broader interests of the country and salvaging Thailand's 
international reputation the media must not be prevented from 
doing so. 

