CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, Feb. 14--The French cosmetics giant, 
L'Oreal, the leading homeopathic manufacturer, Willmar Schwabe 
Gmbh of Germany, and Pepsico Inc. of the United States are among 
the foreign companies whose proposals for direct investment in 
this country were cleared today. A tie-up between British Gas 
and the Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) for supplying 
piped gas to Bombay for domestic and commercial use has also 
been approved. 
  The empowered committee presided over by Finance Minister, 
Dr 
Manmohan Singh, approved 50 proposals envisaging a total direct 
foreign investment of over Rs. 700 crores. The units have 
projected export earnings of over Rs. 1,700 crores over a 
five-year period. 
  L'Oreal has been allowed to set up a 100 percent owned 
company. The $4.5-million project will be in a backward area of 
Gujarat. The French company will provide advanced technology and 
know-how in the form of formulations for products, 
manufacturing, testing and packaging. 
  Green signal for Pepsico: Pepsico Inc. has also 
been given approval for setting up a 100 percent holding company 
with an investment up to dollar 95 million. The holding company 
will invest in Indian subsidiaries or joint ventures and may 
also engage in certain business activities. An official release 
says their main area of interest will be in food processing 
industries, beverages, business, joint ventures, export 
activities and information technology. 
  Willmar Schwabe Gmbh of Germany has been allowed to 
establish 
a joint venture company for producing and distributing its 
products. The project will undertake exports valued at over Rs. 
8 crores over a seven-year period, apart from resulting in 
import substitution. 
  The empowered committee also approved the joint venture 
proposal of GAIL and British Gas for distributing gas, initially 
from Bombay High and later from other potential sources, to 
domestic and industrial consumers in Greater Bombay. The project 
will connect 620,000 consumers to its pipe network over a 
12-year period. 
  Wind energy project: Among the other proposals 
cleared by the committee is that of Cannon Group of California, 
U.S., the world's second largest wind power operator. This is 
for setting up a joint venture for using wind energy with 
special interest in building, operating and owning wind energy 
parks. The project with an equity capital of Rs. 100 crore will 
be located in Gujarat. The Park will have a capacity of 100mw 
having 400 wind turbines. The energy generated will be fed to 
the Gujarat Electricity Board for supply to industrial units in 
the area. 
  Aeolus Aviation Limited has been allowed to establish a 
flying academy and air chartered services in Tamil Nadu to cater 
to requirements of professional pilots of India. 
  A financial and technical collaboration between Lakhanpal 
National Limited and Matsushita Electric of Japan for setting up 
additional manufacturing facilities for mercury-free dry cell 
batteries with zinc chloride paper line technology was also 
approved by the committee. 
  The proposed collaboration between Archie Sports and 
Australian Bat Company for setting up a cricket bat 
manufacturing project in Gurgaon, Haryana, has simultaneously 
been cleared. The Indian company will export a minimum 75 
percent of the bats produced. 
  Other schemes cleared today include Greenland Warehousing's 
proposal for warehousing of containers and bulk cargo in open, 
covered and custom bonded warehouses areas near J.N. Port in 
Maharashtra and Raunak International has been allowed to 
establish bulk drug and drugs intermediates manufacturing 
facility in collaboration with ACG Handal Sgessel Schaft 
Austria. An NRI [Nonresident Indian] promoted project of Venture 
Twenty First Foods for setting up a fruits and vegetables 
processing unit has also been cleared. 
  Another scheme from NRIs based in Canada has been approved 
for setting up a Foreign Language Institute. Its services will 
include training in selected foreign languages, computerised 
foreign translation and cross cultural training for business 
executives. 

