Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Japan Atomic Power Company and the Central 
Research Institute of Electric Power Industry (CRIEPI; Naoshi 
Yoda, director) started joint research with the U.S. Department 
of Energy on metal fuel as the future fuel for FBRs. Present-day 
FBRs use mixed-oxide fuel that is ceramic, but switching to 
metal fuel will serve to increase thermal efficiency and make 
reprocessing easier. 
  Metal fuel is an alloy of uranium, plutonium, and zirconium. 
Because metal fuel, like mixed-oxide fuel, does not contain 
oxygen, its heat- transfer rate is good. Metal fuel can 
efficiently supply heat to the coolant material, sodium, without 
raising the temperature of parts of the reactor core. That makes 
possible smaller FBRs with the same output as larger FBRs that 
use mixed-oxide fuel. In addition, the nature of the nuclear 
reaction is such that when the temperature of the fuel rises, 
the nuclear reaction is inhibited. So, metal fuel has another 
strong point in that the inhibitory effect increases if the 
heat-transfer rate is good. 
  After it is burned the metal fuel melts, then electricity is 
passed through it to make it adhere to electrodes so that the 
plutonium and uranium can be recovered. The process of 
dissolving the fuel in nitric acid, as performed with 
mixed-oxide fuel, is not necessary, and dry reprocessing can be 
done. 
  Metal fuel had not been practical in the past because gas 
was 
generated when the fuel was heated, causing it to swell up and 
break easily. Mixed-oxide fuel is ceramic with many small gaps, 
so the gas can escape and there is no worry about the fuel 
breaking. 
  Although the problem can be circumvented by creating small 
gaps between the inside of the metal fuel and its cladding tube, 
that was not practical because the thermal efficiency dropped. 
The Japan Atomic Power Co., CRIEPI, and the U.S. DOE solved both 
the problems of the thermal expansion and the drop in thermal 
efficiency by filling up the spaces between the metal fuel and 
the cladding tube with sodium. Next, they will look into core 
designs that are suitable for metal fuel. 
  Since 1964 the U.S. DOE has been conducting research on 
metal 
fuel at an FBR in Idaho, the EBR-II (output, 20,000 kw). Japan 
waits until next year for the first criticality of the Monju 
FBR, which uses mixed-oxide fuel. Japan will also move forward 
with research on metal fuel, the next-generation fuel. 

