BFN 

  [Text] Guatemala City, 5 May (NOTIMEX) -- The Guatemalan 
Government today insisted [words indistinct] the warnings of 
danger to tourists who travel to the country because this might 
produce at least $5 million in losses this year. 
  The travel warning for Guatemala was imposed by the U.S. 
Government in response to a wave of violence in recent weeks. 
  Guatemalan Foreign Minister Gladys Marithza Ruiz de Vielman 
said the travel warning for U.S. tourists "does not help 
Guatemalan efforts to promote development, strengthen democracy, 
and move toward peace." 
  Ruiz de Vielman regretted she has not received a reply from 
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher to a letter sent by 
Guatemalan President Ramiro de Leon Carpio on 15 April. In the 
letter, De Leon Carpio promised severe measures against those 
who commit violent actions and create a climate of instability 
for the population and especially for U.S. tourists. The 
president explained that Guatemala [words indistinct] tourists a 
year, making the tourist industry the second greatest source of 
foreign exchange for the country. 
  The greatest number of tourists come from the United States. 
Last year, 147,262 U.S. tourists visited Guatemala. According 
to Guatemalan Tourism Institute Director Bruno Mertins, that 
figure represents 26 percent of the total number of visitors. 
Mertins said that tourism produced [words indistinct] in 1993, 
$9.1 million more than in 1992, although the prospects for 1994 
are not very encouraging. Tourism revenue is only surpassed by 
coffee exports which bring $275 million annually in foreign 
exchange. This amount is only slightly higher than the 
remittance of money from Guatemalans living in the United 
States, which amounts to approximately $200 million. 
  Authorities say they are investigating the reasons for the 
attacks on U.S. tourists in March in Santa Lucia Cotzumalguapa 
in the south, San Cristobal Verapaz in the north, and 
Huehuetenango in the west. 
  According to official studies in the tourism industry, which 
provides 70,000 direct jobs, this sector has been the one most 
hurt by the wave of violence. Mertins said that because of the 
violence AID suspended assistance it had earmarked for the 
tourism sector. 
  Hotels, travel agencies, and tourism operators are 
undertaking campaigns in various U.S. cities to counteract the 
negative reports as a result of attacks on U.S. tourists. 
  U.S. citizen Chris Halter, director of the Christian 
Foundation for Respect of Indians, said that if by 15 May the 
State Department does not lift the travel warning, he will go on 
a hunger strike in front of the U.S. Embassy. On 11 May, a 
group of Indians who are led by Halter and who earn their living 
from the sale of handicrafts will stage a march to the U.S. 
Embassy to protest the travel warning for U.S. tourists. 

