BFN 

  [Text] Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff has asked U.S. 
authorities to stop U.S. officials from attacking him without 
justification. De Greiff has also called on the U.S. Government 
to continue cooperating with the exchange of evidence, as this 
will advance the end of the scourge of drug trafficking. 
  Upon returning from a trip to the UK and the United States, 
the official said in a communique that he held a news conference 
in Washington and had emphatically rejected the charges that 
drug traffickers have infiltrated the government and that there 
is corruption in top government positions and in the legislative 
and judicial branches, as claimed by a convict at a U.S. Senate 
subcommission. 
  The prosecutor said that in his opinion, the procedures to 
bring drug traffickers to trial and the penalty reduction policy 
in effect should continue. De Greiff said those who say drug 
traffickers are given lenient treatment or illegal sentence 
reductions are liars. "No pardons or amnesties of any kind have 
even been considered," he said. De Greiff said cooperation with 
justice cannot be conditioned to forcing judicial officials to 
use given evidence, prior to consultation of their decisions, 
with the country that gives the evidence. 
  De Greiff had told the U.S. media he had not proposed drug 
legalization as a way to stop the use of illegal drugs but, 
rather, as a way to stop drug traffickers from obtaining the 
excessive profits they are making. This decision has to be 
adopted, however, by the international community as a whole, he 
added. 
  The official said Senator Kerry could not affirm, if he acts 
in good faith, that regarding one drug trafficker (Julio Fabio 
Urdinola), who surrendered to justice, the Prosecutor's Office 
has reached an agreement to give him a four- or a 
four-and-one-half-year prison sentence. "There has been no 
trial provision, much less an out-of-court agreement on this 
issue," he added. 
  De Greiff arrived in the UK on 15 April and met with the UK 
prosecutor general, the secretary of state of foreign affairs, 
officials of the Investigation Center on Drugs and Health 
Behavior, and other officials and parliamentarians of that 
nation. During those meetings, de Greiff explained the scope of 
Colombian justice and thanked them for the material and 
intellectual aid the UK has given to Colombia in this field. 

