Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jackie Burdon, Mike Harvey and John von Radowitz, PRESS </F>
ASSOCIATION] 
  [Excerpts] Scotland Yard's chief police officer appealed 
for calm tonight after a third mortar attack on Heathrow Airport 
in the space of five days. Metropolitan police commissioner 
Paul Condon said: "As a community we must keep our nerve and not 
give into the despair that the terrorists would hope to 
generate." 
  He spoke as hundreds of police officers supported by 
soldiers carried out a huge search around the airport for more 
hidden mortar launchers. 
  Today's attack came just after 8 A.M. when four mortars were 
fired towards the Terminal Four area from launch tubes concealed 
about 80 yards from the southern perimeter fence. One hit the 
roof of the Terminal Four building. The others landed in the 
apron area of the terminal, where planes are normally parked. 
  As in the two previous attacks on Wednesday [9 March] night 
and early Friday morning none of the bombs exploded and no 
damage or injury was caused. But once again the world's busiest 
airport was crippled as plane arrivals and departures were 
halted, thousands of passengers moved out of danger areas, and 
roads closed. 
  Terminal Four was evacuated and flights stopped from using 
the southern runway from the time of the first warnings until 
the runway was partially reopened for "short take-offs" at 9.30 
A.M. But police and airport chiefs decided to keep the northern 
runway operating as normal. 
  The southern runway, closed immediately after the attack, 
fully re-opened at 1.40 P.M. and Terminal Four at 2.30 P.M.. 
The northern runway escaped disruption. 
  Mr Condon said he had asked for military help to assist in 
the search for further mortars but claimed army security patrols 
at the airport would not have deterred today's attack. [passage 
omitted] 
  So far the IRA has claimed responsibility only for the first 
attack, but all three incidents have followed a similar pattern. 
  Police said the terrorists had gone to great lengths to hide 
the five-tube trestle launcher used in today's attack. 
  The device was partially buried in scrubland and camouflaged 
with wood, leaves and re-laid turf. It was almost certainly 
fired using a timing device -- long after the terrorists were 
safely away. 
  The attack followed a series of unspecific coded bomb 
warnings to various news media between 0619 and 0641 A.M. 
[passage omitted] 
  Each mortar bomb was potentially deadly, containing between 
half a pound and a pound of powerful Semtex explosive. But 
tonight there was speculation over whether the bombs were duds 
or merely a clever propaganda weapon -- intended only to cause 
disruption but not to kill. Scotland Yard's Anti-Terrorist 
Branch chief Commander David Tucker offered no explanation as to 
why none of the 12 mortars fired at Heathrow in the three 
attacks exploded, but suggested there was a "mechanical defect." 
  Mr Condon maintained that all the devices were "potentially 
viable" and could have detonated. But security sources in 
Northern Ireland said such a failure rate was unprecedented for 
the IRA. They pointed out that the Provisionals had perfected 
their engineering techniques to such an extent that virtually 
every missile fired in Ulster now keeps a straight line and 
explodes on impact. One senior RUC officer said today: "In 
military terms this is powder puff stuff, and it is quite 
obvious what they are up to... 
  ``The Provos [Provisional IRA] are piddling about. If they 
really wanted to cause death and destruction, they could do it. 
It's second nature to them. What they are doing at Heathrow is 
hinting at the potential. They're having a good laugh, and 
keeping morale high back here in Belfast.'' 

