Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "DMK Splits"] </F>
  [Text] Tiruchirapalli, Dec 26 (UNI): The Opposition Dravida 
Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) in Tamil Nadu formally split on Sunday, 
with the parallel "general council" meeting of the party 
convened here by expelled rebel leader V. Gopalsamy, MP (Member 
of Parliament), and his supporters declaring that theirs was the 
"real DMK." 
  Today's split, the third the party's 44-year-long existence, 
came at the end of a three-month-long acute leadership struggle 
and in the wake of a sensational disclosure of an alleged 
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) plot to assassinate 
party president M. Karunanidhi and promote the interests of Mr 
Gopalsamy. 
  The 48-year-old firebrand politician, Mr Gopalsamy, who had 
vowed to "liberate" the DMK from the clutches of Mr 
Karunanidhi's "dynastic rule," announced that today's meeting 
"relieved" Mr Karunanidhi and general secretary K. Anbazhagan, 
among others, from their posts. 
  Announcing far-reaching changes in his new party, Mr 
Gopalsamy, who was elected unanimously as the general secretary, 
said the post of party president, created in 1969, stood 
abolished, and in its place, the post of chairman of Presidium, 
was being revived. 
  Staking his claim to the "red and black" flag of the DMK, Mr 
Gopalsamy said the party would follow the policies of 
founder-leader C.N. Annadurai. 
  He also announced the revival of the party's Parliamentary 
Board with six members and removal of leaders nominated to 
various wings of the party by Mr Anbazhagan. 
  Meanwhile, in what is considered as a trial of strength, Mr 
Karunanidhi has convened the general council of the DMK at 
Thanjavur on December 29 and proposes to make video recording of 
the proceedings to nail the propaganda by Mr Gopalsamy's 
supporters that the Thanjavur meet would be a fake. 
  Asked whether he would release the list of the members, who 
attended the "general council" meeting, district wide, Mr 
Gopalsamy replied that he did not want to release the list now 
for "strategic" reasons. He, would do so at the right time. 
  He said photographs had been taken and video recording of 
the 
proceedings had been made to provide proof, if needed. 
  To a question whether he would capture Arivaalayam, the 
headquarters of the DMK led by Mr Karunanidhi, at Madras, Mr 
Gopalsamy said he had no faith in violence and would not 
"capture" the properties of DMK. 


