CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Liang Wei: "The Provincial Government Reports to </F>
All Sectors of Society: The Provincial Economy Grew in a 
Sustained, Rapid Manner, and There Were New Breakthroughs in the 
Development of All Social Undertakings"] 
  [Text] The other 
day Cai Zhaofa, press spokesman of the provincial government, 
reported on our provincial economy and our province's social 
development, pointing out that 1993 was the year with the 
fastest development in the 15 years of reform and opening up. 
  1. Large steps were taken in the various reforms revolving 
round the establishment of a socialist market economic system. 
Rural reforms continued to deepen, and the degree of 
marketization and commercialization of agriculture further 
increased. The pace of the transformation of enterprises' 
operating mechanisms quickened, and there was progress in the 
experiments on the reform of the property rights system and on 
the transformation leading to the adoption of the joint stock 
system. Provincewide 203 enterprises were transformed into joint 
stock enterprises, and the number of enterprise groups increased 
to 54. There was faster progress in the work of fostering and 
building a market system, and price reform proceeded steadily. A 
market-regulated pricing mechanism was formed in a preliminary 
way; the market-regulated share of the province's retail 
consumer goods reached 97 percent, and prices of many important 
production materials were gradually decontrolled. The reform of 
the provincial-level agencies which was centered on transforming 
the function of government proceeded in an hastened manner. The 
reform of the housing system proceeded in a comprehensive 
manner. The reform of the social security system achieved 
prominent results. 
  2. The provincial economy grew in a sustained, rapid manner, 
demonstrating a good momentum of healthy development. GNP for 
the year reached 60.3 billion yuan, an increase of 12 percent 
over the previous year. The gross value of industrial and 
agricultural output reached 97.18 billion yuan, an increase of 
19.8 percent. Agriculture produced a good harvest rarely seen in 
recent years. The total grain output reached 12.156 million 
metric tons, thereby climbing another step. The total oil crop 
output constituted a historical record. New steps were taken in 
transforming agriculture into being characterized by high 
qualities, high yields, and high efficiency. The total value of 
agricultural output reached 21.78 billion yuan, an increase of 
11.5 percent over the previous year. The value of output of 
township enterprises reached 37.2 billion yuan, an increase of 
48 percent, thereby making last year the year with the highest 
growth rate among recent years. Industrial production grew 
rapidly on the basis of the deepening of reforms, the 
transforming of mechanisms, the adjustment of structure, the 
efforts to expand market, and the improvement in efficiency. For 
the year, the total value of industrial output reached 75.4 
billion yuan, an increase of 22.4 percent over the previous 
year; the rate of products sold reached 95.6 percent, an 
increase of 1.2 percentage points over the previous year. The 
gross amount of profits made and taxes paid by the province's 
industrial enterprises covered by the local budget increased by 
27.5 percent; in this respect, profits increased by 78.6 
percent. The outputs of energy, raw materials, and major 
industrial products increased substantially. The nonstate sector 
and relatively less economically developed northern Shaanxi and 
southern Shaanxi demonstrated strong growth momentums and 
increased their shares of the overall economy. The overall 
functioning quality of industry further improved. 
  3. Fixed-asset investments increased rapidly, and the basic 
industries and infrastructure were strengthened. In the year 
fixed-asset investments worth 21.5 billion yuan were completed 
provincewide, representing an increase of 50.9 percent over the 
previous year and a growth rate which was 36.9 percent higher 
than that for the previous year. With regard to a number of key 
construction projects, especially the 20 "revitalizing-Shaanxi 
projects" and the 38 capital construction projects started last 
year, the progress of 22 projects which must be guaranteed was 
accelerated through the enhancement of the fund allocation work 
on the basis of categorizing and prioritizing the projects and 
of clarifying the focus of investment. Other key construction 
projects proceeded in a hastened manner or were under active 
preparation entailing efforts to create conditions that made it 
possible to start construction as early as possible. 
  4. Buying and selling both boomed on the domestic market. 
The 
total volume of retail sales of the province for the year 
reached 27.24 billion yuan, an increase of 14.8 percent over the 
previous year. The consumer goods market moved in a marked 
fashion, with retail sales reaching 24.55 billion yuan, an 
increase of 17.8 percent. Over the year investments provincewide 
in the construction of merchandizing networks and establishments 
totalled 320 million yuan; 196 markets of various kinds were 
built, renovated, or expanded; the number of bazaars reached 
2,587, and the number of financial, labor service, information, 
technology, and other markets increased to 298. A new 
pluralistic situation of large commerce, large circulation, and 
large markets is emerging. 
  5. The opening to the outside world further expanded, and 
external economic and technological cooperation proceeded in a 
satisfactory manner. In 1993 our province held economic and 
trade talks in Hong Kong, Singapore, Xi'an, and Shangzhou on 
separate occasions, producing abundant results. A new situation 
of multilayered, all-dimensional opening to the outside world is 
emerging. Over the year a total of $234 million in foreign 
capital and loans from such sources as the World Bank and the 
Asian Development Bank was utilized. Seven hundred and ninety 
new foreign-funded enterprises were approved, exceeding the 
number of foreign-funded enterprises established over the 10-odd 
years. Especially, cooperation relations with some large 
conglomerates, large corporations, and large enterprises abroad 
began to be established. There was progress in using foreign 
capital to conduct transplantation in and transform traditional 
industries and in establishing joint ventures. Foreign trade 
exports continued to exhibit a good growth momentum. Exports 
totalled $990 million in the year, an increase of 28.6 percent. 
The tourist industry continued to develop its market 
internationally, thereby increasing the sources of tourists; the 
number of tourists from abroad for the year was 458,000, 
generating 500 million yuan in foreign exchange renminbi; the 
two figures represented increases of 8.4 percent and 21.6 
percent respectively over the previous year. 
  6. Fiscal revenues increased steadily, and financial order 
improved. Last year the province's fiscal revenues totalled 6.24 
billion yuan, representing 113.5 percent of the annual budget 
target and an increase of 22.5 percent over the previous year. 
Although fiscal capability remained in a tight situation, 
investments continued to be made in agriculture, education, and 
key construction. The province's fiscal expenditures totalled 
7.36 billion yuan, an increase of 13.1 percent. The financial 
sector made serious efforts to rectify the phenomena of 
unauthorized short-term financing, unauthorized fund raising, 
and establishing unauthorized financial institutions. Within the 
time stipulated, 1.23 billion yuan in incoming short-term 
financing was repaid, and 1.22 billion yuan in outgoing 
short-term financing was recovered. The year-end balance of 
deposits at banks and credit cooperatives reached 61.67 billion 
yuan, an increase of 11.17 billion yuan over the beginning of 
the year. Existing loans of various kinds amounted to 76.99 
billion yuan, an increase of 13.16 billion yuan. 
  7. Further progress was made in such social undertakings as 
science and technology, education, culture, and health. 
Revolving round economic construction, science and technology 
work and education work were characterized by energetic efforts 
to create breakthroughs in important science and technology 
projects and to utilize results of scientific and technological 
research. Over the year 1,368 items of achievement of scientific 
and technological research were produced; of those 216 were of 
high technology and applied technology items. 
  The education sector carried out a series of reforms on 
enrollment planning, disciplinary composition, and the placement 
of graduates. Regular institutions of higher learning under 
local jurisdictions enrolled 11,600 regular undergraduate 
students and technical college students, and secondary technical 
schools enrolled 23,400 students, representing increases of 22.9 
percent and 16.5 percent respectively over the previous year. 
The provincial school-attendance rate for school-age children 
stabilized at above 98 percent. Education input continued to 
increase. Education expenditures authorized by the provincial 
fiscal budget increased by 23.1 percent over the previous year. 
  The health sector made the reform of the medical care system 
the intended breakthrough point. In the rural areas, focus was 
placed on the construction of three things in the health sector 
(county-level disease-prevention stations, women's health 
centers, and township hospitals) and of the three-tier rural 
health-care networks; in the urban areas focus was placed on 
reforming the medical care system, improving service quality, 
and reforming health facilities. 
  Family planning work produced prominent achievements. 
According to estimates, the rate of population growth for the 
year was 11.0 per thousand, a decrease of 1.2 per thousand from 
the previous year. Such social undertakings as culture, sports, 
news business, and broadcasting all further developed. 
  8. The income of the urban and rural residents increased, 
leading to further improvement in the consumption living 
standards. The urban and rural residents' per capita 
living-expense income for the year was 1,920 yuan, an increase 
of 23 percent over the previous year. With the adjustment for 
inflation made, the increase in real terms was 7.8 percent, 
making last year the year with the largest increase since 1987. 
The peasants' net per capita income reached 653 yuan, an 
increase of 16.8 percent over the previous year; with the 
adjustment for inflation made, the increase in real terms was 
6.3 percent, also making last year the year with the fastest 
growth in recent years. The urban and rural residents' savings 
increased substantially, creating a year-end balance of 40.38 
billion yuan, an increase of 22.7 percent. While the urban and 
rural residents increased their income and expanded their 
consumption scale, consumption structure also changed 
substantially, with large increases in expenditures on clothing, 
entertainment, cultural and educational goods, and health care. 
The masses' housing conditions further improved. Over the year 
166,000 urban job-waiting persons were placed, and the urban 
job-waiting rate was kept under 3 percent. 

