BFN 

  [Excerpts] Khartoum, 28 Mar (SUNA) -- The minister at the 
Federal Government Chamber and spokesman of the government's 
delegation to peace talks, Dr. Ali al-Hajj Muhammad, announced 
that meetings of the technical committees for implementing the 
agreement signed for supplying relief to war-hit areas will be 
started in Nairobi on Thursday [31 March]. Dr. Muhammad said at 
a press conference he held here on Monday that the technical 
committee, which includes representatives from all sides, will 
discuss issues related to the agreement, such as safe ways and 
other topics. 
  He went on to say that the signing of the relief transport 
agreement does not mean stopping shooting of fire between the 
disputing sides, but aims at delivering relief materials to the 
war-hit population. Indicating that the Sudanese Government did 
not use food as weapon in the ravaging war in southern Sudan 
[words indistinct]. [passage omitted] 
  Dr. Muhammad pointed out that the success of the relief 
agreement is linked to many factors, among them were liberation 
of the outlaws' movement from domination of the external 
countries and the so-called northern opposition, adding that 
goals of the so-called national alliance aimed at toppling the 
existing government, not restoring peace in southern Sudan. 
[passage omitted] 
  He indicated that attitudes of the outlaws' movement has 
continuously been changed during the negotiation years, 
particularly by the mainstream faction, John Garang's group, 
where it had requested federalism in the Abuja One peace talks, 
confederalism in the Abuja Two peace talks and 
self-determination in the Nairobi talks. 
  He asserted the government's readiness to continue the next 
talks with the rebels' movement in Nairobi on 16 May, pointing 
out that foreign hands want to exploit the southern Sudan 
problem by speaking on human rights violations in the south and 
the Islamic shari'ah. 
  He announced finally Sudan's welcoming to the Arab League's 
condemnation of the foreign plots aimed at harming Sudan's unity. 

