Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Our Constant Political Principles for a Just </F>
and Comprehensive Peace"] 
  [Text] After his meeting with U.S. President Clinton at 
the White House yesterday, His Majesty King Husayn was eager to 
stress Jordan's support for all efforts being made to achieve a 
just, comprehensive, and lasting peace in the Middle East. His 
majesty also stressed the call to achieve this objective quickly. 
  The Jordanian-U.S. summit was a great opportunity to 
exchange 
views on developments of the Middle East peace process and the 
results of the contacts and meetings held to promote this 
process, including the recent Syrian-U.S. meeting in Geneva, in 
order to plan for the next move in the upcoming bilateral talks 
aimed at achieving a peace that would secure the Arab rights and 
entrench the bases of security, stability, and cooperation in 
this turbulent region. 
  Now that efforts are focusing on achieving the real 
objectives of the peace process, laxity in the negotiations and 
removing them from their true course would create more obstacles 
and complications that might waste this precious opportunity and 
push the entire region back into a whirlpool of endless 
conflict. The repercussions and threats of such a conflict 
would undermine regional and world security. 
  Thus, King Husayn was eager to stress the importance of 
gaining time and speeding up the peace steps and translating 
them into realities on the ground, based on international 
legitimacy and its resolutions in a way that will secure a 
comprehensive and just peace that would return the occupied 
territories and the usurped rights to their owners in addition 
to establishing an equitable, balanced, and fair political and 
economic order throughout the Middle East. 
  With regard to the Jordanian-Palestinian coordination, his 
majesty's emphasis on this positive coordination as part of a 
comprehensive peace embodied the continued Jordanian support for 
the Palestinian people and their legitimate representative, the 
PLO, to regain their territories, rights, and sovereignty. 
  The real desire for peace according to the principles and 
terms of reference of the Madrid conference, which His Majesty 
King Husayn and His Excellency President Hafiz al-Asad stressed 
in their meetings with President Clinton, as well as the Arab 
parties' response to the bases of such a peace, with all its 
political, economic, and legitimate dimensions, would both place 
the United States before its moral and political 
responsibilities to promote the peace process and remove it from 
the procrastinations and deviation which Israel employs in each 
phase of negotiations and on all tracks. Such procrastination, 
however, has not yet succeeded in foiling the peace process or 
pushing it to a deadlock. Israel wants such a deadlock, but the 
United States has thus far ignored this. 

