Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentator's article: "Learn From Xu Honggang"] </F>
  [Text] Xu Honggang, the name of a common soldier in the 
People's Liberation Army, has now spread among more and more 
people. A squad leader in a communications company in the Jinan 
Military Region, Xu Honggang bravely stepped forward and fought 
heroically against four odious thugs armed with knives at a 
critical time when people's lives and property were in serious 
danger. Even while suffering from 14 knife wounds, he still 
jumped off a long-distance bus and chased the thugs until he 
fainted. With a heroic deed of not fearing evil and being ready 
to take up the cudgels for a just cause, he has set a good 
example for us to follow. 
  What is equally praiseworthy, while Xu Honggang was 
suffering 
from serious wounds for the sake of the masses, some comrades in 
Junlian County Taxation Bureau, including Zhan Benfang, together 
with cadres and masses from Junlian, Yibin, and Shengchi, spared 
no effort to save him. In saving this hero, cherishing love for 
this hero, and emulating this hero, they performed a great deal 
of touching deeds causing the song of justice written by this 
hero to reverberate louder and louder. All this not only 
suggests that at a time when we are carrying out reform and 
opening up and establishing the socialist market economic 
structure, the fine tradition of the Army loving the people and 
the people supporting the Army is still thriving across Chinese 
soil; this all the more indicates that the virtue of being ready 
to take up the cudgel for a just cause has been inherited by 
most Chinese descendants. 
  The report RENMIN RIBAO publishes today relates in detail Xu 
Honggang's deeds of bravely fighting for a just cause. Frankly 
speaking, the present situation in social order is not quite 
satisfactory. In broad daylight, some law breakers have made 
trouble and endangered the people's lives and property as well 
as social tranquility. Sometimes, some people are not willing 
to save others from danger. China's reform, opening up, and 
modernization are in a crucial period. There must be a fine 
social environment for the establishment of the socialist market 
economic structure and the materialization of the second-step 
strategic objective. Thus we are required to learn from Xu 
Honggang, cultivate a social mood of taking pride in and 
respecting the spirit of fighting for a just cause, and 
encourage more people to combat bad deeds and bad people so that 
the millions will work hard for the people's tranquility and 
social stability. 

