CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Valeriy Kondrashov: "When Fifty Thousand Is Not </F>
Money"] 
  [Text] Crime 
  Counterfeiting is probably one of the world's oldest and 
most 
widespread types of crime. In our country it now seems to be 
getting accessible to virtually anyone who wishes. 
  Counterfeit money is circulating throughout Russia. It is 
printed with color Xerox machines, drawn by some skilled 
craftsmen, stamped in printing presses. As acknowledged 
"masters" say, forging a 50,000 bill is easy as pie. Perhaps 
that is why the appearance of forgeries is registered every day 
in some 30-40 regions. 
  Some statistics. During the whole of last year, 607 cases of 
discovering counterfeit bills were recorded in Krasnodar Kray. 
In four months of this year there were already 413 cases. In 
Voronezh Oblast - 184 and 141 respectively. In Moscow Oblast 
there were 374 cases last year and already 239 this year. In 
Rostov Oblast the respective figures are 376 and 291. Tula 
Oblast has simply set a record: 250 cases of exposed counterfeit 
money in four months this year as against 102 cases last year. 
In Tyumen Oblast the figures are 173 and 166. 
  Counterfeits are proliferating extensively even in formerly 
little affected areas. The comparative information is the same: 
data for the whole of last year and four months of this year. 
Yakutia: 9 and 22 cases, respectively. Vladimir Oblast: 4 and 
11. Ivanovo Oblast: 11 and 10. Magadan Oblast: 10 and 62. 
Novosibirsk Oblast: 5 and 51. Sakhalin Oblast: 6 and 21. And so 
on, and so forth. 
  Counterfeiting, once the domain of lone craftsmen, is 
increasingly being put on an industrial footing. Whole groups 
are organizing to manufacture and unload counterfeit money. For 
example, not long ago three criminal groups which used college 
students to distribute "forfeits" [fantiki] were uncovered in 
Samara. In Volgograd, three North-Caucasus residents were 
detained with some 87 million rubles' worth of phony R50,000 
bills. In Smolensk, a group of four counterfeiters and 
distributors was detained. A group of nine people counterfeiting 
Deutchmarks was uncovered in Kaliningrad. A search of them 
netted four SKS carbines, pistols, revolvers, hand-grenades... 
  Here is an excerpt from an MVD report for 23 May 94: "In 
Kemerovo Oblast, OEP [Economic Crimes Department] personnel 
detained K. K. Nikerkhayev, born 1951, non-working, in Yaya 
township for passing off counterfeit bills; 38 counterfeit 
R50,000 bills made on a Xerox machine were confiscated. 
  "In addition, two R5,000 bills, sixty-four R10,000 bills, 
and 
sixty-nine R50,000 bills manufactured on Xerox machines were 
found and confiscated in the Kalmyk and Buryat Republics, 
Krasnodar, Krasnoyarsk and Stavropol Krays, Moscow, Novgorod, 
Pskov, Rostov, Sverdlovsk, Smolensk and Ulyanovsk Oblasts, and 
in the cities of Perm, Voronezh, Izhevsk, Nizniy Novgorod, 
Orenburg and Saransk..." 
  According to some data, the "black gross product" [cherniy 
val] market in Russia totals around 90 trillion rubles. This is 
money which is totally unaccounted for. Incidentally, the 
deficit of our current state budget is only about R70 trillion. 
Naturally, in such conditions counterfeiters feel themselves 
like fish in water. 
  Also in circulation are counterfeit dollars manufactured by 
industrial means, mainly in Poland and the Middle East. The 
quality of these forgeries is so high that sometimes it is 
impossible to distinguish a counterfeit from the original even 
with the help of special equipment. This, however, doesn't make 
a counterfeit less counterfeit. 
  In the near future the MVD expects an upsurge in 
counterfeiting of securities and stocks, which presents no great 
difficulty with the existence of color copier equipment. 
  So far it is extremely difficult to combat this phenomenon. 
The temptation to earn a quick buck at minimum risk is simply 
too great, especially when forgeries come to Russia from 
Chechnya, Azerbaijan and other former soviet republics. 
  So, citizens, be wary: the counterfeiter is not napping. 

