CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ahmad al-'Attar: "Investigation of Citizens' </F>
Complaints About Shoddy Goods; Actions Against Factory 
Violations Aimed at Stopping Production"] 
  [Text] There is no doubt that two agencies have an 
important role in the near future, especially with the 
application of free economic regulations and the increased role 
of competition in the Egyptian market. The Ministry of Industry 
has prepared a comprehensive plan, and the Board of Standards 
and the Industrial Regulatory Agency will take part in 
implementing this plan. The purpose is to protect the Egyptian 
consumer and assure production quality, in order to guarantee 
that all goods available in the Egyptian market are in 
compliance with specifications. Actions will be taken against 
companies and factories that produce goods that do not comply 
with specifications, and the rights of Egyptian consumers will 
be safeguarded. 
  Dr. Ibrahim Fawzi, the Minister of Industry and Mineral 
Resources, says that implementation of a comprehensive plan to 
protect the Egyptian consumer and assure production quality will 
begin in mid-April 1994. He added that the Ministry of Industry 
and its various agencies in the quality control field--the Board 
of Standards and Production Quality, and the Industrial 
Regulatory Agency--will participate in executing this plan. 
  Clearly, quality has become a basic element in the 
production 
process, especially with the application of free economic rules, 
marketing mechanisms, and the increased growth of private sector 
activity. Consequently, the importance of the role of 
competition among goods in the Egyptian market has increased. 
Minister Fawzi stressed that "we welcome honest competition. 
However, whenever it is not honest, if--for example--some 
merchants lower prices at the expense of quality, in order to 
increase the competitive possibilities of a specific product by 
illegal means, the role of specifications takes over. 
Specifications make clear the acceptable limits for the level of 
desired quality for each product." He added that if simple 
production defects are found in manufactured goods, that must be 
explained to the consumer and a distinction made between 
first-class and second-class goods. This can be done with regard 
to goods that are not connected to the citizens' health or 
safety, such as products of pottery and china for example, when 
the defect in its manufacturing is simple and would not affect 
the product's capability to perform its consumer function. 
  "As for goods dealing with the citizen's health and safety, 
their production specifications must be strictly adhered to. Any 
deviation from these specifications will result in speedy 
actions that could lead to production stoppage for the 
violators." He added that the Board of Standards' role will 
basically be to issue standardized specifications for products. 
"That will give assurances about the quality of goods entering 
the Egyptian market, both for goods manufactured locally or 
imported from abroad. This will result in stopping the 
importation of leftover and surplus goods and preventing 
attempts to bring them into the country, as if they were 
first-class goods for sale at lower prices, passing them off as 
products of a first-rate importer at a lower price than similar 
goods produced locally and with better quality." 
  The Minister of Industry stressed he will also be 
continuously supervising the issuance of specifications, through 
interaction with modern international developments and trends in 
the industrial arena. He added that the Board of Standards will 
issue compliance and quality seals. "Goods manufactured locally, 
as a condition for their circulation, must obtain the compliance 
seal. These products basically include goods related to 
citizens' security and health. The seal of compliance spells out 
the basic specifications required for the manufacture of these 
goods. 
  "There are also other products that should obtain the seal 
of 
excellence. This is optional for the factories and companies, 
which can ask that their products be given this symbol, after 
giving assurances that these products are superior and more than 
meet the minimum required specifications. 
  "The new system with regard to goods that obtain the seal of 
excellence includes the requirement to specify the advantages 
that these goods have, which lead to their obtaining that 
symbol. This gives the consumer an opportunity to learn about 
them and confirm their fulfillment of those advantages in a 
practical way. If any consumer finds a defect in the conditions 
set forth for these goods that are marked as quality products, 
he can submit a complaint. If he finds any product with defects, 
the buyer can also complain either to the Board of Standards, 
the Industrial Regulatory Agency, or the Ministry of Industry. 
They will contact the manufacturing plant or company and take 
the necessary actions to safeguard the consumer's rights." 
  Dr. Ibrahim Fawzi added that, if complaints occur regarding 
goods that do not meet specifications, the Industrial Regulatory 
Agency will take the required actions to confirm the complaints' 
accuracy. If that is confirmed, several agency experts will 
inspect the plant or company that produced this merchandise. 
That is done in complete cooperation and coordination with the 
Board of Standards. When defects in certain products are found, 
the required actions will be taken against the factories that 
produced these goods. This includes withdrawing the seal of 
compliance. This seal is a basic requirement for merchandising 
these products. This applies to goods for which this symbol is 
compulsory. The seal of excellence will also be withdrawn from 
any product that has obtained it, when it is proved that it 
violates specifications. The new system includes, for each 
specified period of time, lists of goods that have received 
seals of excellence and compliance, as well as products from 
which those symbols were withdrawn. Periodic inspections will 
also be made of products that have received the seal of 
excellence. Samples will be selected at random and tested to 
ensure they adhere to the required conditions. 
  The Minister of Industry stressed the importance of the 
Egyptian consumer's right to obtain quality goods. This is basic 
to the protection of the consumer and the quality of products. 
The Ministry of Industry and its specified agencies are ready to 
offer any assistance required by the consumer in this regard. 

