BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aluf Ben] </F>
  [Excerpt] Israel promised the PLO about two weeks ago, 
around the time that the agreement on security arrangements for 
Hebron was reached, that implementation of the Gaza and Jericho 
withdrawal "will be cut from four months, as decided in the 
Declaration of Principles [DOP], to three weeks." The 
withdrawal from the Gaza Strip will be carried out from south to 
north because the Palestinian police force will enter the 
territory from Egypt through the Rafah border crossing. Jericho 
will be evacuated almost at the same time as the evacuation of 
the southern part of the strip. 
  Discussion on the security situation in the sea and the air 
began in Cairo this week. The IDF [Israel Defense Forces] 
dispatched Air Force and Navy experts to the talks. As had 
previously occurred in the talks with the PLO, substantive 
differences quickly surfaced. 
  A dispute arose over territorial waters. Israel announced 
that the width of the Gaza Strip's territorial waters is three 
nautical miles, the area which will fall under the 
responsibility of the Palestinian entity. The PLO 
representatives rejected the suggestion and demanded a 20-mile 
zone. They explained that the IDF currently permits Gazan 
fisherman to go out some 20 miles from the coastline and 
demanded full sovereignty over that area. 
  When the Israelis explained that determining territorial 
waters requires international approval and that the Gaza Strip's 
territorial waters have always been fixed at three miles, the 
Palestinians suggested signing a joint document expanding the 
area to 20 miles "and sending it to all the countries of the 
world." 
  The Palestinians agreed to the Israeli demand that all 
flights in the area of the autonomy be coordinated with Israel's 
air control, but they insisted on setting up a Palestinian 
national airline, and even promised that so as not to impinge on 
Israel's overall responsibility for the area, their airline 
would only fly "to countries which maintain relations with 
Israel." 
  The Israelis were surprised by the suggestion. Why a 
national airline, they asked the PLO representatives since Gaza 
and Jericho will have only two small landing strips? Israel is 
opposed to the setting up of an airline, which would require 
signing international accords, which violates the autonomy's 
general ban on maintaining foreign relations. The Israeli offer 
was much less generous: The Palestinians can carry out internal 
flights from landing strips in Gaza and Jericho, and in special 
cases, PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat will be permitted to land 
there by plane or helicopter from his travels around the world. 
  Further progress was achieved this week on the clause which 
imposes restrictions on Palestinian building and activity near 
traffic axes used by the IDF in the Gaza Strip. At the same 
time, the PLO did not withdraw its opposition to Israel's 
regional map on settlements and security in the Gaza Strip, 
appended to the Cairo agreement. 
  The PLO this week dispatched representatives to the judicial 
committee whose task is to work out the appendix discussing 
criminal and civilian judicial powers and cooperation between 
the judicial authorities in Israel and the autonomy. In the 
previous round, the Palestinians failed in their efforts to 
recruit lawyers, and five Israeli lawyers conducted the 
negotiations with Nabil Sha'th, head of the PLO delegation to 
the Cairo talks, who appointed himself to the judicial committee 
although he is not an attorney. 
  This time, a Palestinian law professor from London and 
another attorney from the territories came to the talks. They 
sat with Sha'th for discussions with the Israeli judicial team 
headed by Colonel Ahaz Ben-Ari of the military advocate 
general's office. 
  The Palestinian professor received the Israelis with an 
announcement that he firmly opposes the Oslo agreement and 
called for reopening discussions on issues on which agreement 
had already been reached and signed in the DOP. Why should 
Israel enjoy jurisdiction over Israelis and settlements, the 
professor asked. 
  At a new conference to sum up the talks, Sha'th said that 
"problems remain," and gave as an example the judicial powers. 
  The civilian committee, which discusses the transfer of 
Civil 
Administration powers to the Palestinians, has begun to discuss 
the toughest clause: Transferring water powers in Gaza and 
Jericho to the PLO. Noah Kinarti, the defense minister's 
settlement adviser, who is in charge of negotiations on water 
issues in the bilateral peace talks, attended the Cairo talks. 
Progress was made in the water talks, but no agreement has yet 
been reached. [passage omitted] 

