BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Suzana Kos from the Crans Montana economic forum </F>
in Switzerland] 
  [Excerpt] The chairman of the morning plenum, Czech 
President Vaclav Klaus, called on the participants to think 
primarily in two directions: about the changes that could be 
seen over the past year in the participating countries 
themselves, and in their relations with foreign countries. 
  The first one to speak about his experiences this morning 
was 
Slovene Prime Minister Janez Drnovsek. He presented the 
encouraging results that our country has accomplished. He drew 
attention to the growth in GNP, which is expected to amount to 5 
percent this year. He also spoke of the stability of our 
currency, inflation, which is under control, and decreasing 
unemployment. Drnovsek very adamantly pointed at the blackmail 
by Italy which has blocked Slovenia's access to the European 
Union because of unresolved bilateral relations between the 
countries. For this reason, Prime Minister Drnovsek said after 
talks with Croatian Prime Minister Valentic, it is particularly 
in the interests of Slovenia and Croatia to resolve open 
questions and thus consolidate their international positions. 
  Today the Slovene and the Croatian representatives mostly 
discussed three pressing issues that are burdening the relations 
between the countries: the Zagreb branch of Ljubljanska Banka, 
the Krsko nuclear power plant, and the sea border in Piran Bay. 
  Regarding the nuclear power plant, there are no longer any 
major differences. Concerning Piran Bay, Slovenia cannot step 
back from its position. Regarding the issue of the Croatian 
savers, there is still a difference amounting to approximately 
250 million German marks, Prime Minister Drnovsek said: 
  [Begin Drnovsek recording] It has transpired once again, 
just like during our last meeting, that it is impossible to find 
solutions for certain areas individually, and the question poses 
itself whether we should perhaps resolve them in a package; that 
is, in a package where giving way on one issue would mean 
gaining on another. Prime Minister Valentic and I actually 
discussed such a hypothetical speculation or offer. [passage 
omitted] [end recording] 

