BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ryszard Choroszy: "The First Session of the </F>
Defense Affairs Committee of the Council of Ministers; A Defense 
Document Is Being Prepared"] 
  [Text] At the first session of the Defense Affairs 
Committee of the Council of Ministers, chaired by Prime Minister 
Waldemar Pawlak, problems related to the country's defense 
system were discussed. A pertinent document was presented by 
National Defense Minister Piotr Kolodziejczyk. After it is 
supplemented with recommendations and conclusions, it will be 
discussed at the next government session on Tuesday [24 May]. 
  The committee was set up by a 12 April government 
resolution. 
The government issued a positive opinion on the bill submitted 
by the chairman of the Council of Ministers concerning the 
establishment of a Standing Inter-Ministerial Team of the 
Committee for Defense Affairs of the Council of Ministers for 
Countering Threats and Other Crises. Its chairman will be the 
minister of internal affairs and his deputy -- the minister of 
national defense. 
  It is worth recalling that in early May the Council of 
Ministers, at a secret session with the participation of 
President Lech Walesa, dealt with the document called "Problems 
of the Country's Defense System and Military Aspects of the 
Security Policy of the Polish Republic." As National Defense 
Minister Piotr Kolodziejczyk said, at that time certain 
controversial problems were supposed to be resolved by the 
Defense Affairs Committee of the Council of Ministers before the 
document was submitted to the Sejm. 
  At the Thursday session the minister of national defense 
submitted the basic problems that needed to be resolved -- those 
related to the country's defense system, such as problems linked 
to the division of powers between the Ministry of National 
Defense [MON] and the head of the General Staff of the Polish 
Army. The committee supported a variant which does not require 
any changes in the Small Constitution. 
  The submitted document concerning Poland's defense policy 
consists of three parts. The first one includes the legal 
foundations of the functioning of the Armed Forces, such as the 
amendment of the existing law or the preparation of a new law on 
the general duty of defending the Polish Republic, the bill on 
martial law and a state of emergency, on military discipline, on 
responsibility for material damages (now in force is the decree 
of 1955), and on the billeting of the Armed Forces; the document 
is now being reviewed by the individual ministries. 
  The solutions proposed in the bill will not only make it 
possible to resolve the most urgent problems of the cadres 
related to housing; they will also help the Army to manage more 
rationally the property that it owns. 
  Organizational changes in the Army would lie in the 
establishment of three types of forces: Land forces, naval 
forces, and air forces. They would be subordinated to the chief 
commander, who is now the head of the General Staff of the 
Polish Army, but in the future it will be the Chief Inspector of 
the Armed Forces. He is supposed to be responsible for the 
training and mobilization of the Army. 
  Another section of the document deals with concepts of the 
division of power between the minister of national defense and 
the head of the General Staff of the Polish Army. There are two 
options for resolving this issue. In the first option, the new 
office of the chief commander of the Armed Forces would be under 
the president, and the MON head would then fulfill controlling 
functions. 
  In the second option, the president would exercise 
supervision over the Army; he would not, however, interfere with 
the civilian section. Also, the National Defense Committee 
should be replaced by the National Security Office in such a way 
as not to make it necessary to change the binding Basic Law. 
  The document also includes a report on the technical 
condition of the Army. The MON leadership estimates that this 
condition is dangerous. As a consequence of the continuation of 
the present financial policy concerning the Army, our country 
may entirely lose its defense credibility. Already today the 
parameters of our equipment are worse than the parameters of the 
equipment of the Western Armies. This may also lead to the 
lowering of the Army's morale. 
  The authors of the document believe that it is necessary to 
adopt the principle that the condition for rational planning of 
expenditures of the defense system is prior knowledge about how 
much money needs to be spent on the Army. NATO states plan 
their expenses for three periods: for 10-15 years, for three to 
five years, and for one year. 
  In a situation when work is under way on the main points of 
the socio-economic policy until the end of 1997, and on the 
predicted expenditure in the budget sphere, including national 
defense, the decisions that are made in this period may greatly 
influence the financial condition of the Army, the level of 
armament, and the security of the state. 

