Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on developments related to the Colombian elections 
scheduled for 8 May 1994: 
  New Democratic Force (NFD) presidential candidate Andres 
Pastrana Arango has vigorously defended Colombian coffee 
producers during a meeting with residents of Bolivar, Andes, and 
Tamesis Municipalities in Antioquia Department. Pastrana said, 
"We must remember that coffee producers have promoted 
development in areas where crops are grown, as well as 
throughout the country in general." He also told his audience 
that we "cannot turn our backs on them now." (Santa Fe de Bogota 
EL NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 14 Feb 94 p 7A) 
  At a meeting in Teusaquillo neighborhood in Santa Fe de 
Bogota, Conservative presidential hopeful Rodrigo Marin Bernal 
criticized NFD candidate Andres Pastrana's government program as 
being very weak. Marin said that Pastrana's program either 
evades the most pressing issues or approaches them in an overly 
simplistic manner. In Marin's opinion, Pastrana's approach is so 
superficial that "it would have been better for him to remain 
silent." (Santa Fe de Bogota EL NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 14 Feb 
94 p 6A) 
  The Conservative National Directorate has decided to join 
the 
support expressed by Alvaro Gomez and the National Salvation 
Movement (NSM) for Andres Pastrana's presidential candidacy. A 
member of the directorate praised Pastrana's government program 
because of its national -- as opposed to partisan -- scope. 
(Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 
0000 GMT 17 Feb 94) 
  Presidential hopeful Andres Pastrana says that some 
Conservatives are trying to trap his campaign into being 
essentially conservative, when in truth it is a national 
suprapartisan movement. On 19 February, Pastrana toured eight 
municipalities in Bolivar Department. During the tour, Pastrana 
said: "I have said throughout all of Colombia that we do not 
want threats, kidnappings, violence, or massacres. The 
Colombian people want to consolidate peace, and by way of peace, 
we can attain development and, through development, the 
well-being of all Colombians." During the tour, Pastrana urged 
guerrilla groups to lay down their weapons. (Santa Fe de Bogota 
Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 0130 GMT 20 Feb 94) 
  Conservative presidential hopeful Marin Bernal says he will 
continue campaigning for the presidency, adding that after 14 
March he will conduct a nationwide campaign called "The One Left 
Homeless by Alvarismo [Alvaro Gomez of the NSM] and Pastranismo 
[Andres Pastrana]," because he believes he has been sacrificed 
because of his differences with the Pastrana and Gomez camps. 
(Santa Fe de Bogota Emisoras Caracol Network in Spanish 1200 
GMT 18 Feb 94) 
  A month before the Liberal Party's presidential candidate is 
scheduled to be officially nominated, Carlos Lemos and David 
Turbay have stepped up their campaigns. Lemos believes that a 
form of violence worse than guerrilla warfare is created when 
the state plunges the people into poverty. Lemos says, "We must 
pay greater attention to this type of violence, because it 
fosters greater instability; therefore, we must establish a 
dialogue with people who are out of work." Meanwhile, David 
Turbay insists he will be nominated as the party's candidate. 
He said, "Even without the blessing of those who think they own 
the country, I will win the elections. I will win with God's 
blessing alone." (Santa Fe de Bogota EL NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 
14 Feb 94 p 6A) 
  Liberal Party member Carlos Lleras de la Fuente today 
officially announced he will seek the party's presidential 
nomination. He told President Gaviria, "I want to be president 
of Colombia, not vice president." (Santa Fe de Bogota 
Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 1730 GMT 18 Feb 94) 
  Liberal presidential hopeful Ernesto Samper has visited four 
municipalities in Santander Department to explain his economic 
program, which focuses on housing and special attention for 
women and peasants. He said: "I am going to return the Agrarian 
Bank to the peasants of Santander, and we are going to 
strengthen the national rehabilitation plan." (Santa Fe de 
Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 0130 GMT 20 Feb 
94) 
  Antonio Navarro Woff, presidential candidate of the 19 April 
Movement Democratic Alliance (AD/M-19), today commented on 
President Cesar Gaviria's bid to become secretary general of the 
OAS. During a campaign appearance, Navarro Wolf said, "It is 
essential for Gaviria to tell the people of Latin America 
whether, if elected to the post, he plans to serve Latin America 
or to serve the United States." (Mexico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 
1842 GMT 17 Feb 94) 
  AD/M-19 presidential candidate Navarro Wolff has said the 
party's leadership should be enhanced. He also said he fears 
that the party could disappear from the political landscape. 
(Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 
0130 GMT 20 Feb 94) 

