Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["NODONG SINMUN on Revolutionary Faith and Indomitable </F>
Fighting Spirit of Korean People" -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, March 8 (KCNA) -- The revolutionary faith 
and indomitable fighting spirit pulsating with the hearts of the 
Korean people today is the firm conviction that the Korean 
revolution will certainly win as there is the illustrious 
leader, the death-defying readiness to share the destiny with 
him, though the world may change a hundred times and the strong 
revolutionary spirit to break through any difficulties, if it is 
to carry his plan and intention into practice, declares NODONG 
SINMUN in an article today. 
  The author of the article says: 
  Ours is a revolutionary people with the unshakable faith 
that 
the Korean-style socialism led by the dear leader Comrade Kim 
Chong-il is sure to win. Today all our people are following him 
as a mental support. They have keenly realized the greatness of 
the dear leader through their practical life. Covering a road 
of victory and glory under his guidance, they have gained the 
rock-firm faith that there is no one but him to whom the destiny 
of our country and nation can be entrusted and that they will 
win without fail as he is with them. Ours is a loyal people with 
an indomitable revolutionary spirit to defend the dear leader 
Comrade Kim Chong-il with their lives and share the destiny with 
him. They are now fighting stoutly with a burning heart to 
firmly defend him, holding him in high esteem. They have the 
unshakable will to defend supreme commander General Kim Chong-il 
with their lives forever in the future, with the same fighting 
spirit and stamina they displayed during the semi-war state last 
year. As long as there is such faithful people full of 
death-defying readiness to share the life and death with their 
great leader and their dear leader, no enemy can dare harm and 
provoke us. 
  Ours is a heroic people who are fully displaying boundless 
devotion and mass heroism, upholding the plan and intention of 
the dear leader. They are now displaying matchless devotion in 
the fruitful work of socialist construction to carry the dear 
leader's plan into practice, holding high the slogan "when the 
party is determined, we can do anything!" There is no other 
people in the world like our people who are ready to jump into 
water and fire when they are called by the party. Our people 
volunteer to difficult and toilsome work and honestly work ten 
or twenty years at posts assigned them by the party. This noble 
traits tell us well how devotedly they are working to realise 
the intention of the party. 
  As there is such people, the plan and intention of the dear 
leader are being brought into reality in time and socialist 
construction is advancing vigorously. 

