Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Robert Urbain, foreign trade and European </F>
affairs minister, by "PG"; place and date not given: "They Have 
a Place of Honor -- Everywhere in Europe the Citizens Are 
Praised in Speeches. And They Get a Special Mention in the 
Maastricht Treaty. But They Still Continue To Grouch. The 
European Affairs Minister Knows Why"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [KNACK] In the Maastricht 
Treaty, European citizenship is recognized for the first time. 
With the Treaty citizens then gained rights. But the people 
gave a very cold reception to Maastricht. Did that surprise you? 
  [Urbain] There is an explanation for the unenthusiastic 
reaction. For the first time people in Europe actually became 
aware of how important Europe really was. Without people really 
realizing, it had suddenly established itself in all areas of 
economic life. That was the intention of the fathers of Europe, 
because this was how they tried to get around the political 
obstacles threatening European integration. The strategy was 
right. In any case the attempt to extend Europe through 
establishing a common defense community failed completely. It 
was too ambitious, and too unrealistic. With the Treaty of Rome 
the economic path was chosen, and they succeeded in keeping the 
essentials. European Commission President Jacques Delors has 
formulated this strategy more than once. If the economy 
permeates the whole of society, he once said, then politics will 
have to follow. 
  Of course there are dark sides too. Citizens, who were 
situated in their own familiar national politics with all their 
roots, were out in the cold. With Maastricht the people 
suddenly discovered that Europe had grown into an enormous 
machine. [passage omitted] 
  [KNACK] Will Schengen change things much for citizens? 
  [Urbain] At the national borders it will be symbolic rather 
than anything else. Nevertheless, the Germans want to take 
things as far as possible and clear all barriers and toll 
houses. The difference will be noticeable mainly in the 
airports. Therefore, in Zaventem we will have to distinguish 
between domestic, now European flights, and international 
flights. 
  [KNACK] What is the main motivation for the free movement of 
people? Is it political emancipation or is it a way of crowning 
consumers? 
  [Urbain] Free movement is an ambiguous concept. The fact 
that controls are disappearing is de facto recognition of 
European citizenship. In a federal European state everyone must 
be free to move about fully. That is absolutely obvious. 
Therefore there is a marked political dimension. The Treaty of 
Rome had insisted already on the need for free movement in its 
economic sense -- the idea that workers must be able to move 
freely. The Single European Act dealt with many obstacles, like 
the problem of the equivalence of qualifications. With that, 
the economic restriction was finally broken and economically 
inactive people and students suddenly were given access to the 
European space. Police checks also must be stopped to realize a 
truly European citizenship. For me, that is why Schengen is so 
important. We are gradually reaching a situation like in the 
United States. With an identity document issued in New York or 
Miami you can cruise through the whole country without being 
checked. 
  [KNACK] What use is European citizenship without a social 
statute? 
  [Urbain] Europe started as an economic project and the 
social 
aspect was only an appendage to that. Workers could move only 
if it was to the good of industry. The social aspect was 
discovered only much later. And even then, only a fraction of 
politicians attach any importance to it. Citizenship is a 
purely political concept. And a very nineteenth century, liberal 
one at that: The social aspects are virtually not included. In 
any case there is no consensus on the social policies to be 
followed. After all, some parties and countries defend a 
minimal role for the state. Regardless of that, there are major 
differences in opinion between the promoters of a more thorough 
government role. 
  The Spanish socialists try to benefit from their weak social 
security system and the low minimum wage levels. They use it as 
an argument to attract investors. If you were to force them 
overnight to apply the Belgian social security system then you 
would put them in an impossible situation. Therefore there is 
no agreement on the left, nor on the right either. Germany 
wants a federal and politically strong Europe, but they are 
against any state intervention in the economy. They can be 
counted upon to strengthen the European Parliament, but they do 
not want to talk about an industrial policy. And then there is 
the United Kingdom. It wants nothing, apart from a free trade 
zone. 
  [KNACK] Doesn't the absence of social policies mean that a 
time bomb is ticking away under the European building? 
  [Urbain] There is no way back. Any return to a national 
approach, even in social policies, is doomed to fail. There is 
no alternative. Of course we must manage the transition. All 
governments know that they can only fight unemployment on a 
European level. That led to the idea of the European recovery 
plan and Delors's White Paper. Everyone makes largely the same 
diagnosis, but there are differences in opinion on policy 
measures. The way Europe works is in a sense comparable to the 
Flemish Government in the past. All the large parties are 
automatically included, without there being the least agreement 
on a government program. The commission and council are an 
amalgam where all the political tendencies are represented and 
where there is agreement on the minimum only. On a European 
level we should also move toward some sort of coalition 
government, on the basis of a program, but then the European 
Parliament would have to play a very different role and have a 
direct link with government. We are not so far yet. After all, 
if that were to happen, the legitimacy of the member states 
would be put at doubt. [passage omitted] 
  [KNACK] Isn't it time for a European constitution? 
  [Urbain] We will achieve something which looks like a 
constitution with subsequent treaties. In any event I do not 
believe that in the foreseeable future the European Parliament 
will be able to act as a component part. A project like that 
would have to be supported by a powerful current in public 
opinion and that does not exist. Also there is no political 
family which operates at the level of the whole continent. 
There are federations, in fact even confederations of national 
political parties, but everything remains abstract. Who knows 
in Wallonia that Claes is president of the European socialists? 
However, it is fundamental for European unification that real 
European parties emerge. That implies a change in the electoral 
system. Today you still have to vote for national lists of 
candidates. Only when the whole of Europe can vote for Ruud 
Lubbers, Helmut Kohl, Jose Happart, or Freddy Willockx would a 
very different consciousness grow up. We are a long way from 
that and Belgium has even moved in the other direction. 
  [KNACK] So just a European referendum? 
  [Urbain] That is perhaps conceivable for matters like the 
membership of new countries. That is not being discussed yet, 
because it implies direct constitutional power at a European 
level. It presupposes a direct link between citizens and the 
top. Obviously there is great opposition to that. All the 
interim stages -- whether they are the states or regions -- have 
little interest in it. The same line of reasoning applies to a 
European president. It cannot be excluded that one day there 
will be something like that, at least if serious European 
defense policies are ever realized, but it seems impossible to 
imagine taking unanimous decisions in that field. [passage 
omitted] 

