Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lebowakgomo March 23 SAPA -- The South African 
Defence Force [SADF] was called in to stop striking civil 
servants from marching to the Lebowa government's offices on 
Tuesday [22 March] afternoon after two days of a police strike. 
Earlier on Tuesday, striking non-commissioned police officers 
told their superiors to leave the offices. 
  The strike concerns police promotions and salaries since the 
South African Government took financial control of the 
self-governing territory in September last year. About 30,000 
public servants are reported to have joined the strike in 
sympathy with the dissatisfied policemen. During the day, two 
Department of Agriculture officials were taken hostage. 
  After representatives of the strikers negotiated with the 
SADF, the marchers were allowed to enter the government premises. 
  The two Department of Agriculture officials were then 
released unharmed. 
  Senior officials from other departments were also evicted 
from their offices. The non-commissioned officers accused their 
seniors of continuing work while other public servants were on 
strike. 
  SA Regional and Land Affairs Minister Andre Fourie, whose 
department is controlling the homeland's financial affairs, 
appealed to the civil servants to return to work. 
  "By striking, you are actively preventing the correction of 
your and your fellow workers' salaries and its implementation," 
he said in a statement issued on wednesday. 
  He said the money for pensions was available at the banks, 
but the officials responsible for the distribution were are on 
strike. 
  He said the South African Goverenment had to exercise 
control 
over Lebowa's financial administration due to "maladministration 
and mismanagement by the Lebowa government which led to serious 
cash-flow problems". 
  "The lack of proper and responsible government in Lebowa is 
the main reason for central government's involvement in this 
self-governing territory. The situation in Lebowa is a direct 
consequence of the decisions of and lack of co-operation of 
Lebowa's Chief Minister Nelson Ramodike," Mr Fourie said. 
  Mr Ramodike on Tuesday appealed to the Transitional 
Executive 
Council to take over financial control of the homeland, charging 
that matters had worsened since the Department of Regional and 
Land Affairs had assumed control. 
  "The takeover and the subsequent reversal of promotions of 
the civil servants by Minister Andre Fourie have led to a series 
of strike and sit-ins that had the effect of disrupting services 
in the region," the chief minister said. 
  Mr Fourie said the Lebowa civil servants had agreed to 
return 
to work in February to help the financial task team to evaluate 
the personnel files of every Lebowa civil servant, so the team 
could recommendations with regard to legitimate salary increases 
and promotions that were suspended on March 31 last year and 
refer those recommendations to the Lebowa Public Service 
Commission for its final approval. 
  "I have already given the go-ahead that those legitimate 
promotions and/or salary increases, approved by the Lebowa 
public service commission, could be rectified immediately. 
  "I wish to reiterate that I have the fullest confidence in 
the financial task team in the execution of its duties," he said 
adding that the team had already evaluated the files of all 
Lebowa's public servants, "except some cases related to the 
Lebowa Department of Health", and has forwarded its 
recommendations to the Public Service Commission. 
  He said the Lebowa cabinet had taken the "dubious decision" 
to transfer R2 million [rand] from the pension fund of members 
of the Legislative Assembly of Lebowa to the Lebowa Police 
Benefit Fund. 
  "The fact remains that the Lebowa cabinet decided to take 
money from a semi-private fund, which had to be butressed by a 
financial injection of several million rands, well knowing that 
their pensions are guaranteed by the constitution for the 
transition. 
  "I wish to ask the chief minister where he would have gotten 
the money from to pay for next month's salaries -- again from 
the pension fund?" Mr Fourie asked. 
  In Tuesday's statement he referred to an earlier press 
release in which he said: "The taxpayer should know that, had 
central government not intervened, the deficit could have been 
as high as R1 billion, which we have managed to reduce to R340 
million." 

