BFN 

<F P=106> ["Report of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region on the </F>
Implementation of the 1993 Plan for Economic and Social 
Development and the Draft 1994 Plan -- delivered by Su Yongguang 
(5685 3057 0342), director of the Xinjiang Autonomous Regional 
Planning Commission, at the Second Session of the Eighth 
Xinjiang Autonomous Regional People's Congress on 24 February 
1994"] 
  [Text] Deputies, on behalf of the regional people's 
government, I now submit the report of the Xinjiang Uygur 
Autonomous Region on the implementation of the 1993 plan for 
economic and social development and the draft 1994 plan for 
examination by the present congress. 
<H5>  1. Implementation of the 1993 Plan and Forecast for Economic </H5>
Trends in 1994 Under the guidance of the important talks 
given by Comrade Deng Xiaoping when he visited the south and the 
guidelines of 14th CPC National Congress and in accordance with 
the plan adopted by a work conference of the Regional Autonomous 
CPC Committee, Xinjiang never lost sight of the central task of 
economic development, redoubled efforts to solve the glaring 
contradictions and problems arising from economic operations, 
and made marked progress in economic construction and social 
development. It is believed that most of the main targets in 
the 1993 plan for economic and social development -- which was 
adopted at the First Session of the Eighth Xinjiang Autonomous 
Regional People's Congress -- were fulfilled or overfulfilled. 
The overall situation is good. 
  First, the economy grew continuously. It is estimated that 
the 1993 total output value of goods and services for the 
autonomous region was 39.054 billion yuan (calculated in terms 
of 1990 constant price; similiarly hereinafter), up 9.5 percent 
from the readjusted 1992 figure. Total industrial and 
agricultural output value was 51.012 billion yuan, up 8.5 
percent; of which total agricultural output value rose 4.4 
percent, fulfilling the plan in spite of frequent natural 
disasters. Total grain output is estimated at 7.09 million 
metric tons, overfulfilling the plan by 1 percent and 
registering a 0.4 percent growth. The output of oil-bearing 
crops was 370,200 metric tons, overfulfilling the plan by 23.4 
percent and registering a growth of 3.9 percent; meat output was 
383,000 metric tons, overfulfilling the plan by 8 percent and 
showing a growth of 6.1 percent; and cotton output was 680,000 
metric tons, up 1.9 percent. The total output of village and 
township enterprises was 6.289 billion yuan, surpassing the plan 
by 989 million yuan. Total industrial output value rose 10.9 
percent, and growth was registered in all major industrial 
goods. It is estimated that the output of crude oil was 
10,341,100 metric tons, up 24.3 percent; the amount of crude oil 
processed was 6,425,600 metric tons, up 13.4 percent; oil 
products, 4.41 million metric tons, up 11.4 percent; cement, 
4.28 million metric tons, up 14.1 percent; machine-processed 
sugar, 331,300 metric tons, up 3 percent. Quotas for 
transportation, telecommunications, and postal services were all 
overfullfilled. The volume of railroad freight transport was 
20.17 million metric tons, overfulfilling the plan by 2 percent 
and up 6.8 percent over the previous year; of which 12.1 million 
metric tons was east-bound, up 4.4 percent. Business transacted 
by postal and telecommunications departments in 1993 totaled 397 
million yuan, up 37.9 percent. The total telephone exchange 
volume in 13 cities rose 62 percent to 254,000 lines. The total 
volume of retail sales was 18.465 billion yuan, overfulfilling 
the plan by 5 percent and registering a growth of 17.2 percent. 
The export volume was $495 million, up 22.8 percent. Total 
revenue was 3.47 billion yuan, surpassing the budget by 25.2 
percent and registering a 33.08 percent increase. Total 
expenditure was 6.45 billion yuan, up 14.92 percent. The 
natural population growth rate -- 13.85 per thousand -- was 
under target. Steady progress was made in science, education, 
culture, public health, journalism, film, television, sports, 
and social security and living standards improved. 
  Second, in line with the guidelines of document No. 6 of 
the CPC Central Committee, we consolidated order in the banking 
sector, put a stop to illegal money lending and raising of 
capital, and improved cash administration, thereby gradually 
restoring order to the once chaotic banking sector. It is 
estimated that over a billion yuan of capital was withdrawn 
during the year. From August to December of last year alone, 
bank deposits increased by 7,025 million yuan, or 105 percent of 
the total annual increase. The banks' capacity to extend credit 
increased. Some 2,106 million yuan was extended as credit for 
working capital for industry and 3,234 million yuan as loans for 
fixed assets. Ample funds were made available and no IOU slips 
were issued for the procurement of agricultural and sideline 
products. The shortage of credit was somewhat alleviated and 
the macroeconomic environment improved. 
  Third, major progress was made in capital construction, 
particularly in infrastructure facilities and basic industries. 
The completed investment in fixed assets was estimated at 23,195 
million yuan, up 36.4 percent; of which, investment by 
state-owned units was 20,875 million yuan, up 36.8 percent; by 
collectively- owned units, 1,028 million yuan, up 61.4 percent; 
and by individuals, 1,292 million yuan, up 17 percent. 
Investment in fixed assets in localities was 7,385 million 
yuan, or 110.5 percent of the plan, registering an increase of 
30.9 percent. Of which, investment in capital construction 
projects was 3,560 million yuan, or 123.4 percent of the plan, 
registering an increase of 23.9 percent. Investment in technical 
upgrading was 1,110 million yuan, or 111 percent of the plan and 
up 56.3 over the previous year. Investment in real estate, 314 
million yuan, up 89 percent. Fair progress was made in the 35 
key projects under construction in Xinjiang; last year, 11 
accomplished the yearly investment targets. They are: Xinjiang 
Soda Ash Plant, the Beitun-Dahuanshan section of state highway 
216, Kashi Class-B Hydreoelectric Station, Jinghe Heat and Power 
Plant, Shihezidong Heat and Power plant, Heizi Reservoir, 
Taxkorgan Hydroelectric Station, the Saiertun-Maanqiao section 
of state highway 314, Fukang Nickel Smeltery, Wusu Heat and 
Power Plant, and phase four of the Yili Heat and Power Plant. 
The seven key projects that were partially completed or in 
which individual works were completed are: Phase one of a 
polyester project at Wushi Chemical Complex, the Hami-Liaodun 
and Changji-Hutubi sections of state highway 312, a heat supply 
project in Guangming Road, double-tracking of the Lanzhou-Urumqi 
railway, Xinjiang Oilfield, Tarim oilfield, and Tura Oilfield. 
Among the major new additions in production capacity are: 937 
km of newly built or renovated highways, 191 km of railways put 
into operation, generating sets with a designed capacity of 
113,400 kw, 80,000 metric tons of soda ash, 42,000 metric tons 
of polyster, 2.58 million metric tons of crude oil; 2,000 metric 
tons of electrolytic nickle; and 640 million cubic meters of 
reservoir capacity. 
  Four, in the past year, Xinjiang opened up wider to the 
outside world, developed lateral cooperation eastward, and 
promoted exports westward. Xinjiang improved its investment 
environment last year to attract more foreign capital. It 
continued its efforts to expand the scope of economic and 
technical cooperation, and internal and external trade. Last 
year's second Urumqi Border Trade Fair was a success. The 
year's total volume of imports and exports was $912 million, up 
30.3 percent over the previous year. Border trade grew rapidly: 
exports are estimated at $289 million, up 75.5 percent; imports, 
$288 million, up 85.2 percent. The amount of foreign capital 
utilized during the year was $243 million, up 86.9 percent over 
the previous year. New progress was made in the development of 
technological development zones, border economic cooperation 
zones, and new-tech industrial development zones. 
  However, some conspicuous problems also existed in 
Xinjiang's economic development in the past year. They were 
mainly as follows: Structural contradictions in economic 
development remained conspicuous. Contradictions in 
infrastructure, including transportation and communications 
facilities and in basic industries, which hamper rapid economic 
development have yet to be noticeably eased. A considerable 
number of industrial enterprises encountered more difficulties; 
their economic returns were not ideal; more of them suffered 
bigger losses; the volume of exports by spot exchange decreased 
by 14.4 percent from last year; and industrial production and 
exports failed to meet requirements. The combined index of 
total retail prices of commodities in society was estimated at 
112.6 percent, surpassing the plan by 3.6 percent and posting an 
increase of 4.5 percent over the previous year. The 
contradiction between the supply and demand of funds remained 
conspicuous; the ratio of funds for construction projects 
channeled to their proper recipients was low; and the phenomenon 
of delayed payments was serious. Although the above mentioned 
problems are something encountered in the course of our march 
forward and development, and though some of them are gradually 
being solved through deepening reform, they warrant serious 
attention. We must conscientiously treat and solve them in our 
macroeconomic management, regulation, and control in the future. 
  After conducting a comprehensive analysis of various 
factors, 
we believe it is still possible for Xinjiang's economy to 
maintain a comparatively good momentum of growth in 1994. This 
year, the state will implement a series of important reform 
measures and will bring the market mechanism's role further into 
play to speed up the pace of establishing a socialist market 
economic system in all fields of endeavor. They will inject new 
vitality into Xinjiang's economy and this will be conducive to 
promoting economic development. The growth in investment demand 
and residents' consumption needs will also give an impetus to 
economic development. Tremendous potential exists in Xinjiang's 
important material, technology, labor force, and natural 
resources that support economic development. There are still a 
good number of opportunities and favorable conditions for 
foreign trade. As the investment environment is further 
improved, there will be promising prospects for Xinjiang to 
attract investment from other regions at home and abroad, and 
for cooperation. The fact the state attaches importance to 
helping poor areas shake off poverty and become prosperous, and 
to accelerating the development of village and town enterprises 
in central and western China and regions inhabited by minority 
nationalities, will play a positive role in promoting Xinjiang's 
economic development. At the same time, however, we must be 
aware of some unfavorable aspects. This year, as important 
reform measures are adopted for many fields of endeavor, 
economic entities will undergo a process of change and 
adaptation, and new situations, problems, and difficulties will 
continue to crop up. Because commodity prices rose by a 
relatively wide margin last year, the number of factors leading 
to the spontaneous rise in commodity prices will increase this 
year. It will put pressure on production and people's 
livelihood. The implementation of foreign trade and foreign 
exchange system reform will not only make Xinjiang face new and 
keener export competition, but will increase corresponding 
financial burdens for the government due to the merger of 
exchange rates. Some enterprises will still encounter many 
difficulties when they transform their operating mechanisms. We 
are still short of financial funds. Therefore, while fully 
affirming the achievements scored by Xinjiang in economic 
construction as well as this year's favorable conditions, and 
while boosting our confidence in accelerating reform and 
economic development, we must attach a high degree of importance 
to the problems and difficulties that exist and may possibly 
crop up in our current economic life. We must correctly judge 
the hour and size up the situation; continue to enhance vigor; 
continuously blaze new trails and forge ahead; and 
conscientiously and successfully solve the contradictions and 
problems encountered in our march forward and in the process of 
development, to promote rapid and highly efficient economic and 
social development in Xinjiang under the new situation. 
  2. The Guiding Ideology, Macroeconomic Regulation and 
Control Targets, and Questions To Be Dealt With in the 1994 
Plan 
  The general guiding ideology for the region's 1994 economic 
plan is to act under the guidelines of the 14th National Party 
Congress and Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee; comprehensively implement the guidelines of the 
national economic and planning conferences and the Sixth Plenary 
Session (Enlarged) of the Fourth Xinjiang Regional Party 
Committee; accelerate the pace of reform to establish a 
socialist market economy in the autonomous region; open Xinjiang 
wider to the outside world; strengthen and improve macroeconomic 
regulation and control; vigorously readjust the economic 
structure; improve economic efficiency; and maintain sustained, 
rapid, and healthy development of the region's economy. 
  Based on this guiding ideology for our economic work, the 
region's principal macroeconomic regulation and control targets 
for this year are: Total value of goods and services is to 
increase more than 11 percent over the previous year to reach 
34.3 billion yuan. The increase is 5.1 percent for primary 
industry, 13.8 percent for secondary industry, and 14.5 percent 
for tertiary industry. Total regional investment in fixed 
assets is to rise 32.7 percent to reach 9.8 billion yuan. Under 
the tax-revenue-sharing system, regional tax revenues are 
targeted at 2.448 billion yuan, expenditures at 6.615 billion 
yuan, and money supply at 5.5 billion yuan. Exports are 
expected to reach $0.55 billion in value, up 11.1 percent; 
efforts will be made to reach $0.6 billion. The increase in 
retail sales will be controlled at around 11 percent. The 
natural population growth rate will be controlled at about 17.96 
per 1,000. 
  These targets were set after taking into consideration our 
goal to accelerate Xinjiang's development to narrow its gap with 
the rest of the nation in economic development and at the same 
time paying attention to the region's conditions, its ability to 
take on the tasks, and linkage with the Eighth Five-Year Plan. 
Every effort was made to adhere to the principle of looking 
both ahead and behind, the policy of overall consideration and 
all-around arrangement, and the principle of unified planning 
and coordination with some leeway. All departments and 
localities shall base primarily on the regional macroeconomic 
regulation and control targets when formulating their own 
economic development and regulation and control plans, and shall 
make concerted efforts and cooperate closely to help accomplish 
the region's macroeconomic regulation and control targets. 
  We shall pay close attention to the following when 
implementing this year's plan: 
  1. We shall continue to strengthen agriculture as the 
foundation of our economy, stabilize the household-based system 
of contracted responsibility with remuneration linked to output 
and the dual management system that combines household with 
collective operations, and make concentrated efforts to readjust 
our rural economic structure and variety of crops. We shall 
accelerate the application of agricultural technological 
research results and actively develop a type of farming that 
provides high yields of fine quality with maximum efficiency. 
At the same time, we shall vigorously develop village and town 
enterprises in the countryside, primarily in the secondary and 
tertiary industrial sectors, accelerate the transfer of rural 
labor to nonagricultural sectors, and work hard to increase 
peasants' and herdsmen's income. 
  2. We shall persistently and continually carry out 
construction of infrastructure, basic industries, and important 
raw and semi- finished material industries to ease the 
constraints imposed by those "bottlenecks" and create a good 
environment for our economic development and opening up. At the 
same time, we shall implement a strategy to exploit our rich 
natural resources and make concentrated efforts to develop 
petroleum, petrochemical, light, textile, and food industries. 
We shall vigorously develop farm and by-products processing 
industries and gold, nonferrous metal, and coal mining 
industries that have markets and guaranteed material supply, 
require shorter construction time, and produce better economic 
benefits. We shall do so to lay a new foundation for economic 
growth and to quickly develop production capacity for a number 
of new products. 
  3. While maintaining appropriate growth in capital 
construction investment, we shall pay more attention to making 
good use of existing assets and intensifying technological 
transformation. We shall step up our efforts to change 
enterprise operating mechanism and, at the same time, use modern 
technologies to reorganize and transform our traditional 
industries to breathe new life into old enterprises. We shall 
optimize our economic structure, raise technology contents of 
our products, and improve economic efficiency, and we shall make 
this truly the focus of our efforts in accelerating economic 
development. 
  4. We shall integrate closely technological transformation 
and capital construction, focusing on meeting the need of 
Xinjiang's three major oilfields in oil exploration and 
development. We shall develop a number of related industries 
serving and supporting the oilfields to promote their 
development. We shall do so to ensure that the oilfields and 
local economy will promote each other and develop together. 
  5. While continuing to rely on the multipurpose economic 
belt north of Tianshan to accelerate our economic development, 
we shall pay more attention to economic development in south 
Xinjiang, increase investment in its capital construction 
projects, and step up efforts to support the poor so as to 
narrow the gap between north and south Xinjiang. 
  6. While upholding the policy of making economic 
construction the central task, we shall work hard to promote 
coordinated economic and social development. We shall make 
concentrated efforts to undertake certain concrete projects to 
improve water supply, medical services, and electricity supply 
-- matters that are of utmost concern to and urgently needed by 
the masses in some areas -- to enhance unity between various 
nationalities and promote social stability. 
  7. We shall seize the opportunity to accelerate economic 
development. We shall also seize the opportunity to accelerate 
reform and opening up, and promote the establishment of a 
socialist market economic structure. We shall speed up the 
reform of the planning, investment, fiscal and taxation, foreign 
trade, foreign exchange, and enterprise systems in consideration 
of Xinjiang's realities. We shall take full advantage of 
Xinjiang's abundant natural resources and good geographic 
location to further implement the strategy of opening on both 
the east and west fronts. We shall open Xinjiang wider to the 
outside world, actively open up both domestic and foreign 
markets, and develop both domestic and foreign trade. In this 
way, we shall make full use of both domestic and foreign 
resources, markets, and funds to promote economic development. 
  8. While building a number of major construction projects, 
we shall concentrate an appropriate amount of financial 
resources on the preparatory-stage construction of some new key 
projects. So, we shall build a number of projects, put 
completed projects into operation, have a number of planned 
projects in reserve, and explore some new projects at the same 
time. 
<H5>  3. Continue To Strengthen the Role of Agriculture as the </H5>
Foundation of the National Economy and Promote All-Around 
Development of the Rural Economy 
  We shall persistently put agriculture and the rural economy 
above all else and seriously implement the guidelines of the 
national rural work conference and Xinjiang's rural economic 
work principle of "stabilizing grain production, raising cotton 
output, enhancing economic efficiency, and increasing peasants' 
and herdsmen's income." We shall continue to stabilize the 
party's rural economic policies; let market demand guide 
production; accelerate the readjustment of rural economic 
structure and production structure; and actively develop 
agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, sideline production, 
and fishery. We shall rely on science and technology, take the 
road of high output, good quality, and high efficiency, and 
bring about all-around prosperity of the rural economy. The 
projected figures in the 1994 plan are: Total agricultural 
output value, 19.6 billion yuan, up 6 percent from 1993; total 
grain output, 7 million tonnes, roughly the same as last year; 
cotton output, 800,000 tonnes, an increase of 120,000 tonnes 
over last year; oil-bearing crops, 350,000-370,000 tonnes, the 
same as last year; beet output, 3 million tonnes, an increase of 
400,000 tonnes over last year; meat output, 410,000 tonnes, an 
increase of 27,000 tonnes over last year; aquatic products, 
30,000 tonnes, an increase of 2,000 tonnes over last year; 
afforestation, 850,000 mu; and total output value of village and 
town enterprises, 9.2 billion yuan, an increase of 2,911 million 
yuan. 
  Major attention shall be paid to the following aspects in 
agriculture and rural work: 
  -- We shall continue to readjust the mix of crop cultivation 
and food composition, and pay serious attention to animal 
husbandry. In grain production, we shall strive to increase 
both per-unit-area yield and total output. While ensuring 
regional self-sufficiency with some surplus, as well as a 
balance among various zones, we shall increase the area of 
cotton, beet, and oil-bearing crops. We should strive to 
develop the production of melons, vegetable, beans, barley, 
safflower, and other cash crops, and continue to make the urban 
"vegetable basket" project a success. We plan to grow 24 
million mu of grain; 10.7 million mu of cotton, 1.175 million mu 
more than 1993; and 1.1 million mu of beet, 180,000 mu more than 
1993. While continuing to develop grassland animal husbandry, 
we shall also develop livestock breeding in agricultural areas 
and suburban areas. We shall further readjust animal variety, 
livestock grouping, and the mix of animal husbandry products. 
We shall increase per-animal output and overall quality of 
animal husbandry products. 
  -- We shall timely increase the purchase prices of 
agricultural products according to the unified state plan and 
let peasants truly enjoy the benefits from the higher prices and 
from the policy of linking agricultural output to the supply of 
agricultural capital goods. We shall relax the control of the 
sales of agricultural products, except cotton, and guide 
peasants to take a direct part in commodity circulation and 
enter the market. We shall establish and implement the grain 
and cotton reserve system, and a grain price risk regulatory 
fund. 
  -- We shall pay more attention to economic development in 
major grain and cotton producing areas. We shall support the 
construction of a number of selected grain and cotton production 
base counties and demonstration zones of "high yield, high 
economic efficiency, and good quality" in accordance with the 
demand set by the state. 
  -- We shall seriously implement the State Council's 
"decision 
on accelerating the development of village and town enterprises 
in central and western regions," and strive to increase the 
investment in village and town enterprises to 1 billion yuan, 
including 700 million yuan of special bank loans and 300 million 
yuan of funds to be raised by village and town enterprises 
themselves. Efforts shall be made to ensure timely availability 
of both bank loans and enterprise funds. We shall make full use 
of our abundant resources to develop the mining industry and 
processing industry for famous- brand, good-quality indigenous 
products. We shall work in conjunction with the bureau of 
village and town enterprises and banking department to support a 
number of enterprises in a dozen or so selected counties, of 
which the products are highly marketable and yield high economic 
returns. We shall help those enterprises upgrade products and 
enlarge the scale of production. We shall gradually enable each 
county to have a successful major industry and each township a 
famous product, and increase the income of all counties, 
townships, peasants, and herdsmen. 
  -- We shall seriously do a good job in the supply of 
agricultural capital goods, and plan to supply 2.5 million 
tonnes of chemical fertilizer and 35,000 tonnes of plastic film 
for the coverage of 10 million mu of crops fields. We shall 
continue to practice a comprehensive price for chemical 
fertilizer to ensure an increase in both agricultural production 
and peasants' income. 
  -- We shall seriously implement the plan of providing jobs 
instead of relief to make poor regions become better off sooner. 
<H5>  4. Vigorously Grasp Industrial and Communications </H5>
Production, and Effectively Improve the Economic Results of 
Industrial Production 
  Industrial production should be persistently 
market-oriented. 
Efforts should be made to reorganize and transform industries, 
to readjust the product mix, to optimize the industrial 
structure, and to improve economic results. The region's total 
industrial output value is planned to be 36.9 billion yuan in 
1994, an increase of 13.5 percent over 1993. Of 38 major 
industrial products, the output of 34 will increase, that of 
three will remain the same as last year, and that of one will 
decrease. Major products whose output will rise include energy, 
raw and semifinished materials, marketable light industrial and 
textile products, as well as machinery and electronic products. 
The output of crude oil will amount to 12 million metric tons, 
up 15.9 percent; generated energy will be 10 billion 
kilowatt-hours, up 6.4 percent; steel production will be 598,000 
metric tons, up 11.6 percent; cement output will be 4.65 million 
metric tons, up 8.6 percent; and cotton yarn output will be 
950,000 skeins, up 31.9 percent. Rail freight transport will 
reach 23.2 million metric tons, up 17.2 percent; of this, 
east-bound freight transport will amount to 13.1 million metric 
tons, increasing 1 million metric tons. Freight transport by 
motor vehicle will reach 176 million metric tons, up 8.6 
percent. Transactions by post and telecommunications offices as 
a whole will amount to 500 million yuan, up 31.6 percent. In 
1994, 270,000 new telephones are planned to be installed in 
urban areas. Major measure are be implemented in 1994: 
  -- Vigorous efforts should be made to reform, reorganize, or 
transform industrial enterprises and to readjust the industrial 
structure, the product mix, and the organizational structure of 
enterprises. We should continue to change the operating 
mechanisms of industrial enterprises. While deepening the 
reform of enterprises' internal mechanisms, we should establish 
a modern enterprise system as the main phase of attack in the 
reform of enterprises. We should select a number of enterprises 
in which to carry out reform on a trial basis; after gaining 
experience, we should then popularize them step by step. At the 
same time, we should actively promote the shareholding system or 
the cooperative shareholding system in state-run enterprises and 
organize enterprise groups. The management of state-owned 
enterprises may be contracted out or leased to individuals, and 
some enterprises may be auctioned off. We should do a good job 
in enterprise production, operation, and management as well as 
in the development of new products, especially famous-brand 
ones. We should export more products to earn more foreign 
exchange. We should make it possible for enterprises in the 
region to increase their vigor and vitality so they will soon 
develop themselves into key enterprises and turn out top-quality 
products. 
  We should vigorously undertake technical transformation of 
old enterprises. According to the requirements for the 
readjustment of the industrial structure and the product mix, we 
should continue the technical transformation of petrochemical, 
salt-chemical [yan hua gong 7770 0553 1562], textile, 
metallurgical, energy, and communications industries. Financial 
departments, village and town enterprises, local authorities, 
and enterprises should try to raise funds themselves for 
technical transformation and infrastructure construction. This 
is one way to increase investment in technical transformation. 
Meanwhile, for the technical transformation of old enterprises, 
we should actively introduce funds, technology, and equipment 
from abroad and other parts of the country. 
  -- We should rely on the petroleum industry to nurture local 
industries, especially those serving the acceleration and 
exploitation of petroleum and relevant industries. We should do 
a good job in developing ethylene, polyester, and other 
downstream products [xia you chan pin 0007 3266 3934 0756]. Our 
tentative plan is to build 108 projects for the development of 
ethylene, polyester, and other downstream products and for the 
processing of natural gas. We should complete the construction 
of 24 such projects and put them into operation within the year; 
15 projects are now under construction. We should make 
preparations for 69 projects whose construction has yet to be 
started. We should step up our organizing and coordinating 
efforts and strive to build more projects in 1994 and 1995. 
  -- We should continue to effectively perform our work in 
coordinating and balancing production by increasing the 
production of goods in great demand, setting a limit on the 
production of goods that are not very marketable, and stopping 
the production of unsalable goods. We should make every 
possible effort to increase the production of marketable goods. 
Large and medium-sized enterprises should make continued 
efforts to put an end to their losses and increase their 
profits. We should step up the appraisal of industrial economic 
return indexes. 
  -- We should conscientiously do a good job in 
communications, 
transportation, and postal and telecommunications services, and 
tap the potential of east-bound rail transport. We should 
strengthen the organization and management of communications and 
transportation, separate highway transport from rail transport, 
and make rail transport in large quantities a success. 
  5. Maintain a Rational Scale of Investment and 
Concentrate Efforts on Restructuring Investment 
  This year, the whole society's investment in Xinjiang's 
fixed 
assets is set at 9.8 billion yuan, up 32.7 percent from the 
previous year; of which, state-owned units' investment accounts 
for 7.214 billion yuan; collective investment, 1.28 billion 
yuan; and individual investment, 1.3 billion yuan. In 
state-owned units' investment, capital construction will absorb 
4.958 billion yuan, up 39.3 percent; technical transformation, 
1.5 billion yuan and up 35.1 percent; real estate, 525 million 
yuan and up 67.2 percent; and other projects, 230 million yuan 
and up 18 percent. In the state- owned units' capital 
construction investment, 390 million yuan is from the financial 
budget; 85 million yuan draws from two loans offered by the 
People's Bank; 1.2 billion yuan is foreign capital; 1.372 
billion yuan is offered by various specialized banks in the form 
of loans; 240 million yuan is collected from the issuing of 
treasury bonds; and 1.671 billion yuan is invested or raised by 
various departments, bureaus, prefectures, autonomous 
prefectures, cities, and enterprises themselves. 
  The preliminary arrangement for capital construction 
investment is that there will be 151 projects costing over 3 
million yuan each, including 52 key projects costing over 30 
million each. Total investment is set at 7.4 billion yuan -- 
4.627 billion yuan invested by the central authorities and 2.773 
billion yuan by the local authorities. Among the 151 projects, 
43, including six projects costing over 30 million yuan each, 
will be completed this year. The six projects include the 
renovation and expansion project of the 1 August Steelworks for 
upgrading its producing capacity to 600,000 tonnes, the 
second-phase project of Manas Power Plant, the Axi Gold Mine, 
the Markit Bridge over Yarkant River, Tacheng Airport, and the 
project on collective heat supplies for Guangming Road in 
Urumqi. There will be two single or partial projects put into 
operation: The multiple track of Lanzhou-Xinjiang Railway and 
the third-phase expansion project of Tashidian Thermal Power 
Plant in Bayingolin Mongol Autonomous Prefecture. Among the 151 
projects, 94 are being continued from the previous year, 
including 39 key projects with over 30 million yuan of 
investment. There are 13 newly launched projects, mainly the 
renovation and expansion project of Urumqi Airport, the 
Turpan-Urumqi-Dahuangshan Superhighway, the No. 2 Chemical 
Fertilizer Factory of Urumqi Petroleum-Chemical Corporation 
project, the No. 9 Hongyan Battery Factory, the key water 
conservancy project of Wuluwati, the second-phase expansion 
project of the No. 2 Hami Power Plant, the Xinjiang-Tabei 
Charcoal Joint Venture, and others. There are eight preparatory 
projects and 28 key projects, including nine central-invested 
projects and 19 local-invested ones. 
  It is necessary to continue efforts to properly prepare for 
construction projects. This year, we should continue to focus 
some funds on autonomous region-level agriculture, water 
conservancy, transportation, energy resources, and important raw 
and processed materials projects; and projects with an important 
influence on the regional economy whose scale of investment is 
over 30 million yuan. 
<H5>  6. Open Wider to the Outside World, Vigorously Develop Urban </H5>
and Rural Markets, and Continue To Improve People's Living 
Standards 
  We should make full use of Xinjiang's resources and 
geographical advantages, and continue to promote opening up in 
the direction of a high-level, wide-range, and in-depth 
development. The target of this year's total export value is 
set at $550 million, including $280 million through letters of 
credit [L/C] and $270 million from border trade; we should 
strive to achieve $600 million in total export value, including 
$300 million through L/C and $ 300 million from border trade, 
respectively. The major exported goods are: 90,000 tonnes of 
cotton, 20,000 tonnes of rice, and 160,000 tonnes of maize. We 
will use $298 million of foreign funds, up 22.6 percent; this 
includes $243 million in loans and $56 million in direct foreign 
investments, up 22.7 percent and 24.4 percent, respectively. 
  This year, we should take the good opportunity of launching 
significant reform in foreign exchange and foreign trade 
management mechanisms to strive for higher exports and reverse 
declining L/C earnings. While continuing to promote the 
traditional export of bulk farm and sideline products, we should 
try to increase the export of light industrial goods, textiles, 
machinery, electronic goods, chemicals, and other processed 
products that have high-added value, and can earn more foreign 
exchange and economic returns. While consolidating and expanding 
current markets, we should actively develop markets in Southeast 
Asia, west Asia, and the Middle East. Trading enterprises 
should develop themselves into industrialized, conglomerate, and 
internationalized businesses in line with the reform of foreign 
trade system as soon as possible; and uphold the principle of 
focusing on one trade, developing a diversified economy, and 
winning victory through quality. We should actively promote the 
export agency system and vigorously support prefectural, 
autonomous prefectural, and city trading companies, large and 
medium-sized enterprises, and village and town enterprises 
entering the international market. In conducting border trade, 
we should spur exports with imports, emphatically secure the 
source of imported goods and sales, and attach importance to 
improving product quality and economic returns. 
  We shall further improve the investment environment and 
continue to expand the use of foreign capital. While building 
projects under construction well, we shall seriously ensure that 
all contracts signed for building foreign-funded projects are 
fulfilled. We shall enhance our attractiveness to foreign 
investors and invite foreign investment in a number of projects 
with high economic returns which suit domestic conditions and 
demand. According to the state and autonomous regional 
industrial policies, we shall guide more foreign investment into 
foreign-exchange-earning industries, infrastructural 
construction, basic industries, new and high-technology 
industries, and technical renovation of existing enterprises. 
We shall pay attention to effective use of foreign capital and 
ensure that foreign funds arrive in time according to contracts. 
We shall step up the feasibility appraisal for using foreign 
loans and strictly enforce the principle of servicing debts by 
borrowers. We shall build a self-restraining mechanism for all 
departments, localities, and enterprises with respect to 
borrowing foreign loans. 
  With increases in both supply and demand, we will continue 
to 
maintain a market situation characterized by brisk sales and 
basic balance between supply and demand. However, the 
contradiction between supply and demand of a small number of 
goods remains conspicuous. To ensure adequate supply of 
important commodities which have a bearing on the national 
economy and people's livelihood, such as grain, cotton, oil 
products, rolled steel, and timber, we shall strive to maintain 
a balance between total supply and demand; give different 
guidance to suit different conditions; gradually establish and 
perfect a reserve system; make up for shortages in a timely 
manner; and stabilize market prices. As for other commodities, 
we shall give full play to the role of market forces, and mainly 
let the market regulate their supply and demand. We shall 
monitor the trend of commodities of which prices are 
decontrolled, and provide information to guide their supply 
according to demand. In our plan, the total retail commodity 
sales volume is projected to be 22 billion yuan, up 19.14 
percent; and total grain purchase to be 1.5 billion kilograms, 
including 800 million kilograms from contract orders. In the 
1993-1994 cotton growing period, we plan to purchase 700,000 
tonnes. The autonomous region shall treat 5 percent of the 
purchased cotton from each prefecture or autonomous prefecture 
as the latter's retained portion, and return the income from 
sales to the prefecture or autonomous prefecture. In the 
1994-1995 cotton growing period, we will strive to purchase 
800,000 tonnes. In 1994, we will continue to require the 
autonomous regional petroleum administration and Urumqi 
petrochemical company to deliver to the state 60,000 tonnes of 
contribution oil, 202,200 tonnes of oil for making up shortages, 
and 41,500 tonnes of Zepu oil [ze pu you 3419 2528 3111]. In 
addition, the rolled steel earmarked for unified state 
distribution, and the 130,000 tonnes of rolled steel produced by 
the No. 8 Steel Mill and under the autonomous region's 
distribution, shall be subject to orders placed by the state. 
Eighty thousand cubic meters of timber shall be earmarked for 
the autonomous region's distribution. Of the cement produced by 
the Xinjiang Cement Plant, 300,000 tonnes shall be earmarked for 
the autonomous region's distribution. 
  In order to establish an integrated, open, orderly, and 
competitive market, we shall step up market cultivation and 
construction. While striving to improve existing the country 
fair market and wholesale market, we shall give high priority to 
developing autonomous regional-level and district wholesale 
markets for grain, edible oil, animal husbandry products, fresh 
and dehydrated melons and fruit, and sugar this year and next 
year. We shall build, rebuild, and expand a number of large 
and medium comprehensive and specialized wholesale markets in 
Changji, Kuitun, Yining, Korla, Kashi, and other commodity 
collection and distribution centers. According to the state 
plan, we shall actively prepare the establishment of markets for 
cotton, chemical fertilizer, and other important capital goods 
and explore the establishment of futures market for cotton. We 
shall continue to improve the services of rolled steel, 
automobile markets, and capital goods firms. We shall actively 
cultivate markets for capital, technology, labor, and other 
production factors. 
  On the basis of developing the economy and enhancing 
efficiency, the people's livelihood in both urban and rural 
areas will continue to improve. Corresponding to developments 
in production and better efficiency, workers in enterprises will 
have better incomes. Per capita net incomes for peasants and 
herdsmen will also raise considerably as a result of rural 
economic development and better prices for farm products. We 
should pay special attention to the livelihood of personnel who 
have resigned or retired, staff and workers in enterprises 
having production and operation difficulties, and peasants and 
herdsmen in poor areas by showing concern and making appropriate 
arrangements. Reform of the social security system will be 
accelerated to gradually establish a multi-pattern, multi-level 
social security system. 
<H5>  7. Attach Greater Importance to Science and Technology and </H5>
Education; Promote Overall Development of Various Social 
Undertakings 
  We should energetically push forward the plan to "develop 
Xinjiang through the application of science and technology" and 
speed up the pace of reforming the management system for science 
and technology to meet the demands of developing a socialist 
market economy. While committing ourselves to key state 
scientific and technological projects, in line with Xinjiang's 
reality we should closely link local scientific research to 
production and work out Xinjiang's own key scientific research 
and industrial experiment programs to facilitate transformation 
of scientific and technological research achievements into 
productive forces. 
  We should further strengthen elementary education, making 
sure the nine-year compulsory education system is well 
implemented. Secondary vocational education and adult education 
at different levels and in varied forms should be run well. On 
the premise of guaranteeing school conditions and teaching 
quality, higher education should be developed steadily. A 
specialization structure should be adjusted to meet the demands 
of economic development. The student enrollment targets for 
ordinary institutions of higher learning, secondary specialized 
schools, and skilled workers schools for 1994 should be 9,000, 
1.95 million, and 1 million students, respectively. 
  In strengthening the building of socialist spiritual 
civilization, efforts should be made to promote undertakings in 
such fields as culture, press, publications, radio and 
television, public health, sports, and tourism. Development of 
various social undertakings in the vast agricultural and 
pastoral areas, particularly in remote frontiers and poor areas, 
should be stepped up. In 1994 we should strive to garner a 
60-million-yuan investment to solve the water supply problem of 
600,000 people and 1.2 million head of cattle in rural areas. 
We will do what we can to solve the electricity problems in 
Markit, Bachu, and Akqi counties by trying to bring them 
supplies within the coming two years. On the question of 
building 122 new rural hospitals, the autonomous regional 
planning committee and finance office will make available 30 
million yuan to the health office to implement the projects in 
1994 and 1995 to ensure each and every village and town has its 
own hospital by the end of the "Eighth Five-Year Plan." 
<H5>  8. Deepen Reform of the Planning System and Investment </H5>
Structure 
  The Third Plenum of the 14th CPC Central Committee decided 
that, in order to accelerate the establishment of a socialist 
market economic system, it is essential to renew the planning 
concept, transform the functions of planning management, 
thoroughly deepen reform of the planning system, and establish a 
new type of system compatible with the demands of developing a 
socialist market economy. The "Decision" explicitly stipulates: 
"The tasks of planning work are to rationally define strategies 
for the development of the national economy and society; the 
objectives of macroeconomic control and industrial policies; to 
make good economic forecasts; and plan major economic 
structures, the distribution of productive forces, and 
conservation of national territories and construction of key 
projects. Planning work should concentrate on the overall 
situation, strategies, and policies, with emphasis on drafting 
medium and long-term plans, and on the comprehensive and 
coordinated use of macroeconomic policies and economic levers." 
These stipulations have clearly defined the nature, functions, 
scope, and role of planning work under a socialist market 
economic system, and have explicitly defined for us the 
direction and tasks of accelerating reform of the planning 
system. Based on the State Planning Commission's plans for 
reforming the planning system and after taking into 
consideration Xinjiang's reality, we shall put forward our 
opinions on its actual implementation. Xinjiang's basic 
thinking on deepening reform of the planning system is as 
follows: 
  First, we must change the functions of planned management 
as well as the traditional mandatory plan system, and gradually 
establish a guided-type of planned system based on the market 
situation. We must further curtail dependence on mandatory 
plans for production and circulation, formulate and implement 
guided plans capable of forecasting, giving guidance, and that 
are in line with the policy. Second, we must reform the mode of 
planned management; gradually introduce changes from mainly 
direct regulation and control of the past to mainly indirect 
regulation and control; establish an economic monitoring and 
forecasting system; and enhance the ability to regulate and 
control the economy by coordinating and comprehensively applying 
economic policies, economic laws, regulations, and economic 
leverage. Third, we must establish a scientifically sound 
planned system, further reform our annual plans, gradually shift 
the emphasis to medium- and long-term plans, attach importance 
to the formulation and implementation of industrial policies, 
and to plans for various trades, professions, and specific 
projects. Fourth, we must vigorously nurture a market system, 
improve the system for ordering and storing of important 
commodities that have a bearing on the country's economic plans 
and people's livelihood, and promptly guide and coordinate 
market operations through forecasting, information, and means of 
putting new products on the market. Fifth, we must perfect the 
new type of planned system and interdependent system; introduce 
a new auditing system for the national economy; adopt an 
openness in formulating plans; establish a system for evaluating 
plans and policies; increase openness in formulating plans; and 
enhance social participation, so that the process of formulating 
plans will become a process for the government and various 
social sectors to strive and reach a consensus, as well as a 
process for coordinating actions. 
  It is necessary to deepen reform of the investment system, 
gradually establish an investment system favorable to bringing 
the role of the market into play in distributing resources under 
macroeconomic regulation and control. In the light of economic 
efficiency, market needs, and the nature of investment 
activities, we should categorize various projects as 
competitive, basic, or social welfare in nature, and reasonably 
define the investment scope and responsibilities of governments 
at all levels for infrastructure and public welfare; while 
basically raising funds from the market in respect of projects 
which are competitive in nature. We should establish a risk 
responsibility mechanism for investment by a legal person, 
whereby the legal person initiating a construction project will 
be responsible for the entire process of planning, fund- 
raising, design, and construction, as well as for managing 
production, return of loans, along with maintaining or 
increasing the value of assets, and bear the risks involved in 
an investment. We should change the methods and procedures for 
examining and approving proposals for introducing new projects. 
Generally, one may adopt the principal part of investment 
responsibilities in respect of current investments, and then 
work out the methods for creating a project. We should 
establish a sound filing and registration system for newly 
introduced projects, speed up the establishment of a service 
system for the investment market, improve the feed-back system 
for investment information, and strengthen macro-guidance and 
control over the total amount of investment and investment 
structure. We should expand the scope for raising funds for 
construction capital through multi-channels. 
  Fellow deputies, the tasks for reform and construction in 
our 
autonomous region for the current year are extremely arduous. 
However, we firmly believe that so long as we earnestly 
implement the guidelines of the Sixth Plenary Session (Enlarged) 
of the Fourth Xinjiang Autonomous Regional Party Committee, 
properly implement the arrangements for economic work in our 
autonomous region, clearly discern the situation, brace 
ourselves, seize opportunities, deepen reform, accelerate the 
pace of development, ever explore and forge ahead, work hard, 
pay due attention, and do solid work, then we will definitely be 
able to comprehensively fulfill our national economic and social 
development plans for the current year. 

