Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Brasilia -- The Constituent Congress has 
approved -- 381 votes in favor, 75 against, and five abstentions 
-- the new deadline to end work on the constitutional revision: 
31 May. The promise to approve the deadline date before 
approving the Social Emergency Fund [FSE] was part of an 
informal agreement sealed between rapporteur-general Nelson 
Jobim (PMDB -- RS) [Brazilian Democratic Movement Party -- Rio 
Grande do Sul] and the judicial branch. The week before the 
carnival celebrations, Attorney General Aristides Junqueira 
disagreed with the proposal to promulgate the amendments in 
stages, and threatened to resort to the Federal Supreme Court if 
the government decided to promulgate the FSE apart from other 
issues under discussion. The solution to the crisis was to 
establish a deadline for the end of work on the constitutional 
revision. [passage omitted] 
  Planning Minister Alexis Stepanenko handed Congress the 
draft 
bill that made concrete the agreement reached the day before the 
voting to ensure approval of the FSE. The housing area will 
receive $480 million to compensate for the blocking of part of 
the Provisional Tax on Financial Operations in favor of the FSE. 
According to government plans, the budget Law will also ensure 
the same level of investment registered in 1993, including the 
$250 million portion to be used to pay for teachers' salaries. 
Stepanenko bet that the FSE would be approved. "All details 
have already been discussed," he said. 
  According to the economic team, the FSE estimate collection 
decreased from $16.1 billion to $15.5 billion during the FSE 
debate and its voting in Congress. Nevertheless, the FSE will 
ensure the goal of balancing public accounts in 1994, which was 
a pre- requirement for the second stage of the economic plan 
that contemplates the adoption of the Real Value Unit. In the 
opinion of Senate President Humberto Lucena (PMDB -- PB 
[Paraiba]), the fund can be promulgated right after its 
approval, if 293 congressmen support a request in this regard to 
be made by the party leaders. 

