Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Luiz Roberto de Souza Queiroz: "AIDS Now Kills </F>
More Than Traffic in Sao Paulo"; introductory paragraph in 
italics as published] 
  [Text] A survey reveals that the disease caused 684 
deaths between April and June of last year. 
  Deaths from AIDS in the capital already account for an 
absolute majority of all deaths caused by reportable diseases, 
surpassing tuberculosis, meningitis, and schistosomiasis. Now 
AIDS is also ahead of traffic deaths. It is surpassed only by 
homicides. The survey was made by the Municipal Funeral Service. 
  Experts used death certificates from April through June of 
last year for the survey. During that period, reportable 
diseases were responsible for 940 deaths. Of that number, 684 
were attributed to AIDS, 147 to tuberculosis, 60 to meningitis, 
21 to meningococcal meningitis, 15 to schistosomiasis, seven to 
leptospirosis, and four to Hansen's disease. Tetanus and cholera 
caused one death each. 
  In a comparative survey, the study shows that while AIDS 
killed 684 persons, homicides were responsible for 991 deaths, 
traffic accidents 447, other accidents 383, and suicides and 
self-inflicted injuries 98. Other external causes were 
responsible for 182 deaths. 
  Although concerned by the percentage increase in deaths due 
to AIDS, which rose from 3.5 percent in 1991 to 4.1 percent in 
1993, the Funeral Service notes that as far as general mortality 
is concerned, heart disease continues to be the leading cause of 
death: 36 percent of Sao Paulo City's residents die of heart 
disease, 15 percent die of cancer, and about 14 percent die of 
diseases of the respiratory tract. In fourth place are deaths 
due to external causes, which include homicide and accidents and 
are responsible for approximately 10 percent of all deaths. 
  The report says that there is still a great deal of 
prejudice 
regarding AIDS -- so much so that 15 percent of the cases are 
discovered only after investigation based on the death 
certificate. This is because the physician, generally at the 
request of the family, reports the cause of death as an 
opportunistic infection rather than AIDS. Epidemiologists, made 
suspicious by the fact that a person died in his or her 
productive years, contact the physician and then confirm that it 
was in fact an AIDS case. 

