Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "COCOM Disappears, Restrictions </F>
Remain. Christmas Message from Paris"] 
  [Text] Brief announcement by Japanese Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry: As of 24 December 1993, COCOM 
[Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls] has 
banned Toshiba, one of Japan's largest corporations, from 
selling integrated semiconductor circuits to Russia, China, and 
another 25 countries for a month. Toshiba incurred the 
administrative penalty for circumventing the committee and 
secretly selling silicon chips for the production of 
semiconductors and other banned output to the former GDR since 
1986. Some 150 silicon chips and 70 guards [maski] used in the 
production of integrated microcircuits with a 64-kilobyte memory 
-- a considerable size at the time -- were sold to the republic 
between December 1986 and February 1987. 
  Opinion of Yuriy Buykin, representative of the Ministry of 
Foreign Economic Relations: 
  "This is a very strange step. There is, after all, already a 
political decision approved by all the committee's member 
countries that it should cease to exist in the second quarter of 
1994. What is more, any ideological backdrop to this step has 
long since subsided. The USSR no longer exists, and a great 
deal has changed in Russia, the other CIS countries, and East 
and Central Europe. Nor does the GDR as such exist. 
  "Incidentally, even in 1986 the ill-starred silicon chips 
were not at all secret. You could buy them anywhere you liked. 
There is no need to remind you that the USSR was at the time 
one of the world leaders in producing this kind of output. And 
in terms of quality this output was by no means inferior to that 
of Japan. But Toshiba's silicon chips were cheaper than ours 
and the Germans preferred them. 
  "COCOM's action is tailoring present-day reality to fit an 
old framework. And will it not make many Japanese firms that 
are willing to trade with Russia ponder: Is the game worth the 
candle?" 
  Opinion of Japanese Embassy representative in Moscow: 
  "At the moment," the editorial office was told, "we have not 
been informed of this decision." 
  Three hours later, following consultations with Tokyo, the 
embassy confirmed: 
  "This decision is in place. No one has revoked the letter of 
the law, but 31 March is still a long way off. Incidentally, 
this ban could be extended to three years, as happened in the 
past, and not just one month...." 
  Editorial Note: The COCOM ban could be seen as a Christmas 
joke were it not for one thing. It turns out that COCOM is 
retaining the restrictions on shipments of around 10 
state-of-the-art technologies and dual-purpose materials to the 
former socialist countries. These include coders, 
heat-resistant and highly durable composite materials, and 
coatings used in the aerospace industry, in particular in 
manufacturing Stealth aircraft, and for Stealth-type radars. 
Admittedly, in this connection it is planned to revise the 
150-item list of output banned for export to countries within 
the former Communist bloc. 
  After 44 years in existence, COCOM is to all appearances 
still following the old tracks through inertia even though the 
whole world has switched to a new course. So, we would like to 
ask its officials whom they want to punish -- the recalcitrant 
firm Toshiba or Russia, say, which has already drawn a bold line 
under its communist past? 

