BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Robert Krasowski and Piotr Smilowicz: "The </F>
Power of Stereotypes; Politicians of All Parties Complain About 
Their Members' Social Image"] 
  [Text] We present the second part of a poll which we have 
conducted among leaders of the main Polish political parties. 
We asked them about their perception of their parties' rank and 
files, and how -- in their view -- that perception is different 
from popular stereotypes. 
  When one speaks about an average member of the Social 
Democracy of the Polish Republic [SdRP], "comrade Szmaciak" 
appears. He is a former low-level apparatchik who was removed 
from power for a few years; he is the incompetent and dishonest 
activist type, driven by career ambitions and by revenge on 
"Solidarity" activists. 
  "Comrade Szmaciak is total nonsense" -- says an irritated 
Aleksander Kwasniewski. 
  In his view, there are Szmaciaks in all the parties and so 
they are not exclusive to SdRP only. Sometimes they are called 
"comrade Szmaciak," at other times -- "colleague Szmaciak," and 
even "most reverend Szmaciak." Besides, nobody could have 
predicted when joining SdRP in 1990 that the party would assume 
power so soon. 
  But Kwasniewski refuses to talk about his idea of an average 
member of his party: 
  "In a 60,000-member organization, it is hard to talk about 
an 
average member" -- the SdRP chairman says. 
  But he adds that it must be someone 35 to 50, from a city in 
a majority of cases, and educated. Such average members are not 
easily distinguishable in a crowd. They do not wear white socks 
since they do not belong to that kind of generation anymore. At 
the most, they wear slightly worn suits since, often, they are 
not very well off financially. 
  Wincenty Stawarz, acting chairman of the Polish Peasant 
Party, provided the following description of an average peasant 
activist (after having thought for five minutes and after having 
asked us not to delete anything from what he says): 
  "He is very active in social issues, he is closely tied to 
the interests of the countryside and agriculture. He is 
patriotic, with a strong and independent Poland being the most 
important thing to him. He is attached to his family, he 
regards work as an element of moral education, he values good 
work and he expects honest pay for such work. He is religious 
and close to the Church." 
  Stawarz thinks that the stereotype of a peasant activist 
wearing white socks amounts to a distasteful making a laughing 
stock out of rural areas and people living there. But he admits 
that sometimes, peasant activists can be distinguished in a 
crowd. 
  "But some gentlemen with coats of arms behave even worse at 
times" -- he adds. "Sometimes peasant activists are not 'on the 
same level' as people from cities, but this applies only to 
those who make their living by farming. Contact with the land 
and with animals are not very conducive to good manners, but 
they are still good" -- Stawarz adds emphatically. 
  Jaroslaw Kaczynski is outraged when one suggests to him the 
following vision of an average member of the Center Accord [PC]: 
A frustrated and power-hungry activist who uses revolutionary 
rhetoric. 
  "That kind of stereotype was created by our enemies" -- 
Kaczynski says. "PC's first program declaration of 1990 was 
very moderate and one certainly cannot describe it as 
'revolutionary rhetoric.'" 
  But the PC chairman does not deny that the image of his 
party 
created by the mass media is responsible for the fact that many 
people found their way into the party who in some way conform 
with the notion of a stereotype PC member. 
  "Members of PC come first of all from the first-generation 
intelligentsia. There are many people with the status of an 
intelligentsia member despite not having a higher education. 
These are people who since 1980 were active in 'Solidarity' and 
that is what enabled their social advancement." 
  Kaczynski adds that lack of a communist past is a common 
trait displayed by members of PC: 
  "Most of the members are people who 'fought the system at 
the 
lowest level' in the period of the Polish People's Republic. 
We have just a handful of former members of the Polish United 
Workers Party" -- Kaczynski says. 
  He laments relatively few young people being PC members. 
"But that is a trait of all Polish political parties" -- he 
concludes. 
  "Among members of the Christian-National Union [ZChN], a 
majority are young people, with a majority of regional chiefs 
being 20-something or 30-something" -- says Ryszard Czarnecki, 
ZChN's spokesman. 
  In his view, a typical ZChN member is a student or a young 
member of the intelligentsia, "in most cases, he reads Roman 
Dmowski's publications," or else he is someone elderly, a 
Catholic who espouses national values. 
  "The stereotype of a ZChN member as a fanatic Catholic, is a 
snout that has been affixed to us" -- Czarnecki is outraged. 
"Of course, a majority of our members are believers. But there 
is a group of people who regard Catholicism as an important part 
of the Polish national tradition while not being religiously 
involved themselves." 
  Czarnecki perceives ZChN members as people of a cheery 
disposition who like to have fun: "Abstinence from alcohol is 
such a rare phenomenon among us, that it is even admired when it 
does happen." 
  In Czarnecki's view, the stereotype of ZChN members being 
violent and nervous, is also false: "A majority of our members 
are quiet and sedate kind of people" -- ZChN's spokesman says. 

