BFN 

  [Text] Eijiro Hata, minister of international trade and 
industry, reported on the 1994 trade white paper to the cabinet 
on 1 May and the cabinet approved it. Calling "investment a 
source of growth," the white paper points out that "the 
government can no longer keep investment and technology in their 
closets" and expresses concern about the fact that "foreign 
direct investment in Japan is the lowest compared with that in 
major industrialized nations." The white paper stresses that to 
accelerate growth, the government should address price 
differentials between Japan and other nations, promote 
deregulation, and attract more foreign investment to Japan while 
encouraging domestic investment. The white paper applauds the 
Uruguay Round for hammering out a set of agreements on new 
international trade rules. The white paper emphasizes that Japan 
should vigorously support activities of the World Trade 
Organization (WTO), which is slated to be inaugurated next year. 
  Analyzing the world trade structure, the white paper 
indicates that it is going through drastic changes in the wake 
of growing foreign investments. It points out that growth in 
global direct foreign investment largely exceeded the growth in 
the global trade of goods and services during the second half of 
the eighties. The white paper notes that the increase in global 
direct foreign investment has served to spur technology and 
interbusiness trade, promote industrialization in nations where 
foreign direct investments were made, and expand the trade in 
manufactured goods. 
  The white paper notes that ASEAN members, China, and East 
Asian nations that have received foreign investments have 
greatly increased their manufactured goods exports and adds that 
the ratio of the trade undertaken by East Asian nations (with 
the exception of Japan) to the entire world trade swelled about 
2.6 times over the past 20 years since 1972. Describing 
Southeast Asia, including Vietnam, as a "center of growth," the 
white paper emphasizes that Japanese enterprises should use the 
region as their business base not only for exports, but for 
research and development and shape their respective strategies 
for market expansion in the region. 
  Pointing out that "investment will accelerate growth and 
create job opportunities in the long run," the white paper 
proposes that, to expand investment and create job 
opportunities, attempts should be made to efficiently distribute 
resources through trade liberalization and expanding the world's 
production and income. 
  Indicating that Japan's direct domestic investment balance 
in 
1991 was $15.2 billion, 1/27th of that made by the United States 
during the same year, the white paper says the rate between 
domestic and foreign direct investment balances made by Japan 
during the year was 1:17 compared with the 1:1.1 of the United 
States. Noting that "Japan's direct domestic investment can 
serve to vitalize its economy," the white paper stresses the 
need to turn Japan into a nation where business activities are 
attractive to both domestic and foreign enterprises. The white 
paper stresses the need for the government to: 1) upgrade the 
infrastructure and housing; 2) correct the price differentials 
between Japan and other nations; and, 3) relax business 
regulations. 
  The white paper points out that domestic savings need to be 
used for upgrading the infrastructure to prepare for a society 
of senior citizens, adding that the measure will serve to reduce 
Japan's current account surplus, which hit an all-time high in 
1993. 
  Commenting on a set of agreements hammered out in the 
Uruguay 
Round (of GATT) that was concluded late last year, the white 
paper applauds "the Uruguay Round for laying down trade rules on 
service and intellectual property." 
  The white paper stresses that, for the set of agreements to 
be put into effect, Japan should vigorously support activities 
of the WTO, which will become an international body mandated to 
handle international trade matters. 

