OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94UM0236F </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE </F>
 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel A. Zarov and Colonel A. Rodionov] </F>
  [Text] Conceptual provisions were developed in the early 
1960's on using means of simulating a real electronic 
environment to create near-combat conditions in exercises, in 
accordance with which specially equipped aircraft appeared in 
the inventory. Their mission includes active and passive jamming 
of friendly electronics and saturation of the electronic 
environment with signals simulating the operation of various 
enemy electronics. At present, 12 foreign states have similar 
aircraft operating in support of the air force and navy which 
have been designated "Aggressor" aircraft. 
  The first formally organized air group was formed in the 
United States in the mid-1960's based on aircraft leased from 
civilian airlines. In 1965 McDonnell Douglas fitted out two B-52 
Stratofortress strategic bombers, based at Tulsa Air Force Base 
[AFB] (Oklahoma), with special gear. Subsequently (1977-1978) 
they were replaced by modernized NKC-135A Stratotankers (Waco 
AFB, Texas). In 1987 the EC-24A (modified DC-8) was added to 
them. The question presently being considered is of using new 
Learjet Smart Crow EW aircraft to perform these missions. 
  In 1968 a special EW group intended for simulating the 
electronic environment -- FEWSG (Fleet Electronic Warfare 
Support Group) with headquarters in Norfolk -- was established 
on a permanent basis directly in the structure of U.S. Naval 
Aviation. It is made up of three squadrons of EW aircraft 
(VAQ-33, VAQ-34 and VAQ-35) based at the Key West (Florida), 
Lemoore (California) and Whidbey Island (Washington) naval air 
stations, as well as subunits responsible for preparing exercise 
areas and deploying monitoring and measuring equipment and data 
collection and processing points in them. 
  The squadrons are equipped with EA-6B Prowler, EF/A-18 
Hornet, and EP-3E and J Orion EW aircraft as well as a group of 
NKC-135A, EC-24A and Learjet 35 aircraft on a five-year lease 
from McDonnell Douglas. In addition to the squadrons, the FEWSG 
includes two subunits servicing eight AN/ULQ-13 
ground-transportable systems (they simulate ground or shipboard 
radars) and also ELINT and ECM sets. The NKC-135A and EC-24A 
aircraft have AN/ALT-40 and AN/ALT-28 ECM sets with an operating 
band of 0.1-18 GHz and the AN/ALR-75 warning receiver with 
attached OE-320/A direction finder. These aircraft are capable 
of flying at altitudes around 11,000 m at up to Mach 0.8 for at 
least six hours. 
  The U.S. Air Force command currently does not have a similar 
group at its disposal. FEWSG Aircraft as well as aircraft of 
auxiliary and combat aviation equipped with suspended pods with 
EW gear are leased for exercises and drills in using EW 
equipment. 
  Procedures and methods of using various weapon systems are 
rehearsed, problems of improving capabilities of EW equipment 
are solved and scientific research is conducted in the course of 
the exercises. In addition, actions of flight and ground 
personnel (officers of tactical air control centers, 
communications and EW specialists, weapon system operators, air 
traffic control center controllers) are evaluated under jamming 
conditions. 
  The training drill of flight and ground personnel in a 
period 
of escalating tension in any region of the world and preparation 
for delivering a strike acquires special significance. Thus, 
from August 1990 through January 1991 FEWSG crews took an active 
part in U.S. Navy exercises in the Red Sea and Persian Gulf 
(Operation Desert Shield), simulating emissions of Iraqi Armed 
Forces electronics. 
  In the mid-1980's an MEWSG (Multi-Service EW Support Group) 
for simulating the electronic environment, stationed at 
Yeovilton Air Base (UK), was established to support drills and 
exercises of subunits of NATO Allied Forces Europe (above all of 
the Allied Air and Naval Forces). Its missions include creating 
a real electronic environment in Allied Forces exercises and 
also at the request of national armed forces. The MEWSG leases 
Falcon 20 aircraft belonging to a British airline. 
  In addition, aircraft leased from a U.S. airline and 
stationed at Naples, Italy (two Learjet Sea Crows and one 
Learjet Smart Crow, Fig. 1 [figure not reproduced]) operate in 
support of NATO Allied Naval Forces Mediterranean and the U.S. 
Sixth Fleet. Eleven types of ECM sets in a pod configuration 
covering the frequency bands 250-500 MHz, 1-2 GHz and 8-20 GHz 
are used aboard them. Sets of EW gear also are adapted for 
suspension to air force and naval aviation aircraft of Belgium, 
France, Germany, Greece, Portugal, Spain and Turkey. 
  The NATO leadership presently has adopted the CTFS 
(Contractor Training Flight Service) program for establishing 
two MEWSG groups of the new Learjet Phoenix Crow aggressor 
aircraft. Its electronic equipment suite will include AN/DLQ-3C 
and AN/ALQ-176 jammers, the AN/ALE-43 antiradar chaff dispenser 
and a VHF/HF communications jammer. 
  A long-range program for using aggressor aircraft in support 
of the Air Force and Navy was developed in Great Britain in 
1984. Ten Falcon 20 light transport aircraft were equipped with 
ARTS-5 and AN/ALQ-167 jammers. Hunter and Canberra (Fig. 2 
[figure not reproduced]) glider-towing aircraft from naval 
aviation can be used in addition for performing special 
missions; it is planned to use them to replace Learjet 35 EW 
aircraft in the period 1994-1996. Each year they take part in 
approximately 20 operational activities conducted under national 
and coalition plans. 
  Five Falcon 20 aircraft were purchased in Canada in 1991 and 
became part of the joint Anglo-French ADS (Aviation Defence 
Services) Group. They began to be used on a regular basis to 
perform EW missions in support of the French Air Force and Navy 
in 1992. 
  Two Learjet 35 aircraft fitted with sets of EW gear (the 
U.S. 
Naval Aviation FEWSG has similar ones) are used on a contract 
basis in support of the Danish Navy. 
  Sweden purchased ten aircraft (two Learjet 35's and eight 
MU-2B Petrus), and jammers and BOZ-3 antiradar chaff dispensers 
were installed in them. These aircraft serve to train Swedish 
Air Force flight and ground personnel for combat operations when 
EW assets are used. 
  Aggressor aircraft take part in operational activities 
varying in scale and purpose, of which the most significant is 
the U.S. Air Force Red Flag tactical air exercise held at the 
Nellis (Nevada) range, which is similar in conditions to the 
Central European TVD [theater of military operations]. Special 
attention is given to creating a real, complex electronic 
environment and to increasing the number of operating enemy 
electronic assets (to approximately 130). The aggressor aircraft 
jam from a loiter zone 10-20 km from the presumed front line. To 
increase ECM capabilities, tactical fighters rehearse effective 
methods of using individual and collective protection gear 
during the exercises. This EW equipment basically is 
accommodated in pods. 
  In accordance with adopted standards, along with other kinds 
of training each U.S. Air Force tactical aviation crew must make 
at least two air-to-air guided missile launches under ECM 
conditions in a two-year period. Essentially all training 
sorties to intercept an airborne target also take place under 
the effect of jamming. 
  Recommendations designed for a complex jamming situation 
have 
been developed for tactical aviation pilots: Refrain from using 
instrument readings affected by electronic emissions; use backup 
instruments; execute prescribed actions precisely. 
  Aggressor aircraft crews include 2-3 trained operators who 
have a good knowledge of the tactical-technical characteristics 
and capabilities of the probable enemy's electronic assets and 
his operating methods. 
  Onboard EW equipment of aggressor aircraft is divided into 
three categories: Sets for ECM against enemy radar equipment 
(including antiradar chaff dispensers); communications jammers; 
and simulators of enemy radar equipment. 
  The mission of creating a complex jamming environment for 
training purposes is implemented on general technical principles 
developed for EW combat systems. Special demands are placed on 
them: Capability of operating in a broad frequency band (from 
0.25 to 20 GHz), a rather large selection of jammers, 
interchangeability and flexibility of operational use. The 
effective range of onboard ECM sets is 30-40 km. Airborne 
radars, radar altimeters, side-looking radars and ground system 
navigational equipment are subject to the effect of ECM sets. 
  Simulators of electronic equipment are unique gear which 
simulate the operation of enemy radar equipment above all. They 
must give crews and weapon system teams an opportunity to 
rehearse methods of repelling guided missile attacks. 
  A brief description of basic models of electronic 
jammers is given below: 
  The AN/ALQ-167(V) is one of the most widespread types of 
sets 
used by aggressor aircraft (it can be used in 20 types of 
aircraft, Fig. 3 [figure not reproduced]). It is accommodated in 
a suspended pod 3.76 m long and supports jamming in the 2-20 GHz 
frequency band. Transmitting antennas are in the front and rear 
of the pod. The gear weighs 158 kg. It emits both noise as well 
as pulsed responsive jamming with various kinds of modulation 
(eight for noise and eight for pulsed responsive jamming). It is 
combined with a radar warning receiver, if necessary. The set is 
controlled remotely from the ground or from an operator console 
aboard the aircraft. It is planned to automate its remote and 
onboard control equipment, install new antennas, increase power 
output, expand the jammer operating band, and also examine the 
possibility of using digital radio-frequency memories in jamming 
circuits. Outside the United States the AN/ALQ-167 is used in 
aircraft of the NATO MEWSG. 
  In the Canadian Air Force this set is designated AN/ALQ-502 
and is suspended on EC-144 and ET-133 transport aircraft, and in 
the United States to EA-6B, EP-3J, EF/A-18 A and B and NKC-135 
aircraft which are part of the U.S. Naval Aviation FEWSG. 
  The AN/ALQ-176 is a multipurpose noise jammer developed by 
the firm of Hercules and used in Smart Crow and Sea Crow 
modifications of Learjet aircraft. A typical set in a Learjet 
Smart Crow includes five jammers installed inside the fuselage 
(two designed for the 1-2 GHz band and three for the 2-4 GHz 
band) with an effective power output of 650 watts each. 
  Sweep, spot or barrage noise jamming of five enemy 
electronic 
assets can be accomplished simultaneously in the Learjet Smart 
Crow version. From the control console the operator has an 
opportunity to quickly reprogram jammer operating modes by 
frequency and kind of modulation. 
  The set of EW gear in the Learjet Sea Crow includes three 
spot and barrage noise jammers covering the 1-2, 2-4 and 8-10 
GHz frequency bands with an effective power output of 300, 400 
and 100 watts respectively. 
  The AN/ALQ-188 is used in support of the U.S. Air Force 
during exercises for noise and pulsed responsive jamming in the 
8-10 GHz frequency band. It was created in a pod version based 
on the AN/DLQ-3 ECM set developed by the U.S. Navy Pacific 
Missile Test Center. Learjet aircraft are the platforms. 
  The AN/ALQ-28 is a version of the AN/ALT-28 noise jammer 
adapted for the NKC-135A aircraft. 
  The AN/ALT-40(V) is used in NKC-135 (one per aircraft) and 
EC-24A aircraft (two per aircraft) as a powerful source of noise 
jamming in the 8-20 GHz band. It is produced by the U.S. firm 
Watkins Johnson. 
  Systems of the above ECM sets cover the entire band of 
frequencies presently being used by electronic equipment of 
probable enemies. Steps are being taken to increase their 
effective power output by installing highly directional antennas 
with steerable beams. 
  The Adrian is made in a pod configuration by the Swedish 
firm 
Ericsson. It is used in two versions (with frequency bands of 
2-4 and 4-8 GHz) in Swedish Air Force J-32E EW aircraft and in 
the MU-2B Petrus and Learjet aircraft leased from civilian lines 
for jamming ground (surface) acquisition radars. The receiver is 
controlled by a microprocessor. Transceiver antennas are located 
on the front and rear of the pod case. 
  The AN/DLQ-3, developed in the early 1960's, underwent a 
number of modernizations (DLQ-3B, DLQ-3C). It is installed in EW 
aircraft (EC-24A, Learjet Smart Crow, EC-144 Challenger) and 
target drones (BQM-34A/S, BQM-34ET, QF-4 and QF-100). In 
addition, it is used as fixed and mobile ground simulators. The 
operating band is 1-20 GHz. Jamming signals can be emitted with 
different kinds of modulation (up to 24). The set's basic 
purpose is to support tests, evaluate weapon systems and train 
operators of C[.sup]3[/] systems and radar posts. 
  Aries-A (Italian firm of Elettronica) is intended both for 
operator training and for use under combat conditions. The ELINT 
gear, covering the 0.5-20 GHz frequency band, uses digital 
superheterodyne receivers with instantaneous frequency change. 
The firm's experience gained in the course of equipping Falcon 
20 (Norway), HFB.320 (Germany) and PD.808 (Italy) EW aircraft 
was taken into account in creating the equipment. It is proposed 
to install it in Spanish Air Force C-212 EW aircraft. 
  The Druse Moss [name as transliterated] (UK) is produced on 
the basis of the AN/ALQ-167 set described above. The gear 
operates in the 8-10 GHz band and the units are accommodated 
inside the fuselage. Six sets have been produced, which are 
installed in Canberra glider-towing aircraft of UK Royal Navy 
Aviation. 
  The A.100 Erijammer (6-10 GHz band) is produced by the 
consortium of Ericsson-Rodeil and is part of the REWTS 
(Responsive EW Training System). It includes a warning receiver, 
panoramic receiver, and monitor. The gear, weighing 210 kg, is 
housed in a suspended pod 3.23 m long. There is coverage of a 
360 sector in the receive and transmit (jamming) mode. The 
subsystem is controlled by a microprocessor and supports 12 data 
output modes, four electronic signal search modes, nine noise 
jamming modes, 14 modes of manipulative, responsive pulsed 
jamming of Doppler radars, and six modes of combination jamming. 
A multifunctional suppression mode (four successive changes in 
operating frequencies) is supported additionally. It is capable 
of functioning as a threat signal (enemy electronic equipment) 
source. The A.100 set underwent an extensive flight test program 
during 1991-1992. 
  The B.100 Erijammer is undergoing full-scale engineering 
development. It supplements the A.100 in the REWTS program, 
supporting coverage of the 2-6 GHz frequency band. It is planned 
to increase the jammer's effective radiating power to 10 kw. It 
is also proposed to accommodate B.100 set gear within the 
fuselage of the PC-9 Pilatus turbojet trainer. A pod version 
also is not precluded. 
  The G.24 (Sweden) is intended for jamming ground-based air 
search radars. It is produced in three versions for three 
frequency bands: 1-2, 2-4 and 4-8 GHz. The gear, accommodated 
within the fuselage of the J-32E EW aircraft, is designed for 
generating noise and manipulative responsive pulsed jamming. The 
enemy electronic emissions search subsystem also performs 
functions of a warning receiver. 
  The 8-20 GHz band Petrus (Sweden) is intended for noise and 
responsive radar jamming. It is accommodated in a pod and used 
on J-32E and Learjet aircraft. Work to modernize it was 
conducted during 1991-1992. 
  The 8100 (Sweden) supplements gear created under the REWTS 
program. It has four modular subsystems which jam in the 0.5-2, 
2-4, 4-6 and 8-10 GHz frequency bands. There is a total of 24 
modes for generating noise or pulsed responsive jamming. An 
attached computer performs control. Internal fuselage and pod 
accommodation of gear is envisaged. 
  Tree Pods are a family of these suspended-pod ECM sets 
developed for the NKC-135A aircraft of the U.S. Navy FEWSG. The 
sets, with an emissive power output up to 1 kw, are designed for 
different frequency bands. Two pods of this type can be 
suspended to an aircraft simultaneously. Chaff dispensers are 
presented below. 
  The AN/ALE-43 is produced by a U.S. firm in a pod version 
and 
in the form of a set for installation within an aircraft 
fuselage. In the first case the device can contain chaff with an 
overall weight of 145 kg. 
  In the U.S. Navy EW air group such pod installations can be 
suspended beneath EA-6B, EP-3E and J aircraft and preferably 
beneath the EF/A-18A and B. NKC-135A and EC-24A (two on each), 
leased Learjet Smart Crow, and EC-144 (Canadian Air Force) 
aircraft have been adapted for internal fuselage accommodation 
of the AN/ALE-43 device. In one version (for the Learjet Smart 
Crow), the knife of the cutter is adjusted for chaff size 
corresponding to the 1-2, 2-4 and 8-10 GHz frequency bands. The 
aggregate length of dipoles is 5,092 m and the time for 
dispensing chaff is up to 11 minutes. Maximum descent rate of 
the aluminized fiberglass dipole is 914 m/hr. 
  The BOZ-3 in a pod configuration is used on Swedish Air 
Force 
J-32E or leased MU-2B aircraft. Control is manual or automatic. 
When chaff is used, clouds or corridors are created for the 
passage of strike elements of aircraft. 
  Communications jammers are listed below. 
  The AN/ASQ-191A is an experimental development of the U.S. 
firm Rockwell-Collins and is for testing C[.sup]3[/] gear for 
resistance to jamming. It is installed in an EC-24A EW aircraft. 
  The AN/USQ-113 is housed in pods suspended to EC-24A and 
EP-3J aircraft of the U.S. Navy FEWSG and on E-3 Orion 
land-based patrol aircraft for deceptive, spot, and barrage 
noise and tonal communications jamming. ECM gear in the EP-3J EW 
aircraft includes the MD-1203 speech modulator, radar emission 
simulator, PSC-3 satellite communications set, WJ-8718A 
panoramic search receiver, AN/ARC-190 HF radio, AN/USQ-103 and 
AN/ALQ-170 ECM pods, AN/ALT-40 ECM set and OE-320 radio 
direction-finder. 
  The Dragonfly (of UK firm GTE) is accommodated in Canberra 
glider-towing aircraft of UK Royal Navy Aviation. It is capable 
of generating FM and AM noise jamming with a power output up to 
1 kw. The set is controlled manually and automatically. A total 
of 20 sets of gear have been made for an overall amount of $16 
million under a contract let in 1985. 
  The Mera (Ericsson, Sweden) is installed in J-32E aircraft. 
It generates noise jamming with different kinds of modulation 
and is capable of suppressing VHF-band communications equipment 
on several frequencies simultaneously. There are provisions for 
a manipulative emissions mode, including the output of false 
signals and commands. 
  Smart Guard/Fast Jam is a communications jammer in the HF 
and 
VHF bands. It is a component part of the Aries-A onboard EW 
system produced by the Italian firm Elettronica. 
  The UST-104B is produced by Rockwell-Collins (USA) and is 
intended for communications jamming in the 100-500 MHz frequency 
band. In addition to generating jamming signals with noise and 
tone modulation, it is capable of creating manipulative jamming 
which simulates control signals and commands. Three carrier 
frequencies can be suppressed in a time-division mode. Jammer 
power output, adjustable in flight, reaches 400 watts. 
  The ZS 1910 (Canada) was selected by the Ministry of Defense 
leadership as a base system for three EC-144 EW aircraft. The 
system includes a radio direction-finder and jammer. 
  Simulators of enemy electronic equipment are 
examined below. 
  The AN/ALQ-170(V) is a set of gear for simulating the 
emission of radar homing heads of various types of antiship 
missiles. It was developed for use on EA-6B and EP-3J EW 
aircraft and on the F/A-18 A and B deck-based fighter/attack 
aircraft. 
  The AN/AST-4(V) is a pod simulator of radar homing head 
signals. It is widely used on NATO MEWSG Falcon 20, Hunter, GA11 
and Learjet 35C aircraft and on EA-6B aircraft of the U.S. Naval 
Aviation FEWSG. The gear is accommodated in a suspended pod 2.1 
m long and generates signals in the 6-10 and 10-20 GHz frequency 
bands. It is remotely controlled from the ground or from a 
console in the aircraft cockpit. Emission modes and parameters 
are set by a special SG-1189/AST-5(V) unit contained in a sealed 
bay of the aircraft. The SG-1189 unit provides for selection of 
a pulse repetition frequency from 3 to 5,999 pulses per second, 
pulse emission modes, and kind and parameters of homing head 
scanning. There are grounds to assume that the set's production 
may be stopped in connection with transition to more modern 
models. AN/AST-4 gear was reconfigured into pods from the 
AN/ALQ-167 ECM set for use on Learjet Sea Crow aircraft. 
  The AN/AST-7(V) is a multipurpose simulator of enemy 
electronic signals in the 6-40 GHz frequency band. It is 
produced in a suspended pod 3.3 m long and is intended for 
simulating signals of onboard acquisition radars, intercept and 
aiming radars, terrain relief following system radars, and radar 
homing heads of various classes of guided missiles. The system 
operator can choose the carrier frequency, pulse repetition 
frequency and pulse duration. The pulse repetition frequency and 
parameters of pulse emission and homing head scanning are 
regulated using the control unit. A mode for remote switching of 
oscillation frequency also is possible. The transmitter puts out 
a peak power on the order of 125 kw. The gear weighs 145.6 kg. 
  The DARTS (Digital Airborne Radar Threat Simulator) is 
equipment for simulating enemy radar signals. It is housed in a 
suspended pod 3.1 m long and is a component part of the REWTS 
simulator system. The band of operating frequencies is 6-20 GHz. 
It is possible to control all parameters of simulated electronic 
equipment signals from the control console manually or by 
computer program. Mean emissive power of the transmitter is 12.5 
megawatts. The set weighs 147 kg. This simulator is taking part 
in a competition for delivery to the NATO MEWSG under a program 
for upgrading simulation equipment. Three models were delivered 
for test operation in special aircraft. 

