BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jacques Hasday] </F>
  [Text] Mons, Belgium, April 28 (AFP) -- The squat green 
pre-fab was a Cold War HQ, where the United States, France and 
Britain planned to fight a Soviet blockade of Berlin which could 
have sparked World War Three. 
  That was the old Europe. But on Thursday [28 April] the 
building became the first home for an ambitious programme to get 
the military machines of the former Cold War enemies working 
together for peace instead of planning war. 
  "From today this building will represent a new NATO and a 
new 
Europe," said U.S. General George Joulwan, supreme commander of 
NATO forces in Europe, as he inaugurated the temporary 
headquarters of the Partnership for Peace programme. 
  The pre-fab faces a monument comprising a large piece of the 
Berlin Wall, which officially ended the Cold War when it 
crumbled in 1989. 
  The so-called coordination cell is located at the Supreme 
Headquarters Allied Powers in Europe (SHAPE), nerve centre of 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation. 
  Fourteen countries have joined the Partnership since it was 
announced in January, most of them hoping that it will be a 
half-way house to membership of NATO. Poland and Romania have 
already submitted detailed working programmes. 
  One by one, during the ceremony, the name of each new member 
was called out and its flag displayed. 
  In order of joining, they are Romania, Lithuania, Poland, 
Estonia, Hungary, Ukraine, Slovakia, Bulgaria, Latvia, Albania, 
the Czech Republic, Moldova, Georgia and Slovenia. 
  Russia was absent but NATO's deputy secretary general, 
Sergio 
Silvio Balanzino, said he hoped it would join the Partnership 
before the end of the European summer. 
  Joulwan told journalists: "We look forward to working with 
the Russian military." NATO regards Russia as a big catch for 
the Partnership. But Moscow has blown hot and cold over the 
past month. 
  First it said it wanted a better deal more appropriate to 
its 
big-power status, then cancelled a signing date last week in 
apparent irritation over NATO air strikes against Bosnian Serbs 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina two weeks ago. 
  NATO officials now believe that the Russians will join soon, 
in line with Moscow's new partnership with the United States and 
the European Union in the search for a peaceful settlement in 
Bosnia. 
  Partnership for Peace is a flexible programme ranging from 
simple military training and advice to participation in 
full-scale military manoeuvres and peace-keeping exercises, 
depending on what each country can manage and afford. 
  Thus, each country will be asked to pay a "reasonable rent" 
for their place in the green pre-fab, known as "Live Oak," where 
joint manoeuvres and other exercises will be planned. 
  "Live Oak" has done a lot of travelling since it was first 
erected in 1959 as a headquarters for U.S., French and British 
preparations to counter a second Soviet blockade of Berlin 
expected in the late 1950's. 
  It was first put up in 1959 at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, near 
Paris, then moved to nearby Rocquencourt in 1961, then to Mons 
in 1967. Joulwan called it "the symbol of old divisions of 
Europe." 

