BFN 

  [Text] Antidrug "Operation Trebol" was conducted on 23 May 
in Santa Cruz. Three international traffickers organizations 
were dismantled, hundreds of thousands of dollars in assets were 
seized, and 23 presumed traffickers were caught. 
  According to the writ issued on 13 June by the lower court 
of 
controlled substances in La Paz, 15 of the 23 individuals 
arrested have been taken to the maximum security prison in 
Chonchocoro. During the operation 84,500 grams of cocaine were 
seized. 
  Judges Victor Lopez Alcala and Renan Moreno Aviles filed 
against Luis Alberto Arteaga Seleme and Iver Daza Suarez, for 
manufacturing, trafficking, and transporting cocaine. They are 
also accused of illegal association to commit crime and are 
being held at the Chonchocoro prison. 
  The judges also filed against Emilio Arce Vidal, Robin 
Rosales Agreda, Horario Arroyo Bonilla, and Ruddy Yassir 
Pedrazas Suarez. They are accused of manufacturing and 
trafficking cocaine, and of illegal association to commit crime. 
  The following, who are at large, are also accused of the 
same 
crime: Juan Carlos Araoz Antelo, Johnny Lara, Clider Matienzo 
Rodriguez, Victor Rosales Agreda, Johnny Rosales Agreda, 
Fernando Cadario Garrido, Carlos Alfonso Gutierrrez, and Freddy 
Eguez. 
  The antidrug judges also began criminal proceedings against 
Juan Rosales Agreda who is accused of murder, cocaine 
trafficking, and association to commit crime, while Luis 
Fernando Bascope Rivera is accused of cocaine trafficking and 
association to commit crime. 
  The following are accused of the same crime: Alcides Bascope 
Chavez, Wilfredo Rosales Agreda, Pedro Fernandez Barrientos, 
Elvio Cespedes Anez, Mario Antonio Artega Seleme, and Medardo 
Vargas Callau. 
  William Rosales Suarez is accused of participating in 
trafficking and manufacturing of cocaine, and association to 
commit crime. 
  The judges issued an arrest warrant against the eight people 
who are still at large. The Ministry of Government, through its 
specialized organizations, is ordered to catch them. 
  The writ of indictment was forwarded to the La Paz Superior 
Court for approval, according to current legal dispositions. 
  Antidrug judge Justino Ugarte expressed satisfaction over 
the 
2d. Court decision and said the Superior Court must ratify the 
measures. 
  "The Superior Criminal Court must approve the indictment 
issued by the antidrug judges who filed the accusation based on 
evidence of involvement," the criminal prosecutor said. 
  Beside dismantling three trafficking organizations, 
"Operation Trebol" allowed the seizure of assets estimated at 
several hundred thousand of dollars. 
  The following properties were seized in Santa Cruz: 
properties on Mutualista Avenue and Paragua Street, at 605 
Cotoca Canal, at Km 12 of the old highway to Cochabamba, on the 
corner of the third beltway and Pedro Rivera Mendez Street, at 
the "Suto" condominium, on San Aurelio Avenue, and on Virgen de 
Cotoca Avenue. 
  According to the seizure records, 38 assorted vehicles were 
seized at two urban properties -- Aurelio and Cotoca. 
  The police seized 22 vehicles at "Cotoca Automobile Sales," 
among them trucks, tractors, automobiles, vans, jeeps, and 
pickups. Likewise, 16 vehicles were seized at "San Aurelio 
Automobile Sales." Nine other automobiles were seized in 
different places. 

