BFN 

  [Text] U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is to 
arrive in Israel next Saturday [14 May] for shuttle diplomacy 
between Israel and Damascus. His arrival is due right after the 
Knesset is to vote on the Gaza-Jericho accord. David Ze'ev 
reports: 
  [Begin Ze'ev recording] American and Israeli officials say 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher is scheduled to arrive 
here on Saturday. According to the plan, he will have 24 hours 
during which to have talks with Israeli officials after the 
Sabbath and before the festival of Pentecost begins the night 
after. He would spend the Jewish festival in Damascus. 
  The Prime Minister's Office continues to insist that it does 
not share the optimism of the American secretary of state of the 
new substantive phase in the negotiations with Syria. In fact, 
an official in Jerusalem last night said Prime Minister Yitzhaq 
Rabin has given a cool response to pressing on the Syrian track, 
as Israel still tries to digest the accord signed last week with 
the Palestinians. 
  As the new Palestinian self-rule begins to take effect on 
the 
ground, the Knesset will be requested to give its endorsement. 
Prime Minister Rabin is expected to ask the cabinet secretary 
today to present the agreements to the parliament. But because 
of the Histadrut election, the house will not meet Tuesday [10 
May], and the debate is not expected until Wednesday. The 
government has the numbers to prevail. The debate before the 
vote will be a long one. Knesset Speaker Shevah Weiss' office 
said last night he supports giving all 120 members of the house 
the opportunity to speak. The Wednesday session in the plenum 
is being rescheduled to start earlier in the day than originally 
planned, but still the estimate is that the second day of the 
debate on Thursday will last until late into the night if not 
Friday morning, and then the vote will take place. 
  The speaker makes the point that the Knesset vote is not 
actually binding on the government, but that it is taking place 
based on the precedent established by the Camp David accords 
with Egypt and followed last September when the Knesset approved 
the declaration of principles with the PLO. [end recording] 
  Prime Minister Rabin says Israel is interested in getting 
its 
troops out of the Gaza Strip, but that the withdrawal must be 
carried out in an orderly fashion. The premier said the 
timetable of the pullout will be determined based on 
arrangements worked out between working groups of the two sides. 
Rabin was responding to a Qol Yisra'el reporter's question at a 
Histadrut election rally in Beersheba. 

