Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Economics Division. Subsidies will be paid in the 
nation's Second Five-Year Economic Development Plan to producers 
and buyers of housing who conform to the regulations of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Construction. 
  These subsidies will be direct and will constitute 6 to 10 
percent of the facilities received from banks for building or 
buying housing. 
  The minister of housing and urban construction said these 
subsidies will total 1,314 billion rials during the Second 
Five-Year Plan. 
  Engineer 'Abbas Ahmad-Akhundi, speaking yesterday to a group 
of reporters, added: The rate for the banking facilities 
received for housing in the Second Five-Year Plan and in next 
year's budget is 15 percent, and this rate will be the same for 
both large and small units. 
  He said: Based on the Second Five-Year Plan, the ceiling on 
subsidies for mass builders who build housing for teachers and 
those who have sacrificed will be 10 percent. 
  An 8-percent rate will be given to other government mass 
builders and a 6-percent rate will be given to individuals 
undertaking housing construction, provided that regulations are 
observed. 
  Akhundi mentioned the policy of increasing rental housing 
units in the year 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] as one of 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Construction's programs. He 
added: Low-cost capital will be provided to individuals who 
build rental units or rental purchase units. 
  He discussed the conditions for giving subsidies to those 
who 
build housing units. He said: As in the First Five-Year Plan, in 
the Second Five-Year Plan land will be transferred at the 
finished cost. The new policy of paying direct subsidies applies 
both to the builder and the user of housing. 
  Continuing, Akhundi added: In the Second Five-Year Plan, 
means will be given through the creation of housing savings 
funds to individuals who have accounts in these funds. To solve 
the housing problem, the government intends to mobilize low-cost 
capital resources to minimize the cost of completion. 
  He discussed the ministry's policy to expedite activities in 
the new cities. He said: To carry out the work of preparation 
and infrastructure installations in the industrial cities, we 
will support private sector capital. Of course, the relevant 
costs will still be obtained from the applicants. 
  Akhundi discussed the production of standard construction 
materials. He said: In the Second Five-Year Plan this ministry's 
Center for Construction and Housing has been required to obtain 
samples from units producing construction materials and to 
approve or not approve the products from the aforementioned 
units, and violators will be dealt with in accordance with 
regulations. 
  He explained: In the Second Five-Year Plan the policy to 
decrease foundation size, to produce mass housing, to support 
the low-income classes and to improve rural housing is on the 
government's agenda. 
  Likewise the Ownership and Rental Law will be amended with 
the goal of further spreading the culture of renting. 

