BFN 

<F P=106> ["ay"-signed report: "Economic and Political Integration Is </F>
Being Pushed Systematically"] 
  [Text] Duesseldorf, 5 May -- Before the end of this year, 
Latvia intends to begin talks with Brussels on membership within 
the European Union. The head of government, Valdis Birkavs, has 
staked great hopes on the German Presidency. He told 
HANDELSBLATT that he believes he enjoys "a certain sympathy in 
Germany." 
  Birkavs also considers the country's further integration 
into 
Western Europe to be a demonstration of political stability. 
Following agreement with Russia on the definitive troop 
withdrawal, which was sealed in April and May this year, 
European policy has been given priority again. In June, the 
free trade agreement with the European Union will be initialed; 
early next year, an association or partnership status with the 
Western European Union [WEU] will be on the agenda, "and then we 
will go ahead with the EU negotiations." At the same time, 
talks are being held on Latvia's GATT membership. 
  Birkavs says that the free trade agreements, on which talks 
are currently being held between Brussels and the three Baltic 
states -- Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania -- are not fully in 
line with the agreements Brussels concluded with other Eastern 
European reform states. "For us, agricultural and textile 
exports, which are critical issues, take precedence." Both are 
aspects that in the agreements with Eastern Europe were not 
solved to the reform states' satisfaction. "Textile exports in 
particular are, for us Latvians, quite sensitive points. Even 
the Soviets used the textile sector in Latvia as a political 
lever. On the one hand, they forced the development of a 
personnel-intensive textile production, and then brought Asian 
and Russian labor to Latvia." Following the collapse of the 
Russian market, Latvia now has such export capacities, but also 
sees itself confronted with Western European import quotas, says 
Birkavs. 
  It is true that the negotiations with the European Union on 
accession could be held in parallel with those of Estonia and 
Lithuania, but according to Birkavs, they do not have to lead to 
identical results. Whereas Estonia is seeking a transition 
period of four years, Lithuania is considering an adjustment 
period of six years: "We in Latvia can well do without a 
transition period, because we have advanced our economic reform 
most consistently." This concerns not only the development of 
administrative market economy structures, but also many 
economically relevant areas. The privatization of state-run 
companies is to be completed within two years. Two-thirds of 
all production capacities will then be in private hands, while 
some parts of the energy sector (in particular gas production), 
the transport sector, and telecommunications will remain under 
public control. Inflation has been decreased to an annual rate 
of 15 percent, the time of a decline of GDP is definitely over. 
This year, a growth of 5 percent in real terms has been 
predicted. Even the capital market is in excellent shape, owing 
to a high influx of capital. However, the latter is not only 
attributable to the confidence of Western countries favoring 
investment in Latvia. It is largely also a Zhirinovskiy effect 
-- named after the Russian nationalist after whose election 
victory rich Russians safely deposited their money in Latvia. 
This apparently constitutes only a moral problem for Latvia -- 
"our borders are open, everyone can invest his money here." 
  Despite assessments in Western Europe, the "Baltic market" 
-- 
meaning political and economic cooperation with Estonia and 
Lithuania -- is functioning ever better and, surprisingly, 
"above all, since in Lithuania the socialists have returned to 
government." In September, the completion of the Common Market 
was agreed upon ("We will have to wait several months to see how 
it works"), customs were abolished, monetary policies will be 
aligned, energy cooperation has been deepened, and political 
coordination in the scope of the Baltic Council of Ministers has 
been improved. Birkavs admits that for the first time following 
independence, there have been problems and delays in Baltic 
cooperation, "but we are understanding one another increasingly 
more." 

