BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special Feature" by reporter Lin Ying (2651 7751): </F>
"Mainland Provinces Preparing To Build Nuclear Plants"] 
  [Text] Hong Kong, 18 May (ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE) -- Since 
Zhejiang's Qinshan nuclear power station and Guangdong's Daya 
Bay nuclear power station went into operation, the Beijing 
authorities have started preparations for more nuclear plants to 
be built across the country by the end of this century and early 
next century so as to alleviate the country's energy shortage. 
It has been learned that while Zhejiang and Guangdong are 
preparing at the moment to build their second nuclear plants, 
Fujian, Jiangxi, Jiangsu, Liaoning, Shandong, Hainan, and some 
other provinces also are making preliminary preparations for 
building their own nuclear plants. Moreover, provinces like 
Jilin, Sichuan, and Heilongjiang already are conducting 
feasibility studies for nuclear energy development. It has been 
learned that as the country has only limited construction funds, 
the state's departments concerned are expected to invite 
overseas investment and foreign funds to help with the country's 
nuclear development. 
  Over the past few years, the country has witnessed rapid 
industrial and commercial development. Nonetheless, slow energy 
development and a 20-some percent shortage of electrical energy 
supply in the country has impeded the nationwide economic growth 
to some extent. In order to meet the growing demand for 
electrical energy and to guarantee a sufficient electrical 
energy supply across the country, apart from building more 
thermal power and hydropower stations, the authorities also are 
determined to speed up the country's nuclear energy development, 
as this causes less pollution. In accordance with the state 
plan, the country's electrical energy production will have 
reached 300 million kwh by the year 2000, of which nuclear 
energy production will account for some 20 million kwh. 
  It has been learned that since the two 0.9 million kwh 
generating sets installed at the Daya Bay nuclear power station 
went into operation, Guangdong has decided to build its second 
nuclear power station in Lingao, north of Daya Bay, and a third 
one in Yangjiang. Construction of the Lingao and Yangjiang 
nuclear power stations is scheduled to be completed around the 
year 2002. The two nuclear power stations are to have four and 
six generating sets, respectively. By the year 2002, 
Guangdong's three nuclear power stations are expected to have a 
combined installed capacity of 10 million kwh, thus basically 
meeting the province's demand for electrical energy. 
  In Zhejiang, a 0.3 million kwh generating set installed in 
the Qinshan nuclear power station during the first-phase 
construction, has gone into operation. Now two other 0.6 
million kwh generating sets are being installed as well. 
Second-phase construction at the Qinshan nuclear power station 
has begun. The two new generating sets are scheduled to go into 
operation in 1996. Zhejiang has also decided to build two 2 
million kwh nuclear power stations along its coastline, in 
Sanmen Bay and Leqing, respectively. They are scheduled to go 
into operation by the turn of the century. 
  Moreover, a number of provinces with conditions for nuclear 
energy development are also preparing to build nuclear plants. 
For instance, Fujian is planning to build a nuclear plant in 
Shanqian township in Huian County, at the mouth of Quanzhou Bay. 
The nuclear power station will have six 0.9-million kwh 
generating sets, with a combined installed capacity of 5.4 
million kwh when its three-phase construction is completed. The 
plant is to be installed with two generating sets when its 
first-phase construction is completed early next century. 
  In addition, Jiangxi also has decided to build a nuclear 
plant with an installed capacity of 3.6 million kwh on Maoziding 
Mountain in Guze County of Jiujiang City. Hainan Province 
currently is seeking a site on which to build a nuclear power 
station, and is conducting feasibility studies regarding the 
first-phase construction of a 0.3 million kwh generating set. 
Liaoning Province has decided to build a nuclear plant with an 
installed capacity of 1 million kwh in Wentuozi. Jiangsu, 
Shandong, and some other provinces also are conducting 
feasibility studies for building nuclear power stations, and are 
expected to build nuclear power stations one after another in 
the near future. 
  It has been learned that apart from inviting urgently 
needed funds for its nuclear development from some foreign 
countries and regions, the country still will try to raise most 
of the funds it needs for this purpose in cooperation with the 
local departments concerned. This is why the Beijing 
authorities have decided to set up a funds rotation mechanism 
for nuclear development, with an eye to guaranteeing a continued 
supply of funds for the country's nuclear development. Minister 
of Power Industry Shi Dazhen pointed out that under the proposed 
funds rotation mechanism for nuclear development, after a 
nuclear power station is built and goes into operation, the 
state will not try to collect its profits. Instead, the plant's 
profits will be used to build other nuclear power stations so 
that more such stations can be built across the country. The 
nuclear power station is allowed to divert as much as 2.3 
billion yuan of profits to other nuclear stations under 
construction so that more provinces will be able to build 
nuclear power stations. 
  Guangdong's Daya Bay nuclear power station has been 
installed 
with French advanced compressed-water reactors [ya shui shi fan 
ying dui 1090 3055 1709 0646 2019 1018]. In the future, the 
country is likely to continue purchasing French equipment for 
its nuclear plants. However, as the Shanghai-made nuclear 
reactors installed at the Qinshan nuclear power station have 
proven to be perfectly reliable and efficient, the country is 
more likely to use more domestically manufactured equipment for 
its nuclear plants. As a result, Shanghai certainly will become 
the country's nuclear equipment supply base. 

