BFN 

  [Text] One of the three policemen arrested for alleged 
involvement in drug trafficking is the leader of the network 
here of the 14-K drug syndicate, a Manila police officer said 
yesterday. 
  Senior Inspector Lucio Margallo IV, chief of the Manila 
Police Narcotics Division, said SP04 Bonifacio Sangalang, one of 
the three arrested policemen, is "the biggest distributor of 
drugs in Manila." 
  He said Sangalang's group has connections with the 14-K gang 
of Taiwan and the Yakuza gang based in Japan. 
  Sangalang was arrested Wednesday night in front of his house 
in Taytay, Rizal. Sangalang, who had tried to flee, was 
carrying P1.5 million [Philippine pesos] worth of valuables and 
at least P2 million in cash. 
  Also arrested for their alleged involvement in the drug ring 
were SP01 Victor Garcia and Inspector Guillermo Villacorta. 
  Senior Supt. Hermogenes Ebdane, Manila police chief, said 
the 
three will be charged with conspiracy in the importation of 
prohibited drugs. 
  The police are also preparing administrative charges which 
could lead to the policemen's dismissal from the service. 
  Their arrest came after the police Wednesday launched 
"Operation Japayuki" and confiscated 15 kilos of hashish, worth 
about P6 million. 
  The operation started with the confiscation of the drugs at 
Pier 5 of the South Harbor, Manila where the ship carrying the 
goods, the MV Eastern Polaris, was docked. 
  The drug confiscated by the police was reported to have come 
from Japan. 
  Meanwhile, the police tagged two foreigners--a certain S.P. 
Kam of Taiwan and Itchiro Hanada of Japan--as the foreign 
contact persons of the international drug ring. The two, who 
are said to be in the country, are now the subject of a police 
manhunt. 
  The police said the drug taken from the group was hashish or 
"concentrated sativa." 
  Concentrated sativa, believed to be 10 times stronger than 
marijuana, is made up of resin extracted from the flower 
clusters and top leaves of the hemp plant cannabis sativa. 

