Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 4 Jan (MENA)--Afghan Ambassador in Cairo 
Mohammad Sadeq Saljuqi has stated that yesterday he received a 
phone message from Afghan President Borhanoddin Rabbani to 
convey to President Husni Mubarak on the situation in 
Afghanistan, which began to return to normal today. At a news 
conference at the Afghan Embassy in Cairo at noon today, he said 
the message explains the scale of the coup scheme hatched by the 
coalition of Prime Minister Golboddin Hekmatyar, communist 
leader General 'Abdol Rashid Dostam, and former Soviet agent 
Mahmud Barialay to seize power. 
  Ambassador Saljuqi said that on 1 January, Hekmatyar fired 
thousands of missiles at Kabul to support and protect the 
communists and Dostam's militiamen, causing heavy losses in 
Kabul. He said that according to reports from Kabul today, the 
state forces are completely in control and have forced the 
communist coalition forces to retreat from the areas they 
controlled before the offensive. He stressed that Kabul Airport 
has been purged of communist elements after they suffered heavy 
losses--200 dead, 300 captured, and 12 tanks seized. He 
asserted that the Mazar-e Sharif airport has been put under 
control. The northern areas of the Qeysar, (Sherghan), and 
Mazar-e Sharif are being purged. He pointed out that President 
Rabbani has declared jihad against the communists and their 
allies. The Afghan ambassador categorically denied that 
President Rabbani had fled abroad and stressed that he did not 
leave Kabul. Ambassador Saljuqi said the perpetrators of the 
coup have split and fled and specific areas are being purged. 
  On a call by writers and thinkers for the Islamic Conference 
Organization to intercede to establish stability in Afghanistan, 
Saljuqi said there is a dispute between a legitimate government 
and elements opposed to the government, so the situation does 
not require intercession by any friendly party. He noted that 
Pakistan and Iran expressed readiness to help keep the elements 
in check. He said Afghanistan accuses no party regarding the 
funding of these elements, but he noted the country's 
deteriorating economy. He said Afghanistan is suffering 
starvation and is in dire need of food aid in particular. He 
noted that the Afghan Government appealed to the international 
community and friendly countries to provide food aid. 

