Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, Jan 14 (YONHAP) -- Just when the country 
appeared to have run out of hot political issues, drinking water 
contaminated with cancer-causing chemicals gushed out of faucets 
in households in Pusan and other cities along the Naktong River, 
making big waves among government leaders and politicians. 
  President Kim Yong-sam promised Friday that his 
administration will work out short- and long-term measures to 
clean up the country's water resources so that all citizens are 
able to drink safe and clean water. 
  ``Government officials should not just follow the inertia of 
the past administrations, but tell environmental and health 
problems to the citizenry,'' he said, apparently blaming 
previous administrations for today's water pollution. 
  The people, for their part, should actively contribute to 
national efforts to clean up water resources by not dumping 
garbage and liquid waste into rivers, Kim said. 
  Ruling and opposition parties, meanwhile, hastily dispatched 
fact-finding missions to South Kyongsang Province while forming 
party committees to debate the problem. 
  They sharply criticized the administration for leaving the 
state of pollution in the Naktong River as it is today. 
  Both the ruling Democratic Liberal Party [DLP] and main 
opposition Democratic Party [DP] failed, however, to come up 
with any suggestion or alternative action for the administration 
to take immediately. 
  It was the stench emanating from the tap water in homes in 
Pusan and other cities in lower South Kyongsang Province, and 
complaints by citizens that alerted government officials to look 
into the woeful state of pollution of the Naktong River earlier 
this week. 
  Showing the situation to be even worse than feared, 
government officials announced Thursday that they had found 
traces of cancer-causing benzene and other chemicals in the 
Naktong River, from which tap water is drawn, raising grave 
concern among people in the area. 
  The parties have decided that the National Assembly Health 
and Social Affairs Committee will hold a hearing Saturday to 
grill the responsible government officials and try to work out 
measures to clean up the mess. 
  The DLP convened an unscheduled meeting of party postholders 
Friday morning and discussed the problem but could not make any 
concrete suggestion to the government. 
  ``I have nothing to announce,'' DLP spokesman Ha Sun-pong 
said after the meeting. ``We just exchanged our concerns.'' 
  ``Right now, the administration is working on measures among 
the ministries concerned,'' he said. ``The party will make an 
overall and comprehensive action plan after listening to them.'' 
  DLP Secretary-general Mun Chong-su acknowledged that the 
government and ruling party should have done something about the 
Naktong River pollution three years ago, when an industrial 
company was caught dumping phenol into the river. 
  The DLP is resolved, he said, to support the government in 
its efforts to clean up pollution not only in the Naktong but 
all the rivers in the country. 
  The Democratic Party, calling the Naktong River pollution 
the 
worst man-made disaster in the nation's history, demanded that 
the government take fundamental action. 
  ``Some 10 million people in southern South Kyongsang 
Province 
have been drinking water contaminated by cancer-causing 
chemicals,'' DP spokesman Pak Chi-won said. 
  ``The government should trace those responsible for the 
contamination and arrest them immediately while making efforts 
to prevent further pollution,'' he said. 
  DP members of the Health and Social Affairs Committee will 
use the findings of a party investigation team sent down to the 
area Thursday in questioning government officials. 
  The opposition party, taking the position that the Naktong 
River ``disaster'' is a direct result of a lack of government 
environmental measures and lack of supervision, pressed again 
its demand for an extraordinary assembly session in January. 

