Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on crime, investigations, trials, sentencings, and other 
judicial- related activities in the PRC during the period 15-31 
January. The source and mode of processing are given in 
parentheses at the end of each entry. 
  As evidenced by the stories listed below, during the month 
PRC crime reportage focused on robbery, economic crime, and 
corruption. 
<H6>  CENTRAL </H6>
  In accordance with the Public Security Ministry's 
instruction 
to "do a good job in security work during the New Year and 
Spring Festival season and to ensure that the broad masses can 
spend an untroubled and harmonious holiday" in light of their 
respective local situations, the public security authorities in 
various localities have embarked on a "winter offensive" against 
crime with the theme of "cracking major cases and seizing 
escaped criminals." 
  Since the offensive began, Beijing Municipality, Shanghai 
Municipality, and Hubei Province alone have cracked 7,638 
various security and criminal cases, have arrested 6,472 
criminal offenders of all kinds, have smashed 781 criminal 
syndicates, and have seized illegally obtained money and goods 
worth more than 1.6 million yuan. 
  Beginning on 12 November last year, the public security 
bureau of Xian City, Shaanxi Province, carried out consecutive 
operations for over 10 days in a row and smashed a syndicate of 
14 criminals, headed by Liu Qiang and Liu Dongwei, who had been 
robbing taxi drivers at knifepoint. The public security bureau 
of Anshan City, Liaoning Province, solved an extremely large 
case of stolen gold and prevented state losses of nearly 200,000 
yuan. The Shanghai Municipal public security bureau solved a 
heinous case of robbery and homicide which had remained unsolved 
for three years by catching the arch-criminals Wang Xiaolong and 
Zhao Guofa. (Beijing RENMIN RIBAO in Chinese 8 Jan 94 p 1) 
  Four members of a gang of masked burglars armed with knives, 
all unemployed young men from Zhejiang Province, were seized in 
Beijing while committing a robbery on 15 January. They are 
believed to be responsible for three other cases of burglary 
which occurred during the 11-14 January period, involving a 
total value of more than 100,000 yuan. The police are rounding 
up other members of the gang who are still at large. (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 0954 GMT 17 Jan 94) 
  A few days ago, the Shenzhen public security authorities 
smashed a gang that had been robbing Hong Kong container trucks. 
Three individuals were arrested during the operation. While 
waiting for customs clearance, many Hong Kong truck drivers pull 
up alongside roads near check points and sleep overnight in 
their cabs, where they are easy prey for the gang because the 
appropriate security measures have not been taken. 
  The Guangzhou Rail Transport Intermediate People's Court 
held 
rallies in Guangzhou, Changsha, Huaihua, and Hengyang to 
pronounce sentences on a group of individuals convicted of 
crimes committed on trains. Eighteen received death sentences, 
while the remaining 28 received death sentences with reprieve, 
life imprisonment, or jail terms of various lengths. The 
individuals were all convicted of robbing train passengers, some 
of hassling trains along certain railways, some of stealing 
passengers' property or train cargo, and some of murdering 
station guards. Between 1989 and 1992, Sun Changshan and 10 
others on 42 occasions stole train passengers' property, worth a 
total of 730,000 yuan, on the Zhejiang-Jiangxi, 
Beijing-Guangdong, Hunan-Guizhou, and Beijing-Shanghai railways. 
All 11 were sentenced to death. (Hong Kong HSIN WAN PAO in 
Chinese 24 Jan 94) 
  On 24 January, the PEOPLE'S COURT NEWS reported that the PRC 
authorities have executed eight people in Guizhou and Sichuan 
Provinces for drug smuggling and train robbery. Yang Cangrong 
and Zhou Yu, both from Guizhou, were arrested in the southern 
city of Guangzhou while trying to sell 757 grams of heroin which 
they had purchased in Vietnam. Qin Changgui and Yang Lin, also 
from Guizhou, were arrested for the possession of 3.9 kg and 3.4 
kg of opium respectively, which they had purchased in Yunnan 
Province. All four were executed in Guizhou earlier this month. 
Four members of a gang implicated in 16 train robberies were 
executed in Sichuan. (Hong Kong AFP in English 1029 GMT 24 Jan 
94) 
  On 24 January, the Yunnan Frontier Defense Forces of the 
Armed police held a commendation meeting on the struggle against 
the smuggling of guns and drugs in Kunming. At the meeting, it 
was announced that the Yunnan and Guangxi Frontier Defense 
Forces had received a Collective Award of Merit for their 
"remarkable results" in the struggle against gun and drug 
smuggling. Since the campaign against gun and drug smuggling 
began in June 1993, the Yunnan Frontier Defense Headquarters has 
cracked a total of 218 gun-smuggling cases, seizing 119 military 
guns, 3,582 grenades, and 4,605 rounds of ammunition, and has 
solved 596 drug-trafficking cases, seizing 427.477 kg of heroin 
and 283.77 kg of opium. The Guangxi Frontier Defense 
Headquarters has solved a total of 100 gun- smuggling cases, 
capturing 208 military guns, 148 grenades, and 5,722 rounds of 
ammunition, and has cracked 39 drug-trafficking cases, seizing 
4.849 kg of heroin and 64.537 kg of opium. (Beijing GUANGMING 
RIBAO in Chinese 25 Jan 94) 
  The customs authorities in five coastal provinces, 
Guangdong, 
Fujian, Zhejiang, Guangxi, and Hainan achieved marked results in 
their antismuggling activity last year, completely cracking 210 
maritime smuggling cases and seizing goods worth 493.86 million 
yuan, an increase of 40.6 percent over the previous year. The 
smuggled goods included cars, cigarettes, color television sets, 
and air conditioners. Car smuggling was prevalent on the seas 
of western Guangdong and Guangxi last year, while cigarettes 
were the main smuggled goods along the coastline of Fujian and 
Zhejiang. Some mainland ships were involved in smuggling under 
the guise of normal freight transportation activity. (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1416 GMT 31 Jan 94) 
<H6>  PROVINCIAL </H6>
<H5>  Beijing </H5>
  The ninth plenary meeting of the capital's Committee for the 
Comprehensive Control of Public Order and Security has announced 
that the capital city has made major breakthroughs in three 
aspects of the "severe crackdown" against crime in 1993. 
  --A seven-member armed murderer gang was seized in the 
investigation of the taxi driver murder case on 31 January, and 
10 major and serious cases were cracked at the same time. Two 
Wuyi pistols and more than 100 bullets were seized. As a 
result, all the cases of armed crime that had occurred in 
Beijing in recent years were completely solved. Under the 
unified command of the Ministry of Public Security, the 
Municipal Public Security Bureau and the other departments 
concerned joined hands in solving serious robberies on 
international trains and arrested all the criminals in one move, 
restoring order on international trains. 
  --A number of major cases of economic fraud were solved, 
recovering property and cash worth 500 million yuan. In 
cooperation with Hebei Province, a case in which a criminal had 
been using the bank's reserve letter of credit to embezzle $10 
billion was cracked. Other major cases that were solved include 
the fraud case in which Zhang Xiangyu and other people illegally 
speculated in foreign exchange valued at 750 million yuan by 
falsely introducing "foreign investors," the fraud case in which 
Shang Yubin and other people obtained several hundred million 
yuan and $100 million of foreign currency through deceit and 
trickery, and the case in which Deng Fusen and other individuals 
gained 87,280 yuan by signing false steel sale contracts. 
(Beijing FAZHI RIBAO in Chinese 7 Jan 94 p 2) 
  The BEIJING EVENING NEWS on 25 January reported that six 
criminals found guilty of crimes ranging from rape to murder 
were executed in Beijing on 25 January. Another 12 individuals 
were sentenced to death for murder, armed robbery, and fraud, 
but the paper did not report when the sentences would be carried 
out. (Hong Kong AFP in English 1043 GMT 25 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Fujian </H5>
  Since last year, the Fujian Armed Police Headquarters has 
been cracking down on criminals who impersonate armed police 
officers in order to extort money from shops, restaurants, and 
bars and detain people under the pretense of checking identity 
cards or who use fake armed police driving licenses to carry out 
criminal activities. The authorities have discovered over 20 
"bogus armed policemen" and four bogus armed police driving 
licenses. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 0752 12 Jan 
94) 
  Today, the Higher People's Court of Fujian Province 
announced 
final sentences and second-trial sentences for 12 serious 
criminals accused of corruption and taking bribes. Six of them 
were sentenced to death with a two-year reprieve, and two were 
sentenced to life imprisonment. The 12 criminals were 
separately involved in seven major corruption cases and one 
bribe-taking case in eight prefectures and cities. A former 
section chief of the Fujian Foreign Trade Center was sentenced 
to death for embezzling $2.74 million and 640,000 yuan of public 
money. According to the president of the Provincial Higher 
People's Court, between August and December last year, his court 
handled and concluded 568 economic criminal cases and tried 888 
accused people. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1000 
GMT 15 Jan 94) 
  The FUJIAN LEGAL NEWS, in its issue received in Hong Kong on 
24 January, reported that six managers and employees of state 
enterprises in southeastern Fujian Province have been condemned 
to death for accepting bribes totalling millions of dollars. A 
Fujian high court also condemned six others accused of 
corruption to jail terms, in two cases to life in prison. (Hong 
Kong AFP in English 0956 GMT 24 Jan 94) 
  Last year the frontier departments in Fujian's coastal areas 
cracked 86 cases of smuggling human cargo involving a total of 
1,408 people, arrested 294 organizers and transporters, and 
received, examined, and handled 3,325 repatriated illegal 
immigrants. In the meantime, they also seized 47 cases of 
smuggling goods involving a total of 197 people and smuggled 
goods worth more than 30 million yuan. They cracked six cases 
of manufacturing and trafficking in drugs and seized 38.3 kg of 
drugs. (Fuzhou Fujian People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 
GMT 25 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Gansu </H5>
  On 28 December, the People's Courts of the Chengguan, 
Chilihe, Anning, and Xigu Districts of Lanzhou City held a joint 
meeting on arrests and sentences and sentenced to death 12 
criminals involved in a series of cases. After the meeting, the 
12 criminals -- Ma Jianxin, Meng Xiaofeng, He Zaoqiang, Liu 
Zhuqing, Li Zhiwei, Song Zonghuan, Chen Baoren, Wang Ligang, 
Zhang Jinbao, Feng Hongjun, Li Jianghai, and Mayiliangxi -- were 
escorted to the execution ground, where they were shot. Some of 
them had perpetrated violence, while others had murdered for 
revenge. Some traveled from place to place for purposes of 
theft, some robbed and killed people in public, and still others 
trafficked drugs. At the meeting, the courts also sentenced 43 
criminals to prison, and the public security authorities 
announced the arrest of 84 criminals. (Lanzhou GANSU RIBAO in 
Chinese 30 Dec 93 p 1) 
  On 28 December, the Lanzhou Intermediate People's Court 
handed down at first hearing death sentences on two embezzlers 
and two drug traffickers and deprived them of political rights 
for the rest of their lives. The four convicts were charged for 
embezzling public funds amounting to nearly 900,000 yuan and for 
trafficking over 600 grams of heroin. (Lanzhou GANSU RIBAO in 
Chinese 30 Dec 93 p 1) 
<H5>  Guangdong </H5>
  The number of passengers from various localities using 
Guangzhou's railway and highway facilities this spring is 
expected to exceed 10 million. To cope with the influx, 
Guangzhou City's public security authorities have sent 200 
additional policemen to enforce law and carry out all-weather 
monitoring and control in the district containing the railway 
station and the highway transportation terminal since the middle 
of December. Over the past few days, policemen have neutralized 
three criminal gangs and arrested 16 lawbreakers. (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1134 GMT 9 Jan 94) 
  The authorities have been cracking down on robberies along 
the Guangzhou-Shantou highway. The economic development of 
recent years has meant that highway transportation has become 
busier and highway robberies have become more prevalent. In 
Yangxi County last year, 44 highway robbers were arrested -- 
four of whom were executed -- and 99 highway robbery cases were 
solved, of which 89 could be considered major. Most highway 
robbers are young people approximately 20 years old. (Guangzhou 
Guangdong People's Radio Network in Mandarin 1000 GMT 15 Jan 94) 
  In Guangzhou's Tianhe sports center today, the Guangzhou 
City 
Public Security Bureau's traffic police corps held a meeting on 
curbing highway and railway robberies to usher in the Spring 
Festival. Zhang Liansheng, the officer in charge of the traffic 
police corps, made a speech expressing their determination to 
improve traffic order, to severely crack down on highway and 
railway robberies, and to create a safe and smooth traffic 
environment for spring transportation so that the people will be 
able to spend the spring festival safely and harmoniously. 
During the spring transportation season, the Guangzhou City 
traffic police will take strong measures to strengthen road 
supervision, to check violations of traffic regulations, to 
clear crowded traffic lanes, to cooperate with the relevant 
departments in curbing highway and railway robberies, and to a 
ensure safe and smooth traffic environment for spring 
transportation. (Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 0400 GMT 17 Jan 94) 
  The Guangzhou public security departments cracked over 
33,000 
criminal cases last year, of which 14,000 were major ones, 
representing increases of 24 and 45 percent respectively over 
the previous year. In 1993, the public security departments 
wiped out over 5,200 crime syndicates, rounded up over 36,000 
criminal offenders, and seized over 200 vehicles, over 1,100 
motorcycles, and 310 million yuan worth of stolen goods, 
including gold and silver ornaments and home electrical 
appliances. They also seized over 200 firearms of various 
types, over 1000 rounds of ammunition, and over 130 kg of drugs. 
(Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1130 GMT 24 Jan 94) 
  Zhaoqing City held a sentencing rally yesterday, at which 
the 
four individuals who had murdered Zhang Yaoxin were executed. 
On 23 February last year, Zhang Yaoxin, a security guard from 
the Yuejiang Policing Unit of Duanzhou Public Security 
Subbureau, was killed by a gang of Guangxi criminals while on 
duty. The Zhaoqing Intermediate People's Court sentenced Yao 
Qinghui, Wei Lining, Zhang Zegan, and Luo Ming to death for 
murder with intent and sentenced Wei Kecheng to life 
imprisonment. The four appealed to the Provincial High Court, 
which upheld up the sentences at the second trial and ordered 
the Zhaoqing Intermediate People's Court to carry them out. 
(Guangzhou NANFANG RIBAO in Chinese 25 Jan 94) 
  On the morning of 26 January, the Guangzhou City 
Intermediate 
People's Court held a mass rally to sentence 10 economic 
criminals. The deputy director of the hi-tech development 
section of the South China branch of the China Electronics 
Import and Export Corporation was sentenced to 14 years' 
imprisonment for embezzling public money and accepting a bribe. 
The director of the Guangzhou automobile factory received the 
severe sentence of 11 years' imprisonment for accepting a bribe 
of 55,000 yuan because he refused to confess his crime. 
(Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio Network in Mandarin 0400 
GMT 26 Jan 94) 
  Guangzhou City Intermediate Court this morning sentenced 10 
criminals on corruption and bribery charges; among them, three 
were cadres with the rank of deputy department head who were 
prosecuted during last year's anticorruption drive. Xiao 
Changyu, the former manager of Guangzhou City's Baiyun District 
Down Processing Factory, who embezzled a large amount of public 
funds from 1985 to 1991, was sentenced to death. (Hong Kong TA 
KUNG PAO in Chinese 27 Jan 94 p 6) 
  Today, Shenzhen City Intermediate Court held a sentencing 
meeting in Longgang, a town in which many road robberies have 
taken place. The meeting was attended by 15,000 people. Among 
the 21 criminals who had committed robbery and rape, five were 
sentenced to death, four were sentenced to death with reprieve, 
and 12 were sentenced to prison. (Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO in 
Chinese 27 Jan 94 p 6) 
  A number of offenders who had committed serious crimes were 
severely punished today. This represents the city courts' first 
large-scale crackdown this year. 
  This morning, mass rallies to pronounce judgments on 
criminals involved in serious cases were held simultaneously in 
Guangzhou's eight districts -- Liwan, Haizhu, Fangchun, Yuexiu, 
Dongshan, Baiyun, Tianhe, and Huangpu -- as well as in the 
cities of Huadu and Fanyu, at which 30 criminals involved in 19 
major cases of robbery, murder, theft, and illegal trading of 
guns and munitions were sentenced to death with the approval of 
the upper-level courts. They were escorted to the execution 
grounds immediately after the rallies to be shot. 
  Among the convicts sentenced to death was Lu Guiqiang, who, 
in collaboration with other people, on two occasions illegally 
purchased 10 Soviet-made model 54 military hand guns, 138 rounds 
of ammunition, and two pineapple-type hand grenades from Guangxi 
and other places during January and December 1991 and sold eight 
hand guns and 116 rounds of bullets to people in Guangzhou. In 
addition, Lu also collaborated with others to falsify two forged 
"deposit receipts for the options of savings and fixed 
accounts," purportedly issued by the Industrial and Commercial 
Bank of China Guangzhou Branch. He hurried to savings offices 
in Beijing Lu and other streets to cash 414,000 yuan and divided 
the illicit money with his accomplices. Lu's actions constitute 
the crimes of illegal gun and munitions trading and of 
swindling, so he was sentenced to death and was deprived of his 
political rights for life. 
(Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1149 GMT 27 Jan 94) 
  Shenzhen's Wenjindu Customs cracked a drug-trafficking case 
on 11 January, the first of its kind in 1995. When conducting a 
routine border check on a Hong Kong truck bearing the name of a 
Shenzhen transportation company, customs investigators found 
that the cargo area of the truck was empty, with the exception 
of a travelling bag behind the driver's seat. When the 
officials started to examine the bag, the driver jumped out of 
the truck in an unsuccessful attempt to escape. When the bag 
was opened, 40 bricks of heroin were found inside, weighing 
approximately 14 kg. The case is still under investigation. 
(Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 0943 GMT 28 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Guangxi </H5>
  A recent meeting on anticorruption work in Guangxi announced 
that 11,394 cadres at the county sectional level and above have 
conducted a self-examination of their problems. Of these, 767 
are cadres at the prefectural departmental level, while 37 are 
cadres at the provincial level. Discipline inspection, 
procuratorial, and judicial departments have unearthed 93 major 
cases in Guangxi, and 25 of them are being resolved. In 1993 
these departments received and handled 44,931 cases that were 
reported by the masses, an increase of 112 percent over the 
previous year. (Nanning Guangxi People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 1130 GMT 28 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Guizhou </H5>
  The Seventh Session of the Eighth Guizhou Provincial 
People's 
Congress Standing Committee opened in Guiyang on 19 January to 
examine a bill submitted by Guizhou Governor Chen Shineng on 
removing Guo Zhengmin from the post of provincial public 
security chief. The Guizhou Provincial People's Congress 
Standing Committee announced the decision to remove Guo Zhengmin 
from that post, and Guo has been arrested for taking bribes. 
(Guiyang Guizhou People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 GMT 19 
Jan 94) 
<H5>  Henan </H5>
  The Gongmi City People's Procuratorate recently concluded 
its 
investigation of and cracked a major bribery case, in which Wang 
Yongping, former president of the Gongmi City Branch of the 
People's Construction Bank of China (PCBC), was found to have 
accepted bribes totalling 1.06 million yuan from 29 loan 
application units on 46 separate occasions between April 1992 
and September 1993. Wang Yongping was arrested on 3 November 
1993 and was charged with bribery by the Zhengzhou City People's 
Procuratorate in accordance with the law on 14 January 1994. 
(Zhengzhou Henan People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 GMT 17 
Jan 94) 
  Yesterday morning, the Luoyang City Intermediate People's 
Court and the Zhengzhou City Intermediate People's Court 
simultaneously held in Luoyang and Zhengzhou public sentencing 
rallies, which sentenced eight criminals involved in three major 
economic cases, including one former police officer and five 
former policemen. 
  Guo Yong, former deputy section chief at a public security 
sub- bureau in Luoyang City, was found guilty of collaborating 
with five former policemen in embezzling public funds, accepting 
bribes, and engaging in speculation and profiteering between 
July 1988 and November 1990. He was sentenced to death in 
accordance with the law and was executed with a bullet to the 
head in Luoyang City later that day. Former policemen Shen 
Xianbin and Xiao Jinzhou were found guilty of collaborating with 
Guo Yong in the above case and were sentenced to death with a 
two-year reprieve and were deprived of political rights for life. 
  Former Policeman Wang Hongxi was found guilty of 
collaborating with Guo Yong in the above case, was sentenced to 
life imprisonment, and was deprived of political rights for 
life. Former policemen Xu Lintao and Wei Zhengli were found 
guilty of collaborating with Guo Yong in the above case and were 
sentenced to 10 and six years' imprisonment respectively. 
  Li Zirong, a former cashier in the financial section of 
Zhengzhou City Timber Company, was found guilty of embezzling 
more than 0.56 million yuan and was sentenced to death with a 
two-year reprieve and deprived of political rights for life. Qi 
Gaosheng, a former clerk at Zhuge Credit Cooperative of Yanshi 
County, was found guilty of embezzling 100,000 yuan of public 
funds and was sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment. (Zhengzhou 
Henan People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 GMT 27 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Hubei </H5>
  Since 1992, the Hubei Provincial Discipline Inspection 
Commission, the Supervision Department, the People's 
Procuratorate, and the Taxation Bureau have investigated and 
cracked a number of export tax reimbursement swindling cases and 
have punished a total of 163 people involved in such cases, 
including 80 party members and cadres, of whom 12 were cadres at 
the county or provincial department section level. As a result, 
21 people have been relieved of their posts within the party or 
have been expelled from the party; 48 people have been handed 
over to judicial organs at various levels for investigation and 
punishment, including Zhang Wei, the former chief of Tianmen 
City Taxation Bureau; and a total of 26.29 million yuan in tax 
payments have been recovered across the province. (Wuhan Hubei 
People's Radio Network in Mandarin 1000 GMT 15 Jan 94) 
  This morning, Wuhan City held a public sentencing rally at 
which a total of 10 criminals involved in six cases of 
manufacturing and selling false, counterfeit, and sub-standard 
commodities, including cigarettes, wine, and musk, were given 
prison sentences of up to 20 years. (Wuhan Hubei People's Radio 
Network in Mandarin 1000 GMT 22 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Hunan </H5>
  Following reports of gunshots at the execution ground of the 
Changsha City Intermediate People's Court at approximately 10:00 
on the morning of 24 December, Gao Xihua, a criminal convicted 
of murder with intent, and 13 other criminals involved in 
serious cases were duly punished. Gao Xihua, the former deputy 
manager (at the deputy department director level) of the 
provincial stock company, aged 42, was accused of murdering Zhao 
Bao, the son of a woman with whom he had been living illegally. 
Gao Xihua's son, Gao Shang, was accused of being an accomplice 
to the murder. 
  On 4 December, the Changsha City Intermediate People's Court 
sentenced according to the law Gao Xihua to death for murder 
with intent and deprived him of political rights for life. The 
court sentenced Gao Shang to prison. The two defendants pleaded 
not guilty and lodged an appeal, but the Hunan Provincial Higher 
People's Court reviewed the case and rejected the appeal, 
sustaining the original ruling. 
  Yesterday, the Changsha City Intermediate People's Court 
also 
openly sentenced and carried out the execution of 13 other 
criminals involving in serious cases. The case of murder with 
intent of Zhang Weiyi, a retired worker of the Changsha Plastic 
Packaging Plant, caused a sensation in society. Zhang Weiyi 
"pretended to be insane in an attempt to escape legal 
punishment." Zhang Weiyi's case was also sentenced openly, and 
Zhang was executed. (Changsha HUNAN RIBAO in Chinese 25 Dec 93 
p 1) 
  In 1993, procuratorates throughout Hunan examined and 
handled 
7,789 clues to economic crimes and filed 3,128 cases for 
investigation, of which corruption and bribery cases accounted 
for 58.5 percent. Major and important cases accounted for 51.5 
percent, totaling 1,610 -- the highest percentage in recent 
years. Of these cases, 280 involved more than 100,000 yuan. 
Economic losses of 82 million yuan were recovered during the 
crackdown. (Changsha Hunan People's Radio Network in Mandarin 
2300 GMT 18 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Jilin </H5>
  By the end of last year, law- and discipline-enforcement 
organs in Jilin Province cracked 478 large and important cases 
and retrieved 133.27 million yuan in economic losses on behalf 
of the state. According to statistics, from August to November 
1993, a total of 80 law-breaking and criminal cases committed by 
cadres of party and government organs were investigated and 
punished, in which 36 cadres at and above the county and 
department levels were involved; 31 criminal cases committed by 
judicial cadres were investigated and punished; 19 criminal 
cases committed by cadres of executive departments were 
investigated and punished; and 53 criminal cases committed by 
cadres of departments of economic administration were 
investigated and punished. 
  Xue Jingwen, the vice chairman of the Jilin Provincial 
Federation of Trade Unions, embezzled large amounts of public 
funds and property, took bribes, and led a dissolute life when 
acting as director of the Shixian Paper Mill. Liang Fengzhi, 
secretary of Tumen City CPC Committee, extorted and took 
thousands of cash and high-grade electrical appliances from 
private enterprise owners. Chen Fuchun, deputy head of the Jilin 
City CPC Committee Organization Department, embezzled 30,000 
yuan. Li Cai, former deputy head of the Meihekou City Public 
Security Bureau, took 5,000 yuan in bribes and secretly released 
detained murderers who were on trial. Qi Haijiang, head of the 
Taonan City Taxation Bureau, took thousands of yuan in bribes. 
(Beijing FAZHI RIBAO in Chinese 10 Jan 94 p 1) 
<H5>  Liaoning </H5>
  Gao Mingqiu, former manager of the Industrial and Commercial 
Bank in Benxi City, Liaoning Province, has been sentenced to six 
years' imprisonment for abusing power and seeking illicit gain. 
For collaborating in the same offenses, three deputy managers 
-- Jiang Baofu, Sun Maorong, and Pei Zhirong -- and a number of 
senior officers from the same bank were sentenced to 
imprisonment with reprieve and were expelled from the CPC. 
(Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 0954 GMT 30 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Shaanxi </H5>
  In December, the Xian Government launched a campaign against 
pornographic activities and gambling to purify the cultural 
market before the Spring Festival and to maintain public order. 
The authorities dealt with 46 pornographic publication cases 
involving 93 persons and seized 379 pornographic videotapes, 
17,900 copies of pornographic magazines and other illegal 
publications, 200 packs of obscene playing cards, and a number 
of video machines for showing pornographic videotapes. 
  Sex venues, including videotape shops, karaoke halls, 
pornographic book shops and newsstands, were raided. 
Pornography traders and a number of girls involved in sexual 
activities were taken in by the authorities. An underground 
pornographic bookstore was recently smashed, with the seizure of 
65 bags containing 12,000 obscene and pornographic books of 
various kinds. The Xian Public Security Department cracked down 
on 10 amusement venues and 93 persons were arrested. Nearly 
30,000 sexual video tapes and pornographic magazines were 
burned. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1406 GMT 24 Jan 
94) 
  The Xian City Intermediate People's Court sentenced 18 
economic criminals to death or life imprisonment on the morning 
of 24 January. Liu Huiming, former deputy director of the 
operational section of the Xian City Agricultural Bank, was 
sentenced to death for embezzling public money totaling 6.15 
million yuan; Du Mingxing, a former accountant in the Xibei 
University's financial section, was convicted of embezzling 
180,000 yuan and was sentenced to death with a two-year reprieve 
because of the good behavior he exhibited by confessing his 
crime. (Xian Shaanxi People's Radio Network in Mandarin 0010 
GMT 25 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Xinjiang </H5>
  The Urumqi Intermediate People's Court held a public rally 
this morning to pronounce the death sentence on Feng Xiaojiang 
and eight other criminals who had been found guilty of seriously 
undermining social order. Following the rally, the nine 
criminals -- including murderers, robbers, and rapists -- were 
escorted to the execution grounds, where they were shot in the 
head. The rally was attended by nearly 1,000 people of all 
nationalities in the city. (Urumqi Xinjiang People's Radio 
Network in Mandarin 1600 GMT 28 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Yunnan </H5>
  Police in Yunnan Province smashed 4,174 cases of drug 
trafficking last year, with 6,191 criminals of Chinese or 
foreign nationality arrested. The official in charge of the 
provincial anti-narcotics office said that the police had seized 
3,546 kg of refined drugs, including heroin, a rise of 11 
percent, and 1,062 kg of opium, an increase of 57 percent over 
the previous year, while the number of cases solved last year 
was 14 percent up over 1992, with the number of suspects 
arrested rising by ten percent. The provincial authorities 
helped some 20,000 drug addicts get rid of their drug addiction. 
Yunnan was also involved in international cooperation against 
drug trafficking, including one supported by the United Nations 
which achieved a measure of success. The official added that the 
area under cultivation of opium poppy in the so-called Golden 
Triangle had increased in size in recent years. Drug trafficking 
from beyond the borders of Yunnan has imposed a direct and 
serious threat to the province because the infiltration of drugs 
into the province has become a serious problem. Yunnan will go 
further in strengthening its work in fighting drugs and will try 
its best to stop narcotics from flowing into the province. 
(Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1203 GMT 17 Jan 94) 
  On 19 August 1993, three foreigners holding Maldivian and 
Costa Rican passports cashed more than 600 Westpac Banking 
Corporation traveler's checks, worth a total of some 270,000 
yuan, with various Bank of China money changers in Kunming. The 
numbers of the traveler's checks were found to form a sequence, 
which raised suspicion. When one of the swindlers went back to 
a money changer, he was detained for interrogation, and 
confessed to the police. This syndicate was composed of eight 
Pakistani nationals, five of whom were operating in Kunming at 
the time. 
  After they were arrested, two others flew in from Bangkok 
the 
next day, only to find themselves in a police car upon arrival. 
On 18 September, the boss of the syndicate, Aslam, arrived in 
Shantou, Guangdong Province. On 6 October, he was taken to 
Kunming by the police. Police findings indicate that all the 
traveler's checks held by this syndicate had been stolen in 
Bangkok. They cashed 1,075 of them in Kunming alone, worth 
100,750 Australian dollars. They also were found to be carrying 
British sterling and U.S. dollar traveler's checks, plus eight 
forged passports. On approval of the Supreme People's 
Procuratorate, four members of the gang, including Aslam, were 
officially arrested. The other members were deported and 
refused re-entry for five years. (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in 
Chinese 0951 GMT 29 Jan 94) 

