Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 1 Mar (PL) -- Jose Felipe Machado, governor 
of Venezuela's Cojedes State who is winding up a six-day trip to 
Cuba, today in Havana signed letters of intent with Cuban 
authorities for public health, sports, and construction projects. 
  Machado also signed a document whereby Cojedes State and 
Havana's Rancho Boyeros Municipality became twin cities. 
  The visitor expressed satisfaction with signing, with Cuban 
Vice Health Minister Jorge Antelo, an agreement whereby the 
Cuban family doctor experience will be implemented in Cojedes. 
  This agreement also makes provisions for the exchange of 
bilateral graduate students, scholarships in the field of 
health, advice on hospital matters, and the treatment of 
patients from Cojedes at specialized centers in Cuba. 
  In the area of sports, Cuba will act as an adviser through 
trainers and technicians, while in the area of construction 
there are plans to build low-cost housing in Cojedes based on a 
project developed on the island. 
  The governor said the letters of intent constitute sources 
of 
mutual aid that facilitate regional unity, and he thanked his 
hosts for their hospitality and cooperation throughout his visit. 
  The Venezuelan delegation is made up of Leandro Sosa, 
secretary general of [Cojedes State] government; Filinto Duran, 
adviser and assistant dean of the Latin American University; 
Ramon Rodriguez, head of the Sports Federation; Alfredo Paez, 
president of the Housing Institute, and other well-known figures 
as well. 
  On 26 February Machado was declared an Illustrious Visitor 
of 
Havana by Mayor Pedro Chavez. 
  The delegation toured health centers, the National Sports 
Institute, the Latin American Stadium, the Old Havana Historical 
Center, which UNESCO has declared the cultural property of 
humanity, and other interesting sites. 
  Cojedes State, which is primarily a cattle-raising region, 
has an area of 14,800 km, a population of over 200,000 and its 
capital, San Carlos, is located approximately 260 km southwest 
of Caracas. 

