Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs 
Division. The Majles held an open session yesterday with Hojjat 
ol-Eslam Nateq-Nuri presiding, and Messrs. Hoseyni, Razavi, 
Mokhtari, and Mohammadifar, deputies from the cities of Boyer 
Ahmad, Na'in, Najafabad, and Sanqez and Kolia'i, made pre-agenda 
speeches. Then the Majles went into session. We call to your 
attention the details of the discussion. 
<H5>  Seyyed Mas'ud Hoseyni, Deputy From Kohkiluyeh and Boyer Ahmad </H5>
  The first pre-agenda speaker of the open session of the 
Majles yesterday was Hoseyni from Kohkiluyeh and Boyer Ahmad, 
who offered his congratulations on the birthday of his holiness 
Mahdi and said: It is hoped that this raised flag, divine trust, 
and memento of the pious slave of God will be given by the grand 
leader of the revolution, Imam Khamene'i, to his holiness. 
  He continued: Oppressed humanity has found salvation in the 
model of the divine system of the Islamic revolution and no 
longer accepts injustice and misery and is not afraid of the 
threats of the oppressors and the United States. 
  The speaker also added: The claim of a new order is an 
effort 
to create a global regime on the basis of absolute worldliness 
and the manifestations of materialism and based on the 
inclinations of the criminal United States as the sole master 
and also to unite all the followers of falsehood and world 
devourers against the rule of religion, to eliminate 
spirituality, and to disregard human values and virtues, in 
short, the goals of the prophethood of prophets, particularly 
pure Islam. 
  Referring to the changes, the fall of government, and the 
defeat of regimes, he said: The only lasting regime, until trust 
is given to the original owner of this government, is the sacred 
regime of the Islamic Republic. The people of Iran are 
commissioned to perform this divine duty and, as an exemplary 
nation, by obeying the Imam and the guardian; supporting the 
Islamic government; moving along the straight path with hope for 
a bright future; passing through obstacles, shortcomings, and 
deficiencies in the executive system of the society; and 
separating the evil acts of some individuals from beloved Islam, 
by relying on God, will neutralize the conspiracies of the 
villains. 
  In connection with the role and efforts of the government to 
achieve overall independence and self-sufficiency, Hoseyni said: 
(The government) must not be afraid of the propaganda ruckus 
that goes on in the outside world about the economic situation. 
  Pointing out that the nation knows that much of what was 
destroyed has been built and much fundamental work has begun or 
been implemented in the First [Five-Year Economic and 
Development] Plan, he said: No one can expect the revolution to 
own him. Everyone is indebted to the revolution and Islam. What 
claim could those who complain have if they have not been 
involved in the field of battle? And if they have been involved 
and are today creating such a ruckus by misusing freedom and the 
resources of this nation and are trying to make people despair, 
and in making their ideas and statements ring true have 
unpleasant and unreasonable desires, from which cup are they 
drinking and towards which spring are they moving? Of course, no 
one will claim that there are no shortcomings. But if we take 
into consideration the world conditions, the obstacles, the 
problems, the volume of conspiracies, the situation of 
yesterday, and the existing resources, on the whole, we have had 
a growth trend and much great work has been done. The government 
considers it its duty to continue giving priority to the 
interests of Islam and the barefooted and to serve those who are 
the actual owners of the revolution; to avoid love of comfort, 
bureaucracy, waste, and extravagance, which is a great 
pestilence; and to deal with the misusers of the Treasury and 
the embezzlers in the economic system of the country through 
decisive and continuous supervision and prosecution. 
  The deputy from Boyer Ahmad continued: It is not acceptable 
for leniency to be shown towards embezzling gangs, theives, 
those who use connections, and those who cause delays with 
regard to the affairs of the people; or for the flatterers and 
the indifferent to be favored and for some individuals engaged 
in such behavior to violate someone's rights; or without the 
necessary qualifications for a position for someone to acquire 
vast wealth from the Treasury of the country in a short period 
of time; or for those who have given all that they possess 
sincerely and who have been active with their presence, pen, 
words, blood, and reputation since the beginning wherever the 
revolution has needed it to be abandoned in administrative red 
tape with futile excuses. 
  He then referred to the constant conspiracies of the United 
States against the revolution and in another part of his speech 
said: It is the duty of the Majles to devise the policies 
outlined and the directives of the grand leader for the Second 
Plan and the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget in every 
section in such a way that they are carefully implemented and 
their proper implementation is supervised. 
  Considering that constant supervision over various areas 
will 
only be considered lack of trust and also a sign of the 
presence, ability, and power of the regime and will strengthen 
the relationship between the nation and the government, it is 
necessary for the government to take every possible effort and 
care to implement supervision. 
  In conclusion, he pointed out the importance of agricultural 
issues in the national policies. 
<H5>  Seyyed Abolfazl Razavi, Deputy From Na'in </H5>
  The next speaker was Razavi from Na'in, who honored the 
birthday of the spreader of justice in the world, his holiness 
Mahdi, and the 10 days of Fajr of the Islamic revolution. 
Speaking on the present situation of the world, he said: New 
polarizations are being formed in the world around joint 
economic interests, and the world apparently is moving toward 
polarization based on economic competition. Under such changing 
conditions in the world, we must realize the sensitivity of the 
time and place and guarantee our effective presence in this 
global struggle. Our country enjoys a special place in the world 
in terms of culture, especially among Muslims in the world, 
because Iran is the basis of the Islamic revolution and the 
motherland of the Islamic world. 
  In continuation, the speaker said about the 1373 [21 March 
1994-20 March 1994] bill and the Second Developmental Plan: For 
years, our economy has been dependent on oil revenues and the 
fate of our economy decided by the oil markets. The hope and 
goal of everyone has been to be freed of this dangerous 
dependence. The negative effects of the decrease in the price of 
oil in recent months are known to everyone. But, fortunately, it 
has also had a positive effect. It has made the officials 
determined to be free from dependence on petrodollars. The 1373 
[21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget and the Second 
Developmental Plan are the crystallization of such a 
determination. 
  [1] The reform of the administrative system and increase in 
efficiency of the government to make better use of oil revenues 
and decrease dependency on it is an undeniable necessity to 
which serious attention must be paid in the [Second 
Developmental] Plan and Budget. 
  2) In order to be freed from dependence on oil revenues, we 
must rely on domestic revenues, the most important of which is 
taxes. For whatever reason, our tax system has not been 
efficient enough. The tax system of the country must be reformed 
with attention to three main goals of ensuring social justice, 
gaining the trust of the people, and supporting production. 
Social justice dictates that individuals with higher incomes 
should pay more taxes. To ensure that such is the case, I 
suggest that the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance 
establish tax files for all individuals in society. 
  [Text missing] containing a list of the property and 
possessions of every individual, and every year on the basis of 
the increase in the property and possessions of every person 
taxes will be collected from him. Also, for individuals who fail 
to provide a correct list of their property and possessions and 
evade payment of taxes in any manner, severe punishments must be 
imposed, such as deprivation of certain social rights. 
  He also said: To gain the trust of the people, the 
government 
must act in a manner that people realize the taxes paid are 
spent on the development of the country and the welfare of the 
citizens. For instance, the government can allow the taxpayers 
to build schools, libraries, and parks and provide the people 
with the means to participate in the implementation of projects. 
Also, in order to support production, the government must 
provide special tax incentives and, by changing the percentages 
for the collection of taxes, mobilize the resources of the 
country toward production. Obviously, the implementation of such 
a tax system is only possible with the judicial security and 
stability of the economy in the country. 
  3) One of the main goals of the regime is support for the 
oppressed and vulnerable strata of the society vis-a-vis 
economic pressures resulting from the implementation of the 
economic modification policy. Considering that subsidies are 
supposed to be stopped and next year's budget projects increases 
in certain public goods, such as electricity, water, telephone, 
and energy, based on the rationale that the present situation is 
in the interests of the affluent strata, steps must be taken to 
increase the price of these goods, based on careful expert 
studies and the estimate of the probable political tensions 
resulting from them. It is necessary to make preparations in the 
budget to protect the vulnerable strata. 
  4) About 55 percent of the population of the country 
consists 
of individuals under 20 years of age. Planning for the 
administration of this large population, considering their 
educational, cultural, and social needs, requires special care 
and sensitivity. Transmission of Islamic and revolutionary 
culture to this generation through appropriate ways and methods 
and protecting them against the Western cultural invasion are 
major duties of the government and all those in the society who 
are concerned, because the same strata must take on its 
shoulders the responsibility of perpetrating the Islamic 
revolution tomorrow. In the opinion of many contemporary 
thinkers, human resources are the main wealth of a society, 
provided they are trained, equipped with technical knowledge, 
and skillful. It can be said that the future wealth of our 
country is dependent on the level of investment in education. By 
combining the trained human resources with natural resources, 
our country can attain great power and reach a higher growth. 
  5) In connection with the implementation of the directives 
of 
the grand leader concerning decreasing consumption, in my 
opinion, the method of taxation on consumption must be used to 
achieve the desired results. Unfortunately, the level of 
consumption in the country is very high. 
  In conclusion, he thanked the governor-general of Esfahan 
for 
visiting the cities of the province and creating understanding 
and the minister of energy and the head of the Plan and Budget 
Organization for the rapid implementation of the water outreach 
project to Na'in and Khoy. 
<H5>  Hasan Mokhtari, Deputy From Najafabad </H5>
  The third pre-agenda speaker of the open session of the 
Majles yesterday was Mokhtari from Najafabad, who said: The 
beloved people of Iran know that despite the imposed war during 
the revolution, essential, constructive, and fundamental work 
has progressed well in society. However, what has perhaps caused 
the discontent of the people is the lack of control in society. 
Also, goods and production are not controlled as they should be, 
and the economic policies do not consider the welfare of the 
people. 
  Continuing, he said: The government must find ways to 
prevent pressure on such strata other than eliminating 
subsidies, in order for them to be able to carry the burden of 
the society further, because the burden of the perpetuation of 
the revolution is also on the shoulders of these dear ones. At 
the present time, foreign currency in our society is smuggled 
out of the country by the wealth-accumulating smugglers. All 
the foreign currency taken abroad is not to import machinery or 
resources to the country; therefore, we should choose a 
mechanism that goes through the banks. 
  He added: At the present time, factories, due to financial 
inability, the increase in the price of foreign currency, and 
the number of imports that exist in the country, do not have the 
manpower they need and face one problem after another. The 
factory closures, in addition to putting pressure on the economy 
and the deprived working class, causes social corruption. One 
way to fight corruption is to create jobs in society. 
  In connection with control, he said: There is no control in 
society. Taxis are placed at the disposal of taxi owners at the 
government rate; but in Tehran, no one has yet been able to 
control taxi fares. And the taxi driver, from where he picks up 
a passenger to where he drops the passenger off, is 
disrespectful to all government officials in order to justify 
his own violations. People still cannot understand why water is 
30 tomans per kg [as published], sugar is 100 tomans per kg, 
then, how is it that pastries, in this country, are 300 tomans 
per kg. Supply and demand alone cannot solve these problems. 
  Stating that the economic policies must be revised and the 
policy makers must revise their views, he said: It is 
unfortunate that when Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani came to Esfahan, 
one of the high-raking officials in a meeting asked how much the 
rate of foreign currency would be by the end of 1372 [21 March 
1993-20 March 1994]. He responded that it would be 110 tomans, 
which resulted in the laughter of those present. I am astonished 
how an economic policy maker of ours who is still influential in 
political issues can have such a viewpoint and hope to deal with 
the political issues of the country. 
  Then, referring to the self-sacrifice of the people of 
Najafabad, he said: In continuing the path of the revolution and 
in order to show their obedience to the grand leader and 
preserve the prominent personalities in society, (the people of 
Najafabad) contributed the highest percentage of votes in the 
presidential elections in the province, with a 5-percent 
increase, and extended an unprecedented welcome to Mr. 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani. This shows the loyalty of these people to a 
regime in which no one has invested as much as they have. They 
are fond of the regime of the Islamic Republic and the 
leadership. But these dear people are very fond of the revered 
Shi'ite source of emulation, Grand Ayatollah Montazeri, because 
in our society emulation of a particular person is not an 
offense, a religious jurist is not elected, and the people have 
been and are as they are. But because of this issue, today some 
allow themselves to carry out their objectives merely by 
defending the religious guardians in that city. This has 
weakened the morale of the people, a people who have proved in 
practice before everyone else that they are the followers of the 
religious guardian. The dear people of Najafabad are upset with 
journalists who for reasons of expediency accuse him and his 
emulators of whatever they wish in their newspapers. A spokesman 
who may not even be considered his pupil allows himself to 
question his emulators, himself, and his students and make any 
kind of insult and injustice against him. I propose to the 
prominent people that this action is neither in the interest of 
the regime nor the grand clerics, nor is it good for the unity 
of the people. How can we benefit from such behavior toward a 
person about whom the Imam said, Your views give heat to the 
seminaries and the sacred Islamic regime? We request of the 
prominent people that such behavior be stopped and that the 
hearts of the people not be wounded. 
<H5>  Barat'ali Mohammadifar, Deputy From Sanqez and Kolia'i </H5>
  The last pre-agenda speaker of the open session of the 
Majles 
was Mohammadifar, from Sanqez and Kolia'i, who said: Since the 
examination of the budget bill will have two rounds of 
discussions, only the revenues will be examined, and most of the 
Majles committees will propose new taxes to secure the revenue 
resources, some of which are reasonable and some unreasonable, 
and on the whole the result will be higher prices for goods and 
services, the collection of taxes within the framework of the 
law is desirable. But to put taxes on everything will cause 
great problems. The next issue is the failure to observe social 
justice in the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget 
distribution. The budget must be distributed among the provinces 
in such a way that justice and fairness are observed so that not 
the slightest right of any of the provinces is violated. 
  Continuing he said: Justice in the distribution of the 
budget must be such that everyone enjoys the resources equally 
in proportion to the population and the vastness of the 
province. But, unfortunately, we see that welfare resources in 
some provinces are in abundance and in some others deprivation 
rules. Today, the serving government must sincerely and 
decisively defend the rights of the people of all provinces, and 
the ministries must avoid additional expenditures. 
  Referring to the tricks of the oppressors in their hostility 
towards the Islamic Republic of Iran, the speaker continued: 
Apparently, in our country the best and most studied programs 
being implemented suffer from the most trivial administrative 
and service obstacles, and ultimately if they are saved, only a 
useless and weak shell of them remains. 
  Hence, any movement to suppress and reform this structure 
will face the violent reaction and discontent of a number of 
people. But discontent and the violation of the rights of tens 
of millions of people of our country are much more significant. 
Any study in regards to administrative corruption, bureaucracy, 
and red tape in our country shows that this issue is at the root 
of most of the discontent in our country and a legacy of the 
corrupt monarchical bureaucracy. In fact, reform of the 
administrative system is the wish of the revolutionary society 
and will result in increased national wealth. Avoiding luxury 
and showing respect for the people are important duties of the 
officials. 
  The speaker then added: Some officials act on promises 
concerning the elimination of the problems, but some of the 
officials only do so at the level of slogans and do not act on 
their obligations. Hence, the Majles must make every effort to 
eliminate deprivation. 
  He also said: One of the slogans of the regime of the 
Islamic 
Republic is support for the oppressed. Social justice is a 
central issue that the grand leader determined for the Second 
Plan and must not be forgotten under the pretext of development 
of social justice and support for the oppressed and the 
downtrodden, who are the main supporters of the revolution. 
  It is expected that in economic planning the authentic 
duties 
of the revolution will not be trampled. And the reason why the 
statements of the grand leader have had an effect on the soul of 
the people must be kept in mind, since his reverence is not 
inclined towards this world and towards luxury and he loves 
Islam and the next world. It is hoped that the same is true of 
all the officials. 
  In conclusion, the deputy of Sanqez and Kolia'i asked the 
high-ranking officials of the province of Kermanshah to 
disregard certain marginal tasks that are not listed in their 
duties and asked the head of the Judicial Branch to see that the 
embezzlers in the Reconstruction Headquarters of the province of 
Kermanshah are brought to a speedy trial and punishment. 
<H5>  Ratifications </H5>
<H3>  Return of the Bill on Ratifying the Charter of the 
International Engineering and [Genetics] Center </H3>
  The first item on the agenda of the open session of the 
Majles yesterday was the government's request to return the bill 
on the ratification of the charter of the International 
Engineering, Genetics, and Biotechnology Center (returned from 
the Council), and the request was ratified. 
<H3>  Report on the Settlement of the 1370 [21 March 1991-20 March 
1992] Budget </H3>
  The second item on the agenda was the report of the 
Accounting [and Budget] Committee concerning the settlement of 
the 1370 [21 March 1991-20 March 1992] budget. 
  Mr. Ja'fari, the spokesman of the Accounting [and Budget] 
Committee in reporting the settlement of the 1370 [21 March 
1991-20 March 1992] Majles budget, mentioned the goals of this 
action and then read the results of the audit and analysis as 
follows: 
  1) In major cases, the honorable board of directors of the 
Majles is informed about the affairs and issued the necessary 
permission. 
  2) The honorable supply officials, based on the authority 
given in Article 186 of the internal bylaws of the Majles, 
verified and signed the expenditure and payment documents of the 
Majles. 
  3) Copies of the major accounts in 1370 [21 March 1991-20 
March 1992] were similar to copies of previous years and 
government accounting. 
  After mentioning the current and developmental budget 
operations of the Majles, the spokesman of the Committee 
referred to the shortcomings of the financial operations and the 
use of the funds of the administrative organization of the 
Majles and said: The main deficiencies and criticism concern a 
lack of specific financial bylaws and subsequently various views 
and interpretations of the existing financial laws and 
regulations. 
  1) As was announced in the report of the previous year, 
according to Article 53 of the Constitution, all payments must 
be made within the limits of the ratified funds in accordance 
with the law. The financial bylaws of the Majles must be 
ratified by the honorable Majles as soon as possible. In 1372 
[21 March 1993-20 March 1994], the financial bylaws of the 
Majles have been ratified by the honorable Majles, which, God 
willing, will be implemented from 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 
1995]. 
  2) Failure to send the unused funds of the current 1370 [21 
March 1991-20 March 1992] budget on time is contrary to Note 61 
of the 1360 [21 March 1981-20 March 1982] budget law. 
  3) It is appropriate for suitable steps to be taken to 
collect the debts of the honorable deputies in the previous 
session. The remainder of this debt at the end of 1370 [21 March 
1991-20 March 1992] is 377,385,920 rials[R]. 
  4) The remainder of credit of the annual savings account at 
the end of 1370 [20 March 1992] was R192,965,360. As has been 
announced in the audit report of the previous year, all these 
amounts must be deposited in the account of the Treasury. 
  5) Payment from the funds in Article 17 (expenditure 
account) 
totals R187,725,687. This figure has increased about 110 percent 
compared to previous years. It is necessary to explain that from 
these funds, the aid expenditures are in connection with the 
goals of the organization, whereas in accordance with the list 
stated in the text of the report, most of the payments concern 
aid to Majles employees and deputies. Such payments must be made 
in accordance with the law from their related funds. 
  6) The remainder of the special revenues must be deposited 
in 
the account of the Treasury. The remainder of this account at 
the end of 1370 [20 March 1992] amounts to R415,089,436. The 
remainder of some of the annual prepayments from the previous 
years must be followed up and steps taken for their deposit. 
  In the conclusion of this report, Beytollah Ja'fari added: 
The Majles financial affairs has had the utmost cooperation of 
the Auditing Committee, and the shortages announced in 1370 are 
much less than those in the previous years. 
<H5>  Return of the Bill on Law Enforcement Employment Regulations </H5>
  The next item on the agenda was a request by a number of 
deputies concerning the return of the Islamic Republic of Iran's 
law enforcement employment regulations on the basis of Article 
85 of the Constitution to the related committee. This request 
was ratified by the deputies. 
<H3>  Proposal To Determine the Regulations on Selection of 
Teachers </H3>
  The fourth item on the agenda was the report on the first 
round of discussions of the joint Education and Administrative 
and Employment Affairs Committee concerning the proposal to 
determine the regulations on the selection of teachers. Engineer 
Qomi, the spokesman of the Education Committee in explaining 
this proposal said: 
  Every year in education we have to hire about 60,000 people 
and this number is equal to hiring in other government 
organizations and institutions. If selection in education is 
done well, it can be a good model for other revolutionary 
organizations. About 12 years passed since 1361 [21 March 
1982-20 March 1983], when on the order of the Imam, the issue of 
selection was changed. Unfortunately, we still do not have a 
ratified law for this issue in the Majles. Of course, the Majles 
in the past sessions had ratified the general points regarding 
selection. But specifically in connection with selection 
regarding education, we have problems. He added: In regards to 
the Selection Committee, a committee has been specified that is 
in accordance with the decree of the Imam. And since the grand 
leader also is especially concerned about education and 
selection, we request that considering the large number who want 
to be teachers and the importance of this task, careful 
requirements must be imposed to choose the best to serve the 
revolution generation in this cultural stronghold. 
  After the opposing and supporting speeches, the general 
points of the proposal was ratified. 
<H3>  Proposal To Amend Some Articles of the Internal Bylaws of 
the Majles </H3>
  The last item on the agenda was a report by the Committee To 
Devise the Internal Bylaws of the Majles in regards to amending 
some articles of the Majles bylaws, the examination of which was 
postponed to the next session. 
<H5>  On the Margins of the Majles </H5>
<H5>  Inquiry and Investigation Concerning Foreign Travel </H5>
  A member of the inquiry and investigation group of the 
Majles 
concerning foreign trends told our parliamentary reporter: The 
period for inquiry and investigation is two months, which will 
be extended upon the request of the group members and the 
foreign policy committee. This has not been done and the report 
has not been presented to the Majles. Hence, it is understood 
that this has been negligence in carrying out this 
responsibility, and the task is not merely the desired proposal. 
Given the importance of this issue and most of the assignments 
of the government experts, which are not necessary in some 
cases, and the shortage of foreign currency funds in the 
country, serious attention to inquiry and investigation is 
necessary. As a person requesting this issue of the group and 
the committee, I expect this issue not to be delayed more than 
this. 
<H5>  New Year Bonus of Employees and Workers </H5>
  Mr. Rowghani-Zanjani, the head of the Plan and Budget 
Organization, told our reporter yesterday: This year, a month's 
salary will be paid as a New Year's bonus to government 
employees. He gave no further explanation in this regard. 
  Also, Mr. Kamali, the minister of labor and social affairs, 
announced the amount of the New Year bonus of workers eligible 
for the labor law to be two months' salary and added: An 
increase in the wages of workers based on the rate of inflation 
is being studied, which will be announced as soon as the 
decision has been made. 
<H5>  Joint Session of the Cabinet Ministers and Majles Deputies </H5>
  The parliamentary correspondent of RESALAT was informed that 
tonight a joint session of the Cabinet ministers and Majles 
deputies will be held. In this session, a number of deputies and 
ministers along with the president will comment on the most 
important economic issues and the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 
1995] budget. 
<H5>  Weekly Programs of the Majles Committees </H5>
  The most important studies, reports, and visits of the 
Majles 
committees this week are as follows: 
<H5>  Islamic Guidance and Art Committee </H5>

  Visit to the Cultural Heritage Organization. 
  Examination of the proposal to supervise foreign travel of 
government employees. 
<H5>  Administrative and Employment [Affairs] Committee </H5>
  Examination of the proposal to pay aid to dependents for 
working and retired women. 
<H5>  Planning and Budget Committee </H5>
  Examination of taxes, funds, and deficits, notes and general 
points of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget. 
<H5>  Economic Affairs [and Finance] Committee </H5>
  Joint session with the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] 
Planning and Budget Committee. 
<H5>  Housing and Urban Development Committee </H5>
  Report on the programs of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Development by the minister of housing. 
<H5>  [Legal and] Judicial Affairs Committee </H5>
  1) Continuation of the examination of the Islamic punishment 
bill. [sentence as published] 
<H5>  Defense Affairs Committee </H5>
  Examination of the operations of companies and organizations 
affiliated with the defense forces. 
<H5>  Councils Committee </H5>
  Continuation of the examination of the bill on organizations 
and duties and the election of Islamic Councils and mayors. 
<H5>  Revolution Institutions Affairs Committee </H5>
  Examination of the budget of revolution institutions. 
<H5>  Ratifications of Majles Committees </H5>
  The most important ratifications of the Majles committees 
this week are as follows: 
  The bill on the use of weapons by law-enforcement officials 
in necessary circumstances, which was referred to the Council 
Committee as the main committee, was ratified. This bill, which 
has been devised in 17 articles, states the procedures and 
requirements for the use of weapons by law-enforcement 
officials, including self-defense during the arrest of thieves, 
highway robbers, and escaped prisoners. 
  The proposal to build a joint urban tunnel was ratified in 
the Council Committee. 
  According to Article 1, the government is responsible for 
participating and investing in or operating organizations in new 
cities developed by the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Development to take steps to create joint tunnels needed by 
organizations and companies in charge of urban services, such as 
water, sewage, electricity, natural gas, and telephone, using 
the funds of the same projects. 
  The bill on changing the legal status of large university 
presses was another item ratified in the Administration and 
Employment Affairs Committee. In accordance with the single 
article of this bill, all university presses shall be operated 
as joint-share companies. 

