BFN 

  [Text] Nuremberg, Germany May 20 (CTK) -- The realisation 
of the right to homeland and self-determination just as the 
abolition of president Edvard Benes's decrees on the postwar 
transfer of Sudeten Germans and expropriation of their property 
should be the result of a dialogue with the Czechs sought by the 
Sudeten Germans, Franz Neubauer said today. 
  Speaking at a press conference on the eve of the 45th 
Sudeten 
German Days, to be held in Nuremberg at the weekend, Neubauer, 
spokesman for the Sudeten German Landsmannschaft (SL), said that 
the Sudeten Germans were interested in "a mutually acceptable 
solution" and were not demanding anything impossible. 
  Without specifying, Neubauer said that the Czech Republic 
had 
indicated to Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Foreign Minister Klaus 
Kinkel and Bavarian Premier Edmund Stoiber prospects of such a 
dialogue. 
  Neubauer explained the right to homeland as allowing Sudeten 
Germans to live in their former homeland and to have equal 
rights like other citizens, including the right to vote. By 
abolishing the Benes decrees, the Czech Republic would 
dissociate itself from the principle of "expulsion" and property 
confiscation. The SL demands collective settlement because the 
Germans were expelled collectively as well, Neubauer said. 
  The Benes decrees, approved by the Potsdam conference of the 
victorious powers, affected about 2.5 million Sudeten Germans. 
  Asked by CTK on what basis the SL wanted to conduct a 
dialogue with the Czech party in a situation where the 
Landsmannschaft had rejected the German-Czechoslovak treaty of 
1992, which both parties had called a positive contribution to 
building a new Europe, Neubauer said that "not the treaty, but 
goodwill is what matters." 
  He pointed out that the Czechs were putting up for auction 
the former Sudeten German property while property questions were 
not addressed by the treaty, but were left open. 
  Turning to the work group which is to deal lodge a possible 
complaint against the Benes decrees with the Hague-based 
International Court of Justice, Neubauer said that the lodging 
of the complaint did not have to be accelerated, adding that the 
Landsmannschaft preferred negotiations. 
  Reacting to Czech Premier Vaclav Klaus recent rejection of 
the invitation to attend the SL congress, calling it 
provocation, Neubauer said that the SL "will not let itself be 
provoked" by the term "provocation." 
  Hans Sehling, chairman of the `Sudeten German Parliament', 
who was present at the press conference, said that he had 
information from "certain sources" that a "crisis committee" had 
been set up in the Czech Republic in connection with the Sudeten 
German Days. Asked at what level the committee was, Sehling 
declined to reply. 
  Neubauer said Austrian Foreign Minister Alois Mock, who will 
be presented with the highest Sudeten German distinction -- the 
Charles IV Award -- at the SL congress, as "an ardent defender 
of the European idea." He did not mention Mock's contribution to 
the protection of the German expellees' interests which Sudeten 
German circles say unofficially is the main reason for the 
decision to confer it on Mock. 
  Charles IV (1316-78) was King of Bohemia and Roman Emperor. 
  The winners of the award, conferred by the SL on those who 
have contributed to understanding among nations, include former 
Belgian Premier Leo Tindemans (1978), former Bavarian Premier 
Franz Josef Strauss, former German President Karl Carstens 
(1991) who has been the only German president to attend the 
Sudeten German Days during his tenure, and European Parliament 
President Egon Klepsch (1993). 
  It is expected that the participants in the 45th Sudeten 
German Days will be addressed by Mock, German Interior Minister 
Manfred Kanther (CDU), German Finance Minister Theo Waigel (CSU) 
and Bavarian Premier Edmund Stoiber (CSU). 

