CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Radovan Kovacevic: "Continuation of the Muslim </F>
Spring Offensive"] 
  [Text] "We will go for all or nothing," Alija Izetbegovic 
declared yesterday in Sarajevo at a rally in support of Gorazde. 
He added at the same time the characteristic explanation for 
this key thesis of his: "Only strength is respected in this 
world." 
  It is easiest to explain his violent anger in terms of the 
military defeat in the Drina Valley, where an entire corps of 
his suffered defeat. An analysis of reports from the battlefield 
these days nevertheless suggests some serious assessments. 
  Four days ago, that is, Colonel General Ante Roso, commander 
of the General Staff of the Croatian Defense Council [HVO], 
declared in central Bosnia that "the war is not over yet." And 
immediately thereafter, along with General Rasim Delic, his 
counterpart in the Muslim armed forces [MOS], he went on an 
inspection of his units in the area of Zenica, Zavidovici, and 
northward all the way to Gradacac. 
<H5>  The Actions of the Bosnian Muslims </H5>
  Actions like these on the part of the commanders have become 
routine since the Washington agreement. Their purpose, it is 
judged in the staffs of the army of the Srpska republic [RS], is 
to coordinate the armed actions of the Muslims and Croats. 
  Confirmation of this has arrived from Zagreb, where a 
meeting 
of the General Staff of the Croatian Army [HV] was held 
recently; mobilization of Croatian and Muslim refugees from 
Bosnia who have taken shelter in Croatian cities began soon 
afterward. The 112th HVO Brigade has just been formed from 
former inhabitants of Travnik, Vitez, and Busovaca. An immense 
number of them undoubtedly still remember how in the spring of 
last year they had to flee to Vlasic in the face of the Muslim 
offensive in the Lasva Valley, and emergency assistance was 
offered to them by units of the army of the RS.... 
  Allies, however, are highly perishable goods in this war. 
Following the merciless showdown between the Muslims and Croats, 
which lasted more than a year, a combined brigade of the HVO has 
been sent to the area of Usora, Zepce, and Zavidovici. 
  Continuation of the spring offensive is being mentioned in 
the staffs more and more frequently. Gorazde, according to many, 
including even Gen. Michael Rose, was a focal point of limited 
tactical importance. Aside from what we have mentioned, the 
following details indicate the strategic objectives of the 
Croatian-Muslim coalition. The level of combat readiness of the 
HV, especially the artillery and engineers, has been upgraded in 
Slavonski Brod, Slavonski Samac, Orasje, and Zupanja. Six 
hundred soldiers who have arrived from the area of Rijeka have 
also been deployed there. Is it perhaps because as better 
swimmers they are to swim across the Sava as part of a future 
beachhead operation? 
<H5>  Ambitions and Appetites </H5>
  Five days ago, POLITIKA published the observation of the 
defense command of Majevica that no fewer than 28 brigades of 
the MOS had built up in the Tuzla region. The news is similar 
from Kupres: HVO troops are arriving from the direction of 
Livno, Duvno, and Sujica. 
  The offensive campaign is certain, and in many assessments 
the main strike of the Muslim force could be directed at Brcko, 
where there would be combined action with Croatian troops. 
Yesterday's artillery-infantry attacks on Serbian positions in 
Brka, which is 9 km from Brcko, along with a number of similar 
ones, probably represent only a "feeling" of the enemy pulse. 
  Around Ozren it is no longer a question of that, but of 
incessant fierce attacks. Thus the command of the tactical group 
of brigades there had to issue a sharp warning to the Muslim 
authorities in Banovici, Lukavac, Gracanica, and Tuzla that it 
would "take countermeasures" unless they calmed down. 
  The situation is similar in Doboj and Teslic. The shelling 
of 
these Serbian cities has gone on for more than two years with 
brief intervals. 
  The Muslim army, it is acknowledged in Serbian staffs, is 
considerably better-organized than a few months ago, and its 
ambitions (in accordance with the territorial appetites of the 
top Izetbegovic leadership) are growing. The lack of armament 
and especially artillery ammunition is already being overcome 
regardless of the well-known embargo. They are using Croatian 
seaports on the Adriatic for imports from Turkey and the Arab 
countries. Numerical superiority and considerable improvement of 
maneuverability are a challenge difficult to resist.... 
  The response to all this in the high-level circles of the 
army of the RS is that the situation is under control, that is, 
that the Serbian forces are adequate along all the lines of 
possible offensive strikes, which is one of the ways of 
shortening the length of the war. The more reasonable option is 
that of negotiation, but it still seems far away from this kind 
of Bosnia. 

