Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
disease reports monitored from FBIS Abidjan Bureau and EAU 
coverage areas. Source information is given in parentheses after 
each item. 
<H5>  Ivory Coast </H5>
  Malaria -- More than 2 million Africans die each year from 
malaria, half of them children under six, it was learned at a 
2-25 February seminar in Abidjan attended by about 50 experts 
representing 17 countries and the WHO. In economic terms, this 
represents an estimated $1.7 billion loss in 1995 for sub-Sahara 
African countries. 
  Prospects for marketing an anti-malaria vaccine were 
discussed at length by the participants but, as Dr. al-Hadi 
Benzerroug (Algeria WHO), the main moderator of the seminar, put 
it: "This is still in the realm of dreams." [Paris AFP in 
French 2010 GMT 25 Feb 94] 
<H5>  Ethiopia </H5>
  Cholera -- There has been a serious outbreak of cholera in 
eastern Ethiopia, and it seems to be centered in the town of 
Haraar. Princess Anne of Great Britain, who is in the area as 
part of a Save the Children tour, stumbled upon a large camp 
occupied by people suffering from cholera, something, it seems, 
the Ethiopian authorities are keen to cover up. Correspondent 
Lucy Hanan says that when the princess arrived there, the place 
was actually sealed off by guards and the local press was not 
allowed in. She says she saw four tents full of people who were 
affected by what she was told later was cholera. The affected 
people were in bad condition and the place did not look at all 
good. She says that according to reliable sources, there are 
now up to 130 cases a day, and about 3,000 people have already 
been affected by cholera. She says that the reason that 
governments are reluctant to acknowledge cholera is that the 
disease is associated with poverty and poor sanitation. 
Sometimes it affects exports, mainly coffee, which people fear 
may be contaminated. [London BBC World Service in English 1705 
GMT 27 Feb 94] 
<H5>  Ghana </H5>
  River blindness -- The Ministry of Health and 
nongovernmental 
organizations have been called upon to help put in place a 
sustained program to control the growing number of cases of 
river blindness in the Wassa Amenfi area. Dr. Kwaku Kakari, 
district medical officer in charge of the Wassa Akropong health 
center, told newsmen at Wassa Akropong that the disease appeared 
to be prevalent around Samreboi. He said last year alone, 696 
cases were reported at the Eti and Pii hospitals at Samreboi and 
41 cases at the Catholic hospital at Asankrangwa. Dr. Kakari 
said efforts have been made by the epidemiology division of the 
Ministry of Health to educate the public about the disease and 
drugs have been supplied for free distribution at the epidemic 
zones. [Accra Ghana Broadcasting Corporation in English 0600 
GMT 25 Feb 94] 
<H5>  Nigeria </H5>
  Guinea worm infestation -- A report from Oyo State says the 
incidence of guinea worm infestation is assuming disturbing 
proportion in Ibarapa local government area of the state. 
Reporter Femi Bobade says the state administrator, Navy Captain 
Adetoye Sode, visited the area yesterday to assess the 
situation. He said that mostly affected are the people of Iruwa 
and Lanlate, the two major towns in the local government. 
Already, a large number of the people are receiving treatment 
at various health centers in the local government area. On 
arrival at Iruwa, headquarters of the local government area, 
Administrator Sode expressed concern over the lack of potable 
water in the area despite the fact that there were two 
reservoirs in the area. He directed the director, personnel 
management, of the local government to liaise with the water 
corporation in investigating the matter and finding a lasting 
solution to it. At Lanlate, the administrator was shown about 
50 of the victims with the disease in various parts of their 
bodies. Addressing the people, the Oyo State commissioner for 
health, Mrs. Oluyoyede Fatunde, appealed to them to always boil 
or filter their water before drinking. [Lagos Radio Nigeria 
Network in English 0600 GMT 21 Feb 94] 
  Cerebro-spinal meningitis -- Reports say the death toll in 
the outbreak of cerebro-spinal meningitis in Lansa North local 
government area of Plateau State has risen to 28. The death 
toll was confirmed by the head of an investigation team 
dispatched to the area, Dr. Wandem. [Lagos Radio Nigeria Network 
in English 0600 GMT 28 Feb 94] 
<H5>  Somalia </H5>
  Cholera -- A statement issued by the office of the chairman 
of the High Council of the Internal Affairs Committee of the 
Somali National Alliance says a cholera outbreak has been 
officially confirmed in some districts of Somalia. Briefing 
reporters on the outbreak of the killer disease, the chairman of 
the High Council, Mr. Abdi Hasan Awale Qaydid, said, quoting the 
acting secretary general of the Somali Red Crescent, Dr. Ahmad 
Aptidon Kulmiye, that cholera was first diagnosed in Boosaaso 
and since has spread to the regional capital of the eastern 
region, Beledweyne. According to Dr. Ahmad Aptidon Kulmiye, the 
chairman said the outbreak was first detected on 5 February 
1994. The chairman added that the deaths started on 11 February 
1994, and since then 50 persons have died and 165 others have 
been diagnosed as cholera cases in hospitals. Many others may 
be suffering in their homes. [(Clandestine) Radio Mogadishu 
Voice of the Great Somali People in Somali 1700 GMT 23 Feb 94] 
<H5>  Uganda </H5>
  AIDS -- The British Medical Research Council and the Uganda 
Virus Research Institute, UVRI, have launched an intervention 
study in Masaka District to fight AIDS using a combination of 
information, education, communications, and sexually transmitted 
disease controls. The interventional project, which will cover 
18 parishes in Masaka District, was launched yesterday by the 
acting representative of the WHO in Uganda, Professor (Abiye Obo 
Koribo). He said the project epitomizes the aims of the WHO that 
the people of the world should receive adequate health care by 
the year 2000. Prof. (Obo Koribo) said this calls for the 
involvement of community participation and empowerment of the 
people with affordable and appropriate technology for their own 
health. He said research should not be sterile, but applied in 
the field. 
  The head of the program, Dr. (Dan Malda), said the project 
is 
expected to take five years and the actual intervention work 
would start in June or July this year. He said emphasisis would 
be put on community health based care in areas of control of 
sexually transmitted diseases and behavioral change in the 
control of HIV. [Kampala Radio Uganda Network in English 1700 
GMT 26 Feb 94] 
<H5>  Zaire </H5>
  Bacillary dysentery -- An epidemic of bacillary dysentery is 
currently rampant in the Lomela area in Kasai Oriental, where it 
is said to have claimed 800 lives since 1993 from a population 
estimated at about 200,000. A local official, Honorable 
Ekumbaki Ombata Ilongo, who reported this epidemic to ZAIRIAN 
PRESS AGENCY, called on the country's authorities to take all 
necessary steps to deal with the disease. [Kinshasa Voix du 
Zaire in French 1800 GMT 27 Feb 94] 

