Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Safa Ha'iri report: "Sectarian Disturbances in Baluchistan; </F>
Fatalities in Iran after Confrontations with the `Guards'] 
  [Text] Paris -- The Iranian authorities yesterday admitted 
the occurrence of disturbances in the province of Baluchistan 
southeast of the country and accused "counterrevolutionary 
elements" of organizing these disturbances the day before 
yesterday. According to media reports, these disturbances 
resulted in numerous casualties, including dead and wounded. 
  According to several sources, the disturbances in Zahedan 
began after rumors that the authorities had demolished a Sunni 
mosque in the town of Mashhad northeast of Iran triggering fear 
among observers that the disturbances might assume a sectarian 
dimension. 
  Observers say that news of the disturbances coincided with 
the shooting incident as President Hashemi-Rafsanjani was 
delivering a speech during the celebrations marking the 15th 
anniversary of the Islamic revolution. They note that the two 
incidents indicate that the regime is going through a difficult 
phase. 
  It has been reported from Zahedan that forces of the 
"Revolutionary Guards" clashed with demonstrators who occupied 
government buildings, removed the flags from them, and destroyed 
military vehicles belong to the Revolutionary Guards. The 
clashes lasted four hours and resulted in the death of dozens of 
demonstrators and the injury of no less that 400 others. 
  The demonstrators used sticks and stones and the 
Revolutionary Guards responded with tear gas bombs and gunfire 
in the direction of the demonstrators. 
  Eyewitnesses say that the clashes began when forces of the 
Revolutionary Guards stormed a mosque where worshippers were 
listening to antiregime speeches after hearing the news of the 
demolition of the Sunni mosque in Mashhad. They add that the 
mosque as well as buildings and shops in the Khayyam street, 
where the clashes were concentrated, sustained material damage. 
  In a statement to AL-HAYAH, informed sources expressed fear 
that the Zahedan incidents could be serious in view of the fact 
that the province is adjacent to the Pakistani borders and the 
fact that they occurred after the authorities reinforced their 
forces on these borders. Some media organs close to the regime 
have recently stressed the need to "foil the terrorist acts 
which the enemies of the revolution were preparing to perpetrate 
in Baluchistan." 
  The same sources also drew attention to the Foreign 
Ministry's reaction to the disturbances as "a plot hatched by 
counterrevolutionaries with foreign links." The ministry's 
statement spoke of the arrest of a number of demonstrators but 
the sources were unable to say how many were arrested. 

