Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "News" program] </F>
  [Text] A regional economic work conference continued in 
session on the morning of 16 January, presided over by Yang 
Chuantang, executive vice chairman of the autonomous region. 
  Those attending the conference were leaders of the 
autonomous 
region, including Gyaincain Norbu, Guo Jinlong, Banzim, Yang 
Chuantang, Lieque, Puqung, Sengqen Lozong Gyaincain, Pudoji, 
(Gong Daxi), Baima Duoji, (Jiang Cuo), Jipu Pingcuo Cideng, 
Cering Sangzhub, (Yang Song), (Ciren Cuoga), and Luosang 
Toinzhub, as well as heads of prefectures, counties, and 
districts, mayors of cities, and responsible persons of major 
economic departments and regional- level units. 
  At the conference, Gyaincain Norbu, deputy secretary of the 
regional party committee and chairman of the autonomous region, 
gave a report entitled: "Accelerate the Establishment of a 
Socialist Market Economic Structure and Promote Rapid 
Development of the National Economy." 
  Reviewing the region's 1993 achievements in economic work, 
Gyaincain Norbu said: Since the beginning of last year, we have 
scored marked achievements in establishing a socialist market 
economic structure, accelerating the development of the national 
economy, deepening reforms, and opening wider to the outside 
world under the guidance of the guidelines laid down by the 14th 
party congress and the fourth enlarged plenary session of the 
fourth regional party committee. It is estimated that the total 
annual output value of goods and services for the region in 1993 
was 3.65 billion yuan, an increase of 8.1 percent over 1992 in 
real terms. The annual output value of the primary industries 
totaled 1.77 billion yuan, up 4.9 percent; that of the secondary 
industries was 530 million yuan, up 16.6 percent; and that of 
the tertiary industries reached 1.35 billion yuan, up 9.5 
percent. The relatively rapid development of the economy has 
increased the economic strength of the region. It is estimated 
that the region's financial revenues in 1993 were 149 million 
yuan, increasing 37 percent over 1992. 
  The economy of the rural and pastoral areas has developed 
steadily. It is estimated that the region's total agricultural 
output value was 2.228 billion yuan in 1993, an increase of 5.3 
percent over the previous year. A bumper harvest was reaped for 
the sixth consecutive year, and total grain output reached 
620,000 tonnes, up 3.3 percent. Major production targets in 
animal husbandry were fulfilled, which were a little more than 
or remained the same as those of the previous year. Village and 
town enterprises and diversified economic undertakings have 
developed rather rapidly. It is estimated that the total output 
value of the village and town enterprises reached 100 million 
yuan, and the income of diversified economic undertakings 
totaled 240 million yuan, increasing 14.9 percent and 18.8 
percent respectively over the previous year. Per capita income 
for the peasants and herdsmen was 515 yuan, up 5.1 percent 
compared with the previous year. 
  The economic results of industrial and communications 
enterprises have increased noticeably. It is estimated that the 
region's total industrial output value reached 470 million yuan, 
up 7.8 percent over the previous year. The output of major 
products has increased, and the quality of products has 
improved. The marketing rate of products has reached 94.85 
percent. Thus, production, marketing, and economic results have 
increased simultaneously. 
  The number of enterprises suffering losses has decreased. A 
good momentum has been maintained in the development of foreign 
trade and tourism. It is estimated that the region's volume of 
foreign trade reached $100 million, up 55.4 percent over the 
previous year. Of this volume, exports were worth $20 million, 
and imports $80 million, increasing 3.6 percent and 77.6 percent 
respectively over the previous year. Efforts have been made to 
improve the management and operations of tourism, to open up new 
tourist routes and scenic spots, and to run special events, thus 
attracting tourists. In 1993, the region received 23,000 
foreign tourists and earned 100,000,600 yuan, increasing 15 
percent and 10 percent respectively over the previous year. It 
also earned more than 9 million yuan of foreign exchange in 
tourism, up 7.9 percent compared with the previous year. 
  New progress has been made in introducing investment from 
abroad and establishing lateral ties at home. More than 40 
projects were approved in these regards last year, with a total 
contracted investment of 67.1 million yuan and $9.63 million. 
In addition, the region also set up some enterprises with its 
own funds in coastal and other areas of the country. 
  Infrastructure construction, with the stress on energy, 
transportation, and communications projects, has gone well. It 
is estimated that the region invested 1.59 billion yuan in fixed 
assets in 1993, increasing 15 percent over the previous year. 
  The construction of the Bamda Airport runway was basically 
completed last year. The Sichuan-Xizang, Xinjiang-Xizang, 
China-Nepal, and (Zegong) highways were repaired or rebuilt on 
schedule, and the quality of construction was noticeably 
improved. The annual plans for construction of the Yanghu and 
Chalong Power Stations were overfulfilled with quality. The 
Gonggar Airport extension project has been completed and put 
into operation. 
  Communications construction progressed smoothly. A unified 
telephone system, including city and long-distance calls, was 
set up in the urban areas of six prefectures and cities; and 58 
satellite communication ground stations at the county level were 
built and installed with equipment, 35 of which were put into 
operation. Technical transformation projects were carried out 
rather effectively. 
  Urban and rural markets became increasingly brisk. It is 
estimated that the total volume of retail sales in the region 
was 1.9 billion yuan last year, up 13.1 percent over the 
previous year. The fast-rising market prices were brought under 
effective control. 
  Social undertakings developed rapidly. The region invested 
more than 180 million yuan in education last year, increasing 
13.3 percent over the previous year; 248 new schools of various 
types were set up; and 63.2 percent of the children of school 
age were in school, up 2.7 percent over the previous year. 
  Gyaincain Norbu said: We paid close attention to work 
particularly in the following aspects last year: 
  1. We proceeded from emancipating our minds to enhance our 
sense of the urgency of economic development. Last year, we 
made efforts to emancipate our minds and adopt new ideas as a 
prerequisite for deepening reforms, opening up wider to the 
outside world, and accelerating economic development. We held 
discussions on emancipating the mind and changing the mindset in 
various ways. We also organized groups of different sizes to be 
sent to the interior for study. Through study, visits, and 
observation, cadres and people were able to see the big gap 
between the region and other parts of the country in economic 
development, thus increasing their confidence and courage in 
developing productive forces. According to incomplete 
statistics, since Comrade Deng Xiaoping delivered his speeches 
during his tour of south China, 876 new state, collective, and 
private enterprises have been set up in the region, with a total 
registered capital of 766 million yuan. 
  2. We stepped up the reform of the economic structure with a 
view to establishing a socialist market economic structure. 
While reforming the economic structure with the stress on 
enterprise reform, we paid close attention to giving enterprises 
decision-making power in management and improving external 
conditions for their production and operation. The building of 
a market system was accelerated, and market facilities were 
improved day by day. The fundamental role of the market in the 
allocation of resources was initially brought into play. The 
circulation of capital and consumer goods became increasingly 
smooth, presenting a picture of prosperity. 
  3. We promoted a healthy development of the economy by 
improving and strengthening macroeconomic regulation and 
control. In accordance with the guidelines set forth in the 
central authorities' No. 6 Document, we took a series of 
measures to improve and strengthen macroeconomic regulation and 
control, with a view to coping with problems in reform and 
economic development. We made remarkable achievements in this 
regard. 
  4. We carried out the anticorruption struggle to improve the 
general mood of society. 
  Gyaincain Norbu said: In our region today, the economy is 
further developing, the political situation is stable, and the 
unity of nationalities is further strengthened. New progress 
has been made in various social undertakings. The overall 
situation is good. 
  On the guiding principles for this year's economic work in 
Tibet, Gyaincain Norbu said: The guiding principles for this 
year's economic work across the region are to: implement in an 
all-round way the guidelines laid down by the third plenary 
session of the party's 14th central committee and the fifth 
enlarged plenary session of the fourth regional party committee; 
accelerate the pace of reform with a view to establishing a 
socialist market economic structure; open up wider to the 
outside world; continue to improve macroeconomic regulation and 
control; step up infrastructure construction; vigorously 
readjust the economic structure [da li tiao zheng jing ji jie 
gou]; continuously improve economic results; and strive to 
promote a sustained, rapid, and healthy development of the 
region's economy. 
  In arranging this year's economic work, Gyaincain Norbu 
particularly stressed: We should deepen reforms according to 
the national plan in this regard. On the principles of being 
positive and steady, proceeding in an orderly way and step by 
step, and making appropriate adaptions in the light of different 
conditions, we should carry out reforms in an all-round way and 
make sure that our systems are compatible with those in other 
parts of the country. We should seize the opportunity to 
accelerate economic development. At the same time, we should 
maintain social stability and create a favorable environment for 
reform, opening up, and economic development. We should 
concentrate our financial resources on infrastructure 
construction. 
  On ensuring the smooth progress of reform and development, 
Gyaincain Norbu pointed out: Development is the foundation of 
social stability, and reform gives development a tremendous 
stimulus. Only by maintaining social stability will it be 
possible to smoothly carry out reforms, open to the outside 
world, and make economic development. Therefore, we should 
correctly understand and handle the relationship between reform, 
development, and stability. Under no circumstances should we 
maintain stability in a negative way without carrying out 
reforms. Meanwhile, we should take measures to prevent 
troubles, especially serious ones, from occurring. The tasks of 
reform and development for this year are very arduous. To 
accelerate the establishment of a socialist market economic 
structure, we should carry out reforms faster, more extensively, 
and more in depth. Generally speaking, we are really in a 
favorable period for reform and development. However, there are 
also some problems which cannot be ignored. Reform is bound to 
touch or break old systems, old economic relations, and old 
patterns of interests and to give rise to new contradictions and 
problems. In Tibet, which is conditioned by many factors and 
where various contradictions are intertwined, carrying out 
reforms is not only very difficult but involves certain risks as 
well. Party committees and governments at various levels should 
have a clear understanding of this situation. They should fully 
assess problems and make all possible preparations against the 
occurring of serious problems so that they will not hesitate 
about what move to take and that the progress of reform and 
development will be affected. 
  On further ensuring the smooth progress of reform and 
development, Gyaincain Norbu stressed: We should always adhere 
to the principle of grasping two links at the same time, 
effectively perform mass work, extensively carry out the 
anticorruption struggle, and further strengthen our leadership. 
  In concluding, Chairman Gyaincain Norbu called on cadres and 
people throughout the region to guide themselves with the 
guidelines laid down by the third plenary session of the party's 
14th central committee and the fifth enlarged plenary session of 
the fourth regional party committee, to work hard in unity, and 
to strive to bring about a new situation in the region's economy. 

