Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Caracas, 2 Mar (EFE) -- Defense Minister Rafael 
Angel Montero Revette announced today the Venezuelan Government 
and Armed Forces have dismissed the possibility of another coup 
attempt. 
  "We, the Armed Forces and government, do not fear a coup 
d'etat," Montero Revette said in reference to the internal 
situation of the Armed Forces, although he admitted as long as 
soldiers are imprisoned there will be problems. 
  Montero said the intention of President Rafael Caldera's 
government is to resolve "as soon as possible" the problem of 
the soldiers prosecuted for the 4 February and 27 November 1992 
coup attempts. 
  He said 17 soldiers [oficiales], 21 lieutenant colonels, 
three majors, nine captains and three lieutenants are still 
under arrest for the 4 February coup attempt. Added to these 
are two rear admirals, one colonel, five lieutenant colonels, 
one frigate captain, four majors, three captains, nine 
lieutenants, two noncommissioned officers and one civilian who 
were charged in the 27 November coup attempt. 
  In addition to these, a group of soldiers led by General 
Francisco Visconti are in Peru, where they received political 
asylum for their part in the 27 November coup attempt. Two 
soldiers are also in exile in Ecuador for the same reason. 
  Montero said the legal cases of all the soldiers implicated 
in the coup attempts are being studied to determine how they can 
be acquitted. 
  Nevertheless, he said, a return to military service will be 
very difficult for the detainees who have made political 
statements or participated in any way in the country's politics. 
  Montero disclosed, meanwhile, the Defense Ministry had 
financed a trip to the United States by former Defense Minister 
Vice Admiral Radames Munoz Leon as a guest of an American 
university. 
  According to unofficial reports, Munoz Leon traveled to the 
United States to seek Pentagon support for a coup d'etat that 
would hinder Rafael Caldera's victory in the elections. 
  The defense minister said he could not guarantee that Munoz 
Leon did not have conspiratorial intentions. 

