Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] In response to a request by the Guarani 
People's Assembly, PRESENCIA, a Catholic Church-owned, 
center-left daily led an investigative team into the Chaco 
region for a week in December to look into charges that 
approximately 10,000 Guarani Indians are held in virtual slavery 
on large estates. The team included a Congressional delegation 
composed of deputies Silvio Aramayo, of Guarani background, and 
Daniel Santalla. Its observations are contained in a special 
report published 16 January entitled "In the Footsteps of Kunta 
Kinte: `Roots' in the Southeast." 
  According to the report, it is estimated that between 40,000 
and 80,000 Guarani Indians live in the Bolivian Chaco 
departments of Santa Cruz, Tarija, and Chuquisaca. Of these, 
21,000 are "free" and live in Santa Cruz's Cordillera province. 
The 10,000 Guarani Indians in the Chuquisacan and Tarijan Chaco 
live and work in "medieval serfdom," the report says, as 
agricultural laborers on large estates. Their salaries--often 
paid in the form of food, clothing, and coca, or alcohol--are so 
low that the debts they incur to their bosses keep them tied to 
the estate until they die. Their debts are then passed on to the 
next generation, perpetuating the cycle of bondage. The report 
stresses that although indentured servitude, sharecropping, and 
other coercive labor practices were outlawed by the Agrarian 
Reform Act of 1953, and despite Bolivia's ratification in 1991 
of the International Labor Organization convention on 
"Indigenous and Tribal Populations," the Guarani people are 
generally unaware of their rights because most are 
non-Spanish-speaking and illiterate. The patriarchal system of 
the large landholdings gives the landlord absolute power over 
these Indians who are labeled "uncivilized, non-Christian 
nomads." The "buying and selling" of Indians also occurs: one 
boss just pays off an Indian's debts and acquires a new laborer. 
Some of the worst abusers of the system are the "work 
inspectors," government officials whose legal mandate is to 
protect and uphold the rights of agricultural laborers. Instead, 
these functionaries profit by the "capture, arrest, and return" 
of runaway Indians to the estates, claiming violation of work 
contracts signed. Some Indians are able to "buy their freedom" 
with the help of UNICEF and other nongovernmental organizations 
active in the region. Others manage to escape to "free lands" or 
to Argentina. 
  Confiscation of Indian land continues to be undertaken 
"legally" with the complicity of agrarian judges, the report 
charges. Methods by which landlords lay claim to their domains 
and force Guaranis off the land include introducing cattle onto 
traditional Indian land, accusing them of cattle theft, 
arresting them, and putting them on trial; and burning or 
cutting down their fruit trees. Landlords also encircle entire 
Guarani communities with barbed wire to lay claim to the Indians 
as their property. 
  During its tour of the region, the PRESENCIA team 
interviewed 
men and women who described aspects of their servitude and 
voiced their many complaints: the daily wage of 5 bolivianos 
(4.48 bs=$1.00) for men, 3 for women, for a 12- to 14-hour day 
six-day week (the average daily wage in that region is 10 
bolivianos for an eight-hour day); years of work without any 
money exchanging hands; bosses who cheat them by falsifying the 
amount of their debt; poor food; malnutrition among children and 
a high mortality rate; and overwork of and lack of education for 
their children. 
  In past years, the report continues, the Guarani people's 
awareness of their status has changed perceptibly through the 
efforts of the Guarani People's Assembly which now represents 
approximately 80,000 Guaranis in Bolivia. The organization hopes 
to expand its membership to Guaranis in Brazil, Paraguay, and 
Argentina. Programs on their behalf are now better known, such 
as the Bilingual Intercultural Project being developed in 
Cordillera and the literacy campaign launched in 1992. The 
Guaranis in Cordillera, Santa Cruz Department, are better 
organized than those in other departments and have been able to 
hang on to their lands in the face of constant threats. Their 
organizational structure revolves around the five pillars of the 
PISET program (Production, Infrastructure, Education, Land, and 
Territory) which is Supported by various government and 
nongovernmental organizations. In addition, the organization 
Tierra has been able to buy lands and relocate escaped Guarani 
communities on them. Finally, the report concludes, the Guarani 
people are encouraged to denounce the injustices committed 
against them, because they now have a representative in Congress 
who is of Guarani descent. 

