BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, May 25 (YONHAP) -- North Korea is beckoning 
South Koreans to invest and visit China via its ports, officials 
of the Korea Maritime and Port Administration, a trade 
association and industry sources said Wednesday. 
  North Korea's External Economic Cooperation Promotion 
Committee Director, Hyon Sok-hui, met with South Korean shipping 
officials on May 15 in Yanji, China, promising free entry to 
Najin port for South Korean citizens as well as ships and 
guaranteeing their safety, the sources said. 
  Pyongyang has sought Beijing's cooperation in letting South 
Korean tourists to China use direct sea routes to the North 
Korean cities of Chongjin and Najin from South Korea's 
southeastern port of Pusan, Korea Foreign Trade Association 
(KFTA) officials said. 
  In addition, the communist North has asked South Korean 
companies to invest in the Najin and Sonbong free economic and 
trade zones as well as infrastructure projects. 
  North Korea's decision to allow port entry by South Koreans 
has often been conveyed indirectly via ethinc Korean businessmen 
in China, but never directly to South Korea by a senior Northern 
official. 
  South Korean shipping officials will meet with the external 
economic cooperation promotion committee vice chairman in 
Beijing on Saturday to specifically discuss regular direct 
service between Pusan and Najin as well as investment in the 
communist country. 
  KFTA officials confirmed that Pyongyang had proposed to the 
city governments of Hunchun, Tumen and Yanji that South Korean 
tourists bound for China be allowed to enter via its ports. 
  In return for allowing direct sea routes, the North has 
asked 
China to construct railways and roads connecting to the mainland 
and for support in road and railway construction. 
  By offering direct sea routes, Pyongyang wants to draw South 
Korean and Japanese investment into the railway and road network 
between North Korea and China, KFTA officials said. 
  If the idea is realized, South Koreans will be able to 
travel 
to Mt. Paektu and other places of interest adjacent to North 
Korea's border with China through North Korean soil starting 
from as early as next year. 
  But KMTA authorities point out that North Korea has not made 
formal notification of the decision through official channels 
like inter-Korean dialogue but via businessmen and Chinese 
provincial city governments, meaning the plan cannot be blindly 
accepted. 
  They say Seoul cannot allow free travel to the North unless 
Pyongyang promises to ensure the safety of its people through 
negotiations. 
  The industry, eager to take the North up on its offer, says 
Seoul should set aside politics to seek clarification from 
Pyongyang on exactly what its intentions are. 

