CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Tim Radford on an Atlas Which Utilises an 18-Year </F>
Study To Demonstrate the Geography of Disease: Cancer Map Shows 
North-South Divide"] 
  [Text] The first atlas of cancer cases in England and 
Wales, published yesterday [not reproduced] throws the geography 
of disease into relief across the country. 
  The analysis of 3 million cases over an 18-year period, 
county by county, reveals some puzzles and confirms the 
north-south health divide. 
  More than 70 maps, commissioned by the Cancer Research 
Campaign, show an excess of lung cancers in the north of 
England, of breast cancers among older women in the south, and 
as "hot spot" of stomach cancer in Wales. 
  But malignant melanomas of the skin occur with greater 
frequency in the south and west, where sunshine levels are 
highest. 
  The atlas shows a less easily explained excess of lip cancer 
in East Anglia and of thyroid cancer in north Wales. It also 
reveals Anglesey as having the highest incidence of penile, 
cervical and lip cancer in the country. 
  There are many reasons for cancer. "These can include your 
job, where and how you live, your diet, your drinking and 
smoking habits, and your sexual behaviour," said Professor 
Gordon McVie of the Cancer Research Campaign. 
  "This atlas will help cancer professionals to home in on 
areas of high risk and identify the reasons why some types of 
the disease are more common in a particular area." 
  Mapping of diseases began in 1850, when a London doctor 
tracked cholera cases and found a variation according to source 
of water supply. This was before cholera was identified as a 
water-borne disease. But epidemiology -- the science of the 
study of large numbers of cases according to patterns of 
behaviour -- has since been used to link lung cancer with 
smoking and scrotal cancer with some engineering industries, and 
mesothalamia with shipbuilding. 
  The atlas is supported by appendices carrying regional and 
county information on abortion rates, air pollution, alcohol 
consumption, household food purchases, percentages of residents 
born outside Britain, socio-economic and educational status, 
occupation, venereal disease clinic attendances, and so on. 
  The maps were prepared by Dr Anthony Swerdlow and Dr Isabel 
dos Santos Silva, of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine. They are based on records of an average 176,000 cases 
of cancers in each year between 1968 and 1985. More than 33,000 
were of lung cancer, and more than 20,000 were breast cancers. 
  There have been earlier maps of cancer mortality but these 
have not shown the whole picture, because some cancers are 
almost invariably fatal and some are more easily cured. 
  The statistics show a link between scrotal cancer and 
engineering, but no obvious link with leukaemia and nuclear 
power generation. 
  However, there are marked differences according to area. 
  Lancashire has 63 per cent more male lung cancers than the 
average for the rest of the country; Montgomeryshire recorded 85 
per cent fewer. Caernarvonshire and Staffordshire showed 37 per 
cent higher than average rates of stomach cancer, the Isle of 
Wight 35 per cent lower. 
  Prostate cancer incidence was higher in Cambridgeshire and 
Somerset, lower in Denbighshire and Durham. Lung cancer among 
women under 45 was lowest (60 per cent lower) in Hereford and 
Worcester and highest (74 per cent higher) in Northumberland. 
  Breast cancer for women under 45 was highest in Lincolnshire 
(40 per cent) and lowest in Camarthenshire (24 per cent). 
  The Atlas of Cancer Incidence in England and Wales 
1968-1985; Oxford University Press; &pound;170. 

