OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 947A0009A </F>
<F P=104>  St. Petersburg BOTANICHESKIY ZHURNAL </F>
 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by A. K. Skvortsov and M. G. Pimenov, Main </F>
Botanical Garden of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and 
Botanical Garden of Moscow State University imeni M. V. 
Lomonosov, Moscow: ``Soros Foundation Grants for the Problem of 
`Biological Diversity'''; UDC 58:061.21:06.026.53] 
  [Text] The funding of research through a system of grants 
offered on a competitive basis by different foundations is a 
common practice in the West. At the present time, this form of 
funding is also coming to our country but, unfortunately, this 
is happening in the presence of progressive "cuts" in State 
allocations. Thus far, George Soros, the well-known American 
financier and public figure, originally from Hungary, has made 
some real steps to support Russian science. Recently, the 
endeavors of Soros have been aired extensively in the Russian 
press. 
  One of the first Soros project in Russia and other CIS 
states 
was to provide a rather considerable sum to support research on 
biological diversity. Announcements of the competition for 
grants, which was established by the International Cultural 
Initiative Foundation and Russian Federation Academy of Natural 
Sciences [RANS], appeared in the press in June and July 1992. N. 
N. Vorontsov, RANS vice-president, was the initiator. 
  The competition was announced for the following directions 
of 
the Biodiversity problem: 
  1) systematics of plants (including fungi and 
microorganisms) 
and preservation of their biodiversity; 
  2) systematics of animals and preservation of their 
biodiversity; 
  3) paleosystematics and evolution of biodiversity; 
  4) genetic methods of studying and preserving biodiversity; 
  5) methods of preserving collections on biodiversity; the 
museum and collection business; 
  6) study and preservation of biodiversity in sanctuaries. 
  G. Soros allocated slightly less than a million dollars to 
the competition, planning to distribute this sum among close to 
4,000 grantees in republics of the former USSR (with the 
exception of the Baltic states, Ukraine and Moldova, where there 
are branches of the Soros Foundation). 
  It is known that something similar to grants has appeared in 
recent times in our research institutions as a sort of 
supplement to basic funding, but retention of dominance of 
administrative-feudal relations leads, not infrequently, to even 
greater flaws in distribution of funds that with the direct 
payment system. To avoid this, the Cultural Initiative 
Foundation selected the form of individual applications to 
participate in the competition without passing through any 
administrative entities. Two expert commissions, for Moscow and 
St. Petersburg, were created to hold the contest. The Moscow 
commission, headed by N. N. Vorontsov, consists of botanists V. 
A. Krasilov, M. G. Pimenov, A. K. Skvortsov, and V. N. 
Tikhomirov; the St. Petersburg commission, headed by Yu. I. 
Polyanskiy, comprises botanists M. A. Bondartseva, D. V. 
Geltman, N. S. Golubkova, S. G. Zhilin, R. V. Kamelin, N. N. 
Tsvelev, and B. A. Yurtsev. The expert commissions considered 
the following factors: consistency of topic in the submitted 
application and personal experience of the applicant with the 
orientation of the competition, potential benefit of announced 
research and, when screening applications according to Item 5, 
importance and general availability of the preserved 
collections. The Moscow applicants were examined by the St. 
Petersburg commission and the restby the Moscow commission, and 
each application was examined by at least three experts. 
  A total of 2,252 applications were received, and 2,110 
passed 
the competition. Most of the accepted applications came from 
Russia (1,885), 72 were from Armenia, 34 from Kazakhstan, 27 
from Belorussia, 26 from Georgia, 18 from Kyrgyzia, 13 from 
Turkmenia, 11 each from Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan, and 9 from 
Tajikistan. Botanical applications constituted about one-fourth 
of the total number (537 + 137 applications, which could be 
considered botanical), and there was approximately the same 
share among those accepted with regard to distribution in 
different states. Most of the applications submitted by 
botanists were received from the Botanical Institute imeni 
Komarov, RAN [Russian Academy of Sciences] (186), Moscow State 
University] (47), State Botanical Garden RAN (26), Institute of 
Plant Growing imeni N. I. Vavilov (12) and from other cities 
(Novosibirsk, Irkutsk, Vladivostok, Minsk, Alma-Ata, Penza, 
Tver, Ashkhabad, and others). The grants (each for $250) were 
paid out in a lump sum (once); payments began in March 1993. 
  In compiling this information, we used data kindly provided 
by A. P. Rasnitsyn, who performed the duties of commission 
chairman during a temporary absence of N. N. Vorontsov. 
  BOTANICHESKIY ZHURNAL, 1993 

