Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V. P. Pustovetov, A. B. Malyshev; UDC </F>
523.037:525.7] 
  [Abstract] The search for phenomena tying anomalous 
variations in certain physical characteristics of near-Earth 
space to geoseismic activity has, to some extent, been 
successful in that satellite studies have uncovered anomalous 
low-frequency electromagnetic radiation in the upper ionosphere 
over the epicenters of earthquakes just before the ground 
activity begins. The source of the radiation is believed to be a 
ULF/ELF wave generated by seismoelectric transformations in the 
earthquake focus. The considerable spread of the parameters of 
the anomalous radiation in near-Earth space and the episodic 
nature of the phenomenon point to the variety and ambiguity of 
the generation and propagation of the seimoelectromagnetic 
radiation. The movement of such radiation into the ionosphere 
and the magnetosphere could cause variations in certain physical 
characteristics of charge particles of near-Earth plasma. Such 
has been the conclusion of research that studied the 
relationship between short-term sporadic deviations in the flux 
of high-energy particles trapped by the geomagnetic field and 
geoseismic activity. Analysis of the relationship between number 
of earthquakes and difference between the time of main shock and 
time of deviation of particle flux has produced a figure of 
t 
as approximately 2.5 hours. The researchers here set out to 
either confirm that finding or refute it by examining data 
obtained for the period of 16 June to 16 July 1990. They studied 
variations preceding the lithospheric earthquakes by 1-5 hours 
and focused near the L parameter corresponding to a projection 
of the earthquake coordinates to an altitude of 100 km. 
Sixty-four percent of the earthquakes occurring within the 
stated time frame were in a region whose center had the 
coordinates of 37N lat, 49.5E long. The researchers 
confirmed a space-time correlation between earthquakes with a 
magnitude of 3 or greater and the anomalous variation. Figures 
3, references 13: 11 Russian, 2 Western. 

