BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "What Can We Expect of This Government?"] </F>
  [Text] Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata has finished forming 
his cabinet, and the Hata government has finally been launched. 
  When a new government is formed, the normal practice for a 
newspaper is to write an editorial expressing hopes for what it 
should do or to give advice involving words of encouragement and 
expectations. But this time we cannot bring ourselves to do 
that. To our sorrow, we cannot find words for the government 
which has lost the trust of the people even before it set sail. 
  The only thing we can ask of it is not to think about 
prolonging its life, but to consider it a step toward the next 
stage of the reorganization of the political arena. 
  The prime minister may be asking himself the following 
question: "Cannot spilled milk be put back into a pot?" No 
sooner was he named prime minister than his friends engaged in 
trickery and chased the Social Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ] 
out into enemy hands. It will not be easy to regain the trust 
once lost. 
<H5>  Feeling Uneasy When Trusting the Government </H5>
  There are many kinds of people in this world. There are 
people who wanted Hata to become prime minister and those who 
did not. Among those who wanted him, there are also many types, 
ranging from those who support Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] 
to those who support the SDPJ. Even among those who did not 
want him, there are those who thought: "Well, if this is the 
given condition, I hope he will do one thing or another." 
  Being put in charge of the government of a nation means 
being 
entrusted by such different kinds of people to run their 
fortunes and destinies. That is the mission of a government, 
and that is why the position of prime minister is so weighty. 
  Of course, it would be impossible to take the demands of 
everyone into consideration. Sometimes he has to make decisions 
the people do not like. Nonetheless, he must be acutely aware 
at all times that there are many kinds of people. Only then can 
there be trust in politics that goes beyond simple principles 
and assertions. 
  This need is even greater in the case where a coalition 
government is in power. Whatever the reason may be, if a 
government thinks it should expel colleagues who have different 
views, the public will not feel at ease with such a government. 
  We are not saying we cannot understand the feelings of the 
parties which are irritated by the SDPJ. We often feel that way 
ourselves. But the SDPJ is now in agony and at a loss amidst 
changing times. This in a way represents a picture of the 
Japanese who have lived through postwar Japan. Before 
everything else, the party was a partner of the coalition. 
  If Shinseito says it has forgotten about this in the heat of 
the power struggle, no one will believe the party when it 
discusses welfare, human rights, or fairness. After all, if the 
people of Shinseito are the kind of people who had misread the 
thinking of the SDPJ--which was not so difficult to 
understand--we wonder if they can ever understand the delicacies 
of diplomacy. 
  We are not defending the SDPJ. We are only defending the 
basic rules of democracy. Naturally, if the SDPJ were the party 
which produced a prime minister and did the same thing, we would 
be writing the same thing about it in this editorial. 
<H5>  Shocked by the Transformation of a New Foreign Minister </H5>
  When the Hosokawa coalition government was formed last 
summer, we welcomed it. That was because we thought the new 
government--which was a coalition of parties gathered under the 
banner of "change"--would put an end to the bad habits of the 
long-ruling Liberal Democratic Party [LDP]. But the Hosokawa 
government went on to change its color, and the new Hata 
government turned out to be a complete betrayal of our 
expectations. 
  The new cabinet indeed can be said to be the realization--in 
a different form--of the once-considered idea of the 
"LDP-Komeito-Democratic Socialist Party government." The 
joining of Mutsuki Kato, known as "the grey senior official" in 
the Lockheed scandal, with the cabinet also symbolizes its 
deviation from a government aimed at political reform. 
  We do not want to talk more about the faces of the 
Shinseito-led cabinet--which creates the illusion that the LDP's 
power faction has returned to life--but we do want to at least 
refer to Mr. Koji Kakizawa, who gained the post of foreign 
minister in the cabinet. He became the head of a new party after 
it failed to install Michio Watanabe as its head. 
  We would like to recall that it was none other than Kakizawa 
who represented the LDP in an interpellation of the cabinet at 
the plenary session of the House of Representatives on 7 March. 
He was the one who harshly criticized "the absence of economic 
and foreign policies" in the Hosokawa government, and demanded 
"the coalition dissolve itself and hand over government to the 
LDP." 
  Politics may be an element of life. But politics should 
involve a certain degree of justice and integrity. What sort of 
philosophy of life would the majority of the people--who will 
not get on in the world at all--learn from this method of 
transformation practiced by people like Kakizawa? 

