BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "is": "The Slovak Republic Stopped Being a </F>
Creditor and Became a Debtor Last Year"] 
  [Text] Bratislava--On 1 January 1993, state financial 
assets--that is, state resources on Slovak National Bank [NBS] 
accounts, the government's claims against foreign partners, 
claims taken over from Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka 
[Czechoslovak Foreign Trade Bank], the state's deposits with 
international banks, the state's deposits in domestic companies, 
claims from financial assistance and realized guarantees, and 
securities and other claims--amounted to 99.3 billion Slovak 
korunas [Sk]. On the other hand, state financial 
liabilities--the state's liabilities with the NBS, the 
government's liabilities with foreign partners, the state's 
liabilities with commercial banks, liabilities abroad taken over 
from Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, and liabilities stemming 
from the issue of state bonds--amounted to Sk96 billion. Hence, 
the Slovak Republic's property and financial position was that 
of a creditor to the tune of Sk3.3 billion. 
  By the end of last year, the Slovak Republic's creditor's 
position turned into that of a debtor, with state financial 
liabilities exceeding state financial assets by Sk19.3 billion. 
(This sum includes the liability of Sk5.8 billion stemming from 
the clearing account with the Czech Republic.) The change, 
compared with the beginning of the year, between the level of 
state financial assets and liabilities represents minus Sk22.6 
billion. "This situation results chiefly from the Sk21.84 
billion rise in debts with the NBS and the Sk3.69 billion rise 
in debts with other domestic economic entities. In relation to 
foreign countries, on the other hand, the Slovak Republic's 
creditor's position has become even stronger," states the draft 
of the state closing account of the Slovak Republic for 1993. 
The draft continues: "On the side of state financial assets, 
the greatest growth was registered by government claims against 
foreign partners, which now constitute 56.5 percent of all state 
financial assets. The increase was due mainly to the crediting 
of interest and exchange rate differences to the account." 
  The increase in state financial liabilities, on the other 
hand, was caused mainly by the growth in the state's liabilities 
with the NBS, which financed the state budget deficit of 
Sk23.011 billion, the report states. 

