Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Feature comprising address to Russia's citizens from the </F>
Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs and "Materials from" 
"Report by the Ministry of Internal Affairs to Russia's 
Citizens" under the "ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA Exclusive" rubric: "We 
Will Conquer Crime Jointly" 
  [Text] We hope that this report on our work, 
published for the first time ever in ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA, will 
help to give an objective impression of the results and problems 
of the operational and service activity of MVD [Ministry of 
Internal Affairs] organs and troops. 
  At the same time we would like Russians to realize that 
the capacity of law enforcement organs to perform the tasks 
assigned to them increases in direct proportion to the support 
given to them by the entire population. 
  Therefore Russia's MVD addresses all citizens, 
political parties and movements, public and religious 
organizations, state employees, entrepreneurs, and workers in 
state and commercial structures with an appeal to rally for the 
sake of the nationwide cause -- the struggle against crime. 
  Each and every one of us must realize that a war is being 
waged against crime and that if the organs of law and order and 
society's healthy forces give in to the murderers, violent 
criminals, thieves, robbers, embezzlers, and corrupt elements of 
all hues, there will be no future for Russia. 
  We appeal to all Russians not to remain passive onlookers of 
other people's grief and human suffering, to perform their civic 
and moral duty, and to help us in imposing order in the country, 
fully exercising at the same time their legitimate right to 
necessary self-defense. 
  We ask the Russian parliament not to delay the adoption of 
legislative acts on immediate measures in the struggle against 
crime, especially organized crime and corruption. 
  We address the federal and local organs of power and 
self-government to give the MVD organs material, technical, and 
financial support. Miserliness in the struggle against crime 
works out too expensive. 
  We address the Russian intelligentsia, our teachers, the 
workers in science and the arts, and the clergy: Help us by 
means of your moral example, words, and deeds in these hard 
times. 
  We are fully determined to strengthen our cooperation with 
journalists and render the MVD's system as open as possible to 
them. 
  We appeal to the young people -- talented, morally and 
physically staunch, and prepared to make sacrifices for the sake 
of the law's triumph -- to join our ranks. 
  We address the older generation and the veterans. Believe 
us, your lives have not been in vain. We appeal to you: Carry 
on educating the young generation in the spirit of patriotism 
and love for the fatherland, the spirit of respect for the 
letter and spirit of the law and the people upholding it. 
  Entrepreneurs and representatives of state economic and 
commercial structures: Your successful activity based on the 
law means more than just your good reputation and your personal 
prosperity. It is also the path to our society's prosperity. 
Do not resent spending money on the struggle against crime and 
on social and charitable programs, help people in distress. 
Society will be grateful for your self-sacrifice and 
benevolence. 
  Citizens of Russia! We have a common and extremely dangerous 
enemy threatening our national security -- crime. We will 
succeed in defeating it only through joint efforts by the whole 
of society, through resolute and offensive actions. 
  [signed] Russian MVD 
  The internal affairs organs and the Internal Troops 
performed 
their operational and service tasks in complex sociopolitical 
and economic conditions distinguished by persistent inflation, 
deterioration of the prosperity of some groups of the 
population, and growing social tension. 
  Nonetheless, quite a large volume of law enforcement work 
was 
done. Some 1.263 million people were charged [izoblicheno] with 
having committed crimes, and money and valuables worth 168 
billion rubles [R] and more than one tonne of precious metals 
were confiscated from them. 
  For the first time in the last five years, the growth of 
crime has been somewhat contained thanks to the joint efforts by 
state and regional structures. Crime rose by only 1.4 percent 
in 1993. Crime has been reduced in virtually every other region 
in Russia. 
  The system of the Russian MVD's organs and troops has proved 
in deed that it is a stably functioning state structure, capable 
of mobilizing itself and effectively performing its set tasks. 
Attempts by certain political forces to impair its work and 
compromise it have failed. 
  This was helped by the policy, firmly pursued by Russia's 
president and government, of stepping up the struggle against 
crime, consolidating law and order, and giving maximum support 
to the activity of MVD organs and troops. 
  The federal executive power took a step without precedent in 
the MVD organs' history -- centralized allocation of 
considerable manpower resources. A program for the 
stage-by-stage material and technical backup for internal 
affairs organs through 1995 was adopted at state level for the 
first time. 
  The activity of internal affairs organs will also be 
improved 
as a result of the reform launched on the Russian MVD's 
initiative, whose purpose is to consolidate the basic link -- 
city and rayon forces -- and to subordinate the entire 
operational and service activity to the protection of the civil 
rights and freedoms guaranteed by the new Constitution of the 
Russian Federation. 
<H5>  Crime Prevention </H5>
  The crime prevention measures adopted in 1993 failed to 
produce the expected results. 
  Serious crime continued to increase. The level of 
criminality also increased somewhat. 
  Russia's MVD, within the limits of its potential, countered 
criminality by large-scale utilization of the available men, 
equipment, and weapons along the most important avenues of the 
struggle against crime and in regions with complex operational 
conditions. A series of large-scale operational and preventive 
operations were conducted at interregional and federal levels. 
Just two of them -- "Signal" and "Podrostok," conducted 
simultaneously in 26 regions, resulted in the detention of 
28,000 criminals, the institution of administrative proceedings 
against more than 870,000 offenders, and the solution of about 
2,000 cases of theft and vehicle theft. 
  Attention was given to the prevention of violent crimes 
associated with drunkenness, gross behavior, moral squalor, 
personal animosity among some people, senseless and savage 
fights, and bodily harm and murder for domestic reasons. 
  Last year, and with a view to improving the situation in 
everyday life, control was established over 43,700 locations 
with high concentration of criminogenic elements, including 
34,000 dens of alcoholics and drug addicts. Some 290,000 
alcoholics and 6,500 drug addicts were committed to voluntary or 
compulsory treatment. 
  Adiministrative legislation was actively applied for 
preventive purposes. Proceedings for petty hooliganism were 
instituted against 1.168 million persons and 254,000 persons 
guilty of scandalous debauched behavior within the family. 
  Persons returning from places of detention were monitored by 
the militia. Any actions by those among them who attemted to 
resume their past activity were cut short. Criminal proceedings 
were instituted against 287,000, and administrative proceedings 
against 280,000 persons who had committed crimes previously. 
  One of the main tasks was to prevent child vagrancy and 
offenses by adolescents. Some 267,000 "difficult" adolescents 
were taken under preventive supervision. As a result of the 
work that was done, about 130,000 were taken off the records due 
to their rehabilitation. Measures were taken against 63,000 
parents who were neglecting their children's upbringing, and 
case files on 13,000 of them were sent to the courts to decide 
the question of deprivation of parental rights. 
  But there was no success in halting the growth of 
adolescent crime. 
  The reason is that the level of society's moral influence on 
the younger generation declined everywhere. The numerous 
science and technology study circles and free sports facilities 
for children have closed down. The number of adolescents 
without parental supervision has increased. 
  Many organs of local self-government have ceased paying 
attention to jobs for adolescents and the organization of their 
free time. Whereas two-thirds of minors on the militia's 
records vacationed out of the cities in 1988, only one-third did 
so last year. 
  Generally speaking, the negative changes in the status of 
criminality are the consequence of social prohlems associated 
with the weakening of state power, the growth of legal 
nihilism, the moral degradation of some groups of the 
population, the aggravation of the population's incomes 
differentiation, and the emergence of the destitute and the 
unemployed. 
  Russia's MVD realizes that these problems can be solved only 
at state level. Therefore, much hope is pinned on the federal 
program for the struggle against crime, the revival of the 
system of social law enforcement formations and the revision of 
its purpose, and the cooperation with religious organizations, 
commissions for minors' affairs, guardianship and health care 
organs, employment services, and centers for the social 
protection of children and adolescents. 
  A reliable juridical base is also necessary in order to 
solve 
the problems of crime prevention and law enforcement. Last year 
Russia's MVD was involved in the preparation of 70 draft laws 
and legal acts of the Russian Federation president and 
governments, which are already in force. 
  But legislation is obviously lagging behind the 
realities of life. 
  The law enforcement organs especially need the earliest 
possible adoption of new criminal, criminal procedure, and penal 
codes. They would provide the basis of their activity. 
  Russia's MVD has addressed the State Duma with a request to 
urgently consider the draft laws on key problems of the struggle 
against crime and the functioning of the law enforcement system, 
and hopes that deputies will support it. 
<H5>  Results of the Work To Investigate and Solve Crimes </H5>
  The duty sections of internal affairs organs are the main 
organizers of the solution of crime "hot on the trail." Last 
year they organized up to 1.5 million scene-of-crime visits by 
investigating operations groups. Crimes solved "hot on the 
trail" with participation by duty sections accounted for 44.8 
percent of the total. 
  A large volume of the work to solve crimes was done by 
criminal investigation detectives, criminology experts, 
investigators, and officials from other services. 
  The clear-up rate improved somewhat thanks to their hard 
work 
(from 46.9 percent in 1992 to 50.6 percent in 1993). Some 1.395 
million crimes were solved, including 273,000 serious crimes. 
  Broad publicity was given to the solution of the serial 
murders of women and children committed by the sex maniacs 
Golovkin and Ryakhovskiy in Moscow Oblast and Tsyuman in Rostov 
Oblast, of the three monks in Optinaya Pustyna, and the armed 
raid on Krasnoyarsk Kray's Mostovskiy Rayon Internal Affairs 
Department. Unique treasures worth R10 billion were recovered 
from robbers who stole them from the arts combine museum in 
Dagestan's settlement of Kubachi. 
  Internal affairs organs, jointly with the Russian Army and 
subunits of the Federal Counterintelligence Service, 
successfully conducted a unique operation last December to 
release the school pupils seized by bandits in Rostov-na-Donu -- 
one of the most complex operations in the entire world practice 
in the struggle against terrorism. 
  On the whole, the personnel were more resolute in 
counteracting the criminal elements. Last year staffers of the 
internal affairs organs used firearms on 2,200 occasions to deal 
with crime, and in this process 376 dangerous criminals who 
offered armed resistance were killed. 
  The investigations apparatus is a key link among the 
services and subdivisions providing backup for the solution of 
crimes. 
  Last year investigators of the internal affairs organs 
handled 2.7692 million criminal cases. Investigations of 
753,000 cases were completed (up 12.6 percent), and 542,000 of 
these (up 20.2 percent) were sent on to prosecutors with the 
appropriate indictments. Some 437,700 suspects were detained 
during preliminary investigations, and almost two-thirds of them 
were subsequently arrested. 
  But the principle of the inevitability of punishment was not 
fully applied. About one-half of all crimes -- 1.364 million, 
725,000 of which involved theft of personal property -- remained 
unsolved. No culprits were identified in 6,400 murder cases, 
21,200 cases of grievous bodily harm, 18,900 robberies with 
violence, and 114,900 burglaries. One out of every four persons 
missing without trace and on the federal list of wanted persons 
was never found. 
  In 1994, Russia's MVD will tighten up to the utmost its 
requirements as regards results from the work to solve crimes. 
A package of measures has been elaborated and is being 
implemented to expose persons engaged in racketeering or 
committing contract murders, burglaries, robberies with 
violence, hijackings of motor vehicles, and thefts of cultural 
treasures. We still have to improve the system for tracing 
criminals who are on the run from investigation and court 
proceedings and persons who have vanished without trace, 
especially those who have disappeared in criminal circumstances. 
  The work of tracing operations groups will be stepped up to 
expose extortionists, robbers, thieves, organizers of fraudulent 
gambling, and other criminal elements. 
  At the same time, these and other measures will not yield 
the desired results unless an end is put to the persistent 
judicial practice of passing unjustifiably soft sentences on 
persons guilty of committing serious crimes. 
  During the first half of last year, and despite the 
commission of crimes in aggravating circumstances, criminal 
punishment sentences not involving detention were passed on 
about 60 percent of persons guilty of thefts and on more than 50 
percent of persons involved in robberies. 
  The courts passed detention sentences on only 9.2 percent of 
officials and other persons in positions of responsibility found 
guilty of embezzlement by misappropriation, fraud, or abuse of 
office in aggravating circumstances. 
  Almost 42 percent of criminals who had committed 
embezzlement 
on especially large scale went free. Just over one-third of 
corrupt functionaries, proved by militia staffers to be guilty 
of bribery, were given real detention sentences. 
<H5>  The Struggle Against Organized and Armed Crime and Corruption </H5>
  Last year the internal affairs organs exposed 5,700 
organized crime groups, this being one-third more than in 1992. 
  Criminal proceedings were instituted against 11,400 
organizers and active members of criminal groupings. One out of 
every six groups engaged in interregional criminal activities, 
while more than 300 groupings committed criminal actions outside 
Russia either jointly with criminal elements from nearby and 
distant foreign countries, or autonomously. 
  According to operational data, there was a total of almost 
150 major criminal fraternities operating across Russia's 
territory and controlling the activity of several thousand 
numerically smaller and less organized groupings. According to 
operational data, their sphere of influence extended over more 
than 35,000 entities engaged in economic activity. 
  These mafia-style fraternities tried to divide the 
federation's territory into spheres of influence, got actively 
involved in the economy, and lobbied for their interests with 
power structures at all levels, using in this process bribery, 
blackmail, threats, and direct violence. 
  In these conditions, Russia's MVD was forced to undertake 
the 
creation of a fundamentally new system of organs for the 
struggle against organized crime -- strictly centralized, 
enjoying reliable operational information, and having at their 
disposal specialized mobile rapid reaction combat subdivisions. 
  Their contribution to the struggle against organized crime 
is 
already more substantial. Forces from regional administrations 
for organized crime, in collaboration with other services of 
internal affairs organs, eliminated a considerable number of 
dangerous gang formations and confiscated from the criminals 
more than 1,100 cars, about 500 radio transmitters, and 11,700 
firearms. MVD organs confiscated from illegal circulation 
53,000 firearms, including 7,400 rifled weapons. 
  The struggle against corruption was stepped up somewhat. 
  Some 4,500 instances of bribery (up 34.8 percent) and about 
1,500 officials in breach of the president's edict on the 
struggle against corruption were exposed. Two-thirds of those 
officials were dismissed from office or incurred different forms 
of punishment. 
  At the same time, Russia's MVD is highly critical of the 
results of the struggle against organized crime and corruption. 
  Many corrupt functionaries still engage in graft with 
impunity, illegally open accounts with banks abroad, acquire 
real estate abroad, and include their relatives as cofounders of 
commercial structures sponsored by them. 
  So far there have been few results from efforts to solve 
criminal explosions and contract murders, including murders of 
bankers and entrepreneurs, committed by criminal fraternities. 
  The aggressiveness of the struggle against such criminal 
activity is also held back by the absence of laws "On Struggle 
Against Organized Crime," "On State Protection of Judges and 
Staffers of Law Enforcement and Monitoring Organs," "On 
Protection of Witnesses, Victims, and Other Persons Cooperating 
with Criminal Proceedings," and "On Immunity from Criminal 
Liability as a Result of Effective Repentance and Participation 
in Operational Investigations Activity." 
  This year Russia's MVD is preparing new targeted strikes 
against criminal groups operating in the sphere of motor 
vehicles production and engaged in the marketing of stolen cars, 
including abroad; gang formations raiding railroad junctions, 
highways, airports, and coastal and border regions. 
  It is planned to conduct large-scale operations in the 
struggle against organized crime, primarily in regions where 
criminal groupings are most active. The sources and channels 
for the illegal circulation of weapons, ammunition, and 
explosives will be resolutely blocked. It is planned to conduct 
comprehensive stocktaking of weapons wherever they are 
manufactured, transported, stored, or used. 
  At the same, time, efforts are being stepped up in the 
struggle against drugs trafficking. Last year already saw the 
detection of 53,200 such crimes (an increase by a factor of 
1.8). There were twice as many detected instances of the 
manufacture and marketing of drugs (8,200 cases). More than 54 
tonnes of drugs and narcotic plants were confiscated, and about 
300 underground laboraties were eliminated, including 
laboratories producing synthetic drugs. 
  But the efforts of internal affairs organs alone are clearly 
not enough. The activity of medical institutions dealing with 
the cure of drug addicts is being curtailed. There is a lack of 
the necessary means and effective methods to destroy the raw 
materials base of drug addiction, while more than 1 million 
hectares of Russian land are polluted by hemp growing in the 
wild. 
  This is why Russia's MVD devotes the most serious attention 
to the elaborated of a federal targeted program of 
"Comprehensive Measures To Counter the Abuse and Illegal 
Trafficking of Drugs in 1994-1995." 
<H5>  Ensuring Economic Security, Protecting the Consumer Market </H5>
  The criminal militia subdivisions exposed 110,400 crimes in 
this sphere. The number of exposed cases of large and 
especially large embezzlement increased by one-fourth (to reach 
7,500). 
  The most serious economic crimes were exposed and blocked in 
the sphere of credit and banking relations. Criminals exploited 
to the utmost loopholes in legislation and shortcomings in the 
organization of banking activity, specifically the flaws in the 
system of interbank settlements, the lack of security along the 
channels for transmission of payment documents, and the breaches 
by commercial banks of elementary rules for conducting money 
operations. This resulted in large-scale swindles involving 
forged payment advices and "Rossiya" checks, illegal acquisition 
and utilization of preferential credits, and other mercenary 
abuses. 
  The MVD organs, within the limits of their powers, countered 
these crimes which are essentially financial 
sabotage. There were 4,300 crimes successfully exposed in 
the banking system in 1993, including cases of embezzlement 
whose number increased by a factor of 3.7. The misappropriation 
of almost R2 trillion was prevented, and 429 criminal groupings 
were exposed. 
  A Russian Federation Interdepartmental Commission for 
Questions of Cooperation Between Banks and law Enforcement 
Organs was created with a view to imposing order in banking 
affairs. Additional proposals are being elaborated, aimed at 
enhancing the status and efficiency of this coordinating organ. 
  In the conditions of the state border's "transparency," 
measures were taken to prevent the exportation of oil products, 
strategically important raw materials, other commodities subject 
to quota limitations, and foreign currency assets. More than 
9,000 crimes involving the illegal exportation of strategic raw 
and other materials were exposed. Operation "Trawl" alone, 
conducted jointly with other law enforcement organs, blocked the 
illegal exportation of 97,900 tonnes of oil products, 17,800 
tonnes of metal, and goods in short supply worth more than R18 
billion. 
  A struggle was waged againt the counterfeiting of money. 
  The release of counterfeit money to a total of more than 
R1.5 
billion and $650,000 into circulation was prevented; counterfeit 
Russian money to a total of R9.4 billion and privatization 
checks to a total value of R64 million were confiscated from 
circulation. Proceedings were instituted against more than 400 
makers and distributiors of counterfeit bank notes. But 
subdivisions of the Ministry of Finance, the State Bank, and 
Goznak [Main Administration for Production of State Bank Notes, 
Coins, and Medals] must immediately take the most resolute 
measures to protect Russian currency against forgeries. This is 
the only way to halt this criminal aggression. 
  Some 27,700 crimes involving privatization checks were 
exposed. Numerous instances were discovered when the balance 
sheet value of facilities being privatized had been reduced, or 
when facilities whose privatization was prohibited had been 
either sold or leased with the right to subsequent purchase. 
  Some measures were implemented to impose order in the 
consumer market. Last year saw the exposure of about 15,000 
instances when purchasers were defrauded, and 5,000 cases of 
illegal enterprise. 
  But the measures being taken are still ineffective and the 
process of criminalization in individual spheres of the economy 
is swelling. In order to contain it, we need measures, 
coordinated at federal government level, to improve the entire 
economic mechanism's work. 
  More aggressive actions are also needed by monitoring 
organs. 
There is only slow advance in the process of setting up 
subdivisions of the tax police, the antimonopoly committee, the 
foreign currency and export control services, the alcohol 
inspectorate, and others. 
  Russia's MVD, jointly with other ministries and departments, 
plans to institute rigid control over the utilization of all 
kinds of financial and credit benefits; to continue its 
inspections of the formation of initial capital in commercial 
structures, primarily those created by utilizing state property. 
  It is also planned to conduct an inspection of the legality 
of barter deals involving the delivery of rare-earth and 
nonferrous metals and of fish and other produce to nearby and 
distant foreign countries. 
  There will be an investigative operations audit in 40 
regions 
to cover almost 1,300 entities engaged in entrepreneurial 
activity, which are directly or indirectly involved in 
embezzling from the banking system R80 billion using forged 
paytment advices and R68 billion using the unauthorized entry of 
false data in the computer network of the Central Bank of Russia 
Main Payments and Cash Center. 
  It is planned to give assistance to customs organs and 
border 
guards in cities with international sea and river ports and 
airports. 
<H5>  Ensuring Public Order and Protecting Property </H5>
  About 100,000 precinct patrol details covered the streets of 
Russia's population centers to ensure public order. They took 
part in solving 73,300 crimes, including 30,300 thefts, 
burglaries, and robberies with violence. 
  The OMON [special purpose militia detachment] servicemen 
made 
a certain contribution toward ensuring public order. Several 
additional such detachments were formed last year. Now they 
exist in 77 republic, kray, and oblast centers, as well as in 20 
cities with a population of more than 300,000. 
  But there was no success in halting the growth of acts 
of violence and vandalism in Russia's city streets. They 
were the scene of 334,000 crimes, or of one out of every eight. 
  This is to a certain extent due to the fact that patrols are 
understrength. Many organs of state power in Federation 
components and organs of local self-government are in no hurry 
to implement the demands of the Russian president's edict on the 
public safety militia. Consequently, the strength of patrols in 
the Federation as a whole is just over 50 percent of the set 
normatives. This service is staffed only 15-30 percent in 
Novgorod, Orel, Tver, Rostov, and Chita Oblasts. 
  In the conditions of militia cadre shortage, Russia's MVD 
was 
forced to ask the public for help. Following an initiative by 
MVD organs, voluntary people's militia detachments, including 
Cossack detachments, resumed their activity in Krasnodar and 
Stavropol Krays and in Astrakhan, Vladimir, Volgograd, Vologda, 
Voronezh, Rostov, Samara, and Yaroslavl Oblasts. The first 
15,000 members of voluntary people's militia detachments also 
appeared in Moscow. 
  The potential of 3,000 nonstate protection and detection 
structures, legislatively authorized to use gas weapons and 
personal protection means, started being utilized for the sake 
of ensuring public order. Thus, jointly with Moscow Oblast's 
Noginskiy Rayon Internal Affairs Administration, one such 
protection enterprise performs special missions to prevent 
thefts and the uanthorized tacking of motor vehicles and 
participates in motor vehicles inspections. And this is not an 
isolated example. 
  Russia's MVD is enhancing its demandingness toward the 
precinct patrol service, the external appearance, helpfulness, 
and proper behavior of patrolmen, and their initiative and 
determination in dealing with offenses. A system of daily 
reporting and monitoring the work of each staffer of this 
service is being introduced. 
  There will also be an enhancement of the personal 
responsibility borne by precinct inspectors for the state of law 
and order, the management of militia details on their territory, 
and their constant contacts with the population. 
  Last year they solved more than 232,000 crimes, including a 
large number of domestically-motivated cases of murder and 
grievous bodily harm, as well as mercenary offenses. 
  Extradepartmental protection ensured the safeguarding of the 
property of citizens and installations under all forms of 
ownership. This service protected 485,000 blocks and apartments 
and about 300,000 enterprises, banking institutions, stores, and 
warehouses. There were about 3,000 centralized protection 
centers in operation. Some 8,500 armed security groups with the 
right of arrest [vooruzhennaya gruppa zaderzhaniya] operated 
around the clock. 
  The relaibility of protection remains quite stable. On 
average, there is success in preventing 96 percent of attempted 
thefts from protected facilities. As a result of this, thefts 
of property worth many billions of rubles have been prevented. 
  The protection of facilities for the storage of weapons, 
narcotics, precious metals, historical and artistic treasures, 
and expensive consumer goods will be stepped up in 1994. 
  At present the extradepartmental protection service has the 
latest alarm and warning systems and sufficient manpower. We 
have a chance to conclude contracts for the protection of 
commercial banks, offices, and so on. All we need is for 
leaders of enterprises under all forms of ownership to show 
interest in cooperating with protection service subdivisions. 
<H5>  Ensuring Road and Fire Safety </H5>
  A certain volume of work has been done in the sphere of 
ensuring road safety. Gross violations of the Road Traffic 
Regulations resulted in the detention of 26 million drivers, 
including 1.69 million for driving motor vehicles while drunk. 
  State Motor Vehicles Inspectorate [GAI] staffers detected 
more than 5 million instances of drivers breaking the speed 
limit and 2.3 million cases of breaches of seat belt regulations. 
  Despite the measures that have been taken, the number of 
deaths on the roads reached 37,120, while 192,800 Russians were 
maimed or injured. 
  The deterioration of the quality of Russian roads 
made a significant contribution to the high incidence of road 
accidents. The standards elaborated by the MVD, jointly with the 
Russian Ministry of Transport, for the building and maintenance 
of roads were not observed by the majority of economic 
organizations. 
  The new Road Traffic Regulations are designed to enhance 
road 
safety. They regularize road traffic in housing zones and 
farming areas. They clearly define the militia staffers' rights 
as regards subjecting drivers to breathalyzer tests and the 
verification of drivers' knowledge of the rules and their 
driving habits. It is planned to introduce an annual technical 
inspection of motor vehicles which have been in circulation for 
more than five years and are used for entrepreneurial activity. 
  Motor vehicles belonging to foreign legal entities and 
citizens (excluding diplomats) are now subject to state 
technical inspection. 
  At the same time, Russia's MVD perceives the high incidence 
of road accidents also as a consequence of the inefficiency of 
GAI's work. The monitoring of motor vehicles' technical 
condition remains inadequate. There are frequent instances of 
rash decisions to regulate road traffic. The problems of GAI 
staffers' participation in the tracing of hijacked and stolen 
vehicles were resolved only slowly. 
  Bearing in mind the extremely complex situation on the 
roads, 
Russia's MVD has instructed the GAI to adopt the strictest legal 
measures against deliberate offenders and to tighten its 
monitoring of the observance of rules, normatives, and standards 
operating in this sphere by departments, organizations, and 
citizens. 
  Measures are also being taken to establish an interregional 
determent system of militia control points on the highways. The 
federal computer system for tracing motor vehicles will be 
brought up to design strength. 
  Intense struggle was waged against fires. The measures that 
were taken made it possible to reduce their incidence in 26 of 
Russia's republics, krays, and oblasts. There were fewer fires 
in buildings for production purposes, stockbreeding premises, 
and other agricultural production facilities. Fires are less 
frequently started as a result of breaches of rules governing 
the installation and use of electrical equipment and domestic 
electrical appliances. A total of more than 710,600 fires were 
prevented, while 30,100 persons and material assets worth R94.2 
billion were saved from fires. 
  Nonetheless, there were 331,400 fires in Russia last year 
(5.9 percent more than in 1992), causing damage worth R203.9 
billion. The loss of human life as a result of fires reached 
13,700 persons. One out of every five dead persons was a child. 
Some 11,500 persons suffered injuries and burns. 
  This is mainly the result of noncompliance with the 
elementary demands of fire safety by officials and citizens. 
There was an especially large number of violations at 
facilities of the power industry, the timber processing 
industry, and railroad transport. 
  One out of every three fires was in a rural 
locality. Meanwhile, only one-third of collective farms 
have voluntary fire brigades, and their number is steadily 
declining. 
  The federal program "Fire Safety and Social Protection" was 
adopted last year on the initiative of Russia's MVD. It 
envisages a package of measures to develop the fire fighting 
service infrastructure, strengthen fire safety in the 
countryisde, and convert the professional fire fighting service 
into a militarized service. It is necessary to work on and 
resolve the question of creating municipal fire fighting service 
subdivisions funded from local budgets. 
<H5>  On the Work of Passport and Visa Subdivisions </H5>
  An autonomous Passport and Visa Service of the internal 
affairs organs was established last year in compliance with 
legislation. 
  The passport and visa subdivisions started their work in 
complex conditions. The issue of foreign travel passports, 
valid for five years and multiple journeys to all countries in 
the world, has resulted in long lines and in citizens' 
dissatisfaction with the long time it takes to deal with their 
applications. 
  Russia's MVD critically appraised the prevailing situation. 
Last May the government decided to reinforce the service by 
7,600 units and ensured its supply of blank foreign travel 
passports, thus partially alleviating the existing problems. 
  Last year the passport and visa subdivisions processed and 
issued to citizens a total of 3 million passports for temporary 
travel abroad (against 1.5 million in 1992), as well as 114,000 
passports to people traveling to take up permanent residence 
abroad (103,700 in 1992). 
  In addition to this, the service systematically monitored 
the 
rules governing residence by foreign citizens in the Russian 
Federation. Administrative proceedings were instituted against 
9,400 foreigners. The commission of offenses resulted in the 
forcible (under escort) deportation of 643 citizens of foreign 
states (354 in 1992). 
  In fulfillment of the Russian federation president's edict 
"On the State Seal of the Russian Federation," the service 
prepared a mockup of a new-style passport for Russian citizens. 
It is expected that it will be issued to tens of thousands of 
young people in the new year (provided it is approved). 
  A new procedure governing citizens' travel abroad, in line 
with the most rigorous international law standards, came in 
force in Russia 1 January 1993. Passports are issued to all who 
apply for them. The time for the processing of applications has 
been reduced (up to one month for temporary travel, up to three 
months for travel to take up permanent residence). 
  In the new year Russia's MVD requested the service's leaders 
to ensure compliance with the set time limits for dealing with 
citizens' applications and applications sponsored by 
organizations, as well as the proper standards when dealing with 
the population and processing applications for foreign travel 
documents. 
<H5>  On the Penal Organs' Work </H5>
  At the beginning of 1994 corrective labor institutions held 
about 600,000 persons, including 21,600 women and 19,100 
adolescents. In addition to this, 233,500 persons were held in 
pre-trial detention centers and jails. 
  The "criminogenic composition" of convicts deteriorated 
sharply. About one-half of them were serving punishment 
for violent crimes, 60 percent were repeat offenders, and more 
than 15 percent were alcoholics and drug addicts. 
  At the same time, there were also certain positive changes 
in 
the work to restore order in the [penal] colonies. The number 
of murders at places of detention declined by 25 percent, the 
number of escapes by one-third, and the number of mass 
disturbances by two-thirds. 
  Whereas the liberalization of the detention regime for 
convicts in the late eighties mainly boiled down to imposing 
softer punishment for offenses on rarer occasions, the policy 
now is to differentiate between the conditions of detention. 
  Russian penal legislation is now largely in line with world 
standards (but this cannot be said about the conditions of 
detention). Last year about 55,000 persons took advantage of 
the right to take leave involving travel beyond the place of 
detention, and 97 percent of them returned safely. 
  Punishment in the form of deprivation of visits, parcels, 
and 
letters, and of the shaving off of hair has been abolished. The 
legendary form of address as "Citizen Chief" has receded into 
the past -- convicts now can address representatives of the 
administration by their name and patronymic. Provision has been 
made for the convict's right to personal safety. If he is under 
threat of retribution by his "comrades" in detention, it is 
incumbent upon the adminisrration to take measures, right up to 
and including his transfer to another institution. Those who 
are serving sentences are guaranteed the freedom to practise 
their religion. At the same time, the law has increased to 
eight years' detention the punishment for escape in aggravating 
circumstances. 
  The corrective labor institutions make a significant 
contribution to the country's economy. The value of industrial 
output reached R319 billion. Forest-based corrective labor 
institutions produced commodity output worth R84.1 billion. 
They produced 7 percent of all commercial lumber, 16 percent of 
all railroad ties, and 23 percent of all summer cabins. 
  At the same time, the corrective labor institutions' 
enterprises, just like our entire economy, are suffering from 
inflation and the slump in production. Many of their business 
partners, lacking economic interest in the utilization of 
convict labor, continue to curtail the production sharing ties 
established with corrective labor institutions and halt 
deliveries of material resources. Consequently, some 200,000 
convicts were without work by the end of last year and yet the 
right to work was already being granted as reward for good 
behavior. 
  Pre-trial detention centers found themselves is a 
particularly difficult situation. 
  Today two-thirds of pre-trial detention centers and jails 
are 
dilapidated and some are housed in stockades dating back to the 
times of the Empresses Elizabeth and Catherine. The wall at the 
local pre-trial detention center in Novokuznetsk collapsed due 
to dilapidation and it was only luck that nobody died beneath 
the rubble. These institutions are overcrowded by a factor of 
1.5 above the set norms, while overcrowding in some of them -- 
St. Petersburg's Kresty, Moscow's Butyrka, and Yekaterinburg's 
pre-trial detention center -- is by a factor of three to four. 
  Taking all these facts into account, Russia's government 
adopted a special decree to reinforce the material and technical 
base of pre-trial detention centers and jails. Given proper 
financing, the MVD will ensure its unconditional fulfillment. 
<H5>  Service Activity of the Russian MVD Internal Troops </H5>
  In 1993 the Internal troops, jointly with the militia, 
guarded public order and safety, the most important state 
facilities and cargoes, and corrective labor colonies, and 
escorted convicts and detainees. A 5,000-strong grouping of 
troops was permanently stationed in North Ossetia and Ingushetia. 
  Soldiers and Officers of MVD troops took part in 80 
operations. They detained more than 5,000 persons who had 
committed crimes and 430,000 persons who had committed 
administrative offenses, and confiscated from criminal elements 
1,150 firearms, about 3,000 units of cold steel weapons, 21 kg 
of explosives, 28,000 rounds of ammunition, and 16 units of 
armored equipment and artillery systems. 
  They vigilantly served to guard cargoes and special 
facilities, especially in the nuclear arms complex and the 
atomic industry. Patrols and soldiers' details detained 48,000 
persons attempting to penetrate these facilities, and recovered 
for the state embezzled material resources worth R1 billion. 
More than 200 attempts by convicts to escape from corrective 
labor institutions were thwarted. 
  There are numerous examples of selfless performance of 
service duty by the troops' personnel. During the hearing of a 
case at Dagestan's Supreme Court, seven armed gunmen opened fire 
in the court room in an attempt to free the defendants. The 
Internal Troops escort, although in the minority, skillfully 
used their weapons and, jointly with militia staffers, rendered 
the criminals harmless. 
  But the Internal Troops find it quite hard to perform their 
set tasks -- the units' manpower strength is only 53 percent. 
In 1993 this situation was remedied by recruitment for contract 
service. About 10,000 contract servicemen were selected and have 
started serving. 
  A state program for the development of Internal Troops 
through the year 2000 was adopted on the Russian MVD's 
initiative. It is planned to create subunits for direct 
struggle against crime and equip them with new equipment and 
weapons, and to use transport aviation to enhance the units' 
mobility and their readiness for immediate actions in any of 
Russia's regions where a threat to internal security may develop. 
  By 1996 the functions of guarding places of detention will 
pass fully to the penal system, as is done in the overwhelming 
majority of countries. The Internal troops will be given an 
opportunity to concentrate fully on their main task: To protect 
the rights and freedoms of citizens, maintain internal 
stability, and struggle against crime. 
<H5>  International Cooperation </H5>
  The preservation on the territory of the former USSR of a 
"single criminogenic space" has required that the Russian MVD 
conduct an active search in conjuction with the ministries of 
internal affairs of the CIS countries for measures to counteract 
crime. 
  With our partners in the "nearby foreign parts" 11 
multilateral agreements have been signed concerning cooperation 
in various fileds of activity by the internal affairs organs. A 
specific mechanism for implmenting these agreements was 
discussed at sessions of a specially created organ -- the 
Conference of Internal Affairs Ministers of the Indepedent 
States. 
  The formation of a standing Bureau has been started for 
coordinating the fight against organized crime and against 
transnational groupings engaged in sophisticated extortion, 
weapons dealings, and banditry. 
  Apart from that, bilateral agreements have been concluded 
with the MVD's of Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan, Latvia, 
Kazakhstan, Armenia, Tajikistan, and Lithuania. 
  Interstate cooperation has progressed furthest of all 
in the sphere of combating the illegal traffic in 
narcotics. "Monitored deliveries" operations carried out 
jointly with the special services of foreign countries made it 
possible to arrest in Paris and Stockholm four citizens of 
Ghana, Liberia, Jamaica, and France involved in drugs 
trafficking. 
  Cooperation within the framework of Interpol is expanding. 
Of the 117 member countries of this organization, 115 cooperate 
with Russia's MVD. An up-to-date system of protective 
communications has being commissioned which makes it possible 
within 10-15 minuites to verify when and in which country a 
particular stolen vehicle was taken, and to carry out 
operational exchanges of information of other kinds with the 
general secretariat and national bureaus in Interpol's member 
countries. 
  In total, using Interpol's potential, 2,689 crimes were 
cleared up in 1993 including 1,257 motor vehicle thefts, 511 
economic crimes, 277 cases of the counterfeiting of money and of 
securities, 139 thefts of items of cultural value, and 109 
crimes against the person. 
<H5>  Material-Technical, and Financial Support </H5>
  The Russian MVD has done a certain amount of work on 
improving the material-technical, and financial support of the 
internal affairs organs. 
  However, the criminal world has kept pace with us and 
sometimes even overtaken us, having at its disposal modern 
weapons, efficient electronic instruments for observation, for 
monitoring of communications channels, and fast foreign-made 
transport means. 
  In 1993 the MVD organs' level of provision with equipment 
for 
operational and criminal detection purposes stood at 75 percent, 
automobiles and buses -- 65 percent, specialized transport for 
various purposes -- 46 percent, bullet-proof vests and handcuffs 
-- 50-70 percent. Because of a shortage of finance we were 
unable to acquire in excess of 7,000 passenger cars, 8,000 
trucks, 136 buses, and a considerable quantity of other 
equipment. The Russian MVD's indebtedness to industrial 
enterprises amounted to R27.5 billion rubles. 
  Operational services experienced a deficit of essential 
equipment. Last year every fourth motor vehicle in alert-duty 
units had to be written off. Duty vehicles were 70-percent 
provisioned with fuel and lubricants. Subunits concerned with 
organized crime were provided with less than half the necessary 
number of transport means and with only 40 percent of the 
computers, video equipment, movie and still cameras. 
  In 1994 appropriations in the order of R16 trillion and 
capital investment in the sum of R915 billion are required for 
the needs of the MVD organs, including finance for the State 
program for the phased development of the material-technical 
support of the internal affairs organs's operational-service 
activity for 1993-1995. 
<H6>  * * * </H6>
  The results of the operational-service activity of the 
internal affairs organs and internal troops during 1993 were 
discussed at an enlarged sitting of the Russian MVD collegium 
with the participation of Government Chairman V.S. Chernomyrdin, 
all the leaders of the MVD, main internal affairs directorates, 
internal affairs directorates, internal affairs directorates of 
the territories, district commanders of internal troops, chiefs 
of training establishments, and of a number of other subunits. 
  Serious concern was voiced to the participants in the 
session 
over the crime situation that is taking shape in the country. 
The results of work were subjected to comprehensive, objective, 
and critical analysis and the necessary additional measures were 
adumbrated. 
  The main task in 1994 is deemed to be the backup for the 
implementation of the provisions of the new Constitution of the 
Russian Federation, and reliable protection for the rights and 
interests of the individual. 
  The collegium approved the directive of the Russian 
Federation minister of Internal Affairs "On the Basic Guidelines 
for the Operational-Service Activity of the Internal Affairs 
Organs and Internal Troops in 1994," which defines a package of 
measures for imposing order in the country and for the 
substantial improvement of the results of work with crime and 
ensuring public security. 
  The necessary adjustments are being made to the organization 
of the activity of the internal affairs organs and internal 
troops in connection with the Russian President's Message to the 
Federal Assembly "On Strengthening the Russian State." 
  [Editorial note: The report is accompanied by the following 
grpahs and charts:] 


Dynamics of Crimes against the Person. 

               1989         1990         1991         1992         1993 

Murder         13,543       15,566       16,122       23,006       29,213 

Grievous       36,872       40,962       41,195       53,873       66,902 
Bodily Harm 

Rape           14,597       15,010       14,073       13,663       14,440 




------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Concerning Persons Committing Crimes (by occupation)                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Percentage of total                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Workers                               |31.6                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Private Farmers                       |0.3                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Kolkhoz Members                       |4.1                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Private Entrepreneurs and Members of  |2.6                                   | 
|Cooperative Ventures                  |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Office Workers                        |4.2                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Persons Without a Permanent Source of |34.0                                  | 
|Income                                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Students                              |1.0                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Pupils                                |6.9                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 




------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Structure of Corrupt Persons Liable To Be Tried Before a Court Who Have been | 
|Prosecuted.                                                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                                      |Percentage of Total                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Employees of the Customs Service      |2.5                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Staffers of Law-Enforcement Organs    |25.8                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Deputies                              |2.2                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Employees of Monitoring Organs        |3.8                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Employees of the Credit and Finance S-|11.3                                  | 
|ystem                                 |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Employees of Ministries, and Local Co-|42.7                                  | 
|mmittes and Structures                |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Others                                |11.4                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 



