BFN 

  [Excerpts] Nelson Mandela's electoral victory has been 
welcomed in Angola. Acting President of the Republic Franca van 
Dunem says the victory of Mandela and the ANC is also a victory 
for the Angolan people. 
  [Begin Van Dunem recording] I am pleased that the ANC 
struggle has culminated with its victory at the polls. I am 
convinced that my sentiment is shared by the majority of 
Angolans, who, for many years now, have rubbed shoulders with 
South African nationalists, and have given their best to make 
today's celebrations a reality throughout Africa. Likewise, the 
efforts of Angolans over the past years, which culminated in the 
ANC victory....[changes thought] I am convinced that the victory 
of the ANC and the South African people in general will be 
beneficial to developments throughout Africa. [end recording] 
[passage omitted] 
  Prime Minister Marcolino Moco is pleased with the outcome of 
the South African elections. 
  [Begin recording] [Moco] It is not an issue that only 
affects 
Angola. Obviously, Angola will benefit from the new situation 
that has been created in southern Africa. I would like to 
stress, however, that over the past years this process has 
attracted the attention of the whole world, and Africa in 
particular. It is not only a question of an ANC electoral 
victory, but fundamentally a process of liberation and struggle 
against racial segregation and of oppression of men by men. So, 
I think the ANC victory is very good for us because the ANC 
consists of our friends, who have fought by our side. I would 
like to stress the major change that is taking place in the 
world right now with the acknowledgment of all the victories the 
South African people have scored in the past few years. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] As South African president, 
will 
Nelson Mandela ask to play a more important role in the Angolan 
peace process? 
  [Moco] Any country involved in a process like this depends 
fundamentally on its own people and on the capacity of its 
politicians. That has been proven in South Africa. Like I said 
earlier, with the completion of the liberation process and of 
elections in South Africa, Nelson Mandela and his country will 
know how to make a major contribution to Angola's progress, 
including the peace process and development, because we are 
aware that South Africa is a major economic power. 
  [Correspondent] But what about the ongoing Lusaka talks? 
  [Moco] Well, I think the Lusaka talks have made a great deal 
of progress, despite a number of difficulties. What matters 
with the South African experience is to specifically consolidate 
the peace process in Angola and in southern Africa in general. 
I think this will be a very useful experience. The fact that 
Nelson Mandela and other South African politicians now have more 
time to take part in African meetings, particularly in southern 
Africa, will be very useful to us in general. [end recording] 

