Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Romanian President Ion Iliescu has said that 
relations between his country and Turkey are on the best level 
possible. Iliescu announced that he is waiting impatiently for 
President Suleyman Demirel's visit to further bilateral 
relations. Iliescu made these statements to a group of Turkish 
correspondents in Bucharest while answering their questions on 
bilateral relations and regional issues. Serdar Dimli reports 
from Bucharest: 
  [Begin Dimli recording] Both Iliescu and Romanian Foreign 
Minister Teodor Viorel Melescanu defined the relations between 
Turkey and Romania as excellent. Iliescu said: Our relations 
with Turkey are on the best possible terms and are being 
perpetually furthered in all areas. Demirel's visit will be a 
significant step toward furthering and strengthening these 
relations. We are giving exceptional importance to this 
dialogue in view of the roles both countries play in the 
stability of Europe. 
  In answer to a question on the kind of assistance he expects 
from Turkey regarding Romania's liberalization and privatization 
programs, Iliescu answered: We are currently undergoing the 
same experiences that other countries have gone through and we 
hope to make good use of these in our efforts at liberalization 
and the creation of a market economy. We also want to take 
advantage of Turkey's experience in establishing free economic 
zones since we see this as the most important step toward a 
modern economy. We are still conducting work toward 
establishing free economic zones in Constanta and Sulina on the 
shores of the Black Sea. Joint investment projects to be 
established between the two countries will contribute 
significantly toward the development and externalizing of the 
economies. 
  In answer to another question on his views regarding the 
future of the Romania-Black Sea Economic Cooperation Project and 
on ways to quicken this process, Iliescu said: It is to the 
advantage of all that regional countries develop their relations 
in all areas. Today, however, there is a political stability 
issue in the region and this situation is preventing regional 
countries from furthering their relations. The relations 
between Turkey and Romania should be an example of countries 
that make great efforts to establish stability. This kind of 
cooperation expanding to all the countries in the region will 
contribute toward the development of the project. 
  Romania, a regional country which has common borders with 
Serbia, closely follows the developments in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
and the former Yugoslavia. While answering questions regarding 
this issue, Iliescu said that he does not think a military 
approach to this issue is right. Iliescu said that it is 
necessary to find a peaceful solution to the issue with the help 
of international organizations and other countries. Iliescu 
indicated that the agreement reached between the Muslims in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Croats could be a good basis for a 
peaceful solution. 
  In answer to a question on Russia's military presence in the 
region, Iliescu said that he is not at all happy with another 
country's military presence in the region. 

