Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by Lin Ying (2651 7751)] </F>
  [Text] Hong Kong, 21 Mar (ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE) -- Some 
time ago, the relevant authorities in the Chinese mainland 
publicly incinerated a total of 280 kg of tiger bones and 
rhinoceros horns, both precious Chinese medicinal ingredients, 
in Harbin and Zhanjiang Cities. This was a gesture to show 
China's determination to outlaw the trading in tiger bones, 
rhinoceros horns, and all products containing them, in pursuance 
of the international treaty on the preservation of endangered 
animals. But there is a high economic price to pay on the part 
of the mainland in doing this and the production of a large 
variety of Chinese medicines will be affected for the time being. 
  Tiger bones and rhinoceros horns are fine, natural medicinal 
materials used in traditional Chinese prescriptions and have 
always been expensive. This is why tigers and rhinoceros, both 
wild animals, have been hunted to the brink of extinction. Take 
tigers for example. There used to be eight types of tigers 
throughout the whole world, namely: The Manchurian tiger, the 
South China tiger, the Southeast Asian tiger, the Indian tiger, 
the Siberian tiger, the Sumatran tiger, the Javan tiger, and the 
Bali tiger. But now, three of these are extinct and the 
remaining five types are endangered. For instance, India 
recently published the results of a survey on the Indian tiger, 
which indicate that the population of this tiger species dropped 
from 4,334 in 1989 to 375 at the end of last year. Another 
example is that, according to some findings published by the 
Chinese mainland recently, there are now less than 50 South 
China tigers living in the wild. If things go on this way and 
the countries concerned fail to adopt effective preservation 
measures, it is estimated that these wild animals will be gone 
from the earth by the end of this century. 
  In order to put an end to the hunting of and trading in 
these 
protected wild animals, China has promulgated a series of laws 
and ordinances in recent years, such as the "Law on the 
Protection of Wild Animals," "Implementation of Regulations for 
the Protection of Terrestrial Wild Animals," and "List of 
Wildlife Under Special State Protection." The repeated public 
incinerations of tiger bones and rhinoceros horns in recent 
years were conducted in accordance with the "Convention on 
International Trading of Endangered Wild Life." China signed 
this convention in 1980 and has rigorously honored its 
obligations thereto. According to an estimate, the mainland has 
suffered a total economic loss of as much as 2 billion yuan 
incurred by the ban on trading in tiger bones, rhinoceros horns, 
and products containing them. 
  Because tiger bones and rhinoceros horns are frequently used 
ingredients in traditional Chinese pharmacy, they are very much 
in demand. Therefore, the relevant research institutions on the 
mainland have always devoted a lot of attention to developing 
substitutes for the two materials. They achieved initial 
results toward the end of last year. Of all the findings, the 
research on tiger bone substitutes has been quite fruitful. The 
bones of the "sailong [1049 7127]," a burrowing animal which 
inhabits the Qinghai Plateau in large quantities, are an ideal 
substitute for tiger bones. Clinical research indicates that 
sailong bones have the functions of dispersing cold and 
relieving pain; relaxing muscles and tendons and activating the 
flow of vital energy and blood in the channels and collaterals; 
strengthening the muscles and bones; and enhancing the 
resistance of the human body. They are no less effective than 
tiger bones in treating inflammation, killing pain, and healing 
fractures and bone injuries. This achievement has attracted 
much attention from pharmaceutical industries around the world. 
Besides, the mainland researchers have also successfully 
synthesized rhinoceros horns, bear gallbladders, musk, and cow 
gallstones. They have also experimented on obtaining bile from 
live bears and turned it into natural bear bile powder for 
clinical and pharmaceutical use. 
  Hosking [huo si jin 7202 2448 6855], chairman of the 
standing 
committee of the "Convention on International Trading of 
Endangered Wild Life," who recently visited mainland China, 
pointed out: China has made outstanding achievements in 
protecting endangered wildlife and developing substitutes for 
them. 

