BFN 

<F P=106> [Stanislav Kondrashov article: "Who Got Suckered in Gorazde </F>
and How"] 
  [Text] This time the contrast between what was said and 
what happened was striking. On his return from a lightning 
visit to Belgrade, Andrey Kozyrev informed journalists actually 
at Vnukovo Airport itself of the success -- an accord relieving 
the situation in Gorazde and, furthermore, in other Bosnian 
trouble spots as well. However, fresh reports almost 
immediately indicated the failure of his mission -- Bosnian Serb 
tanks were entering the suburbs of Gorazde, panic-stricken 
Muslim inhabitants were seeking refuge in the quarters of UN 
representatives, and among the dismayed UN and NATO leadership 
the question of continuing the bombing, which had provoked sharp 
protests from Russia and Kozyrev's visit, was raised with even 
greater urgency. 
  Last week was a week of Russian recriminations against those 
who until recently were regarded as lifelong partners, a week of 
large-scale demonstrations of great-power attitudes, if the 
pathetic assurances of the powers-that-be that Russia was, is, 
and will remain a great power can be understood as such. The 
declarations achieved unprecedented unity among all branches of 
power as far as present times are concerned. 
  I would remind you that the week began on Monday, when Boris 
Yeltsin communicated to Bill Clinton by telephone his 
undisguised irritation that no effort had been made to consult 
the great power before the first NATO bombing strikes on Serbian 
positions near Gorazde. The week ended on Sunday, when Andrey 
Kozyrev, after emergency meetings at night with Serbian leaders, 
informed the Russians that the china broken by the Americans and 
other NATO members was being successfully glued back together. 
  What then happened? On the first morning of the new week, 
with Serbian tanks in Gorazde, Vitaliy Churkin, Kozyrev's deputy 
and Yeltsin's representative, complained on the BBC that he 
could not remember so many broken accords as in recent days. 
The treachery of his Serbian interlocutors, like the specific 
"forgetfulness" of the U.S. and UN leadership prior to the 
bombing strikes, unfortunately indicate the same thing, namely 
that Russia's status as a great power is being called into 
question -- by action rather than by words. 
  And Russia's status has to be established by action rather 
than self-consoling words. And great powers' action means, in 
particular, a considered, consistent policy where ostentatious 
gestures to the public are accorded a more modest place than 
painstaking work, where flexibility is combined with toughness, 
and where politics -- as the "art of the possible" -- seeks to 
achieve the impossible, compensating for a temporary, let us 
hope, lack of authority and strength. 
  Former Yugoslavia has become a test bed for the practical 
search for such a policy. I, among others, was glad two months 
ago when Russia acquired its own identity -- and diplomatic 
niche -- in Sarajevo when it prevented through its timely and 
successful intervention planned bombing strikes on Serbian 
positions. In the very complex Bosnian situation this gain 
might have been said to be just for the moment, but it was 
consolidated by the efforts of Vitaliy Churkin, who himself 
deservedly acquired the reputation of being the prime peacemaker 
in that troubled region. 
  Has this identity -- and the niche -- now been lost in 
Gorazde? I don't think so, as the need for Russia's unique 
mediation remains. But if it has been lost, then it has been 
lost to no greater extent than that of the Americans and the 
leadership of the United Nations headed by Secretary General 
Butrus Butrus-Ghali, which is under the dominant influence of 
the West. 
  After what happened they were faced with a tough choice, a 
choice made more difficult by the logic of their behavior: 
Bombing "until victory," which could produce growing political 
and moral complications, or backing down, which means not only 
recognizing the failure of a strong, one-sided approach but the 
victory of the Serbian extremists. President Clinton would like 
to pursue America's manifestly anti-Serbian policy under the UN 
flag by means of NATO, within which not just American combat 
planes are employed. The ideal would be, they now think in 
Washington, to pursue U.S. global policy in general through the 
United Nations, with minimum costs in terms of dollars and 
potential U.S. casualties. Apart from anything else, the United 
States needs the UN smokescreen, according to commentator Jim 
Hoagland, to "reduce Boris Yeltsin's internal problems and get 
Russia to give Serbia a nudge under the negotiating table with 
its foot." 
  The civil war raging on the ruins of Yugoslavia is not the 
best test range for the present United Nations to rehearse its 
expanding peacemaking operations on. Unfortunately, Russia, by 
automatically voting in the West's wake during the early stages 
of development of the Yugoslav tragedy, helped the United 
Nations get more and more deeply involved and more and more 
bogged down there. Indignant or otherwise, the mandate for NATO 
bombing on behalf of the United Nations was sanctioned earlier 
by Russia's vote too. 
  Despite all the latest great-power recriminations, Moscow's 
task is not to recreate the former bipolar world of rivalry 
within the United Nations -- that has disappeared irrevocably 
into the past -- "if only" because neither the forces nor the 
allies to resolve this task are available. Nor does the task 
consist in being at the beck and call of the United Nations and 
the West, pulling the chestnuts out of the fire or sticking 
together the broken pieces as the pottery is smashed in the 
Yugoslav china shop where more than one bull is currently on the 
rampage. 
  Our own Russian niche means our own voice at UN headquarters 
in New York insisting on a modification of the current dead-end 
approaches. And the continuation and strengthening of Churkin's 
activity "on the scene," despite his growing weariness and 
perfectly understandable disillusionment. 
  Blessed are the peacemakers who toil unstintingly. 

