SUMMARY 
                                 In what appears to be an at tempt to avoid direct criticism of 
the Clinton Administration, Pyongyang has recently blamed the 
current impasse on the nuclear issue on unnamed "conservative 
forces" in the United States. 
                             END SUMMARY 
   Pyongyang's apparent interest in preventing a breakdown of U.S.- 
North Korea talks on the nuclear issue seems reflected in its 
careful media treatment of the Clinton Administration and its 
domestic critics.  A 22 January commentary in the party paper 
Nodong Sinmun, reported by KCNA the same day, claimed that 
Pyongyang has agreed to nuclear inspections, but only to the 
extent of ensuring "the continuity of the safeguards" and only 
because Washington had expressed a "willingness" to discontinue 
Team Spirit military exercises.  The paper then went on to point 
to "anti-dialogue forces" in the United States, "intelligence 
plotters," and "paid trumpeters" as responsible for the current 
stalemate on the nuclear inspection issue.  The commentary also 
criticized these "forces" for demanding that Pyongyang accept 
"routine and ad hoc" nuclear inspections and "even" special 
inspections of the two suspected nuclear sites.  In a move 
seemingly calculated to impress Pyongyang's own hardline forces, 
the paper claimed that the U.S. conservatives are justifying 
these demands on the grounds that Washington had made 
"unilateral" concessions to Pyongyang on the nuclear issue. 
   Further underscoring Pyongyang's effort to avoid antagonizing the 
Administration in order to protect the dialogue on the nuclear 
issue, monitored Pyongyang media have not commented on criticisms 
of North Korea's stance on the nuclear issue made by U.S. 
officials in recent weeks.  Pyongyang passed up opportunities to 
react to criticisms contained in the joint statement by 
Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin during his recent visit to Moscow 
and a 5 January press conference by Undersecretary of State Lynn 
Davis. 
   Implications     The calibration of Pyongyang's criticism 
suggests that those leadership elements in Pyongyang pressing for 
ending North Korea's international isolation hope to avoid 
raising rhetorical tensions with the Clinton Administration in 
order to prevent any break in the bilateral talks on resolution 
of the nuclear issue. 
   (AUTHOR:  YIM.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENT, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, ASIA 
DIVISION ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6534.) 
EAG/BIETZ/PF 26/2042z Jan 

