BFN 

<F P=106> [By Cristina D. C. Pastor] </F>
  [Text] The Senate yesterday unanimously ratified a bill 
increasing stocks transaction taxes on listed shares and 
imposing taxes on initial public offerings (IPOs). 
  The measure, which is expected to generate incremental 
revenue of P800 million [Philippine pesos], is one of several 
revenue-enhancement measures recommended by the executive for 
legislation. 
  Senate bill 1127 is entitled "An act imposing a tax on sale, 
barter or exchange of shares of stocks listed and traded through 
the local stock exchanges or through IPOs, amending for the 
purpose the National Internal Revenue Code." 
  The bill seeks to impose tax rates equivalent to 3/8th of 1 
percent on listed and transacted stocks on the first year, and 
1/2 of 1 percent on the second and succeeding years. 
  IPOs of closed corporations going public will be taxed as 
follows: 
-- 4 percent of gross sales for corporations offering shares 
below 33 1/3 percent; 
  -- 2 percent of gross sales for corporations offering 
shares from 33 1/3 percent to below 50 percent; 
  -- 1 percent of gross sales for corporations offering 
shares of more than 50 percent. 
  Right now, listed stocks are taxed at 1/4 of 1 percent. 
  Senator Ernesto Herrera, chairman of the ways and means 
committee, said the idea behind the provision on closed 
corporations is to encourage such firms to go public. "The more 
shares you offer, the lower your taxes," he told reporters. 
  He said this provision amends an earlier provision seeking 
to 
impose a uniform 2 percent on IPOs. 
  The bill also redefines a "100 percent closed corporation," 
a 
term currently used to refer to a company owned by less than 
five persons. The measure defines a closed corporation as a 
company held by less than 20 persons. 
  "The tax will be based on gross selling price ... and will 
be 
paid by the issuing corporation," said a provision of the bill. 
  Meanwhile, the Senate failed yesterday to ratify the bill 
expanding the value-added tax (VAT), and has set a Monday 
deadline for its ratification. 
  Senate President Edgardo Angara said some senators asked for 
more time to go over the compromise bill. 
  He said final approval of the bill by both chambers should 
not be tied to the ongoing negotiations between the country's 
economic managers and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
  "This is independent of the IMF," he said of the pending 
ratification. "This is for our own sake. The VAT will simplify 
the tax administration." 
  At the same time, he said IMF approval of the country's 
three- year economic program is also important if government 
wants to "unlock" official development assistance, and 
restructure about $1 billion in Paris Club loans. 
  The senator said what could be problematic is not so much 
the 
approval of the bill but enforcement of the VAT law. He spoke 
of a big businessman with VAT liabilities amounting to P1 
billion. 
  "We have to do something in terms of the collection effort," 
he said. 
  Mr. Herrera said the VAT bill itself has the answer to the 
potential collection problem. The bill appropriates 5 percent 
of the incremental revenue from VAT collection to the budget of 
the Bureau of Internal Revenue [BIR]. 
  "So the BIR cannot come to us and say they have problems 
with 
personnel and facilities. We are giving 5 percent of the 
incremental revenue to them," he said. 

