BFN 

  [Text] Bileca, May 12 (TANJUG) -- By proclaiming Gorazde, 
Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia, as a U.N. safe area, it seems 
that the Muslims have been given the green light to freely 
attack the Serbs who are not permitted to fire a single bullet 
in self-defence. 
  In keeping with an agreement with the U.N. Protection Force 
(UNPROFOR), the Serbs last month pulled out their infantry to 
three km from the centre of Gorazde, and their artillery to 20 
km away following the collapse of a Muslim offensive launched in 
March from this U.N.-designated safe area which should have been 
demilitarized in the spring of 1993. 
  After this, some 200 U.N. peacekeepers were deployed in this 
region. 
  The wounding of a Serb soldier last Tuesday near the village 
of Kolovarice (9 km southwest of Gorazde in the direction of 
Foca) is only an illustration of the Serbs' claims that UNPROFOR 
has no interest in them in this region. 
  The Serb soldier was wounded after the Muslim forces from 
the 
villages of Vranici and Stupe (on the left Muslim bank of the 
Drina river) opened strong fire on Serb positions on the right 
bank of Drina which separates the warring sides. 
  Since the arrival of the U.N. troops in the Gorazde region 
two weeks ago, the Muslims have countinually launched attacks 
and armed provocations on the Serbs. In the village of Kazlagici 
(3 km east of Gorazde) a Muslim sniper on April 25 shot dead 
Sasa Burovic, a Serb, from Cajnice. 
  Burovic was killed before the very eyes of the Ukraine U.N. 
troops. Eyewitnesses claim that he was shot close to a U.N. 
armoured vehicle while he was talking with the Ukrainian troops 
and discussing their deployment along the lines separating the 
Serb and Muslim forces. 
  Burovic's close proximity to the U.N. peacekeepers did not 
in 
the least affect the Muslims, nor were they afraid they would 
have to suffer any consequences for the attack. 
  Judging by UNPROFOR's subsequent conduct, the Muslim 
estimates were not wrong. Not only did their action pass 
unpunished, but the UNPROFOR command failed to inform the public 
about this in an attempt to dismiss and forget the incident. 
Clearly, this served as an additional impetus for the Muslims so 
that their troops continued penetrating the so-called 3-km 'blue 
zone' in Gorazde and firing at the Serbs over the heads of the 
U.N. troops. 
  It has been shown that the U.N. resolutions are not binding 
for the Muslims as they are shooting even at Serb civilians who 
trusted the U.N. guarantees and returned to their homesteads in 
the Drina river valley. At the same time, the UNPROFOR from 
Gorazde is daily informing the world public that some Serb 
police stationed in certain positions near the town are carrying 
guns with cut-off barrels. UNPROFOR is also increasingly voicing 
doubts that the Serbs have withdrawn all their artillery to 20 
km away from the centre of Gorazde, but is not giving proof for 
this. 
  UNPROFOR continues to employ double standards towards the 
warring sides in Bosnia, ignore the obligations stemming from 
the U.N. resolutions and fails to take any steps to disarm the 
Gorazde Muslims and demilitarize the town. 

