BFN 

  [Excerpts] Nairobi, 26 Apr (AFP) -- Faustin Twagiramungu, 
the man who was to bring Rwanda's Hutus and rebel Tutsis 
together in a broad-based interim government, accused Rwandan 
soldiers of killing their president to revive the civil war. A 
transitional government based on a peace agreement signed on 
August 4 last year was to include members of the insurgent 
[Rwandan] Patriotic Front (RPF) most of whose members are from 
the Tutsi minority. But the ethnic bloodshed which broke out 
after President Juvenal Habyarimana's death on April 6 in a 
suspicious plane crash put paid to the plan. 
  "The soldiers wanted to stage a coup but they realised a 
coup 
would not win support and instead installed a government which 
would do what they wanted," said Twagiramungu, who has fled to 
Kenya where he is living at an undisclosed location. He said 
Monday [25 April] the "strongman" behind the alleged coup was a 
chief of staff at the Defence Ministry. [passage omitted] 
  Twagiramungu, 49, a member of the Republican Democratic 
Movement (MDR) - the main opposition party to the Habyarimana 
regime - is a Hutu. He was to have taken over as prime minister 
from Agathe Uwilingiyimana, also from the MDR. However Hutu 
hardliners in the presidential guard murdered Uwilingiyimana and 
would have killed Twagiramungu if he had not fled his home and 
left the country, he said. He said he had "jumped over the 
wall" into a neighbour's home from where he was taken aboard a 
United Nations armoured vehicle to the headquarters of the UN 
Assistance Mission in Rwanda (UNAMIR). He stayed there until 
April 19. 
  Twagiramungu said he had had to leave his family at the home 
of another neighbour because there was only room in the UN 
vehicle for himself and his eight Bangladeshi bodyguards. 
Soldiers looted and machine-gunned his home after he left, he 
told journalists here. In the doomed plane carrying Habyarimana 
were also several of his closest aides including the Army chief 
of staff. The president of neighbouring Burundi Cyprien 
Ntaryamira and two of his ministers were also aboard, though 
Twagiramungu said that in his view "for the Burundians, it was 
an accident. No one knew they would be there." 
  Twagiramungu said the RPF had "nothing to gain" from killing 
the president and that it was more likely that Hutu extremists 
in the Army had done it to "revive the civil war" because they 
resented sharing power with the Tutsis. Twagiramungu accused 
these soldiers of having made several previous attempts to 
revive the fighting. One involved the murder of the minister of 
public works Felicien Gatabazi, who was shot dead in Kigali on 
February 21, he said. 

