Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Second Friday sermon by Ayatollah Khamene'i, leader of the </F>
Islamic revolution, in Tehran on 4 March -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] In the name of God, the Merciful, the 
Compassionate. [passage omitted] 
  The issue of the Zionist enemy's aggression against the 
immaculate shrine of Abraham is such a great atrocity and it is 
such a painful incident that saying a few words does not do it 
justice. We believe that the usurper government of Israel is 
directly responsible for the Hebron massacre. The supporters of 
the usurper government, headed by America, are also responsible 
for this incident, because they always defended the Zionists 
during all those years. Whenever there was a problem for the 
Zionists, immediately America rushed to their defense. Those 
American Jews, those big capitalists, did whatever they wanted 
using American power and money and used America's political 
influence all over the world to support that cancerous cell 
which has been created in the heart of the Islamic nations. 
  Very well, are they not guilty in this case? Are they not 
responsible? No doubt they are. Also responsible in this 
incident are other allies and supporters of Israel. The world 
public media that have not justly explained that incident are 
also responsible. Human rights organizations, UN Human Rights 
Committee and other small and large organizations -- which 
operate all over the world under different titles -- are lying 
in ambush, waiting for small incidents to happen for any 
government in any corner of the globe that has no friendly ties 
with America, so that they could scream about violations of 
human rights. Now look at this case, the usurper, malicious and 
tyrannical government of the Zionists, who are the enemies of 
humanity, shed the blood of hundreds of Palestinians when they 
are fasting and prostrate in prayers. They kill tens of 
persons, injure hundreds, and later, when people who are 
naturally angry, bereaved, and sympathetic come to streets with 
their fists clenched, then Israeli soldiers target them one by 
one, hunting them and killing them. Here those organizations 
proclaiming to be defenders of human rights are keeping their 
mouths shut and say nothing. 
  At best, such and such international organization set out to 
condemn it. What good is a word of condemnation to Palestinians 
anyway? If organizations which claim to be championing human 
rights were genuine, then they should have all stood up, raised 
a cry, and imposed a blockage on the Israeli Government. They 
should have issued an ultimatum to Israel's backers and warned 
them that they had no right to help a corrupt, bloodthirsty, and 
criminal regime. However, none of this was done. 
  The Arab governments too were unfortunately complacent. They 
neither declared mourning nor set out to grieve and cover 
everywhere in black cloth [sentence as heard]. Moreover, they 
made no efforts to put a complete stop to the ongoing 
negotiations. They were at fault for their complacency. Of 
course, the conscience of the Islamic ummah became aroused and 
turbulent. 
  The Western press, however, were more at fault than any one 
else. As far as the Israeli press and media were concerned, 
they said what was exactly expected of them. They were 
murderers themselves, so how could one expect a murderer to 
condemn himself? However, why did the press in the so-called 
free world indulge in overlooking the truth to such a degree and 
remain silent or at best portray the whole thing as an 
insignificant incident? However, when an Arab took up arms and 
attacked a few people -- an attack which as far as I know did 
not lead to a great deal of damage -- the American press created 
such a hue and cry during the recent days. As far as I was 
informed, the whole of the press reports were saturated with the 
news of that incident. Nonetheless, they chose to be silent 
toward the Hebron incident, or at best decided to belittle the 
whole issue. The Western press, alternatively, set out to 
portray the incident as a provoked act committed by a single 
individual. These all constitute a great injustice. How 
fanatic, ruthless, and devoid of a free spirit -- to which they 
lay claim -- the employees of the Western press must be to react 
to the incident in such an unacceptable manner? 
  Our dear nation has of course always declared its stances. 
Let us not say --and I ask the others not to say -- what is the 
use of this anyway? The heaviest burden on the shoulder of the 
usurpers is the uprising of nations in any part of the globe. 
If nations rise, stage demonstrations in their respective 
countries, and display their clenched fists, then the criminals 
will feel trapped. This applies to all issues and processes, 
such as anti-Americanism or protest against the bloodthirsty 
elements in former Yugoslavia. 
  The peoples of the world must announce their presence on the 
political scene. That is very effective in the international 
climate of world politics. Let them not overlook this. 
Therefore, when Jerusalem Day [11 March] comes, if the world of 
Islam, God willing, honors that day with its true meaning, if it 
honors next Friday to shout at the usurper Zionists, the enemy 
will be defeated and forced to retreat. And you the people of 
Iran will, God willing, demonstrate the meaning of using 
Jerusalem Day as an opportunity to declare your stand on the 
issue of Palestine. 
  Next Friday is Jerusalem Day. Thank God, the Iranian nation 
has behaved well in that respect, and so have the government and 
the foreign ministry. They did not waste any time; they said 
what needed to be said. The oppressed Palestinians realized 
that there are people around the world who are concerned about 
their issue. 
  That concern must be proved. Pressure on Israel should be 
increased. The Palestinians, themselves, should take on the 
responsibility of reviving the issue of Palestine and fight. 
Struggle is hard, but a life like that is harder than the 
struggle. The difference is that if they fight the future would 
be good for them, but living like that would bring more hardship 
for them every day. 
  Of course, the people in occupied Palestine are awake today. 
But the struggle inside Palestine should be general and 
all-embracing and continual and connected to the outside world 
and connected to the heart of the Muslim ummah. And Muslim 
nations should help them. 
  About this issue I would like to talk to our Muslim brothers 
overseas, so I will say a few words. [passage omitted] 

