CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yuriy Golotyuk: "Firing Training Turning into </F>
Combat Operations: the Seamen of the Black Sea Fleet Warn: `The 
Ukrainian Side Will Lose, Although There Will Be No Victors'"] 
  [Text] The situation developing with respect to the Black 
Sea Fleet was more and more reminiscent of an undeclared war 
last week. Ukrainian fighters patrolling the skies over 
Sevastopol with their full combat load. Attempts to pursue and 
seize the hydrographic ship "Cheleken" that were like a scene 
from a pirate adventure novel. And the prohibition by the 
Ukrainian Ministry of Defense against ships of the Black Sea 
Fleet entering the ports of Odessa, Kherson, Nikolayev, and 
Izmail out of fear that a "Russian landing force" would come 
ashore there.... 
  Early morning. With the first rays of the sun rising over 
Sevastopol, the guard ships "Ladnyy" and "Pytlivyy" raise anchor 
and go to sea. They will execute a routine training mission to 
search for and "destroy" a submarine of a hypothetical enemy. 
But on the ships, as usual, is a full load of munitions that are 
by no means for training. 
  In response to the question of whether there is a chance 
that 
in the course of the exercises the "Ladnyy" and "Pytlivyy" might 
encounter ships of the Ukrainian Naval Forces, we were given the 
answer: "In principle there is; they do not tell us about their 
plans. The command ship `Slavutich' of the Ukrainian Naval 
Forces may be somewhere around here right now. If we do 
encounter it, then nothing will really happen, for we are 
civilized people. Although it will all depend upon the actions 
of the Ukrainian side. Recently, during the performance of a 
training mission to destroy air targets, a fighter of the 
Ukrainian Air Defense Forces constantly circled over the 
`Pytlivyy.' It left for its base only after the air defense 
system of the guard ship fired missiles at training targets. In 
general, the pilot could not fail to understand that such games 
do not lead to anything good." 
  Something else that happened in Odessa could have ended 
badly. The seizure of subunits of the Black Sea Fleet by 
Ukrainian military formations evoked an extremely painful 
reaction in the Fleet. At a meeting of officers of the Black Sea 
Fleet in Sevastopol, warship commanders did not hide the fact 
that in the event of new provocations they are prepared to carry 
out any order of the Fleet commander, including the use of 
combat weapons against ships of the Ukrainian Naval Forces. At 
the same time, the position of Ukraine itself does nothing to 
lessen tension. "There was no incident in Odessa," Vice-Adm. 
Vladimir Bezkorovaynyy, commanding officer of the Ukrainian 
Naval Forces, continues to insist. "There was a gross violation 
of the constitution and laws of Ukraine by individual officials 
of the Black Sea Fleet." The actions of the Ukrainian side 
correspond to these assessments. The situation remains tense in 
Izmail, where a brigade of river craft of the Black Sea Fleet is 
stationed. Ukraine is still trying unilaterally to subordinate 
this part of the Fleet to itself, despite the fact that 
immediately after the events in Odessa officers from Izmail 
issued an official warning to the leadership of the Ukrainian 
Naval Forces that "if something similar is undertaken with 
respect to our unit and our family members, then we will act in 
accordance with the law and military regulations, even to the 
point of using weapons." 
  The recent bosom friends, who knew each other even in school 
and went to the Fleet together as green lieutenants, are 
beginning to see each other as enemies. They were separated by 
oaths. Most of them swore allegiance to the former Black Sea 
Fleet back in the time of the Soviet Union. A few have sworn a 
new oath of allegiance to Ukraine. "We will not go on board an 
enemy ship," declared Capt. 2nd Rank Aleksandr Petrov when it 
was proposed that he and other members of the Black Sea Fleet 
who refused to swear allegiance to Ukraine go on board the 
"Slavutich." The members of the Black Sea Fleet are even trying 
to do everything they can to send their sons, who because of 
their registration in Sevastopol are considered to be citizens 
of Ukraine and accordingly are supposed to serve in the 
Ukrainian Armed Forces, to serve in the Russian Army. 
  "Delay in the negotiations on the problem of the Black Sea 
Fleet may lead to the most unpredictable conflicts," the 
officers of the Black Sea Fleet warn officially. "This conflict 
(deliberately planned) is pushing us toward counteractions. At 
the same time, one should keep in mind that Ukraine will 
inevitably be the losing side." By the way, the sailors of the 
Black Sea Fleet themselves recognize that if, God forbid, they 
are unable to avoid such a conflict, then it will simply be 
ridiculous to speak of someone winning." 

