Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vladimir Polevanov, by correspondent Nikolay </F>
Belyy; place and date not given: "On the High Banks of the Amur"] 
  [Text] Blagoveshchensk--Another change of leadership 
took place at the end of last year in Amur Oblast. The previous 
head of the administration, having fallen victim to political 
intrigues, was dismissed by the president for having clearly 
counterposed himself to the well-known Edict 1400. Vladimir 
Polevanov, a 44-year-old doctor of sciences, become governor. 
What are the concerns of the distant region at this difficult 
time and how is it surviving today, and has the president's 
choice given a good account of himself? The new governor of Amur 
Oblast answers ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI's questions. 
  [Belyy] The Amur region is a land far away from centers, 
which is, possibly, no bad thing. Formerly, when the first 
Cossacks came to the Amur, they linked their successful life 
with distance from the authorities. Or have things changed in 
our day? 
  [Polevanov] Our forefathers were right in their own way. It 
is important that the reckless voluntarism of the center has 
not, as in the past, prevented the regions themselves from 
devising the strategy and tactics of their own development or 
resolving the problems of the organization of their own life 
themselves, without soliciting everything from Moscow. While 
recognizing at the same time that a region, however far from the 
capital it may be, is an integral law-abiding part of the 
Federation, with all the ensuing obligations. 
  We are currently preparing to elect a new representative 
authority. Following consultations with various parties and 
movements, the corresponding documents have been drawn up, and 
elections will be held in the oblast on 27 March. Nominating and 
forming on the basis of the people's free expression an oblast 
parliament which does not, like the previous one, throw wrenches 
in the works of the executive is an urgent task. 
  [Belyy] And you think it will be possible to elect such an 
oblast parliament? Amur Oblast is quite conservative.... 
  [Polevanov] I hope so, at least. We have adopted the 
provision that only a person who resides in a district may run 
for election from it. This will spare the electorate the "decoy 
ducks" and "Varangians" popular in the era of the omnipotence of 
the CPSU. 
  [Belyy] How does the governor intend to determine the 
priorities of the region's development? 
  [Polevanov] In the past 100 days of my governorship, I have 
seen for myself that there are no trifling issues and that 
everything is important for people. Reforms will occur in any 
case; we need only create the conditions for the normal 
functioning of market relations. Amur Oblast is among the 
regions of Russia where crime has fallen. A wide-ranging and, in 
my view, very necessary operation code-named Barrier began as of 
the start of this year. Ours is a border oblast, and a procedure 
of the registration of foreigners is vitally necessary, for we 
run the risk of losing control of the situation, as happened in 
Vladivostok. 
  We hope to complete the construction of the Blagoveshchensk 
Thermal Electric Power Station and get the installation of the 
Bureyskaya Hydroelectric Station, the biggest in the Far East, 
going. Owing to inadequate financing, this construction project 
has for many years been eking out a miserable existence. In the 
future this will be a powerful source of energy, and, once 
again, not only for us. 
  We will continue to fight for our regional rights guaranteed 
by the new Constitution of Russia, but the mechanisms and 
legislative instruments pertaining to these rights have still to 
be completed. We need, finally, to have eliminated a whole 
number of disproportions. The most obvious and glaring of these 
is the fact that in the past year the customs charge for the 
transshipment of freight through our customs houses on the 
Russian-Chinese border amounted to R17 billion, of which the 
oblast came in for an utterly risible 3 percent--R350 million. 

