Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with FRG Chancellor Helmut Kohl by Martin S. </F>
Lambeck in Bonn; date not given: "We Cannot Afford Quarreling"] 
  [Text] [Lambeck] Mr. Chancellor, on the eve of the 
Christian Democratic Union [CDU] congress in Hamburg, various 
opinion polls are painting a gloomy picture for the 
CDU/Christian Social Union [CSU]. How will you motivate the 
concerned members of your party in the super election year 1994? 
  [Kohl] First of all, our members are not unmotivated. I am 
continuously on the road and I not only get a lot of 
encouragement, but many people are also militantly prepared to 
shape this election year. The following is valid for the whole 
party: We have to struggle for every vote. I am confident that 
we will also win the election in this way. We must explain the 
considerable achievements we want to point out to the citizens. 
We must not let every antagonism scare us. In the past 
quarter, we achieved things others were unable to accomplish 
over decades. These include railroad and postal service 
reforms, which are hardly mentioned any longer. We Germans made 
a very decisive contribution to the conclusion of the GATT 
negotiations. In this way we created an important prerequisite 
for free world trade, which is of utmost importance for a top 
exporting nation like Germany. My colleagues in the European 
Union decided that the European Central Bank will have its seat 
in Frankfurt. Moreover, I state that this Federal Government 
and this head of government have excellent, friendly relations 
with Moscow, Paris, Washington, and London. When has that ever 
been the case in Germany's recent history? I do not see a 
reason for pessimism and fatalism, but I will say the following 
at the party congress: We must fight and some must stop talking 
nonsense. 
  [Lambeck] How do you explain the facat that the citizens 
have hardly taken note of this catalogue of achievements? 
  [Kohl] There are many reasons. Basically, I want to say the 
following: One is talking of weariness concerning politics. I 
deny that politics alone is at issue. There is a general 
weariness, certainly also weariness concerning parties, but, for 
example, weariness concerning trade unions, too. At any rate, 
the German Trade Union Federation lost considerably more members 
in the past 12 months than the democratic parties. There is 
weariness concerning the employers' associations. There is 
weariness concerning the church. There is weariness concerning 
the media. I do not know what would happen if the German 
citizens were able to decide completely and freely whether they 
should pay fees to the television station which are compulsory 
under public law. 
  No, the mood is generally bad. This is all the more absurd 
because it does not correspond to the real mood of the 
individual. You can see this in all opinion polls. If you ask 
the people how they feel personally, the results will be 
surprising. If they are graded using the marks one to six like 
at school, the personal situation ranges from about two minus to 
two plus. If the same people are asked how the country is, the 
result will be five minus, which means that the promotion is 
endangered. This is an absurd result! A bad mood is being 
preached constantly. I will not be infected by it. 
  Germany is one of the most beautiful countries of the world. 
This has nothing to do with chauvinism. I, Helmut Kohl, am 
lucky that I can live here in a time of dramatic changes, in a 
time when we have had 48 years of peace in Germany. All my 
foreign visitors tell me: Is that all you have to worry about? 
Of course, we have many worries in our own country. We have to 
cope with dramatic changes. We have unemployment, we have to 
save money, but we are still better off than comparable 
countries. 
  [Lambeck] The pollsters are stating that many citizens 
expect a change of government in October. How do you explain 
such a trend? 
  [Kohl] First of all, the statements by pollsters are not a 
trend. You know, the election will be decided on the evening of 
the election at 1800. Four years ago, before the first really 
free election in the former GDR, the People's Chamber election, 
the pollsters predicted a disastrous result for us. Even the 
very clever people said at that time: These are traditional 
laender of the Social Democratic Party of Germany [SPD]. And on 
the evening of the election, they only stammered silly excuses 
on German television. I was the frontrunner in four Land Diet 
elections in Rhineland-Palatinate, and I am now facing my sixth 
Bundestag election. How often have I heard that everything is 
going wrong and how often have I been politically buried! 
  [Lambeck] One often has the impression that leading 
CDU/CSU politicians contradict each other from one day to the 
next. Is the CDU/CSU lacking the necessary consistency? 
  [Kohl] Consistency is far more difficult for the party that 
bears responsibility than for one that is in opposition. I, 
myself, was the leader of the opposition. It is far easier to 
state at 1200 on Friday that one is disgusted and indignant at 
the acts of the government than to do the right thing in 
difficult times with 4 million unemployed. Some controversies 
within the party are necessary, some are absolutely unnecessary 
and only help some squabblers to acquire status. However, this 
does not change the fact that we cannot afford these quarrels. 
At the federal party congress in Hamburg an end will be put to 
unnecessary quarrels. 
  [Lambeck] Mr. Chancellor, do you feel that some party 
friends have let you down in your struggle for a victory in the 
election? 
  [Kohl] I feel as I have always felt. We are a big party, 
just like the other people's party, the SPD. And the people do 
not leave their identity in the cloakroom of the Adenauer House. 
Our spectrum of opinions is very broad. Whoever cannot bear 
this must not become party chairman or chancellor. 
  [Lambeck] The spectrum of parties has increased. How 
dangerous will the challenge from the Instead Party and 
Brunner's party be for the CDU/CSU in the election year? 
  [Kohl] I am deeply convinced that we will have a good 
turnout at the Bundestag election, as has always been the case 
since 1949. The turnout will certainly be close to 80 percent. 
This is a very important statement because the 5-percent clause 
will have a completely different weight. 
  The CDU/CSU cannot give any votes away. Whoever runs against 
us is a political opponent. We have to take him seriously. 
There are certainly differences. In general, the following 
applies: We have to form a tougher, more decisive front against 
all radicals from the left and the right. As for the rest, we 
have to struggle for ourselves. 
  [Lambeck] But such parties, as well as the Republikaner, do 
not develop from nothing. Do the big parties have to reproach 
themselves for failures? 
  [Kohl] Of course, we have to reproach ourselves for 
failures! The question of the big people's parties capacity of 
integration is at issue again and again. We in the CDU -- just 
like the others -- have certainly made mistakes here. 
  [Lambeck] Fewer and fewer citizens are currently prepared to 
commit themselves in political parties. What can you and the 
CDU do against this? 
  [Kohl] Are the citizens prepared to commit themselves in 
other fields? Commitments in a party, a sports club, a youth 
group are permanent commitments. And the preparedness to 
participate here has decreased alarmingly. 
  This is a basic fact of our society. The situation is 
completely different if you call for a specific charitable 
action to help people, for example, children in Bosnia. You 
will hardly find as much encouragement and support as here in 
any other country of the world. 
  But let us come back to the parties: If the CDU presents a 
reasonable, clever, and convincing program to the people, it 
will show its charisma and motivate the members. I am 
completely sure of that. But I am also saying: The 
presentation of the party personnel has to be in line with the 
programmatic claim. Then we will be successful, despite the 
undeniable antagonism about which you are rightly talking. 
  By the way, I am pleased to state that there are currently 
many district associations in the CDU that are joined by a 
considerable number of new members every month. If one inquires 
about the reason on the spot, one ascertains that the 
responsible persons commit themselves; they go to the people in 
their local and district associations, and they talk about the 
pending problems. They are successful with it. 

