BFN 

<F P=106> [Harald Stanghelle report: "Continued Massive `No' to the </F>
EU"] 
  [Excerpt] According to Opinion's April EU [European Union] 
poll, 48 percent say "no" to EU membership, while 33 percent day 
"yes," and 19 percent have not made up their minds. 
  But the poll also shows that if Sweden and Finland become 
members, the mood would change: Then 42 percent would say 
"yes," 37 percent "no," while 21 percent have not made up their 
minds. 
  The poll was carried out from Monday to Wednesday [11-13 
April] this week and is the first Opinion poll since voters have 
had the opportunity to follow the debate on the agreement 
reached with the EU. Several polls, undertaken in the days 
after the text of the agreement became known, showed major 
swings, while Opinion's April poll shows a body of public 
opinion on the EU issue which does not seem to have been much 
influenced by Norway's EU agreement. The "yes" side receives a 
2 percent increase in support, while the "no" side falls back 1 
percent, but relative strengths are exactly the same today as 
they were a month ago. It is also worth noting that the "yes" 
side is well below its 37 percent support in January this year. 
  The poll shows that the choices which Sweden and Finland 
make 
are important to many voters, but we also asked them about the 
timing of Norway's referendum in relation to that of Sweden. It 
turns out that 44 percent of voters want the referendum on the 
same day as Sweden, 40 percent want the referendum after that of 
Sweden, while 16 percent do not have any firm views on the 
matter. A total of 64 percent of "yes" voters want a Norwegian 
referendum after Sweden's, while 62 percent of "no" voters want 
the referendum on the same day as Sweden's. In other words, 
there can be no doubt that voters believe that the timing of the 
referendum will be very important for its result. 
  This was also shown by the poll when Opinion asked how 
voters 
will vote if Sweden and Finland join the European Union: 42 
percent said "yes," 37 percent "no," and 21 percent had no firm 
view on the question of membership. The "yes" side leads by 5 
percent, and Opinion has not registered so clear an advantage 
for the "yes" side on this issue before. The position of the 
voters seems to be that, if at the time of a Norwegian 
referendum, it is already clear Sweden and Finland will become 
members of the EU, Norway has no choice but to follow. [passage 
omitted] 

