BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Golts report: "On the Brink of Sanctions Which </F>
Can Solve Little"] 
  [Text] The nuclear poker game begun by the DPRK leadership 
is nearing a climax. The stakes are close to as high as they 
can get: In response to attempts by inspectors from the 
International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA] to clarify just how 
much weapons-grade plutonium the DPRK has at its disposal, 
Pyongyang has stated that it is leaving this international 
organization. Foreign agencies also report the possibility of a 
"definitive" DPRK withdrawal from the nonproliferation treaty. 
Pyongyang has declared its intention "to implement its own 
nuclear program autonomously." 
  In these conditions, the question of international sanctions 
against North Korea, the need for which is defended by the 
United States, Japan, and South Korea, shifts to a practical 
level. Washington is already carrying out direct work on a draft 
resolution for the gradual introduction of these sanctions. In 
a telephone conversation, the presidents of Russia and the 
United States exchanged views on the resolution, in which both 
the idea of sanctions and the holding of a conference for a 
comprehensive solution to the problems of the Korean peninsula 
are expected to be reflected on an equal footing. 
  Meanwhile, through its own news agency, KCNA, Pyongyang 
declares: "Sanctions against our republic signify immediate 
war, and war is marciless." Four years ago, I was in this 
country. The North Korean military explained how they were 
preparing to repulse a threat from the South. They showed me 
underground bases where 1960's Soviet fighters were located. A 
fortified region set up near the demarcation line was a source 
of particular pride for them. It constituted a huge granite 
mountain, in which, by dint of incredible labors, galleries and 
caverns had been forged. It was in these that artillery and 
machine gun pockets were located. 
  Even at that time, it occurred to me that the horrors of the 
last war, the merciless bombings by American aviation, had not 
been forgotten in the DPRK. And they are preparing for another. 
Although this probably bears only a tangential relation to 
resisting a modern army. But now, whether you like it or not, 
all these preparations have to be taken seriously. At the very 
least in South Korea, where right now they are stressing that 
Pyongyang has accumulated the requisite reserves in its 
underground stockpiles and it has sufficiently combat ready 
Armed Forces. 
  All of which indicates that an extremely alarming situation 
is indeed taking shape on the Korean peninsula. The world 
community cannot allow any country to ignore the nuclear 
nonproliferation regime. However, the introduction of sanctions 
in this instance is no more effective than transforming the said 
granite mountain into an "unassailable fortress" which you can 
easily go right past. 
  As shown by recent practice of applying sanctions, be they 
against Yugoslavia or Libya, they produce any results except 
those desired. And I see no grounds to believe that they will 
be effective in respect of the DPRK. This country's foreign 
economic relations are negligible, and a deterioration in the 
population's living standards is by no means a factor which may 
cause problems for the North Korean leaders, especially in an 
atmosphere of heightened military hysteria. In principle, they 
will boil down to calling a halt to the transfer of currency 
into the DPRK from the Korean community in Japan, and to 
restrictions on the already less than extensive economic 
relations with Russia, should it support the sanctions. That 
China -- the DPRK's chief economic partner -- will join the 
sanctions is fairly unlikely. 
  But I suspect that the very ineffectiveness of sanctions, 
the fact that they bear an almost symbolic significance, suits 
those who started this risky game. I do not think that it is 
Pyongyang's real aim to create its own nuclear weaponry. There 
is something else which is more likely: This program is the 
North Korean leaders' bargaining chip with the world community, 
as a result of which they want guarantees that Western states, 
and above all the United States, acknowledge the DPRK for what 
it is, with all the "specific" peculiarities of this regime. So 
that it can exist in the future without experiencing pressure on 
the subject of, say, observing human rights. In this sense, 
sanctions which isolate the DPRK meet this same objective to a 
certain extent. The idea of the country as a besieged fortress 
gives the rulers far greater opportunities even than 
international recognition of the regime. 
  The United States' desire to introduce sanctions is also 
understandable. Washington has yet to have much success in 
strengthening its position in the role of chief guarantor of law 
and order in Asia (this was especially clear after the retreat 
in the dispute about most favored nation status in trade with 
China). The introduction of sanctions, especially accompanied by 
some kind of military preparations in response to Pyongyang's 
threats, provides an opportunity to show just who is defending 
the Asian states. 
  Things with Russia are more complex. It, of course, has no 
interest whatever in a violation of the nonproliferation regime 
or the appearance of new nuclear states, especially not right 
alongside it. On the other hand, it has equally little interest 
in whipping up military tension on its own borders. The 
introduction of sanctions will inevitably lead to this. 
(Incidentally, of the potential participants in the sanctions, 
Russia alone has an embassy in Pyongyang.) This is why Moscow 
is firmly promoting the idea of an international conference 
during which it would be possible to eradicate suspicion over 
the DPRK's nuclear program and to allow the latter to "save 
face" at the same time. 
  Admittedly, as the visit by the South Korean president 
shows, 
the main thing which our partners have latched onto from the 
Russian stance is the possibility of its acceding to the 
sanctions, and its reluctance to support the DPRK in the event 
of a deterioration in the situation. Until recently the idea of 
a conference has hung somewhere in the background. As a result, 
the world is on the brink of sanctions which can lead to nothing 
except fueling tension. 
  The nuclear poker game is nearing a climax. It is not 
impossible that, when the time comes to show the cards, somebody 
will simply lose their nerve. The trouble is that it is by no 
means a candelabrum which will be aimed at the head of the 
opponent.... 

