CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Davor Drezga: "Croatian-Macedonian Economic </F>
Cooperation: Free Trade Zone for Greater Exchange"] 
  [Text] Zagreb--In order to promote mutual cooperation as 
well as overall economic and trade relations between Croatia and 
Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM], 
a cooperative agreement between the economic chambers of the two 
states was signed Thursday at the Croatian Economic Chamber 
[HGK]. This document, through which active measures are 
undertaken on a reciprocal basis to promote the economy, to 
stimulate the development of trade, and to support economic and 
technological cooperation between Croatia and Macedonia, was 
signed by the HGK chairman Mladen Vedris and GKM [Economic 
Chamber of Macedonia] chairman Dusan Petreski. 
  The agreement stipulates that the chambers will assist one 
another, within the bounds of what is possible, in appearances 
at international exhibitions and other events in Croatia and 
Macedonia. In addition, there will be support in organizing 
seminars, business meetings, and reciprocal visits by trade 
delegations. The chambers will also cooperate in the area of 
international arbitration, patent law, and trademark protection. 
  Referring to the difficult recent period during which 
economic cooperation between Croatia and Macedonia has fallen 
off, Mladen Vedris emphasized that now we must focus on the time 
to come. He added that businessmen feel a need for business ties 
in various activities and sectors. A philosophy of economic 
cooperation could be created on the basis of a free trade zone, 
which presupposes liberalization in economic relations. This 
would promote the establishment of a higher level of trade, 
Vedris said. Vedris invited Macedonian businessmen to come 
exhibit their products at the Zagreb Trade Fair. 
  Noting that economic structures in Macedonia have been in 
crisis for three years now, Dusan Petreski said that despite the 
crisis, an economic reform program is being carried out, but 
slowly. Privatization is also proceeding gradually. 
  Petreski emphasized that the Macedonian economy is 
interested 
in expanding trade with Croatia, which last year amounted to (a 
total of) $84 million. Macedonia had a small deficit, which it 
would like to even out. Petreski stressed that the vast majority 
of the trade is based on compensation and barter, while 
cooperative arrangements between enterprises have ended 
entirely. The Macedonian business sector would like to 
liberalize trade relations with Croatia. 
  Petreski then spoke of the need to adopt, as soon as 
possible, numerous documents that are important to economic ties 
between Croatia and Macedonia: agreements on commercial and 
economic cooperation and on eliminating double taxation; accords 
on investment, employment, and social security; and an agreement 
on trade payments, which he considers very important. Petreski 
invited representatives of the HGK to visit Macedonia, and his 
invitation was accepted. 

