BFN 

  [Text] The amnesty proclamation signed by President Ramos 
last Friday does not cover soldiers and policemen who committed 
human rights violations, Justice Secretary Franklin Drilon said 
yesterday [28 March]. 
  Drilon was reacting to the objections raised by the National 
Democratic Front (NDF) to Presidential Proclamation (PP) 348 
which offers amnesty to military and police personnel who may 
have committed acts punishable under the Revised Penal Code, the 
Articles of War or other special laws in connection with 
counter-insurgency operations. 
  Luis Jalandoni, NDF vice chair for international affairs, 
said the proclamation was practically condoning the atrocities 
committed by government forces in the anti-insurgency drive. 
  But Drilon cited Section 1 of PP 348 which states that the 
amnesty does not cover soldiers and policemen who committed 
torture, arson, massacre, rape or other crimes against chastity, 
or robbery of any form. 
  These crimes are specifically listed as excluded in the 
proclamation because these acts "are not necessary in counter- 
insurgency operations," he said. 
  Drilon also noted that PP 348 was based on a draft submitted 
by the NUC [National Unification Commission] and that it was 
during discussions by the NUC that a "conscious decision" to 
exclude human rights violators was made by the commissioners. 
  Senator Rodolfo Biazon, meanwhile, chided rebel leaders who 
rejected the president's amnesty program on the ground that it 
did not result from peace talks. 
  "Their objections are irrelevant because they have no right 
to decide for those who have returned to the government fold and 
already out of their control and influence," he said. 
  Proclamation 347 offers amnesty to all rebels who have 
committed crimes in pursuit of their political beliefs. 
  The NDF and the Rebolusyonaryong Alyansang Makabansa 
[Nationalist Revolutionary Alliance] have rejected the amnesty 
offer pending the outcome of the peace talks. 
  But Biazon, a member of the defunct National Unification 
Commission, explained that PP 347 applied only to those who have 
"opted to come out and lead a peaceful life." 
  Rebels are deemed to have "returned to the fold of the law" 
once they declare their intent to apply for amnesty, he added. 
  Drilon, who was also an NUC member and is an ex-officio 
member of the National Amnesty Commission (NAC), also dismissed 
the rebel leaders' position. 
  He said PP 347 did "not exclude the possibility of another 
amnesty proclamation." 
  The president himself had said the amnesty was being granted 
without prejudice to any legal arrangement that may result from 
a negotiated settlement which the government is pursuing with 
the various rebel groups. 
  Biazon said the amnesty covered rebel returnees who missed 
Proclamation 10 and 10-A issued in ]992 or will come out within 
six months after Congress approves PP 347. 
  He said those opposed to the latest round of amnesty, as 
drafted, will have to wait for the outcome of the peace talks. 
  "If the peace talks succeed, their case may be provided for 
through a negotiated settlement of the insurgency," Biazon said. 
  "If the talks fail and the rebel leaders decide to continue 
the armed struggle, government may still consider another round 
of amnesty proclamation for rebels who opt to end the fighting 
individually," he added. 
  The Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) also 
rejected the amnesty package for similar reasons. It said: 
  -- The fate of those applying for amnesty will still be 
decided on by the amnesty commission, and the NAC decision can 
still be questioned before the Court of Appeals. 
  "This tedious process negates one of the government's 
reasons 
for declaring its amnesty package, that is, to speed up the 
peace process." 
  -- It does not address the cases of political prisoners 
charged with or convicted of common crimes. This means that 80 
percent of them are automatically disqualified. 
  -- It covers government personnel who committed atrocities 
in 
the anti-insurgency campaign. "How can the release of the 
perpetrators of human rights violations contribute to a lasting 
peace?" 
  -- It preempts the outcome of the peace talks between the 
government and armed dissident groups. 
  The TFDP is pushing for a general, unconditional amnesty, 
which it said "must come after a negotiated political settlement 
and not before." 

