Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Hat Yai, Songkhla -- A time bomb exploded yesterday 
afternoon in bustling downtown Hat Yai, in Songkhla province, 
injuring four Malaysia tourists and three Thais, police said. 
  Police said it was fortunate that they learned of the bomb's 
existence 15 minutes before it went off. They managed to clear 
most people away from the area. 
  The injured, who were standing or walking several metres 
away 
from the bomb, were only slightly hurt about the legs by the 
blast and nails included in the explosive device, police said. 
  Two policemen and private security officers were among the 
injured. 
  Police said it was too soon to determine any connection 
between the explosion to the discovery in Bangkok of a "truck 
bomb" allegedly intended to explode at the Israeli Embassy. 
  The Hat Yai bomb, stuffed inside a plastic bag like those 
used to hold grain, was left in front of a leather shop on the 
Nipat Uthis 3 Road, the town's main shopping spot. 
  The shop owner, Wilawan Sae Ung, noticed that the bag had 
been left unattended for too long and alerted police at 4 pm. 
She tried to make a phone call, but the line was busy so she 
ran to a traffic policeman in the area. 
  Sgt. Bunsoem Thongmai opened the bag and found a bomb wired 
to a clock. Hundreds of nails were also found in the bag. He 
immediately called for reinforcements and alerted bomb-disposal 
experts. 
  While some policemen were clearing the crowd away from the 
area it went off at 5:30 pm, before the arrival of disposal 
experts. 
  Boonsoem and Pol Sgt. Suchin Chet-Urai were knocked down by 
the blast, along with the four Malaysian tourists. The injured 
received treatment at Hat Yai Hospital and were discharged. 
  The blast left a hole 30 cm in diameter and about 18 cm 
deep. 
It scattered leather goods inside the shop as well as books 
inside a nearby bookstore. Some books were blown more than 
seven metres away. 
  The windshield of nearby car was also smashed and nails 
damaged one side of a parked pick-up truck. 
  Hat Yai police chief Pol Lt Col Khamronwit Thupkrachang said 
the bomb was made of dynamite and had a destructive radius of 
seven to eight metres. He said it seemed that the assailants 
wanted to "create a disturbance" rather than cause much 
destruction. 
  No one had claimed responsibility for the bomb. 
  But Pol Lt Gen Michai Nukunkit, assistant police director 
general in charge of the southern provinces claimed police knew 
the identities of the people behind the explosion. Police had 
made sketches of suspects from accounts given by the shop owner 
and other witnesses. 
  Stepped-up security had been ordered for major business 
areas 
in the town, including the railway station and bus terminal. He 
said there could be further attacks. 
  Following the blast, sniffer dogs and disposal experts were 
sent in to comb the area for more bombs, but nothing was found. 
The search continued until 9 pm as hundreds of onlookers 
gathered nearby to observe. 

