Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with V.I. Romanov, chairman of the All-Russian </F>
Association of Trade Union Organizations From Regions With 
Adverse Ecological Conditions (EKOASSPROF), by Viktor Ukolov; 
place and date not given: "Do Not Drink or Breathe, or Else You 
Will Die. EKOASSPROF Chairman Vasiliy Romanov Maintains: `The 
Ecological Crisis Has Spread to Virtually All of Russia'"] 
  [Text] There is no need to introduce Vasiliy Romanov 
to our readers. Trade union activists know him as the former 
deputy chairman of the FITUR [Federation of Independent Trade 
Unions of Russia]. When a new team came to lead the Federation 
after the October events and the extraordinary Congress that 
followed, he focused on work in the All-Russian Association of 
Trade Union Organizations From Regions With Adverse Ecological 
Conditions (EKOASSPROF). 
  Ukolov: Are you waiting it out in a quiet haven? 
Vasiliy Ivanovich, pardon me for this tactless question. 
  Romanov: I do not consider concern about the 
health of the working people to be something of a rear echelon. 
Traditionally, it has been above all for trade unions. 
  Of course, this is a very extensive field of activities. 
There is room for executive organs, entrepreneurs, and public 
organizations alike to apply themselves. We cannot 
procrastinate--the life expectancy of Russians is falling 
sharply, the birth rate is declining. Specialists project that 
if emergency measures are not taken, by the end of the century 
Russia will turn into a sick society with a low percentage of 
healthy people. 
  Ukolov: I know that for you this is not just 
scientific research and projections; you have had occasion to 
inhale smog yourself.... 
  Romanov: Indeed, I lived and worked for almost 30 
years in the Kuzbass, which is actually an ecological disaster 
zone. The population is under continuous pressure from the 
heavy, poisoned air. Kemerovo, Novokuznetsk, Prokopyevsk.... 
When the air is still there is nothing to inhale. It is 
dangerous to go outdoors, people faint. I remember that classes 
were canceled in schools. This is why I did not hesitate when 
comrades proposed that I head the ecological association of 
trade unions (EKOASSPROF). 
  Ukolov: Is this a major organization? 
  Romanov: It was formed relatively recently, in 
July, but 53 regional interunion associations (trade union 
councils of republics, krays, and oblasts) have already joined 
it. The number will increase. 
  Let us talk of broad issues. To this day Russia lacks a 
state 
ecological policy, and health issues are not considered a 
priority in the process of economic reforms in Russia. 
  At present, in the course of the preelection debate, I 
diligently search for things that diverse "friends of the 
people" contending for seats in the Duma are promising Russians 
as far as healthy living is concerned. I am surprised; they are 
silent as if they had a mouthful of water. 
  Ukolov: If this water is from foreign bottles this 
would be possible, but if it is our running water it is risky. 
  Romanov: This surfaced in one of the newspapers: 
ecological laws are an excessive economic burden on Russia, and 
it is hardly feasible for the new parliament to consider them. 
In short, it is cheaper to blow off the future of the Russian 
people. However, the issue is "either-or": either die or live. 
  Ukolov: Do you think that the association will tip 
the scales toward a favorable outcome? 
  Romanov: We have no intention of surrendering. We 
will work on specific measures to improve the ecological 
situation at enterprises and places of residence. This is the 
first point. Second, we should overcome the ecological 
illiteracy of the populace. We will try to devise a system of 
prompt information for the people concerning what they inhale 
and drink. We should get used to such messages as we did to 
weather reports. We should know how to take self-defense 
measures as long as it is useless to attach hopes to the state. 
To facilitate the provision of preparations and drugs to victims 
is also a task of the EKOASSPROF. 
  An applied scientific conference which is scheduled to be 
held in Kemerovo in January-February of next year will serve as 
a prologue for the creation of regulations. At the conference we 
will ponder a mechanism necessary for the official recognition 
of ecological disaster zones and the requisite procedures for 
compensation for harm done to the health of the people and their 
property. 
  This is what is strange at present; why do they now charge 
us 
an arm and a leg for everything: The system of consumer services 
has driven up prices, and power generation.... Everyone says 
that he operates in a market economy. However, why should I pay 
the entire 100 percent of the price for dirty water which I am 
forced to drink? 
  In Russia more than 60 million people reside in an 
environment of high gas content and extreme air pollution. About 
50 percent of the population of the country use water for 
drinking which does not meet hygiene requirements on various 
indicators. Why do we pay for that in full? 
  Here is an equally "naive" question: Why is someone 
deliberately trying to cut short my life, which my mother and 
God have given me? On what grounds? 
  Ukolov: Simmer down, Vasiliy Ivanovich. Let us 
turn to the draft Constitution of Russia which is to be 
submitted to a referendum on 12 December. Article 42: "Everyone 
shall have the right to a favorable environment and authentic 
information about its condition, as well as compensation for 
damages inflicted on his health or property by violations of 
ecological law." 
  Romanov: For now this is a hollow declaration. The 
trade union ecological association is specifically undertaking 
to prepare regulatory acts in order to translate very good words 
into equally wise actions. 
  Since we have touched on the draft Constitution, I will note 
that great powers granted to the components of the Federation 
are built into it, including those to solve the most acute 
ecological problems. Alas, we do not have a single republic, 
kray, or oblast in which these problems are not acute to some 
degree. This means that regional trade union organs should work 
long and hard together with the local authorities in order to 
make the residence of their fellow citizens safe. 
  The Days of Defense Against Ecological Dangers, from 15 
April 
to 5 June 1994, will become a major and memorable action which, 
I hope. will be useful for all citizens. The EKOASSPROF is among 
its organizers. The Day of Remembrance for those who died in 
radiation accidents and disasters on 26 April and the World 
Environmental Protection Day on 5 June will be the focal events. 
  Ukolov: Let us agree on this: This event requires 
a separate conversation, and we will postpone it for now. 
However, here is my last and perhaps somewhat improper question: 
Vasiliy Ivanovich, you were forced out of leadership positions 
in the FITUR because, as I understand it, you are a proponent of 
forcible methods for conflict resolution, one of the originators 
of the ill-fated Collective Action Plan which incurred the wrath 
of the powers that be. As a result, they nearly "stamped out" 
the entire FITUR. Therefore, have you overcome your nature or 
not? 
  Romanov: I believed and still believe that 
collective actions of the working people are a regular means to 
protect their socioeconomic interests which, incidentally is 
provided for in the constitutions of all civilized states. It is 
primarily proper and effective when the government or 
entrepreneurial side violates the previously achieved 
agreements. However, this highly significant decision should, of 
course, be made by the primary organizations, their sectoral 
trade unions, and associations themselves. 

