Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unsigned article: "Cosmonautics in a Beggar's Orbit"; the </F>
first paragraph is an introduction] 
  [Text] The Ministry of Defense and the Russian Space Agency 
have sent to the government a draft decree of the Council of 
Ministers entitled "Measures for State Support of Russian Space 
Activity and Maintenance of the National Rocket and Space 
Industry." 
  The document is a reaction of the two departments to the 
promise of Viktor Chernomyrdin to provide government support to 
"Russian space," which he made during a visit to the NPO 
Energiya. The draft decree proposes the allocation to the 
Ministry of Defense of 120 billion rubles for settling debts and 
paying for standard deliveries for space hardware, scientific 
research and experimental-design work... 
  It is noteworthy that in the indicated paper provision is 
made for so- called "selective" state support. Seven enterprises 
which are participating directly in the production of Russian 
boosters, the most competitive in the world market, are 
receiving preferential credits. However, observers note that the 
government is considerably watering down the draft decree and it 
is significantly reducing the credits. If this happens, Russian 
cosmonautics will remain in an orbit of a beggarly existence. 
The plan for creating (on the basis of key space enterprises) 
corporations capable of realizing high-technology development 
work in such important branches as electronics, instrument 
making, high-speed railroad transport, aircraft construction, 
etc. is collapsing. The Ministry of Defense cannot update space 
systems for early warning of nuclear attack, satellites for the 
monitoring of the movement of armed forces and space 
communications, which to a high degree have been degraded. 
  Experts feel that this sort of economy (120 billion rubles 
are needed in space; 100 billion were spent on reconstruction of 
the "White House") may finally destroy the space production 
branch. 

