CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Freddy Torres] </F>
  [Text] Victor Hugo D'Paola, who lost his bid for the post 
of secretary general in the most recent party elections, is 
making another run. 
  D'Paola is from the group of the old Hawks led by Freddy 
Munoz and Teodoro Petkoff. He is now seeking the support of MAS 
members from the central states and of Vicente Bello, secretary 
general of MAS in Caracas. Another important figure in the 
orange ranks who has thrown support to him is Luis Manuel 
Esculpi. 
  Although D'Paola favors horizontal leadership and detests 
bossism, he is defined as a centralist. 
  Some of those questioned do not rule out the possibility 
that 
in the course of the campaign, D'Paola could gain the support of 
the party's four harshest critics: Moises Moleiro, Hector Perez 
Marcano, Jorge Valero, and Rafael Thielem. 
  Another candidate for the post of secretary general of MAS 
is 
Simon Garcia, who is proposing a change in party leadership and 
calling for a new discussion of the objectives originally 
outlined by this political force. 
  He supports changing MAS's name and seeks far-ranging change 
within the organization. 
  He is rallying the support of small regional factions that 
refuse to submit to directives from the national leadership. 
  He was very close to Freddy Munoz at the last National 
Convention, but seems to have drifted away from his chief. 
  A low-profile leader, Garcia has the support of Segundo 
Melendez, leader of the Socialist bench in Congress. He is also 
backed by MAS leaders from Lara and Zulia. 
  Another name on the list of candidates is that of Jorge 
Valero, who proposes a return to a leftist, revolutionary line. 
He joins critics of the political conduct of Carlos Tablante. 
  Valeiro enjoys the support of Socialist leaders in the 
interior and, it is said, of Moises Moleiro and Hector Perez 
Marcano. 
  One emergency option for resolving the crisis has emerged 
and 
gained the support of prominent MAS intellectuals: the candidacy 
of Enrique Ochoa Antich for the office of secretary general of 
MAS. Ochoa Antich has moral support because of his record as a 
human rights activist. 
  In the meantime, 6,500 MAS delegates waiting to attend the 
June convention are confident that they will set the course of a 
movement born when it split off from the Communist Party of 
Venezuela and proclaimed to change Venezuela without changing 
itself. 
  The MAS National Convention will elect party presidents, 
vice 
presidents and secretaries general at the national, regional, 
municipal, and parish levels. 
  It will also choose the delegates that will select the rest 
of the party officials for all other organs. 
  The last MAS convention counted nearly 250,000 members 
joined 
by the hope that the debate initiated will pull the organization 
out of its apathy. 
  Moleiro has already issued a warning: "Without an in-depth 
discussion, MAS will become a party without importance, a kind 
of orange URD [Democratic Republican Union]." 
  Carlos Tablante, governor of Aragua and a candidate for the 
presidency of MAS, has entered the race preaching for 
regionalism, a formula he believes can guarantee more democracy 
in the party. 
  "No longer is it only in Venezuela that figures in national 
politics are the target of discussion," he says, a reference to 
the national committee. 
  Tablante maintains that there is no coordination between the 
MAS National Executive Committee and regional leaders. 
  He claims that the national leadership of MAS is not only 
out 
of step with the regional structure of the party, but with the 
country's social dynamics as well. 
  Tablante's proposal has been rejected because some say it 
leads to the danger of little pockets of regional leaders and 
destroys the national purpose of the Socialist Party that was 
born 23 years ago. 
  Tablante's position favors changing MAS's name because the 
term "socialism" is associated with totalitarianism and 
authoritarianism. 
  It is not likely that Tablante's statements will gain any 
following because the governor of Aragua has many opponents who 
condemn his connection with the Capriles economic consortium. 
  One of Tablante's critics is Hector Perez Marcano, who 
claims 
that the weakening of MAS's national political program has given 
rise to a misinterpreted regional autonomy. 
  Marcano says the development of regional political 
leaderships has not consolidated MAS as a party and that in some 
cases, the latter have done nothing but promote unfortunate 
alliances with the AD, Copei, and certain economic groups. 
  To support his claim, he cites one fact about Governor 
Carlos 
Tablante: Of the 1.6 billion bolivars in public works contracts 
awarded in Aragua, 70 percent went to companies in the Capriles 
group, in violation of the law on bidding. 
  Perez Marcano accuses Tablante of buying off AD and Copei 
lawmakers during the last term in order to put together a 
majority in the Legislative Assembly. 
  MAS thus moves toward internal elections marked by visible 
internal problems. 

