BFN 

<F P=106> [By Frank Gonzalez] </F>
  [Text] Cartagena de Indias, 11 Jun (PL) -- Cuba hopes to 
host the Ninth Ibero-American Summit, which will be held in 
1999, Cuban Deputy Foreign Minister Jorge Bolanos announced here 
today. He added that a formal request has already been filed. 
  The deputy foreign minister told Cuban journalists that the 
final decision will be made by the presidents of Mexico, Spain, 
Brazil, Colombia, and Argentina, members of the Coordinating 
Committee of the fourth summit, scheduled to be held in this 
city resort next week. 
  Argentina will organize the next summit. The candidates for 
subsequent summits are: Chile in 1996, El Salvador in 1997, 
Portugal in 1998, and Panama in 2000. Bolanos heads the Cuban 
delegation to the meeting of experts that will hold sessions 
until tomorrow to review the final draft document that will be 
approved by the presidents of Latin America, Spain, and Portugal 
on 14 and 15 June. 
  According to reports, the draft document has undergone a 
series of modifications, the one that currently exists is the 
sixth version of the original, and there is a possibility that 
another version may emerge before it is submitted to the heads 
of state or government. According to the official program, the 
heads of state will have seven minutes for their speeches before 
the plenum. They will subsequently discuss behind closed doors 
three topics related to trade and integration. 
  The topics that were selected for discussion are related to 
the new multilateral trade system, the convergence of regional 
integration systems, and competitiveness and social development. 
Colombia proposed that the topics be presented by an equal 
number of presidents, but the idea was discarded because the 
countries could not reach an agreement as to who would make the 
proposals, a diplomat with access to the organizing committee 
told PRENSA LATINA. 
  The method that will be used will be that of an open 
discussion without an introduction, and at the conclusion of the 
debates a brief document will be approved summarizing the 
results of the presidents' discussion, the source added. 

