Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Ion Cristoiu editorial: "Ion Iliescu Has Fallen From the </F>
Top of the List"] 
  [Excerpts] The TINERETUL LIBER daily, which has been 
issued in a new format today, publishes the latest opinion poll 
of the IRSOP [Romanian Institute for Public Opinion Poll] on the 
issue of the population's electoral options. The major 
conclusion of the opinion poll is really sensational: For the 
first time since December 1989, Ion Iliescu cedes the top place 
that he has held in the electoral sympathy to another 
politician, who is none other than Ion Iliescu's former 
adversary in the September 1992 elections, namely, the current 
leader of the CDR [Democratic Convention of Romania], Emil 
Constantinescu. [passage omitted] 
  I will only mention that, as a result of this recent opinion 
poll carried out by IRSOP, the perennial Prince Charming of the 
Romanian electorate, the person who won two presidential 
elections and has been the holder of the first place in all 
polls since 1989, is now holding second place, 10 points behind 
the first one on the list, Emil Constantinescu. This represents 
the response to the question: If presidential elections were 
held next Sunday and the same candidates as in 1992 would run in 
those elections, whom would you vote for? The IRSOP polls have 
always been suspected of behind-the-scenes games. At a first 
glance one might suspect such a game being played now. One of 
the means through which the Iliescu group has kept its position 
for four years has been to put the opposition to sleep, by 
feeding it the illusion and the feeling that it has become 
victorious. This is precisely what happened for example shortly 
before the September 1992 elections, when the opposition, 
intoxicated -- in a shrewd manner -- with the prospects of 
indisputable triumph, slackened the intensity of its electoral 
actions. It is clear that the PDSR [Social Democracy Party of 
Romania] is preparing for early elections. However, considering 
that the open and brave confrontation is not one of this party's 
habits, the moment of provoking elections has been postponed. 
All this time, the PDSR will be able to carry out its activity 
of fighting political adversaries using state money, without 
anybody being able to accuse it of violating the provisions of 
the electoral law. The IRSOP poll could be regarded as a simple 
maneuver meant to appease the vigilance of the opposition by 
creating the illusion that the PDSR and Ion Iliescu have already 
been knocked out. However, at a closer glance -- which would 
mean to take into consideration the current concrete social, 
political, and economic situation -- the fall from the top of 
electoral options is convincing. From 1992 and up to now, Ion 
Iliescu's political capital has not stopped eroding. He is 
losing his electoral inheritance at an incredible speed of late. 
The reasons for this process should be sought first of all in 
the dramatic deterioration of the daily life. No matter how 
strongly the constitution stipulates that it is the government 
and not Ion Iliescu who is responsible for national economic 
affairs, an ordinary person, less attentive to subtleties, 
automatically holds the president responsible for the country's 
disastrous state. This transfer of responsibility from the 
government to Ion Iliescu has been much accelerated by Ion 
Iliescu's lack of capability to play exclusively the role of 
Romania's president. His actions to appoint a mediocre prime 
minister who lacks personality, to send numerous recommendations 
to the government from Cotroceni [presidency], and to turn the 
job of the president into that of counselor of numerous 
ministers, have gradually convinced the entire population that 
Romania is virtually led by Ion Iliescu. Thus, the president 
has been and continues to be held responsible for all current 
evils in Romania, even those for which he is not guilty at all. 
  The reason for this process that intensifies the erosion of 
the president's electoral capital can be found also in the 
ambiguous policy promoted by Ion Iliescu. The president won the 
elections through a left-wing platform. Later, he became -- at 
least according to his statements -- a passionate promoter of a 
right-wing policy. Neither the previous option for the 
left-wing, nor the current one for the right-wing have been 
clear and firm options. Currently, just like at that time, the 
president is leading a paradoxical policy which we could call 
today a left-right-wing policy. This has made Ion Iliescu lose 
the sympathy of the left-wing electorate, without succeeding in 
winning the right-wing one. As usual, not only in politics but 
also in life, ambiguities and half measures, as well as the 
habit of hopping from one side to another, have to be paid for. 

