Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Lieutenant Colonel Viktor Burlakov, chief of </F>
the department for combating terrorism at the Ukrainian Security 
Service Administration, by unidentified UKRAYINA MOLODA 
correspondent; place and date not given: "Terrorism Will Not 
Pass" -- first paragraph is UKRAYINA MOLODA introduction] 
  [Text] As indicated by its name, the main purpose of the 
Administration for Protection of National Statehood and 
Combating Terrorism and all relevant subunits of local 
governments is to detect and investigate crimes of a terrorist 
nature. This is why the administration and the local "T" units, 
in conjunction with other law enforcement agencies, the 
Ukrainian State Border Committee, and customs services, 
undertake operational actions to prevent illegal imports and the 
spreading of firearms and ammunition on Ukrainian territory. 
They reveal illegal pressuring of state and government 
officials, such as explosion, arson, and other methods, and 
conduct operational searches for authors and disseminators of 
anonymous documents containing evidence of plotting and criminal 
activities, whose investigation rests with the Ukrainian 
Security Service [SBU]. Those subunits are also in charge of 
counterintelligence tasks to counter anti-Ukrainian subversive 
terrorist actions. 
  Correspondent: How acute is the issue of terrorism 
in Ukraine? 
  Burlakov: Fortunately, no activities of 
organizations resorting to what is typically considered as a 
terrorist act in their political or religious struggle were 
reported in Ukraine. However, a kindling ground for this is now 
being cultivated in the state, abetted by the flawed legislation 
and the ever increasing legal nihilism on the part of both 
specific individuals and entire public groups. In 1993, 172 
cases of terrorist threats and attempts on the lives of 
government officials, deputies, and judges were reported, 
compared to 110 in 1992. Attempts by criminals and ultraradical 
individuals to acquire firearms, ammunition, and explosives, 
with which 762 aggravated crimes were committed, became very 
frequent. Given the danger to society posed by illegal 
possession of firearms and ammunition as well as their possible 
use in staging terrorist acts and other crimes, the SBU and the 
Interior Affairs Ministry [MVS] conducted several joint 
operations in 1993 resulting in the seizure of 1351 units of 
firearms, including 79 grenade launchers, 10 machine guns, 111 
assault guns, 103 rifles, 451 hand pistols, 2517 grenades -- a 
substantial increase since last year. 
  Correspondent: Could you give examples of specific 
cases that were successful? 
  Burlakov: Last year in January, agents from our 
administration, in conjunction with the SBU Chief 
Administration, foiled a conspiracy by one of the Middle East 
terrorist organizations to prepare in Ukraine a terrorist act 
against a foreign embassy based in Moscow. As a result, we 
confiscated grenades and explosives. We also prevented another 
foreign terrorist organization from purchasing in Ukraine 
equipment for conducting terrorist acts in other regions of the 
world. We have some evidence that due to its poorly patroled 
borders and some other factors, international terrorism has 
already "zeroed in" on Ukraine. 
  In late 1992, much attention was attracted by the case of V. 
Yukhno, deputy of the Kherson City Council and head of the 
Ukrainian Democratic Party Kherson-based organizations, who was 
severely beaten by unidentified individuals, and died in the 
hospital on 1 December, 1992. Some media and public 
organizations, prior to completion of the investigation, 
classified this tragedy as a terrorist act, accusing government 
institutions, the SBU, and MVS of inaction. Some even went as 
far as to suggest that law enforcement agencies abetted 
perpetrators of that murder. A special commission that included 
experienced agents from the Internal Affairs Administration and 
the Security Service Administration in Kherson Oblast was 
established to investigate the case. As a result of the 
commission's investigation, the culprits were found. They were 
adolescents aged 16 to 17, who had committed more than 10 
assaults and robberies. Two of them were convicted. The 
version claiming political reasons behind that crime, which was 
examined by our employees in great detail, was not borne out by 
the investigation. 
  In September 1993, the Internal Affairs Administration in 
Vinnytsya and Kharkov Oblasts along with the militia detected 
and broke up a criminal group that included residents of the 
above oblasts, as well as residents of the Dniester region. We 
confiscated 1,000 "F-1" grenades, 59 grenade launchers, 2 trotyl 
cartridges, 32 smoke pots, 100 electric detonators, 10 signal 
pistols, and 6 meters of safety fuse -- all stolen some time ago 
from warehouses of the 14th Army of the Russian Federation. 
  Last year, we found in Pervomaysk, Dniepropetrovsk Oblast, 
the authors, manufacturers, and distributors -- all local 
residents -- of leaflets containing provocative and threatening 
statements that were sent to the City Council chairman. It 
turned out that they were motivated by personal animosity toward 
the above official. 
  Also established were authors of anonymous letters sent to 
deputies V. Chornovil. O. Moroz, V. Ismalkov, S. Ostroushchenko, 
and others. 
  Correspondent: What organizations or groups in 
Ukraine pose the greatest threat of terrorism? 
  Burlakov: Today, such a threat is posed by 
attempts on the part of some ultraradical members of the 
Ukrainian National Self Defense, who do not rule out violence in 
their struggle for power. This organization sends its activists 
to fight in conflict zones (the Dniester region, Georgia). Over 
the past year, 4 units of firearms, 14 grenades, 10 explosive 
devices, and some 400 cartridges were confiscated from them. 
One should not write off criminal groupings and certain 
so-called defensive formations, used to prepare and carry out 
terrorist actions and other aggravated crimes, as well as 
emissaries of international terrorist organizations. 
  Correspondent: What obstacles do you encounter in 
fighting terrorism at present? 
  Burlakov: Of course, difficulties in building a 
new Ukrainian state affect the formation of profoundly different 
organs from the former KGB and other security agencies. Our 
administration, as the SBU as a whole, are in the process of 
organization. This causes problems hindering our antiterrorist 
measures. Cadre is the most important thing. Our 
administration is currently staffed only at 59 percent. Of 
those, two thirds do not have sufficient operational experience. 
The organization is poorly equipped, especially with computers. 
In addition, current legislation calls for particular 
improvement of Article 58 of the Criminal Code "Attempt at the 
Life of State Officials." We are talking about combating 
terrorism, but the state failed to come up with its concept of 
such a fight. There is even no legal definition of what the 
meaning of "terror" or "terrorist acts" in the Criminal Code are. 
  In spite of all those difficulties, we work to overcome them 
and believe in the success of our work. 

