BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Juergen Busche: "Scharping Wins -- His Party"] </F>
  [Text] It was not the style of his appearance, it was the 
style of a man who relieved many Social Democrats' minds of 
their doubts. At the congress of the Social Democratic Party of 
Germany [SPD] in Halle, Rudolf Scharping addressed individual 
delegates, not a firmly forged core of a political force 
vibrating in the expectation to enforce a decision. Those who 
had come to Halle with anxious hearts were cheered by the speech 
of the party chairman and chancellor candidate, who convinced 
them that it is a good thing to do party work for this 
politician and his goals. 
  It certainly also makes sense to try to form a "Federal 
Government without Helmut Kohl" in the fall, as Rudolf Scharping 
put it so very delicately. However, how to achieve this goal, 
was something the Rhineland-Palatinate minister-president was 
unable to illustrate in an inspiring way. The SPD is currently 
comparable to a car driver who is stuck a traffic jam. 
Scharping tells the party that it would not be in order to get 
out now and throw the ignition key away, but stresses that it is 
necessary to stay in the car and wait until one can go. 
  Go -- where? To more social justice. To an economic policy 
that safeguards jobs. To a wise environmental protection 
policy. For all these goals, the social democrats are in their 
party. But are they sitting at the feet of their political 
speakers to hear just that, especially at a time when important 
elections are upcoming? A culminating point of Scharping's 
speech was his eulogy for Johannes Rau. The party congress 
reacted spontaneously, with the delegates giving Johannes Rau a 
standing ovation. Johannes Rau undoubtedly deserves this, and 
everyone witnessing this moment in the desolate ice sports hall 
of the scrounged central German city was deeply impressed by the 
loving way in which the party leaders deal with each other and 
show their cordial gratitude. 
  However, Scharping thereby made the defeat that the party 
had 
suffered in the presidential election a topic at the party 
congress, and the message that the delegates heard said that the 
SPD would act the same way again. These were -- for a very 
brief moment only -- notes that would fit into a farewell 
address rather than a statement intended to challenge an 
opponent, and in the humorous address to his rival in the party, 
Lower Saxony Minister-President Gerhard Schroeder, he struck 
such notes, too. Would chancellor candidate Rudolf Scharping 
have preferred to continue his speech in this way? 
  He had too much to say about current policy for that. His 
statement in this respect was credible and to the point and was 
the first official speech of someone who will be in government 
before long. However, this speaker failed to open the curtains 
to give a view of an unpleasant reality and a future that could 
fascinate everyone, no matter whether social democrat or not. 
This is the reverse side of the refusal -- which is basically 
right -- to make rash statements on future coalitions, including 
the discussions and speculations involved. The fight alone for 
one's own policy can only be successful if this policy is so 
convincing that everyone is eager to join it and acquire a 
strong image by representing it. However, there is little 
evidence that this is the case with the SPD. Nor will Rudolf 
Scharping's speech change much in this respect, even though it 
was at times marked by an effort to formulate his policy in a 
passionate way. 
  It was a speech to the party, it was a speech to the 
comrades 
-- it moved and touched them, and they were and are extremely 
grateful to their chairman for this speech. The delegates 
expressed this through the excellent result of the vote by which 
they officially nominated Scharping as SPD chancellor candidate. 
This result -- 95.4 percent, with no more than 14 votes 
against, in a secret ballot -- is really a triumph for the 
candidate. However, for him to win within the party is not 
enough. He must enthuse the public outside the party, and he 
must show people his vision of the future, as Willy Brandt was 
so excellently able to do. He did not achieve this with his 
speech at the party congress. He must manage to do so by 
election day. 
  If this had not been intended at the party congress in 
Halle, 
it would to a certain extent contradict the slogan -- We swear 
on our own flag. But perhaps the goal of this party congress of 
Halle was much more modest. Judging by the mood at the 
beginning, it could, for instance, have been: How do we get the 
party soldier out of the low of his involuntary role of single 
combatant? How can we explain to him that he forms an active 
part of a party that is able to demonstrate cohesion and is 
better than the party of its political opponent? 
  If this was Scharping's goal in Halle, the chancellor 
candidate may tell himself that this is what he achieved. It 
may not look like very much. However, if it is true that the 
optimism demonstrated by Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the 
Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union is the only 
thing that can unreservedly be called an upswing, and if it is 
true that it was primarily this optimism that paralyzed the 
opposition, then Rudolf Scharping has achieved something at the 
party congress in Halle. Perhaps he could only achieve it in 
this circle. 

