CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Viktoriya Andreyeva from Lvov, under the rubric </F>
"Point of View": "Better With Plyushch to a Kolkhoz Than With 
Kuchma to Russia"] 
  [Text] The number of signatures collected in the Lvov 
region for candidates for president makes it possible to 
determine the preliminary apportionment of sympathies in the 
western region. 
  Even V. Babin, who did not collect the necessary number of 
signatures in Ukraine overall, acquired about 2,500 supporters 
in Lvov Oblast. This figure, of course, relates sooner to a 
curious incident, and it only indicates the "multifaceted 
nature" of the politicized region. But there are the signed 
lists filled out in support of the serious aspirants to the 
highest post in the state that make it possible to draw certain 
conclusions. 
  Leonid Kravchuk is leading. A total of 51,748 signatures in 
an oblast in which V. Chornovil, the No. 1 rival to the 
president, took the unequivocal lead in previous elections in a 
nationally oriented oblast in which the "streamlined" policy of 
yesterday's Communist Party secretary never aroused enthusiasm. 
This is an important result. Behind him is the work of the 
National Rukh of Ukraine [NRU]. The NRU, perhaps, was the only 
organization in Lvov that collected signatures in its 
headquarters, without shunning newspaper photographers who 
recorded those who approached the tables to witness support for 
the former president. The NRU, naturally, worked on the 
instructions of its head--Larisa Skorik. And here we again 
return to a paradox: The organization that started with lumpen 
superradicalism and the rejection of any existing authority, 
being "dominated" by the Kravchuk "Amazon," became pro- 
presidential... 
  The rest of the organizations were collecting signatures as 
if in secret from themselves according to the principle--the 
right hand does not know what the left hand is doing. But how 
can it be otherwise? Rukh, for example, adopted a number of 
statements about the unfeasibility of presidential elections in 
June, but meanwhile it was secretly collecting signatures for 
aspirants I. Plyushch and V. Lanovoy. For this reason, there is 
no one to ask--why for two candidates? Quite a few were 
collected in Lvov for Plyushch-- 20,669. The methods were 
diverse. For example, the signature lists were distributed to 
the chairmen of the branch trade unions. The head of the oblast 
trade union committee is People's Deputy Yaroslav Kendzor. On 
this basis, it can be said unequivocally: The support for 
Plyushch was the position of the Rukh leadership. 
  Ya. Kendzor put it this way: "Everyone who thinks about the 
future of Ukraine should vote for the candidate who will be able 
to take the biggest number of votes from Kuchma. L. Kuchma's 
pro-Russian position does not have any substantial support in 
the Galicia region (objectively: 2,686 signatures compared to 
second place in Ukraine as a whole). When Leonid Kravchuk 
visited Lvov on Ukrainian Union of Industrialists and 
Entrepreneurs business, he was met by pickets with slogans, 
among which there was a rather rude one: "Get your military 
overcoat, and go back to where you came from!" However, 
attraction to the "older brother" not only does not please those 
who are distinguished by their emotional simplicity, the 
picketers, but also the more undecided politicians. The question 
lies elsewhere-- what will it be possible for the various 
sovereign forces deployed in the West to place in opposition to 
Kuchma's high national Ukrainian rating? After all, the problem 
is that they are already very diverse. If we start with the 
extremists, S. Khmara simply scolded the NRU for supporting 
Kravchuk, but, on the other hand, he called V. Lanovoy an 
"anti-Ukrainian force." L. Skorik's people will fight 
desperately against Kuchma, using the Galicia beachhead. But 
they simultaneously will also start to ruin Ivan Stepanovich 
and, however, everything that will originate from Chornovil's 
Rukh. 
  Many here regret that V. Pynzenyk removed his candidacy and 
that Chornovil did not move forward. At this time there is no 
figure on the horizon of the presidential elections who for the 
Galicians would be thoroughly theirs. This is probably not that 
bad on an all-Ukrainian scale: Western Ukraine cannot win the 
elections on the whole numerically, and possibly in this way its 
votes in this case will favor a more or less acceptable 
candidate? 
  According to preliminary feelings, the democrat-centrists of 
Western Ukraine are inclined to the candidacy of I. Plyushch not 
because they are so enthusiastic about it, but because half a 
loaf is better than no bread. It is worth quoting the words of 
M. Kosyv in this respect: "Of course, if someone wants to see 
something in the head of state who even slightly resembles the 
Crown Prince of Wales in manners, then the problem will be 
difficult. What is Plyushch--he even uses crude words... But, 
after all, it will be necessary to choose not between the good 
and the best, but between the bad and the utterly bad..." 
  It is a pity, of course, that this is the case. As for the 
quality of the elections--who will become the new president of 
Ukraine will depend in many ways on Western Ukraine, which is 
politicized and always active in elections. If it is taken into 
account that neither Kuchma, nor Moroz (2,494 signatures) have 
any success here, then drawing the Galician card becomes even 
more interesting for the rest of the aspirants. 

