CSO 

  [Text] Ahmedabad, February 13--Poliomyelitis, one of the 
childhood's crippling scourges, will soon be a disease of the 
past in Gujarat, thanks to the massive vaccination programme 
that was launched by the state government some eight years back. 
  Already Gujarat stands on the threshold of totally wiping it 
out; it is in `control grade'. 
  By the end of the present century, just six years from now, 
the dreaded disease will be declared "eradicated," as is the 
goal set by the World Health Organisation and the Centre, the 
minister of state for health, Mr. Shaktisinh Gohil, confidently 
says. 
  Already, consulting paediatricians and orthopaedic surgeons 
conform the decline in cases. In fact, Dr. Kumar Nathani, a city 
paediatrician, said he had seen just seven new cases of polio 
during the last seven years. "All we treat now are the old 
cases," said Dr. Nathani and his physiotherapist wife, Yamini. 
  An orthopaedic surgeon, Dr. Bharat Bhagat, also asserts that 
the disease is fast declining. He should know, being the 
managing trustee of Polio Foundation, which has organised 40 
free polio camps till date, where 15,600 cases, mostly old 
cases, were examined and 2,120 corrective surgical operations 
were performed. 
  Government statistics show that in the first year of the 
massive vaccination programme launched in 1985-86, as many as 
1,012 cases were registered in Gujarat. This fell to 650 in 
1986-87, 156 in 1987-88, then went on rising to 323 in 1991-92 
and then fell again during the last two years to 77 till 
November last. 
  As per the survey report in June 1993, declining trends in 
the occurrence of poliomyelitis are being recorded at the 
national level, as well as in many well-performing states and 
within several districts of other states. 
  The national mass vaccination programme, launched by the 
Centre since 1985-86, has also made a significant dent in the 
occurrence of polio cases. In a single 12-month period, 20 
million children were contacted at least five times, it adds. 
  Before launching of the mass vaccination programme, the 
virulence of the disease in the country was so extensive that 
every year some 200,000 children used to suffer from the disease 
and 2,000 of them used to die. 
  According to a survey conducted by the Union government 
then, 
over 60 per cent of the children became lame due to polio before 
reaching their second birthday. Percent-wise polio resulting in 
physical deformities was 67.6 in urban areas, while in the rural 
areas, the percent was even higher--up to 71.6. In Gujarat, for 
instance, it was reported to be 69 and 71.7 per cent in urban 
and rural areas, respectively. 
  Mr. Gohil states that the government took special care to 
enlist the help of panchayats and anganwadi workers to reach 
ashram schools and anganwadis in deep interiors and inaccessible 
areas to make the programme really effective. 
  To avert the usual occurrence of the disease on a wider 
scale 
during the monsoon months, the minister says that a mop-up 
system has been put in practice, where two doses of polio 
vaccine are administered to all children up to the age of three 
years in March and April. 
  From the beginning of the massive vaccination drive, the 
government took the help of local bodies, medical associations 
and also several voluntary organisations, like Rotary Club, the 
latter even launching a `Polio Plus' programme of its own. 
  The government, and the medical profession aver that the 
credit for the success must go to the mass media, particularly 
to the visual TV media, which gave wide and regular publicity to 
the programme, educating the masses, both in the urban and rural 
areas. 
  The `control grade' for polio, which Gujarat has attained, 
is 
a predecessor to the `elimination grade', when not a single case 
is registered in any of the districts. The next stage will be 
one where not a single case is registered in a three-year 
period. This will come around the year 2,000, it is expected. 
  Specific goals set up by the government for other diseases 
include elimination of neonatal tetanus in all districts by 
1995, reduction in measles cases by 90 per cent by 1995 compared 
to the 1985 level, reduction of deaths and cases due to 
diarrohoeal diseases by 30 per cent and ten per cent by 1985 and 
70 per cent and 25 per cent by the end of this century. 
  According to many private doctors and specialists, this mass 
vaccination programme for various childhood diseases has been 
most effective and the declining trend is not confined to 
poliomyelitis, but also in other childhood scourges such as 
measles, diptheria, whooping cough and neonatal tetanus, which 
cause deaths, debilities and deformities (physical). 
  They are also confident, like the government, that these 
diseases will be declared eradicated in Gujarat in the coming 
years in the same fashion as small pox was declared eradicated 
from the world women 18 years ago.[sentence as printed] 

