Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Euro-Lubbers Must Wait Longer for </F>
Praise"] 
  [Text] Since Saturday [30 Saturday], Ruud Lubbers is no 
longer the leader of the CDA [Christian Democratic Appeal]. The 
idea takes some getting used to, but in a few months he will 
have disappeared from the national political arena. The 
decision on the presidency of the European Commission is coming 
increasingly closer. In any case, there were enough, even open, 
allusions to Lubbers' ambitions in Brussels at the CDA congress 
in Rotterdam. 
  Former Belgian Prime Minister Leo Tindemans, nicknamed 
Mister 
Europe, pressntly a member of the European Parliament, nicknamed 
Mister Europe, and one of the three guest speakers, said that he 
had to hold himself back from already trumpeting praise about 
Lubbers. "It is too early for that," he said. 
  Tindemans sincerely hopes that his political friend Lubbers 
will succeed French Socialist Jacques Delors, even if this is 
merely to prevent his compatriot Wilfried Martens from gaining 
the post. Martens swept aside Tindemans as Belgian prime 
minister 15 years ago, and the two Flemish Christian Democrats 
have been at odds ever since. 
  Former Foreign Minister Hans Van den Broek, now a "mere" 
member of the European Commission, also referred to Lubbers' 
European aspirations. Turning to the new CDA leader, Elco 
Brinkman, he said: "Either I myself, or Ruud, or Hanja Maij (the 
CDA's top candidate at the European elections--DE VOLKSKRANT 
editor's note) will make sure that you bear the interests of 
Europe in mind." 
  Incidentally, this is no superfluous luxury, because, to put 
it mildly, foreign policy is not exactly Brinkman's strong 
point. Nonetheless, it is a remarkable comment on the part of 
Van den Broek, who will have to make way if Lubbers does indeed 
become president of the European Commission. The most suitable 
alternative for Van den Broek would appear to be European Union 
[EU] ambassador to Washington, succeeding Dries van Agt. 
  Lubbers, who was sitting in the front row, listened to the 
whole thing with a smile, but did not say anything. Last year 
he denied he was a candidate, but that does not mean anything: 
One does not stand as a candidate for a post as high as that; 
rather, one is called to office. That old adage of British 
statesman Oliver Cromwell applies to Lubbers: "He who does not 
know where to go, comes first." 
  At the European summit, due to be held in five months' time 
on the Greek island of Corfu, the EU leaders will decide who 
will succeed Delors. Until then, speculation will remain rife, 
and the outgoing prime minister will remain stubbornly silent. 
However, in the meantime, there are indications that he has 
firm ambitions in Brussels. 
  For instance, the word in diplomatic circles in The Hague is 
that Lubbers recently refused to back the possible candidacy of 
Van den Broek at NATO. Nor is any pressure being exerted by The 
Hague on the allies to extend the term of office of former VVD 
[People's Party for Freedom and Democracy] Minister Wim van 
Eekelen as secretary general of the WEU [Western European 
Union]. After all, one top international job is more than 
enough for a small country like the Netherlands. 

