BFN 

<F P=106> [YONHAP from Washington] </F>
  [Text] Emotionally-charged mutual distrust has reportedly 
increased between the ROK and the United States as the ROK-U.S. 
trade conflict becomes more specified. Complaining that the ROK 
is speaking with a double tongue over the issue on implementing 
the Uruguay Round [UR] agreement, the United States picks 
quarrels with the ROK in each and every field, including autos, 
sausages, cod-jowls, and even carpet cleaners. 
  The government's dissatisfaction has become apparent as the 
United States, far from appreciating the extent of cooperation 
provided by the ROK Government for the UR agreement, continues 
only to step up pressure for market opening. 
  Emotional portions appeared between the ROK and the United 
States in the 16th meeting of the ROK-U.S. working-level trade 
committee held in Washington on 4-5 April to exert a negative 
influence upon the meeting. After the meeting, some U.S. 
participants openly complained, saying "Far from making 
progress, this meeting is a step back in negotiations." 
  A U.S. official who attended the Washington negotiations 
cited the sausage issue as an example of an emotionally-charged 
ROK-U.S. trade conflict. Pointing out the customs procedure as 
a major point of dispute, he stressed, "Although the sum in 
question may only amount to several million dollars, it is a 
firm policy of the United States that no matter how small the 
amount, it will straighten it out without fail. He also said 
that, considering the symbolic significance of the issue, the 
U.S. Trade Representative plans to resolve the sausage issue as 
soon as possible. 
  The cod-jowls issue is similar to the sausage issue. The 
U.S. official said that both sides held intense negotiations on 
the cod- jowls issue for over an hour and a half in the 
Washington talks. Stressing that the United States "is angry" 
with the ROK attitude toward negotiations, he complained, "There 
has been no progress in resolving this issue since it was first 
raised four years ago." 
  The emotionally-charged ROK-U.S. conflict is also reflected 
in negotiations on the auto issue, the focal point of U.S. 
pressure listed on its list of "unfair trade manners." Although 
the ROK Government has expressed its attitude that it will seek 
more specific methods to resolve the ROK-U.S. trade conflict at 
the upcoming UR ministerial talks, the United States seems 
unconvinced. The government's ill feeling against strong U.S. 
pressure is apparent. 
  Observers say that the ROK's clear expression of its basic 
policy in the recent Washington working-level negotiations 
paradoxically caused relevant U.S. officials to complain about 
negotiations regressing instead of making progress. 
  The U.S. side's abrupt complaint about the ROK's attitude in 
a recent meeting in Washington between ROK Foreign Minister Han 
Sung- chu and U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor which 
caused a strain in the atmosphere of the meeting, may be seen as 
an expression of pent up emotions. 
  With the United States stepping up trade pressure with the 
principle of attaching primary importance to its own economy, 
the ROK is making every effort to voice its position in a manner 
quite different from that of the past. This is today's reality. 
However, amplified mutual distrust and emotional conflict 
caused by the ROK attitude will only burden us, the weaker side 
in trade relations with the United States. 

