BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Sinn Fein leader Martin McGuiness </F>
by unidentified correspondent on 20 May; place not specified -- 
recorded] 
  [Text] [Correspondent] As you may have heard on "Morning 
Ireland" this morning, the chairman of Sinn Fein in the north, 
Mitchell McLaughlin, said that measurable progress was made with 
the British Government's commentary on his party's questions 
about the Downing Street Declaration. Mr. McLaughlin told RTE 
that Sinn Fein was committed to working its way round the 
clarification roadblock, and he was hoping that the answers they 
had got would succeed in that purpose. But he said the 
conditions required to render the IRA campaign redundant were 
still some way off. While our bulletin was on air, I spoke to 
the Sinn Fein leader Martin McGuinness about his response to the 
British Government's commentary. 
  [McGuinness] We believe that the peace process, necessarily 
by the nature of the thing, will be a series of small steps, and 
we believe that is far more important than grand unilateral 
gestures. We believe that small steps are actually the [word 
indistinct] substance of a developing peace process, and we will 
have to look at what the British Government has said in that 
context. I have been saying, as you're aware, for some time 
that what Republicans were looking for was a level playing 
pitch. And we will look at what the British Government has said 
in these answers and see whether or not this actually provides a 
level playing pitch. 
  [Correspondent] Well, what would you single out as advances 
in the commentary? 
  [McGuinness] Well, I wouldn't be prepared to single anything 
out at this stage, it's much too early. Sinn Fein personnel 
individually will be examining what the British Government has 
said in their reply and they will then by the nature of our 
organization [words indistinct] collective thinking on this, and 
we will then arrive at a position -- hopefully, shortly.... 
  [Correspondent, interrupting] Mitchell McLaughlin said this 
morning that measurable progress was made with this British 
Government commentary. He said that the British had recognized 
that Sinn Fein had serious and legitimate questions to ask, and 
I believe he referred to the fact that your electoral mandate 
was recognized. 
  [McGuinness] Yes. Well, I mean obviously this is very 
important from our point of view and we will look at all that 
the British Government said in their reply in the context of the 
questions which we put to the British Government, which were 
very detailed questions, which go to the heart of what we 
believe to be the problem here in the (?six counties). And 
obviously we are going to have give that [word indistinct] 
consideration and that isn't something that can be done in hours 
or days; it's going to take some time. But it will be done as 
expeditiously as we possibly can do. 
  [Correspondent] But the taoiseach [Irish Prime Minister 
Albert Reynolds] has already questioned whether or not another 
life should be put in danger, given the fact that so much effort 
has been made to open the door to Sinn Fein to come into the 
democratic political arena. 
  [McGuinness] And we have been at the heart of that movement. 
Sinn Fein has taken a very active role. In fact, I think we can 
credibly make the case that we have been the initiators of this 
process. And I'm not going to go into a history of the whole 
business, but I think we can say with some credibility that we 
were the initiators of it, and we have been trying to bring 
about a situation where (?not a single life is lost). We 
realize that there's massive tragedy here in this part of 
Ireland where we live -- (?many) soldiers have lost their lives; 
a young child is lying on its deathbed in Armagh; Catholics have 
been killed daily by Loyalist paramilitaries. And all that we 
are doing --this is our primary political objective -- is to 
attempt to bring an end to all of this, and we are trying to do 
this as constructively as we possibly can. 
  [Correspondent] But don't you recognize that that child 
would 
not be lying on that bed in Armagh if it weren't for the IRA? 
  [McGuinness] Well, I (?just) don't think anybody would lose 
their lives in the situation here in the north if it wasn't for 
the political situation which we've all been condemned to live 
in for the last 25 years. And I don't think that we can see the 
issue of violence and what people are doing as separate somehow 
from the factors which are there in the background, which have 
caused this instability and violence which afflicts our 
community [words indistinct] 
  [Correspondent, interrupting] Can you give people 
encouragement, then? Can you give them some hope as the result 
of what has transpired over the last 24 hours? 
  [McGuinness] Yes, I think we can. Sinn Fein is still very, 
very committed to an effective peace process, but that must be a 
peace process which embraces everyone. No party must be 
excluded. And we are prepared to play a full and positive role 
in this. And we will continue with that. Of course. 
  [Correspondent] But don't you think this process could be 
speeded up at this stage? Because the longer it goes on, the 
more blood will be spilt. People are talking about something 
coming after the European elections now -- surely that's 
allowing the agony to continue too long? 
  [McGuinness] Well, I mean, even reading this morning's IRISH 
TIMES, I mean, there are people in Dublin, in the establishment 
there, who accept that because of the nature of Republicanism 
and the type of organization we are that this is by necessity 
going to take some time. Now I certainly hope that it will not 
be an overdue length of time and that we can get rid of this 
whole issue as quickly as we possibly can. And the reality is 
that we are in the middle of an election, the European 
elections, we do have a policy of consulting our membership. 
This is something that we do on a regular basis and by the 
nature of things we have to do this and this is going to cause, 
I believe, a slight delay. But hopefully it won't be too long. 
  [Correspondent] Given the fact that the British Government 
says that constitutional matters, including the Government of 
Ireland Act, can be on the table, do you feel that you can 
advise your supporters to look favorably on this commentary? 
  [McGuinness] Well, I think we will have to look at all of 
that, at everything which the British Government has said -- all 
the positive stuff and anything which may be negative -- and see 
what our opinion is at the end of that process. And I couldn't 
at this stage attempt to prejudge what the positive elements or 
negative elements are, but certainly we will give it very very 
serious consideration. And we will attempt to move the peace 
process on in a positive way -- absolutely. 
  [Correspondent] And that was the Sinn Fein leader Martin 
McGuinness speaking on the line from Northern Ireland. 

