Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In Togo, the Action Committee for Renewal [CAR], 
which had decided to suspend its participation in the second 
round of the legislative elections, has finally rescinded its 
decision. Several differences seem to have been settled. Yaovi 
Agboyibor's CAR has reportedly received concrete assurances from 
the government concerning its candidates in the second round of 
the legislative elections in Togo. Our correspondent in Lome, 
Olabire da Cruz, has the details. 
  [Begin da Cruz recording] There are no more obstacles to the 
continuation of the electoral process. Yaovi Agboyibor's CAR, 
which decided on 15 February to suspend its participation in the 
electoral campaign in order to obtain security guarantees for 
its candidates, has lifted the suspension order, so the second 
round of the legislative elections will certainly take place on 
20 February. Out of the 22 parties, which entered the race at 
the beginning of the elections, five have qualified for the 
second round. 
  The CAR's decision to lift the suspension order follows the 
mediation of the International Monitoring Committee, which after 
meeting with President Eyadema, received a number of guarantees 
from him to ensure the success of the electoral process. One of 
these guarantees is that only civilian and military observers 
will be deployed, as a priority, to the 11 electoral 
constituencies where the Rally of the Togolese People and the 
opposition parties -- CAR and Togolese Union for Democracy -- 
are in a tie. 
  The head of state also agreed to put an end to the 
interference of soldiers in the electoral campaign. Steps will 
be taken to make soldiers aware of their neutrality. As if to 
demonstrate good faith, a commander of the Reconciliation and 
Security Operation Force 93, accused of partiality, will be 
transferred. Also, technical measures will be taken in the 
seventh electoral constituency in Lome to avoid the fraudulent 
use of some 1,000 voters' cards which disappeared a few days ago. 
  In short, the second round of the legislative elections, to 
elect the 24 deputies to add up to the 57 who were elected in 
the first round, will take place on 20 February. The electoral 
campaign will end at midnight tomorrow. Concerning land 
borders, those on the east and north have closed since midnight, 
while the western border has remained closed since 5 January. 
[end recording] 

