Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by 'Amira Hess] </F>
  [Excerpts] Sharp criticism was leveled yesterday at the 
Palestinian representatives to negotiations with Israel by 
participants in a conference of economists in Gaza yesterday for 
not demanding compensation from Israel. 
  The criticism was voiced by Hisham al-Khatib, a member of 
the 
People's Party. Al-Khatib claims the Palestinians should have 
demanded compensation due to the harsh economic restrictions 
imposed by Israel during the occupation years, which according 
to Palestinian economists resulted in an economic setback and 
retardation. Al-Khatib also mentioned the taxes levied from the 
Palestinians over the years, mainly in the Gaza Strip, which 
were not reinvested in the territories. He also referred to the 
taxes paid by Palestinians who have worked in Israel. [passage 
omitted] 
  The discussions, which started in Jerusalem, yesterday 
centered on the challenges to the Gaza Strip economy during the 
interim period. The first session dealt with priorities in 
development initiatives. It was emphasized that investments in 
infrastructure are a condition for encouraging the private 
sector and a market economy. It was agreed that only under a 
local-national authority will it be possible to start 
implementing this goal. 
  During the third session of the conference, which dealt with 
the Palestinian economy's place in the region, the speakers 
agreed it will be impossible to severe economic relations with 
Israel at once. All the speakers agreed that dependency on 
Israel will continue at least in the near future. 
  The most interesting part of the conference was the second 
session, which dealt with the practical issues relating to the 
financing of the planned projects. Dr. Samir 'Abdallah, member 
of the People's Party and the Palestinian delegation to the 
World Bank, defended the need to rely on foreign aid and 
emphasized the fact that the plan formulated by the World Bank 
is only a recommendation and that the Palestinians are entitled 
to propose their own emergency plan. Apparently, however, the 
Palestinians will adopt the World Bank plan with minor 
alterations. [passage omitted] 
  Salah 'Abd-al-Shafi of the "economic development group," a 
center for handing out loans for economic initiatives, claims 
that the Declaration of Principles preserves the status quo in 
economic relations between Gaza and Israel, adding that the 
dependency of Gazan economy on Israel will in fact only deepen. 
  According to him the national mission should be to quickly 
establish the appropriate institutions and train men who will 
know how to make efficient use of the funds. 
  'Abd-al-Shafi criticized the donors and lenders who have 
delayed the transfer of promised funds until the final signing 
of the Gaza-Jericho agreement. He said that the delay is partly 
caused by fear of corrupt use of the funds, but it also points 
to disbelief in the Palestinians' ability to manage their own 
affairs. [passage omitted] 

