BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Conference of Ministers Serreqi and Kinkel" -- ATA </F>
headline] 
  [Text] Tirana, April 15 (ATA) -- Taking the floor at the 
beginning of the press conference on April 14 in Tirana with his 
German counterpart, Kinkel, the Albanian Foreign Minister Alfred 
Serreqi expressed his thanks for the aid that Mr. Kinkel has 
given to Albania with regard to its integration into Europe and 
for the promise that during the second half of this year, when 
Germany will be in the lead of the European Union, Albania will 
have it as a defence attorney of its interests in the 
integration process. 
  Mr. Klaus Kinkel, German foreign minister and deputy 
chancellor of Germany, said that his visit to Albania was short 
but intensive. "We spoke about our bilateral relations. In the 
future too, Albania may rely on Germany," Mr. Kinkel said, 
adding that "we consider ourselves defence attorneys of the 
countries that are in the transition period and nurture friendly 
feelings for them." Mr. Kinkel offered Germany's aid for 
problems of drinking water, energy, infrastructure, as well as 
for the problem of debts. "Both parties agreed on bilateral 
relations. We will try on bilateral and multilateral level, 
and, particularly, through international organisations, which 
can help on these cases, to help Albania cope with these 
difficult questions," Mr. Kinkel said. 
  Regarding the question of the Albanian refugees in Germany, 
Mr. Kinkel said that Germany is ready to welcome them but, 
however, a way should be found to return these people to their 
country. Until 1993, the Federal Republic of Germany had been 
providing Albania with an amount of 175 million German marks in 
aid for the development of the judicial system in Albania and 
other fields, Mr. Kinkel said adding that "we are ready to 
support Albania resolve these questions such as admission to the 
Council of Europe, integration into the European Union, 
integration into NATO and support regarding Albania's efforts 
toward West European Union. We will support Albania in the 
International Monetary Fund and other international financial 
institutions. Albania is a member of the North Atlantic Council 
of Cooperation. The fact that Albania is also interested in 
bilateral military cooperation with Germany is well known." 
  As regards the Kosova problem, Kinkel said that the Serbs 
must put an end to their oppressive actions, and that the plan 
of actions and efforts for peace include the Kosova issue. 
"Here we fully support Albania's interests and demands," Mr. 
Kinkel said. He said that he has asked both the Albanian 
president and the foreign minister to give up objections 
regarding Macedonia's admission to CSCE. Kinkel denounced 
Greece's embargo against Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia --FYROM] and demanded that the killings near the 
Albania-Greek border be clarified. He appreciated the agreement 
signed on the war graves and expressed gratitude for the 
realization of this agreement. 
  Later both ministers responded to the reporters' questions. 
  Responding the question about the statement of the Greek 
minister for European affairs, Mr. Pangalos, according to whom 
Germany is a giant with a child's brain, about its economic 
blockade to Macedonia, as well as the serious incident in the 
Albanian-Greek border, Mr. Kinkel said that these three points 
should be separated from each other. 
  Regarding the embargo on Macedonia, Kinkel said that Greece 
must lift the embargo because it is a violation of the European 
consensus attained on the international law. Regarding the 
third point, the border killings, he said that the issue should 
be clarified as soon as possible. 
  Responding to the question whether Kosova will be excluded 
from the sanctions against Serbia, Mr. Kinkel said that, 
officially, Kosova is not included in these sanctions and that 
the Albanian Government maintains a very strict stand as regards 
the question of lifting the sanctions. "We understand this 
stand and for this reason I tried to explain how to treat 
sanctions and how to differentiate between their suspension and 
non-lifting, depending on the steps to be undertaken by the 
Serbs," Mr. Kinkel said. 

