Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Jakarta, Feb 9 (ANTARA) -- The Nonaligned Movement 
(NAM) will explore the possibilities of the United Nations 
convening a special session on Bosnia-Herzegovina if current 
efforts to establish peace in the area prove fruitless, Foreign 
Minister Ali Alatas said Wednesday. The idea of calling for a 
special UN session was approved by a NAM foreign ministers 
conference currently underway here, Alatas told newsmen. 
  Participants of the NAM ministerial meeting requested 
Indonesia as NAM chairman to propose to the movement's 
coordinating bureau in New York to meet with the purpose amongst 
others to explore the possibilities of having the United Nations 
organize a special session on Bosnia-Herzegovina, he said. A 
special UN session was a last resort in case the UN Security 
Council proved unable to implement the resolutions it had itself 
issued, Alatas said. 
  The NAM foreign ministers also asked the five Nonaligned 
countries that are currently member of the UN Security Council 
to urge the council to carry out its resolutions. 
  "If the UN Security Council cannot execute its own 
resolutions we will, through our coordinating bureau in New 
York, call for a special UN session on Bosnia", Alatas said. 
  He said non-implementation of the UN Security Council's 
resolutions -- such as on establishment of safe areas and 
limited air strikes against Serb forces in Bosnia, was caused by 
reluctance on the part of a number of council members. A 
special UN session, according to Alatas, could authorize a 
number of member countries to settle a conflict such as had 
happened in the case of the Korean war. In such a special UN 
session a decision could be reached by voting while the veto 
right of UN Security Council members did not apply. 
  "We hope that in this manner the slaughter in the region can 
finally be ended," he said. 
  The NAM Foreign ministers also supported the idea to stage 
an 
international conference on Bosnia-Herzegovina as proposed not 
long ago by the Organization of the Islamic Concerence (OIC), 
Alatas said. 
  They called on the NAM chairman to propose to the movement's 
coordinating bureau in New York to examine the possibilites of 
undertaking such an international conference since the London 
conference on Bosnia had yet to produce any decision capable of 
halting the war. Alatas said the principles of the London 
conference's resolutions had remained unimplemented. "It is 
therefore time to settle the conflict in Bosnia in a just and 
comprehensive way," he said. 
  The ministers at their meeting here also called for the 
lifting of the arms embargo on Bosnia-Herzegovina in order to 
bring about a military balance and press Serbia into returning 
to the conference table, Alatas said. 
  Opened by Alatas Wednesday, the NAM foreign ministers 
meeting 
here is being attended by 22 countries and will discuss a number 
of topics in preparation of a NAM ministerial meeting due to 
take place in Egypt next June. 
  On the meeting's opening day Indonesia as NAM chairman 
briefed participating countries on various progammes of 
activities that had been implemented and those yet to be carried 
out. 

