Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Last year Hainan registered comprehensive, 
sustained, stable, and rapid economic development. According to 
initial statistics by the provincial statistical department, 
last year the province's gross domestic product [GDP] amounted 
to 20.4 billion yuan, an increase of 22.8 percent over the 
previous year, and the per capita GDP was 3,017 yuan, an 
increase of 21 percent over the previous year, ranking in the 
forefront in terms of the country's growth rate. 
  Last year the province adjusted the rural production 
structure and encouraged the development of high-yield, 
high-quality, and highly efficient agriculture and township and 
town enterprises, with the focus on increasing the peasants' 
income and ensuring market supply, thus bringing about overall 
development in the rural economy. Industrial enterprises 
expedited the transformation of their operational mechanisms and 
achieved marked results in making up their deficits. Last year 
the province's gross industrial and agricultural output value 
amounted to 18.879 billion yuan, an increase of 24.71 percent 
over the previous year. Last year the province speeded up the 
construction of energy, traffic, telecommunications, and other 
key projects. There was improvement in power supply and postal 
and telecommunications service. Last year the handling capacity 
of coastal ports throughout the province totaled 13.56 million 
metric tons, an increase of 27 percent over the previous year. 
Postal and telecommunications business amounted to 530 million 
yuan, an increase of 92.4 percent over the previous year. 
  Last year was an international industrial and commercial 
year 
for Hainan. The province signed contracts for 3,106 
foreign-invested projects, an increase of 68.4 percent over the 
previous year, and foreign capital actually used amounted to 
$972 million, an increase of 82.7 percent over the previous 
year. Last year the province's total import and export volume 
amounted to $2.569 billion, an increase of 51.7 over the 
previous year. The total retail sales volume of commodities 
amounted to 7.731 billion yuan, an increase of 32.6 percent over 
the previous year. Business transactions in urban and rural 
marketplaces totaled 3.657 billion yuan, an increase of 55.5 
percent over the previous year. The province's income from 
tourism amounted to 352 million yuan, an increase of 13.2 
percent over the previous year. 
  The province's revenue grew by a wide margin last year. 
Financial institutions' deposit balances throughout the province 
amounted to 43.292 billion yuan, an increase of 24.3 percent 
over the previous year. Urban and rural deposit balances were 
18.4 billion yuan, an increase of 63.2 percent over the previous 
year. The province's revenue amounted to 2.9 billion yuan, an 
increase of 100 percent over the previous year. 

