BFN 

  [Text] Hungary will also ask the International Court in 
The Hague to conclude that Slovakia is not the "inheritor" of 
the CSFR-Hungarian agreement on the construction of the Bos 
power station, an agreement signed in 1977. We learned this 
from Laszlo Valki, a member of the group of Hungarian legal 
experts participating in the trial in The Hague, and one of the 
authors of the Hungarian lawsuit submitted to the International 
Court. 
  Laszlo Valki presented us with the Hungarian lawsuit 
consisting of eight points, a lawsuit fully written in English 
and submitted to the International Court in The Hague on 2 May. 
According to this document of claims, Hungary asks the 
International Court to conclude that: 
  1. Hungary had the right to halt and then abandon the 
construction in Nagymaros, as well as the construction projects 
it had to carry out at Bos in accordance with the agreement 
signed in 1977; 
  2. Czeckoslovakia did not have the right to build the C 
version (the document includes neither the expression "C 
version" nor the term "diversion of the Danube;" there is 
instead a long description, because the Slovaks only agreed to 
take the issue to the court in The Hague with this description); 
  3. Hungary abolished the 1977 agreement legitimately; 
  4. The 1977 agreement would have not remained in force 
anyway after 1 January 1993 due to the lack of a successor state; 
  5. Slovakia is responsible for its continued operation of 
the C version; 
  6. Slovakia is responsible for the damages and losses caused 
to Hungary and Hungarian citizens with the operation of the C 
version; 
  7. Slovakia is obliged to pay compensation for these 
damages, and Hungary will ask to set the amount of this 
compensation if the two sides fail to come to an agreement 
within six months after the International Court's decision; 
  8. Slovakia is obliged to fully redirect the Danube waters 
in the original Danube bed and restore former navigation on the 
river; Slovakia is also obliged to restore the original 
prevailing situation prior to the C version and guarantee that 
it will not repeat its damaging activity in the future. 
  Laszlo Valki described the contents of the Slovak claims in 
five points. According to this document, Slovakia asks the 
International Court to conclude the following: 
  1. The agreement of 1977 continues to be valid and, in this 
respect, Slovakia is the legal heir of the former CSSR; 
  2. Hungary did not have the right to halt and then abandon 
the construction at Nagymaros and the projects it had to carry 
out in the Bos area in accordance with the 1977 agreement; 
  3. The construction and operation of the C version was 
legal; 
  4. Hungary must halt any activity that hinders the 
implementation of the 1977 agreement and must continue the 
implementation of the stipulations of this agreement; 
  5. Hungary is obliged to pay compensation for all damages 
and losses caused to Slovakia, including interest and lost 
profits. The amount of this compensation will be probably be 
set in the second phase, following the first decision of the 
International Court. 
  As for Bratislava's desire to include a Slovak judge on the 
International Court of Justice in The Hague, Laszlo Valki said 
that this request is justified and can be implemented almost 
automatically. 
  According to the rules, if the sides in question do not have 
their own judges in this 15-member international body, they have 
the right to appoint ad-hoc judges themselves, judges who are 
either citizens of the countries in question or third country 
citizens. Given the fact that there has been a Hungarian member 
in this international body since last year, namely Geza Herczeg, 
Hungary cannot appoint another judge. Slovakia, however, can do 
so, but only for this affair and only for the duration of court 
proceedings connected with the Bos issue. His authority will be 
the same as that of the other judges, and his activity will be 
financed by the United Nations. 

