BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with ANC President Nelson Mandela by editor </F>
Aggrey Klaaste and political editor Mathatha Tsedu at the 
Carlton Hotel in Johannesburg on 1 May;] 
  [Text] Question: What practical steps will be taken 
by the new government to implement the Restoration and 
Development Programme [RDP]. 
  [Mandela] Firstly, we must bear in mind that the RDP is a 
product done in consultation with the people in the People's 
Forum. That RDP was drafted five times, the first time through 
consultation with the people. It was then circulated widely to 
opinion-makers for major comments. Every time we got these 
comments we recirculated it. We also had a meeting with people 
like Mr Harry Oppenheimer and other top businessmen to give 
final touches to the plan. We are meeting them again next week 
to ensure that this RDP contains the views and aspirations of a 
wide range of opinion- makers. 
  Now we know the high expectations of our people and these 
have to be respected and met. They can see their counterparts 
in this country and in neighbouring states enjoying 
opportunities which have been denied them. They are justified 
in those expectations. Our duty as a leadership is to say they 
must not expect miracles and that to address their basic needs 
is going to require a year or even as much as five years. 
  After the election results have been announced the process 
of 
involving the masses of the people in addressing their basic 
needs will start. The significance of the Peoples' Forum is 
that it is the people who are telling us what they want. This 
is the mechanism used to apply the RDP, not only generally as in 
the case of houses and jobs, but in particular instances. This 
is important because we will also be having a government of 
national unity. Those involved must feel they are not just 
rubber-stamping what the majority party decides. It is 
important to build mutual trust among various South Africans to 
build the nation. 
  How will you avoid isolation from the people who voted 
you into power? Where will you be staying? Places like Groote 
Schuur and Libertas not only have Afrikaans names but are 
associated with apartheid. Might you change names or have 
symbolic residences in black townships? 
  [Mandela] It is not so much the place where you stay as the 
commitment. I have been to all the people's townships rather 
than the suburbs. There is hardly any place during the 
elections that I have not visited with my road show. It is 
significant that leaders should live in a style which is not 
very different from the masses of the people. I would have 
preferred to stay in the house that I own and travel to Pretoria 
and Cape Town. But there is security to be considered. 
  A president is not only a president of Africans, Coloureds 
and Indians, but a president of whites as well and they expect 
certain standards. We must consider the feelings of the 
minorities as well. Our quarrels of the past must be buried. 
The question of names will have to be addressed very seriously. 
Historical places in this country must reflect the population 
mix, and the role that has been played by the entire population. 
It has to be done. But with great care, through consensus. We 
have in the last few months of negotiations shifted people from 
their old positions to ones where they now collaborate with us 
to build. Also we must tell them you can't have the Jan Smuts 
Airport, Hendrik Verwoerd Airport and D.F. Malan Airport. We 
cannot have that. They must reflect the role played by all 
communities. 
  The peace we have had through the elections may be 
followed by some violence as already shown in some parts of 
Natal. What contingency plans do you have to maintain the 
peace? 
  [Mandela] Our strategy is twofold. There is the political 
initiative and the security initiative. We have discussed this 
with the Inkatha Freedom Party. I had a four-hour meeting with 
the king alone and various discussions with Mr Buthelezi. I 
told the king about the killings in Ulundi and he was shocked, 
for he'd heard from me for the first time about these events as 
he had just returned from Swaziland. He was very responsive. 
That is the political initiative. We have taken another 
initiative on the security side and deployed the army and the 
South African Police. With all the criticism the security 
forces have done well. They have brought down the level of 
violence in that province. 
  I am in constant touch with Mr de Klerk, Kobie Coetzee, the 
Minister of Defence, and General van der Merwe the Commissioner 
of Police. I am satisfied that the security forces are doing 
very well. The crux of the matter is we should develop 
community policing, where the police will have credibility and 
legitimacy. We must also make sure that the police and defence 
forces reflect the population mix. Not only in the lower ranks. 
We must push people of all race groups right up to the command 
structures. 
  What is your attitude towards freedom of the Press? 
  [Mandela] The Press is one of the most important pillars of 
democracy. There can be no democracy without a free, vigorous 
and fearless Press. It is a mirror in which public figures must 
see themselves and without that it will be very difficult to 
ensure that public figures are going to behave as they are 
expected to. 
  We will go all-out to ensure that this freedom is 
entrenched. 
The Press is a very important cornerstone of democracy. 
  What exact offer are you going to make to the right 
wing? 
  [Mandela] We are having discussions with Viljoen and you 
know he has stated more than twice that the Afrikaner Volksfront 
[National Front], and now the Freedom Front, has found more 
sincerity and made greater progress with the ANC than with the 
National Party. That is because we have engaged them in 
discussion and you must not forget what I have been emphasising. 
The National Party was once in the same position as the right 
wing. Through discussion we have broken down all their 
superstitions. 
  I have seen General Constand Viljoen several times. I have 
seen Ferdi Hartzenberg twice I have asked for a one-on-one with 
him. I have asked him to bring his leadership to meet my 
leadership. He has refused. Flatly. I said he sounded like 
Hernus Kriel. He said he was worse than Kriel, who could at 
least consider what I was saying. But they have become 
isolated. He will soon realise that he either talks to us or 
disappears into the wilderness. 
  We will continue speaking to all leaders, including the 
right 
wing. We don't think they pose a threat. They will always 
remain a police matter. We should not make them too important 
by banning them. Our agreement with the right wing is the idea 
of a volkstaat [Afrikaner homeland] will be examined after the 
election. In our country no minority will determine what is 
going to happen to any party of the country. Their demands will 
be listened to, but if they dare to overstep the constitutional 
mark, we will deal with them firmly. 
  As far as the question of the volkstaat is concerned, it is 
not one to be dealt with by a particular group but by the entire 
population of South Africa. The right wing is also a minority 
within a minority. We have fought and defeated the bantustan 
policy and by accepting the volkstaat we would then be negating 
the work we have done over decades. 
  When Tambo died you asked for a moment alone with his 
body. What was going on in your mind? 
  [Mandela] Oliver Tambo was an outstanding leader. A 
scientist, a teacher, a lawyer and a musician and a politician 
and statesman. We had grown up together. We were at varsity 
[university] together. We had a partnership. He did a 
remarkable job of keeping our organisation together, and put it 
to this great level. When I voted for the first time in my life 
I had mixed feelings. Joy and sadness that outstanding leaders 
like Chris Hani, Robert Sobukwe and Steve Biko and many others 
were not there to share it with us. 
  Will you offer the PAC [Pan-Africanist Congress] 
anything in the cabinet? 
  [Mandela] It is painful that the PAC has not shown strength 
in this election, because these are men and women who have 
suffered as much as we have. I was with them in prison. We 
struggled together. The proper thing to do would be to find 
some role for them in government. As an individual, I will 
continue to make sure that those in other political 
organisations who were in the liberation movement are 
accommodated. Not only the PAC but AZAPO [Azanian People's 
Organization] as well. 
  AZAPO and the PAC have outstanding leaders whose 
contribution 
has been great. As an individual I have not ruled out the 
possibility that in one way or another we will give them a place. 
  There will be two deputy presidents and Mr. de Klerk 
will be the second. Who is your first choice? 
  [Mandela] That is a decision that I will have to make. It 
is a matter I will announce at the right moment. It will be a 
question of ability pure and simple. The first deputy president 
will play a prime minister's role and the State President is 
going to rely very heavily on him on government matters. He 
must be a person who can liaise with leaders of other political 
organisations. 
  Business was once very hostile to the ANC but that 
perception 
has changed. But we are concerned to deal with the fears of 
minorities, especially the whites, as we require their skills. 
We will not compromise on the basic needs of our people, 
joblessness, homelessness, education, running water and 
electricity. 
  We must remember we must get the support of the minorities 
and we should not accentuate the feelings of insecurity. 
  What about the rest of Africa? 
  [Mandela] We owe all the African leaders a great deal. We 
must take Africa historically. The problems come from the 
colonial era. The colonisers never tried to develop Africa. 
They wanted raw material and routes to the harbours and to 
resell them at exorbitant prices. The economic problems date 
from that background. If you consider that, then Africa has 
done well. The Organisation of African Unity has played a 
tremendous role in bringing about our freedom. They have given 
us courage and resources. Even now the OAU is poor because it 
has given us support. I have collected no less than 66 million 
American dollars from them. 

