Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dmitriy Kamin: "Formation of Duma Budget </F>
Committee. Committee Intends To Begin With Banking Legislation"] 
  [Text] Members of one of the key Duma committees--on 
budget, taxes, banks, and finance--is to complete the formation 
of subcommittees and select their chairmen today. Yesterday the 
deputy chairman of this specialized parliament structure, 
Aleksandr Pochinok, reported to KOMMERSANT-DAILY that it had 
been proposed to create two banking committees among its 
subdivisions. In his words, the banking sphere will be a 
priority in the budget committee's legislative work. 
  The committee includes 45 deputies, and the ratios of the 
numbers of representatives of various political groupings in it 
turned out to be almost proportional to the alignment of forces 
in the Duma. Considering the experience of the last parliament, 
one can assume that the direction of the committee's work will 
be determined basically not by political factors, but rather by 
the demands of the real economic situation. In this connection, 
Aleksandr Pochinok thinks, the banking sphere is optimal for 
cooperation among various political groupings. At the same time 
it is the one that has now become the arena for the harshest 
conflicts of economic interests. Thus, in Pochinok's opinion, 
the high degree of competition in the banking sector of the 
Russian economy has led to attempts on the part of many market 
subjects (for example, the well-known case of the GMM [not 
further identified]) to increase the volume of capital by taking 
advantage of gaps in banking legislation: It has become 
traditional to attract clients' money under a trust agreement 
(which is actually, though not legally, a banking operation) 
without a license from the Central Bank. 
  Mr. Pochinok pointed out that among the immediate measures 
for protecting Russia's secondary financial market from highly 
risky operations it is necessary to adopt a number of laws 
regulating both the procedure for circulation of securities and 
bonds and the activity of its subjects--for example, a law on 
mandatory audits. 
  If the banking sphere does not evoke any special 
disagreements among the politicians, such aspects of the 
committee's activity as currency regulation and management of 
the foreign debt will be objects of constant interest--the 
representative of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia claims 
the right to be in charge of this particular subcommittee. The 
realization of this possibility could create additional 
difficulties for the current government. The more so since 
Russia's Choice, which was initially its main "support" in the 
Duma, has actually gone over to the opposition to Viktor 
Chernomyrdin's cabinet. 


