CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Guillermo Knochenhauer] </F>
  [Text] The week's news regarding the drug traffic: the DEA 
investigation to learn whether one of Luis Donaldo Colosio's 
collaborators is linked with that activity; the discovery of a 
plot by the Arellano Felix brothers to kill Hernandez Galicia, 
alias "La Quina," in jail, and to foist the blame on President 
Carlos Salinas; the disclosure on Wednesday, 10 days after its 
occurrence, of the reason given by Eduardo Valle Espinosa for 
his resignation as adviser to Attorney General Diego Valades, 
citing the economic, political, and social influence attained by 
drug traffickers and the government's powerlessness to prevent 
it; and, finally, the Salinas meeting with Baja California's 
governor, on Thursday, has two possible readings. They are not 
necessarily contradictory. 
  One might be that the public is being prepared to accept the 
story that the drug trafficking business assassinated Colosio. 
To make this credible, it would have to be based on the second 
reading that we, the government and society together, are 
compelled to make of this dreadful phenomenon. 
  The question that we must all put to the authorities is 
asked 
by Eduardo Valle of Attorney General Valades: "When will we have 
the courage and political maturity to tell the Mexican people 
that we are suffering from a kind of `narco'-democracy? Will we 
have the intellectual capacity and ethical fortitude to assert 
that Amado Carrillo, the Arellano Felix brothers, and Juan 
Garcia Abrego are, inconceivably and degradingly, promoters and 
even supporters of our economic growth and social development? 
  President Salinas's government has fought the drug traffic 
with determination, dealing it severe blows. However, by so 
doing it has only managed to disrupt the balance of power that 
existed among the various gangs, giving rise to a bloody battle 
for supremacy among them. Second, it has made the business more 
powerful every day because, by its very nature, it grows all the 
more as the illegality in which it operates increases. 
  Let us observe some of the publicly known data: A report on 
the Mexican Government's action against the drug traffic during 
1991 states that, in that year, drugs with a street value twice 
that of the nation's total debt were seized. From 1989 to 1991, 
over 60,000 criminals associated with the drug trade were 
arrested, and more than 20,000 weapons and nearly 10,000 cars 
were confiscated. Today, the profits accrued from drug 
distribution in our territory amount to $27 billion per year: a 
figure exceeding the GDP [gross domestic product] of Costa Rica 
and of many other countries. The Gulf cartel alone, which 
Eduardo Valle was supposed to be dismantling, has over $10 
billion in funds, and an army exceeding 500 heavily armed men, 
not to mention its influence on the police and politics in the 
region. 
  The drug traffic and that of the weapons to equip those 
engaged in it are two inseparable phenomena that are producing 
armies like the ones keeping Colombia, Bolivia, and Peru in a 
state of civil war. The experience of those countries, and of 
our own, in fighting drug production under the pressure of the 
consuming countries, proved, a long time ago, that the drug 
business can be understood only in its international dimension, 
and that the deciding factor is not production, but rather, 
consumption. In other words, the isolated battle being waged by 
the producing countries or those used for transit to the market 
is doomed to failure in advance, so long as there are consumers 
willing to pay the price of the drugs: 95 percent of which 
consists of the risk premium left in the distributors' hands, 
with only 5 percent representing production and processing costs. 
  Reacting to the DEA investigations whereby the United States 
was attempting to intensify its pressure on the Mexican 
Government, Ernesto Zedillo, the PRI [Institutional 
Revolutionary Party] presidential candidate, countered by 
declaring that the governments of consuming countries should 
expend a greater effort to combat the drug traffic. To end the 
fabulous business, with its criminal damage to the economic, 
political, and social life of countries, unfortunately including 
Mexico, there is only one method: its decriminalization. No 
nation can do this unilaterally. The problem can be solved only 
on the international level and, if this has not been achieved, 
it is not for want of imagination, but rather because the drug 
traffickers' influence in the consuming nations does not allow 
it. Their power can be better understood if one has the capacity 
to imagine that the business, on a worldwide scale, turns over 
approximately $800 billion per year. That is almost two and a 
half times Mexico's GDP: money without which the international 
financial system as we know it now would not be operating. 

