Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Looking at the Electric Power Development 
Coordination Council's goals until 2002, about 28&percnt; of 
FY99's 
approximately 900 trillion kW is calculated as necessary. 
Analyses show that a yearly growth of 2.5&percnt; is needed, and 
that 
nuclear power plants must also be equipped for up to 54 million 
kW. Nuclear power, which is essential for energy security, 
already plays the role of supporting the way of life in Japan. 
It supports the information society, keeps industry stable, and 
guarantees a comfortable way of life. This concept of energy 
security is also the basis of Japan's government policies on 
atomic energy, and it is essential for changing the weak nature 
of energy so that energy can be ensured into the future. Japan 
has been involved with nuclear power since the Atomic Energy Act 
was instituted in January 1956, 11 years after the war. That law 
is based on the policies that atomic energy is to be "limited to 
peaceful uses," "premised on the guarantee of safety," "managed 
democratically," and that "its results are to be made public." 
It was also a decision made by Japan, one of the world's most 
"nuclear-allergic" countries. 
  Japan's atomic energy development started with enriching 
uranium and then burning it as fuel in boiling water reactors 
(BWRs), pressurized-water reactors (PWRs), or high-temperature 
gas reactors. Later, while using the plutonium made in those 
reactors, Japan went on to convert depleted uranium (U-239), 
which was not used before, into plutonium and use it in fast 
breeder reactors, from which the amount of energy produced 
(plutonium) is more than the amount consumed (plutonium). 
Furthermore, Japan is following the road to nuclear fusion 
reactors. Atomic energy utilization plans that involve the use 
of plutonium, in particular, form the basis of the government's 
atomic energy policy, and that sort of plan has been emphasized 
since the beginning of Japan's atomic energy development. The 
reason for the promotion of that government policy is first and 
foremost the effective use of resources: (1) The uranium 
resources that become nuclear reactor fuel are presumed to be in 
"reserves of about the same amount as petroleum reserves," and 
are limited. In another hundred years or so, when the 
economically offsetting uranium can no longer be mined, that 
amount is estimated to be two and four million tons. This 
uranium is not just for use by Japan and the other wealthy 
countries whose atomic energy development is advanced; with the 
rate of economic development in developing countries, we can see 
how after a while countries will no longer be able to use 
uranium freely. (2) Using plutonium can be 10 or more times 
efficient than using uranium. Trial calculations show that the 
approximately 70-years worth of uranium reserves can be expanded 
to 3,600-years worth. That is the big reason for using plutonium. 
  The results of developments in plutonium utilization are 
bearing fruit: in the 31st year, next April the Monju reactor, 
which uses plutonium for fuel to generate electricity, is to 
reach criticality. With that, the development of reactors that 
use plutonium will be all the more definite. That is also the 
way to skip ahead to the forefront of atomic energy development, 
given the waning interest in such development with the new 
Clinton administration in the U.S. 
  This use of plutonium is not something that the world 
welcomes, as the plutonium-transporting ship the "Akatsuki Maru" 
experienced this January. There are also highly vocalized 
misgivings about plutonium use that links to nuclear weapons. To 
clear away such doubts, Japan has already made clear its 
position on the need for plutonium-fuel-based reactor 
development. Japan is also actively working to make sure that 
the development is limited to peaceful uses and is transparent 
enough to be understood. 
  In electric power generation by means of light-water and 
other such reactors, plutonium produced within the fuel rods 
provides one-third of the electric power generation. When a 
light-water reactor operates, plutonium is turned naturally into 
energy for electric power, and that amount reaches up to 
one-tenth of the total amount of electric power produced by 
thermoelectric, hydroelectric, and other power plants. 
  Using plutonium seriously involves even more active 
utilization of the plutonium produced within nuclear reactors. 
The way to do that is to remove plutonium (in a state in which 
it is mixed with uranium) from spent fuel, then to burn it in a 
special kind of reactor, a fast breeder reactor (FBR), and also 
to use the plutonium in combination with BWR and PWR fuels. 
  With the fuels for nuclear reactors, centering on 
light-water 
reactors, only a mere 1&percnt; of the burnable uranium 
(uranium-235) 
contained in the uranium ore can be utilized. The remaining 
99&percnt; 
is unburnable uranium (uranium-239) that is discarded. 
  The use of plutonium has two aspects: converting that 
unburnable uranium into plutonium with a special reactor like 
the Monju, and then actively using that plutonium; and, using 
the plutonium produced in the fuel rods of light-water reactors. 
Establishing the technology for that will lead to achieving the 
goals of expanding uranium usage by 10 or more times, and 
Japan's creation of a new, man-made energy. 
  The first stage in the serious use of plutonium is the Power 
Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corp.'s Monju FBR. That 
reactor, whose technology is based on the 100,000-kW Joyo 
experimental reactor that reached criticality in 1977, is 
Japan's first FBR for electric power generation. Construction of 
the Monju reactor, which will have an electrical output of 
280,000 kW, started in October 1985. In 1991 equipment 
installation was completed, and comprehensive testing concluded, 
and on 13 October the initial fuel loading was carried out. 
Criticality is expected to happen in April 1994. 
  Furthermore, there is also a demonstration reactor project 
underway to develop a commercial FBR based on Monju technology, 
and the conceptual design for that is already completed. The 
demonstration reactor, which is being developed by the Japan 
Atomic Power Co., will have an electrical output of 1 million 
kW, and the cost of its construction will be 1.5 times that of a 
light-water reactor. The construction of this demonstration 
reactor is seen as a project with a definite time period, even 
in the Long-Term Atomic Energy Development and Utilization Plan 
that is being written this year. The plutonium utilization route 
will become certain. 
  In addition, the private-sector started the construction of 
a 
reprocessing plant that will be the deciding factor of the 
nuclear fuel cycle; the reprocessing plant will supply plutonium 
fuel to the FBRs that are under development. Ground preparations 
are now being made for the reprocessing plant, which will be in 
the Rokkasho reprocessing plant that the Japan Nuclear Fuel Co. 
is building in Rokkasho-mura, Aomori Prefecture. The 
reprocessing plant is to start operating in 2000 and will have 
the capacity to reprocess the spent nuclear fuel from about 30 
1-million-kW power plants (800 tons per year). The plan is for 
the plant to produce about 50 tons of plutonium by 2010. 
  The plant will use a wet method (the Purex method) to 
dissolve spent fuel in nitric acid and then separate the 
uranium, plutonium, and fission products. In order to prevent 
the plutonium from being converted into nuclear weapons, the 
plutonium and uranium will be in an oxide state and will be 
removed just as they are, mixed in a one-to-one ratio. 
  The reprocessing plant will be a plant that takes nuclear 
nonproliferation into consideration. At the same time, to answer 
any doubts, extra care will be taken to guarantee the control of 
nuclear substances, and the emphasis will be on a management 
system in which there will be no extraction of plutonium from 
the production process and no plutonium with an unknown 
destination. The STA is also giving serious consideration to 
security measures for the reprocessing plant; in the budget for 
next fiscal year it will establish an industrial-level nuclear 
substance management system by putting the "Security Measures 
Center" next to the plant. The STA is developing containment 
surveillance equipment that will enable management without a 
supervisor present, and weighing devices that take inspection 
into account. 
  In addition to the reprocessing plant, there are other 
facilities in Rokkasho-mura. A uranium enrichment plant is in 
operation; by about this winter uranium produced there will be 
shipped for the first time. There is also an underground 
low-level radioactive waste center, which processes the 
low-level radioactive waste generated by power plants, that went 
into operation in December 1992. A high-level radioactive waste 
management facility, which will store high-level radioactive 
waste generated from domestic and overseas reprocessing, is now 
under construction. The task of equipping the main facilities 
for a nuclear fuel cycle is steadily progressing. 
  Japan also emphasizes the important safety issues that go 
along with atomic energy development. Facilities for nuclear 
fuel cycle safety engineering research are also being equipped. 
Those facilities are involved in research on the prevention of 
severe accidents in pressurized-water-type light-water reactors 
that use a large non-stationary state loop (LSTF) (the ROSA-V 
project), test research on reactivity accidents using a nuclear 
safety research reactor (NSRR), and the evaluation of nuclear 
fuel facilities. 
  The results achieved in this atomic energy development reach 
world-class levels and are coming to the point where Japan will 
assert how a management system should be in issues such as 
managing the excess plutonium generated from the dismantling of 
nuclear weapons. At the 37th General Meeting of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, STA Director General Eda 
clearly stated that, because of Japan's energy situation, Japan 
will not bypass nuclear power and will utilize plutonium for 
strictly peaceful purposes. Japan made clear to the rest of the 
world that, despite the change in the administration, the new 
government will take over the atomic energy development that has 
taken place thus far in Japan. Then, in regard to a system of 
international management of plutonium, which draws the most 
concern in the world, Japan announced its strong intention to 
play an international role. This way of thinking, i.e., to 
increase transparency by making clear the plans for using 
plutonium for peaceful purposes and the whereabouts of the 
plutonium, is backed by Japan's long period of atomic energy 
development for peaceful purposes. At the brink of the 21st 
century, the world's economy will grow more, and the energy used 
by developing countries will increase. The development and 
utilization of atomic energy is seen as something to accelerate, 
and Japan's history will be a model. 




