Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Foreign Minister Prasong Sunsiri yesterday 
justified Thailand's right to fire on Cambodian armed trawlers 
and said Thailand was seeking compensation for damage from Phnom 
Penh. Sqn Ldr [Squadron Leader] Prasong said the Foreign 
Ministry's treaty and legal affairs division had concluded that 
Thailand had the right to claim damages because the armed 
trawlers intruded into Thai waters, an act against Thai and 
international law. 
  A battle between the Navy's gunboats and suspected Cambodian 
pirates took place on Saturday off Koh Kut in Trat province. One 
Cambodian trawler and two Thai fishing boats, apparently caught 
between the Navy and suspected pirates, were sunk. 
  Sqn Ldr Prasong maintained that the Foreign Ministry would 
call for "high level" talks unless Cambodia paid for the damage. 
Thailand has set a condition for Cambodia to pay for the damage 
to two Thai trawlers and to pay for the treatment of one injured 
navy crew member. 
  Cambodia called for the release of 14 suspected pirates 
detained after the battle, he said. The cost of damage to the 
Thai fishing boats was not known, according to the minister. 
  Thailand held talks between the Trat provincial governor and 
the chief of staff of the Chantaburi-Trat Force and Cambodia's 
Koh Kong governor, Rung Phlamkesan, who reported the outcome of 
the talks to those concerned, he said. 
  The pirates were being detained in Trat for questioning. 
They were suspected of being Cambodian soldiers, he said. 
  Sqn Ldr Prasong said the Cambodian armed trawlers were 
believed to have been stolen from Thailand. 
  Navy Commander-in-Chief Adm Prachet Siridet said the 
suspected pirate ships were actually "Cambodian warships" which 
came into Thai water to arrest Thai trawlers. The battle erupted 
after the Cambodian ships ignored warning shots. He said the 
Thai Navy was patrolling Thai waters 24 hours a day to ensure 
safety for Thai fishermen and were now in need of new patrol 
boats because existing ones had been in service a long time. He 
said the violent incident could have been avoided if the 
Cambodian warships had let the Thai trawlers go after warning 
shots were fired. He said there might be ulterior motives for 
the Cambodian actions but he did not want to reveal these. 

