Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Salah al-Mukhtar: "1958 Union Anniversary; </F>
Mother of Battles; Arab Unity"] 
  [Text] Today is the birthday of the first Arab union in 
contemporary history -- the United Arab Republic -- a name that 
plays upon the heart strings of Arab nationalists. The United 
Arab Republic was the product of a merger between Egypt and 
Syria and the struggle and sacrifices of the Arab masses. It 
came about as the result of the historic agreement between the 
late Jamal 'Abd-al- Nasir and the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party. 
  Those of us who experienced that major, historic, and 
memorable event must recall it with great pride. It was the 
fulfillment of a dream cherished by successive generations and 
thousands of Arab martyrs. It dealt a body blow to the satanic 
alliance between the Zionist movement and British-led Western 
colonialism. 
  Having labored for decades under British and French 
colonialism and for much longer under the Ottoman Empire, Arabs 
-- spearheaded by Ba'thist militants allied with Jamal 
'Abd-al-Nasir -- rose from the ruins of repeated defeat. They 
took a determined stand against a Zionist-Western alliance bent 
on keeping Arabs divided and on looting their resources. 
  The tide of pan-Arab liberation had to contend with Western 
manipulated Arab regimes that were lying in wait to abort the 
Arab nationalist policies. While some such regimes played up to 
Arab nationalists in the hope of containing them, others 
resorted to the more direct approach of repressing and 
liquidating Arab militants fighting for freedom and Arab unity. 
Thus, a bitter struggle began, pitting anti-colonialist, 
progressive Arab liberation forces against the 
colonialist-Zionist camp, aided by reactionary and agent Arab 
dictatorships. 
  With huge resources at the disposal of the enemies and the 
inexperience of the new unionist state, colonialism plotted the 
retrogressive secessionist coup of 28 September, 1961, setting 
the stage for a campaign to contain the Arab liberation movement 
and drown it in a sea of blood. Hence the string of crimes 
committed against the standard bearers of Arab nationalism by 
the reactionary and hireling Arab regimes, some of which, thanks 
to their imperialist backers, are still in power. 
  Arab unionists must never lose sight of the fact that the 
first Arab unionist experiment would not have failed if it had 
not been for reactionary Arab dictatorships that had been 
recruited by Zionism and colonialism to strike at Arab unity. 
  With the foremost colonialist power of the day contending 
that it wants to spread democracy and human rights, we should 
remind our younger generation that by wrecking the 
Syrian-Egyptian merger, the West and the United States took a 
stand against democracy. 
  We feel we must point out that the Mother of Battles counts 
as the most decisive and far-reaching in the history of Arab 
struggle. If Zionism and colonialism assassinated 
Egyptian-Syrian unity, Ba'thist militants, led by Saddam Husayn, 
holding the banner of Arabism, and armed with the lessons 
learned from that rich experiment, achieved a major victory in 
the Mother of Battles against the U.S.-led Western forces of 
evil. 
  Our victory in the Mother of Battles is not limited to a 
single front, as some may think. Three years after the 
aggression, the hostile forces have begun to admit that Iraq 
scored a series of victories. Militarily, Iraq was able to 
deter America and its allies from pursuing the land war. More 
importantly, Iraq won the battle of wills by thwarting the U.S. 
effort to invade its territory and liquidate its leadership. 
Furthermore, the United States failed to destroy Iraq's 
industrial base. Strategically, the U.S. effort to gain control 
over the oil of the world and use the crude as a political and 
economic weapon against its enemies has also failed. The credit 
belongs to Iraq, which managed to neutralize oil as a weapon. 
  The generation led by Saddam Husayn has learned the lesson 
of 
the aborted union and set up a pan-Arab experiment that survived 
the labors of birth and then firmed up its foundations. It is 
now a lighthouse showing the way for freedom- and 
independence-lovers around the world. Iraq's pan-Arab 
experiment is the proper response to all Arab defeats, not least 
Syria's secession from Egypt in 1961. 
  Hail to all the militants who presided over the 1958 union, 
led by Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir. 
  Let the faithful who defended the honor of Arabism and Islam 
in the Mother of Battles hold firmly to and raise the banner of 
Arab unity. 
  Hail to the great militant Saddam Husayn who succeeded in 
realizing the most widespread and deepest Arab unity that was 
apparent in the Arab masses rallying around his excellency's 
pan- Arab banner. 

