Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] We will continue on the same subject of the 
government reshuffle. We have asked correspondent Peeter 
Kaldre, who is currently in the studio, to comment on today's 
presidential speech and events at the Riigikogu. 
  [Kaldre] President Meri's speech consisted of two parts 
[words indistinct]. Firstly, he justified his negative attitude 
to the government reshuffle as proposed by Prime Minister Laar. 
Secondly, he explained the extraordinary circumstances 
affecting Estonia's independence under which he did agree to 
sign Prime Minister Laar's proposals, amounting to him agreeing 
to dismiss Toomas Sildmae as economics minister and appointing 
Toivo Jurgenson to this post, and to appoint Heiki Kranich as 
finance minister. 
  If one is to (?explain) matters straight away then the first 
half of Meri's speech was predominantly devoted to criticism of 
Laar and the defense of Toomas Sildmae. In Meri's opinion, Laar 
did not have sufficient instinct as a statesman to resign in the 
interests of the Fatherland. This would have been at the time 
when it came to light, after the local election results [in 
October], that the balance between political forces in Estonia 
had altered considerably. Laar opted for another path, the 
unsuccessful government reshuffle whose aim was to preserve his 
own -- that is Laar's -- power. The Fatherland's crisis is 
first and foremost the prime minister's own crisis, said Meri. 
Meri's belief is that Laar should have taken into account 
popular feelings and expanded the government coalition 
resolutely, even at the price of his own personal resignation. 
  Next, Meri dwelled on Estonia's achievements in the economy 
and finance sphere, as accepted at world level. If anything at 
all has been functioning effectively in Estonia, it is the 
economy, Meri stated. That is due to the fact that a hard core 
of home-grown industrial, trade, and financial circles have 
emerged in Estonia based on Estonia's own capital. Meri spoke 
about Toomas Sildmae's letter of yesterday in which Sildmae says 
that he sees no reason for his resignation. Sildamae is 
convinced, as before, that an open economy forms the foundation 
of Estonia's development as a state. The government must 
support precisely this, rather than the state system which is 
corrupt. Meri doubts whether Estonian industrial and trade 
circles will continue to feel secure after Sildmae's departure. 
  Meri highlighted the fact that the security of our economic 
policy has not at all been analyzed. Instead, only arms are 
being discussed. At the same time, the Russian capital's 
infiltration into Estonia, through both shadow individuals and 
firms is beyond control. Who does the Republic of Estonia 
belong to, Meri asked? 
  In the second half of his speech Meri explained the 
extraordinary circumstances that made him sign Laar's proposals 
for the government reshuffle. Meri reproached Laar for 
neglecting new essential developments in international life. 
The current NATO summit and the upcoming Russian-U.S. summit 
may bring about a decisive change in the balance of powers, that 
one way or another, will also affect Estonia. Instead of being 
extremely active in the foreign policy sphere, weeks have been 
spent on the government reshuffle and our whole intellectual 
potential has focused on contemplating our own navels. At 
present, the government should be in top gear for activity. The 
government reshuffle that Laar has carried out took place in an 
undesirable manner and at the least suitable time, said the 
president. 
  Meri concluded the following: He takes a negative attitude 
to 
the proposed governmental changes, but the present extraordinary 
moment and the country's interests demand that the president 
should agree. Under the very eyes of the peoples' deputies Meri 
signed the government reshuffle documents. 
  What is one to conclude from all this? The following aspects 
are obvious. Meri's speech was pointed against Prime Minister 
Laar. Several grave accusations were raised against Laar. 
Firstly, that Laar does not consider popular opinion and 
feelings, and thus he has become alienated from the people, as 
the people have from him. It is interesting that the Fatherland 
as a party, and the government coalition as a whole, were not 
included in Meri's criticism. I want to protect the Fatherland 
from the Fatherland itself, Meri noted. [passage omitted] 
  After such a speech from Lennart Meri it is hard to believe 
that there are any prospects for the Toompea [seat of Riigikogu] 
and Kadriorg [presidential residence] to cooperate, albeit that 
the president did not exactly say this in an interview to 
Estonian Radio. Only two options are left: Either Laar or Meri 
will resign. The latter seems unlikely indeed. In any case, 
Meri has left the public with the impression of a true father of 
the nation who, in the interests of Estonian security, is forced 
to take decisions that in the long term he considers to be 
without any prospects. [passage omitted] 

