Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Victor Smart: "Fear Prevents Twelve Becoming </F>
One"] 
  [Text] With fear of immigration, drugs and crime at the 
top of national political agendas across West Europe, the quest 
for concerted action is increasingly urgent for the Twelve. Yet 
the past two months have proved that agreeing that there shall 
be a common European Union [EU] policy is one thing, agreeing 
what that policy should be is quite another. 
  Since last November a new framework for EU states to tackle 
these matters "a douze" has existed in the guise of the interior 
and justice "third pillar" of the Maastricht Treaty. But, as 
last week's tough clampdown against illegal immigrants by 
France's hardline Interior Minister Charles Pasqua proved, 
politicians are not ready to downplay the national dimension of 
such gut issues for the sake of Europe-wide policies. 
  Indeed, a taste of the problems to come surfaced last month 
at the very first EU council of interior and justice ministers. 
Spain flatly refused to agree to the setting-up of a fledgling 
police force, Europol, an integral part of the Maastricht Treaty 
designed to spearhead Europe's war against drug barons and to 
hunt down gangs smuggling in immigrants. It also blocked moves 
towards a Europe-wide asylum law. 
  Madrid's motive was simple. It was retaliating against a 
Belgian government decision to grant temporary asylum to two 
Spaniards accused of being Basque separatists. How, asked the 
Spanish, can the EU debate common asylum rules if one EU state 
is busy granting asylum to citizens of another? To the 
irritation of the others, the Dutch also held up the proceedings 
because of their obligation to report to their national 
parliament. 
  Though not auspicious, this was far from a disastrous start 
for Europe's move towards a coherent interior policy. The spat, 
after all, was merely the latest in a long line of similar rows. 
Among these are the delays inflicted by Pasqua on the Schengen 
open-border accord after a no-holds-barred attack on liberal 
Dutch drug laws, and the feud between Britain and Spain over 
Gibraltar, which has prevented the signing of the EU's External 
Frontiers Convention. 
  No one realistically expected that progress would be other 
than patchy. Adrian Fortescue, the responsible official at the 
EU Commission, can say with conviction: "These are early days, 
but we have got off to a very reasonable start." One difficulty 
is that public fears -- such as that of being overrun by 
immigrants -- run deep. With political hot potatoes such as 
these, there is only limited scope for the horse-trading between 
the Twelve on which Brussels normally thrives. Moreover, unlike 
the new foreign and security aspects of the Maastricht Treaty, 
inauguration of the interior and justice pillar was not a 
relabelling of an already functioning process. Rather, creation 
of the new decision-making mechanism has meant a bewildering 
array of ad hoc groups have had to be unified. 
  Even so, the new structure is itself pretty labyrinthine. 
The Treaty of European Union puts asylum and immigration into 
the third pillar of the Union. This is basically a 
government-to-government mechanism, although the Commission 
shares the right to initiate policy. By contrast, visa policy 
was shunted into the main "first" pillar of the Union, where the 
EU Commission enjoys sole right of initiative. Under the 
Commissioner responsible for justice, Padraig Flynn, the 
Commission has been quick off the mark with its new powers: 
Brussels officials have embarked on a fundamental review of 
immigration and asylum. They are examining not just the 
question of access but far wider issues such as the economic 
factors that lead people to uproot themselves from their 
homelands in the first place and ways in which they can best be 
integrated once they have reached the shores of the Union. 
  Once completed, the document will go to the full Commission 
for approval early next month. The Commission will be at pains 
not to stir up a hornets' nest by the inclusion of too many 
contentious proposals, but the tensions underlying the EU's 
foray into this most sensitive of policy areas are never far 
from the surface. Britain is still hoping to limit the 
encroachment of Brussels into the fields of justice and interior 
affairs. 
  Though not opposed in principle to Europol, London is 
determined to keep the organisation strictly nonoperational -- 
that is, as an intelligence network without the power to make 
arrests. And it is similarly jealous of its rights over asylum 
and immigration policies. 
  By contrast, to Bonn even the basic architecture of the 
interior and justice pillars did not go far enough. Germany 
remains keen to pass responsibility for asylum policy over to 
the EU, and is still attracted to the idea that this can be done 
by sharing round the incomers through quotas among the member 
state -- not a welcome idea in other capitals. 
  Chancellor Kohl is beset by fears about the growth of 
organized crime: foreign diplomats complain that he keeps 
harking back to reports that the Mafia bought up every pizza 
parlour in eastern Germany. And he still wants Europol to be a 
real counterpart to the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the 
United States. 
  Ironically, those governments, such as the German one, 
wanting more control at the Union level find themselves sharing 
a common cause with the very groups set up to help the refugees 
whose entry they wish to curb. 
  Refugees' groups say that there is an unanswerable need for 
the Twelve to adopt a comprehensive asylum policy. Anne 
Castagnos of the Paris-based France Terre d'Asile comments: "It 
is vital that groups like ours can make representations during 
the decision-making process rather than seeing policy created 
behind closed doors, as at present. We want a coherent, open 
policy with both national parliaments and with European 
Parliament having a much bigger say." 

