Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mahmud Bakri] </F>
  [Text] AL-SHA'B has obtained information proving the 
involvement of the Israeli army chiefs in the criminal massacre 
of the Palestinians in the honorable al-Ibrahimi Mosque last 
Friday. The massacre led to the martyrdom of 90 Palestinians and 
the wounding of some 500. 
  The information confirms that the massacre was arranged in 
the wake of the recent agreement signed in Cairo between Yasir 
'Arafat and terrorist Shim'on Peres, the foreign minister of the 
Zionist enemy. According to this information, Israeli Chief of 
Staff Ehuda Barak received the plan for attacking the 
al-Ibrahimi Mosque in the first week of February. In light of 
that plan, he gave orders to change the security guards in the 
city of Hebron one week before the massacre. The change 
involved 20 security chiefs, who were informed of the details of 
the settlers' scheme to commit the massacre. 
  Our information is that the Israeli security chiefs ordered 
the Israeli soldiers to intervene should the plan fail or in 
case the Palestinians resisted the settlers who had been 
selected to carry out the plan. The name "Operation Theresa" 
was given to the operation to storm the al-Ibrahimi Mosque and 
slaughter worshipers inside it. "Theresa" is the name of a 
leading settler who took part in arranging the massacre together 
with the chief of staff and three Israeli leaders. Operation 
Theresa was the literal outcome of the seven agreements Rabin 
signed with settlers leaders, the agreements which AL-SHA'B 
publicized a few months back. 
  Information reveals that sophisticated Israeli weapons were 
handed to the settlers 48 hours before the massacre. The 
weapons were transported from the United States by the terrorist 
Zionist groups, who are still in possession of these weapons. 
  According to our information, the criminal who was said to 
have committed the al-Ibrahimi massacre was an officer in the 
Israeli Army. 

