Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Comunique issued by the Rally of the Togolese People in </F>
Lome on 15 February -- recorded] 
  [Text] The Rally of the Togolese People has learned with 
strong indignation of the sordid kidnapping and the savage 
assassination of Gaston Edeh, an Action Committee for Renewal 
[CAR] member, who was recently elected member of parliament for 
the second Yoto constituency. This tragedy raises various 
questions, including this one: Who benefits from this crime? 
At any rate, it neither benefits democracy nor honors the 
people and even less the RPT which has always fought against 
violence as a means of political expression. 
  The RPT strongly condemns this horrible assassination of 
peaceful citizens including an elected representative of the 
people. The RPT demands an inquiry to determine the exact 
circumstances of this tragedy. The participants should be 
brought to trial so that they may be judged and severely 
punished to the fullest extent of the law. How can Togolese 
resort to such barbarous acts at a time when the entire Togolese 
people are mobilized for the completion of a long process of 
democratic transition in order to put an end to its suffering. 
  The RPT presents its condolences and expresses its sympathy 
to the bereaved families and bows with sadness and emotion 
before the mortal remains of the victims. The RPT appeals to 
the population to be more vigilant in order to foil all 
Machiavellian maneuvers of those whose sole ambition is the 
conquest and exercise of political power whatever the price. 
The RPT invites the entire political class of our country to 
show moderation and tolerance so that this last phase of the 
political competition can be carried out with dignity and with 
respect for the adversary, and in peace and security to 
guarantee the best chances of functioning for the Republican 
institutions. 
  Signed Ayite Gachin Mivedor, national chairman of the 
campaign committee. 

