BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 25 Jun (XINHUA) -- The Seventh Meeting of 
the Ninth Central Committee of the Standing Committee of the 
China Association for Promoting Democracy [CAPD] was held in 
Beijing from 23 June to 25 June. At the meeting, all levels of 
party organizations and party members were urged to continuously 
study Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics; to study theory on socialist market 
economy; to study modern scientific knowledge; to rally even 
more closely around the CPC Central Committee; to voluntarily 
implement the basic line of "one central task, two basic 
points;" to be enterprising; to have a pioneering spirit; to be 
innovative; to make self-improvement; and to actively contribute 
to the deepening of reform, promoting of development, and 
maintenance of stability. 
  Agricultural and rural work issues topped the discussion at 
the CAPD meeting. While describing the current state of China's 
agriculture and the situation in rural areas as excellent, the 
meeting's participants recognized the existence of some problems 
which need to be solved speedily. They advanced many opinions 
and suggestions. They include: enhancing macroeconomic control 
and regulation over agriculture; increasing investment funds for 
agriculture; curbing the use of arable land for other purposes; 
increasing the number of agronomists; reinforcing the building 
of grass-roots organizations in rural areas; stepping up 
management of public order in rural areas; raising laborers' 
quality; and improving education in rural areas. 
  Lei Jieqiong, vice chairwoman of the National People's 
Congress Standing Committee and chairwoman of the CAPD Standing 
Committee, spoke at the opening ceremony. She said China is now 
in the process of comprehensively promoting a socialist market 
economic system as well as of trying to achieve some major 
breaktroughs in practicing the socialist market economic system. 
We will be confronted with many problems and difficulties in 
fulfilling these tasks. Very often, the replacement of an old 
system with a new one produces contradictions and brings forth 
both benefits and shortcomings. In the course of deepening 
reform and developing the economy, vested interests will 
inevitably be affected, relationships of interest will be 
readjusted, people's concepts will change, and deep-seated 
contradictions will be exposed. Only by adopting proper 
measures to solve these contradictions and problems, can we 
expect to help maintain social stability, promote reform, and 
bring about the development of the economy. 
  Lei Jieqiong said the main areas of the CAPD's political 
work 
lie in education, culture, and publishing, which she pointed out 
are in line with the characteristics of the CAPD and with the 
principle of seeking truth from facts. She said the CAPD needs 
to continuously develop this superiority. She continued, saying 
that in addition to seeking major breakthroughs in political 
work, the CAPD should emancipate the mind and energetically 
explore new fields. 
  Zhao Puchu, vice chairman of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference and honorary chairman of the CAPD 
Central Committee, attended the meeting. Chen Shunli, Ge 
Zhicheng, Chu Zhuang, Ye Zhishan, Mei Xiangming, Chen Nanxian, 
Deng Weizhi, and Xu Jialu, vice chairmen of the CAPD Central 
Committee, also attended. 

