BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Interior Minister Roberto Maroni by Mario </F>
Coffaro in Luxembourg; date not given: "Maroni: `Modifications? 
I Will Not Be the One To Ask For Them'" -- first paragraph is 
IL MESSAGGERO introduction] 
  [Text] Luxembourg -- [Interior] Minister Maroni, together 
with his colleague [Justice Minister] Biondi, has just signed an 
EC resolution that closes the doors of Europe to non-EC 
citizens. He explains what repercussions the EC directive will 
have on our regulations. 
  [Coffaro] Italy will have to conform. Will you be the one, 
upon your return to Rome, to propose the necessary modifications 
to the Martelli law [on immigration]? 
  [Maroni] No, the Martelli law entailed a thousand 
difficulties and a thousand controversies. Therefore, the last 
thing that the government must do is to change it by authority. 
I will limit myself to telling the ministers and parliament 
what has happened. Of course, I will stick to what the two 
houses decide, but I will take no initiative. This resolution 
constitutes a political affirmation of principle, but it is not 
legally binding. It is not a directive. Italy, therefore, is 
not obliged to change its laws. 
  [Coffaro] But other laws could be changed judging by the 
controversies over Article 41 and that on criminals who 
collaborate with the judicial authorities. 
  [Maroni] The government has no intention of changing Article 
41, which provides for severe terms of imprisonment for Mafia 
bosses, nor that on those who collaborate with the judicial 
authorities. 
  [Coffaro] And what if the study group on Article 41 and on 
those who collaborate with the judicial authorities ares of 
different opinions? 
  [Maroni] By mid-July I will receive the conclusions 
concerning possible changes from a mixed study group consisting 
of representatives from the magistrature, the Interior Ministry, 
and the Justice Ministry. These, however, will be modifications 
to the regulations, there is no need for a new law on how to 
treat those who collaborate with the judicial authorities to 
improve protection. Moreover, I will remain firm on Article 41. 
This government will not diminish its fight against the Mafia, 
rather it will intensify and improve it. 
  [Coffaro] How did your European debut go? 
  [Maroni] Well, I would say, perhaps I am lucky. Just today I 
was congratulated by the American Vice Attorney General on the 
Teledrug accord with Russia, and here in Luxembourg we succeeded 
in launching the operations of the Europol Community police. 
For the time being it will principally be involved in the fight 
against drugs, but it is also an embryo around which the 
structure of the future European FBI will grow. On 20 and 21 
September I will be in Washington to define the terms of 
increased collaboration among Europe, Italy, and the United 
States. In exchange for the information that Italy will receive 
from Russia in the fight against the Mafia drug traffickers of 
the East within the framework of Teledrug, the Americans will 
provide us with the news they receive from Colombia. 
  [Coffaro] But Europol is starting off with the rejection of 
an Italian candidate at its head? 
  [Maroni] As envisaged, the director of Europol will be the 
German Juergen Storbeck, who was involved from the very 
beginning. The two deputy coordinators will be the Belgian 
Willie Bruggeman, Storbeck's right-hand man, and the 
Luxembourger George Rauchs. I had maintained that an Italian 
should be at the head of an institution that fights against drug 
trafficking, particularly Deputy Head of Police Emanuele 
Marotta, an expert from the Central Antidrug Service. The drug 
trade is one of the businesses that the Mafia deals in at 
international level and who knows the Mafia better than an 
Italian policeman? It is not a matter of nationalism. However, 
I have been told that Bruggeman will be at Storbeck's side only 
until the end of the year. 
  [Coffaro] The national anti-Mafia district attorney Siclari 
has said that the Mafia used last year's attacks in Via Fauro, 
Florence, and Milan to launch a request to attenuate the 
severity of Article 41 and to request a different treatment for 
those who collaborate with the authorities. In addition he 
spoke of an alarm attack. Do you confirm this? 
  [Maroni] I share Siclari's opinion. Perhaps the Mafia wanted 
to launch a terrorist message to modify Article 41 and the law 
concerning the treatment reserved for those who collaborate with 
the judicial authorities. I have said and repeated that these 
two institutes are not under discussion. 

