Language: <F P=105> Danish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Flemming Rose: "Moscow Wants Danish Leadership </F>
Role"] 
  [Text] Moscow -- Moscow wants Denmark to assume a leading 
international role in the field of peacekeeping missions and the 
prevention of armed conflict. 
  Moscow is therefore urging Denmark to take the initiative, 
now that in the North Atlantic Cooperation Council Denmark has 
been entrusted with the task of gathering and exchanging 
information on peacekeeping operations throughout the world. 
  "There must be a leader in the world community in this field 
and we hope that Denmark will take the lead in this work so that 
we succeed in creating new international legal and political 
mechanisms for the resolution of conflicts and the 
implementation of peacekeeping operations," General Leonid 
Ivashov, secretary of the council of defense ministers of the 
Commonwealth of Independent States, told BERLINGSKE TIDENDE. 
  A week ago BERLINGSKE TIDENDE was able to report that Moscow 
had contacted Denmark to bring about cooperation in the field of 
peacekeeping. However, what is new is that Russia is proposing 
that Denmark assume a leading international role in the field. 
  Per Carlsen, Defense Ministry chief of section, said that 
the 
Russian request is currently on Defense Minister Hans 
Haekkerup's desk. According to Per Carlsen, Denmark will 
respond to the Russian call for cooperation either by sending 
its own delegation to Moscow or by inviting the Russians to 
Copenhagen. 
  Gen. Ivashov added that conflict prevention and peacekeeping 
missions are the predominant problem in the former Soviet Union 
that has been hit by several armed conflicts. The problem is at 
the top of the agenda of the defense cooperation among the 
former Soviet republics. 
  According to Ivashov, Moscow's awareness of Denmark's 
internationally acknowledged experience in this field has played 
a crucial role in the Russian request. "The political means 
that the world community has at its disposal today are clearly 
inadequate. This is something we can see in the former 
Yugoslavia, for example," Gen. Ivashov added. 
  Ivashov pointed out that inside military alliances there is 
a 
tendency to put the stress on the use of force and military 
intervention in armed conflicts. "We hope that Denmark will 
tackle things differently. It is important that the stress 
should now be put on the formulation of political mechanisms in 
the resolution of conflicts," Gen. Ivashov said. 

