Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Professor Walter Kroell, head of the German </F>
Aerospace Research Institute (DLR), by Norbert Lossau, place and 
date not specified: "Farewell to Space? That Would Make the 
Crisis More Acute"; first paragraph is DIE WELT introduction] 
  [Text] Professor Walter Kroell (55), head of the German 
Aerospace Research Institute in Cologne, sees a hazard for the 
German economy in the mass layoffs occurring in the aerospace 
industry: "These are the jobs of the future. If they are lost, 
there will be a severe problem," he says in this WELT interview. 
"The public does not yet realize that both key technologies and 
the means for securing our very existence are at stake." 
Norbert Lossau spoke to Walter Kroell. 
  [Lossau] Mass layoffs are occurring in the German aerospace 
industry. What do you see as the cause of this trend? 
  [Kroell] The aerospace industry is in fact in a very 
critical 
situation. In the aviation sector this is a result of excess 
capacity. A ruthless price war is being waged. Contracts are 
being canceled, and capacity is thus not fully taken up, even in 
successful firms, such as the European Airbus. A second factor 
is the drastic cut in military contracts as a result of 
worldwide detente, which from all other points of view can only 
be welcomed. The critical situation in the space sector results 
largely from the fact that -- pursuant to ESA [European Space 
Agency] Council of Ministers decisions -- capacities built up 
over a fairly long period must now be significantly cut back. 
The development program for the European Hermes space plane was 
canceled in 1993; the "free-flier" planned under the Columbus 
program had been given up even before that. All we are left 
with is the debate on the role of a dock-on laboratory module 
for an international space station. The financial, political, 
and programming framework lacks stability and continuity. 
  [Lossau] So, first and foremost, you identify the 
instability 
of political conditions as the root cause of the German space 
industry's weakness. 
  [Kroell] It is true that the political situation is 
difficult: Priorities have to be set. In the ultimate analysis, 
however, the issue is: What priority is to be assigned to 
research and technology in general, and to aerospace research 
and technology in particular, with a view to safeguarding the 
German economy? 
  [Lossau] How important is the aerospace industry to the 
German economy? 
  [Kroell] If you look at the United States, Japan, or even 
South Korea, Taiwan, or Indonesia, you will see that these 
countries' state programs pronounce aerospace research and 
technology to be key technologies of the future and draw the 
logical conclusions. NASA's aviation research budget, for 
instance, rose by 30 percent from 1992 to 1994. 
  [Lossau] Why is space a future technology? 
  [Kroell] Because many problems can only be solved with help 
from the aerospace sector. Aerospace's contribution to solving 
traffic, environment, climate, and energy problems will be 
indispensable. Satellites are needed for weather forecasting 
and international crisis management; the development of 
satellite communications will continue; satellite-based 
navigation and mobile telephony are areas whose significance is 
constantly increasing. 
  [Lossau] So are we missing out on a major technology while 
other countries are investing in it? 
  (Kroell] We are indeed running the risk of losing our 
ability 
to compete and collaborate in these major fields. Other 
European countries, too, Italy and Spain for instance, face 
particular financial problems that are having repercussions on 
their space sector commitments, but, generally speaking, space 
is regarded as a particularly significant area of technology in 
Europe. 
  [Lossau] Why is it that aerospace enjoys particularly high 
status in France? 
  [Kroell] Germany currently spends about 1.8 billion German 
marks [DM] a year on space, whereas France spends nearly DM3.2 
billion. It enjoys higher status in France because aviation and 
space are widely recognized there as technologies of the future. 
Moreover, the French regard aviation and space as matters of 
national identity, an attitude completely alien to Germany. 
Here, the tendency is rather to set things in motion, to reach 
a high standard, maybe even a leading position, and then to keep 
casting doubt on them. Perhaps this is a feature of the German 
mentality. 
  [Lossau] Are we more hostile to technology than the French? 
  [Kroell] No. I believe that the value that German public 
opinion sets on aerospace is at the crux of the matter. The 
general public does not yet realize that both key technologies 
and the means for securing our very existence are at stake. If 
we want to withstand international competition in the aerospace 
sector, we need continuity, persistence, and stable long-term 
framework conditions, financial conditions included: Rather 
more modest figures if necessary, provided they remain stable in 
the longer term. 
  [Lossau] Is Germany losing jobs with future prospects while 
other countries, such as France, are setting long-term 
safeguards on them? 
  [Kroell] Jobs in the aerospace sector are jobs with a 
high-technology orientation and prospects for the future. If we 
cut them back while other countries, primarily the United States 
and countries in southeast Asia, are creating them, we shall 
face serious problems in the future. Generally speaking, I 
believe it can be said that we shall only render the crisis more 
acute in the future if we cut back on research and technology 
posts in the present situation. 
<H5>  Know-How for Americans and Russians </H5>
  [Lossau] The reaction to every funding cut has always been: 
In that case, we shall only do so much; even that is still good 
research. Have the space sector's prestige and effectiveness 
suffered from this attitude too? 
  [Kroell] It undoubtedly detracts from the space sector's 
image. Both the man in the street and the technical expert look 
for tangible results. They rightly expect that once things have 
been initiated in a climate of consensus, they should be brought 
to a proper and speedy conclusion. Constantly adjusting or 
revising plans gives a bad impression. Of course, the space 
community can only spend the money that it actually receives. 
If money that is promised, for developing Hermes, for instance, 
is subsequently not forthcoming, the blame should not be laid at 
the door of the space sector. 
  [Lossau] Are there areas of aerospace in which Germany 
enjoys 
a technological lead? 
  [Kroell] Yes, several. The DLR and its German partners are 
the undisputed world leaders in space robotics. We have 
received interesting offers for the use of our know-how in 
future American and Russian projects. The DLR is also a leader, 
and an internationally sought-after partner, in teleoperation 
and telemanipulation. Another of our strong points lies in 
sensor, camera, and radar scanner development, a concrete 
example being the Mars cameras to be used on a Russian mission 
to Mars. The Americans, too, acknowledge the lead that this 
technology has gained. 
  [Lossau] You mention robotics. Are we actually so far ahead 
of the Americans in this field that they would have preferred to 
prevent the German Rotex robot from flying the D2 mission by 
setting particularly high requirements for it in terms of 
spaceworthiness? 
  [Kroell] Rotex has not only caused a sensation but has given 
rise to some concern in both the United States and Japan. There 
is no question about it: The Americans themselves admit to 
concern that Germany manifestly has its nose out in front in 
this important field of technology, the use of automation and 
robotics in space. 
  [Lossau] Hence the attempt to prevent space trials with the 
German robot? 
  [Kroell] I can confirm that the Americans set extremely high 
spaceworthiness requirements for Rotex and that it was difficult 
to demonstrate that it met them. But we succeeded. I cannot 
say that the Americans set greater hurdles on purpose. 
  [Lossau] When the German D2 astronauts visited Houston, I 
had 
the feeling that they were merely regarded as the Americans' 
junior partners. 
  [Kroell] The Americans and Russians are undoubtedly the 
leading space nations. NASA has an incomparably greater wealth 
of experience than we do, indeed it spends on quite a different 
scale. To this extent I find it understandable that the DLR was 
regarded as a junior partner on the shuttle flights. But the 
lesser partner's achievements have earned the Americans' high 
regard, not only for our astronauts' competence and 
professionalism but for the DLR Space Center's operational 
handling in Oberpfaffenhofen. However, it would not be 
realistic for us to claim to be a partner of equal weight and 
equal importance to the Americans and Russians, especially as 
far as manned missions are concerned. 
<H5>  New Tasks Waiting for Ariane-5 </H5>
  [Lossau] In 1993, the Europeans, and consequently the 
Germans 
as well, were taken by surprise by an agreement between the 
Americans and Russians to operate a space station together, 
whereas there had been plans for years previously for a joint 
space station with the Europeans. How do you see this turn of 
events? 
  [Kroell] It would undoubtedly have been desirable and proper 
to give the Europeans earlier notice of these discussions. But 
one never knows when agreements of this type may come about 
during discussions at top political level in the midst of many 
other, perhaps weightier topics. At the moment, it indeed looks 
as though we shall arrive at a joint European, American, and 
Russian project. This joint space effort can only be welcomed, 
and indeed it is what Germany has always been calling for. So, 
although the approach itself may leave something to be desired, 
everything points to Europe and Germany having a share in the 
space station. 
  [Lossau] ESA's latest plans envisage a manned space capsule, 
to be launched into space with an Ariane rocket. Is this the 
first step toward independence from the Americans? 
  [Kroell] I believe Europe must make a major point of 
incorporating the Ariane rocket into the overall concept of a 
space station of the type we have mentioned and using it as a 
transport vehicle. However, if we want to do this, we must 
consider whether the transfer vehicles should be manned or 
unmanned. I think it would therefore be useful at this point to 
carry out studies to examine whether and with what modifications 
Ariane-5 can be used to serve the space station. The manned 
capsule is one of the options that we can study in terms of any 
advantages that it might offer, its technical feasibility, and 
its financeability. 
  [Lossau] When is the earliest we can expect a decision? 
  [Kroell] Not before the end of 1995. 
  [Lossau] How much less than Hermes will it cost to develop 
this capsule? 
  [Kroell] That I do not know. This is one of the aspects that 
the planned studies set out to clarify: What should a capsule 
of this type look like in detail? What would it cost? How does 
it fit into the international scenario? These are questions 
that require intensive study. In any case, the capsule would 
have to cost substantially less than Hermes, otherwise it would 
not be a realistic alternative. 
  [Lossau] The politicians are the ones who set your finance 
framework ... 
  [Kroell] Correct. As I have said, the important thing is 
medium-term stability, even if the finance framework turns out 
to be more modest than originally anticipated. Then we shall 
have to see which priorities can be met within that framework. 
One thing is clear: With significantly less money we cannot 
achieve the initial targets, otherwise it would mean that the 
targets had not been defined in serious terms. 
<H5>  Data From Space Slumbering in Archives </H5>
  [Lossau] Back to Ariane, whose image emerged from the 
spectacular false start somewhat battered: How seriously do you 
take the danger of its success being completely undermined by 
cheaper competition from Russia, China, or Japan? 
  [Kroell] The risk is real, especially in the absence of fair 
international competitive conditions. If there were a real open 
market with all the competitors enjoying equal opportunities, 
without "political prices," I should not be worried about Ariane. 
  [Lossau] But rockets -- just like CD-players -- can be 
produced more cheaply in countries with low wage levels. 
  [Kroell] There is no mass production for low-wage countries 
to date in the aerospace industry. Russia is a low-wage 
country, but just look at the hosts of people who, I grant you, 
work for low individual wages but, taken together, make for high 
overall costs. CD-players are a different matter: The 
international market and competition are open. There is no open 
market in rocket technology, nor do I see how one could come 
into being in the near future. If the Russians or Chinese say: 
Whatever the Western price is, we shall deliver rockets 20 or 
30 percent more cheaply, the price is not the result of low 
payroll costs but of political calculation. 
  [Lossau] But the United States has already purchased some 
cheap flights from the Russians and even from the Chinese. 
  [Kroell] Not only the United States. If things are allowed 
to continue much further in this direction, with transport 
capacity being purchased wherever it is cheapest -- just think 
of the Russians' massive excess capacity -- Ariane will find it 
difficult to compete. 
  [Lossau] Can this issue only be settled at the political 
level? 
  [Kroell] Yes. Framework agreements on the subject and quota 
arrangements are being negotiated. 
  [Lossau] Apart from Rotex, can you give other examples to 
illustrate the significance of the manned D2 mission? 
  [Kroell] Another outstanding example is the DLR-designed 
Moms 
camera. During the mission, over 7 million square kilometers of 
the earth were photographed in exceptional quality. Most of the 
material and life science experiments performed during the 
mission are still being evaluated, but a number of excellent 
results are emerging here too. 
  [Lossau] What will the Moms photographs be used for? 
  [Kroell] They are stereoscopic images with high resolution 
to 
just a few meters. First and foremost, these images are 
immensely useful for cartography, especially for parts of the 
world that are not readily accessible or are completely 
inaccessible. They also show vegetation cover very clearly, 
distinguishing between bush, grassland, and cereal farming 
areas, and they identify the water collecting areas in karstic 
regions. They are also useful when undertaking 
three-dimensional terrain reconstructions. 
  [Lossau] A practically unmeasurable amount of data has been 
beamed to earth by satellites or brought back by manned space 
missions. The vast bulk of this data is slumbering unused on 
magnetic tapes. Does this not rather shake the credibility of 
claims that there is a constant need to collect more data? 
  [Kroell] The problem, and the challenge, here is to broaden 
the base using the wealth of information from space. The fact 
that this data has not yet been used to the desired extent by no 
means renders it worthless. It rather calls for greater efforts 
to organize use of the data more effectively. 
  [Lossau] Is the fact that most of this data is lying unused 
in the archives attributable to lack of money or lack of 
interest on the part of researchers? 
  [Kroell] There are potential users who do not have the 
money, 
and there are others who have not yet realized that there is 
massive potential to be tapped here. What we need to do is 
activate and organize the user community. The DLR receives the 
data collected by all the main and, in the future, eastern civil 
satellites, and can process it according to user requirements. 
The problem is the end-use of this data. Money is needed to 
solve this problem. 
<H5>  It Would Be Dangerous To Break the Thread </H5>
  [Lossau] In Germany we do not hear much about the use of 
satellites for verification purposes. Is there not major work 
to be done in this field in the future? 
  [Kroell] Undoubtedly. Our Defense Ministry has not yet gone 
in for space activities, but I am convinced that the potential 
for peacekeeping and crisis management from space will acquire 
increasing importance and that we, too, cannot afford to deny 
ourselves access to this potential in a context of international 
cooperation. 
  [Lossau] In future there will be less money available for 
manned space missions. Do you merely put this down to 
straightened finances, or has the need for research capacity in 
space declined as well? 
  [Kroell] Straightened finances, primarily, and also a 
resetting of priorities within this financial framework. There 
will be no national manned space projects in the foreseeable 
future, and this is fully in line with the desire for 
internationalization. We must therefore adjust our capability 
in this area accordingly. I believe it is a good thing to set 
space priorities in the environment and earth observation sphere 
and in particular technologies, such as robotics and 
telecommunications, regardless of budget size. However, I would 
also regard completely discontinuing work on manned space flight 
as fatal. We would run the risk of losing our hard-won 
competence as international partners. Losing our competence in 
aerospace research and technology would break the thread in a 
major field, it would mean giving up a strategically important 
area of research and technology, and it would consequently have 
a detrimental effect on the German economy. 
  [Lossau] Despite the general crisis and shifting of 
priorities away from manned space flight, do you believe man 
will actually fly to Mars? 
  [Kroell] This is without doubt an issue that will not be 
accorded top priority over the next few decades. At the moment 
there are more pressing problems for the space sector to help 
solve. Mars missions are thus not one of our foremost interests 
or concerns. However, I have no doubt that one day -- albeit 
not in our time -- such missions will become a reality. 

