SUMMARY 

                              In an apparent effort to reassure the international community 
that Jordan remains committed to the peace process, King Husayn 
has issued statements that appear to soften an earlier ultimatum 
linking Amman's continued participation in Mideast peace talks to 
a change in the procedure of UN-mandated Multinational 
Interdiction Force (MIF) inspections of ship cargo bound for the 
Port of al-'Aqabah, which Jordanian media characterize as a 
severe hardship for Jordan's economy.  Although the King's recent 
remarks make it clear that Amman wants to remain a full 
participant in the peace process, the government may find it 
difficult to justify its participation amid increasing anti-U.S. 
sentiment unless progress on the al-'Aqabah issue is forthcoming. 

                       END SUMMARY 

   Recent statements by King Husayn have signaled Amman's continued 
commitment to the peace process and its conviction that a 
solution to the al-'Aqabah issue is imminent.  Addressing a news 
conference during the visit of Austrian President Klestil, the 
king characterized the present mode of al-'Aqabah inspections as 
"totally intolerable," but added that the government had "an 
indication that the problem is being addressed, and we hope that 
we will have a positive response soon" (Jordan Television, 16 
April).  More recently, Husayn took pains to emphasize Amman's 
role in the peace process, stating that "we in Jordan have 
reiterated our position in terms of our readiness and 
determination to work seriously to implement the provisions of 
the agenda . . . approved after the signing of the Palestinian- 
Israeli agreement in Washington" (Jordan Television, 16 April). 
Echoing the king's conciliatory tone, House of Representatives 
speaker Tahir al-Masri stated that there are "clear and strong 
signs" that a resolution of the al-'Aqabah issue is at hand.  He 
reiterated Jordan's "strategic" interest in the peace process, 
adding that a resolution of the al-'Aqabah issue would "reflect 
positively on Jordan's stand toward the peace process" (Paris 
Radio Monte Carlo, 15 April). 
   The statements mark a departure from the king's strong statement 
to the five ambassadors of the UN Security Council permanent 
members on 28 March asserting that the resumption of talks with 
Israel was contingent on resolving the "completely unacceptable 
situation" in al-'Aqabah, which constitutes a "direct affront to 
Jordan's dignity" (Jordan Times 29 March).  The king's statement 
came amid the backdrop of a flood of articles in Jordan's semi- 
independent press criticizing the slow progress in reaching an 
accommodation with Washington on changing the mode of the MIF 
inspections. 

   Media Protest Escalation of al-'Aqabah Searches 

   Although Jordanian media have long criticized the MIF inspections 
of ships bound for al-'Aqabah port as an economically burdensome 
by-product of the UN sanctions against Iraq, the issue has taken 
on a highly politicized dimension in recent months and has 
dominated press editorials as a result of a perception that the 
stepped-up MIF searches constitute U.S. pressure on Amman to sign 
a peace agreement with Israel.  In February, Jordanian media 
began noting a substantial increase in the frequency of MIF 
interceptions of Jordan-bound ships (See Note 1), and press 
articles viewed the phenomenon as "harassment" and U.S. arm- 
twisting to force Jordan to sign a unilateral peace treaty with 
Israel and initiate an end to the Arab boycott of Israel (Al- 
Ra'y, 1 February). 
   (Note 1) A Jordan Times report noted that a ship held for 
inspection at the Straits of Tiran on 17 April was the 13th 
vessel intercepted by the MIF this year, compared to a total of 
20 for all of 1993.  The report concluded that since none of the 
more than 1,700 ships inspected since the inception of the 
process had been found to be carrying cargo in contravention of 
the Iraq sanctions, the inspection regime is a "deliberate 
harassment aimed at pressuring the Kingdom to make sweeping, 
illogical concessions to Israel in the peace talks" (19 April). 
   At the same time, some Amman papers were reporting that the U.S. 
appeared receptive to a proposed land-based procedure for the al- 
'Aqabah inspections that would ease the economic cost to Jordan, 
and expressed optimism that the U.S. would act swiftly on the 
issue.  Al-Dustur cited the spokesman for the Jordanian 
delegation to the talks with Israel, Marwan al-Mu'ashshir, as 
saying that during the king's January visit to Washington, the 
U.S. Administration had "welcomed the idea of replacing sea 
searches by an international on-land inspection of the goods 
bound for Jordan through the Gulf of Aqaba."  Al-Mu'ashshir even 
hinted at a possible quid pro quo by Amman, noting that while a 
final decision on the Arab boycott issue rested with the Arab 
League, "the secondary and tertiary boycott can be studied, and 
ways can be worked out to deal with this matter" (1 February). 
   In the wake of a subsequent lack of movement on the al-'Aqabah 
issue, coupled with the mid-March UN Security Council renewal of 
the economic embargo against Iraq, press editorials stepped up 
their anti-U.S. rhetoric (Jordan Times 22 March, Al-Ra'y 21 
March), and government resolve to deal decisively with the matter 
crystallized.  Only hours before the arrival of U.S. special 
envoy Dennis Ross in Amman, the Jordanian House of 
Representatives issued a statement calling on the government to 
suspend its role in the peace process "until the U.S.-led 
blockade on the Red Sea port of al-'Aqabah is actually lifted" 
(Jordan Times, 23 March).  The highly charged atmosphere 
surrounding the Ross visit was reflected in the press, which 
noted coolly that while Ross said Washington would "study" 
Jordanian proposals to change the MIF procedures, he "refused to 
make any promises that these pressures would be lifted" (Akhbar 
al-Usbu', 24 March). 

   Government Signals Displeasure 

   In further indications of Jordanian displeasure with the slow 
progress of negotiations on al-'Aqabah, the government chose to 
cancel a high-level trip to Washington and lowered its level of 
representation at various multilateral peace talks committee 
meetings.  However, Jordan's decision to downgrade its 
representatives at multilateral meetings--rather than boycott the 
sessions altogether--signaled its reluctance to risk serious 
disruption of the peace negotiations. 
   --In place of an official delegation, Amman sent an observer to 
the 7 April multilateral talks on environmental issues "because 
we are still awaiting Washington's decision on the Port of al- 
'Aqabah blockade," according to Foreign Ministry officials cited 
by Al-Ra'y (7 April). 
   --Similarly, Jordan reduced its level of representation at the 
Oman multilateral talks on water rights to observer status (Al- 
Dustur, 17 April); in the previous four sessions of the water 
committee, Amman had participated with a six-member official 
delegation  (Amman Radio, 19 April). 
   --Crown Prince Hasan reportedly canceled a visit to Washington 
scheduled for 20 April "following the U.S.-Jordanian tension 
resulting from the al-'Aqabah Port blockade"  (Al-Majd, 18 
April). 
   --Amman declined to host a regional conference on economic 
investment slated for 1O April that was to have included an 
Israeli delegation (Al-Majd, 18 April). 

   Student Protest Underscores Domestic Discord 

   Reflecting one facet of the domestic pressures the government 
faces on the issues of al-'Aqabah and the peace process from an 
increasingly vocal press and public, the Jordan Times reported a 
demonstration of between 500 and 1,000 University of Jordan 
students against the al-'Aqabah inspections, noting that the 
fundamentalist-oriented "Islamic bloc" dominated the event.  The 
newspaper reported that the students called on the government to 
"withdraw from the peace process altogether" (21-22 April).  They 
also "set fire to U.S. and Israeli flags," and "raised posters 
supporting His Majesty King Husayn's pan-Arab policies and 
condemning Washington's arrogant policy," according to Akhbar al- 
Usbu' (21 April). 

   Implications 

   The recent escalation in the number of al-'Aqabah inspections- 
-and the accompanying public and press perception of the MIF 
searches as being a form of U.S. political pressure--have posed 
considerable challenges to the government's stated intent to 
continue its active role in the peace process.  A modified 
arrangement at al-'Aqabah that would ease the strain on the 
domestic economy is clearly what Amman is seeking.  Such an 
accommodation would likely go a long way toward easing internal 
pressures on the government and permitting further progress on 
both bilateral and multilateral tracks of the Middle East peace 
talks. 
(AUTHOR:  MURRAY.  QUESTIONS AN/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH, (703) 733-6094.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH  CS 23/0020Z APR 

