BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Muslim Brotherhood Spokesman Ma'mun </F>
al-Hudaybi by Sana' al-Sa'id; place, date not given] 
  [Excerpts]][Al-Sa'id] Why has the Muslim Brotherhood washed 
its hands, crawled into its shell, and turned into a spectator 
in the game of terror and extremism? 
  Al-Hudaybi: We have not turned into spectators. 
We work within our potential. Ours is a constant effort to 
spread the true faith and the correct ideas, which involves 
eradicating any mistaken ideas and unfounded opinions. 
  Al-Sa'id: But the tide of terror remains high and 
has not been turned back. 
  Al-Hudaybi: Terror exists and no one can deny it. 
But I cannot destroy it with my current resources. The 
government does not legally recognize my group. All my 
activities are unlawful and my people are prone to arrest. Can 
I call a public meeting? No, it is forbidden. 
  Al-Sa'id: If you sincerely want to contain 
extremism and terror you will succeed. 
  Al-Hudaybi: No, not so. They [the government] 
want us to attack them [the terrorists] without spreading the 
true word [of Islam]. 
  Al-Sa'id: Don't you have a good cause for 
disclaiming their [the extremists'] wrong views? Or are you 
afraid of them? 
  Al-Hudaybi: To act, the state should give us 
leeway. Besides, how can I reach these people [the extremists] 
when they work underground. I do not know them. It is not easy 
for me to get to know them. 
  Al-Sa'id: Rumor has it that you have lines of 
communication with them, isn't that so? 
  Al-Hudaybi: There are no lines of communication or 
links between us and them. And the stage is not set for me to 
confront them. I cannot change things through preaching when I 
am a wanted man and my group is unrecognized. The first thing 
we should have to confront terror is a climate of freedom in 
which our rights and those of others would be respected and 
everyone would be free to express their opinions peacefully and 
without the use of force or threat of using it. 
  Al-Sa'id: Some people claim there is an unholy 
alliance between you and the terrorist groups? 
  Al-Hudaybi: We have nothing to do with them. We 
continue to denounce terror. We oppose violence because it 
disrupts our march, hampers Islamic propagation at home and 
abroad, and tarnishes our image. The government is required to 
uphold the Constitution and respect the law. It should promote 
justice, fairness, and freedom of opinion. The government 
should play by the rules of democracy. It should build true 
democracy, not a bogus one in which elections are rigged and 
parties are banned unless they have the personal approval of the 
head of state.[passage omitted] 
  Al-Sa'id: If [Islam is a creed and code of ethics 
and conduct, as you say], you might as well apply Islam's 
criteria on terrorists, who ruin society by killing, stealing, 
and usurping in the name of religion. 
  Al-Hudaybi: We have no power over them; we have no 
authority to apply to them. How can we do that? 
  Al-Sa'id: By propagating Islam and cleansing 
terrorists of their faults and wrong concepts. 
  Al-Hudaybi: I am promoting the call, making 
efforts, and speaking. I have no militia to fight people with 
arms. I am no agent for the authority. I propagate my creed 
and authentic Islam. 
  Al-Sa'id: Nobody asked you to be an agent of the 
authority and nobody prevented you from propagating authentic 
Islam. 
  Al-Hudaybi: My call is to distinguish the 
authentic from the false. Recruiting me to attack people as if 
I were a tool in the government's hand is rejected. 
  That is why I say that official jurisprudence produces no 
results, because it does not enjoy all its freedom. It is being 
asked to support the authorities. Hence, it loses its 
credibility instantly.[passage omitted] 
  Al-Sa'id: The relationship between you and the 
terrorists is one of specialization but you pretend to have 
nothing to do with them. While you pretend to disapprove of the 
terrorist operations of the extremist groups, you give 
justifications and defend them. 
  Al-Hudaybi: Anyone who wants to discuss things 
that have no foundation can do so. We have nothing to do with 
these people. 
  Al-Sa'id: It is being said that the hardline wing 
represents your first line of defense and that the Muslim 
Brotherhood is hiding behind it until the time is ripe to seize 
power. 
  Al-Hudaybi: We cannot argue with those people who 
make false accusations, because they do not understand our 
conscience or mentality. But they do oppose reality. The 
investigations into the cases of violence, the old case of the 
war college, the killing of al-Sadat, and current events, 
confirm that the Muslim Brotherhood had nothing to do with such 
actions. Had anything been proven against us, it would have 
appeared immediately, because the government does us no favors. 
  Al-Sa'id: You have reportedly had contacts with 
the outside world, including the United States and Iran. Also, 
your contacts with the Zionist movement are not ruled out. 
  Al-Hudaybi: We have no connection with any of 
those. We have no relations with Iran, except when we are 
invited to attend a conference there. We have no relations with 
the United States, because nobody would accept having relations 
with the United States. In what way could we benefit from this 
relationship? It is a major disaster. 
  Al-Sa'id: What about the Zionist movement? 
  Al-Hudaybi: You should not say anything that is 
untrue. 
  Al-Sa'id: You have an international organization 
with charters in Switzerland and Munich. You also have 
resources that enabled you to coordinate the efforts of the 
political Islamic movement in the Arab and Islamic worlds. 
  Al-Hudaybi: We have no organizations abroad. Do 
you call the attending of an international conference that is 
attended by people from elsewhere an organization, as if we were 
using this conference to stage a coup against the world? 
  Al-Sa'id: What exactly do you want? Do you want 
an Islamic approach or a religious state? 
  Al-Hudaybi: First, let's be specific and take, for 
example, the Islamic approach. If we say we want a government 
that abides by Islam, they will then say that this government is 
a religious one and that the Islamic approach is the basis. I 
do not care who applies this. The application of this approach 
is what counts. We are ready to be the servants of the 
government if it applies it. 
  Al-Sa'id: What issues do you propose as essential 
in the national dialogue? Do you believe the issue of a 
religious party should be considered? 
  Al-Hudaybi: Parties are civilian. Each party must 
have its line of thought. Is it prohibited for Muslims to set 
up parties that adopt their Islamic creed and thought? 
  Al-Sa'id: The Constitution makes no provision for 
religious parties. 
  Al-Hudaybi: But it did not ban them. I am a man 
of law and I challenge this. 
  Al-Sa'id: But this will open the door wide to 
religious parties and the Copts will demand equal treatment. 
  Al-Hudaybi: What will happen if they set up a 
religious party? The Copts are no idiots. Let them set up a 
party. Whoever forms a political party seeks to rule to apply 
his principles and dogma. If the Copts in Egypt represent no 
more than 7 percent, they can never contemplate ruling the 
country. But if they want a party, it will be to defend their 
interests and rights and we welcome this. 
  Al-Sa'id: A conflict will ensue. 
  Al-Hudaybi: Nothing of the sort will happen. Is 
the application of Islamic principles a novelty? Islam has been 
applied for centuries. Why the fear then? 
  Al-Sa'id: If the arena is opened to religious 
parties, extremist Islamic currents will demand parties of their 
own. 
  Al-Hudaybi: What do we fear? On the contrary, 
when freedoms are guaranteed only the good will survive. Even 
devious trends will expose themselves in such a climate. 
  Al-Sa'id: But can the state withstand being a 
field for experiments? 
  Al-Hudaybi: All states have parties. There is no 
fear of parties. 
  Al-Sa'id: Do you want parties made up of murderers? 
  Al-Hudaybi: If there is freedom a murderer cannot 
murder. If he kills, the whole world will rise against him, 
detest him, and cast him out. In every state there are parties. 
Algeria had 50 parties. Now there are three. Yemeni parties 
have fallen to three. Issues are always settled; elections 
provide the supportive power of the entire people. 
  Al-Sa'id: Do you see a need to set up a national 
front? 
  Al-Hudaybi: No. All it will do is applaud. 
  Al-Sa'id: So what is the remedy for terror? 
  Al-Hudaybi: Freedom. The government restricts 
freedoms and we call upon it to give freedom to the people and 
abandon the use of force. We call on it to hold free elections 
and call off the emergency laws that have been in force since 
1981. Even the legally recognized parties feel restricted by 
these laws. The government should be truthful, just, and fair 
to gain the people's confidence. There is also a need for 
economic, social, intellectual, and cultural reforms.[passage 
omitted] 
  Al-Sa'id: Why have you not used your influence to 
contain terror? 
  Al-Hudaybi: What can we do? Is it not enough that 
we protect all the professional associations of which we gain 
control from any terrorist influence and prevent any terrorist 
ideas from infiltrating them? We are not a government that can 
eradicate terror. I can destroy them if I have freedom. Some 
90 percent of the causes of deviation and violence would 
disappear if the people were given the freedom to express their 
opinions safely and without threat of violence. Violence breeds 
violence. 

