BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Chico Otavio] </F>
  [Text] Rio de Janeiro, 26 May (AE) -- Brigade General Joao 
Consenza, 60, was elected president of the Military Club on 25 
May. He is willing to resort even to the courts to protest the 
loss of purchasing power in the salaries of Armed Forces 
members. Consenza, who was the candidate for Renewing Action 
[Acao Renovadora], defeated General Jose Oscar Bellas Galvao in 
receiving 66 percent of the overall votes. 
  Consenza's victory represented the choice of 4,500 officers 
who voted for a Military Club that can participate actively in 
political matters. The new president said that one of his 
program priorities is "to promote and stimulate civic and 
patriotic demonstrations as well as studies and debates on 
national matters of paramount importance." 
  The general promised to do his best to obtain better 
salaries for the Armed Forces. According to him, the salaries of 
the military are "horrible." In the program, Renewing Action 
commits itself to defending the interests of Military Club 
members and "to fighting for measures that ensure their rights, 
be it in the courts or outside of them." Consenza asserted, 
however, that he is not planning to clash with the military 
ministers. 
  One of the first steps the new president will take will be 
to 
study the details of the lawsuit filed by the current club 
administration to protest to the federal government the loss in 
salaries' purchasing power that has resulted from the economic 
plan. The general confessed: "I know none of the details of this 
lawsuit." The lawsuit was prepared by Jurist Saulo Ramos, who 
charged the club millions for his work. 
  Joao Consenza will be installed on 26 June to replace 
General 
Nilton Cerqueira, who leaves the presidency of the Club after 
four years to run for federal deputy. According to the new 
president, the Military Club will not officially support any 
military candidate. "Personally, however, I support these 
candidacies, and will vote for General Newton Cruz for Rio de 
Janeiro governor," he admitted. 

