BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Statement" by the Foreign Ministry spokesman -- </F>
announcer-read] 
  [Text] A spokesman of the DPRK Foreign Ministry released 
today the following press statement on the situation concerning 
the Korean peninsula recently turning in an unusual direction 
with each passing day [choson pandoui chubyon chongsega narul 
ttara simsangchi anun panghyanguro umjigigo innungotkkwa 
kwallyonhaeso]: 
  The situation around the Korean peninsula has recently been 
turning in an unusual direction with each passing day. 
According to reports, Rimpac -- a Pacific-rim exercise in which 
the U.S., Japanese, and South Korean Armed Forces will join -- 
is going to be held in the West Pacific Ocean near our country 
for about 50 days, from late May to mid-July. Reports say 
large-scale Armed Forces -- including two U.S. aircraft carriers 
in addition to some 60 Navy vessels, some 200 airplanes, and 
some 25,000 troops from the three countries, with the U.S. Naval 
forces as the base -- will be mobilized for this exercise. 
  The Naval forces of the United States, Japan and the South 
Korean puppets plan to form the first unified fleet ever in 
history and stage a joint operation against fleets of other 
countries. 
  This is a military action which must not go unnoticed in 
view 
of the arms buildup the United States is forcing in South Korea 
while seeking sanctions against the DPRK over its fictitious 
nuclear issue. 
  The joint operation is going to be staged by a unified fleet 
this time while the military bosses of the United States, Japan, 
and South Korea are holding aggressive confabs repeatedly 
against the DPRK, visiting each other frequently. This is vivid 
proof that the three-way military alliance with the United 
States as the axis, which was formed long ago for stifling the 
DPRK and other Asian socialist countries, is stepping into the 
stage of practical action. 
  We cannot but be alerted against the United States bringing 
into the open through such joint operation its intention to 
force the military action against the DPRK, come what may. 
  The Korean people are not afraid of anyone's military action 
but are prepared to counter the U.S.-orchestrated multinational 
military action [migugi chudohanun tagukchogin kunsahaendongedo 
teachohalsu innun]. 
  The dangerous military situation created in and around the 
Korean peninsula today proves the validity and opportuneness 
[chongdanghago sigijokcholhadanun] of the overture of the DPRK 
for negotiations to establish a durable peace arrangement that 
will replace the military armistice machine in Korea and 
urgently demands its early realization. 
  The United States must know that it is a reasonable act 
either in view of the interests of the United States itself or 
in view of the guarantee of regional peace to respond to the 
peaceful overture of the DPRK, instead of taking adventurous 
military actions against it with the mobilization of its 
satellites. 
  Otherwise, the DPRK will no longer be able to discharge its 
duties under the Korean Armistice Agreement, and the United 
States must know this. 

