Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Eiji Hirano, Bank of Japan: "Loans Unlikely To </F>
Increase for Time Being Based on Grim Real Economy--Debate on 
Expansion of Government Affiliate Share"] 
  [Text] The amount of increase in loans from city 
banks, long-term credit banks and trust banks for the first half 
of fiscal 1993 is anticipated to be a minus 1 trillion yen. 
Since the initially projected amount was 5 trillion yen, the 
plummet will be 6 trillion yen. A homogenization of loans also 
has been seen, and a trend slanted toward short-term loans can 
be inferred. While loans by private financial institutions have 
been sluggish, it is a fact that [loans from] government 
affiliated [banks] are increasing. It probably would be proper 
to have debate on this point. Their plans for the second half of 
the year are rather enthusiastic, like the first half. It 
appears to be a kind of united goal. Steady efforts probably 
will be necessary to increase loans. 
<H5>  Lowest Level in History </H5>
  Looking back over the first half of fiscal 1993, the loan 
record for private financial institutions began and ended on a 
very low note. Initially, the 21 city, long-term, and trust 
banks had established a loan increase plan of about 5 trillion 
yen in the first half. In reality, however, it is anticipated 
that there will be about a 1 trillion yen net decrease. It will 
be a plummet of about 6 trillion yen compared to the initial 
plan. Even viewing recent figures, it seems that the growth rate 
for the average monthly balance compared to the same month the 
previous year for the three business sectors of city banks, 
long-term credit banks, and trust banks in September will be no 
more than 0.6 percent to 0.7 percent, the lowest level in 
history. Loans by private financial institutions continue to be 
as sluggish as ever. 
  Therefore, let's consider first the factors why the plans of 
the financial institutions have been greatly off the mark. One 
probably is that the various financial institutions established 
rather over-enthusiastic numerical values for loan programs in 
the first half. The BIS net worth ratio at the end of March this 
year showed a considerable improvement, affected by the high yen 
and rally in stock prices. Consequently, the BIS standard was 
not a factor curbing loans this term. Rather, it seems that an 
awareness that securing profits by expanding loan volume in 
order to find a source of capital for amortizing mounting bad 
assets was strongly at work in the continued sluggishness of 
loans. Consequently, there is the side effect that the plan 
itself was set high in terms of an unified target, so to speak. 
  The actual trend of the economy, however, was worse than 
expected and demand for funds was weaker by far than anticipated 
at the time the plans were established. Looking at corporate 
plant and equipment funds, for example, there was a strong 
feeling of an unclear future due to the advance of the high yen, 
many firms postponed plant and equipment plans or strived to 
reduce them, and the demand for plant and equipment funds 
continued to be a very weak situation. 
  For working capital also, on the other hand, in addition to 
no increase in sales due to the sluggish economy, inventory also 
already has been reduced considerably, and naturally, demand for 
those funds has been poor. Overall, corporate fund demand has 
been weaker than anticipated amidst stagnated corporate activity. 
  Even viewing the personal field, on the other hand, consumer 
loans recently have been in a minus world compared to the 
previous year. Moreover, there also is the side aspect that a 
demand for home loans was expected due to the rally in housing 
starts, but actually, a considerable portion of the fund demand 
was fulfilled by loans from the Housing Loan Corp. Moreover, in 
so far as there were quite a few repayments of home loans 
executed in the past, there inevitably only was a very low 
increase on a balance basis, even though there was a good 
showing to a certain extent on an execution basis. On the 
financial institution side, the actual situation in the first 
half probably was that although the desire to expand lending was 
great, it was not manifested in performance at all. 
<H5>  Medium- To Long-Term Fixed Loan Swaps </H5>
  Even under such an environment, however, there have been 
various efforts and schemes to increase loans somehow. A typical 
example, centering on city banks, are medium- to long-term fixed 
loans incorporating swaps. In a low interest situation like now, 
corporate needs are for medium- to long-term borrowing. Rather 
aggressive moves have been seen in the form of meeting these 
needs. 
  Moreover, it has been observed that many financial 
institutions are proceeding with adjustments in structural 
aspects such as mechanizing screening procedures and 
strengthening financial planning functions. For example, they 
are attempting to strengthen competitiveness by providing for a 
system which can execute lending rather swiftly with regard to 
lending conditions which can clear screening standards by, for 
example, shortening screening procedures or conducting a rather 
close and organic exchange of information between the lending 
division and screening division. 
  Right now, however, the state of interest competition, which 
is both good and bad for lending growth, is by no means 
perceived to have increased loans at all. That is to say, it is 
because there also is the situation that the huge amount of bad 
debts has considerably curbed the flow of profits and as 
financial institutions, they strongly recognize the need to make 
a profit by ensuring a profit margin. The profit margin indeed 
became very thin as the result of intense interest competition 
in the golden age of the bubble, but in so far as volume was 
rapidly expanding at the time, they were able to ensure a 
profit. However, under a situation like that now when large 
volume expansion is not desired, financial institution operation 
will not be effected at all if there is a concentration on 
lending with a thin margin. Actually, after the profit margin of 
private financial institutions took a trend toward expansion 
from fiscal 1991 after the collapse of the bubble until the 
first half of fiscal 1992, a leveling-off situation has 
continued for the most part since the second half of fiscal 
1992, supporting the move toward profit margin normalization. 
  In addition, the deregulation of liquid deposit interest 
rates next year is drawing near and probably will bring another 
increase in costs for financial institutions. Consequently, it 
can be said that it will not be a situation where they can 
rashly make loans to the point of disregarding profitability. 
Moreover, as a real problem, it is believed that there is the 
side aspect of not being in an environment that can evoke a 
demand for funds by having made some drop in interest. 
<H5>  Midsized to Small Firms Have Further Cooled </H5>
  Not a few voices of criticism have been heard, concentrated 
in the media, about the sluggishness of financial institution 
loans that "the attitude on loans is becoming excessively 
cautious because of reflection on the bubble era." Indeed, in 
comparison to past periods of relaxation, whether good or bad, 
the overall loan attitude is cautious. However, even when 
viewing the August "Tankan" [Bank of Japan (BOJ) short-term 
business review], the DI which determines the loan posture of 
financial institutions has been steadily moving in the direction 
of relaxation, and rather, it can be said that it is in the 
direction of gradually becoming positive as a change in the loan 
attitude. 
  Looking at the vital demand for funds, however, not a few 
financial institutions point out that large corporations have 
hit bottom and medium to small firms have become cool at this 
point. A further concern is the fear that fund demands for 
non-expansionary purposes are gradually increasing, centering on 
auto and electrical machinery subcontractor firms who have 
suffered blows from the high yen. Specifically, funds to offset 
substantial deficits, retirement fund allowances for employment 
adjustments, or funds to finance non-expansionary inventory are 
cited. In these cases, the price of real estate that is 
considered collateral by medium to small firms has fallen 
considerably and in so far as mortgage power is declining, the 
situation of difficulty in borrowing certainly exists. 
<H5>  Decrease in Market Share for Regional Banks </H5>
  In so far as the demand for funds, especially when it comes 
to the best customers, is very limited, loan competition by 
taking over business from other banks and scrambling for market 
share seems to be increasing in intensity. Comparing the growth 
rate level throughout the first half by business sector, the 
regional bank and credit association sectors, rather than the 
city bank and long-term credit bank sectors, generally show a 
somewhat high growth rate. If taken as a trend, however, the 
growth rate for city banks, long-term credit banks, and trust 
banks continues to be leveling-off at this time, but that of 
regional banks, second tier regional banks, and credit 
associations continues to go down month by month. This suggests 
that they have sustained a blow in loan competition and it has 
taken on the appearance of regional bank and second tier 
regional bank shares being eaten up, with the city bank portion 
at the center. 
  Speaking of city banks, long-term credit banks, and trust 
banks, their limited actions are becoming rather homogenous. 
That is to say, it can be inferred that city banks, of course, 
and also trust banks and long-term credit banks, have a tendency 
to be slanted toward short-term loans rather than long-term 
loans. The needs of the firms themselves are for medium- to 
long-term, low interest, fixed loans, but considering the 
interest risk based on such super low interest rates, in 
addition to competing with government affiliated financial 
institutions for this portion, naturally there are limits to the 
ability of financial institutions to respond. As a result, 
lending has come to be centered on short-term loans. 
<H5>  Government Affiliates and Life Insurers </H5>
  As long as they are under a situation where the demand for 
funds from firms is very limited, it is not completely off the 
mark to point out that loans from government affiliated 
financial institutions have become a large threat to private 
financial institutions. In this regard, while private financial 
institutions cannot realize a 1 to 2 percent growth rate 
compared to the previous year, government affiliated financial 
institutions across the board have shown a two-digit increase 
compared to the previous year. If there is a supplier with low 
interest, fixed, and super long-term funds right before your 
eyes, naturally, for example, large corporations will run to the 
Japan Development Bank and medium- to small-sized firms to the 
Small Business Finance Corp. and People's Finance Corp. 
Furthermore, as previously stated, loans by the Housing Loan 
Corp. have shown a marked increase in the home loan market. 
Viewed from the private sector which wants to increase loans but 
cannot, it probably is linked to the impression that fields in 
which they themselves inherently should expand are being stolen 
somewhat by the government affiliates. 
  On the other hand, however, a move to make use of government 
affiliated financial institution agency loans, centering on 
medium- to small-sized financial institutions, has been seen. In 
cases where terms to satisfy the customer with the proper loan 
cannot be offered, it makes use of a method to hook up with a 
customer by brokering a government loan with good terms. In this 
case, it can be taken as the government affiliated financial 
institution playing the role of supplementing the functions of 
the private financial institution. Of course, the intention is 
not to deny the important fixed role which government affiliated 
financial institutions perform, but like today, when loans by 
private financial institutions are hardly increasing at all, it 
probably is natural that the current situation where government 
affiliated financial institutions are greatly increasing their 
share will be debated more. 
  Moreover, regarding the aspect of competitors of private 
financial institutions, some point out an offensive by life 
insurance loans in the large corporation sector. Certainly, life 
insurance loans, viewed relatively, are increasing compared to 
banks. It seems that behind that is the situation that they are 
increasing their loans by offering long-term fixed funds with 
better terms than banks. In the case of life insurers, however, 
different from government affiliates, a price mechanism clearly 
is working there since they must be conscious of the cost of 
procuring funds. They cannot continue forever a low interest 
loan offensive ignoring the cost of procuring funds. Actually, 
the offensive by life insurers had become quite a topic of 
conversation up until around summer, but recently it has 
subsided. 
<H5>  Steady, Accumulated Effort </H5>
  Looking once again all together at the trends of the first 
half, the desire to try to expand loan volume is strong on the 
side of financial institutions, but under the current situation 
where bad debts are curbing the flow of profits, they cannot 
assume an easy posture in maintaining profitability and cannot 
venture into trying to increase loans to the point of carrying 
out interest dumping. Moreover, with this economic situation, 
they must be cautious about risks and cannot expand clients 
haphazardly. As a result, they probably are in a deadlock 
situation where loans do not increase. 
  Nevertheless, the loan programs for the second half of this 
fiscal year established by the various financial institutions 
have become rather enthusiastic at the present stage, like the 
initial plans of the first half. The loan environment certainly 
is not good, but they are strongly aware that a profit cannot be 
secured unless they increase volume to a certain extent. It is a 
situation where they have set plans high implying a kind of 
effective target. 
  It is believed that the emergency economic measures some 
time 
ago, especially the lowering of the official interest rate, 
decidedly have had no little effect in bolstering the economy, 
but considering the grim situation in which the Japanese economy 
now has been placed, it is difficult to believe that the economy 
overall will be refloated immediately by this. Lending and the 
real economy inherently should move in parallel. Since a grim 
situation is anticipated for the real economy in the future 
also, it is believed that an environment where it is difficult 
to increase loans will continue for a while. Bearing this in 
mind, it probably will be important for financial institutions 
to tax their ingenuity in dealing with it while making an steady 
accumulation of effort. 

