BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Liu Yingqiu (0491 6601 4428): "Choice of </F>
Policies To Curb Inflation"] 
  [Text] Since the government adopted a series of measures 
to control commodity prices last March, the price raises have 
been eased to a certain extent. By comparing the figure for the 
first quarter of this year with the same period last year, 
however, one can see that the country's general retail price 
index still increased by 20.1 percentage points. Such a 
situation tells us that China is currently faced with fairly 
high inflation pressure and should promptly formulate effective 
countermeasures in order to curb inflation and maintain a high 
economic growth rate. 
<H5>  Special Features of Current Inflation </H5>
  Statistics clearly show that the inflation which began in 
the 
latter half of 1993 differs greatly from the two previous 
periods of inflation which occurred from the fourth quarter of 
1984 to 1985 and in the year 1988. The following are three 
major features of the current inflation: 1. Instead of 
starting with the production and circulation of downstream 
products, the current inflation first began with upstream 
products and then spread to downstream products. 2. The current 
inflation has neither led to "panic buying" in society nor 
disturbed the relative tranquility of the consumption field. 
What it has caused is "the glinting and flashing of cold steel" 
in the production and the circulation of the means of 
production. 3. During the current inflation, the fastest rise 
has been registered in the producer prices of industrial goods, 
not in the purchasing prices of agricultural and sideline 
products. These three distinguishing features are clear proof 
that the current inflation is pushed by costs on the basis of an 
imperfect structure. 
  In view of the three major features of China's current 
inflation, as well as the general characteristics of cost-push 
inflation, we know very well when choosing curbing measures that 
it is not enough to just adopt the policy of currency control as 
we did before. 
<H5>  Curbing Inflation Should Start With Structural Reform </H5>
  Since the structure still remains the primary cause of the 
current inflation, we should continue to take the deepening of 
structural reform as the point of departure. Starting with 
structural reform is a long-term measure of fundamental 
importance for curbing inflation. 
  We should focus our attention on the following two problems: 
The first problem is how to define the property rights of 
enterprises and how to reorganize and establish a modern 
enterprise system; and the second is how to define things that 
the government should or should not do, that is, the problem of 
how to define the functions of the government. If we can find 
satisfactory answers to these two problems, we can certainly 
find a fundamental way to curb the "impulse for expansion" in 
enterprises and a fundamental cure for inflation which is 
brought about by mutual impediments caused by both the 
irrational government structure and the improper behavior of 
local governments. 
  To answer the first problem, an important task is to reform 
the existing management system for state-owned assets, establish 
new property rights relations for state-owned assets, and bring 
changes to the foundaton of the soft restriction system on the 
state-owned economy capital. A basic problem which has never 
been properly solved since the beginning of reform is that the 
property rights of state-owned enterprises exist in name only. 
The following are two major causes for such nominal property 
rights: The first is the imperfect property rights system in 
enterprises. Instead of fortifying the state-owned property 
rights, the contracted system has actually weakened, to a 
certain extent, the restrictive power of state-owned property 
rights over the behavior of enterprises. A concrete 
manifestation of this weakened restrictive power is the 
short-term nature of the behavior in contracted enterprises. 
Workers are the main body of an enterprise with the entrepreneur 
at the core. If the entrepreneur is squeezed out of the 
enterprise's property rights system, it will become unavoidable 
that the property rights of the enterprise are but an empty 
shell. The second cause is the unclear definition of the 
property rights in enterprises. When this is the case, the 
property rights of state-owned enterprises will inevitably 
become nothing but ornaments. Therefore, without solving the 
problem of defining the property rights of state-owned 
enterprises, we can neither find any solution to the problem 
that the property rights of enterprises exist in name only nor 
can we establish an agent system for state property rights. The 
property rights agents we are talking about here must include 
not only agents at the national level but also those at four 
other levels, namely, the provincial, city (prefectural), 
county, and townships levels. Otherwise, inflation resulting 
from the distorted behavior of enterprises will also be 
unavoidable. 
  To find an answer to the second problem, one of our basic 
countermeasures in the present stage is to change the contents 
of and methods employed in the assessment of work results of 
local governments. This means that, in a thoroughgoing manner, 
we should change the orientation of assessing work results from 
stressing only the pace of economic development and the 
per-capita income of the local area to stressing whether or not 
the local area has paid enough attention to the construction of 
urban and rural basic facilities, to providing services for the 
production and operation of enterprises, and to improving the 
functions and efficiency of government services. When it comes 
to relations between the central and local authorities, our 
emphasis on a shift from administrative decentralization to 
economic decentralization will inevitably lead to the situation 
wherein inflation is triggered by the behavior of local 
governments. This also means that, as a feasible 
countermeasure, a major task which should be fulfilled by both 
the central and local authorities is to change the functions of 
the government in real terms. 
<H5>  Explore Ways To Unify Interest Rates for Renminbi Savings </H5>
Deposits and Loans 
  The "Decision by the CPC Central Committee on Several Issues 
Concerning the Establishment of a Socialist Market Economic 
Structure" gives a comprehensive and brilliant exposition on the 
basic framework of China's banking structural reform. It can be 
said that the road is already open now for China's banking 
reform. In the present stage, what counts is to decide on 
necessary measures and appropriate plans in light of the new 
situations cropping up during our economic practice and the new 
problems we have confronted during the process of reform, seize 
all favorable opportunities, and to develop a comprehensive 
reform of the banking system, step by step. To this end, we 
need to study ways to unify interest rates for renminbi savings 
deposits and loans in accordance with the objective demands of 
the modern market economic development on the basis of 
unification of the renminbi exchange rate; through open market 
businesses and discounts and rediscounts, we can hopefully reach 
the goal of successfully readjusting the direction of capital 
flow, keeping inefficient loans under control, optimizing the 
investment pattern, bringing about a balanced market supply and 
demand, and eliminating inflation. 
  Another task which needs to be fulfilled in improving the 
management of the banking market in the present stage is to 
acquire a new understanding of how to control the credit line. 
In line with the inherent logic of the market economic 
development, we should reduce the credit line to a minimum as 
soon as possible so that we can base the principal management 
means of China's finances mainly on market signals. 
  Since we should undoubtedly retain a certain number of 
production and operational projects which are run exclusively by 
the state within a certain scope, both at present and in the 
future, we need to continue exercising credit line control over 
a certain amount of investment capital to a certain extent. On 
the other hand, if we fail to equally impose a flat interest 
rate on all major economic bodies (except those run exclusively 
by the state), it will be difficult to find any effective ways 
to prevent swollen investment and recurring inflation caused by 
the former. 
<H5>  While Rectifying Market Trade Order, We Should Put the Brake </H5>
Firmly on the Practice of Arbitrarily Raising Prices in the 
Production Fields 
  This will indeed be a workable short-term countermeasure for 
curbing inflation. Under a chaotic market trade order, venture 
capital can also play the role of jacking up prices and inducing 
inflation under certain conditions and during certain periods, 
thus fanning the flames of disorder. Therefore, we must 
strictly rectify the market trade order, including the order in 
the banking, securities, real estate, property rights, and 
futures markets, with a view to enhancing the operational 
efficiency of the market, reducing the costs of social dealings, 
and expanding the coverage of social welfare. Meanwhile, we 
should also realize, with a sober mind, that this is not really 
a permanent cure. It can thus be seen that without the basis of 
chaotic behavior in productive enterprises, it is impossible for 
the chaotic market trade order to last for a long period of 
time. That is to say, to get at the root of this problem we 
must first rectify the behavior in productive enterprises. 
  The below-standard behavior of China's enterprises is 
closely 
related to the existing enterprise structure which recognizes 
the operational autonomy of enterprises on the one hand and 
suffers from unclear enterprise property relations on the other. 
Apart from this, enterprises are also encumbered with "internal 
diseconomy" and "external diseconomy," including serious 
protracted problems known to all. For example, enterprises are 
plagued by surplus personnel; social welfare projects they have 
undertaken; retired personnel, for whom they have to provide 
housing and other welfare benefits; the schooling and employment 
of the children of their employees; arbitrary collections of 
charges and fees; and by difficulties they have encountered when 
getting things done. Under the situation wherein enterprises 
are operated at a low efficuency, or even without efficiency, 
their only choice is to "raise prices," for "price-raising" is 
the cheapest and least costly thing for them to do. That is how 
prices increase as enterprises follow each other's example and 
compete with one another (in the pursuit of higher prices). To 
effect a permanent cure for the present situation, we should 
rectify not only the market trade order but the production and 
opertional order in enterprises, adopting radical measures to 
stop the trend of raising prises among enterprises. 
  Of course, apart from the aforementioned several basic 
countermeasures, there are also other indispensable measures for 
the rectification, including readjusting industrial and 
import-export policies; coordinating credit policies with 
taxation policies; encouraging the production and import of 
low-price commodities and the construction of residential houses 
and private cars; giving shape to more "hot spots for 
consumption"; and attracting more ready money from both urban 
and rural residents within a shorter time frame. 

