Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vladislav Jovanovic, federal minister for </F>
foreign affairs, by Dragan Colovic; place and date not given; 
from the "An Argument More" program -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Colovic] Good day, Mr. Jovanovic. 
  [Jovanovic] Good day. 
  [Colovic] A lot of hullabaloo is being raised these days on 
the occasion of the NATO summit in Brussels because of the 
threats of air raids on Serbian positions in Bosnia. What do 
these threats mean? 
  [Jovanovic] They are a part of the total, rather incoherent 
approach by NATO and the leading Western powers to the Bosnian 
crisis. Hiding behind this is their indecision as to whether it 
is more in their interest for peace to be immediately 
established in Bosnia or for sanctions against Yugoslavia to be 
continued. This indecision or, how shall I put it, failure to 
show complete determination is being skillfully used by the 
Muslim side in Bosnia (?and) the Islamic bloc of countries to 
strengthen the war option. As regards NATO, the positive thing 
in its stand is the orientation toward a political solution to 
the dispute as the only road that can be followed in the future. 
  However, this positive orientation toward negotiations and a 
political solution to the crisis is not supported by an explicit 
and definite stand for directly establishing peace in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. This is because the illusion has been 
prolonged to the Islamic side in Bosnia and in the world that by 
obstructing peace by various procedural reasons and artificial 
questions that they can ask subsequently, they can gain more 
than by concluding a peace. At the same time, this is the 
weakest side in the NATO meeting. As regards those threats that 
have been voiced, they express the vestiges of this double 
standard and I would say a further divorce from the Bosnian 
reality. At the time when the non-Serbian sides in Bosnia are 
waging real and very bloody battles against each other, and the 
Serbian side in Bosnia is only defending itself from 
provocations and attacks from the Muslim side, it is the Serbian 
side that is singled out as the target of possible air raids and 
the other two are not even mentioned. This is not only a 
deviation from reality, but also is not helpful for overcoming 
the present military situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
accelerating this peace process. 
  It goes without saying that these threats include many 
expressions of disagreement and difference of views on the 
interests of many factors within NATO itself. It goes without 
saying that they include much tactical political pressure in the 
expectation that it will show its worth in Geneva on 18 January 
where the Muslim side would subsequently grab some more 
territorial concessions apart from those that the plan of action 
of the European Union demanded. 
  [Colovic] Mr. Jovanovic, Yasushi Akashi, special envoy to 
the UN secretary general, visited Belgrade yesterday. To what 
extent did the talks that Akashi had with Serbian President 
Slobodan Milosevic and FRY Prime Minister Kontic help clear up 
this question, which is very important and serious for peace not 
only in Bosnia? 
  [Jovanovic] I think that both meetings helped a lot, because 
they firmly stuck to the ground, to the facts and the reality, 
and started from an uncompromising commitment to a political 
solution to the crisis in Bosnia exclusively through peaceful 
means. This is a significant correction to the euphoric and 
somewhat militant mood that existed in the work of the NATO 
meeting and in its final document. On the other hand, it is 
also support for the meeting in Geneva on 18 January, where 
pleas are being made to mobilize all political efforts on all 
sides with a view to finally putting an end to the war in Bosnia 
and establishing a final peace. 
  Mr. Akashi presented himself as an absolutely astute and 
responsible person, who attaches high importance to this aim, to 
ending peace by peaceful means and establishing peace in the 
shortest and quickest way possible. In that respect he engages 
the entire authority of the United Nations and its secretary 
general in the correct way and with the correct means. In the 
talks with our representatives, he could see for himself once 
again that Yugoslavia is absolutely a peaceful factor and that 
in this respect the United Nations and Mr. Akashi can count on 
our permanently constructive cooperation. It goes without 
saying that this is cooperation that would take care of the 
equality and legitimacy of all three sides in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
and would not start from the point that only one, the Serbian 
side, should make endless concessions to the others. 
  [Colovic] Mr. Jovanovic, talks between Croatian President 
Tudjman and Muslim President Izetbegovic were held recently. It 
appears that they were unsuccessful and were followed by a very 
belligerent statement by the Muslim president. Can you explain 
this? 
  [Jovanovic] This can be easily explained. There has been no 
adequate reaction to any of the belligerence of the 
fundamentalist leadership in Sarajevo on the part of the 
international community and particularly on the part of these 
who are directly involved in solving the Bosnian crisis. There 
has been no adequate reaction on the part of the European Union, 
the Security Council, the United Nations, an even on the part of 
the two cochairmen, although one must admit that they were most 
objective and most direct in observing the negative aspects of 
the Bosnian Muslim stance (?thus far). Mr. Izetbegovic is 
obviously encouraged by such concessions and at the same time 
strongly supported by the Islamic Bloc throughout the world. He 
found food for his illusion that by further obstructing peace 
and mobilizing every potential with the goal of lifting the 
embargo on arms imports -- promised to him by some sides -- he 
will be able to radically turn the situation to his own 
advantage. This illusion is very dangerous and, as the Italian 
foreign minister said a few days ago -- it also represents the 
greatest enemy of peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Colovic] Finally, you mentioned the continuation of the 
Geneva negotiations on 18 January. What can be expected from 
this, if I remember correctly, 16th meeting? 
  [Jovanovic] For a long time, for several months, we have 
expected every such meeting to be the last and to put an end to 
war and a roof to the building of peace. In this respect our 
side -- and I include here the Serbian side in Bosna as well-- 
has a completely clear conscience. Meanwhile what the world 
demanded of us: A joint Serbian-Croatian proposal and 
concessions guaranteeing Muslims in Bosnia one-third of the 
territory, has been reached, and from that moment on the world 
should have been addressing the Muslim side alone. The Muslim 
side should finally be told to stop this game of hide-and-seek 
with the world and with peace, and state finally whether it is 
in favor of peace, as its basic demand has been accepted, or if 
it is in favor of war -- so we can know what we are going to 
talk about. We think that in Geneva on the 18th, if that 
meeting takes place at all, the international community will 
talk with the only side that is still obstructing peace in such 
an obvious and direct manner. 
  [Colovic ] Therefore, peace depends on the Muslim side 
regardless. Thank you Mr. Jovanovic, on behalf of the listeners 
of the "An Argument More" program. Thank you very much. 
  [Jovanovic] Not at all. Thank you and goodbye. 

