BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Francisco Gomez and Lorenzo Garibay] </F>
  [Text] Tijuana, Baja California, 8 May -- Given its 
geographic location, its almost 40 km of common border with the 
United States' richest state, and its economic potential, this 
city has been one of the areas most contested by drug gangs and 
cartels operating in Mexico. This is particularly true of the 
those led by the Arellano Felix brothers and by Hector Palma 
Salazar, alias El Guero Palma. 
  The war among drug trafficking mafias has left behind a wake 
of death and violence. In the past two years, more than 50 
"executions" have taken place involving the death of people 
linked to these two gangs that are vying for control of this 
area, which is strategic for drug trafficking. 
  Tijuana, which is a natural stepping stone to the world's 
largest drug consuming market, has been known for its large 
numbers of drug seizures. In the past 16 months in this area, 
approximately 65,500 kg of marijuana and 16,316 kg of cocaine as 
well as 10 kg of heroin have been seized, demonstrating that 
this is a place favored by drug traffickers, according to the 
Attorney General's Office. 
  The streets in this city have been the scene of drug 
trafficking gang rivalries and of police complicity with these 
gangs as well as an increase in drug abuse among the community, 
particularly among youths. 
  So far this year, five deaths have been attributed to the 
drug trafficking groups. Of these deaths, the murder of 
Alejandro Castaneda Andre, commander of the special group of the 
Judicial Federal Police [PFJ], and the 28 April murder of 
Federico Benitez Lopez, director of Municipal Public Security 
and of his driver Ramon Alerid Cardenas, stand out. In this 
last case, no one has been arrested, and there are no leads. In 
the Castaneda Andrade case, however, a state judicial police 
officer, who was in the company of a group of drug traffickers, 
and a "godmother" were arrested. Nevertheless, what is most 
remarkable is that legal action was taken against Sergio Ortiz 
Lara, the state's deputy prosecutor, for helping in the escape 
of members of the Arellano Felix gangs. 
  According to an investigation conducted by the National Poll 
on drug use in Baja California and Tijuana, in particular, the 
community is becoming a large consumer market, particularly for 
drugs such as cocaine and crack. The study results indicate that 
the majority of the youths polled in junior high and high 
schools started abusing drugs before they were 15. 
  The drug cartels' struggle to impose their control on this 
area has given way to the so-called "executions," which, in the 
last 24 months, have taken as victims a state judicial police 
agent; Wenceslao Berinstain Avila, a former Attorney General's 
Office agent; Pedro Rodriguez Moreno, a customs agent; Israel 
Alvarado Acosta and an associate; and Jose Luis Stavinsky, son 
of a well-know Tijuana businessman, in addition to many other 
victims. The majority of these cases remain unpunished. 
  The drug cartels' struggle for this city and other important 
sites for drug trafficking activities came out in the open a 
year ago in Guadalajara, Jalisco, when Cardinal Juan Jesus 
Posada Ocampo and six other individuals were murdered. The 
incident took place during a confrontation at the Guadalajara 
airport among groups led by the Arellano Felix brothers; Joaquin 
Guzman Loera, alias El Chapo Guzman; and El Guero Palma. 
Previously a confrontation had taken place between them at the 
disco Christine de Puerto Vallarta. 
  The Arellano Felix brothers, Ramon, Benjamin, and Javier, 
are the ones who have controlled this activity in Tijuana in the 
past few years, after they inherited control from their uncle 
Miguel Angel Felix Gallardo. Felix Gallardo during his time and 
up until his incarceration at the high security penitentiary in 
Almoloya, Juarez, was considered the capo of Mexico's largest 
drug trafficking ring. 
  Arellano Felix's power and influence became obvious when 35 
safe houses, a farm, and an industrial factory were seized. An 
unfinished tunnel was uncovered in the factory. This tunnel was 
to connect Tijuana with San Diego to smuggle drugs into the 
United States. 
  Recently the PGR sold off properties belonging to this gang 
consisting of 12 furniture lots, stuffed animals, vintage wines, 
paintings and sculptures of well-known artists, and other 
ostentatious articles. The starting bidding price was 134,642 
pesos. Two days before, 11 homes that had been seized were put 
on public auction, however, only one was sold, the price of 
which is unknown. The company in charge of carrying out this 
operation was Avaluos Integrales S.A. de CV, contracted by the 
PGR itself. 
  Up until now, the Arrellano Felix brothers remain at large 
with the exception of Francisco Javier Arellano Felix, who was 
arrested by the PJF in Tijuana in December. He was transferred 
to the Almoloya high security jail in Juarez where his staunch 
rival, Joaquin Guzman, alias El Chapo Guzman, has been since 
June. El Chapo Guzman was arrested in Guatemala and turned over 
to the Mexican authorities. 
  The last time any news was heard about the Arellano Felix 
gang was on 3 March during the shoot out in which Alexandro 
Castaneda Andrade, commander of the special group of the PFJ in 
that city, was killed. Andrade had located the site where 
Javier Arellano Felix, alias El Tigrillo, and his lieutenant 
Ismael Higuera Guerrero, alias El Mayel, were hiding. He was 
killed, however, during the confrontation when he attempted to 
arrest them. The case still has not been totally cleared up, 
but, according to versions of the PRG itself, El Tigrillo and El 
Mayel had already been arrested but were released by state 
police agents, allegedly by deputy prosecutor Sergio Ortiz Lara 
himself. Ortiz Lara is currently under arrest for his alleged 
responsibility in this case. 
  The most recent victim here of the drug trafficking groups 
was Federico Benitez Lopez, director of Municipal Security 
Police, and his driver Alarid Cardenas, who were murdered 10 
days ago on the highway in La Mesa. Benitez Lopez became known 
for confiscating weapons and marijuana in that city. 
  Benitez Lopez held that post for five months, when the drug 
trafficking phenomena was to be attacked in a joint action on 
three government levels. Nevertheless, the plans failed due to 
the rivalries among the different police corps and the 
corruption spread by the distribution of dollars by organized 
crime. 
  The large drug cargoes that reach this border have resulted 
in a peculiar phenomena: San Diego California drug addicts come 
to exchange weapons for drugs. This was reported by David Rubi, 
chief of the Tactic Group, who affirmed that weekly a weapon 
known as a goat's horn [cuerno de chivo] is found in the hands 
of gang members in this city's poor neighborhoods. 

