Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tripoli, 14 Mar -- The Voice of America broadcasted 
yesterday a commentary that reflects the views of the U.S. 
Government. 
  As is customary, the commentary accused the Great Jamhiriyah 
of supporting what it termed as terrorism and spoke about what 
it termed as sanctions against Libya, which where imposed by the 
UN Security Council on the Great Jamahiriyah. 
  The commentary said: America will seek to impose other 
sanctions, including an embargo on Libyan oil. 
  The JANA Arab affairs editor has responded to that saying: 
  These remarks, which American officials have grown 
accustomed 
to reiterating, affirm that their originators are shameless. 
One even doubts if they really belong to the human kind. 
Otherwise, had they a little bit of shame, they would have kept 
quiet and refrained from repeating the talk about terrorism and 
official terrorism after what they have done in the al-Ibrahimi 
mosque, killing worshippers while prostrating for God. 
  We may ask here what is behind these remarks. Are those who 
made it trying to cover the Sun with a mesh when they pour their 
irresponsible accusation against Libya, claiming that there are 
Libyans accused of opening fire on American Embassy officials in 
Sudan and Yemen, of murdering American and British hostages, of 
launching an attack on a British air base in Cyprus, of 
hijacking an American plane in Pakistan, and of planting 
explosives in a Jewish synagogue. 
  The American Government is trying to cover up the fresh 
scandal in the Security Council, which was, as a result of the 
American position, incapable of issuing a resolution condemning 
Israel of terrorism for killing tens of praying Palestinians 
inside the holy al-Ibrahimi mosque two weeks after that savage 
massacre. Was not America's position in the Security Council 
based on terrorism, and was there not more official terrorism 
when America affirms before the entire world that it supports 
the perpetrators of the al-Ibrahimi mosque massacre, protects 
them, and prevents international condemnation of them? Was not 
that an encouragement to those terrorists to commit more of 
these massacres? And then what can we call America's arming of 
doctors with machine guns and encouraging them to commit 
collective massacres against the Palestinians? Is not that 
terrorism? 
  But to make threats, in accordance with the American 
official's assertions in his statement, on the need to impose 
trade and oil embargo on Libya, would only make us, the Libyans, 
scornful, because we believe in ourselves and we are proud of 
our free will and our sovereign decision, which are not the 
subject of any blackmail. It is, furthermore, a stance that 
would make us reiterate with clarity that we do not need you; we 
do not need your industries or your business; we do not need to 
sell our oil to you or to Europe, which is under your sphere of 
influence. 
  We no longer need your equipment to market our oil, and 
moreover, we wish the day when we have no oil would come, 
because once we get ourselves rid of oil the better we are, as 
there would no longer be anything to threaten us with. And who 
said that we have been seeking to forge an economic cooperation 
with you? What kind of cooperation can be established with an 
enemy? What has been separating us is barriers and a sea of 
blood for centuries. 
  History has thus spoken and facts have thus affirmed. 
However, what you should bear always in mind when you were 
making such statements is the fact that you are dealing with a 
people that has divorced fear; nothing will ever frighten it 
save losing its freedom and dignity, which it will defend until 
the last man. 
  Hence, we look forward to the moment when you would deprive 
us once and for all from what you have called "our sophisticated 
equipment," to the moment when we get ourselves rid of industry 
and oil and of everything else you have been trying to use as a 
means to shackle us. Because only then we can deal with you in 
a way that would remind you of what the Vietnamese people had 
done to you when routing you and the Red Army, which you were 
never sure from where it was going to hit you again, and the 
IRA, whose members you have called terrorists and accused us of 
helping terrorism when we had contacts with them at a time His 
Majesty's government [as received] was holding secret meetings 
and negotiations with them. This army closed Great Britain's 
airport for 48 hours under its blows. You will taste something 
even more bitter than what was done to you by Aidid, who forced 
you to escape from Somalia after inflicting shame and disgrace 
on your forces because he has nothing to lose and because you 
yourselves have turned him into a guerrilla, relentless in 
confronting you and attacking your forces. 
  It has become clear that you are incapable of protecting 
your 
citizens and tourists, who are falling everywhere, because the 
ones who are fighting you are ghosts you do not know and who 
appear from nowhere and deal you [word indistinct]. They are 
not a regular army or a state or a government. For this reason 
we wish that we too turn into ghosts, and we are sure that you 
are going down that path. That will be the time to turn the 
world on your heads, and our slogan in this confrontation will 
be: On me and on my enemies. We will fight according to this 
slogan's spirit anywhere and from any spot. Then you will not 
be able to threaten us or hit us with your aircraft and atomic 
bombs because we got rid of everything that makes us prisoners 
to your threats and, thanks to you, we turned into giants, 
ghosts, and guerrillas. You will not find us as anything other 
than fighters wherever you show your faces. 
  There is enough in this to warn you against the consequences 
of continuing to level irresponsible accusations and attacks 
against us and to seek sham justifications with references to 
international laws. It is you who violate international law and 
trample under foot and violate international conventions in 
front of the world. You are using state terrorism as a method in 
international dealings, and you support, protect, and pardon 
terrorists and pardon yourselves from punishment and from 
chapter 7 of the UN charter. You are dominating the Security 
Council and using it as a sword hanging over the heads of the 
peoples that reject submission to your blackmail. You issue on 
its behalf false resolutions against them, resolutions we do not 
recognize, just as we do not recognize the Security Council. 
  What respect to international conventions are you calling 
for? And when you ask Libya to hand over to you its two 
citizens, do you respect the Montreal convention, which clearly 
says any signatory state has the right to carry out the 
necessary measures to impose its own judicial provisions 
concerning the crimes pertaining to civil aviation when the 
accused is in its territory and it has not handed him over. The 
convention also gives the signatory states, including the Great 
Jamahiriyah, naturally the right to take its own national 
judicial measures to impose its own jurisdiction in the case 
where the accused is in the territory of the state on whose 
territory the crime was not committed, and where the airplane 
was not registered, and when it has not handed him over either 
to the state where the crime was committed or to the state 
handing over the plane [sentence as received]. 
  Therefore, the two Libyan citizens whom you are accusing are 
in their own country where they should be tried according to its 
own national jurisdiction and not in any other country, 
according to the Montreal convention. What legal logic are you 
going to use to meet this convention, barring falsification and 
forgery, and [indistinct word] international law and trampling 
it under foot? 

