Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Anne Fulda: "Francois Mitterrand -- An Act of </F>
European Faith"] 
  [Text] Frankfurt -- Between two select committee meetings 
on the situation in the former Yugoslavia, the president of the 
Republic flew to Frankfurt for one of those historical-cultural 
escapades he so likes. At about the same time that European 
foreign ministers and their Bosnian and Serb counterparts were 
meeting in Bonn, the head of state was participating in 
Frankfurt's 1,200th anniversary celebrations. 
  Arriving in the snow and in miserable weather in this town 
described by Mayor Andreas Von Schoeler as the "cradle of German 
democracy," Francois Mitterrand yesterday morning attended the 
festivities accompanied by German President Richard Von 
Weizsaecker. The word "festivities" is perhaps a little strong, 
since the chosen musical program and the speeches of the various 
speakers in the town's Alte Oper [opera house], richly decorated 
with red and white flowers, did not really convey a spirit of 
conviviality. 
<H5>  "Europe Is Our Common Heritage" </H5>
  Finally, at the end of this dreary ceremony it was the 
French 
head of state, "crowned" citizen of honor of the town in 1986, 
who received the most applause. It has to be said that the 
president of the republic, who recalled that his first visit to 
Germany as head of state was to Frankfurt -- "I had come before 
but it was not a real visit" -- flattered his audience by 
saying how pleased he was that this town had been chosen as the 
seat of the European Monetary Institute. 
  "The European Monetary Institute has just been set up in 
Frankfurt. The stakes for both our countries is the creation of 
a strong and stable currency. On that point, you know your 
business," Francois Mitterrand said. The choice of Frankfurt, 
he continued, "bears the future, the symbol of German monetary 
power, and, why not, of European monetary power. Therefore, let 
us not hide the fact that Germany, to which we have attributed 
the headquarters of the European Bank, has a special 
responsibility in ensuring the success of this undertaking." 
  The president of the Republic also reminded his audience 
that 
Frankfurt had always been "a crossroads for the European idea," 
since it was here, in this region that used to be called eastern 
Franconia, that Charlemagne convened the first imperial synod in 
794. Finally, after mentioning Goethe, Nietzche, and Francois I 
-- "Francois, France, Franconia, Frankfurt -- I find it all very 
confusing" -- the head of state declared, more European than 
ever: "Long live Frankfurt, long live Franco-German friendship, 
long live Europe, our shared heritage!" 

