Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Vitez, Bosnia-Herzegovina, March 4 (AFP) -- The 
UN commander in Bosnia on Friday voiced "disappointment" over 
the lack of response to an urgent UN appeal for more troops in 
Bosnia and warned it could "make things fail." 
  "Obviously, it's a disappointment," said British Lieutenant 
General Michael Rose who Thursday [3 March] said his troops now 
were operating only "on a wing and a prayer." "I asked for at 
least 5,000 men, and if we assume that we are going to stay on 
here for months, obviously I need even more than that," he said. 
When asked how many reinforcements he had actually been 
promised, he said only "not many." [passage omitted] 
  Despite continuing peace efforts that have led to a Serb 
artillery pullback around Sarajevo and a separate US-brokered 
Moslem-Croat accord, Rose expressed concern. "There are 
difficulties, in some way increasing difficulties, in terms of 
ceasefire violations going on at the moment," he said without 
giving specifics. 
  He said the war continued in the central Bosnian city of 
Maglaj, where a tiny Moslem enclave is under attack by Bosnian 
Serb forces. The Bosnian Serbs have repeatedly refused to allow 
in an aid convoy with 100 tonnes of relief supplies for some 
19,000 residents trapped in the Moslem enclave in what are 
described as dire conditions. 
  "It's not an easy business. They are not giving us the 
freedom of movement we require. There is a war going on there 
in Maglaj. We're not in the business of imposing a peace through 
force," he said. [passage omitted] 
  Rose did not venture any date for when the airport in Tuzla, 
the Moslem enclave besieged by Serbs in northern Bosnia, would 
be reopened. The airport has been closed for more than a year 
but Bosnian Serbs agreed to allow its reopening for humanitarian 
shipments to the desperate surrounding region after Russia, a 
traditional Serb ally, offered to send observer troops there. 
  Rose said the airport's reopening now only depended on 
technical details. Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic "has now 
accepted the reopening of the airport. It's just a question of 
looking into the mechanics, moving the observers up there and 
some extra troops. I don't think there is a problem, just a 
question of our own timing," he said. 
  Rose arrived in the central Bosnian town of Vitez, a Croat 
enclave besieged by the mainly Moslem Bosnian army, Thursday 
night to visit the British UN base there which notably houses 
the First Coldstream Guards. 
  Meanwhile, Brigadier-General Fikret Muslimovic of the 
Bosnian 
army, who negotiated the arrangements to be introduced Saturday, 
said that more international troops were needed to enforce the 
Moslem-Croat ceasefire. 
  Muslimovic, speaking by phone from Zenica in central Bosnia, 
said the UNPROFOR force was not large enough to keep the peace 
between Moslems and Croats, who are confronting each other over 
large tracts of territory. "It won't be possible," he said, if 
more troops do not come. 
  UNPROFOR has about 14,700 troops in Bosnia, 4,100 of them in 
Sarajevo where they are tied up enforcing a separate ceasefire 
between the Moslems and Serbs. 
  UN envoy for Yugoslavia Yasushi Akashi said Thursday that 
10,000 more troops are needed but the United States has ruled 
out sending soldiers while France and Britain, with infantry 
already in Bosnia, are reluctant to provide more. 
  Muslimovic said Moslem-Croat fighting could end "if there is 
political will," but he added, "one thing is sure, that the 
number of (UN) troops now on the ground is not enough." 

