BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 9 (XINHUA) -- Chinese President Jiang 
Zemin today expressed his "warmest congratulations" to Nelson 
Mandela for his election to the presidency of the Republic of 
South Africa. 
  In a message to Mandela, Jiang said, "it gives us special 
joy 
to learn of Your Excellency's election to the presidency of the 
Republic of South Africa. On behalf of the Chinese people and 
in my own name, I wish to extend to you our warmest 
congratulations." 
  He said, "The end of the racist rule in South Africa has 
added a bright new chapter to the history of Africa and the 
annals of world human civilization." 
  "Your Excellency has waged protracted and arduous struggles 
for and made major contributions to the realization of racial 
equality in South Africa," Jiang said, "you have thus won not 
only the support and affection of the South African people but 
also the admiration of the Chinese people." 
  The Chinese president said, "I believe, under your 
leadership, South Africa will become a country of racial 
equality, peace, stability and prosperity, and will contribute 
to peace and development in Africa and the world at large." 
  He reiterated, "The Chinese people have always been firm in 
supporting the just cause of the South African people," and 
noted, "the birth of the new South Africa has opened up a broad 
prospect for the advancement of the relations between our two 
countries." 
  Jiang said, "I wish to take this opportunity to assure you 
once again that China cherishes the profound friendship between 
our two peoples nourished in the long common struggles and is 
ready to establish and develop friendly relations and 
cooperation with South Africa on the basis of the Five 
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence." 
  He stressed, "I am convinced that through our joint efforts, 
the traditional friendship between the Chinese people and the 
South African people will develop further on the new basis." 
  Jiang finally wished the Republic of South Africa to enjoy 
prosperity and its people well being. 

