BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 1 May (NA) -- A report submitted to 
the Chamber of Deputies on 1 May, in which the Ministry of 
Foreign Relations, International Trade, and Worship takes stock 
of the past year, states that the U.S. decision to authorize the 
sale of materiel to equip the Argentine Air Force constitutes a 
milestone in bilateral relations. 
  It further stated that "it implies an express 
acknowledgement 
of the trust that our country has managed to obtain thanks to 
its security policy." It added that "current cooperation 
between the two countries is characterized by mutual commitment 
to the regional control of weapons, nonproliferation, and 
participation in peacekeeping missions." 
  With regard to relations with Washington, the Argentine 
Foreign Ministry recalled Bill Clinton's remarks, on the 
occasion of Argentine President Carlos Menem's state visit to 
the United States, to the effect that "Argentina might join 
NAFTA in the medium future." 
  Also in the framework of relations with the United States, 
the Foreign Ministry pointed out that an agreement on the 
establishment of a fund for the Americas and a managing 
commission for childhood was signed between the two countries on 
27 September 1993." [no opening quotation marks as received] 
  As for relations between Argentina and the UK following the 
conflict over the Malvinas Islands, the official report stated 
that "on the occasion of the 161st anniversary of Great 
Britain's illegitimate occupation" on 3 January, Argentina 
"firmly reasserted that it will never renounce its rights over 
the islands." 
  To that effect the report went on to say that "it reiterated 
its adamant intention of continuing to make headway in its 
dialogue and negotiations with the UK, in order to strengthen 
mutual trust and enhance bilateral cooperation in the southwest 
Atlantic." The Foreign Ministry stressed that Argentina "has 
offered to the UK Government to clear the Malvinas Islands of 
the mines laid during the 1982 war." 
  The official report noted that, within the framework of the 
talks held with England and Northern Ireland during 1993, the 
parties discussed the implications of deep sea fishing for 
conservation, and reviewed the functioning of the reciprocal 
communications system. 
  As for fishing zones, the report added that on 7 May 1993 
the 
Argentine Government rejected "the extension by the UK of its 
alleged jurisdiction over the territorial waters of South 
Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands." 
  Argentina's incorporation into the UN Security Council on 1 
January 1994 was another subject broached in the report. It 
underscored the importance of Argentina's participation in 
conflicts like those in Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Middle East, 
Haiti, El Salvador, and Guatemala, among others. 
  Concerning Mercosur [Common Market of the South], the 
Foreign 
Ministry's report pointed out that trade between the four member 
countries added up to some $9 billion last year. 

