Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, Dec. 15--The Prime Minister of Malaysia, 
Dr Mahathir Mohamed, said today that he had sought India's 
co-operation in building up its defence infrastructure. He 
confirmed that Malaysia was buying several MIG 29 fighter planes 
from Russia and had approached India for their maintenance and 
manufacture of some of the spares. 
  Addressing a press conference on the conclusion of his 
four-day visit, Dr Mohamad explained that Malaysia was not 
acquiring arms with any motive but was engaged in the task of 
replacing the existing hardware which was outdated. He admitted 
that Malaysia could afford to spend a little more on defence and 
to upgrade its armament. 
  Significantly, Dr Mohamed was quick to add that China for 
one 
was getting richer and it would, in real terms, spend more on 
defence. He, however, explained that this did not indicate that 
there was any threat of war. "As the nations grow rich, they can 
afford to spend more on defence," he said. 
  Dr Mohamed said that Malaysia would welcome India to the 
Asia 
Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) but felt that some 
countries would be opposed to it as India was not really on the 
Pacific rim. The minister of state for external affairs, Mr 
Salman Khurshid, had yesterday sought Malaysia's help in 
becoming a member of APEC. 
  Dr Mohamed said that APEC should be restructured to allow 
more countries in the region to join. He felt that APEC was too 
formal a forum. The countries should get together and talk of 
economic cooperation informally. There were many countries which 
geographically came under the Pacific rim but were not members 
of APEC, Dr Mohamed added. 
  The Malaysian prime minister said that during his visit, he 
had several rounds of discussions with the Prime Minister, Mr 
P.V. Narasimha Rao, and other members of the cabinet and the 
focus was on greater bilateral co-operation in a number of 
fields. He said that liberalisation of the Indian economy had 
opened up new opportunities for joint ventures. 
  In response to a question, he said that it would take some 
time for the people of India to accept the economic reforms 
since any change was always uncomfortable. It would be some time 
before India achieved the status of a free-market economy. 
  Regarding the detention of Madame Aung San Suu Kyi, the 
pro-democracy leader in Myanmar, he said that he regretted the 
detention of any one without proper trial but added that 
confrontation was no solution to problems and differences. 
Efforts should be made to persuade Myanmar to be more liberal. 
  Replying to a question on Kashmir, Dr Mohamad said that 
Malaysia stood by the United Nations resolutions and adhered to 
the policy of not normally interfering in the internal affairs 
of other countries. 
  Talking on terrorism, the Malaysian prime minister said that 
all countries should co-operate to put an end to this. The 
terrorists should have nowhere to go. No country should give 
shelter to terrorists, he said. 

