Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wilhelm Dietl: "The Hunters of Hot Goods; The </F>
Customs Office Is Fighting the Heroin Flood With Small, 
Effective Special Units"] 
  [Text] The red 36-ton DAF, loaded with Turkish sledge 
[reed-like grass] had almost passed through the customs 
checkpoint at the Bavarian-Czech border crossing of Furth im 
Wald, when the official was struck by something in the freight 
documents: Long-distance driver Turgut Oezkaya had taken 
suspiciously long between loading the truck and starting from 
Turkey and could not conclusively explain it. 
  Reason enough for an "overhaul," the toughest thing a truck 
pilot can experience in German customs. 
  Hard-boiled specialists from the S-unit (S as in Special 
Handling) board the suspicious truck, guide it to a remotely 
located corrugated metal building and roll up their sleeves, 
because what follows is a gruelling job. 
  First, the Turkish driver must remove the tarpaulin from the 
truck. The 41-year-old remains cool, obviously feeling quite 
certain even when the customs people remove his spare tires and 
examine them with special X-ray equipment. The tires of a 
transport vehicle have lots of room for smuggled goods. 
Oezkaya's tires are clean, however. 
  The Turk looks on impassively as S-unit chief Karl Neumann 
(name changed) has a drill and an endoscope brought over. The 
customs officers drill holes in inaccessible hollows in the 
body; insert the finger-thick, flexible rod with a lens and a 
light source; and illuminate the most hidden angles. Nothing. 
The driver's cab is lifted off. The special Furth unit, all of 
them expert truck technicians and familiar with the design 
features of each type of vehicle, tap the floor of the driver's 
cab, scrape at the protective underfloor coating. Bit by bit the 
gigantic rig loses its superstructures. 
  Hunting fever has seized the group. Drug investigator Alf, 
the supernose, enters the stage. Slowly and with concentration 
the hunting dog circles the partially disassembled truck, 
sniffing every square centimeter. 
  A game full of suspense for the four-legged creature. In his 
training he has learned to detect cleverly hidden heroin, 
cocaine, and hashish packages. Alf does not do his work just to 
please his master; a reward in the form of a beautiful piece of 
sausage also beckons. 
  Now that the dog is in the shed, Turgut Oezkaya for the 
first 
time shows signs of slight nervousness, which also does not 
escape the customs officers. 
  Alf is now at the left-hand of the two powerful diesel 
tanks; 
he hates the smell of the fuel, but even so he does not leave. 
He stretches his neck and inhales jerkily. 
  The men from the customs office merely exchange brief 
glances. One scratches with the screwdriver on the forward side 
of the tank. Under the paint some white putty compound becomes 
visible and under that the edge of a screwed-down cover, 
invisible from the outside. The same thing on the front of the 
truck tank on the other side. 
  The S-unit men remove 37 kilos of heroin from the two 
perfectly camouflaged chambers. Later, the investigators 
encounter a second hiding place with 54 kilos of heroin in the 
double floor of the sleeping cab. Here as well the cover placed 
on top had been carefully spackled and painted over. 
  The customs people regard the professional job with great 
respect. "I would like to meet the man who did that," says group 
leader Neumann. 
  Turgut Oezkaya does not reveal the name. Although he has 
just 
lost a drug shipment with a street value of more than 9 million 
German marks [DM], as well as his commission of an estimated 
DM60,000 and, further, the truck, he does not soften. 
  The interrogation remains fruitless. The truck driver names 
neither the sender of the hot freight nor its addressee. His 
only explanation he finally deigns to make is a purely 
obligatory act: "At a parking lot in Hungary I met an Iranian 
whom I did not know. He convinced me to smuggle caviar for him 
to Germany. I knew nothing about heroin." 
  Heribert Baumann of the Joint Narcotics Intelligence Group 
at 
the Bavarian Land Criminal Office and the Nuremberg Customs 
Investigative Office only dismisses that: "All drug smugglers 
provide such stories for the protocol, so that after their 
prison term in Germany they do not have to be tried once more in 
Turkey for narcotics smuggling." 
  Turgut Oezkaya still has a long time before his trip home. 
The large-scale smuggler, now sentenced to 13 years 
imprisonment, can be released at the earliest in six and a half 
years with good behavior. 
  A great success for the S-unit. The highly motivated 10-man 
group, one of 72 in the entire area of the FRG, is part of the 
customs elite and enjoys a reputation among insiders which is 
comparable to that of the GSG 9 [Border Patrol Squad] or the 
SEKs [Special Action Groups] in the police force. But unlike the 
tough troopers of the special squads, the customs specialists 
practically never appear in public. 
  Although the S elite in the Customs is exempted from general 
routine processing service and is able to operate quite 
independently, there is no successor generation. 
  Chief customs clerk Neumann mentions the reasons: "We do not 
earn more than our colleagues in the regular service, but are 
ready to be called in at any time of day or night. This means a 
large amount of overtime. Also, when we disassemble trucks we 
have to work really hard physically. That deters many 
applicants." 
  On occasion there is a great deal of conspiracy when the 
S-unit secretly follows detected contraband transports from the 
border to the destination in the country. This does not involve 
vodka and cigarettes, of course, but exclusively dangerous 
contraband: weapons and narcotics. 
  The results of the investigations are spectacular. For the 
area of the Nuremberg regional revenue office which is in charge 
and to which all crossings for the northern Balkan route belong, 
regional revenue office spokesman Wolfgang Zilk reports: "In 
1993, 832 kilograms of heroin were confiscated in all of 
Germany, more than 60 percent of which in our area. For hashish, 
a total of 3.3 tons, we found one-third." 
  It could be even more, if the S units founded five years ago 
could be reinforced to the same extent as the increase in the 
traffic from Bucharest, Budapest and Prague. But there the 
customs office is on the losing side. 
  "In December alone, 28,000 trucks came through here," says 
Neumann, leader of the Furth S-unit, "but we are only able to 
examine thoroughly a maximum of two." 
  Although this is hardly more than spot checks, the customs 
investigators always have astonishing success: They uncovered 
291 kilos of heroin on 4 December at Schirnding under a load of 
Turkish hazelnuts. And colleagues in Regensburg found another 57 
kilos of heroin on 13 January. Again, the hot goods were hidden 
on a Turkish nut transporter. 
  But between those the S-units often have painfully 
unsuccessful days and weeks as well. Then the S elite 
occasionally takes turns in the normal border-crossing traffic 
and catches a few minor Marlboro smugglers as training exercises. 
  In order for the frustration not to get too high, the Furth 
investigators set out once a year at their own expense on a 
"business excursion" to the opposite side. Then Neumann's men 
look around incognito and quite discreetly in the countries 
where the hemp and the red poppy grow. 

