Language: <F P=105>French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Malian President Alpha Oumar Konare is among the 
African heads of state and prime ministers participating today 
in the extraordinary summit on the CFA franc. The summit is 
aimed at adopting a common position on the eventual devaluation 
of the CFA franc. The presence in Dakar of IMF Director General 
Michel Camdessus and French Cooperation Minister Michel Roussin 
reinforces the idea that devaluation has become inevitable. 
Here is the position of Burkina Faso as given by President 
Blaise Compaore, who made a stopover yesterday at Bamako airport 
on his way to the Senegalese capital. He was answering 
questions from our special correspondents. 
  [Begin recording] [Compaore] As far as Burkina Faso is 
concerned, we intend to share our position with the other heads 
of state, for it is obvious that monetary manipulation may also 
be an economic measure. For our states, we will always have to 
raise the same issues of debt, the purchasing power of workers 
--the hardworking masses of our countries -- and certainly the 
solidarity mechanisms which will shore up our union after such a 
measure. This means that with the other heads of state we will 
come up with a common position on the issue. 
  I think there is concern in all our countries. We do not 
have a final position. This depends on the advantages we might 
obtain from this measure and also on what international 
organizations and France, our main partner, will tell us. 
  [Reporter] Is the fight against devaluation lost in advance? 
Can the franc zone countries put up solid arguments to the 
proponents of devaluation? 
  [Compaore] I think the problem is not at that level. What 
advantages do we have today with regard to the current economic 
situation? There is economic stagnation in all our countries. 
There is no investment and there is flight of the little capital 
that remains. We have a rather unpleasant situation. This 
means that what we are seeking today is not either devaluation 
or no devaluation. I think we have gone beyond this stage. Our 
concern today is whether devaluation will improve our economic 
situation. 
  In the event of devaluation, what are the relief measures to 
be taken? What will be the internal measures and what measures 
can we expect from the financial institutions and from our main 
partner, France, and the international community in order to 
improve our economies? The debate is not exactly whether we 
should devalue or not, but if we have to devalue today in the 
interests of our economies, what are the relief measures that we 
have to take with our partners so that this devaluation will not 
be a disaster for our economies? 
  [Reporter] It must be noted that 10 out of the 14 heads of 
state in the franc zone will take part in the Dakar summit. 
Cote d'Ivoire, Congo, and Togo will be represented by their 
prime ministers, while Cameroon will be represented by its 
finance minister. The extraordinary summit on the CFA franc has 
overshadowed somehow the second major subject to be discussed in 
Dakar -- the situation of Air Afrique. The company is in very 
poor shape and the heads of state need to adopt a rehabilitation 
plan. They will also decide on the admission of Guinea Bissau as 
the 12th member and on the renewal of the term of office of Air 
Afrique's managing director, Yves Roland Billecart. [end 
recording] 

