BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Qullu Muherremov] </F>
  [Text] The political nature of NATO's program on the 
Partnership for Peace, which has been adopted in accordance with 
the proposal made by the United States, is aimed at neutralizing 
a possible threat of war either in Europe or elsewhere in the 
world after the collapse of the former Soviet Union. Meanwhile, 
the recent developments particularly in eastern Europe have 
raised the question of the need to restructure NATO to enable it 
to assume a special role for the establishment of a new security 
system in that continent. In fact, a coordination and 
solidarity council was created within NATO for that purpose in 
1992. However, several political observers believe that it 
failed to fulfill its tasks. 
  Recent incidents, particularly the Bosnia syndrome [previous 
word in English], have forced NATO to consider new parameters in 
its approach on various developments. That is how NATO's 
program on the Partnership for Peace was drawn up. Considering 
the fact that the countries, which have signed that program, 
have undertaken certain commitments, Azerbaijan's participation 
in it will be in our republic's interest. The main commitment 
is that none of the signatory countries must put forward 
territorial claims against the other. Furthermore, they must 
avoid using force and respect the principle of nonviolation of 
borders. According to that program, NATO will hold intensive 
talks with any country that is threatened. That is of real 
significance for Azerbaijan. 
  Another important aspect of that program for Azerbaijan is 
the help our republic can get from NATO in the establishment and 
training of Azerbaijan's Armed Forces. 
  Participating in NATO's program of the Partnership for Peace 
will also bring to light various complex problems in the 
Karabakh dispute. It will be recalled that the CSCE summit in 
Helsinki in May 1992 discussed the possibility of using NATO's 
military forces in ending disputes in the CSCE countries. The 
proposal that was made on the matter was approved. That means 
that our republic's participation in NATO's program of the 
Partnership for Peace is essential if it wishes to safeguard and 
maintain its independence and if it decides to exclude itself 
from the framework of the other countries [CIS] in the future. 
  Two important points should be assessed when that matter is 
considered. The first is the question of whether or not Armenia 
can participate in that program. Political observers are 
convinced that an initiative by Armenia in that regard will 
depend on Russia's stand. That is due to the agreement they 
have signed to become military allies. So, an initiative by 
Armenia will depend on Russia's decision. The second is the 
question of whether or not Azerbaijan's participation in the 
program will create anxiety in the neighboring countries, 
particularly in Azerbaijan's northern and southern neighbors. A 
serious cause for anxiety does not exist. Those countries are 
well aware that Azerbaijan has no claim against them and that 
its participation in the program is related only to its 
intention to maintain its independence. 

