BFN 

  [Text] Lhasa, June 24 (XINHUA) -- Zhang Yun, a livestock 
expert in Tibet, has devoted 11 years to upgrading the breeding 
rate of yaks. 
  He wanted to curb the degeneration tendency of domestic 
yaks, 
and by using artificial insemination, Zhang has raised the 
reproduction rate of domestic yaks from 35 percent to 70 percent. 
  It is estimated that there are 13 million yaks in China, 
about 90 percent of the total number in the world. They live on 
plateau grasslands with altitudes between 3,000 m to 5,000 m. 
  For hundreds of years, yaks in their bitter living 
conditions 
have been closely bound up with the millions of Tibetans in 
western China, providing the latter with meat, milk, fur and 
animal power. 
  "However, during the past several decades, the quality of 
yaks in some places has degenerated and their reproduction 
ability got lowered," said Zhang. "The main reason was the 
worsening of the grassland and inbreeding of yaks." 
  According to an investigation, a male yak during the 1950s 
might weigh about 460 kg, but now it weighs only about 300 kg. 
Similarly, one female yak four decades ago could turn out 200 
kg of milk a year; now it can produce only 120 kg. Inbreeding 
also made the reproduction rate and survival rate fairly low. 
  Zhang thinks that artificial insemination can avoid use of 
many male yaks so that more grassland can be saved and 
inbreeding avoided. 
  In 1984 he took up the study of the frozen semen 
reproduction 
technique. He is now in charge of a frozen semen station in 
Damxung county in the Tibet Autonomous Region, where the semen 
is collected from strong wild yaks and their first generation. 
  At the beginning of his work, he went up to an area of 
plateau grassland together with an assistant and worked on eight 
yaks. 
  "Male yaks have a hot temper, and it is rather troublesome 
to 
tame them," he said. However, in five months, without resorting 
to whipping or electric shock, they found a way to get on good 
terms with yaks. 
  After training, the eight male yaks were docile enough for 
the workers to collect semen. 
  In August that year, Zhang and his co-workers carried out 
artificial insemination of 60 female yaks which gave birth to 40 
calves the next year; the reproduction rate was 66 percent. 
  In order to spread the insemination technique throughout 
Tibet, Zhang wants to set up a modern frozen yak semen center. 
"There are 124 frozen semen centers nationwide, but not one yak 
semen bank yet," Zhang said. 
  Zhang's work won support from the late Tibetan religious 
leader, the 10th Bainqen Lama, who showed great concern for the 
development of livestock and application of new techniques in 
Tibet. 
  "In a sense, we work hard starting from scratch in order to 
complete the wish of the Bainqen," Zhang said. 
  With the support of the central and and local government, 
they are building a high-grade frozen yak semen center with 
semen processing workshops and laboratories. They are also 
considering introducing modern equipment with international aid. 

