Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report: "Liu Jiyuan, Responsible Person of China's </F>
Aerospace Industry, Reveals in Hong Kong That China Has More 
Than 30 Contracts To Launch Foreign Satellites"] 
  [Text] Yesterday, Liu Jiyuan, a responsible official of 
China's astronautics industry, said that the satellite launched 
by China in early October did not fall to the earth and the 
department concerned was still tracing the satellite. It was 
expected that it would continue to orbit several months. He 
said that many Western reports about the satellite were 
inaccurate. 
  Liu Jiyuan, president of China's Aerospace Industry 
Corporation, yesterday attended the topping-out ceremony of the 
ground control station of Asia-Pacific Communications Satellite 
Corporation in Hong Kong. After the ceremony, he was asked 
about the fall of the satellite launched by China on 8 October 
into the Pacific Ocean as the United States alleged. He pointed 
out that the foreign reports were inaccurate on many points, and 
he also denied that the satellite had fallen to earth. 
  Liu Jiyuan revealed that the Chinese department concerned 
was 
still tracing the satellite which failed to return on time, and 
monitoring of its movement. China did not plan to retrieve the 
satellite because it had almost used up its energy and would 
eventually fall. However, it will continue to orbit for a 
fairly long time, and it is expected that it will remain in the 
outer space several months. 
  He did not think that the fall of the satellite would cause 
any catastrophe. "Like other foreign satellites, when they fell 
to the ground they had almost burned out and become ashes, and 
nothing was be left." 
  As for China's future plan, Liu Jiyuan said that applied 
satellites will be developed to meet the needs of economic 
construction, including communications and meteorological 
satellites and mobile communications facilities. Now, the State 
Aerospace Bureau is vigorously promoting international 
satellite-launching services, and has more than 30 foreign 
satellite-launching contracts, including some from the United 
States. 

