Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 31 Jan (NA) -- The U.S. Government 
today agreed to sell Argentina a total of 36 combat planes with 
their respective radars. The deal had been stalemated due to 
England's opposition. This is the first large weapons sale to 
our country since the Malvinas war. 
  Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella, who is in New York for a 
series of meetings with White House and UN officials, this 
afternoon talked with NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS on the telephone 
confirming the news. 
  Di Tella said: "The planes' sale shows the level of trust 
the United States has in our country." The foreign minister 
said the event was "important political support" for the 
democratic and economic process living Argentina. 
  For the past two years the government has been insisting on 
purchasing a total of 36 Skyhawk A-4M planes from the United 
States to replace, in part, the planes lost during the 1982 
Malvinas war. 
  These planes, which the United States stopped using in 
combat 
because they are a generation older than the Phantoms, must be 
equipped with ultra-sophisticated radars in order to be 
effective. 
  The British conservative government repeatedly has opposed 
Argentina's rearming, even though the current rapprochement 
policy made their position more flexible. "The news is still 
too fresh. We still have not heard of any reaction from the 
British Foreign Office," Di Tella said. "Any way we look at it, 
the sale of the planes and the radars is a show of trust in our 
country and, therefore, I do not think there will be any 
problems." 
  Di Tella admitted that the Argentine Government "was 
anxiously waiting" to learn about the U.S. decision, and that 
England "has slowly changed its opinion about us and I am sure 
they will understand the situation." 
  "I do not want to look victorious in front of England, 
nothing of the kind, but I repeat that the sale of the planes 
and radars as well as the possible invitation to join NAFTA are 
indications of a lot of trust in our country," Di Tella stressed. 
  Referring to NAFTA, Di Tella said: "We should wait until we 
receive the formal invitation. Then we will stop and think about 
it carefully to see if it is advantageous to us." Di Tella said 
Argentina's possible entry into NAFTA "will not imply a 10-page 
treaty. The treaty will need hundreds of pages. Argentina must 
not separate itself from Mercosur [Common Market of the South]. 
Argentina must add Mercosur to NAFTA." 
  The minister then talked about the possibility of U.S. 
investments and the increase in Argentina's exports. He said: 
"We will not see sharp increases because the U.S. economy is 
slowly changing." 
  Di Tella then returned to the issue of the planes, saying 
"the political impact of the U.S. decision will undoubtedly help 
the investment process." 
  Regarding opportunities for the Argentine "Pampa" advanced 
training plane, Di Tella said the U.S.' purchase of the plane 
"does not have any political component. It is a bidding and 
only technical questions matter." 
  Defense Minister Oscar Camilion revealed two weeks ago that 
the "Pampa" plane "has been classified for the finals" among the 
foreign bids. On that occasion Camilion did not reveal what 
other country is also in the finals to sell the training plane. 
  On 25 January, Di Tella travelled to the United States, 
where 
he met Secretary of State Warren Christopher, U.S. Trade 
Representative Michael Kantor, and security representatives. 

