BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporters] </F>
  [Text] Official confirmation that China has jailed a Hong 
Kong reporter for 12 years has sent shock waves among 
journalists and political groups, who denounce the verdict as 
unacceptable, unjustifiable and a threat to press freedom. Xi 
Yang's employer Ming Pao, the Hong Kong Journalists' Association 
(HKJA) and political parties called on Beijing to release 
details of Xi's case while allowing the public to attend his 
appeal in court. The Hong Kong Government said in a statement 
yesterday they were seeking more information on the case, while 
top official in charge of territory affairs, Lu Ping, maintained 
that the sentence was not overly stiff. Beijing's Intermediate 
People's Court confirmed yesterday that Xi, in his 30s, had been 
sentenced to 12 years in prison for "spying and stealing state 
secrets", and stripped of political rights for another two years. 
  It also confirmed that Xi's "main accomplice", Tian Ye, a 
clerk at the People's Bank of China, had been sentenced to 15 
years in prison. "Xi has already appealed the sentence to the 
Higher People's Court," the spokesman added. An official of 
Beijing's Higher People's Court confirmed yesterday that Xi's 
appeal was being processed. But she refused to say when the 
case was to be heard. 
  Analysts in Beijing said the Draconian sentences were 
designed to act as a strong warning to Hong Kong journalists not 
to report on confidential documents and for government employees 
not to provide classified information to journalists. 
  Saying that the sentence was "out of proportion and 
unacceptable", HKJA vice chairman Kevin Lau Chun-to said 
yesterday the 12-year jail term was unjustified because the 
Chinese State Security Act allowed very loose interpretation of 
the meaning of "state secret." 
  "Xi Yang was in the course of normal news gathering. No 
serious damage to China's state interest can be discerned," Mr 
Lau said. "The Chinese Government had never alleged any 
involvement of corruption or spying activities. In these 
circumstances, the sentences given to Xi Yang and Tian Ye are 
unreasonable and unproportional." Mr Lau said that this case 
was an alarming sign to journalists because China's definition 
of, state secrets was very arbitrary. And since the whole 
process was conducted in secret, there was no guarantee of a 
fair trial, a right recognised by the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights of which China was also a signatory, he added. 
  HKJA chairman Li Yuet-wah said the low profile of Ming Pao 
in 
dealing with the case was partly responsible for Xi's heavy 
sentence. It was an atmosphere in which employers did not want 
to speak up for their employees, she said. 
  A group of journalists will petition the local Xinhua (New 
China News Agency) office today for the immediate release of Xi 
and to respect press freedom. In an open letter to Chinese 
premier Li Peng, these journalists said they believed Xi was 
only doing normal reporting and had no intention to "steal" any 
state secrets. They urged the Chinese Government to understand 
the working style of Hong Kong journalists and respect freedom 
of the press. 
  Vowing full support for Xi and his family, Ming Pao said in 
a 
statement yesterday that the ruling was both "deplorable and 
very regrettable". Denouncing Xi's charge as ambiguous and the 
sentence heavy, Ming Pao said that "all this is bound to hamper 
Hong Kong news organisations' efforts to report on China 
on-the-spot to shake any faith in Hong Kong's post-1997 free 
press and to harm China's image among the Hong Kong people". It 
demanded Xi's appeal to be heard as soon as possible. 
  Xi's father, still in hospital after suffering a heart 
attack 
upon hearing of his son's heavy sentence, said he would write 
letters to Hong Kong Affairs Advisers, Hong Kong National 
People's Congress and Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Committee (CPPCC) members seeking help. 
  Law Cheung-kwok, newly-appointed deputy to the CPPCC, said 
he 
was liaising with other CPPCC members to reflect their opinion 
in a letter to the Ministry of Justice and the CPPCC chairman. 
"We will ask them to give a full account of Xi's case and will 
appeal to the mainland authorities for a lenient treatment," Mr 
Law said adding that the penalty was too heavy. 
  Director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs, Lu Ping, said 
12 
years imprisonment was not a heavy penalty for offenders on such 
charges. He also said Hong Kong reporters should not worry if 
they did normal news gathering on the mainland. 
  The Hong Kong Government released a statement yesterday 
calling the verdict "disappointing". 
  [Hong Kong EASTERN EXPRESS in English on 5 April carries a 
similar report on page 1 which adds the following: "Lu Ping, 
director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, said 
yesterday that the 12-year jail term imposed on a Hong Kong 
journalist was `not too heavy.' `Xi Yang had not come to 
report,' he said. `He came to pry into state secrets.' 
  [`The sentence will not affect Hong Kong reporters' normal 
reporting work. You (Hong Kong reporters) don't have such a 
problem.'"] 

