BFN 

<F P=106> ["Calmly" column by Chief Editor Ibrahim Nafi'] </F>
  [Excerpts] The television interview with 'Adil 
'Abd-al-Baqi, one of the former leaders of the al-Shawqiyun 
Group, has provided a good example of the ideology and methods 
used by the terrorist organizations. These organizations are 
raising the banners of religion falsely to achieve their true 
goals, which are the domination and control of the people's 
destinies to seize power by force. 
  The corruption exercised by these groups through Islamic 
legal rulings on murder, plunder, and seizure of unbelievers' 
property to finance their operations [istihlal] represents the 
height of offense against religion, country, law, and public 
order unpracticed by any gangster group in our country before. 
[passage omitted] 
  Frankly and objectively, I say that the terrorist elements 
of 
these new generations are a bad product of the gap between the 
Egyptian media (press and audio-visual) and these youths, their 
aspirations, hopes, and real problems. Most of our media 
concentrates on what is happening in greater Cairo and 
Alexandria and the problems that exist there, without giving 
much attention to the big vacuum in which the new generations 
live and to the need to create bridges of confidence and 
dialogue between these generations and our scholars, thinkers, 
intellectuals, media men, and even politicians and political 
parties whose role has been limited to political contests in the 
press. Not much effort has been made to fill the dreadful 
ideological vacuum that exists among these generations. This 
vacuum is also the result of the defect in the educational 
system. This system requires real revision because it is 
molding unopen minds that do not debate or discuss ideas or 
positions in a rational and critical manner that respects the 
opinion of others. 
  Behind this dreadful ideological vacuum in which Muslim 
legal 
rulings on murder, terrorism, and the seizure of unbelievers' 
property flourish stands the absence of rational, tolerant, 
religious thinking, which has been represented for many decades 
by the al-Azhar and its scholars. [passage omitted] 
  We are facing an illness that requires the efforts of all of 
our scholars and researchers to diagnose the causes of these 
dangerous manifestations. [passage omitted] 
  I think that placing the responsibility for dealing with 
terrorist activity on the shoulders of the security services 
alone is extremely unfair to them, because everyone is called 
upon to do their part in this confrontation. A media role is 
urgently needed to confront the extremist terrorist ideology and 
its sources, which deviate from the principles of religion and 
the consensus of jurisprudence. There is an important and 
required role for the cultural services in this confrontation. 
[passage omitted] 
  According to all indications, there is a need for 
integration 
between the policies of education, culture, and information to 
make it easier for the police forces to carry out their duty 
with competence and efficiency. [passage omitted] 

