BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 13 (XINHUA) -- A delegation of 
leading Chinese business executives will travel with Premier Li 
Peng on his official visit to four Central Asian nations next 
week, as a way to boost bilateral trade and economic cooperation. 
  This will be the first time for a delegation of business 
figures to accompany a top government leader on a trip abroad. 
  The entrepreneurs' delegation will be led by President Zheng 
Hongye of the China Council for the Promotion of International 
Trade (CCPIT). It will include executives of the China 
National Construction Engineering Corporation, China National 
Petroleum Corporation, China National Textiles Import and Export 
Corporation, China Electronics Import and Export Corporation, 
and an iron-steel industrial and trade group, which has grown 
largely from the previous China Metallurgical Import and Export 
Corporation. 
  For the business figures to travel with the head of 
government has been arranged in the light of international 
practice, said Zheng Hongye in an interview with XINHUA. 
  He added that it would on the one hand help enrich the 
program and results of the visit, and on the other hand, serve 
to propel bilateral economic and trade cooperation, thus helping 
the Chinese entrepreneurs to open up the world market. 
  The new practice, introduced against the backdrop of China's 
efforts to speed up the establishment of a socialist market 
economy, is very conducive to the expansion of foreign economic 
and technological cooperation, Zheng said, adding: "This is 
also meant to let diplomacy better serve reform, opening and 
economic development." 
  An advance group has made a study tour of Uzbekistan, 
Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan, with what Zheng called 
"generally good" results. 
  During Premier Li's visit, the Chinese entrepreneurs will 
meet and talk with their local counterparts on possibilities or 
even specific projects of cooperation in the fields of 
construction, textiles, electronics, telecommunications, 
metallurgy, petro- chemical and mineral resources, with the 
prospect of signing a range of agreements or letters of intent, 
according to Zheng. 
  The CCPIT last year welcomed large groups of business 
personalities who travelled with leaders of their countries on 
trips to China. 
  "This has produced a positive impact on the enhancement of 
mutual understanding and cooperation between Chinese and foreign 
business circles," Zheng said. 
  China and the four Central Asian nations, which are close 
neighbors, with highly complementary economies, enjoy vast 
potential for expanding cooperation, Zheng said. 
  The arrangement for business figures to travel with the 
first 
top Chinese leader on a visit to Central Asia reflects the 
importance China attaches to developing trade and economic 
cooperation with the four nations, he said. 

