Language: <F P=105> Belarusian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Statement of the Belarusian Popular </F>
Front opposition in the Supreme Soviet"] 
  [Text] The Belarusian Popular Front [BNF] opposition in the 
Supreme Soviet has adopted a statement "On the Current Political 
Moment." The statement, in particular, reads: "The so-called 
unification of the monetary systems -- being, in fact, an 
incorporation of Belarus into the monetary system of Russia -- 
is nothing more but an act of disarmament of the Belarusian 
economy and the Belarusian state in the face of the more 
powerful Russian capital and business. Our enterprises and 
banks will be swallowed, our property and national wealth will 
be bought up. The competitiveness of our goods will decrease, 
resulting finally in the stoppage of production. We will become 
an outlet for duty-free passage of Russian gas, oil, and raw 
materials, as well as a place for arms of foreign army and 
nuclear missiles." "The question arises," the statement also 
reads, "why is the nomenklatura government and the Supreme 
Soviet majority supporting the neocolonialist policy of Russian 
orthodox imperial circles and acting against the interests of 
their own state? Because nomenklatura officials are afraid of 
the responsibility for corruption, `grab-what-you-can' 
privatization, the robbery of national property, and the 
destruction of our economy. To avoid this responsibility, they 
are ready to surrender their state. Yet the destructive intents 
of governmental nomenklatura have to be stopped. We should 
prevent the situation, in which our nation is forced to take up 
arms and fight for national freedom and independence, as it is 
done in other countries." The statement underlines that the 
only realistic and legal action in this situation is a mass 
all-Belarusian political rally demanding the recall of Kebich's 
antinational government, the dismissal of the illegitimate 
Supreme Soviet, and the holding of democratic elections. The 
authors of the statement also have an understanding of the 
appeal of the Free Trade Unions and the Strike Committees to 
launch a general political strike. 

