BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Miroslav Hrehor, Czech State Bureau for </F>
Nuclear Safety press spokesman, by Cestmir Klos; place and date 
not given: "Nuclear Experts Held Talks With Austrians"] 
  [Text] Discussions appeared in the daily press on the 
article carried by the Austrian weekly NEWS that commented 
critically on the allegedly top secret report by the Czech State 
Bureau for Nuclear Safety (SUJB) on the execution of the state 
supervision of nuclear safety. At the same time, the 
approximately 30-member Czech-Austrian commission of nuclear 
experts met in Prague. LIDOVE NOVINY learned of this session and 
asked the SUJB press spokesman, Secretariat Director Miroslav 
Hrehor, for information. 
  [Klos] Was the critical atmosphere surrounding the 
aforementioned article the reason for the meeting, and was it 
kept secret? 
  [Hrehor] Neither our report nor our meeting was kept secret. 
According to unofficial sources, President Havel even passed the 
report to [Austrian] President Klestil. The expert meeting was 
called in an ordinary manner on the basis of the bilateral 
treaty of October 1989. The first part of the meeting took 
place in Vienna in March, and the Prague continuation was 
necessitated by numerous joint problems. The article would not 
have been mentioned at the session, were it not that I learned 
about it from you. At the request of the Austrian party, we 
agreed beforehand not to issue any final press statement from 
the session, and therefore it was not necessary to inform about 
the meeting taking place. 
  [Klos] Does it mean that no binding resolution will be 
issued from the meeting? 
  [Hrehor] It is no secret that the Czech and Austrian 
opinions on the use of nuclear energy differ. The objective was 
not to write a protocol on where we agree but rather to explain 
to each other our disparate stands. I can say without 
exaggeration that the talks were useful, accommodating, and 
fruitful. They resulted in numerous recommendations -- the 
Austrian request, for instance, that various working teams be 
formed and some documentation be provided. I do not see any 
reason not to accommodate them, but we cannot promise anything 
until the CEZ [Czech Power Generating Works] Company provides 
its comments. We can initiate such a cooperation with that 
firm, but cannot order them to do it. 
  [Klos] What were the main topics of the talks? 
  [Hrehor] They were the completion of Temelin, the location 
of the storage for the spent fuel, the overall radiation 
situation, the monitoring of radiation on the territory of both 
republics, and the explanation of mutual problems linked to 
nuclear power generation. I consider it necessary to emphasize 
that the experts tried to keep to the technical basis of the 
problems and avoid politicizing the discussion. They succeeded 
here, although the diverse spectrum of opinion of the Austrian 
delegation included radical critics of the use of nuclear power. 

