BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on news conference by Interior Minister Franz </F>
Loeschnak and Russian Interior Minister Viktor Yerin by Robert 
Stoppacher in Vienna on 22 June -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Stoppacher] After the collapse of the Soviet Union, 
crime has risen dramatically in the successor states. Organized 
crime is a particularly serious problem. About 2,000 to 3,000 
gangs specialized in extorting protection money, illegal deals, 
and speculation are now active in Russia. According to the 
Austrian Interior Ministry, money of the so-called Russian mafia 
is also reaching Austria. This problem was also a major issue 
that was discussed during the working visit to Austria by 
Russian Interior Minister Viktor Yerin. 
  Interior Minister Franz Loeschnak and his Russian 
counterpart 
mainly discussed drug trafficking, economic crime, and 
immigration problems. The two officials are resolved to take 
joint action, particularly in the fight against organized crime. 
An intensive exchange of information should help stop criminal 
activities by Russian gangs. The Russian mafia -- a term that 
Loeschnak's opposite number does not like -- is to be stopped. 
Austrian authorities have received information recently that 
enormous sums resulting from Russian crime are being invested in 
Austria through the establishment of various companies that 
specialize in trade and the procurement of goods. 
  Interior Minister Loeschnak spoke of companies that 
obviously 
serve organized crime. 
  [Loeschnak] In addition, there are individual cases of 
companies in Austria and in Russia that have only one or two 
employees and an office with a telephone, but which have a 
turnover of hundreds of millions of schillings. Thus, one must 
ask whether there is something fishy about these companies, and 
whether the money that is being deposited has been earned in 
noncriminal activity. There have been several such cases in the 
past few months. Thus, in the event of dubious deals, we will 
increasingly investigate, with the support of the Russian 
executive bodies and on the basis of the existing banking laws 
in Austria, where the money comes from. 
  [Stoppacher] Russian Interior Minister Viktor Yerin reported 
the following on the structure of organized crime in Russia. 
  [Yerin] The connection between economic and everyday crime 
is 
typical of organized crime. Moreover, these groups are bribing 
public employees. Thus, you can rest assured that we will 
inform you fully on their activities after a full investigation. 
  [Stoppacher] Thus, the Russian mafia, international drug 
trafficking, and the smuggling of refugees is to be fought 
together with the Austrian authorities. Viktor Yerin also 
stressed that nobody needs to be afraid of a wave of emigration 
to Austria, involving millions of Russian, as has repeatedly 
been mentioned by the media. The situation has already 
stabilized to a certain extent in Russia. Numerous Russians 
even want to return to home. 

