BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo by CLARIN </F>
reporter Maria Laura Avignolo at the Imperial Hotel The Regent 
in London on 9 June] 
  [Text] [Avignolo] Why are you travelling abroad so often of 
late to explain the economic program? 
  [Cavallo] Because we consider that direct foreign investment 
in Argentina is of paramount importance. There has been an 
inflow of foreign capital into our country and we want that to 
continue. It is very important that the Argentine companies that 
place shares and bonds on foreign markets have a good reception. 
To this end, one must not only explain the virtues of each 
company in particular but also the country's overall situation. 
Institutions first assess the country where they want to invest 
to measure the level of "risk" involved and then make estimates. 
Only when the country is rated as eligible do they look into 
each company. We have the responsibility of keeping the 
country's foreign credit open not for the government but rather 
for Argentine companies. 
  [Avignolo] The events that took place in Chiapas have cast a 
shadow on Latin American countries; what can you tell those who 
say that a situation similar to that in Chiapas may take place 
in Argentina? 
  [Cavallo] The riots in Santiago del Estero Province occurred 
before Chiapas. The media reported about Chiapas and Santiago 
del Estero as two examples of social upheavals allegedly sparked 
to protest adjustment programs. We said the state of unrest in 
Argentina was to protest local authorities' corrupt practices 
and inefficiency. This was proven in the last elections. The 
federal trustee managed to redress an adverse situation in four 
months and the Justicialist Party won the elections. 
  In Argentina, there may be strikes and protest rallies here 
and there like in any other country in the world, but we do not 
foresee a situation that would lead to an armed uprising similar 
to the one in Chiapas. 
  [Avignolo] If you are not afraid of a possible Chiapas, why 
are you in favor of establishing a security secretariat? 
  [Cavallo] The idea was not to establish a security 
secretariat but rather to divide the Interior Ministry into two 
functions. The first person I heard talk about this idea was 
Interior Minister Carlos Ruckauf, who was the one who presented 
it. Then [President Carlos] Menem wanted to implement it. It was 
not my idea but the president's, based on an initiative by the 
interior minister himself. Hence, all this fuss about my 
proposing it is just a groundless invention. But I think it 
would be quite good to have two ministries--one that would be in 
charge of political relations with provincial governments and 
another one in charge of domestic security. 
  [Avignolo] There are many rumors about the president's poor 
health. Have foreign investors asked you about this? 
  [Cavallo] Nobody has asked me about the president's health. 
In my opinion, he looks very well and healthy and is always in a 
good mood. I do not know where those rumors came from. I have 
read magazines that discussed this issue, but I see him nearly 
every day and he looks absolutely normal. I think that is pure 
invention. 
  [Avignolo] The trade deficit grew 378 percent in the first 
four months of the year. Is this not putting the feasibility of 
your plan in jeopardy? 
  [Cavallo] No, on the contrary. It is a symptom of health. 
The 
deficit in the current account of the balance of payments is due 
to the considerable inflow of capital by those interested in 
investing in our country. This has occurred in the first quarter 
of the year compared with the same period in 1993. A country in 
which there are major investments on account of the inflow of 
capital must of necessity import many capital goods. 
  [Avignolo] Are you not going to take measures in light of 
the 
massive import drive in Argentina? 
  [Cavallo] No, because imports of capital goods are the ones 
that are increasing the most. We want to have a high level of 
investment in our country. 
  [Avignolo] Can the trade deficit affect the parity of 
exchange between the peso and the dollar? 
  [Cavallo] No. The certainty concerning the exchange rate and 
the economy's progress is precisely what fosters the inflow of 
capital and high levels of investment. The fact that we pegged 
the peso to the dollar has been instrumental in creating a 
climate of confidence and as long as it is maintained--and I 
hope it will be for a long, long time--there will be a high 
level of investment. If we attract considerable domestic 
savings, they will be financed with domestic savings. Otherwise, 
as long as investments are financed with foreign savings, there 
will be a trade deficit in Argentine accounts. However, the fact 
that there is a deficit does not necessarily mean it is a 
negative thing. 
  [Avignolo] But hasn't the inflow of foreign capital slowed 
over the last few months? 
  [Cavallo] No, it has increased. Nevertheless, the cost of 
the 
funds may have been higher. The balance of trade deficit is an 
estimate of the inflow of foreign capital. 
  [Avignolo] Is the Argentine Government afraid of taking 
measures against dumping [preceding word in English] as other 
countries do? 
  [Cavallo] No, we do apply them. What happens is that we 
rigorously follow the procedures allowed by GATT. We are 
organizing the system dealing with subsidies and measures 
against dumping in a very efficient way because previous 
administrations just resorted to devaluing the peso or banning 
imports. 
  [Avignolo] Do bankers ask you whether the peso will be 
devalued? 
  [Cavallo] They did not ask me that until last year because 
it 
is clear that markets in Argentina are not expecting any 
devaluation. It is worth comparing the evolution of interest 
rates in pesos in Argentina and in Mexico. While over the last 
few weeks, interest rates in pesos have increased quite sharply 
in Mexico, they have been maintained at a stable level in 
Argentina and neither Chiapas nor the murder of [Institutional 
Revolutionary Party presidential candidate Luis Donaldo] Colosio 
or the drop in U.S. interest rates have had any bearing on them. 
This means that there is no expectation of a devaluation of the 
peso in Argentina as is the case in Mexico. Bankers have become 
aware that Argentina has a very special monetary system. 

