BFN 

  [Text] Facts on 8 June proved the existence of a political 
agreement between the MIR [Movement of the Revolutionary Left] 
and the MNR [Nationalist Revolutionary Movement] in the 
narcolinks [alleged MIR involvement with drug traffickers] 
investigations. The politicians involved later secretly 
confirmed the agreement. The details of this agreement, which is 
beginning to yield results, remain unknown. 
  MIR legislators told HOY about the agreement with the MNR 
for 
the purpose of obtaining a "lenient report" regarding the 
"narcolinks" subject in exchange for support to impeach two 
Supreme Court justices. 
  Two legislators, who asked not to be identified, said they 
were "disappointed" with the development of the investigation 
that, according to them, was supposed to "clearly determine" 
that the MIR leaders charged with being involved with drug 
traffickers were not guilty. 
  Moreover, MBL [Free Bolivia Movement] Deputy Juan del 
Granado 
admitted the existence of "regretful evidence that nonlegal 
matters related to the impeachment process are being used" in 
the "narcolinks" investigations currently under way. 
  The agreement, which was a mere rumor until now, became 
obvious on 8 June when MIR Senators Leopoldo Lopez, Jose Luis 
Carvajal, and Gonzalo Valda reappeared at the impeachment 
sessions despite their announcement that they would not even 
endorse it with their presence. 
  What is more, MIR Deputy Hugo Carvajal announced that his 
party would vote in favor of sentencing the court justices. 
  Moreover, a few hours later, MIR legislators approved the 
education reform bill that had been approved by the Chamber of 
Deputies, after voting against it in previous sessions. 
  According to MIR leaders, the narcolinks subject "was 
handled 
shamefully" through an agreement whose details still are unknown. 
  According to Deputy del Granado, one of the main 
protagonists 
of the investigation, there are clues that lead one to believe 
in the existence of some sort of agreement between the MNR and 
the MIR. 
  Among them, he mentioned the delay in drafting the final 
report, which should have been ready several days ago, but oddly 
enough is constantly postponed. Del Granado said: "This is very 
suspicious." 
  Del Granado said that in addition to this, there is the 
little conviction shown by Senator Gonzalo Valda when he sought 
an injunction preventing the enforcement of Resolution 113-94 
allowing the alternate senators to occupy the seats of those 
senators objected to by [Supreme Court Justices Ernesto] Poppe 
and [Edgar] Oblitas' defense. 
  There is also a numeric issue that would "justify" a MNR-MIR 
agreement. Two-thirds of the Senate's votes--18--are necessary 
to condemn the court justices. Since the governing coalition 
does not have that number of votes, the announcement by Carvajal 
could be feasible. 
  Although the agreement's exact terms have not been leaked, 
sources consulted by HOY said it is allegedly designed on one 
hand to obtain the most lenient report possible on the 
"narcolinks," and the MIR in exchange would give its support to 
the impeachment process, the education reform bill's approval, 
and constitutional reform. 
  When asked about the subject, Condepa [Conscience of the 
Fatherland] leader Carlos Palenque said: "It would be terrible 
for democracy and the political organizations involved." 

