BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Frank Smyth] </F>
  [Text] "The humanitarian situation in Rwanda is grave: 
innocent women and children continue to be killed, thousands of 
wounded are without medical treatment, the country's 
infrastructures continue to be destroyed, a horrific war is 
raging in the hills, in the streets and in innocent people's 
homes," reads a statement signed by prominent African leaders 
including President-elect Nelson Mandela. 
  They sent it to the Organisation of African Unity, the 
United 
Nations Security Council and its secretary general, Butrus 
Butrus-Ghali. 
  But in acknowledging the crimes being predominantly 
committed 
by Rwandan government soldiers and ruling party militiamen, 
Mandela fails to acknowledge South Africa's role in arming them. 
At least 3,000 of Rwanda's soldiers and some militiamen carry 
South African R4 automatic rifles. Rwanda bought them in 1992, 
along with 10,000 hand-grenades, 20,000 rifle grenades, 10,000 
launching grenades, and more than one million rounds of 
ammunition. 
  Rwanda's purchase of arms from South Africa was in violation 
of a 1984 voluntary UN Security Council resolution. By 1977 it 
had already imposed a binding resolution against any arms sales 
to South Africa. 
  But the UN is expected to lift its arms embargo against 
South 
Africa soon. This would give Mandela the chance to demonstrate 
that the new South Africa would not sell arms to countries like 
Rwanda. Instead, Armscor [Armaments Corporation of South Africa] 
executive Andre Buys told Defense News: "We expect that by 
1996 exports will at least 
  When Vaclav Havel became president of Czechoslovakia in 
1989, 
he promised to end armed exports. But last year, after the 
country split into the Czech Republic and Slovakia, both renewed 
exports. Unfortunately, Mandela and the African National 
Congress seem likely to take the same road. 
  "Once the new government is up and running, we will welcome 
a 
complete lifting of all remaining sanctions and embargoes 
against South Africa," ANC spokesman Madala Mthembu told DEFENSE 
NEWS. "We also wish to state the new government will be in full 
compliance with international standards governing exports of 
technologies and materials that would threaten world security." 
  Such standards would preclude arms sales, for example, to 
states like Libya, which is also currently subject to a UN 
embargo. But states like Rwanda before its present crisis would 
still be able legally to buy arms. 
  No one expects Mandela to turn his back on what promises to 
become one of the new South Africa's best earners of foreign 
exchange. But few would expect, either, a man who has devoted 
his life to his country's struggle for justice, equality and 
human rights to turn his back on future victims of other abusive 
regimes now. 
  He wouldn't necessarily need to. Because of the existing US 
embargo, precise figures on South Africa's military exports are 
unknown. But Denel, the state-owned manufacturing consortium 
created out of part of Armscor and its subsidiaries in 1992, has 
assets of $2.9-billion and has made about $175-million in arms 
exports annually so far. Denel accounts for only about 60 
percent of the country's total defence sales. 
  However lethal to its own citizens, Rwanda's purchase of 
$5.9- million worth of grenades, mortars and ammunition from 
Armscor made only a tiny addition to South Africa's balance 
sheet. A leader in almost every weapons grouping, it expects to 
make most of its profit from the sale of expensive, hi-tech 
systems like laser-designated missiles, aircraft electronic 
warfare systems, tactical radios, anti-radiation bombs and 
battlefield mobility systems. 
  South Africa also has a technological edge in landmine 
detection and sweeping equipment that countries like Cambodia, 
especially, need. While South Africa has already begun to 
market this equipment, it announced in March that it would not 
sell landmines at the same time, and stopped exports. 
  Although motivated by appearance before principle, this is a 
welcome sign. 
  But the ANC's present policy isn't good enough. While 
exporting mine-sweeping equipment and hi-tech weapons to earn 
foreign exchange rightfully, the new South Africa should 
re-examine its small-arms export policy. International 
prohibitions against arms sales to abusive regimes are at 
present non-existent or low. 
  Rwanda, long documented for its grisly record, is a case in 
point. Rather than sink to this standard, Mandela should lead 
the world in raising it up. 

