Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement issued by the North side's delegation of the </F>
working-level delegates' contact for the exchange of top-level 
special envoys of the North and South on 21 March -- read by 
announcer] 
  [Text] In connection with the fact that the exchange of 
special envoys is faced with a grave crisis [omjunghan wigi] 
because of the unreasonable maneuvers of the South Korean 
authorities, the North side's delegation of the working-level 
delegates' contact for the exchange of top-level special envoys 
of the North and South issued the following statement: 
  Statement issued by the North side's delegation of the 
working- level delegates contact for the exchange of top-level 
special envoys of the North and South: 
  With the rupture [kyollyol] of the working-level delegates 
contacts which were being held between the North and South, the 
exchange of top-level special envoys is currently faced with a 
very grave crisis. 
  As already known, working-level delegates contacts were held 
on eight occasions between the two sides from May of last year, 
when our side for the first time initiated the exchange of 
top-level special envoys of the North and South, up till the 
present. 
  During the whole process of the working-level delegates 
contact for the exchange of top-level special envoys of the 
North and South, the North and South showed fundamental 
differences in positions. While the North was of the position of 
national independence, peace, reunification, and patriotism, the 
South was of the position of depending on outside forces, war, 
division, and nation-selling. 
  As the party concerned that directly initiated the exchange 
of special envoys, our side from the first exerted all sincerity 
and efforts so that the special envoys of the North and South 
can quickly exchange visits between Pyongyang and Seoul. From 
the level of the special envoys, their duties, to the procedures 
of the exchange, we put forth reasonable proposals, and showed 
the sincerity of holding working-level delegates contacts with 
the South side from a sincere attitude for its early settlement . 
  In the contacts, our side sometimes showed tolerance 
[aryang] 
from a broad-minded position of making concessions to the South 
side regarding the level of the special envoys, and when the 
South side showed a negative attitude in holding dialogue by 
following the outside forces, our side progressed the contacts 
with tolerance by giving necessary explanations and advice to 
the South side from the position of realizing the exchange of 
special envoys in whatever way. 
  Nevertheless, the South side assumed a fundamentally 
contrary 
attitude with us. At first, without any reasonable reason, they 
not only from the beginning rejected even to accept our proposal 
for the exchange of special envoys, but they also dragged this 
issue on for as many as five months and rejected the 
working-level delegates contact itself. Also even after coming 
forth to the contact because of the pressure of the public 
opinion at home and abroad, they repeatedly created artificial 
barriers and obstacles before the contact, thus interrupting 
[panghae] the realization of the exchange of special envoys. 
  While sitting face to face with us--the fellow 
countrymen--to 
hold dialogue, the South side begged to the outside forces for 
the establishment of an international cooperative system and 
asked to put pressure and sanctions against the fellow 
countrymen. Also, they have been assuming a very insidious 
attitude of intentionally aggravating a tense situation, and 
provoking an absurd warmonger's remark to the other side of 
dialogue by saying that they will be ready even for military 
confrontation. 
  The South side even committed reckless acts which threatens 
the other side of dialogue by enforcing various provocative 
military exercises including the Team Spirit nuclear war 
exercise which cannot be compatible with dialogue and the 
exchange of special envoys, and promoting the plan to bring in 
the Patriot missiles. 
  In particular, what cannot be overlooked is the fact that 
the 
South Korean ruling bunch repeatedly carried out insidious 
maneuvers of abusing the working-level delegates contact for the 
exchange of special envoys of the North and South to obstruct 
and put the brakes on the DPRK-U.S. talks. 
  The DPRK-U.S. talks and the exchange of special envoys of 
the 
North and South are originally different issues. The fact that 
the South Korean ruling bunch is abusing the issue of the 
exchange of special envoys to obstruct the DPRK-U.S. talks 
itself is a nation- selling and antinational act. 
  When the South Korean authorities regarded the fellow 
countrymen with hostility, carried out wicked rash acts to plot 
to harm us with the outside forces, and even suspended the 
working-level delegates contact, we did not abandon our will to 
exchange the special envoys but tolerantly urged for dialogue 
and negotiations and dealt with the working-level delegates 
contact with sincerity. 
  Our side's active will and efforts regarding the exchange of 
special envoys was all the more clearly revealed during the 
talks held on five occasions since 3 March, when the 
working-level delegates contact for the exchange of special 
envoys was resumed. 
  As an expression of tolerance and sincerity toward the other 
side of dialogue, our side showed a constructive negotiating 
attitude by making new epoch-making measures and repeatedly 
making proposals for revisions on the issue of discussing 
procedures, so that a situation in which the working-level 
delegates contact, which was resumed after a long time, will not 
be suspended or ruptured again. 
  At the sixth working-level delegates contact, our side took 
a 
broad-minded position regarding the four-point demand which was 
justly proposed to the South side to suspend all large-scale 
nuclear war exercises which oppose the other side of dialogue; 
give up the international cooperation system; cancel the plan to 
bring in Patriot missiles; and cancel the remark that we cannot 
shake hands with the counterpart that possesses nuclear weapons. 
Our side also made a proposal to remove apprehensions to the 
whole nation on the exchange of special envoys by issuing a 
joint communique that the two sides reconfirmed the will for the 
exchange of special envoys and agreed to realize it as soon as 
possible. This is a clear example of our side's active attitude 
in the talks. 
  In reality, our side's such sincere position became an 
epoch- 
making opportunity in untying the knot between the North and 
South at once and in opening a firm prospect for the exchange of 
special envoys. 
  However, even this time the South side not only took an 
attitude of opposing our side's constructive proposal without 
giving any reason [toponokko], but also perpetrated the 
extremely haughty against us at a so-called high-level strategic 
meeting of ministers concerned and of clamoring at the meeting 
about resuming the Team Spirit nuclear war exercise, promoting 
the plan to introduce Patriot missiles and international 
sanctions while babbling outside the contact that the exchange 
of special envoys is a precondition for the third round of the 
DPRK-U.S. talks. 
  Such a sudden [kapchaksuroun] provocative act by the South 
Korean ruling bunch is in fact a declaration of renouncing the 
exchange of special envoys after the declaration of the breakup 
of the working-level delegates contact and a declaration of 
overall confrontation with us. [namjoson tongchibaedului i 
kapchaksuroun tobalhaengwinun sasilsange issoso silmudaepyo 
chopchok pakoe sonon ihu toksagyohwan pogi sonon imyo uriedaehan 
chonmyonjok taegyol sononida.] 
  In this way, at a time when the third round of the DPRK-U.S. 
talks are only five to six days away, the South Korean ruling 
bunches irritated the other side of dialogue and unilaterally 
declared the breakup of the North-South working-level delegates 
contact. Thus, they committed the intolerable criminal act of 
going so far as to deliberately put the brakes on the DPRK-U.S. 
talks. 
  We strongly condemn the South Korean authorities for having 
revealed the dark intent to part [kyolbyol] from us by 
consistently utilizing the exchange of special envoys for 
insidious political purposes and eventually breaking the 
North-South working-level delegates contact. 
  The South Korean authorities should know that they can never 
escape the responsibility for breaking the working-level 
delegates contact for the exchange of special envoys. 
  The developments in South Korea today show that the Kim 
Yong-sam ring, although it is clamoring about a civilian 
government, has deteriorated North-South relations more than the 
previous military dictators and is leading the situation to an 
aspect [kugmuyon] of confrontation and war. 
  There is no other treatment [taejop] for those who clamor 
about a civilian government in words but run wild with knife in 
deeds. Crime is destined to go to those who commit it. There 
will be only the nation's curse and ruin for those who do not 
know how to defend independence, the life of the nation, who 
inspire antagonism and confrontation within the nation by 
following outside forces, and who lead the situation to the 
aspect of war. 
  The people of all strata, youth, and students in South Korea 
will never tolerate the antinational act the South Korean 
authorities took this time in the entire course of North-South 
working-level delegates contact for the exchange of special 
envoys. They should know that there have been no dictators in 
South Korea who could survive committing the antinational act of 
betraying fellow countrymen in collusion with outside forces and 
that these flunkyist, nation-sellers met bitter doom. 
  Our North side's delegation will, in the future, pay 
attention to the South side's chief delegate's remarks that it 
will not hold contact any longer. 
  [Dated] 21 March 1994, Pyongyang 

