CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Stepanka Kucerova: "The Slovak Government Claims </F>
That It Continues To Be Interested in Maintaining the Customs 
Union With the Czech Republic"] 
  [Text] The Government of Slovakia considers the 
customs union to be functional and is interested in maintaining 
it. This was stated yesterday at the extraordinary session of 
the Council of the Customs Union (CCU) by Peter Magvasi, Slovak 
economics minister. 
  At yesterday's session, the results of the work of CCU 
expert 
groups resulted in a proposal for an intergovernmental agreement 
regarding the mutual recognition of the output of testing 
facilities and certificates issued by both countries. This 
information was provided by the chairman of the Council of the 
Customs Union, Vladimir Dlouhy, Czech minister of industry and 
commerce. Experts from another working group yesterday proposed 
the unification of all standards and regulations having to do 
with the responsibility for damage caused by trading a certified 
product and regulations having to do with consumers and 
directives issued by the European Union. Both proposals will be 
subjects of intrastate markup proceedings, and the governments 
of both countries should be approving them by 31 August of this 
year. "I consider the proposal for the treaty to be progress, 
even though it categorizes individual products, certificates for 
which will be issued with various `buts...,'" said Dlouhy. 
  Reservations with regard to the customs union had previously 
already been expressed by B. Schmoegnerova, Slovak economic 
deputy chairperson, according to whom the customs union is 
disadvantageous for Slovakia. She particularly did not agree 
with the current form of payments agreements and with the 
clearing transfer process. On this topic, P. Magvasi said 
yesterday that, in creating this treaty, the possibility for 
some partners to make payments in hard currencies had been 
overlooked. "In the year of experience involving the payments 
agreement, it has turned out that there are a number of 
specifics that require further solution," stated Magvasi. 
Yesterday, two alternatives were presented as supplements to the 
payments agreement. However, as Minister Dlouhy stated, both 
sides failed to agree on which alternative would be selected. In 
the case of so-called sensitive products, both sides yesterday 
agreed that working groups that would be compiling a mechanism 
for identifying listings of such products would not be formed. 
"It is only a short step from this to setting up quotas for 
trade in these products," warned Minister Dlouhy. According to 
him, these problems would be solved on an "ad hoc" basis. 

