Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Anabel Diez and Luis R. Aizpeolea report: "Gonzalez Calls </F>
For Ideas To be Clarified and Wounds Stanched"] 
  [Text] Madrid -- They met, talked, and lunched together. 
What is not yet known is whether they reached agreement and how 
the possible agreement would take shape. Felipe Gonzalez opened 
the 33d PSOE [Spanish Socialist Workers Party] Congress 
yesterday with a conciliatory image. He made his entrance into 
the Madrid Conference Center auditorium -- packed with 4,000 
people, including delegates, guests, observers, and journalists 
-- chatting with Deputy Secretary General Alfonso Guerra, and 
his speech was intended to calm the turbulent party waters. The 
PSOE number one called for unity, clarity of ideas, and the will 
"to stanch wounds," in order to enter a new and difficult stage. 
His speech was followed by 300 news media, represented by 1,000 
professionals. 
  Gonzalez devoted an hour to his declaration of intentions, 
an 
aperitif to the marathon of debates which tomorrow will be 
transformed into ideological and program resolutions and 
political and party organization plans. A relaxed but rather 
cold atmosphere was the keynote of the congress' first few 
hours, as if there had not been long months of discord and 
confrontation. 
  The Socialist leader made clear what he wants: To defend the 
left's own values, but with feasible proposals, geared to 
society and, above all, economically sustainable. "Any hope 
that is not founded on reality is in danger of fading," said 
Gonzalez, who appealed for loyalty and the stanching of wounds. 
He himself set to work by lunching with the deputy secretary 
general -- their first private meeting for eight months. 
  Many delegates were asking in a critical tone why their 
secretary general and the number two did not sit down and talk a 
few days earlier, and when it was learned that the meeting had 
taken place yesterday, relief spread like wildfire through the 
Exhibition Center. There was no agreement but some important 
guidelines for rapprochement, according to prominent Guerraists. 
Guerra's formal response and the ensuing exchange of views took 
place in the early hours of the morning. 
  This meeting and Gonzalez' invitation to the delegates to 
speak freely helped to enliven the rest of the first day. 
Deputy Prime Minister Narcis Serra proposed that the "irregular 
or corrupt" conduct "which has cast shadows over politics in 
general and the Socialists in particular" be "firmly" clamped 
down on in the "new stage" now beginning. Serra, who spoke on 
behalf of the Catalan delegation, urged the party to strive to 
approach society and called for courage to explain unpopular 
measures. 
  Guerraist Jaime Blanco, secretary general in Cantabria, 
deplored the lack of solidarity in the party at difficult 
moments, and cited the Filesa affair in order to state that many 
comrades had dissociated themselves from the Executive 
Committee. In another tone, Madrid chairman Joaquin Leguina 
enumerated the scandals which have tainted the PSOE, and 
concluded: "Let those who do such things pay for it." 
  Before these speeches, Gonzalez addressed the hall as prime 
minister and the Spanish Socialists' leader. His speech 
recalled much of the election program defended by the PSOE nine 
months ago, with the leitmotiv of the framework report prepared 
for this congress and with measures reminiscent of the white 
paper against unemployment of European Commission President 
Jacques Delors. 
  The Socialist leader was scarcely interrupted during his 
speech, which was read, and was free from demagogic tones. He 
sought not applause but consensus and agreement among grassroots 
who have shown with almost 8,000 amendments that "between yellow 
and red they stand at a strong pink," in the words of Madrid 
chairman Joaquin Leguina. Freedom, equality, and solidarity are 
the three elements which Felipe Gonzalez will defend at all 
costs, but reconciling, he said, the left's values with economic 
pragmatism. He also devoted an important section to championing 
the public sector as the driving force of some policies, 
especially in infrastructure projects and the services demanded 
by society. In this section he especially mentioned the aged, 
the underprivileged, and the environment. 
<H5>  Guerra's Applause </H5>
  Alfonso Guerra and the other Executive Committee members 
watched him closely. The deputy secretary general was the one 
who kept up his applause longest at the end of his old friend's 
speech. Moreover, once Gonzalez had taken his seat again and 
since the applause was continuing, Guerra, intent on all the 
details, as in the old days, urged him to stand up again in 
order to acknowledge it. 
  "At this congress we must prove to society that we are an 
open and lively party in constant touch with the public." "We 
must stanch the wounds because, if we reach agreement on how to 
set our house in order, the task which we have of offering 
society a blueprint of optimism and hope will be easier," 
Gonzalez said in his sole reference to party affairs. 
  Earlier, he defended the current policy of cooperation with 
"moderate nationalism," an allusion to CiU [Convergence and 
Union], and in his eagerness to integrate all viewpoints he 
asserted that the Socialists "are not giving up the idea of 
reaching agreements with United Left." Nevertheless, he omitted 
to mention the trade unions. 
<H5>  "Self-Criticism Is Not a Sign of Weakness" </H5>
  Felipe Gonzalez made an ardent parallel call for Socialist 
Party members' unity and for cohesion in Spanish society. And 
he told them both: "Self-criticism is not a sign of weakness." 
These are some of the most significant remarks in his speech: 
  Pragmatism -- "Any hope that is not founded on reality is in 
danger of being thwarted." 
  Renewal -- "There is nothing special about our coming to 
this 
congress talking about renewal, differing, and proclaiming that 
we are and wish to remain a party which makes the left's values 
a reality." 
  House in Order -- "If we reach agreement on how to set our 
house in order, the rest will be attainable. Let society 
perceive the renewal and openness." "We have three days to 
clarify ideas and stanch wounds, uniting wills...in order to 
cleanse and galvanize our morale, and in order to prepare 
ourselves and continue to work seriously for freedom, social 
welfare, and peace." 
  Criticism of People's Party -- "There is an opposition which 
says only `no,' `no,' and `no.'" 
  Praise of CiU -- "There has been no pressure or giving way. 
If this occurred some day, we would not give way in our 
convictions of cohesion and solidarity. The conduct is serious 
and responsible; more so than that of those who cry out against 
it in order to obstruct the government's work." 

