BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Defense Minister Francois Leotard by Jacques </F>
Isnard; place and date not given: "Leotard: `It Is for the 
Next Head of State To Modernize the Nuclear Arsenal'"-- first 
two paragraphs are LE MONDE introduction] 
  [Text] In an interview with LE MONDE, Francois Leotard 
rejects the criticisms made of the proposed 1995-2000 military 
programming law by those who accuse him of having made no 
choices. "It is not a law which pleases everybody nor a simple 
piece of transitional legislation," the defense minister 
retorted, adding: "There are only choices" in this government 
program. 
  It is for the next head of state to choose the new nuclear 
panoply which is to coexist with the strategic submarines, Mr. 
Leotard also said. 
  [Isnard] You have been defense minister for a year. You have 
drawn up a white paper and a military programming law. Your 
opponents say that these two texts are, in reality, cohabitation 
"bastards." What is your response to those who accuse you of 
having made no choices? 
  [Leotard] There are only choices in this programming law, 
from the launch of the new program for a precision weapon fired 
over a long distance (APTGD), to the postponement of the M-5 
nuclear missile! There is the choice of simulation for the 
nuclear sphere, the choice of a new-generation attack submarine, 
the choice of military use of space, the choice of strengthening 
the intelligence service, the choice of greater 
professionalization of the army, and so forth. Those who talk 
of "nonchoices" are in fact criticizing three aspects of 
government policy: that of having failed to make a decision on 
the future of the Albion Plateau; that of having failed to 
decide on any program; and that of having failed to launch new 
programs. 
  On the first point, our fellow citizens will understand that 
it will be for the next head of state to give guidelines on 
whether or not to maintain the second "component" of our nuclear 
deterrent force.[.sup]1[/] This question could clearly not 
be answered in the programming law. 
  A word on the second point: If none of the existing major 
programs has been canceled, it is mainly because I thought the 
priority was to equip the forces and because virtually all the 
equipment programs have reached the production and delivery 
phase. It is also because the maintenance of some programs 
carried out in cooperation struck me as essential to avoid 
killing a European defense system at birth. 
  Finally, the third point is that it is true that only one 
major new program -- that of the ATPGD -- has been included in 
the law. Others will only be included once the vital 
preconditions for their implementation have been established: 
commitment by our European partners; agreement on the military 
specifications; and the availability of industrial structures 
guaranteeing an implementation of the programs at a lesser cost. 
<H5>  `Not Preparing for the Last War' </H5>
  Far from being a simple "transitional program," this bill is 
the result of three major guidelines: giving the Armed Forces 
tools which are in keeping with operational requirements as 
defined by the white paper; maintaining and developing 
cooperation at the European level; not making a "mess of a 
program" by hastily launching ill-defined, badly negotiated, and 
badly organized arms programs, for which the state would not 
have the means of funding in the medium term. I do not see how 
cohabitation could influence the outlook to the year 2010 (the 
period covered by the white paper), the date when the third 
presidential term after 1995 will start. 
  [Isnard] What could be called the "archetype" of the wars 
which threaten French interests? Is it the Gulf war or the war 
in the Balkans? 
  [Leotard] There is probably no archetype. The wars which 
have already taken place will not recur. And, although we 
should learn from them, it strikes me as dangerous to try to 
refer to them too much. It is in this way, by lack of thought 
and imagination, that you prepare for the last war, i.e., the 
one which will not take place, and are helpless when faced with 
the war which does occur. It is perhaps time we avoided 
repeating past mistakes which have cost us so dear. I think 
that this is what the white paper does very well. 
  It takes six scenarios. The first two are: "a regional 
conflict not threatening our vital interests" and "a regional 
conflict which could threaten our vital interests," in which the 
most plausible situations with which we could be faced are 
described. Large and modern forces would be involved. We would 
very probably act within coalitions, as was the case during the 
Gulf war. These two scenarios have served to quantify the 
conventional strength of the three services and to define their 
structures and methods of action. The services and their 
equipment will be established in several stages. The 1995-2000 
programming law which I will shortly submit to parliament will 
be the first of these. 
  The white paper adds four more scenarios to these two: 
First, attack on national territorial integrity outside the 
mainland; second, implementation of bilateral defense 
agreements; third, operations to promote peace and international 
law; fourth, the resurgence of a major threat to West Europe 
which alone justifies the maintenance of adequate and credible 
deterrent forces. 
  [Isnard] You have described the United Nations as a 
"contraption." However, France is delegating to it the maximum 
number of blue helmets. Should our actions not in future be 
prioritized more effectively? 
  [Leotard] I used General de Gaulle's expression to express 
legitimate frustration at some inconsistencies. Everybody has 
been able to observe that the United Nations' involvement in 
peacekeeping operations has changed completely in two or three 
years. First in its scale, because the number of blue helmets 
in the world, which was 5,000 in 1989, peaked at 80,000 in 1993. 
Second, in its form, because peaceful intervention between 
consenting warring sides has been replaced by action closer to a 
war operation, for instance in Somalia and Yugoslavia. 
  It was inevitable that the United Nations, also a victim of 
the inherently cumbersome nature of a humanitarian organization, 
should find it difficult to adapt. Criticisms were justified. 
The French Government made them. I handed a memorandum on this 
subject from Mr. Balladur to Mr. Butrus-Ghali back in the summer 
of 1993. But the United Nations is still the international 
community's framework of law and intervention. It must adapt to 
the new crises it is facing, and France intends to help it do 
that. 
  [Isnard] The impression is that the discussions between NATO 
and the WEU [Western European Union] are becoming bogged down 
with regard to the establishment of the flexible instruments of 
command and conduct of operations, namely the multinational and 
joint army forces groups.[.sup]2[/] Is this a sign of the 
United States' insincerity or proof that a European defense 
identity, which is being discussed so much, is difficult to 
develop? 
  [Leotard] I do not think you can say that they have become 
bogged down. Since January, NATO has been working on the 
implementation of the Partnership for Peace, which was its 
priority. In this sphere, everything went remarkably quickly, 
because 14 countries have adhered to it. And I note that the 
Americans and the Europeans have cooperated in a spirit in 
keeping with the declaration of the 10 January summit. I 
welcome that fact. 
  What we need to do, in fact, is carry out a comparable 
exercise for the multinational and joint Armed Forces groups. 
The work has started in Brussels and I can tell you that it is 
taking place in the same spirit. I have high hopes of seeing it 
succeed in keeping with our wishes. 
  [Isnard] How can we resolve this inconsistency between the 
fact that Western societies do not accept the idea of sacrifice, 
i.e, what the general staffs call the concept of "zero death 
war" at home, and the observation that there are increasingly 
menacing dangers around them? 
  [Leotard] The concept of "zero death war" is ridiculous and 
dangerous. War, when you resort to it or respond to it, is 
still violence. Democratic states still find it difficult to 
respond to this violence. But they must accept the idea of 
sacrifice if they stand by their values. You can only 
effectively defend what you love by risking your life. Winston 
Churchill's remark is still relevant. You think you have the 
choice between shame and war. If you choose shame, you have war. 
  [Isnard] You are accused of introducing a two-speed army. 
On the one hand, a heavy territorial structure and a 
territorial defense which involves a large numbers of men. On 
the other, a "projectable" army of 100,000 operational soldiers 
for overseas actions. How can they be made to coexist? 
  [Leotard] The white paper sets as the objective of the army, 
the creation of "projectable" forces of between 120,000 and 
130,000 men, professional soldiers and conscripts. This figure 
should be compared with the 227,000 soldiers which this army 
will have in the year 2000. Around 100,000 men and women will 
therefore be carrying out other essential tasks, such as 
providing support, training, and instruction; national service 
conscript management; preparing for mobilization; and overseeing 
the functioning of the territorial structure and the central 
general staffs. They will also have the task of carrying out 
the permanent mission of monitoring of territorial security. 
  It is not a two-speed army but an army refocused on its 
operational missions at the cost of a reduction in support and 
territorial structures. We cannot be asked to learn from the 
Gulf war and be criticized for doing so. 
<H5>  European Option </H5>
  [Isnard] Another criticism consists of accusing you of 
manufacturing an army of prototypes. Orders are being reduced 
and delayed or even put on the back burner. Because of a 
failure to choose, a little of everything is being done in 
homeopathic doses, at the risk of having nothing but samples. 
  [Leotard] The programming law has precisely given priority 
to 
the manufacture of equipment and the completion of as many as 
possible ongoing programs, the aim being to breaking with the 
old rationale which you condemn. Priority must be given to 
equipping our forces. The current situation reminds us of that. 
Let us cite the programs which have been maintained: the 
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier; the naval version of the 
Rafale plane; the nuclear attack submarine, whose launch is even 
being brought forward; the Horizon frigate; the Leclerc tank; 
the space programs (Syracuse and Helios). These are by far the 
most numerous. 
  It is true that some will be postponed. The NH-90 
helicopter, for instance, fulfills a real need. That is why 
this program is being maintained. However, its specifications 
were very elaborate because it had been designed in the days of 
the Cold War. It was necessary to go back to the drawing board, 
review it completely, and reduce the costs. A saving of 30 
percent is being targeted. What was to be done. Halt the 
program and hence not respond to a real operational need? That 
would have been inconsistent with my desire to give priority to 
equipping our forces. 
  The first choice is to give priority to manufacture: 75 
percent of funds will be devoted to it in the year 2000. This 
choice imposes a constraint on research and development whose 
relative share is being reduced. This choice results, first, 
from a concern for greater efficiency in the management of 
public funds. I am convinced that we can do as much with a 
little less. Second, it results from my European conviction. 
The gradual building of a European defense industry will make 
it possible to have a greater sharing of knowledge and reduce 
duplication in public research spending. I am banking on 
Europe. However, I made sure that funds for the most basic 
research are being maintained. 
  The second choice is the great selectivity I have shown in 
limiting the number of new programs launched. There will be the 
program for the submarine to replace the current attack 
submarines, the French cruise missile, funds for launching the 
design of the future antiship missile, and the heavy transport 
plane. But these are the only new programs. 
  The third choice is that of industry and, hence, of the 
economy and employment: 600,000 jobs are involved in 
high-technology sectors with strong civilian activity. I have 
reduced the spending on the Armed Forces' infrastructure in 
order to increase the effort toward industry. Competence has 
been maintained and the overall spending plans confirmed. I 
believe that at a time when our industrialists are negotiating 
rapprochements among themselves or with foreign partners and 
when they were thus contributing to the shaping of European 
defense, my responsibility is to give each as much chance as 
possible to enable France to play the role it deserves in this 
sphere. 
  [Isnard] You have called on industrialists to eradicate 
"waste" and to aim at productivity increases of 2 percent per 
year. In so doing, you urged them to reconsider and reduce the 
specifications and performances of their equipment. Can we have 
a "discount" defense system? 
  [Leotard] There are two different and complementary 
approaches. 
  First, the reduction in the specifications of the equipment. 
My concern is twofold. First, to take some programs originally 
designed during the Cold War back to the drawing board so as to 
adapt them to the strategic context described in the white 
paper. The example is the NH-90. The second is to gradually 
change the Defense Ministry's designing methodology to ensure 
that, each time an additional specification is requested, 
questions are asked about its cost before the decision is made. 
This depends on better dialogue among the industrialists and 
the different components of my ministry. In short, it means 
moving toward a more efficient and more responsible ministry. 
  The second complementary approach is that of increases in 
productivity. It consists of asking industrialists to be more 
efficient, to do the same thing at a lower cost. This is doing 
them a service, because it enables them to be more competitive 
and to improve their chances of exports. 
  This is certainly not a "discount" defense, nor does it mean 
equipment inferior to that of others. It is a question of 
asking everybody to be more efficient, to do better with the 
same. You only have to compare our know-how and the performance 
of our equipment. We are still among the best in the world: 
The performance of our nuclear submarines, the success of the 
Rafale program, and the technological advance of the Leclerc 
tank bear witness to this. I think that rigorous management is 
part of my responsibility. We owe the citizens of our country 
this assurance. 
Footnotes 
  1. The strategic missile-launching nuclear submarines form 
the first component. There are two others: the Mirage-IV 
bombers (to be withdrawn from service in 1996) and the Albion 
Plateau missiles in Haute-Provence. 
  2. This is NATO's plan (which France supports) to create 
multinational and joint Armed Forces general staffs, which the 
Americans call CJTF [Combined Joint Task Forces]. 

