Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel by </F>
unidentified correspondent in Ankara; from the "Morning 
Interview" program--live] 
  [Text] [Correspondent] At the moment, the British Foreign 
Secretary Douglas Hurd is in the Turkish capital, Ankara, with 
his German counterpart, Klaus Kinkel. I now welcome the German 
foreign minister. Good morning. 
  [Kinkel] Good morning, Mr. (?Wiese). 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Kinkel, this German-British-Turkish 
grouping seems unusual. How did it come about? 
  [Kinkel] The fact is that Turkey is of great strategic, 
political, and cultural importance for us, particularly after 
the end of the East-West conflict on a bilateral level, but also 
with regard to Europe as a whole. It has a new function as a 
bridge on the frontier between Europe and Asia, between 
Christianity and Islam. It was my idea at the last 
German-British talks that we should attempt, in trilateral talks 
with Britain, to involve Turkey in this role in a stronger 
dialogue with the European countries. This is why we are here 
-- Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary, and I. Why the 
two of us? Why Great Britain and Germany? Because we have 
roughly the same approach with regard to Turkey. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Kinkel, Turkey is regarded as an 
important regional power in relation to the surrounding areas of 
unrest, which I mentioned in my introduction. In connection 
with this, many people follow your talks with Turkish Foreign 
Minister Hikmet Cetin with particular attention. 
  [Kinkel] Well, I have just said that this bridge function -- 
the frontier position of Turkey to Asia and to the Balkans -- is 
extraordinarily important in the region. One must see that 
Turkey already has relatively strong links with Europe and with 
the OECD. It has an association that has not yet been ratified, 
but will be, with the WEU [West European Union]. It is 
associated with the EU and also maintains close cooperation, 
above all, within the CSCE. The CSCE is of considerable 
importance in the areas of change here in this region. 
Therefore, we will discuss, in particular, the situation in 
areas where the Islamic component has gained greater importance 
than it had before due to the changes. 
  [Correspondent] You mentioned Turkey's association with the 
WEU and the EU [European Union]. The Turkish side thinks that 
is not enough. Will the end of this development be formal 
Turkish membership in the WEU and the EU? After all, this is 
what Turkey really wants. 
  [Kinkel] Yes, that is perfectly clear. Naturally, Turkey is 
at the moment not satisfied with its current links with the EU 
and the WEU, because so far it has only associate membership. We 
have -- and I can say this for Great Britain as well as for us 
-- we have always strongly supported Turkey's full membership in 
the European Union. Formal WEU membership is only legally 
possible if one is already an EU member. So, Turkey can only 
have associate membership in the WEU at the moment. Our talks 
are also intended, however, to bring Turkey -- with its 
important function as an important NATO partner -- even closer 
to Europe. 
  [Correspondent] Clearly, once again: Does the German 
Federal Government support full Turkish membership in the EU as 
well as--as a consequence of this--in the WEU? 
  [Kinkel] Certainly we do. It is only a matter of time. We 
are not alone in this wish, but we also do not decide this 
alone. Naturally, Turkey must fulfill certain preconditions. 
These include, for instance, an improvement of the human rights 
situation. This is something that we will, of course, raise here 
as well, something I have always raised with our Turkish friends. 
  [Correspondent] You have given me a clue, Mr. Kinkel. Turkey 
has been seen not exactly as a bastion of human rights. Its 
policy toward the Kurdish minority, in particular, is being 
criticized strongly. What will you tell your Turkish 
counterpart in connection with this? 
  [Kinkel] Douglas Hurd and I will tell our Turkish 
partners--the prime minister and the president, whom we will 
also meet--clearly and unambiguously that Turkey must, of 
course, play its part in this respect. It must solve its 
internal problems. There is the difficult problem of PKK 
[Workers Party of Kurdistan] terrorism. We understand it has to 
be fought, but we point out urgently that this must be done by 
means that are compatible with the rule of law. There are the 
continuing problems with the Christians in the southeast. There 
is the Kurdish problem in general. There are also human rights 
abuses in police custody. My approach has always been and will 
continue to be to remind Turkey from a friendly position to 
respect human rights--from a friendly position--while at the 
same time stating very clearly where the journey will have to 
take us in this respect. 
  [Correspondent] Do you believe the persecution and the fight 
against the PKK is currently not being conducted in a lawful way? 
  [Kinkel] I cannot say anything generally, but there are 
indications again and again that there are problems with this. 
We have our own problems in our country. You know that I have 
always very strongly urged a ban on the PKK in Germany. The 
Turks are grateful for this now. Naturally, we have every 
reason -- after Moelln and Solingen -- to say clearly that we 
too, in our own country, want to and must meet the 
responsibility of ensuring the welfare of the 1.9 million 
Turkish fellow citizens. We also have a specific need to 
explain what is happening in our own country. We must 
acknowledge this clearly. 
  [Correspondent] As a NATO partner, Turkey receives large 
quantities of weapons, not least from Germany. There are 
repeated reports that these weapons are being used by Turkish 
Government troops in their fight against the PKK as well as 
against civilians. How do you ensure that this does not happen? 
  [Kinkel] I cannot ensure this. In all my discussions, 
however -- and I have a very amicable relationship with Mr. 
Cetin, who is a Kurd himself -- I have repeatedly stressed that 
it is wholly unthinkable that weapons coming from us, in 
particular former GDR Army weapons, are used against the Kurds. 
The Turks have assured us that everything is being done to make 
sure this does not happen, but I cannot check every individual 
case. I have to rely on their pledges, but it is something I 
have to constantly remind them about. I will do so again today. 
  [Correspondent] Germany is supporting genocide with the 
weapons it supplies, according to [Remzi] Kartal, the deputy 
chairman of the Democracy Party who is also a member of 
parliament in Ankara. Do you accept this argument? 
  [Kinkel] No. I really do not think one can say that. I 
mean, on the one hand, you have to see that Turkey is a crucial 
pillar of NATO, working closely with us in the overall security 
system. For this reason, it simply has to have these weapons 
deliveries. There is no question about it. With regard to the 
other component -- as I said a moment ago, and I repeat the 
point -- we do everything to urge the Turks to ensure that 
eventualities do not arise that we do not want, that we do not 
tolerate, but that we probably cannot prevent in every 
individual case. In spite of this, I say again that I will 
touch on this point clearly during my talks as well as publicly 
during my news conference. 
  [Correspondent] What do you think in this context about the 
demand made by human rights organizations as well as Alliance 
90/Greens that economic, arms, and intelligence cooperation with 
Turkey be stopped unless the situation in Kurdistan, with the 
fight against the Kurds, changes. 
  [Kinkel] Well, it is fair to say that the situation in 
southeastern Turkey is not good at the moment. Unfortunately, 
it looks as if there are problems above and beyond the 10 
provinces where there is a state of emergency. However, it will 
not be possible, and I do not think it would be right to stop 
cooperation with Turkey in these areas as a whole. 
  I repeat, Turkey is our NATO partner. We have had friendly 
ties with this country for a long, long time, although this 
cannot stop us from clearly telling each other in an amicable 
way what we think of each other and where there has to be 
change. I have to repeat that we ourselves have every reason to 
explain certain things to Turkey in light of recent extreme 
right-wing violence in Germany. You always have to see these 
things calmly and in a balanced way. You can rest assured, 
however, that I, as German foreign minister, have always raised 
the points you mentioned in terms of human rights, and I will 
raise them again today--clearly and plainly. 
  [Correspondent] This also means that the Federal Border 
Guard 
unit GSG-9 will train special Turkish units to fight against the 
Kurds. Can you confirm this? 
  [Kinkel] I cannot confirm that. I do not know the answer to 
that, so I am unable to give a response. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Kinkel, regarding all the issues we have 
just discussed, particularly the question of human rights, are 
you in full agreement with your British counterpart Hurd? Will 
you be pulling in the same direction during your meeting with 
the Turks? 
  [Kinkel] Of course. We have had these trilateral 
consultations prepared by our political directors; that is point 
A. Point B is that we have had the chance to discuss this with 
each other constantly in Brussels and Luxembourg. We see that 
we are pulling in the same direction. Half an hour ago, I spoke 
to Douglas Hurd by telephone to harmonize our approach once 
again, and we also discussed these points. There is not the 
slightest difference in the British and German positions. 
  [Correspondent] One final question. Will you, as demanded by 
Alliance 90/Greens, take up the case of the Kurdish family that 
is alleged to have disappeared in Turkey since they were 
deported from Germany about two weeks ago? 
  [Kinkel] Yes, I shall raise this point. I have a host of 
individual items on my list, as well as points from Amnesty 
International. I have a number of items on my agenda, 
particularly with regard to the persecution of Christians. We 
have to discuss these issues clearly and plainly. There is no 
reason to duck or to avoid anything. I have to repeat, however, 
that the aim of our visit here is, of course, to give Turkey 
credit for the role it has played since the end of the East-West 
conflict, to support it, and to help it move closer to Europe. 
That is the main reason for our talks here, but other issues 
will feature as well. 

