BFN 

  [Text] On 3 March, Deputy Zlotnikova sent a question to 
President Yeltsin and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin regarding the 
location of radioactive waste on Russian territory and, in 
particular, on the intention of the Russian Government to accept 
a proposal by the Hungarian side to store radioactive waste from 
its nuclear power stations on the territory of Orenburg Oblast. 
On 8 April, the State Duma adopted a statement by the Yabloko 
Faction on holding parliamentary hearings on the matter in 
question in the near future. Here is Tamara Vladimirovna 
Zlotnikova, deputy chairwoman of the State Duma Committee on 
Ecology and member of the Yabloko Faction . 
  Zlotnikova: I received an answer to my question 
from the Russian Ministry of Atomic Energy; the answer is 
striking not only in its environmental and economic illiteracy 
but, I would say, also, to a certain extent, in its cynicism. 
They write that the Hungarian waste will not be a significant 
addition to our own radioactive waste. The main aim, then, 
behind the signing of this contract is quite obvious, and it is 
a pity that strategic documents, especially ones that concern 
environmental issues, are not used as bases for making state 
decisions -- that is both the president's message on 
strengthening the Russian state in the area of ecological 
problems and the president's edict on the Russian state strategy 
on protecting the environment, which identifies the guarantee of 
the population's safety from radiation as one of the main 
problems in the realization of the constitutional rights of 
citizens of Russia to a safe environment. 
  The bluntly expressed departmental position of Minatom is 
being used as a basis for making decisions at the state level. 
And the main task of this agreement is the guarantee of a 
stable, long-term hard currency income, which will enable funds 
to be directed into rehabilitating territories [polluted by 
radiation]. Well, this is really a cannibal's point of view. 
First we poison the land and then we spend part of the currency 
we get on rehabilitating the territory. This is immoral as far 
as Russia's inhabitants are concerned. It is not only 
anti-ecological but anti-people. 
  And so, we got the support of the entire Duma. We are 
waiting for an answer from the president and from Viktor 
Stepanovich Chernomyrdin. We would not like to see Russia 
getting such anti- ecological presents from him. Therefore, the 
Yabloko Faction was unanimously supported by all of the Duma. 
No economic difficulties, even Russia's disastrous financial 
situation, can justify the signing of this protocol. It is 
unjustified from the points of view of the economy, politics, 
and the law. It would be immoral to turn Russia into an 
international waste dump. 

