BFN 

<F P=106> [By China editor Cary Huang and Angel Lau] </F>
  [Text] Senior Guangdong officials have called for a 
clampdown on unauthorized fund-raising in an effort to toe the 
line on Beijing's recent reimposition of austerity measures. 
  The move called by Governor Zhu Shenlin and Executive 
Vice-Governor Lu Ruihua was aimed at rectifying the financial 
situation in the booming southern province after increasing 
pressure from the central authorities. 
  In a recent speech, Mr Zhu called on local governments 
across 
the province to launch an investigation into illegal 
fund-raising. 
  The governor also called for a renewed campaign to rectify 
the financial situation in a drive to cool down the overheating 
economy and support Beijing's effort to raise funds for the 
state coffers. 
  Sources said central departments, including the Finance 
Ministry, People's Bank of China, the central bank and the State 
Planning Commission, were upset by Guangdong's failure to 
fulfill the quota imposed by Beijing for treasury bond 
purchasing. 
  Mr Zhu blamed the rampant practices of illegal fund-raising 
by localities and businesses as chief reasons for the failure of 
state bond purchasing in the province. 
  The unauthorized raising of interest rates by local banks 
and 
financial institutes was also another factor that resulted in a 
sluggish market for state bonds, Mr Zhu said. 
  The governor called for a responsible system to be 
introduced 
for state bond issuing, which required local government heads to 
be personally liable for fulfilling their planned quotas. 
  Meanwhile Mr Lu, vice-governor in charge of overall 
economics, called for a renewed campaign to fight illegal 
activities in the financial and banking sector. 
  Mr Lu warned local government and banking officials to 
sincerely implement central policies or face charges if they 
were found to be seriously violating government regulations on 
banking and financial business. 
  The rectification policies, known as the austerity program, 
were initiated by Chinese economic czar Executive Vice-Premier 
Zhu Rongji last June but lifted at a later date. 
  However, Beijing has recently decided to reimpose the 
policies, which include measures to tighten credit, attain 
financial discipline and monetary order. 
  Guangdong, with the largest economy in China, has become the 
chief target of Beijing's clampdown. 
  Meanwhile, a Chinese news agency said Guangdong should keep 
investment in fixed assets to within a growth rate of 40 percent 
this year after rapid increases during the previous two years. 
  "Guangdong is not only the fastest growing place of the 
Chinese economy but also a huge investment province," the China 
News Service said yesterday. 
  However, two years of speedy development in fixed assets 
from 
1992 to 1993 had brought about a so-called "investment expansion 
disease" to the province whose investment in fixed assets 
generally accounted for one-tenth of China's total. 

