Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Program hosted by reporter Imana] </F>
  [Text] The negotiators from the High Council of the 
Republic [HCR] and the Parliament met once again at the Palace 
of the People today. Contrary to yesterday's session, only one 
item was on the agenda for today's meeting: namely, the 
formation of the definitive executive committee of the 
legislative body for transition period. Our reporter, Kabamba 
Kasongo, who was at the Palais du Peuple, is in the studio with 
details on the session: 
  [Kasongo] It is worth correcting that this evening's session 
had three items on the agenda, not just one item. These three 
items are the formation of the executive committee, as you said, 
the presentation of the final report on the political 
consultations, and also the presentation of the information 
gathered from those who participated in the formation of the 
various commissions. Those are the three items on the agenda 
for the session at the Palace of the People. The session began 
at 1715 [1615 GMT] instead of 1500, as previously announced. As 
you know, people always report for meetings late, and one must 
wait until a quorum is reached before opening the deliberations. 
The deliberations are still going on and might continue beyond 
2200. 
  The two officials who led the two delegations to the 
political consultations read out the names of the candidates 
proposed by the two political groups for membership to the 
executive committee. The first head of delegation was Nguz A 
Karl-I-Bond, who took the floor to read out the names of the 
four candidates selected by the Political Forces of the Conclave 
[FPC]. The reading of the names was done in accordance with 
Article 10 of the draft agreement, which says--and I quote--the 
Sacred Union of the Radical Opposition and Allies [USORAL] and 
the FPC will have the same number of members in the executive 
committee of the HCR, transitional parliament, unquote. This 
was confirmed yesterday by Monsignor Monsengwo, who said that 
each side will propose four candidates. 
  The four candidates announced by Nguz A Karl-I-Bond are as 
follows: (Ange Luni Bembe), former speaker of the National 
Assembly, for the post of first deputy chairman--the chairman of 
the HCR, transitional parliament, is still Monsignor Monsengwo 
in accordance with the consensus reached by the two political 
sides--Kabimbi Ngoje for the post of second deputy chairman; 
Professor Nguyi Nduba for the post of first secretary and 
rapporteur; Vangu Mambwene for the post of second secretary and 
rapporteur. This list was welcomed by applause from the entire 
palace without any protest. But the USORAL's list, which was 
presented by Chairman Gizenga, who led the FPC delegations to 
the negotiations, generated lengthy debates that are still going 
on in the hall. 
  [Imana] What were the reasons for the debates? 
  [Kasongo] Before answering your question, I will first give 
the names. Mr. Gizenga, on behalf of the USORAL, read out four 
names: Mr. Joseph Ileo for the post of first deputy chairman, 
Christophe Lutumbula for the post of second deputy chairman, 
Lawyer Chinkinla for the post of first secretary and rapporteur, 
and Valentin Mubaka for that of second secretary and rapporteur. 
Actually, the USORAL simply presented its former executive 
committee, and this is why there was a protest by the Allies, 
who are now gathered within what is known as Rally of the Forces 
for Democratic Change. 
  It was Fredy Mulongo who took the floor to strongly protest 
the composition of the executive committee proposed by the 
USORAL. Mr. Mulungo's protest was caused by the fact that the 
Allies were not contacted when this list was being drawn up. 
Many people also took the floor to intervene and challenge the 
list proposed by the USORAL, and this is why the deliberations 
are still going on right now. 

