CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Senshu University Professor Kimihiro </F>
Masamura by unidentified reporter; place and date not given: 
"Misfortunes of Tight Funding of Welfare Programs"] 
  [Text] [Boxed item: "21st Century Welfare Vision 
Program." This was the title of the report published by 
Minister of Health and Welfare Keigo Ouchi's private advisory 
organ in March. The objective of the report was to propose ways 
to enhance social welfare standards, primarily in the area of 
nursing and childcare. If among the four proposed estimates, the 
one titled "Improvement of Nursing and Enhancement of Efficiency 
of Annuities and Medicine" is selected, the ratio of the social 
security burden representing the costs of annuity premiums and 
medical insurance premiums paid as a percentage of personal 
incomes will rise from an estimated 17.8 percent in fiscal year 
1993 to about 30 percent in fiscal year 2025. If taxation for 
other than social security remains unchanged, the combined tax 
burden on individuals will reach 51 percent.] 
  [ASAHI SHIMBUN] The 21st century welfare vision program, 
which encompasses improvement in the levels of social welfare in 
the areas of nursing for the elderly and childcare, serves as a 
basis for justifying hikes in the consumption tax. Are you 
satisfied with the vision spoken of in this case? 
  [Masamura] I approve of the welfare vision program's 
proposal 
to change the allocation of social welfare funding for annuity, 
medical, and welfare programs from 50-40-10 to 50-30-20. Japan 
lags drastically in its handling of welfare programs. Finally, 
after implementation of the consumption tax, a Gold Plan (a 
10-year strategy to promote the health and welfare of senior 
citizens) was compiled, but the welfare vision program proposes 
a bold enhancement of those objectives. Doing so is only 
logical, but the measures proposed are still wholly inadequate. 
  [ASAHI SHIMBUN] In what ways is the vision inadequate? 
  The welfare vision program does not provide specific 
personnel and facility numbers, but provides for "a minimum of 
some kind of in-home service once daily." That level of service 
will require a family member to dedicate himself to the care of 
the elderly person in question and would make it impossible for 
the elderly person to live by himself with a sense a security. I 
feel that providing nursing care on a fully delegated basis will 
require increasing the number of home helpers provided for in 
the Gold Plan for the end of fiscal year 1999 from 100,000 to 
500,000. 
  [ASAHI SHIMBUN] However, wouldn't that mean a huge fiscal 
burden? 
  [Masamura] Using the 500,000 figure, assuming personnel 
costs 
of 10 million yen per home helper per year, the total cost would 
come to 1 percent of GNP. The question is whether that figure is 
high. Shortchanging a program and making its outlook uncertain 
would be most unfortunate. Moreover if we would increase the 
number of home helpers and case workers, employment 
opportunities would increase near the homes of such specialists. 
Such job opportunities will enhance options for women at a time 
when a lower birth rate is at issue. 
  [ASAHI SHIMBUN] Is it inevitable that the taxpayers' burden 
for taxes and social security premiums will rise as a percentage 
of personal income? 
  [Masamura] The Provisional Council for the Promotion of 
Administrative Reform and Provisional Administrative Research 
Council have consistently stressed that the government will take 
action to ensure that the public's burden will not rise above 50 
percent (compared to an estimate of 38.6 percent for fiscal year 
1993), but there is no basis for such projections. In the past, 
Sweden and the former West Germany attained high economic growth 
rates despite a high level of welfare services coupled with high 
taxation. They were able to establish welfare programs of a 
high, stable standard, but taxation rates totaling 60 percent 
were inevitable. 
  [ASAHI SHIMBUN] Don't you see a potential for uncontrolled 
increases in the tax burden? 
  [Masamura] There is a need to compile an economic reform 
package which includes cost reductions based on administrative 
and fiscal reform. The welfare vision program provides estimates 
of the benefits and costs of social security programs through 
fiscal year 2025, but it should include an estimate of total 
government spending. Previously, the public was unable to grasp 
the total picture of how their lives related to government 
activities, but that has begun to change. It is government's 
responsibility to provide that picture and to maintain a 
dialogue with the public. To speak of a future vision without 
revealing the costs is demagoguery. 
  [ASAHI SHIMBUN] Does this mean specifically that we have no 
choice but to raise the consumption tax rate? 
  [Masamura] Yes. And the issue is not limited to that single 
action. We need to deal with the question of just what is fair 
taxation and deal with an across-the-board tax system reform for 
the first time since the postwar Sharp recommendations on tax 
reform. Direct taxes are subject to a variety of exemptions and 
special provisions and are obscure and confusing. It is said 
that the consumption tax is retrogressive and relatively more 
burdensome for low-income families, but if inheritance taxes and 
taxation of savings are properly administered, they need not be 
retrogressive. The overall debate must also include social 
security taxes. There is not enough time to arrive at 
conclusions before the year end. Tax reductions and provisions 
for additional revenues for the next year should be based on 
temporary revisions, and a working committee composed of 
specialists other than the government Tax Council should be 
organized to conduct a study within a specified time frame. 

