Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Boris Belyakov] </F>
  [Text] Samara March 9 TASS -- A group of Russian officers 
of the Volga Military District's 27th Motorized Infantry 
Division returned from the German town of Wurzburg, the 
headquarters of the 3rd U.S. Infantry Division. The Russian 
officers had discussed with their American colleagues details of 
joint manoeuvres of U.S. and Russian peacekeeping forces 
scheduled for this coming summer. 
  The military exercises will aim to practice coordinated 
actions in zones of possible inter-ethnic conflicts. The 
peacekeepers are to disengage "the warring sides", disarm them, 
organize observance and patrolling. Also planned are operations 
for delivering humanitarian aid, protection of "refugee 
makeshift camps" and some other actions. The peacekeepers will 
be confronted with complicated tasks difficult to practice in 
densely-populated western countries. For this reason, the 
manoeuvres will be carried out near the village of Totskoye in 
the Orenburg region, the place of the 27th Division's location. 
  U.S. soldiers will be carried here by their planes and with 
all their military equipment. General Leonard Holder, commander 
of the 3rd Infantry Division, has already visited the village 
and examined the site of the upcoming military exercises. The 
guests measured the runway at the local air-field and took 
samples of local air fuel, petrol and lubricants to check out 
whether they can be used for filling American vehicles. 
  The U.S. peacekeepers are going to bring about 70 various 
wheel vehicles, including armoured combat vehicles and trucks, 
as well as ammunition and foodstuffs. The Russian side will 
provide engineer support, fuel, partly foodstuffs and bedding. 
  American "blue helmets" also requested help from Russian 
pilots, since they need helicopters for the manoeuvres. 
  Living conditions in the village of Totskoye, situated 
amidst 
bare steppes, can hardly be regarded as easy. The exercises are 
scheduled for the hottest summer month, July. But the 
commanders of the 3rd U.S. Division assert that their soldiers 
are accustomed to any conditions. They participated in the 
operation "Desert Storm" and in the Korean war. And still 
earlier, the division fought the Nazi Germany. It has been 
awarded with 38 orders and medals. 
  The Russian peacekeepers also have much to its credit. The 
27th Guards Motorized Infantry Omsk-Novobug Division named after 
Bogdan Khmelnitsky was formed in 1918. It took part in the 
Finnish war and World War II, storming Berlin. Then it was part 
of the Western Army Group. After withdrawing from Germany in 
1991, it was deployed in Totskoye. Now the division is 
practicing peacekeeping operations. 

