CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ursula Schiele-Trauth: "Fluids Replace </F>
Dangerous Organic Solvents and Break Down Harmful Substances"] 
  [Text] VDI-N, Duesseldorf, 6 May 94 - Nature 
possesses water and carbon dioxide in almost unlimited amounts. 
These natural materials are capable of assuming quite unusual 
properties. In the "supercritical" state, for example, they can 
replace solvents that are harmful to the environment and can 
break down extremely stubborn ecological poisons. Even 
chemically stable harmful substances can be broken down into 
CO[.sub]2[/] and water. 
  When liquids or gases are heated beyond their respective 
"critical temperature" and "critical pressure," they undergo a 
surprising metamorphosis. They lose their typical properties and 
take on entirely different ones. The extraordinary solvent power 
they possess in this supercritical state is extremely 
interesting for the technology field. Dr. Helmut Schmieder of 
the Institute for Hot Chemistry at the Nuclear Research Center 
(KFZ) in Karlsruhe explained: "Water becomes a universal solvent 
for organic compounds under such conditions." With respect to 
their densities, the supercritical media scientists designate as 
"fluids," are similar to liquids, although their molecules move 
as rapidly as gas particles. Fluids, therefore, surpass all 
other liquids or gases in the rate of their solvent processes. 
  The best known such process introduced throughout the world 
is the removal of caffeine by means of supercritical carbon 
dioxide. Professor Helmut Tiltscher at Munich's Technical 
University observes that "problematical solvents like methylene 
dichloride, benzene, and toluene, which had been used 
previously, can now be replaced." Carbon dioxide enjoys the 
greatest advantage as a supercritical extracting agent by virtue 
of the fact that it already achieves the solvent properties of a 
fluid at a temperature of 31C and a pressure of 74 bar. 
  In recent years, these environment-friendly and time-saving 
extractions have undergone rapid development in the United 
States, especially in the food industry, where to a great extent 
the use of halogenated hydrocarbons is forbidden. In this way, 
the fat content of foods sold as dietary aids is reduced. These 
processes are used to remove up to 80% of the cholesterol 
from 
powdered eggs and to derive aromatic substances from herbs. The 
pharmaceutical industry is currently testing a supercritical 
carbon dioxide extraction process to purify vitamin E. The 
process could replace vacuum distillation, which has been 
required to date, but which, with its temperature of 200, 
entails the danger of thermal decomposition. Carbon dioxide is 
nontoxic as a solvent, and it can be easily separated again from 
the dissolved substances after the reaction by means of 
"relaxation." 
  These supercritical processes are being increasingly used to 
separate organic toxins or oils out of sewage and contaminated 
solids. In laboratory tests researchers in the Nuclear Research 
Center have now succeeded in almost completely separating the 
grinding oil from the sludges, which build up during glass 
processing, from the rubbed-off glass powder. "In so doing," 
Schmieder concludes, "nothing more prevents the grinding oil 
from being reused." Previously, almost DM1,000 per ton had to be 
spent to dispose of the sludges in dumps. Similar experiments 
are also underway in Karlsruhe to recover the same oils from 
metal grinding sludges. About 150,000 tons of such sludges 
accumulate yearly in Germany. 
  Reactions in supercritical water offer a new alternative for 
the destruction of highly toxic waste materials. Water only 
reaches the fluid state at a temperature of at least 374C 
and a pressure of 221 bar. It not only becomes a good solvent 
for organic harmful substances, but is also mixes thoroughly 
with the air or oxygen. Under these conditions the substances 
dissolved in the water oxidize, and are therefore destroyed, in 
seconds. Several laboratories in Germany and the United States 
are now studying "supercritical oxidation" as a means of 
disposing of harmful substances. 
  The Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Center has developed a pilot 
plant operation at 500C and a pressure of 250 bar with an 
hourly through-put of 10% watery media. The content of 
harmful 
substances must not exceed 10%. The system requires very 
little 
space. The 15-m-long Karlsruhe tube reactor only has an inner 
diameter of 9 mm. With the words, "unlike incineration, these 
reactions take place in a closed container," Schmieder describes 
a considerable advantage of the process, namely, in that no 
harmful substances can escape. 
  While in the subcritical state in wet oxidation the harmful 
substances are only partially decomposed, in the supercritical 
process up to 98% of stubborn waste materials like 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), explosive materials, and 
chemical agents decompose. The organic skeleton is completely 
oxidized into carbon dioxide and water. No nitrogen oxides are 
formed since the organically bound nitrogen is transformed 
mostly into molecular nitrogen. Sulfur, phosphorus, and halogens 
occur as acids or salts. 
  These anorganic salts are not soluble in the supercritical 
water. They settle on the vascular walls and still constitute 
processing difficulties. "The greatest problem is the massive 
corrosion attack which even nickel-based alloys find difficult 
to resist," Professor Siegfried Leistikow, materials expert at 
the Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Center, elaborated. The 
supercritical media are extremely aggressive, although hope 
exists for a solution through the use of linings made of noble 
metals. 
  But, in so doing, the system becomes more expensive. 
"However, the costs even out since the reactors are so small," 
Tiltscher reckons. Tiltscher sees the best chance for the 
process in special applications like byproducts from the 
production of medicines, chemicals from the varnish and paint 
industry, pesticides. 
  The efforts of the various laboratories and pilot operations 
in the Fraunhofer Institute for Chemical Technology (ICT) in 
Pfinztal are concentrated on the decomposition of halogenated 
hydrocarbons, nitro-and amino aromatics like plastics. Professor 
Michael Modell of Framingham, Massachusetts, believes that 
sewage sludges are an ideal object for supercritical water 
oxidation. Having a solid material component of under 
10%, they 
are just right for this process. Modell is professor emeritus at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, at which the bases 
for the elimination of harmful substances in supercritical water 
were developed. He claims that in laboratory conditions he can 
prevent the caking of salts and therefore prevent corrosion by 
undertaking certain constructive measures. The first commercial 
plants are scheduled for this year. 
  The attempt to clean heavily contaminated soil by means of 
supercritical water is being tackled by Professor Gustav Brunner 
in Hamburg-Harburg. The soil is placed in the system as a fixed 
bed and then irrigated by the fluid. "The supercritical water 
has to handle a dual role in the process," Brunner explains. 
First, it has to rid the soil of as many hydrocarbons as 
possible, and, second, it has to oxidize the contaminants only 
to the point that they become biologically degradable. However, 
Brunner admits that the costs involved in this process of soil 
cleansing are so great that it can only be used in exceptional 
cases. 

