Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Minireactor for All"] </F>
  [Text] At the German boat fair in Hamburg, one Russian 
company was unusually restrained. As a subtenant of a joint 
stand, Roseco retreated to the last row in hall No. 12 and was 
not mentioned in the catalogue at all. For a good reason, as it 
now turns out: Roseco-Atom Co., Ltd from St. Petersburg wants to 
sell discreetly entire nuclear reactors. 
  "Our company," Roseco manager Venyamin Skvirskiy says in his 
office in Sestroretskaya 2 in St. Petersburg, "has permission to 
sell reactors and steam generators for submarines, warships, and 
icebreakers to other countries" -- both plans and entire 
facilities. Russian President Boris Yeltsin himself reportedly 
gave the permission -- the only condition: The use must be 
"peaceful." 
  Russian military officers fear the potential sell-out of 
their most secret drive technologies. Before Skvirskiy's trip 
to the boat fair, the Russian intelligence service told German 
authorities about alleged nuclear smuggling that is controlled 
by Skvirskiy. 
  Customs officers arrested the nuclear manager when he 
arrived 
at Kiel on the Baltic Sea ferry Anna Karenina. They did not 
find any radioactive material -- Skvirksiy was only carrying 
advertising brochures. 
  These brochures, however, were explosive: His offers include 
two reactors for icebreakers with a 70 megawatts capacity for 
$100 million. Big numbers do not frighten Skvirskiy: He 
demands $1 billion for 10 reactor units in relay, which yield 
500 megawatts together. 
  Roseco also has in its program steam generators of the new 
PCVS type -- for $930 million. Skvirskiy does not see any 
safety problems: He praises the reactor's "systems of passive 
safety," which regulates "itself in line with temperature." 
  Thomas Schulz-Jagow, Greenpeace nuclear expert in Hamburg, 
knows about negotiations already initiated between Russians and 
the Philippine Government concerning the delivery of a floating 
reactor unit. The contract has not yet been concluded, because 
the island state lacks foreign currency. 
  Schulz-Jagow says the safety standard of the facilities is 
"disastrous." In the compact reactors, there is hardly any room 
for safety technology. 
<H3>  Federal Office of Criminal Investigations: Trade in 
Missiles Soon </H3>
  In an internal paper, the BKA [Federal Office of Criminal 
Investigations] notes a skyrocketing increase in illegal nuclear 
trade in Germany. In 1993, 241 cases became known, in 1992 
there were only 158. These cases included 118 "fraudulent 
offers" -- cashing in without delivery or offers of 
nonradioactive materials (in 1992 there were 59 cases). 
  Weapons-grade material (plutonium and highly enriched 
uranium) was offered but, according to the BKA, "there is no 
information that confirms that the persons making the offer are 
actually in possession of weapons-grade material." 
  For the future, the BKA fears a drastic increase in nuclear 
material, which could get into the wrong hands in the former 
USSR, "if the existing nuclear weapons are disassembled on the 
basis of the disarmament treaties." 
  The summary of the investigators: "The situation is not 
improving regarding crimes in this field." 

