Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tirana, February 8 (ATA) -- In the recent press 
conference held in Prishtina, Professor Doc. Rexhep Ismajli, 
member of the Presidency of the Democratic League of Kosova 
(DLK), noted among others that the census of the Albanians in 
Macedonia will present serious problems and it will be hindered 
by the Macedonian authorities. These impediments will affect on 
a 30 per cent reduction in the number of Albanians "in this 
Macedonia," he said. We can not comprehend the fact that the 
authorities make the receiving of the citizenship dependent on a 
15 years living in Macedonia when it is well known that in the 
ex-Yugoslavia Federation the citizens could live wherever they 
wanted and they could receive the citizenship of the country 
where they lived, Mr. Ismajli said. In introducing the new legal 
dispositions about the citizenship in Macedonia, the Macedonian 
authorities aim to reduce the number of Albanians in Macedonia 
and to present them as a national minority. 
  Many Albanians from Macedonia live presently in Kosova but 
they were born and lived for over 20 years in Macedonia and they 
have actually their families and real estates there. The 
Macedonian law excludes these citizens from the right to receive 
citizenship and from other rights of the Macedonian state. 
There are many cases when Kosovars married in Macedonia and who 
have created their own families and live there for over 40 years 
can't receive the Macedonian citizenship, "America Voice" Radio 
[Voice of America] said on February 6. 
  But Macedonians living in Macedonia and in other foreign 
countries can easily receive the Macedonian citizenship. About 
30 per cent of the Albanian population in Macedonia do not 
possess passports issued after April 1 of last year because of 
the above problems but this will be the basic condition to 
participate in that census. Even if they accomplish all the 
conditions required for receiving citizenship during the 
administrative procedures they will be unable to secure the new 
passports up to April 1, 1994, the date of the beginning of the 
census. According to estimates, also during this census there 
will be evidenced 30 per cent less Albanians actually living in 
Macedonia despite of the fact that international observers can 
participate in this event. 

