Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the press review] </F>
  [Text] Under the headline "International Legitimacy and 
the Need To End Israeli Disdain," AL-BA'TH writes: The results 
of the Geneva summit between Presidents Hafiz al-Asad and Bill 
Clinton have undoubtedly provided new prospects for the efforts 
to establish a just and comprehensive peace in the region. The 
summit has placed the entire peace process in its correct 
framework and stressed the need to achieve progress on all 
tracks of the peace talks. 
  The paper adds: If things go as they should in the 
Washington talks, scheduled to resume next week, then the just 
and comprehensive peace can certainly be achievable. 
  The paper stresses that after the Geneva summit, Israel not 
only failed to change its rejectionist positions, but also 
fabricated new obstacles to place on the path of the forthcoming 
Washington talks. The paper notes that this confirmed that the 
Tel Aviv government continues to refuse to work in accordance 
with the resolutions of international legitimacy and the 
principle of land for peace to achieve the just and 
comprehensive peace in the region. 
  The paper adds: The world, particularly the United States, 
has acknowledged that separate and partial solutions will not 
bring the kind of peace which the world community is seeking to 
achieve. 
  AL-BA'TH concludes by saying: It is now imperative for the 
world community, represented by the United Nations, to put an 
end to Israeli disdain for the world's security and peace, and, 
consequently, work on rehabilitating this organization, which 
was founded to spread peace and security in the world. We say 
this because Israel is the only party that has not yet 
implemented any of the UN resolutions. 
  On the same subject and under the headline "Hope," 
AL-THAWRAH 
says: The Geneva summit came in response to the call for the 
just and comprehensive peace, which has been a Syrian objective 
since the launch of the Corrective Movement. It is also true 
that the summit marked a major qualitative action that rose to 
the level of the challenges and aspirations of the nation. 
President al-Asad has carried the worries of the nation, 
embodied its hopes, expressed its objectives, and spoken on its 
behalf. 
  The paper stresses the need to concentrate on rescuing the 
peace process from the state of inaction and stumbling and 
moving it to a new phase, based on a driving force drawn from 
President Bill Clinton's statement that his country is 
determined to do all it can to achieve the just and 
comprehensive peace in the region through the implementation of 
the pertinent UN Security Council resolutions and the 
land-for-peace formula. The paper stresses that such a move 
will raise great hopes that the peace process can be placed on 
the track charted in the Madrid conference to bear fruit this 
year. President Hafiz al-Asad hopes this year will be the year 
of genuine peace, the just and comprehensive peace. 
  The paper also notes that progress in the peace process must 
put an end to the various Israeli methods of deception and 
maneuvering and the avoidance of the principles of the just and 
comprehensive peace and the UN resolutions. 
  AL-THAWRAH concludes its editorial by stressing the 
soundness 
of the Syrian view, saying: Has Syria not said at the early 
stages of the peace process that the battle for peace, is just 
like war, and has its requirements, principles, and conditions? 
Has Syria not fought that battle with the skill of the peerless 
leader who took it upon himself to carry the task of defending 
the rights of the entire nation. Who else but leader al-Asad 
can wrest the nation's rights and correct its march in the most 
difficult circumstances and the most complicated positions? 

