BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article; part one of series entitled </F>
"Bureaucrats and the Coalition Government": "The Finance 
Ministry Continues To Push for a High Consumption Tax"] 
  [Text] On 10 May, shortly after Prime Minister Tsutomu 
Hata's minority government came into full operation, a Ministry 
of Finance [MOF] division head called on opposition Liberal 
Democratic Party [LDP] executives, including Secretary General 
Yoshiro Mori, at the LDP headquarters. 
  A senior LDP executive advised: "I fully understand your 
feelings, but you do not have to work out a tax reform plan in a 
hurry until the political situation's future development becomes 
clearer. Just take it easy." 
  Since then, high-ranking MOF officials have been paying 
frequent visits to LDP headquarters. On 27 May, Tadashi Ogawa, 
director general of the Finance Ministry's Tax Bureau, called on 
Chairman Ryutaro Hashimoto, of the LDP Policy Research Council, 
to give him an explanation of the ministry report, "A Technical 
Estimate on Tax Reform," which was submitted to the government's 
Tax Commission on the same day. Hashimoto and Ogawa reportedly 
had the following conversation: "In this report, there are 
several figures that might be criticized as having been 
calculated arbitrarily by the MOF" (Hashimoto). "Thank you for 
your advice, we will think up an appropriate explanation for 
that" (Ogawa). 
<H5>  The Air of Crisis Is Growing at the MOF Because of Political </H5>
Instability 
  "After all, MOF officials are counting on the LDP," said an 
LDP Policy Research Council member, with a smile. However, the 
LDP is not the only party frequented by MOF officials. The 
ministry is also working hard to persuade the Social Democratic 
Party of Japan [SDPJ] and New Party Sakigake that a high 
consumption tax is indispensable. 
  Since the coalition government led by former Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa was formed in August 1993, the MOF has been 
making steady progress in paving the way for a high consumption 
tax, although it was once frustrated in its scheme to introduce 
a 7 percent national welfare tax. However, its scenario was 
suddenly upset by the SDPJ's departure from the ruling 
coalition. The preconditions for tax reform virtually 
disappeared following the formation of a minority government 
plagued with the prospect of an early election. 
  Until now, high-ranking MOF officials have been counting 
heavily on Shinseito, which favors a high consumption tax. "The 
MOF has considerably changed its coercive attitude following the 
turmoil caused by the national welfare tax proposal," a Tax 
Commission member said, commenting on the fact that MOF 
officials are now paying frequent visits to the opposition 
parties. Why are they adopting an omnidirectional approach and 
a low profile? "We are now obliged to listen to every party, 
because any party can come into power depending on how the next 
coalition is formed," a senior MOF Tax Bureau official said. 
  However, bureaucrats are tough by nature. They may change 
their tactics but they never change their strategy. Senior MOF 
Tax Bureau officials are ordering their staffs to lobby openly 
for a tax hike. They are saying: "It does not matter if we look 
like Don Quixote. We must push for a high consumption tax." 
<H5>  MOF Officials Are Also Looking After the Ministry's Interests </H5>
  "Even if we prepare a bill, we do not know if it will pass 
the Diet or not. All our efforts might prove fruitless." Some 
minor officials once made such complaints. Among high-ranking 
officials, there is a sense of growing crisis that the tax hike 
issue might be put on the shelf if the MOF uses passive tactics, 
while income tax cuts alone might be renewed on a long-term 
basis. Should things come to such a pass, the fiscal balance 
would continue to worsen. Behind this sense of mounting crisis 
lies the bureaucrats' eagerness to protect their ministry's 
interests. "If the fiscal balance worsens, MOF officials will 
be embarrassed because their authority over budget drafting will 
be weakened," a senior Ministry of International Trade and 
Industry official said. Be the matter as it may, high-ranking 
officials are determined to push for a high consumption tax no 
matter how severely they are criticized. Their enthusiasm is 
the driving force of the entire ministry. 
  Their firm resolution clearly appears in the ministry's 
report entitled, "A Technical Estimate on Tax Reform," which 
projects Japan's fiscal balance in fiscal year 2000 based on 
consumption tax rates ranging from 7 to 10 percent. The report 
underscores the need for a consumption tax higher than 7 percent 
to cover revenues lost from income tax cuts and to meet the 
growing fiscal demands for social welfare. MOF officials had 
initially planned to include another option that calls for a 
counterbalancing increase of 6 percent in the consumption tax to 
be implemented after two years of income tax cuts. However, 
they dropped this option and decided to directly push for a net 
tax increase. By thrusting a set of figures proving Japan's 
critical fiscal conditions before politicians and the public, 
MOF officials hope to create an atmosphere that a large-scale 
income tax hike is unavoidable. Once the atmosphere is 
produced, they will leave the final decision to the politicians. 
<H5>  MOF Officials Welcome Even Provocative Remarks </H5>
  There is a difference in views between the MOF and the 
government's Tax Commission, which will use the ministry's 
figures when it compiles its final report. For instance, Tax 
Commission Chairman Hiroshi Kato stresses the need for 
administrative reform, which the MOF does not want to include in 
the preconditions for tax reform. However, MOF officials now 
even welcome provocative remarks. "We want Chairman Kato to 
make provocative remarks from time to time, because this will 
help arouse people's concern on the tax hike issue. What we 
fear most is the general public's indifference toward this 
matter," they said. 
  Meanwhile, some members of the ruling coalition's Tax Reform 
Council are proposing to examine the possibility of a 
consumption tax lower than 6 percent, in an effort to gain 
public support in view of the next general elections. In 
response to this proposal, the MOF will present an additional 
version of "A Technical Estimate on Tax Reform," which will give 
a projection of the fiscal balance in 2000 based on consumption 
tax rates ranging from 4 to 6 percent. MOF officials seem to be 
quite certain that the new version will further help prove how 
critical Japan's fiscal conditions are. They hope that it will 
become another strong tool for pushing the view that a high 
consumption tax is inevitable. It is clear that the MOF is 
trying to control the policy-making process, although the wind 
is blowing against it. 

