Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lome 7 Jan (AFP) -- The Gendarmerie in Lome 
announced today that clashes which have occurred in Lome since 
the evening of 5 January between security forces and groups of 
armed men, have resulted in 42 dead, with about 60 suspects 
arrested. The number of people injured has not yet been 
established, the Gendarmerie added. A previous official report 
stated that 40 people had been killed and 35 arrested. 
  According to Togolese authorities, these armed men have 
"come 
from neighboring Ghana" with the aim of killing or capturing the 
head of state, General Gnassingbe Eyadema. 
  From circles close to the presidency, it is asserted that 
these "aggressors" are members of the opposition in exile, and 
have enjoyed the support of the Ghanaian civilian and military 
authorities. These accusations have been denied by the 
government in Accra. 
  According to the Gendarmerie, among the dead are 29 
"terrorists," eight members of the security forces, and five 
civilians, one of them a Brazilian pastor who was on a visit to 
the capital. He was killed in the evening of 5 January while 
driving his vehicle. His identity has not been specified. 
  On the other hand, military sources have reported that 
during 
last night's attack on the border post between Lome and the 
bordering Ghanaian town of Aflao, eight members of the security 
forces had been injured. 
  Reporters -- including an AFP correspondent -- who were able 
to visit the post, noted that although the building had not been 
destroyed it had been riddled with bullet and rocket holes. All 
the windows were smashed and broken water pipes had flooded it 
with water. 
  The area near the police post is littered with casings and 
broken shells. No Ghanaian military forces were to be seen on 
the other side of the border. About 300 meters away from the 
border some civilians apparently were observing the situation. 
  Very close to the border on the Togolese side, some dozens 
of 
soldiers and gendarmes were in position -- some of them on board 
machinegun carriers and others buried in trenches or hidden in 
neighboring houses. 
  At the Gendarmerie camp near downtown Lome, reporters were 
able to meet with seven of those arrested. Among them were 
three young Ghanaians who asserted that they were traders, and 
that they had not in any way taken part in the attacks. 
  The four others, who are Togolese, admitted their 
participation in the attacks, stating that they had "shot into 
the air." Only one of them appeared to be injured -- he had a 
broken lip and a gash on the chin. 
  They stated that they were trained in camps located in 
Ghanaian territory, at Viepe and Gagodope, not far from Aflao. 
They named Kakouvi Massemeh, minister of interior in the first 
Togolese transition government from 1991 to 1992, as their 
"leader." They explained that they had infiltrated themselves 
into the country in plainclothes and unarmed early this week. 
In Lome, shortly before the beginning of the 5 January 
operation, they received their weapons, ammunition, and 
instructions from accomplices: "To catch Eyadema, dead or 
alive." 
  The Gendarmerie also exhibited to newsmen six vehicles, two 
all-purpose vehicles, and four minibuses which, according to the 
authorities, had been used by the "terrorists." All had on 
their wind screens a self-adhesive tag bearing two triangles -- 
red and white -- superposed top to bottom like the Star of David. 
  One of the four-wheel drive vehicles was equipped with a 
canvas made of sown sack cloth and bearing the initials HCR, 
that is, UN High Commission for Refugees. 
  Among the equipment seized were AK-47 rifles, ammunition, 
and 
magazines, anti-tank rocket launchers, fatigues, cutlasses, 
torch lights, and ...charms. Calm prevailed this afternoon in 
the streets of Lome, which is still under heavy security guard. 
  Western embassies have instructed their nationals to remain 
indoors excerpt in case of circumstances beyond their control. 
  The 81 French soldiers, who arrived in the country early 
this 
week to participate in the supervision of the legislative 
elections slated for next month, are stationed at the 
Inter-African Military Academy of Administration, whose 
buildings are close to those of the Presidency. 

