Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, December 30 (CNS) -- The population 
problem in China remains critical this year because of various 
factors and in spite of the fact that the state-level and 
provincial departments concerned as well as individual cities 
had adopted many measures to strengthen family planning. 
  Considerable progress was made in population control across 
the country in 1992 when the national birth rate dropped by 1.44 
per 1,000 with the gross population registering only slight 
growth with 4.96 million fewer babies born than the expected 
increase. Some provinces and autonomous regions had a good 
performance in carrying out family planning. In Shandong 
Province, the planned birth rate rose by 5.3 percent in the 
first five months this year over the same period last year, the 
rate of late marriages by 21.3 percent and late pregnancies by 
25.8 percent. In Shanxi Province, the birth rate dropped by 
0.98 per 1,000 and the natural growth rate of population by 0.69 
per 1,000 in the first half of this year over the same period 
last year. In Yunnan Province, the birth rate was reduced by 
2.24 percent and unplanned children born by 30 percent in the 
first nine months of this year over the same period last year. 
With difficulties becoming serious in the population census in 
the past two years and the survey receiving artificial 
disruptions, an annual population increase of 1.9 million is not 
taken into account in the census. 
  A sample survey conducted by the State Family Planning 
Commission in 16 villages in each of Hebei and Hubei provinces 
last October showed that most of the 32 villages had failed to 
report births and early marriages as well as pregnancies and the 
heavy rate of births constituted serious problems. Birth 
figures reported to the authorities may not necessarily reflect 
the actual situation. The State Family Planning Commission has 
paid much attention to this problem while experts have pointed 
out that population control should be carried out by setting up 
an administrative system in line with the socialist market 
economy. 

