CSO 

    The following list includes terrorism-related video 
reports extracted from FBIS Video Program Summaries from 1 to 7 
April, ordered alphabetically by country. Each entry is prefaced 
by the name of the city where the report originated, followed by 
the FBIS TV Center order number (e.g., BOG 94-001) and the date 
of broadcast. Tapes may be ordered by calling 1-800-822-5115 for 
subscribers in Virginia and 1-800-542-8660 for those outside 
Virginia. Tapes are available for 30 days and are for U.S. 
Government official use only. 
<H5>  Algeria </H5>
  Algiers ALG 94-091 (1 Apr)--Clips of house in Boumerdes 
Province where security forces killed 13 terrorists. 
  Tehran TEH 94-093 (2 Apr)--Foreign newsreel footage on 
police killing extremists. 
  Tehran TEH 94-094 (3 Apr)--Foreign newsreel footage on 
death sentence against two "Muslim activists." 
  Luanda LUA 94-090 (3 Apr)--Report on continuing violence 
(1 min). 
  Algiers ALG 94-096 (6 Apr)--Still photo of assassinated 
party head Abbas Allalou 
<H5>  Algeria/France </H5>
  Paris PAR 94-191 (6 Apr)--Background report on men 
arrested in France on charges of belonging to Armed Islamic 
Group (GIA). 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
Police arrest four men planning to hijack small plane. 
<H5>  France </H5>
  Algiers ALG 94-094 (4 Apr)--Bomb exploded at trade union 
in Corsica. 
<H5>  Israel </H5>
  Paris PAR 94-180 (1 Apr)--Report on Hebron Jewish 
extremists mobilizing. 
  Paris PAR 94-185 (3 Apr)--Report on arrest of "Jewish 
extremist" Marzel. 
  Ankara ANK 94-061 (3 Apr)--Footage of Marzel being taken 
into custody. 
  Tehran TEH 94-097 and Paris PAR 94-191 (6 Apr)--Shots of 
'Afula carbombing aftermath. 
  Tripoli TRI 94-095 (6 Apr)--Report and commentary on 
'Afula attack. 
  Ankara ANK 94-065 (7 Apr)--Footage of injured being 
evacuated from site of carbombing in 'Afula. 
<H5>  Japan </H5>
  Johannesburg JOH 94-092 (1 Apr)--Report on hostages held 
in ASAHI SHIMBUN office (1 min). 
<H5>  Mexico </H5>
  Rio de Janeiro 042300 (4 Apr)--Report on developing "plot" 
in Colosio assassination. 
  Berlin BER 94-123 (5 Apr)--Report on arrests after Colosio 
assassination. 
<H5>  Spain </H5>
  Madrid MAD 94-090 (4 Apr)--ETA kills civil guardsman in 
Bilbao; reactions to killing. 
<H5>  Spain/France </H5>
  Madrid MAD 94-087 (1 Apr)--France arrests Iparretarrak 
member; Spain awaiting ETA members extradited from Uruguay. 
<H5>  Turkey </H5>
  Paris PAR 94-182 and -183, Tehran TEH 94-093, and Madrid 
MAD 94-088 (2 Apr)--Reports on bomb attack in Istanbul bazaar. 
  Ankara ANK 94-060 (2 Apr)--Footage of bomb aftermath, 
injured people being removed (1.5 min). 
  Madrid MAD 94-090 (4 Apr)--Arrival of Spaniards injured by 
Istanbul bomb. 
<H5>  FOREIGN MEDIA NOTES: ALGERIA </H5>
  ALGERIAN ABSTRACTS #5: REPORTING ON ARMED ISLAMIC GROUP 
<H5>  Slain GIA Members Identified </H5>
On 28 February EL WATAN reported that ten members of the Armed 
Islamic Group (GIA) including their leader Si Ahmed Mourad, 
known as El-Afghani, (alias "Seif Ellah" [Sayf Allah] according 
to LIBERTE of 1 March) had been shot down by police forces in 
Bouzareah. According to EL WATAN, other GIA members killed were 
Rachid Djabri, Beraf ta Aissa, Daas and Lounici; the other five 
members killed have not yet been identified. However, LIBERTE of 
28 February reported that the death of Aissa was not yet 
confirmed. 
  EL WATAN reported the following biographical information on 
slain GIA members: Si Ahmed Mourad, a 29-year old Afghani 
veteran living in Kouba had been condemned to death in abstentia 
by the Algier's Special court. Mourad is reportedly the author 
of several assassinations and behind numerous horrible crimes 
attributed to the GIA. He was also responsible for the 
kidnapping of the officers from the French Consulate last 
October which resulted in the death of five GIA members and the 
escape of El-Afghani, Beraf ta Aissa, Rachid Djabri and Guezmir 
Mohamed. Mohamed was later killed by police. 
  Berafta Aissa and Rachid Djabri were thirty-five and 
twenty-nine years old respectively, both residents of Algiers. 
An arrest warrant had been issued for his participation in 
committing several murders and various crimes in the region. 
Daas had reportedly been head of the GIA in the Bouzareah 
region. He too was wanted for several murders in the 
neighborhood. 
<H5>  Reaction to Slaying of GIA Members </H5>
  According to EL WATAN of 28 February the slaying of GIA 
members on 27 February in not only "a brilliant success for the 
forces of order but also a severe blow to the organization and 
structure of the terrorist groups." The slaying of El-Afghani 
and his followers, considered "the bloodiest and the most 
radical of the fundamentalist armed groups within the terrorist 
movement" is viewed as a "decisive turning point" in a three 
year struggle against "terrorism." While historically, according 
to EL WATAN, a new leader generally emerges, the loss for this 
group is believed to be so significant that it is "reasonable to 
think that a considerable slakening and a reduction from these 
blows is expected." The article recognizes that a murderous 
reaction on the part of those remaining in the group cannot be 
downplayed. 
  Given El-Afghani's refusal to support any dialogue between 
the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) and the government, this wing 
of the GIA was considered a "serious barrier to dialogue." Now, 
however, according to EL WATAN, "if the disappearance of 
El-Afghani and his followers does significantly paralyze the 
actions of the group, his dissappearance should logically open 
channels for dialogue." Given the GIA's threats, under the 
leadership of El-Afghani, to kill all Islamists who engaged in 
any kind of negotiations with the Government, EL WATAN asserts 
that his death was probably a priority and a prerequisite for 
any negotiations between the FIS and the government 
  LIBERTE of 28 February interpreted the operation as an 
indication of Algerian President Liamine Zeroual's determination 
to combat violence. "The successful attack demonstrated that the 
authorities not only had the intention of not giving respit to 
the armed groups, but in a pinch had the means to attack 
`terrorism.'" 
  According to LIBERTE, the first consequence of this incident 
for Zeroual is that it will "weigh heavily on government- FIS 
negotiations," given El-Afghani's resistence to dialogue. But, 
on the other hand, LIBERTE predicts that the government will 
clearly enforce its position, pointing out that the government 
can now "flaunt" its steadfastness to eradicate violence and 
perhaps will no longer tolerate dialogue while Algerians engage 
in violence. Finally, according to LIBERTE, the incident could 
mean that the government is simply in the process of "getting 
back on its feet." 
<H5>  New GIA Leadership; Organizational Structure </H5>
  Sayah Attia, according the French language weekly LE FIGARO 
of 9 March, has become the new chief of the GIA, replacing 
Mourad Si Ahmed. According to EL WATAN of 1 March, Attia's 
group is one of three groups operating under the name of Armed 
Islamic Group (GIA) outside of Algiers. Attia is reportedly 
operating in Medea, Ksar El Boukhari and Tissemsilt. He is 
reportedly a "bloodthirsty" individual, with a preference for 
hand-to-hand fighting. Son of an Harki, he has reportedly lead 
a "commando" of armed criminals. The commando is credited with 
having committed more than 200 terrorist acts described as the 
most murderous and savage. He is identified by security 
services as the principal instigator in the assassination of 
twelve Croats last December, killing approximately ten members 
of an official cortege. According to security services he is 
also responsible for an attack on the military barricks in 
Boughezoul in 1993. 
  ALGER REPUBLICAIN of 8 March reported that in 1989 Attia 
returned to Afghanistan through Saudi channels, where he 
remained for three years. He re-entered Algeria clandestinely 
in November 1992. The father of six children, plus a 
fourteen-year-old daughter of his second wife, Attia is 
reportedly responsible for 132 assassinations and 283 acts of 
aggression and vandalism. 
  Khaled Sehili heads the second group, which operates in 
Blida, El-Affroun, Chrea and Boufarik. Sehili is reportedly 
responsible for the slaying of at least 50 police officers and 
nearly 150 acts of sabotage. He is also reportedly responsible 
for an ambush which killed about 12 military personnel last 
September in Chrea. 
  Kada Benchiha heads the third group, which operates in Sidi 
Bel-Abbes. Benchiha is also son of an Harki. Given the 
geographic pecularities of this region, this group is composed 
of about 20 elements who reportedly easily slip through police 
blockades and various police sweeps in the region. Benchiha is 
reportedly responsible for the assassination of two French 
surveyors last September, and for fires wich ravaged ENIE 
[expansion no given] in Sidi Bel-Abbes last August. 

