Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Tatyana Cherkasova under the general heading </F>
"Death in the Russian Skies": "Kemerovo Calling"] 
  [Text] The Novokuznetsk air traffic controllers were the 
first to get worried: At about 0100 hours local time on 23 
March, a plane traveling on the Moscow to Hong Kong route 
stopped responding to radio signals. All attempts to contact 
the crew from the ground or the air proved fruitless. The chain 
of tracking points, Yekaterinburg--Novokuznetsk--Krasnoyarsk, 
showed that the last of these points had received no signals 
from the plane. Weather conditions, by Siberian standards, were 
ideal for the time of year: With a temperature of minus 5, 
visibility was 10-12 km. 
  At 2310 hours Moscow time, an AN-12 plane and an MI-8 
helicopter took off from Mezhdurechensk. After 20 minutes the 
pilots located a burning section of taiga approximately 17 km 
south of the taiga settlement of Mayzas. This is a sector of 
dense, neglected taiga where timber cutting stopped 20-30 years 
ago. A snow cover 1.5-2 meters thick and dense growths of young 
fir, spruce, birch, and willow make the locality virtually 
inaccessible for aircraft landings. 
  Although journalists are strictly prohibited at the disaster 
site before the special commission starts work, our 
Mezhdurechensk colleague Vasiliy Gorbunov managed to get there 
with a rescue party. Here is what he said: 
  "The first impression, as you approach, is a very strong 
smell of kerosene. You look around -- and it's spooky: a heap 
of small debris. It looks like the plane literally broke into 
smithereens. The smallest fragments are scattered over the side 
of the hill in a band 100 meters wide, stretching for 
approximately half a kilometer. The biggest fragment of the 
starboard side which I saw is 3 by 4 meters. Bodies? Nearly 
everything that is left of the people is deeply embedded in the 
snow. You can see arms here, legs there, torsos there. If -- 
God forbid -- the frost deepens, the boys will have to work with 
crowbars to dig the remains out of blocks of ice. In these 
places, the worst thought is this: Why are objects more durable 
than people? Scattered all over the place are beer cans, bags, 
items of clothing, dollars.... I could not tear my eyes away 
from a brightly colored Easter egg: Someone was preparing for 
the holiday." 
  There has been a report that the plane's descent was 
directly 
observed from the ground by the driver of a timber truck who was 
stuck on the Orton to Mayzas road. He was changing a wheel, 
when there was a loud booming noise in the sky. Then he saw a 
plane trailing smoke, trying to maneuver, probably so as to make 
a landing on the hillside. A few minutes later there was an 
explosion.... 
  The prosecutor's office is carefully studying the evidence 
of 
the witness, whose name we have not yet managed to discover. 
That is not surprising: This region of the Kuzbass is 
inhabited mainly by citizens who are serving sentences for 
various kinds of crime. 

