BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Zhu Bao: "Local State Licenses To Clean </F>
Up the Drug Trade"] 
  [Text] The government is introducing local authority 
licenses for all pharmaceutical traders from July in a bid to 
crack down on the black market in fake and shoddy drugs. 
  All producers and dealers must apply to their provincial 
health and pharmaceutical administrations for the new licenses 
by the end of the year, according to the Ministry of Public 
Health. 
  Unlicensed traders will be shut-down and punished starting 
from next year. 
  Hospital laboratories will also need licenses under the new 
system, said the ministry's Pharmaceutical Administrative 
Department. 
  The registration scheme aims to upgrade the country's 
pharmaceutical industry and ensure the safety and effectiveness 
of its products. 
  And it will crackdown on the production and sale of 
substandard drugs, the ministry said. 
  All drug producers will have to pass rigorous hygiene 
standards, which cover staff, facilities, raw materials and 
packaging. 
  And their production processes will be fully inspected. 
  Drug businesses which fail to meet the stipulations of the 
State Pharmaceutical Law will be required to come up to standard 
by a set deadline or face being shutdown. 
  Traders which pass the inspection will be given a licence by 
the end of this year. 
  Both the Ministry of Public Health and the State 
Pharmaceutical Administration have stepped up preparations for 
applications and inspections. 
  And improved controls over the medicine industry will help 
China's pharmaceutical sector come up to advanced international 
standards, said Qi Mojia, Director of the State Pharmaceutical 
Administration. 
  More international drug-production standards and techniques 
will be introduced, he said. 
  And regular quality-control inspections will encourage 
medicine makers to improve their manufcturing methods, he said. 
  Quality has improved over the past year, Qi said. 
  And government standards have become more rigorous. 
  The ministry has revised the "national standard for 
medicinal 
product quality" promulgated in 1988, bringing it into line with 
World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines. 
  The new standard obliges pharmaceutical producers to improve 
quality control and report any patient side-effects to the local 
health authorities. 
  Over 95 percent of pharmaceutical plants surveyed reached 
State standards last year. 
  Medicine exports came to moe than $1.4 billion last year, an 
increase of 10 percent over 1992. 
  But an illegal medicine market still exists in the country, 
Qi said. 
  Profiteers continue to produce and sell fake and substandard 
medicines. 

