Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ashraf al-Faqiyy: "Al-Surani Tells AL-HAYAH: </F>
Resumption of Negotiations Would Lead to PLO's Liquidation"] 
  [Text] Cairo -- An authoritative Egyptian diplomatic source 
yesterday described Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin's 
decision declaring the "Kahana Hay" and "Kakh" to be terrorist 
movements as "a step in the right direction but not sufficient 
to provide full protection for the Palestinian people in the 
occupied territories." 
  In a statement to AL-HAYAH the source urged the Israeli 
Government to protect the Palestinians and comply with the 
fourth Geneva convention concerning civilians living under 
occupation. The source also stressed "the need to resume the 
peace talks as soon as possible." 
  Meanwhile, PLO Executive Committee member Jamal al-Surani 
has 
attacked Israel, saying that "Rabin's decision concerning Kakh 
and Kahana Hay is no more than the first letter in the 
alphabet." He said that the "real terrorism is the one 
practiced by the Israeli Government itself through the 
continuation of settlement building in the occupied Palestinian 
territories and the racial discrimination policy." 
  In a statement to AL-HAYAH he said that Kakh and Kahana 
leaders do not differ much from Begin, Yitzhaq Shamir, Ariel 
Sharon, and Rabin himself. He described them all as "hostile 
settlers and colonialists prompted by their love for 
expansionism." He said that "the Zionist tree is a harmful tree 
that consumes oxygen and releases carbon [dioxide]." 
  Al-Surani pointed out that there are "no justifications for 
so-called peace negotiations. They are merely a waste of time." 
He said: "About 30 months have elapsed since the Madrid 
conference and still nothing has been achieved, and 30 years 
will be spent in vicious circles." 
  He added that "Israel's persistence in building settlements 
and Judaizing Jerusalem is the result of the continued U.S. 
support. The United States is an adversary and a judge at the 
same time. The Palestinians' resumption of these talks would 
lead to the liquidation of the PLO, the sole legitimate 
representative of the Palestinian people." 
  Al-Surani attacked the foundation on which the Madrid 
conference was launched, "because it overlooked Jerusalem, the 
refugees, and the settlements, and there is now nothing over 
which to negotiate." 
  Meanwhile, Palestinian ambassador in Cairo Sa'id Kamal has 
stressed that the PLO will not resume the talks with Israel 
before the Security Council adopts a resolution condemning [the 
Hebron massacre] and before guarantees are offered as regards 
providing full protection for the Palestinian people. 

