Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Chong Pong-kil: "The Justifiable Struggle"] </F>
  [Text] According to Seoul radio, some 30,000 farmers, 
youth, and students held a rally at Taehang-no, Seoul on 1 
February opposing the puppet Kim Yong-sam clique's agricultural 
market opening, a treachery to the country and the nation. The 
farmers rally organized by nine farmers associations, including 
the National Federation of Farmers Associations, alias Chonnong, 
started at 1300 [0400 GMT] and lasted until 1530, giving a 
vigorous kick to repressions. With furious indignation, the 
participants of the rally berated and convicted the antinational 
act of the puppet Kim Yong-sam regime that sold markets of rice 
and other farm products to the United States. 
  After the rally, the participants staged a demonstration, 
exclaiming that they oppose importing farm products. The 
demonstrators rushed out to Tapkol Park and approached the U.S. 
Embassy in Sejong-no. Embarrassed with this, the civilian 
regime mobilized some 130-company riot police troops, and they 
frantically oppressed the demonstrators by firing tear gas at 
them in succession, just following the means that the military 
fascist dictators of the Fifth and Sixth Republics had used. 
  This enraged the demonstrators, who burned out five police 
vehicles while crying out anti-U.S. and antigovernment slogans. 
Some 500 students proceeded toward Chongwadae [presidential 
residence], dazzling the puppets. Youth and students disarmed 
about 100 riot police and set fire to their repressive 
equipment. The demonstration was held in downtown Seoul until 
2200. 
  At the same time, some 200 farmers from the North Cholla 
Provincial Branch of Chonnong demonstrated on the Seoul-Pusan 
expressway on their way to the rally site in Seoul to join the 
struggle. The struggle of South Korean farmers, youth, and 
students is an explosion of their indignation at the puppet Kim 
Yong-sam clique, which makes it its business to sell the country 
and the nation, and it is extremely justifiable. 
  As everyone knows, if the rice market is opened in South 
Korea, foreign rice will be rushed in there, stand unchallenged, 
and bring a great damage to the six million South Korean farmers 
and the South Korean agriculture, above all. South Korean rice, 
whose production cost is as much as five times higher than that 
of U.S. rice, will naturally be pushed out in the competition 
with U.S. rice. This will strike a deadly blow to farmers' 
livelihood, diminish their desire to produce rice, and result in 
a large-scale rural exodus. 
  The South Korean publications write: The rice market opening 
will destruct agriculture, whose food producing function will be 
paralyzed. At least two or three million farmers will give up 
farming, and this will accelerate the devastation of rural areas. 
  The rice market opening will also exert serious influence 
upon agriculture-related sectors -- such as fertilizer, farming 
machinery, and farming materials production -- and result in 
unemployment and bankruptcy. Housing and employment problems 
will be increased in urban areas and working people's social and 
economic status will be seriously aggravated. 
  When the so-called special tax for farming and fishing 
villages, which the puppet Kim Yong-sam clique is trying to 
enforce under the pretext of preventing farmers from suffering 
damages, is added to this, people will stand sufferings beyond 
description. 
  Facts show that the puppet Kim Yong-sam clique's rice market 
opening maneuver is an intolerable, big criminal act that 
gravely threatens the survival of not only millions of South 
Korean farmers but also thousands of South Korean people and 
reduces them to slaves of foreign rice and foreign monopolistic 
capitals. 
  Under this situation, how on earth can the South Korean 
people restrain themselves from struggling against the puppet 
Kim Yong-sam clique that is trying to cut off their lifeline. 
  Nevertheless, the puppet Kim Yong-sam clique is frantically 
oppressing people involved in the farmers rally, like an act of 
a thief raising a hue and cry. On 2 February, traitor Kim 
Yong-sam told his petty men that violence cannot be allowed, 
that leading members of the rally must be thoroughly 
investigated, and the like. 
  According to the puppet traitor's oppressive order, the 
puppet police, prosecution, and other fascist oppressive groups 
are making a stir of investigating demonstrators and farmers 
associations. This is, however, nothing but a desperate effort 
of those who have no future. Fascist oppression can never 
control the people's struggling spirit, and it only excites the 
people's antigovernment struggle all the more. The struggle 
against the rice market opening is actually being expanded, and 
people from various classes and strata are joining it. This is 
because the South Korean people are aware of the fact that the 
popular masses should unite for the struggle against the fascist 
oppression and that only such a struggle can deter and destruct 
the rascals' rice market opening maneuver and can overthrow 
[tado] the country and nation-selling group. 
  It is no accident that the opposition Democratic Party 
leader 
appealed to politicians and the popular masses to actively 
cooperate in struggling against the agricultural market opening. 
  The South Korean people will finally overthrow the country 
and nation-selling Kim Yong-sam group by launching into a more 
cooperative and active struggle. The Kim Yong-sam group must 
look straight at the development of situation, act discreetly, 
and had better retire from power before being given a stern 
trial by the people. 

