Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Douglas Wade, "recently" in Lhasa] </F>
  [Text] As the numbers of Chinese settling in the "Tibet 
Autonomous Region" increase, reports are filtering through of 
growing unrest in rural areas. For the first time, there is 
clear evidence the Chinese Government is actively encouraging 
agricultural workers from China to settle in rural sites 
specially prepared in Tibet. 
  Chinese peasants are being attracted by loan guarantees, 
less 
stringent application of the one child policy and promises of 
land. At the same time, Chinese mining operations in remote 
regions of Tibet are being stepped up, helped by investments in 
infrastructure, principally road building, costing some 800 
million yuan (about HK$710 million [Hong Kong dollars]), 
according to XINHUA (the New China News Agency). 
  This has sparked numerous protests by Tibetan farming 
communities, expressing their resentment at what they see as 
Chinese appropriation of Tibetan timber minerals and land. 
However, it now appears that the scale of the Chinese 
population transfers -- which entail preparations for tens of 
thousands of settlers -- is resulting in ever bolder and more 
widespread opposition. 
  The largest rural settlement programme documented is that 
now 
underway in the Lhasa valley, where a United Nations scheme 
intended to enhance the fertility of the valley will reportedly 
result in some 130,000 Chinese peasants taking up residence. 
Tibetan villagers in the Lhasa valley have reported receiving 
official notification that they will be required to vacate their 
houses to accommodate Chinese settlers. The farmers claimed 
that at a village meeting they were also informed they would 
have to "give up surplus land", in response to which, although 
they did not dare openly criticise the principle of Chinese 
settlement, several villagers complained field quotas were 
already too low. 
  Reports of similar events elsewhere in Tibet indicate that 
local farmers are often heavily in debt to the authorities as a 
result of various taxes, and sometimes due to contracts for 
chemical fertilisers which they have been encouraged to sign. 
  One farmer from Dampa expressed his sense of grievance over 
the loss of his land in a written statement that was smuggled 
out of Tibet: "I have been ordered to pay 1,000 yuan per mu (a 
unit of land) as tax. I have two mu and I was forced to pay 
2,000 yuan per year. The sky belongs to the communists and the 
earth belongs to the communists. If we fail to pay the tax, the 
leaders seize the land from the masses and give it to the 
Chinese in order to please them. Lots of people tried their 
utmost to hold on to their farm lands but ultimately it was 
taken from them against their will." 
  The transfer programme has in other cases led to more 
forthright expressions of anger. Over recent months there have 
been numerous accounts of village meetings being disrupted, with 
pro-independence poster and leaflet campaigns in areas thought 
to have been politically cowed since the suppression of the 1959 
uprising, and even of the organised sabotage of infrastructure, 
such as road construction and telecommunications. 
  Rural demonstrations, unlike the urban protest marches, have 
apparently shown little fear of authority. In one case last 
September, farmers from Sungling in the southern province of 
Lokha operated road blocks on the main road in their area for 
two days and distributed leaflets and posters calling for 
Tibetan independence. When the local administration sent two 
cadres to investigate, they spent the day beside the road 
without food, while the demonstrators spat on them and called 
them names. The demonstration was broken up only when armed 
police arrived. 
  In Kyimshi, also in the Lokha region, it appears Tibetan 
farmers protesting at the purging of Tibetan officials known to 
oppose the population transfer programme took control of their 
region for a full month before 1,700 troops quelled the 
rebellion. In an appeal to the UN smuggled over the border to 
India, the Kyimshi villagers asserted that during the protest 
more than 700 demonstrators united to expel Chinese cadres from 
their region, liberate Tibetan prisoners and shout slogans 
calling for independence and an end to the population transfer 
programme. 
  Concluding their appeal, the villagers expressed concern 
over 
the fate of 35 named men and women currently detained in Gutsa 
Prison in Lhasa. The appeal concluded: "The village has been 
surrounded, with each home guarded by three soldiers. On the 
hill to the south of the village they have set up machine-gun 
posts. At present, people in this village are in a state of 
turmoil, living under tension and terror. All the people of the 
village participated in this demonstration, and as a result our 
brothers and sisters are now undergoing severe treatment, 
imprisonment and torture. We Tibetans have no human rights and 
are facing great risk of extermination. We ask for urgent 
action to be taken by the United Nations." 
  Similar, but smaller, events have resulted in numerous 
arrests elsewhere. Sentences of up to 15 years imprisonment 
have been handed down to demonstrators on charges of "spreading 
propaganda regarding counter-revolution". Asia Watch and 
Amnesty International have documentation of 75 named men and 
women imprisoned as a result of non-violent demonstrations in 
rural regions of Tibet over the last year, although the actual 
figure is undoubtedly much higher. There is also well-documented 
evidence of the routine torture and beatings of these prisoners. 
  Ultimately, the causes of this wave of rural unrest are the 
same as those that sparked off the major demonstrations in Lhasa 
last year. As the population in Tibet swells due to the influx 
of Chinese settlers, prices of food and essential goods rise. 
Tibetans who are losing out in the increased competition for 
education, jobs and land rights are thus faced with destitution. 
However, the Chinese Government continues to encourage 
migration in the apparent hope it will settle their problems 
there once and for all. 
  On July 21, 1993, Jiang Zemin was quoted by Xinhua as 
praising "individuals who have left their homes in coastal and 
other regions to contribute to Tibet's economic and social 
development". In August, the new deputy secretary of the 
Tibetan Communist Party, Chen Kuiyuan, said: "We should open 
our job market to all our fellow countrymen to participate in 
the economic opening." 
  Meanwhile, the Tibetan government in exile, headed by the 
Dalai Lama, fears it will soon be faced with a situation in 
which even if there is a plebiscite over Tibetan independence, 
the on-going influx of Chinese settlers may put the outcome in 
doubt. 
  As one of the ministers of the exiled Tibetan government, 
Kalon Tashi Wangdi, said: "China hopes to drown Tibetans in a 
sea of Chinese." 

