Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] LA PRENSA contacted Malvinas Islands residents 
yesterday to sound islanders out about the climate in Puerto 
Argentino [Stanley Port] after learning the news about the deal 
finalized by Argentina [with the United States] on the purchase 
of [Skyhawk aircraft fitted with] state-of-the-art radar. A 
Kelper told LA PRENSA that "we do not understand the rationale 
behind Argentina's decision to buy the Skyhawk planes -- unless 
it is seeking to attack the islands." 
  Another islander, who is very close to the islands' 
government, added that "we do not trust Argentina, and even 
though it is terrible for us, we are not afraid because here we 
have the Royal Air Force to defend us." 
  The Malvinas Islands' representative in London, Suky 
Cameron, 
reported that the islands' government -- through the United 
Kingdom -- had lodged a strong protest before the Clinton 
administration about the sale of the U.S. Skyhawk aircraft. 
  Argentine Deputy Foreign Minister Fernando Petrella told LA 
PRENSA that "Cameron's remarks have caused a great 
disappointment in the Argentine Foreign Ministry, because it 
seems that she has not taken note of the fact that Argentina 
will continue to press its claim to sovereignty over the 
Malvinas by diplomatic and peaceful means, as it has every right 
to do." 
<H5>  "It Reached Clinton's Ears" </H5>
  For his part, Defense Minister Oscar Camilion has disclosed 
that the dispute arising from Great Britain's opposition to that 
business transaction "even came to President Bill Clinton's" 
knowledge. 
  As the defense minister pointed out: "It is my considered 
opinion that the stance taken by the British is totally 
groundless and anachronistic. If this were not so, we would not 
have this favorable outcome now." 
  Camilion further stated that it was not possible that while 
Argentina was aligned with the UN Security Council, two of its 
leading members -- the United Kingdom and the United States -- 
"should be enforcing an arms embargo against Argentina." 
  He also said that "this is why this means that the arms 
embargo on Argentina has been raised by all the countries in the 
world except for Britain, until it decides to the contrary." 
  He likewise denied that Argentina was interested in buying 
F-16 fighter planes, noting that "our budget possibilities would 
never allow it; it would be impossible to find someone willing 
to sell them, and it would logically cause a regional imbalance." 
  In its 1 February edition, the FINANCIAL TIMES reports that 
the sale of the U.S. planes to Argentina represents "a severe 
blow" for the UK Government led by Prime Minister [John] Major 
and its relations with the United States. 

