BFN 

  [Excerpts] His Excellency President Hafiz al-Asad yesterday 
received Turkish Interior Minister Nahit Mentese and his 
accompanying delegation. The meeting was attended by Interior 
Minister Dr. Muhammad Harbah and the Turkish ambassador in 
Damascus. [passage omitted] 
  Official talks between the Syrian Arab side headed by 
Interior Minister Dr. Muhammad Harbah and the Turkish side 
headed by Turkish Interior Minister Nahit Mentese were concluded 
at the Ministry of Interior yesterday afternoon in the presence 
of members of both delegations and the Turkish ambassador in 
Damascus. 
  Dr. Harbah delivered a speech, saying that Turkish Interior 
Minister Nahit Mentese asserted during the talks that Turkey 
recognizes that Syria and Iraq have rights to the Euphrates 
waters. He explained to Mentese and the delegation accompanying 
him Syria's views on the issue. He said that it is in nobody's 
interest to delay an agreement on water sharing among Turkey, 
Syria, and Iraq so that future generations may not be left with 
a disconcerting problem, and so that Syria and Turkey may launch 
joint projects in the areas of water, electricity, and other 
economic areas, something which might have a positive effect on 
the two neighborly and friendly countries and states. 
  Then, Turkish Interior Minister Mentese delivered a speech, 
saying: In all frankness, I would like to reiterate that there 
is no cause for concern regarding views that have been expressed 
in this regard. Today, I have been honored by the three-hour 
meeting I held with His Excellency President Hafiz al-Asad. I 
have gained experience from his excellent ideas. I am fully 
confident that bilateral contacts will shortly be held at the 
highest levels to achieve the best possible results in the 
fields of security, economy, and trade. 
  Mentese added: I would like to reiterate again that the 
bilateral economic, cultural, and social ties have begun to show 
signs of success; and this is in the interest of the two 
countries and peoples. We will make adequate efforts to 
implement the projects previously agreed on. 
  Mentese went on to say: Dr. Muhammad Harbah announced that 
Syria is eager to safeguard Turkey's security and stability just 
as it is eager to safeguard its own security and stability. 
Moreover, our views are identical on how the drug combating 
agreement signed by the two countries in 1966 can be promoted to 
render it one that meets the requirements of today's world. 
  At the end of the talks, a press statement was issued, 
explaining that the bilateral talks were permeated by a climate 
of amity and cordiality. [passage omitted] 

