Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jana Dorotkova: "Power Supply Cut Threatens </F>
Slovak Firms"] 
  [Text] Bratislava--Slovakia's many lumbering factories may 
be pushed to the brink of death by the state-owned electricity 
monopoly's decision to slash production 10 percent as of Dec. 1. 
  Slovensky energeticky podnik (SEP), citing many state 
enterprises' unhealthy dependence on free electricity, passed 
the cut on to the three regional distribution monopolies (one 
each in western, central and eastern Slovakia) who will now have 
to decide which insolvent factories to pull the plugs on. 
  "We have become the biggest and cheapest bank in the 
country," said SEP finance director Jaroslav Lehota. "Everybody 
owes us money." 
  SEP general manager Rudolf Kvetan said the move would not 
plunge Slovakia into a crisis. "It doesn't mean a complete 
blackout," he said, announcing the cuts in late November. "This 
is just a warning." 
  SEP made a similar warning in July, when exasperated 
directors complained of having their hands tied by the 
government in efforts to solve their nearly 3.5 billion Sk debt. 
"Our coffers are empty, and we have to take steps to break this 
vicious cycle," an SEP official said at the time. 
  Government representative Ivan Vlachovsky, who was 
commissioned to tackle the energy crisis, preached patience. 
  "For more than 40 years we were not encouraged to have 
independent economic thinking. Now solidarity and togetherness 
are required for us to navigate the Slovak economy into peaceful 
waters," Vlachovsky said in July. 
  So SEP and the three distributors let things go until 
November, when SEP's steam plants, which produce more than 30 
percent of the country's electricity, found themselves burning 
up their last coal reserves. Tired of waiting for cash, 
Ukrainian coal suppliers finally cut off SEP's deliveries, 
Lehota explained. 
  The Vojany power plant in eastern Slovakia has about 120,000 
tons of coal left. According to SEP spokesman Juraj Sidor, 
Vojany burns 5.5 tons a day. Vojany director Jan Kudlovsky said 
his reserves would last three more weeks. "The situation is not 
critical, but it is very serious," he said. 
  Of the three distributors, the most troubled is 
Stredoslovenske energetickezavody (SSE) in Zilina, central 
Slovakia. Communist planners stuffed this hilly region with arms 
factories and other heavy industry that has been hard pressed to 
survive the last four years of economic transformation, 
Prague-ordered weapons production cuts, and the world recession. 
Now, most of the factories lay in the polluted green valleys 
like dead ugly monsters, working at half or quarter capacity 
only because SSE has been in effect providing them with free 
energy. 
  The central Slovak distributor is owed 1.3 billion Sk, and 
SSE chief economist Michal Poloni says the most he can ever hope 
to see is about 500 million. SSE has already severed electricity 
flow to two small factories, and Poloni said 40 more could face 
a cutoff. "The bankruptcies will definitely start, and it's not 
going to take long. Finally things will start moving. Primary 
insolvencies will crop up," he said. 
  With unemployment raging at or above 20 percent in several 
central Slovak districts, a rash or bankruptcies would represent 
the last nail in the coffin for scores of battered factory 
towns. "It's awful, especially from a human point of view," 
Poloni said. "[The factory managers] [bracketed insert as 
published] inherited something from the past and now there's 
nothing they can do about it." 
  SEP and government officials prefer to view the cutback more 
as a disciplinary action against negligent companies, rather 
than the long-delayed kickoff of the painful bankruptcy process. 
  "We're counting on their conscience. They do have money," 
Lehota said, adding that companies had simply learned that 
unpaid electricity bills would go unpunished. Indeed, in the 
week after SSE's announcement, 300,000 Sk worth of old bills 
came pouring in. 
  Imrich Szitas, the Economics Ministry's director of 
industrial policy, laughed when asked about the plight of the 
debtors. "I get 28 phone calls a day! They think we can supply 
them forever, even if they don't pay if there is no pressure." 
  In what they described as an attempt to ward off a possible 
wave of bankruptcies, SEP and government officials agreed that 
instead of completely cutting off especially negligent 
factories, the distribution companies would provide them with 
the "technical minimum," defined as the least amount of 
electricity required to prevent the factory's equipment from 
breaking down (due to lack of use). The experience of operating 
a factory that cannot produce, officials hope, will scare the 
companies into action. 
  "We could start a chain of bankruptcies, but it wouldn't 
bring us the money back," SEP general manager Kvetan said. 
  Most officials, however, preferred to avoid the topic of 
bankruptcies. One SEP official, speaking under the condition of 
anonymity, explained, "I've got the strong impression that 
nobody wants to set off a chain of bankruptcies, they push it 
around like a hot potato. You know, politically something like 
that could have very unpleasant consequences," he said. 
  SEP's move was intended to a large extent to inject a dose 
of 
market reality into what has always been a state-run apparatus. 
Leftover Communist pricing practices, officials say, have 
saddled energy producers with a burden that has only gotten 
worse since the 1989 revolution. For example, large industrial 
producers pay about 1.2 Sk per kilowatt hour for their 
electricity. Smaller businesses, using costlier smaller wires, 
pay 2 Sk/kwh, but private households, with their even more 
expensive wires, pay just 0.83 Sk/kwh. 
  "Just like under socialism, industry pays for the individual 
consumer in order to give the impression that energy is cheap," 
Poloni said. 
  SEP officials contend that even with three hikes since 1989, 
prices are still ridiculous; they complain that two attempts to 
raise them earlier in the year were rebuffed by the government. 
"The whole rate system needs to be redone, it's unbelievable," 
Poloni said. 
  Undoubtedly change is in the air, and the government is 
getting involved. Finance Minister Julius Toth said Dec. 5 on 
television that price would probably have to go up some time in 
January. 
  Meanwhile SEP still awaits privatization. The Slovak 
government in June announced that the monopoly would be 
privatized no later than October, but then immediately kicked 
the project back down to the Economics Ministry, where it 
continues to languish. After reapproval, the project will have 
to go through the hands of the acting privatization minister, 
Premier Vladimir Meciar. 
  "The government gave the project back to make it better," 
Szitas said. "These are very important tasks. They have to be 
solved." 

