BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following review of the 17 March 
issue of Cairo AL-USRAH AL-'ARABIYAH summarizes articles that 
are Islamic in nature. 
<H5>  CONTENTS: </H5>
  1. Call to Revive Islamic rule 
  2. Secularism Versus Islam 
  3. Antinormalization Committee 
  4. Roots of Jewish Thought Examined 
  5. Anti-Sudan British Conspiracy 
<H5>  CALL TO REVIVE ISLAMIC RULE </H5>
  The 17 March issue of AL-USRAH AL-'ARABIYAH devotes much of 
its space to the struggle between secular and Islamic currents. 
  A 5,000-word report by Hani al-Makkawi on page 3 speaks of 
the ills wrought by "morbid secularism". The article, which 
bears the headline: "What Has the World Gained by Drawing Away 
From Islam? ... Destruction, Corruption, Humiliation, and the 
Nations' Inability To Feed Themselves", addresses the following 
question to a large number of Islamic figures and academics: 
"What have the Muslims lost or gained by adopting secular 
methods in various spheres?" 
  Among the answers cited is one by Dr. Fawzi Ta'il, who lists 
the ills resulting from the abandonment of Islam, including the 
spread of AIDS, illegal drugs, weakened family ties, 
unemployment, spiritual emptiness, the specter of trade wars, 
and "moral catastrophes in the scientific field such as organ 
transplants; genetic engineering; artificial insemination; the 
right to end one's life, which they call suicide; and the right 
to get rid of a fetus, which they call abortion." 
  Noting that "60 percent of the world's population are 
idolaters", Ta'il asks: "If the West casts off its hostility to 
Islam, it will benefit from this great message that brings 
guidance to the people of the Earth." 
  Dr. Salim Najm, chairman of the Egyptian Relief Committee 
and 
deputy president of the Physicians Association, comments on the 
Islamic countries "disgraceful" attitude on the issues of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Somalia, and Kashmir, which, he says, would 
be different if Islam ruled the world. 
  Islamic preacher Tal'at al-Shinnawi, from al-Daqahliyah 
Governorate, says that the Islamic world's abandonment of 
shari'ah has led to autocratic rule and produced a strong Israel. 
  Dr. Jamal 'Abd-al-Hadi, a professor of Islamic history, says 
that as a result of its alienation from its religion, the 
Islamic world suffered "an obliteration of Islamic identity 
following the collapse of the Caliphate [Ottoman Empire] and an 
intellectual invasion via foreign educational curricula and 
media, non-Islamic values, and foreign economic domination, 
particularly after the Gulf war." 
  'Abd-al-Hadi continues that alienation from Islam also 
caused 
the loss of Jerusalem, the blessed al-Aqsa Mosque, the chaste 
land of Palestine, and al-Andalus [Spain]. 
  Dr. Mahmud Himayah, professor of comparative religion and 
head of Asyut University's Islamic Studies Department, 
criticizes "imported constitutions and laws," which fail to 
punish "immorality and corruption of the faith." He attacks 
secular writers who ridicule Islamic teachings and symbols. He 
extols such figures as Shaykh [Muhammad] al-Ghazali, Shaykh 
[Muhammad Mutawalli] al-Sha'rawi, and the Grand Imam of al-Azhar. 
  Himayah continues: "It is strange that when al-Azhar uses 
its natural right to confiscate the garbage of human thought 
[zibalat al-fikr al-bashari], the secularists and communists 
raise a brouhaha about freedom of belief and thought. It 
appears as if freedom of thought among these people means to 
attack sanctities and ridicule Islam." 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Sattar al-Miliji, a professor at Suez Canal 
University and secretary general of the Scientific Professions 
Association, says that by drawing away from Islam, the Islamic 
world lost its respect. He adds: "We have become the world's 
plaything. Muslim blood has become the cheapest blood. The 
era's major tragedy in Bosnia-Herzegovina is two years old now 
but the Islamic world remains complacent and unconcerned. The 
European-U.S. West is fighting them by giving political, media, 
and diplomatic backing to their enemy. Russia and Greece are 
supplying the aggressors with soldiers and hardware. The 
international organizations, in the absence of Islam, are even 
worse." 
  Dr. 'Abdallah Hilal, a nuclear energy professor, contrasts 
Israel's early acquisition of nuclear power with the Islamic 
world's lack of success in this sphere, which he blames on 
inter-Arab differences and foreign intervention. Commenting on 
Egypt's plans in this field, he says: "When the Egyptian 
Nuclear Energy Authority was established to boost the economy by 
producing electricity and desalinating sea water, it had great 
success in its first years. It brought good repute to Egypt and 
other Arab and Islamic countries. Its cadres of trainees began 
to carry this knowledge to Arab, Islamic, and African states. 
Nuclear power plants were supposed to be built and feasibility 
studies began for eight such stations. However, Zionist-U.S. 
conspiracies did not allow the project to be completed. As a 
result of Egypt's links with the U.S., there were no Egyptian 
secrets. They let us make studies and plans, offer tenders, and 
spend much money and efforts only to interfere at the last 
moment to wreck our plans by using the weapons of aid, the IMF, 
and the World Bank. In addition, we were given frank 
instructions to abandon the project. As a result our trained 
cadres emigrated." 
  Shaykh al-Ghazali says that after the collapse of the 
caliphate, the Islamic world's enemies multiplied and communists 
and secularists became stronger. He remarks that alienation 
from Islam has rendered the Muslims very weak and notes that if 
the Islamic nation realizes what its role should be and returns 
to its God and shari'ah, it will be "qualified to lead the 
world." 

<H5>    SECULARISM VERSUS ISLAM </H5>
  Under the headline "The Atheistic-Secularist Onslaught on 
Islam: Its Causes and Motives," Dr. Ahmad al-Majdub, in a 
2,000-word column on page 2, brands Egyptian communists as 
selfish and superficial opportunists who, having lost their 
erstwhile Soviet master, are now attacking Islam and Muslims in 
order to demonstrate their credentials to the "rich new U.S. 
master." He notes that some of them are afraid of "transferring 
their loyalty directly to the West" in order not to expose their 
true opportunist nature. The column also defends Arab Muslims 
who helped the Afghans against the Soviet invaders, noting that 
most of them are not terrorists or extremists. 
<H5>  ANTINORMALIZATION COMMITTEE </H5>
  A brief report by Hani al-Makkawi on page one discusses a 
conference organized by the Cairo University Faculty Club, which 
issued a statement announcing its determination to form a 
"committee for boycotting normalization with the Zionist enemy 
in all spheres of life." The conference appealed to every 
Egyptian who has any information on individuals and companies 
dealing with the "Zionist enemy" to submit it to the above 
committee. 
  In a related item by al-Makkawi, a 3,000-word report on page 
4 recounts protests against the Hebron massacre carried out by 
students and faculty members at several Egyptian universities. 
<H5>  ROOTS OF JEWISH THOUGHT EXAMINED </H5>
  A 2,000-word back-page article on page 10 offers an analysis 
of the "doctrinal and cultural roots" that made a "Zionist army 
physician take the liberty of assassinating hundreds of 
Palestinians," a reference to the shooting of Muslim worshipers 
in Hebron. 
  The writer, Dr. Ahmad 'Abd-al-Rahman, says the Talmud 
teaches 
that the Gentiles are not human beings, the Torah permits the 
"Semites" to enslave the Canaanites, and Arabs have no right to 
resist Jewish settlement in Palestine. He says "Zionist racism" 
drew sustenance from "modern racist ideology in Europe and 
America," which is based on Greek philosophy and Roman culture, 
notably Aristotle's division of humanity into "Greek humans and 
non-Greek savages," a view which the writer says was adopted by 
the Romans. He says this ideology was further strengthened by 
Machiavellian thought. 
  The writer goes on to warn of possible nuclear attacks on 
Arab capitals such as Damascus, Baghdad, Khartoum, or even 
Mecca, especially as the United States has prevented the Arabs 
from acquiring similar weapons. 
  He says: "Such a possibility is not an illusion. The 
conditions to which we have been reduced encourage the sons of 
Israel and Judah to consider it." 
  He concludes by urging the overthrow of "the chains of 
secular government" because an Islamic government would respond 
with whatever weapons it had at hand and would proceed "on the 
path of glorious victory." 
<H5>  ANTI-SUDAN BRITISH CONSPIRACY </H5>
  A 300-word report by Muhammad 'Urfah on page 1 notes "a 
secret document revealing a British conspiracy against the 
Muslims in Sudan that is designed to seize the Nile sources". 
This document is a letter circulated by a group of British 
opposition politicians and reportedly sent by British Prime 
Minister John Major to his foreign secretary Douglas Hurd, 
specifying Britain's position on Sudan and other issues, 
including Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  In the letter Major reportedly advocates south Sudan's 
secession with the help of media publicity, claiming that Arab 
Muslims are oppressing the Christian southerners, the aim being 
to "confront political Islam" in that country and Africa in 
general. 
  The document is said to reveal a report about the Nile 
water, 
of which Israel hopes to have a share; the projected control of 
all governments in the region in the 21st century; and the 
"Zionists' cooperation with the Turkish Government against Arab 
regimes and Islamic organizations." 
  The document reportedly discloses a British attempt to unite 
south Sudan's rebel factions with the help of a 
British-influenced local church to guarantee British, rather 
than U.S., influence in the region. 
  The document is said to hint at "extensive military 
intervention in south Sudan under UN supervision." 

