CSO 

  [Text] Economic Service -- It is said that within the next 
10 to 15 years the nation's foreign exchange revenues from oil 
sales will be cut off. If is said that if agriculture is not the 
only hope, it is the nation's greatest hope for replacing oil. 
It said that the government is not giving the necessary 
attention to agriculture. It is said that with the measures that 
could be taken, the agriculture situation could be brought to a 
state that not only would we be self-sufficient with domestic 
consumption, but we could also break new ground in the area of 
exports. 
  The importance of agriculture and the proposed consolidation 
of the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of the 
Construction Jihad have led us to seek interviews with the 
minister of agriculture, the minister of the construction jihad, 
the minister of heavy industries, and the minister of mines and 
metals. 
  Concerning the interview with Dr. 'Isa Kalantari, minister 
of 
agriculture through the efforts by Engineer Khamseh, general 
manager of publications for the Ministry of Agriculture, after 
three extensions of the time for the interview we were finally 
able last Thursday (a holiday) to have an interview with him for 
several hours. 
  Dr. 'Isa Kalantari is an expert on agriculture from several 
perspectives. He is an engineer in the field 
(agriculture/botanical engineering) from Urmia Agricultural 
University. He took his master's degree in the same field from 
America's University of Nebraska, and he finally graduated with 
an American Ph.D. in "agricultural physiology." 
  Dr. Kalantari's experience in science, research, and 
education includes teaching undergraduates as a doctoral 
student, research on issues pertaining to the physiology of 
agriculture with regard to corn and soy beans, research on the 
system of cultivation and the model for feeding the Islamic 
Republic of Iran, and teaching in various agricultural colleges. 
  What you will read below is the result of our relatively 
long 
interview with Dr. Kalantari. As always, in this interview he 
answered our questions using only his astonishing memory. 
  We hope in the near future to have ABRAR's interviews with 
the minister of the construction jihad, the minister of heavy 
industries, and the minister of mines and metals. 
  [ABRAR] Mr. Minister, it is being said that Iran's foreign 
exchange revenues will drop to zero in 10 to 15 years. 
  On the other hand, last year Iran imported about $1.5 
billion 
in foodstuffs, while our exports of agricultural crops, with all 
the commotion, did not even reach $1 billion. 
  In view of what has been said, many are worried that after 
its oil revenues end Iran will go hungry. Do you think this 
concern is appropriate, or groundless? 
  [Kalantari] Of course. Unfortunately, this is a reality. 
After 10 years, according to some people, after 15 years 
according to others, Iran's oil production will reach the point 
where it will only be enough for domestic consumption. Perhaps 
after 15 years we will have nothing to export without sharply 
reducting domestic consumption in order to have enough to export. 
  [ABRAR] How much domestic production [as published] is 
there, 
for us to "sharply reduce," as you say? 
  [Kalantari] Based on existing information, per-capita oil 
consumption in the world is declining sharply and continuously, 
while, to the contrary, in our country per-capita consumption is 
increasing. In this respect we are an exception in the world. 
  [ABRAR] Then you agree that in 15 years at most, we will 
have 
no more foreign exchange revenues from oil. In this case, what 
will happen? Will Iran go hungry or not? 
  [Kalantari] This depends on the Iranians themselves. We 
could 
go hungry or not go hungry. In my view, with appropriate 
investment and proper implementation, we could even make 
agricultural products a replacement for oil. 
  Everything depends on our own nation, it depends on our own 
planning and policy making. 
  [ABRAR] You referred to planning and the fact that the 
policymakers must make a decision. You are an agricultural 
policymaker. Our country has its resources. All the statistics 
and figures say we have everything. Why, in view of the vast 
variety of our climates, don't the policymakers, as you say, 
make decisions so that we will no longer import more food than 
we export? 
  [Kalantari] In general they wish to do this, but they have 
priorities. It is true that agriculture is currently an 
important priority, but 65 to 70 percent of the nation's foreign 
exchange revenues still comes from oil exports. We have had 
explosive population growth since the revolution. Along with 
that we have the problems and difficulties that were created for 
us by the imposed war. We have reconstruction before us. Well, 
when they took the priorities into account, clearly the bombed 
and destroyed refinery had priority. 
  [ABRAR] In your view was this setting of priorities correct? 
That is, did agriculture find its true position? 
  [Kalantari] I cannot express a definite opinion on this. The 
country was faced with a fuel shortage, and in any case its 
refinery had to be built. The power plants had to be rebuilt. 
Investment in building a dam to capture water had more priority 
than delivering water to a desert. 
  [ABRAR] You mentioned investment. What kind of attention was 
given to agriculture and investment in this sector after the 
revolution? 
  [Kalantari] Throughout the war we had no serious investment 
in the form of infrastructure investment in the agriculture 
sector. There was somewhat more attention after the war, but not 
to the point where we could do infrastructure work in order to 
be food exporters within five years. The priorities did not 
permit this. 
  [ABRAR] We were not even able to do anything to increase 
agricultural exports to the level of agricultural imports? 
  [Kalantari] If we judge fairly, we have had good progress in 
recent years. Four to five years ago we did not do what we could 
have done either with respect to production or development. We 
could have done more, invested more. We could have produced more. 
  [ABRAR] Why didn't you? 
  [Kalantari] Again this goes back to the level of resources. 
The financial resources did not exist. In infrastructure 
investment and foreign exchange, again the priorities went to 
other sectors. 
  [ABRAR] You said that after the war more attention was given 
to the agriculture sector. 
  [Kalantari] More attention was given, but not to the extent 
it should have been. 
  More investment was made, but perhaps it would have been 
appropriate if it had been several times that amount. You must 
realize that at that time we did not even have a consulting 
engineer in our organizations. Despite this, we came and created 
these shortages. The country has everything that is needed for a 
leap in production. 
  Some people did not believe in production. There were some 
who could not believe that it would be possible to produce. They 
say "agriculture does not have priority, agriculture does not 
have priority" so much that this has been transformed into a 
"belief." 
  [ABRAR] Has this belief now been discredited, or does it 
still exist? 
  [Kalantari] To some extent this belief has been discredited. 
Fortunately, those who hold this belief are now in the minority. 
  [ABRAR] Meaning there are not enough of them to be 
obstructive? 
  [Kalantari] Perhaps they can, but I do not think they can be 
successful. Nor do they any longer have the courage to do so. To 
some extent the performance under the Five-Year Plan and the 
clarification of issues and problems have disarmed them, unless 
they are people with little knowledge. Despite this, to the 
extent that we have gone from one atmosphere to another, 
standing in front of a tangible reality has made their task 
difficult. 
  [ABRAR] You have mentioned a jump in production. Can we hope 
for a jump in agricultural production in the near future? 
  [Kalantari] Of course we, meaning both the government and 
the 
Ministry of Agriculture, can make this jump. However we, meaning 
the government agriculture sector, have not always been the ones 
to decide. If the national will is at play, we certainly can do 
so. If there is no sabotage, we certainly can do so. 
  [ABRAR] If it is this way. If there is no sabotage. Who are 
these saboteurs, Mr. Minister? 
  [Kalantari] In any case, the overall decisionmaker is the 
government. 
  When the return on our irrigation is about 33 percent, when 
the nation's greatest agricultural problem, in terms of 
short-term production, is water, when with a small amount of 
investment this return could be increased to 50 percent, we have 
the resources. The engineering resources exist. The technical 
procedures exist. The industry exists. There is not even any 
foreign exchange needed in this sector. Our agriculture is 
suffering from the lack of water. 
  [ABRAR] As you put it, all the technical and executive 
resources exist. So where is the problem? Why don't you do this? 
  [Kalantari] The primary problem is financial. The government 
must give money, the government must invest. Supposing the 
government agrees to make 60 percent of the investment needed 
for agriculture, the people would pay the other 40 percent. 
  [ABRAR] How much is this 60 percent? 
  [Kalantari] A total of about 1,600 billion tumans. 
  [ABRAR] In view of the fact that this is a trivial amount in 
relation to this huge project, what kind of thinking, what 
group, invests billions of dollars in sectors that are not as 
necessary for the country as agriculture, while they are stingy 
in the agriculture sector? 
  [Kalantari] Well look, the one making the decision is the 
government, and ... 
  [ABRAR] You are a member of the Council of Ministers 
yourself, you have shared responsibility in the government... 
  [Kalantari] I have shared responsibility, agreed, but they 
say that 1,600 billion tumans does not exist. 
  [ABRAR] Where should the government's 60 percent share, 
which 
would be about 900 billion tumans, be spent? 
  [Kalantari] No, this must be procured over a six- or 
seven-year period. 
  [ABRAR] If this investment were made, what changes would be 
made in agriculture, other than raising the rate of return on 
water from 33 to 50 percent? 
  [Kalantari] Definitely and certainly, in the agriculture 
sector not only would we achieve self-sufficiency, but also our 
exports would increase dramatically? 
  [ABRAR] In my view, the implementation of such a beautiful 
and useful project would be supported by the Majles deputies, 
the media, and the officials. Who wants to put obstacles in your 
way? 
  [Kalantari] Well! They say: We have no money. Just last year 
about half the country was in a drought. We could have, 
fortunately, minimized the production deficiencies. 
  If we make the necessary investments, even if we do have a 
year or two of drought the damage will not be that great. 
  [ABRAR] Mr. Minister! You are being conservative to an 
extent. Half the farmers and experts believe that the attention 
that is being given to industries and services in the country is 
not being given to agriculture... 
  [Kalantari] Yes, in the First Five-Year Plan, we invested a 
great deal in industry. 
  [ABRAR] And your needs were not addressed? 
  [Kalantari] Our needs were addressed, but it got nowhere, 
other than the instance with water I mentioned. In the area of 
agricultural training, if we invested less than one-tenth of 
these costs in this area, there would be a striking increase in 
agricultural production. 
  [ABRAR] Look, Mr. Minister! All the experts, and by that I 
mean the experts with whom we are in contact, with whose 
theories we are familiar, or whose articles we read, believe 
that agriculture can get the country out of its one-product 
condition, that agriculture is the salvation of Iran's economy, 
and not industry. 
  [Kalantari] Agriculture and industries dependent on 
agriculture, modern and complete agriculture. Yes, in my view 
this comes before industry. 
  Our problem is the problem of the government's heavy 
expenses. The government has two million staff employees, and 
they all have wages. Taxes are not collected in sufficient 
amounts. 
  [ABRAR] These are not expenses, they cannot be contained. 
You 
do not mean that the wages of staff employees should be cut? 
  [Kalantari] No! We need more revolutionary action. As the 
president of the republic said at the last Friday prayer 
service, we must deal with these instances. 
  [ABRAR] What are these instances? 
  [Kalantari] The subsidies we pay to the energy sector are 
seven or eight times the amount the consumer spends. 
  The useless subsidy that is paid for gasoline is seven to 
eight times the entire budget for the nation's universities. 
  [ABRAR] Don't you think that if these subsidies were not 
paid, the main agencies in charge (the ministries of energy and 
petroleum) would use the extra revenues to develop their own 
work and not agriculture? 
  [Kalantari] A decision must be made. One must see. A 
solution 
must be found. A solution will be found. 

