Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Saying that they will take the case to the GATT, 
the Prime Minister's Official Residence, Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry, Ministry of Posts and 
Telecommunication, and other ministries are maintaining the 
stand of opposing the U.S. move to impose economic sanctions 
against Japan. In this regard, a senior Foreign Ministry 
official expressed strong concern on 17 February saying "such a 
reaction will worsen the Japan-U.S. relations." 
  The Foreign Ministry plans to ask relevant agencies to 
coolly 
respond to the U.S. move while giving consideration to bilateral 
ties. 
  The United States decided that "Japan violated the accord" 
over the issue of selling mobile phones in the Japanese market. 
Following this decision, the United States is suggesting the 
possibility of reviving the Super 301 (clause designed to 
specify unfair trade partners and unfair acts and to impose 
sanctions against them). In this regard, some government 
officials are saying that depending on the nature of sanctions, 
they will not hesitate to appeal to the GATT. Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa said: "We will deal with the situation on the 
basis of the international rules." 
  However, the Foreign Ministry -- which takes not only 
economic aspects but also overall Japan-U.S. ties, including 
security matters, into consideration -- wants to ask the United 
States to calmly deal with the issue. At the same time, it 
points out the need for the government to objectively and calmly 
respond to the U.S. move, saying that "we should avoid radical 
responses and deal with the issues one by one while actually 
observing the U.S. move and thoroughly studying contents (of 
sanctions against Japan)," (according to a senior Foreign 
Ministry official). Foreign Ministry officials are saying this 
because they feel a sense of crisis that "the entire Japan-U.S. 
relationship will go wrong once both sides start to speak 
emotionally," (according to a Foreign Ministry source). 
  As for the future measures to deal with the situation, the 
Foreign Ministry firmly maintains its conventional stance that 
"economic issues should be separated from (political issues) to 
avoid their negative impact on the entire Japan-U.S. 
relationship," (according to a government source). The Foreign 
Ministry wants to secure U.S. understanding by working out its 
own market liberalization measures soon and conveying government 
policies to the United States through some means, such as 
dispatching a special envoy to the United States. 
  Moreover, the Foreign Ministry and the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry are working in close 
cooperation with each other. Kunihiko Saito, vice minister of 
foreign affairs, and Koichiro Matsuura, deputy minister for 
foreign affairs, are contacting Hideaki Kumano, vice minister 
of international trade and industry, and Sozaburo Okamatsu, vice 
minister for international affairs, respectively. The Foreign 
Ministry plans to do its best to "avoid a situation in which 
sparks of the economic issues spread out to the entire 
Japan-U.S. relationship causing brush fires," (according to a 
senior Foreign Ministry official). 

