BFN 

<F P=106> [By Annie Thomas] </F>
  [Text] Nairobi, May 9 (AFP) -- Rebel artillery gunners 
pounded government-held parts of Rwanda's capital Kigali on 
Monday [9 May] in what could be a final push to seize control 
despite separate ceasefire offers by both camps. 
  During the heaviest fighting yet in a month of bloodletting, 
a mortar round slammed into the airport runway, forcing a United 
Nations relief plane to turn back to the Kenyan capital Nairobi, 
a UN spokesman said. 
  The fiercest artillery duels erupted around the Kanombe Army 
Camp near the airport, spokesman Abdul Kabia said. 
  The UN cancelled flights ferrying in desperately needed 
medicines and food for the second time in a week, said Kabia, 
contacted by telephone in Kigali. 
  "We're reinforcing our positions and trying to control those 
that can be tactically important," said a spokesman for the 
rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front (RPF) contacted by telephone at 
rebel headquarters in Mulindi, northern Rwanda. 
  Government forces have deployed artillery around the 
airport, 
making it a key target for the rebels, who claim to control half 
the country. 
  The spokesman said the RPF would guarantee security for UN 
relief flights to preserve Kigali's only lifeline once it had 
cleared out the army gunners around the airport who are shelling 
rebel headquarters in the old parliament building. 
  Monday's flareup after a relatively quiet weekend shattered 
hopes of a truce after the RPF and government separately 
announced unilateral ceasefires that should have taken effect at 
the weekend. 
  "We are open to dialogue but only with army commanders who 
do 
not recognise the government's authority," the rebel spokesman 
said. 
  Before they stop fighting, the rebels want an end to the 
slaughter of Tutsis and Hutu opposition supporters in which 
200,000 people have died. It all started when president Juvenal 
Habyarimana was killed in an April 6 plane crash that his 
security forces blamed on a rebel-fired rocket. 
  Half a million Rwandans have swarmed over the borders to 
neighbouring countries, with 250,000 sheltering in the world's 
biggest makeshift refugee camp in northern Tanzania. 
  Foreigners who left Kigali on Sunday saw dismembered bodies, 
and reports from around the country also indicated that the 
bloodbath was continuing. 
  Food is running short, and a lack of water purification 
chemicals has raised fears of cholera. 
  The international aid agency Caritas estimates that two 
million people risk famine in Rwanda and neighbouring Burundi, 
which shares Rwanda's history of feuding between the majority 
Hutus and minority Tutsis who make up about 15 percent of the 
population in both countries. 
  The Red Cross meanwhile planned to evacuate some of 
thousands 
of wounded people from Kigali hospital to a newly set up field 
hospital in Kabgayi, about 45 kilometres (27 miles) southwest of 
the capital. 

