CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Democratic Party Chairman Pavol Hagyari: "The </F>
Democratic Party Wants To Overcome Artificial Barriers"] 
  [Text] Shortly after the last parliamentary elections we 
became witnesses to a process that constituted a denial of the 
existing natural arrangement of things as well as a denial of 
the trends and tendencies prevailing in Europe. At a time when 
the coexistence of Czechs and Slovaks could have finally, after 
decades of totalitarian government, reached its logical 
outcome--a democratic arrangement of relationships between the 
republics, but mostly among citizens--the coexistence came to an 
end. At a time when the importance of borders in all of Europe 
is diminishing and the integration of the countries of the 
European Union is progressing ever further, a new border was 
created along the Morava River. 
  A border, which no one needed. A border which, apart from a 
handful of ambitious politicians and an evident minority of 
nationalists, no one wanted. And despite the efforts of 
individuals on both sides, the separation continued to be more 
and more transformed into an alienation. Whereas elsewhere 
borders are being changed into purely formal lines, for us this 
border is becoming more and more of a barrier. An artificial and 
nonsensical barrier which no one wants anymore and no one needs 
and which no one is able to espouse. 
  On the contrary, more and more people are realizing the need 
to overcome this artificial barrier or, better still, not to 
permit it to grow to greater dimensions, as is unavoidably 
necessary. Simple citizens engaged in travel, people from the 
new near-border communities and regions, entrepreneurs, people 
with relationships to the culture of the second nation, 
television viewers and radio listeners, students, patients 
undergoing therapy in the health facilities of the other 
republic, people who live permanently on the territory of the 
other republic, mixed marriages, etc.... All of these people 
were not only surprised and saddened by the division of the 
common state, but are experiencing specific practical problems. 
  Even though we cannot now eliminate the very essence and 
main 
cause of these problems, we should at least try to effect the 
maximum mitigation of their consequences. Although many people 
speak of overcoming artificial barriers, only a few are sincere 
about it and even more rarely does someone actually do anything 
about it. I am not now speaking of citizens and their efforts 
and longings of small, but at the same time great attempts at 
maintaining the Czecho-Slovak relationship. I have in mind those 
who primarily brought the problem about--in other words, 
politicians. 
  Seeing the unhappy situation and the lack of interest in 
resolving it, the Democratic Party decided to act. In view of 
its traditions, its membership, its basic values, it is 
generally understandable that it is precisely this party as the 
first among the Slovak political forces, which has come out with 
a specific program of Czecho-Slovak cooperation, with specific 
proposals to effect rapprochement between the Czech Republic and 
the Slovak Republic. 
  We are proposing to effect an economic and social 
transformation, utilizing all of the experiences of the Czech 
Republic. We are proposing that membership in European 
integrational structures be coordinated, that new legislation be 
created, taking into account the legislation of the European 
Union, as well as that progress be made in the fight against 
international criminality. We desire for the republics to grant 
citizens equal political rights (with the exception of elections 
to parliament), an equal opportunity to study, equal medical 
care, and, in the case of permanent residents, even equal social 
security benefits, equal to those of the republic's own 
citizens. We want to make available to citizens of the Czech 
Republic who are longer-term residents in Slovakia the right to 
participate in community elections. We propose supporting joint 
cultural projects, the creation of a joint radio broadcast and a 
joint television program or, at least, joint news broadcasts, 
prepared by a joint news staff. 
  We are convinced that the alienation has now lasted 
sufficiently long and that the time has come for a reciprocal 
rapprochement. To that end, the Democratic Party is proposing a 
specific way. It will not be an easy road and one without 
problems. We shall not avoid being attacked and accused. But, 
even so, it is worth it. History cannot be fooled. The 
relationship between Czechs and Slovaks will never be a 
relationship such as exists between two adjoining nations. 
  The impulse for the division originated with the Slovak 
political representation. That is why the moves toward 
rapprochement should originate with the Slovak side; at least we 
should show good will. The best example of our interest in 
drawing closer to the Czech Republic would be the showing of 
appropriate respect for the day on which the first Czechoslovak 
Republic came into being and proclaiming 28 October a holiday 
for the Slovak Republic. If for no other reason than at least 
because it is our duty toward our history and particularly 
toward ourselves. Decent people become accustomed to fulfilling 
their duties. Even we shall prove that we belong among decent 
people. It will be of great significance for any future 
rapprochement. 

