BFN 

  [Text] King Husayn of Jordan yesterday said in Washington 
that a public meeting between himself and Israeli leaders is 
possible before signing an Israeli-Jordanian peace treaty. The 
Jordanian king told journalists that such a meeting is not a 
taboo and that there is nothing to prevent such a meeting. 
  Answering a question on the subject of visiting occupied 
Jerusalem, King Husayn said: There is much speculation about 
this point. I hope circumstances will allow a visit to the holy 
places in Jerusalem. 
  King Husayn did not deny press reports that he and his crown 
prince, Hasan, met secretly with Israeli leaders. He said there 
were no public meetings. 
  A Jordanian official has stated that the first official 
meeting between King Husayn and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq 
Rabin may be convened in October on the fringes of the ceremony 
to mark the signing of the Jordanian-Israeli agreement on border 
demarcation. The official, who preferred anonymity, said that a 
final agreement on border demarcation between Jordan and Israel 
may be reached in October. The signing ceremony, which will 
most probably take place in Washington, will, he said, provide 
an opportunity to hold an official meeting between the Jordanian 
king and the Israeli prime minister. 
  The official said there is nothing to prevent public 
meetings 
between senior Jordanian and Israeli officials after the signing 
on 7 June of the Jordanian-Israeli agreements on a detailed 
agenda for the bilateral talks, which are expected to lead to a 
peace treaty. 
  The official said a meeting between Jordanian Prime Minister 
'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali and Israeli Foreign Minister Shim'on 
Peres will precede the meeting between King Husayn and Rabin and 
may take place soon, when substantial progress in the talks over 
borders is achieved. 
  The Jordanian Democratic Popular Unity Party, the Jordanian 
People's Democratic Party, and the Jordanian Arab Democratic 
Party have criticized the Jordanian-Israeli agreement on border 
demarcation, signed recently in Washington. 
  In a statement published in AL-HURRIYAH [published by the 
Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine] yesterday, the 
leader of the Jordanian People's Democratic Party said the 
Israeli-Jordanian agenda is another step in the political 
capitulationist settlement plan and establishes the course of 
separate and bilateral solutions, represented by the Oslo-Cairo 
Agreement, or, in other words, dismantles what was left of Arab 
coordination for the benefit of Israel's separate dealing with 
each Arab state. He stressed that such a solution cannot be 
bilateral, but means, in political terms, the discussion of, and 
contribution toward, the process of settling the Palestinian 
refugees and displaced persons. The Jordanian bilateral drift 
in that direction falls within the context of the Israeli-U.S. 
policy that establishes the process to settle the refugees. 
  He said the Jordanian Government has placed the country in a 
dark political tunnel and establishes, with these policies, the 
course of subservience to the United States and the imperialist 
states and is avoiding the national solution and its Arab 
framework. 
  For his part, 'Azmi al-Khawaja, secretary general of the 
Jordanian Democratic Popular Unity party, said the Oslo-Cairo 
agreement came as a great surprise to Jordan and confused it, 
thus causing it to bless that agreement. In order not to lose 
its role in the settlement plan, or have it marginalized, it 
hastened to sign the 7 June Agreement in Washington separately, 
after the 'Arafat wing of the PLO had done so. 
  He stressed that the agreement is yet another infiltration 
in 
the front of the Arab-Israeli conflict and establishes the 
principle of separate solutions. It also violates Jordanian 
national rights, the refugees issue, Jerusalem, and has 
established the principles for the start of the process of 
normalization with Israel on the political, economic, touristic, 
cultural, and security levels. 
  Al-Khawaja said the agreement will affect the march of 
democracy, and that the grip around the opposition forces will 
be tightened. The agreement will also link the Jordanian economy 
to the Israeli economy. 
  Muhammad al-Bashir from the Jordanian Arab Democratic Party 
said this separate solution will not be any better than the Oslo 
Agreement. He warned that the new trends by the Jordanian 
Government will fragment Arab ranks even further and increase 
the Arab losses. 

