CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Guillermo Correa, Julio Cesar Lopez, and Ignacio </F>
Ramirez] 
  [Text] Tuxtla Gutierrez, Chiapas--The Zapatist National 
Liberation Army (EZLN) emerged as an armed group in the early 
1980's under the slogan "Live for the homeland or die for 
freedom." 
  The Armed Forces of National Liberation (FALN) had been 
formed previously; they were one of the organizations that 
spread the urban and rural guerrilla fighting into several 
states in the 1970's. When the FALN disappeared, their members 
in Chiapas crossed out the A, leaving the organization's name as 
the Forces of National Liberation (FLN). 
  From it emerged the present-day EZLN, which on 1 January, 
coinciding with the enactment of the Free Trade Agreement, 
cried: "Enough!" And on behalf of those who "have nothing, 
absolutely nothing," it proceeded to take over several Chiapas 
towns, weapons in hand. 
  The current conflict in Chiapas has its most remote 
antecedent in the "Fray Bartolome de las Casas" First Indian 
Congress, which was held in San Cristobal from 13 to 15 October 
1974. 
  The date was fitting. It was the 500th anniversary of Fray 
Bartolome de las Casas's birth. State authorities asked Bishop 
Samuel Ruiz to cooperate with them; he agreed, on the condition 
that it be a true Indian congress, not a quaint tourist event, 
much less one with overtones of demagoguery. His condition was 
accepted. 
  So the Indians spoke: 
  "It is time that we start thinking about whether we really 
have the freedom that Fray Bartolome de las Casas left behind, 
because all of us, the Tzotziles, the Tzeltales, the Choles, and 
the Tojolabales, live in the highlands while all of the ladinos 
live in the city and have nice ranches and estates. 
  "But when we demand our rights or want to ask for our lands, 
we cannot. They already took our former organization away from 
us. This is why now they even impose our authorities and even 
the federal ones on us. This is also why there are abuses by the 
estate owners. Like in Altamirano, where the soldiers burned 
down our homes, just because we asked for land. 
  "Who is going to defend us? We are going to defend ourselves 
by organizing everyone. Because in unity there is strength." 
  Juan Ortiz, a Mame Indian from Guatemala, said on behalf of 
his Indian brothers: 
  "There is a lot of oppression. We are never going to be 
respected unless we unite. All of Latin America is interested in 
uniting now. 
  "We Indians were never consulted when the borders were 
drawn. 
We Mame Indians are one example. Our race is split in two: Mames 
in Guatemala, Mames in the Soconusco in Chiapas. 
  "Let's talk and let's walk together." 
  And they kept on talking about the poverty and misery in 
which the Choles live in their hovels on the estates, owing to 
the working arrangements imposed on them, the starvation wages, 
the hacienda stores, the lack of medicine, the alcoholism, and 
the business interests. 
  "We work from sunup to sundown for less than seven pesos a 
day. Children have to start working at age 10 at wages of one to 
two pesos a day. These wages are paid in vouchers or merchandise 
or drinks, not in cash. You have to work for free on Sunday 
under the system they call `la pagina' [the page]. And then 
there is the droit de seigneur, when our wives and daughters get 
raped. At coffee harvest time the women and children have to 
work just like the men." 
  In olden days the Indians had communal ownership of the land 
on which they lived, as stated in the documents in their 
possession. 
  "We have been trying to legalize our lands since 1935 and 
have not been able to get the documentation up to date so far. 
The engineers, who charge a lot of money, never hand in the 
complete report, either because they do not finish their 
measurements or because they get fed up with the commune or 
ejido members. There is a lot of corruption among the agrarian 
authorities." 
  There are no health centers or medicines. As a result the 
Indians suffer from diseases "and we do not know where they come 
from, whether it's the water, the food, or the housing. The 
reason is malnutrition and poverty, because our living 
conditions are conditions of disease and death." 
  Grievance movements emerged among the Indian groups after 
the 
congress. The "Ach Quiptic ta Lecubtesel" Union of Ejidos was 
created on 12 December 1975 in the Ocosingo Forest. The "Land 
and Freedom" Union of Ejidos emerged in 1976 in the Comitan 
area, which includes part of the Lacandon Forest. And on 14 
August 1978 the "Peasant Struggle" Union of Ejidos was born. 
  Other independent groups were formed in the northern part of 
the state starting in 1974; they later linked up with the 
Proletarian Line (LP) movement. 
  In the highlands region the peasants from Villa de las Rosas 
and Teopisca pursued the struggle to regain their lands most 
intensely, as did the Indians from San Juan Chamula, Larrainzar, 
and Tenejapa. 
  The Peasant Bloc of the State of Chiapas (Blocech) was 
organized in the Soconusco zone in 1979. 
  Agrarian movements also arose along the coast. There was a 
vigorous peasant movement that took isolated action in Tonala, 
Arriaga, and Pijijiapan. 
  In the case of the peasants from Villaflores, Chiapa de 
Corzo, and Flores Magon, the struggle revolved around demands to 
extend the ejido areas and, in a few cases, funding for or the 
establishment of new population centers. 
  Other movements had not waited for the congress. This was 
the 
case with the community of Venustiano Carranza in the Central 
Valleys, which had been fighting to regain its communal lands 
since the 1930's, and with the 10 April Peasant Alliance in the 
Fraylesca. 
  Neither the Mexican Communist Party (PCM) nor the Socialist 
Workers Party (PST) were involved back then. Nor were mass 
organizations like the Independent Federation of Agricultural 
Workers and Peasants (CIOAC) or the Emiliano Zapata Peasant 
Organization (OCEZ) or the Union of Ejido Unions and Peasant 
Groups in Solidarity of Chiapas, all of which emerged more 
strongly in the late 1970's. 
  In 1974, President Luis Echeverria decreed that 614,000 
hectares of the Lacandon Forest would remain the possession of 
just 67 Lacandon Indians, even though more than 20,000 peasants 
who had been brought in from all over the country were already 
settled in the surrounding area and were asking for plots of 
land. Eventually, the peasants charge, the lands remained in the 
hands of the latifundio [great estate] holders and officials of 
Nacional Financiera (NAFIN) [National Finance Bank], who got 
rich by exploiting the fancy woods, thus further intensifying 
discontent in the region. 
  A group of leftist militants that emerged as part of the 
1968 
Student Movement also arrived in the Chiapas jungle in the early 
1970's, seeking to identify with the problems of the peasants 
under the pro-Maoist "mass line." 
  In 1974 the Federal Government destroyed a guerrilla 
encampment in the Lacandon Forest. It was a training camp that 
the FALN had been operating on "El Diamante" estate in the 
municipality of Ocosingo. The FALN were led by Cesar German 
Yanez Munoz, "Pedro." 
  Weapons and subversive propaganda were seized, and an 
undetermined number of members of the organization were 
arrested. They were displayed publicly by the then attorney 
general of the republic, Pedro Ojeda Paullada. 
  The Emiliano Zapata Revolutionary Brigade, which was part of 
the 23 September Communist League, then came to Chiapas. It was 
under the command of Luis Miguel Corral Garcia and Manuel 
Amarilla Palafox, who were killed in Mexico City in 1977. 
  The Guiding Ideological Organization (OID) officially 
arrived 
in the state in late 1977 and early 1978. Also showing up were 
the militants from the Union of the People, which later became 
the Clandestine Revolutionary Workers Party-Union of the People 
(PROCUP); after 25 years of armed struggle this group linked up 
ideologically with the Party of the Poor (PDLP), which Lucio 
Cabanas had founded in the state of Guerrero. 
  These groups pursued their policy of the "Prolonged People's 
War," based on Marxist-Leninist fundamentals, "to achieve 
political power and emancipate the people from the bourgeoisie 
and U.S. imperialism." 
  In 1982 PROCUP took up the legacy of the Union of the 
People, 
an armed group founded by Jose Maria Ortiz Vides of Guatemala. 
That year it reassessed its short-, medium-, and long-term goals 
for the takeover of power by the proletariat. 
  For five years as the Union of the People, its activists 
conducted "expropriations" (bank holdups) and planted bombs in 
shopping centers, banks, and government offices along with other 
armed militant groups. 
  The Armed Forces of National Liberation were exterminated in 
Chiapas. Years later, other natives of Chiapas rebuilt the 
political-military organization, removing the A from its 
initials. As of the early 1980's they called themselves the 
Forces of National Liberation (FLN) and set up their armed wing: 
the Zapatist National Liberation Army (EZLN). 
  The EZLN has a broad social base. According to ranchers in 
Ocosingo and Altamirano, its visible face is the Emiliano Zapata 
National Independent Peasant Alliance (ANCIEZ). 
  ANCIEZ started in late 1989, when it was called the Emiliano 
Zapata Independent Peasant Alliance (ACIEZ). It was local back 
then, with a presence in Altamirano, Sabanilla, Salto de Agua, 
Ocosingo, and San Cristobal de las Casas. 
  It set itself up as ANCIEZ two years later, taking in 
Indians 
and peasants from the municipalities of El Bosque, Larrainzar, 
Chenalho, Ocosingo, Chanal, Oxchuc, Huixtan, Salto de Agua, 
Tila, Tumbala, Sabanilla, and San Cristobal de las Casas. It was 
officially established in the Puebla highlands, where peasant 
delegates from the states of Chihuahua, Veracruz, Oaxaca, 
Chiapas, and Puebla met. The next year, 1992, peasants from 
Coahuila, Guerrero, and San Luis Potosi joined the organization. 
  They demonstrated their ability to call up and rally their 
members on 12 October 1992 in Chiapas to commemorate 500 years 
of Indian, Black, and Grassroots Resistance. Some 10,000 Indians 
marched in San Cristobal de las Casas, half of them from ANCIEZ. 
They could be distinguished from the rest because their columns 
had a military look and were carrying bows and arrows. 
  They toppled the statue of Diego de Mazariegos, the 
conqueror 
and founder of San Cristobal de las Casas. Mayor Jorge Mario 
Lescieur Talavera accused the Dominican friars of what he called 
"acts of vandalism." 
  Seventeen other organizations that on 11 October 1992 had 
formed the Front of Social Organizations of Chiapas (FOSCH) 
marched along with ANCIEZ. The most representative were CIOAC, 
OCEZ, and the Council of Indian Representatives of the Chiapas 
Highlands (CRIACH). 
  During the days prior to the Indian march, a rumor was going 
around the forest and highlands of Ocosingo, Altamirano, and Las 
Margaritas that the guerrillas were going to take over the 
municipal capitals and loot shops. 
  ANCIEZ disappeared officially from Chiapas in February 1993 
after an assembly in Sabanilla. All of its leaders left San 
Cristobal de las Casas during the first three months of the 
year. No one knows where they went. The last time that they 
appeared as an organization was during a FOSCH march in Tuxtla 
Gutierrez on 22 and 23 April of last year. The EZLN kept up its 
political, ideological, and military training, however. 
  The first public news of the guerrillas' existence came 
after 
the charred bodies of two military personnel were found in San 
Isidro El Ocotal on 20 March 1993. Then came the shoot-outs in 
the Corralchen highlands, between Ocosingo and Altamirano, on 
22, 23, and 24 May. Two soldiers were reported dead and two 
others wounded. A civilian, who it is now known belonged to the 
EZLN, also died. 
  In March and April 1993, issue 61 of the newspaper 
PROLETARIO, which is published by PROCUP-PDLP and distributed 
clandestinely in several states around the country, said that 
"the existence of the revolutionary movement in the state 
(Chiapas) is an open secret that is being heard and spread all 
over. The people are helping it, sympathizing with, aiding, and 
protecting the guerrillas." 
  It commented on the appointment of Governor Patrocinio 
Gonzalez Blanco as interior secretary: 
  "There were countless human rights violations in Chiapas 
during his term of office: assassinations of peasant and Indian 
leaders in agrarian conflicts; merciless evictions of entire 
communities struggling for land; quasi-fascist reforms of the 
Penal Code; jails full of peasants, Indians, and social 
fighters; harassment of newsmen for exercising their freedom of 
expression, to the point of murder in some instances; serial 
killings of homosexuals, suggesting the existence of "death 
squads" linked to police chiefs in the state; a rise in drug 
trafficking throughout the state; persecution and jailing of 
clergy committed to the suffering people and Indians; cacique 
and cattle-ranching groups that encourage paramilitary forces to 
kill grass-roots leaders, attack peasants and Indians, and 
kidnap and assault citizens. 
  "These are Patrocinio Gonzalez Garrido's credentials, and 
his 
appointment to head the secretariat in charge of internal 
politics is symptomatic. As far as the people of Chiapas are 
concerned, Gonzalez Garrido remains a latent threat, all the 
more so since his successor enjoys his complete confidence and 
is committed to the same shady, retrograde, cacique interests: 
Elmar Setzer Marseille." 
  Although there were no political grievances at all, there is 
evidence that the wave of kidnappings gripping Chiapas is linked 
to the guerrillas. 
  At least 20 persons have been kidnapped over the past two 
years, and ransoms of close to 40 million new pesos have been 
paid. 
  On 6 January 1993, for example, rancher and coffee-grower 
Joaquin Gutierrez Farrera was kidnapped. He was forcibly removed 
from a restaurant in the town of Rizo de Oro, in Cintalapa, by a 
group of seven heavily armed men, who took him into the 
highlands along the border with Oaxaca. A month later, on 17 
February, he was released, weighing 20 kilos less, after a 
ransom of 1.5 million new pesos had been paid. 
  A month later, on 20 February, rancher and merchant Ramon 
Wong Jimenez was kidnapped by another heavily armed group. "Men 
with light weapons cut him off on the coastal highway," said his 
driver, Luciano Dominguez Arreola. 
  On 8 November, ranchers Jorge Alfredo Chamlaty Espinosa and 
Arnulfo Puon Horita were kidnapped by six individuals carrying 
high-powered weapons. 
  Four days before, the leader of the Livestock Union of the 
Coast, Mario Monterrosa Reyes, had disappeared; he was released 
five days later after his relatives paid a ransom of 240,000 new 
pesos. 
  This is Monterrosa's account: 
  "They were passing themselves off as members of Guatemalan 
National Revolutionary Unity (URNG). They belong to a Central 
American international command consisting of Guatemalans, 
Salvadorans, Nicaraguans, Hondurans, and Mexicans. They use 
R-15, AK-47, and M-16 automatic weapons and grenades. They also 
have a sophisticated radiocommunications network and information 
on persons likely to be kidnapped. They are only after money, 
and based on what they said, they need it to buy medicine, food, 
and weapons...." 

