Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lisa Buckingham and Roger Cowe: "CBI Costs </F>
Pollution Clean-up at &pound;40 Billion"] 
  [Text] The Confederation of British Industry [CBI] has 
warned that the cost of cleaning up all industrial-contaminated 
land in the United Kingdom could be as much as &pound;40 billion. 
  Responding to European Community [EC] clean-up plans, the 
CBI 
says this cost should not be borne wholly by industry. 
  Admitting that putting a figure on the extent of 
contamination is difficult, and putting a price on 
rehabilitation even more problematic, CBI experts have 
calculated that as much as one tenth of United Kingdom land 
could be defined as polluted to some extent. 
  The industry body's submission to the EC calculates that 
assessing the scale of contamination could cost as much as 
&pound;600 million and that merely containing the problem may 
cost 
&pound;20 billion. 
  If all the main polluted sites were to be completely 
rehabilitated--fit to be used for any purpose and not just for 
industry--the total bill could rise to an astronomical &pound;40 
billion, the CBI says. 
  But the submission highlights problems caused by the 
Government's failure to pursue plans for a register of 
contaminated land. It says the biggest impediment to better 
clean-up is a lack of agreement on what constitutes 
contamination and what then constitutes adequate cleanliness for 
the intended purpose. 
  Despite the growing hysteria in some business circles, the 
Confederation cautions against scaremongering over the potential 
scale and cost of the clean-up. "After centuries of economic 
activity in Europe much of it is contaminated. But the areas of 
real risk are much more limited," it says. It reckons only about 
2 per cent of all polluted sites need urgent remedial action. 
  The EC issued a consultative Green Paper earlier this year 
on 
environmental damage and who should be held liable for the costs 
of cleaning it up. British industry is worried that it will be 
exposed to much greater liabilities than at present. 
  Of particular concern is the possibility that a strict 
liability regime might be introduced, laying business open to 
paying for pollution even if its operations conform to accepted 
standards. Banks and insurance companies are also alarmed that 
the notion of joint and several liability could come into force, 
meaning that any organisation with an involvement in a polluted 
site could be liable for the entire clean-up cost. 
  Industry is also adamant that retroactive liability would 
lay 
it open to huge claims for past pollution which met standards 
then in force. 
  "Business people need to know that actions which are lawful 
when they are taken will not become unlawful in the future 
because of improved science or the introduction of higher 
environmental standards," the CBI states. 
  The organisation supports other businesses lobbying to 
prevent pressure groups being able to take legal action against 
polluting companies. The CBI believes the right to take legal 
action should be restricted to those who suffer damage or to the 
statutory authorities. "To do otherwise is to invite the use of 
the law to achieve environmental improvements," it says. 
  Friends of the Earth spokesman Andrew Lees said this would 
give the Government a "monopoly on conscience." He added: "It is 
fundamental to any concept of citizens' rights that 
organisations such as ours should be able to fill the action 
gap." 
  Mr Lees also argued that it was necessary to have strict, 
retrospective joint and several liability. He said that lenders 
who can influence management should be liable for companies' 
pollution and that environmental contamination had such a wide 
impact on society that it should stand apart from other issues 
in the way it is dealt with by the law. 
  "We need to have a proper integration of the environment and 
the economy," he said. "It can't be just a bolt-on extra. It has 
to be one of the pillars of the way we organise society." 
  Guardian Newspapers Limited, October 25, 1993 

