Language: <F P=105> Georgian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Head of State Eduard Shevardnadze by Nato </F>
Oniani; place and date not given -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Oniani] Mr. Shevardnadze, you have been in 
touch by telephone with the White House, obviously about your 
forthcoming visit to the United States. Taking into 
consideration the complex situation -- I mainly mean the 
economic crisis and the Abkhazian problem -- what is the 
significance of this visit for Georgia? 
  [Shevardnadze] The issue of this visit has long been on the 
agenda. A number of variants have been under consideration in 
Washington regarding the most acceptable date for the United 
States and us. Last night I was informed by the White House and 
later by the Ambassador Kent Brown that the White House is ready 
to schedule this visit for 7 March and that everything pertinent 
to a visit like this must be done. [passage omitted] 
  There are countries in which we have a particular interest, 
including England and some other countries, Uzbekistan and 
certain republics of the former Soviet Union, but I think that 
by beginning these new relations with the United States and by 
preparing a legal basis we will have completed quite an 
impressive circuit from the point of view of expanding our 
political and diplomatic arena. 
  This is in general. In detail, I do not want an impression 
to be created that after the visit we will have electricity, 
sugar, and bread and we will have abundance. It never happens 
like this. But the way to this is connected with Russia as well 
as the West and the United States in particular. [passage 
omitted] This visit should become a guarantee of future active 
cooperation between Georgia and the United States and this 
cooperation will do good to every family and every citizen. 
This is the major aim of the visit. 
  [Oniani] Mr. Shevardnadze, there is a committee in support 
of Georgia in the United States. Do you think the activities of 
the committee are limited to moral and political support, or is 
this committee involved in other activities? 
  [Shevardnadze] This is not a symbolic committee. I would 
like to point out that the committee has worked since the 
preparations for the visit started and will actively work during 
my visit. [passage omitted] Relations with the IMF and the 
World Bank are of a particular interest for me. Preliminary 
preparatory work for the meetings has been done and I think the 
U.S. Administration as well as the World Bank and IMF will 
consider the current situation in Georgia. Since we are more or 
less moving in the direction of peaceful settlements of 
conflicts and are establishing order in the country, I do not 
think we shall return emptyhanded. Guarantees resulting from 
the visit for credits, an increase of humanitarian aid, and 
concrete supplies of products or currency will apparently be 
substantial. [passage omitted] 
  [Oniani] You have said that you will have meetings at the 
IMF, at the Reconstruction Bank [as heard]. In addition, the 
press has reported that the committee in support of Georgia is 
preparing your meeting with businessmen. I think we have to 
infer that the visit in general and the meetings will have a 
link with an anticrisis program in our country. 
  [Shevardnadze] There is much talk in Georgia about 
anticrisis 
programs and ways to escape from the crisis, which mainly result 
in an implication that if the present government quits and 
another one comes in everything will be all right. I do not 
think like this. Changes can always be introduced in the 
government, into every line of power, but this will obviously be 
only a detail rather than a means to survive. 
  We have drafted a program on getting out of the crisis. I 
have said that it is an optimum program to be implemented. 
However, we are not rushing to reveal the draft program to the 
people for consideration because we have to get certain 
guarantees, not only within the country but also from the 
outside world. I was not able to present the program to our 
community until relations with Russia were settled. It can only 
be in a fairy tale that the crisis can be overcome without the 
restoration of economic links of vital importance with Russia, 
Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Armenia, and others. This is 
one thing. 
  Second, I cannot offer the population an anticrisis program 
unless I have certain guarantees from countries like the United 
States, Germany, to some extent France, and especially the whole 
UN system with the IMF, the World Bank, the European Bank, and 
the European Union. [passage omitted] 
  As we start to develop economic relations with Russia, I 
will 
be able to offer the draft we call an anticrisis program. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Oniani] How about the Abkhazian conflict in which combat 
activities have renewed despite the intervention of the United 
Nations and other international structures? 
  [Shevardnadze] I have expressed my opinion on this issue 
several times. Indeed, Russia's role and place is indispensable 
and unique in a way. If the Russian leadership is inspired in 
the same way as we felt during President Yeltsin's visit to 
Tbilisi, these conflicts, one and the other, will be settled and 
order restored relatively soon. It does not mean, however, that 
I am not capable of assessing a role for the West. Especially 
as regards actions taken by the United Nations, the 
participation of European structures and...[pauses] I have to 
tell you that we have received the UN secretary general's reply 
to a letter Yeltsin and I sent him. It does not contain many 
promises, but I know that comprehensive work is under way, so to 
speak, in the lobby, including Washington, to work out all 
conditions. Here is the first condition: If a political process 
for a settlement starts, the deployment of international 
peacekeeping forces to Abkhazia will become more real. 
  I am positive that this will be one of the principal issues 
of our discussions. [passage omitted] I envisage that our visit 
to Washington will reveal the expediency of a visit to New York. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Oniani] Finally, Mr. Shevardnadze, do you think that this 
visit could affect Rusian-Georgian relations negatively because 
there is a certain disagreement, if I can say so, between Russia 
and the West? There really is a certain annoyance due to 
relations with Serbs. 
  [Shevardnadze] I think that your question is a reflection of 
the general feeling which may arise within our public. Even 
those who are against the improvement of our relations with 
Russia will immediately put forward this question: Shevardnadze 
is going to Washington and this is yet another mistake by him 
because it might annoy Russia. I would say that this is a 
simplified approach to serious politics. 
  You know that our Western friends' advice and 
recommendations 
-- letters from and personal conversations with Chancellor Kohl, 
the former U.S. President, and the present President -- were 
based on the idea that Georgia is to be able to establish good 
relations with Russia as soon as possible. The Russian 
leadership knows perfectly well what kind of attitude the West 
has toward Russian-Georgian relations. Then why should the more 
active development of relations between us and the United States 
cause annoyance within the Russian leadership? 
  Georgia can play a positive role not only in the CIS but 
also 
in preventing a recurrence and revival of what we used to call 
the Cold War and what the planet paid a high price for, if 
Georgia has very good relations built on a legal basis with the 
United States and other Western countries. So I cannot see any 
contradiction or foundations. 
  There will be certain speeches and certain actions in the 
State Duma or elsewhere. Our so-called friends will not miss a 
chance to pinch us, to bite us. Something like this will take 
place but, in principle, this is a natural process we have been 
following for the recent two years. I think we are gradually 
approaching what is desirable for us and are creating 
advantageous conditions in the outside situation for the 
interests of the building of our national democratic state. 

