`Alarming   Proportions' 

<F P=102> BK1405121194 Islamabad THE NATION in English 14 May 94 p 12 </F>
<F P=103> BK1405121194 </F>
<F P=104>  Islamabad THE NATION </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>
BFN 

  [Text] Islamabad -- The three Southwest Asian states of 
Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan are producing an estimated 1,500 
to 3,000 metric tonnes of opium every year, a recent United 
Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) report 
states. 
  The report says, drug-related problems in the Southwest 
Asian 
sub-region, (covering Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan) are among 
the most serious in the world. 
  Despite efforts by the Governments to reduce demand, 
addiction to opium and heroin is rampant in this sub-region. 
  Detailing the local addiction in figures, the report notes 
that addiction rates have assumed alarming proportions in this 
region. 
  Pakistan reported 3 million drug addicts in 1993 of which 
about, 1.5 million were heroin and 162,000 opium addicts. The 
Government of Iran estimated some 500,000 drug addicts, of which 
some 350,000 were opium and 150,000 were heroin addicts. 
Figures for Afghanistan are not available. 
  It is estimated that more than half of the opium produced in 
the sub-region is consumed within the three countries. 
  Drug trafficking, however, is not just limited to the 
Southwest Asian sub-region, that has been transformed into one 
of world's largest drug producing and trafficking areas. Large 
quantities are also trafficked elsewhere in Asia and in other 
parts of the world. 
  Opium, morphine and heroin refining and trafficking is 
continuing to feed both local and foreign demand, the UNDCP 
report points out. 
  Scizures in Pakistan and Iran have established that the 
Iran/Pakistan/Afghanistan border areas are one of the principal 
narcotics trafficking areas in the world. Drug trafficking in 
these border areas involves large quantities of drugs, 
sophisticated criminal organisations and a great deal of 
violence. In terms of quantity and violence, the movement of 
morphine from Afghanistan directly and through Pakistan into 
Iran for Turkey is the main problem. 
  In 1993 alone authorities in Iran seized more than 25 metric 
tonnes of morphine, 2 metric tonnes of heroin and 63 metric 
tonnes of opium originating from this area. 
  In Pakistan (Balochistan) the law enforcement agencies also 
seized major amounts of opium, heroin and cannabis (hashish), 
more than 90 metric tonnes) last year. 
  Helmand province of Afghanistan is the main opium producing 
area supplying opium which is shipped directly into Iran or 
through Pakistan into Iran. Opium production estimates for 
Helmand suggest that it alone produces more than 50 per cent of 
the opium of the sub-region. 
  Most of the opium is processed into morphine at laboratories 
in Helmand and Nimroz (also in Afghanistan), from where it is 
shipped into Iran directly and through Pakistan into Iran. The 
ultimate destination of this morphine is Turkey and western 
countries where it is refined into white heroin. 
  Opium not transformed into morphine in Afghanistan is 
shipped 
from them directly into Iran or through Pakistan into Iran or 
remains in Pakistan to meet local demand. Some opium and heroin 
is trafficked through Balochistan to the coast. The opium 
transported to Iran is mostly for consumption there. 
  Cannabis (in the form of hashish) produced in Afghanistan 
rarely enters Iran, but is shipped in large quantities through 
Balochistan to the coast of southern Pakistan. In January this 
year, Pakistani authorities seized more than 50 metric tonnes of 
Hashish in one single seizure in southern Balochistan. 
  Southwest Asia has been engaged in the cultivation of opium 
poppies for local consumption for centuries. But, the 
transformation of the opium poppy into a major cash crop is a 
phenomenon of the last few decades. 
  There was dramatic increase in the poppy cultivation in the 
area comprising Afghanistan and northwestern Pakistan, following 
the Soviet intervention in 1979, and the subsequent war in 
Afghanistan. 

