Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial report] Tokyo NHK General Television Network in 
Japanese at 2310 GMT on 1 January 94, in its "New Year Interview 
Program With Heads of Ruling Parties," carries a 108-minute 
series of recorded interviews with heads of ruling coalition 
parties -- Tomiichi Murayama, chairman of the Social Democratic 
Party of Japan [SDPJ]; Tsutomu Hata, representative of Shinseito 
[the Japan Renewal Party]; Koshiro Ishida, chairman of the 
Komeito; Keigo Ouchi, chairman of the Democratic Socialist Party 
[DSP]; Masayoshi Takemura, representative of Sakigake [the 
Harbinger Party]; Satsuki Eda, representative of the United 
Socialist Party [USP] and Yasumatsu Hoshikawa, representative of 
the Democratic Reform Coalition -- by NHK commentator Takashi 
Yamamoto and NHK announcer Atsuko Yamada at NHK's Tokyo studio. 
  At 2311 GMT, Yamamoto begins an interview with Murayama by 
asking the latter about policy differences between the SDPJ, the 
Komeito and Shinseito. In response, Murayama says: "As I always 
said, political parties which have policy conflicts and 
different political beliefs form a coalition government to 
cooperate with each other in the search for a policy consensus, 
and this is the character of a coalition government. It is a 
matter of course that coalition partners have differing policy 
views." Stressing the importance of intracoalition debate to 
narrow the policy differences, Murayama says, "Viewing the 
debate as a confrontation misses the point." Murayama also says, 
"I think the intracoalition debate will consolidate the 
foundation of the coalition government." Discussing policy 
conflicts among the coalition partners, Murayama denies the 
existence of differences among the coalition partners over a 
package of political reform bills under deliberation in the 
lower house, saying "The coalition partners have already agreed 
on the package." Murayama also adds the coalition partners will 
coordinate their views if there are any differences among them 
on revising the bills. 
  Asked by Yamada about the SDPJ's position in the coalition 
government, Murayama stresses the need to stabilize the 
foundation of the coalition government and says: "The passage of 
the political reform bills holds the key to stabilizing the 
coalition government, and it is important for the coalition 
government to seek bold policies on the basis of that 
stabilization." Murayama also adds "the SDPJ should take the 
responsibility for bolstering the coalition government." Asked 
by Yamamoto if the SDPJ has displayed no significant leadership 
in the coalition government, Murayama says: "I believe that 
since the coalition partners have different political beliefs, 
what the SDPJ advocates is hard for the rest of the coalition 
partners to accept." Asked by Yamamoto about the possibility of 
the SDPJ backing out of the coalition government, Murayama says: 
"Popular consensus shaped in the July general elections is that 
38 years of politics by the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] 
should be ended, and the consensus has developed into a major 
trend among the people. The SDPJ joined the coalition government 
out of its need to respond to the high public expectations for 
an end to LDP politics. Since the SDPJ joined the coalition 
government, it should play a role in changing Japan's politics 
and fulfilling the people's high expectations." 
  Asked by Yamada about political reform, Murayama notes the 
delay in the deliberations of the package of political reform 
bills in the upper house and says: "My view is that since both 
ruling and opposition parties have pledged to push for political 
reform, the package of political reform bills will be passed in 
the upper house. The passage of the bills in the upper house 
will stabilize the political situation and consolidate the 
foundation of the coalition government, enabling the government 
to push ahead with bold policies." 
  Asked by Yamamoto about the possibility of dissolving the 
lower house, Murayama says, "I believe that if the political 
reform bills are not passed or are killed in the Diet, the 
Hosokawa Cabinet would be held responsible. As I said earlier, 
the lower house must not be dissolved at a time when Japan is 
gripped with a serious recession. If the Hosokawa cabinet is 
held politically responsible for failing to pass the political 
reform bills in the Diet, there would be no alternative but to 
dissolve the lower house, but this is a matter to be decided by 
the prime minister. I think the dissolution of the lower house 
should be averted at all cost." 
  Asked by Yamada why the SDPJ is opposed to raising the 
consumption tax, Murayama says, "I am against any argument for 
raising the consumption tax to make up for a fiscal revenue 
shortfall resulting from cuts in the income tax because this new 
taxation arrangement will hit wage earners," adding that the 
government should issue bonds to make up for the fiscal revenue 
shortfall instead. 
  Discussing the issue of cutting the income tax and 
raising the consumption tax, Murayama says, "If the income tax 
is cut and the consumption tax is raised at the same time, this 
would fuel a sense of unfairness among the people and would not 
serve to stimulate the economy." 
  Discussing a realignment of established political parties, 
Murayama says: "There is talk that the established political 
parties should be realigned into two conservative parties. I 
think the talk is out of the question. The realignment of 
established political parties into two conservative political 
parties runs counter to democracy. I am in favor of the moderate 
multiparty system Prime Minister Hosokawa has broached. I 
believe the multiparty system is inevitable. The time has passed 
when a single party will continue to stay in power. The time has 
come when multiple parties form a coalition government. The SDPJ 
intends to play its part in the multiparty system as a party 
that upholds the social democracy. The SDPJ also intends to work 
hard to maintain its influence as a political organization while 
shoring up the coalition government." Murayama goes on to say 
that the SDPJ will seek to rally liberal forces. 
  Asked by Yamamoto about the possibility of the SDPJ's 
seeking 
an alliance with the LDP, Murayama says the LDP should transform 
itself into a more liberal party and adds, "We will seek an 
alliance with liberal members of the LDP." Asked by Yamamoto 
about the possibility of a split in the SDPJ, Murayama says, 
"There are various groups in the SDPJ and they should not take 
any actions that lead to a party split." Yamamoto and Yamada end 
the interview with Murayama at 2334 GMT after thanking him. 
  At 2335 GMT, Yamamoto begins an interview with Shinseito's 
Hata and points out that the ruling parties and the government 
are not in step. In response, Hata says: "There have been turns 
and twists. A ruling party agonized a lot when it decided to 
accept the GATT compromise proposal calling for a partial 
opening of the Japanese market. The ruling party made the 
decision based on the conclusion that it is necessary to make 
the Uruguay Round a success to defend free trade. I do not care 
at all about the existence of the turns and twists." 
  Asked by Yamamoto if the coalition partners will run into 
difficulty coordinating their views with the SDPJ in the future, 
Hata says: "The SDPJ had continued to exist as a main opposition 
party while upholding its own ideology. Whenever I have met with 
members of the SDPJ, however, I have found them changed a lot 
since the end of the Cold War. They have become broad-minded. I 
have continued to discuss political reform and other issues with 
them. I have felt little difference between me and them when we 
have discussed the future of Japan." 
  Asked by Yamamoto about the possibility of Komeito's and 
Shinseito's forming a new party, Hata says, "It would be good if 
the Komeito and Shinseito, and many other parties discuss ways 
to form a new party." Asked by Yamada if he still sticks to his 
plan for two political forces, Hata says: "I have stuck to the 
plan for seven or eight years since I was with the LDP. I think 
that as the current electoral system changes, a situation will 
be created wherein two major political forces are formed." Asked 
by Yamamoto what he means by the two political forces, Hata 
says, "I think that the term conservative or reformist is 
obsolete." Asked by Yamada if he envisions a split in the LDP in 
the course of rallying the two political forces, Hata says: 
"Yes, the LDP has already begun to fall apart. I believe that 
there is a possibility that the LDP will split when the 
established political parties are realigned." Yamamoto asks 
about a possible alliance between Shinseito and the current LDP. 
In response, Hata says his party is not thinking of forming any 
alliance with the LDP at present. Yamamoto also asks when the 
second stage for the realignment of the political parties will 
begin. In reply, Hata says: "I think it is certain that a 
movement will gain momentum to that end if the new electoral 
system is introduced." 
  In that context, Yamamoto asks if there is a possibility 
that 
the ruling partners will try to revise the political reform 
bills in a bid to compromise with the LDP. Hata says: "As I 
said earlier, the Diet is a venue for debate, and the political 
reform bills in question are designed to establish the 
foundation for democracy. It is not desirable for the coalition 
government to insist on keeping the bills intact. But if both 
ruling and opposition parties engage in genuine discussions, it 
would be possible to come to some conclusions. So, if all the 
parties give up pursuing their own party interests or individual 
interests, I think it is possible to find a way for 
discussions." He then discusses the significance of carrying 
out political reform. Yamamoto then asks if Prime Minister 
Hosokawa should take responsibility if the political reform is 
not carried out. Hata answers "I wonder if we are qualified to 
hold Prime Minister Hosokawa responsible. The people would call 
on each of Diet member to take responsibility instead," saying: 
"Prime Minister Hosokawa is seriously coming to grips with 
political reform." He then says if he fails to carry out the 
political reform, the responsibility rests with the opposition 
parties and some of the coalition partners. 
  Asked by Yamamoto about the possibility of dissolving the 
House of Representatives, Hata says the dissolution of the House 
of Representatives could be one path, but he adds: "Now the 
government faces economic issues and many other problems to be 
resolved immediately. Therefore, we cannot dissolve the House 
of Representatives." 
  Asked by Yamada if the government's economic affairs 
consultation council chaired by Hata will come up with concrete 
measures to stimulate the economy, Hata says in-depth 
discussions will be held to work out concrete stimulus measures. 
On the issue of raising the consumption tax to make up for a 
fiscal revenue shortfall resulting from cuts in the income tax 
cut, Hata says it is difficult to raise the consumption tax 
simultaneously with the income tax cut and notes the immediate 
issuance of deficit-covering bonds is also difficult. 
  Asked by Yamamoto when the budget for fiscal 1994 will be 
compiled, Hata indicates the hope that debate on a budget bill 
will begin in early February, stressing significance of the 
budget. The interview with Hata ends at 0000 GMT. 
  At 0001 GMT, Yamamoto begins an interview with Komeito's 
Ishida. Yamamoto first asks if the political reform bills can be 
passed in the House of Councillors during the current Diet 
session. Ishida says: "The deliberation of the political reform 
bills will resume in the House of Councillors on 4 and 5 
January. But I think the situation is still grim. When I come 
to think about it, we have spent five years dealing with this 
issue. Since the political reform bills were adopted at the 
House of Representatives at the end of the debate, I strongly 
hope that the coalition partners will draw a lesson while 
seeking cooperation from the opposition parties." Asked by 
Yamada to what extent the coalition partners can compromise with 
the opposition parties, Ishida says: "Taking into consideration 
the fact that fierce discussions were held between the ruling 
and opposition parties on possible revision of the bills, I do 
not think we need to further change the bills." He then briefly 
explains the major points of differences between the ruling and 
opposition parties on the political reform bills. 
  Asked by Yamamoto if Prime Minister Hosokawa should take 
responsibility if he fails to get the bills passed in the Diet, 
Ishida says: "I think he is somewhat responsible for it. But I 
do not think his failure in passing the bills will lead to the 
dissolution of the House of Representatives or resignation of 
the cabinet en masse." He says "The responsibility also rests 
with both the ruling and the opposition parties," adding: "I do 
not think the prime minister alone should be held responsible." 
  Asked about the Komeito's policy conflict with the SDPJ, 
Ishida says it is nothing to worry about. He then discusses 
Komeito's relations with Shinseito, saying Shinseito's members' 
opinions are worth paying attention to because they have 
experience in running the government as LDP members. But he 
rules out the possibility of forming a new party with Shinseito 
in the near future. 
  On controversial relations between the Komeito and the Sokka 
Gakkai, a Buddhist sect, which LDP member Watanabe views as 
running counter to the principle of separating religion from 
politics, Ishida says he intends to work for more transparency 
in relations between the Komeito and the Soka Gakkai. 
  Asked about his view on plans by the Finance Ministry and 
the 
Tax Reform Council to raise the consumption tax and cut the 
income tax simultaneously, Ishida says: "There is an opinion 
that the effect of the income tax cut would be offset by the 
hike in the consumption tax. I do not think we should ignore 
this opinion. In this sense, even if the government decides to 
cut the income tax, deficit-covering bonds should be issued as 
fiscal revenue source. The government should not decide to 
raise the consumption tax until in-depth discussions are held." 
The interview with Komeito Chairman Ishida ends at 0020 GMT. 
  At 0021 GMT, Yamamoto begins an interview with Ouchi. Asked 
by interviewer Yamada about the possibility of passing the 
political reform bills in the Diet during its current session, 
Ouchi says: "Our party will do its utmost to have the political 
reform bills passed. The duration of the current Diet was 
extended for 45 days. We have enough time to debate this issue. 
I think we can pass the bills after making thorough debates 
unless there is vicious obstruction to the debates." Asked 
about a possible compromise with the LDP, Ouchi says the 
coalition partners and the government have to make efforts to 
have the bills passed even by compromising with the LDP. 
  Noting the LDP is maintaining that the stimulus measures 
be placed ahead of political reform, Yamamoto asks Ouchi to 
comment on this. Ouchi points out the Hosokawa government was 
inaugurated after pledging to push for political reform and 
stresses "the need for the Hosokawa government to push for 
political reform to maintain a relationship of trust with the 
people," adding that the coalition government should not abandon 
or delay the stimulus measures. Ouchi also regrets the 
"government's decision to defer the compilation of a budget for 
fiscal 1994 to this year." Ouchi adds, "It is important for the 
coalition partners to work together to reassure the people of 
the prospect of an early economic recovery by unveiling the 
outline of the 1994 budget." 
  Asked by Yamamoto about the possibility of dissolving the 
House of Representatives if the political reform bills fail to 
pass in the Diet, Ouchi rules out the possibility and stresses 
the "coalition partners should do their utmost to pass the 
political reform bills in the Diet." Asked by Yamamoto about 
Prime Minister Hosokawa's political responsibility if the 
political reform bills are not passed in the Diet, Ouchi notes 
that Mr. Hosokawa recently apologized for his failure to pass 
them and made clear that he would take political responsibility. 
Ouchi makes it clear that "Mr. Hosokawa should take political 
responsibility one way or another if the bills fail to pass in 
the Diet." 
  Asked by Yamada about the economic outlook, Ouchi admits 
that 
"the more than 3 trillion yen stimulus measures have thus far 
failed to generate the desired effect of stimulating the 
economy" and stresses the "need for the coalition government to 
compile a third supplementary budget with the aim of helping the 
economy recover this summer." Ouchi also stresses "the need for 
the coalition government to seek bold tax cuts, and a policy to 
spur land and housing transactions, and overhaul the current 
monetary system." Discussing ways to cut taxes, Ouchi contends 
that income tax cuts and the consumption tax hike should be 
treated separately. Discussing the income tax cut, Ouchi says 
the ruling parties and the coalition government have yet to 
decide on it and says his view is that at least 0.6 trillion yen 
should be cut from taxes to spur the stagnant economy, and 
deficit-covering bonds should not be issued. Discussing the 
realignment of the political parties, Ouchi says political 
parties that share the same policies should form a new party, 
and adds that "once the political reform bills are passed in the 
Diet, the political parties will immediately move 
behind-the-scenes toward a realignment." The interview with 
Ouchi ends at 0037 GMT. 
  At 0038 GMT, Yamamoto begins an interview with Takemura by 
pointing to a recent fall in the popular approval rating of the 
Hosokawa government. In response, Takemura concedes that the 
rating has fallen in the wake of the coalition government's 
decision to accept the GATT compromise proposal calling for a 
partial opening of the Japanese rice market, and adds the 
coalition government will work hard to regain popular support. 
Asked by Yamamoto about the personal relationship between 
Takemura and Ozawa, Takemura says: "Mr. Ozawa and I have often 
met for discussions of major political issues. Mr. Ozawa is a 
reformist politician. Mr. Ozawa and I are of almost the same 
view on reform programs including political and administrative 
reforms." He says there are some differences between them on 
how to carry out the reform programs. 
  Asked by Yamamoto about an alleged policy rift between the 
SDPJ and Shinseito, Takemura says he does not take this 
seriously, but admits the "existence of a sense of incongruity 
among the coalition partners." Takemura says the "SDPJ has a 
different security policy from the rest of the coalition 
partners." Takemura also says the "SDPJ has been working hard 
in the coalition government while making difficult decisions." 
Asked by Yamada if the political reform bills will be passed 
without fail in the Diet during its current session, Takemura 
says: "We are trying hard to pass them during the current Diet 
session. It was regrettable to fail to pass them in the Diet 
within 1993. I feel sorry for that. I intend to work hard to 
pass them in the House of Councillors." Discussing Prime 
Minister Hosokawa's political responsibility if the bills fail 
to pass in the Diet, Takemura says: "Prime Minister Hosokawa 
has repeatedly pledged to work for their passage with a firm 
resolve. The prime minister and I intend to do our utmost to 
pass them during the current Diet session." 
  Discussing the possibility of revising the political 
reform bills under deliberation in the House of Councillors, 
Takemura says: "Both ruling and opposition parties are closer 
to agreeing on the revision. If they make minor concessions to 
each other, they will find areas of agreement." Discussing the 
possibility of dissolving the House of Representatives, Takemura 
rules out this possibility and stresses the need for the 
coalition partners to resolve many thorny issues one by one 
while shoring up the coalition government. Discussing the 
stimulus measures, Takemura regrets the deferment of the 
compilation of the 1994 budget and reveals that "the coalition 
government intends to use all fiscal and monetary means to 
tackle the worst post-war recession while upholding the 
principle of compiling an unprecedentedly bold third 
supplementary budget to spur the economy." 
  With regard to income tax reduction, Takemura says: "The 
coalition government intends to make a final decision on the 
size of the reduction. The prime minister is prepared to do 
so." Discussing the consumption tax hike, Takemura says he 
thinks the coalition government should make a decision on it 
after studying public opinion. Takemura also says the coalition 
government should avoid issuing deficit-covering bonds. 
  Asked by Yamamoto about prospects for a realignment of the 
political parties, Takemura says "it is desirable that political 
parties sharing the same policies and political beliefs forge a 
coalition to seize power, and a second realignment of the 
political parties will surely take place after the next 
elections." Asked by Yamamoto about the merger of Shinseito and 
Sakigake, Takemura says "there is no change in their plans to 
merge themselves and I intend to start talks with Shinseito on 
the merger in the near future." The interview with Takemura ends 
at 0052 GMT. 
  At 0053 GMT, Yamamoto begins interviews with Eda and 
Hosokawa. Eda says the United Socialist Party will play a key 
role in the realignment of the political parties. Commenting on 
the realignment, Eda says the LDP still has a powerful electoral 
base in the countryside and stresses "the need to ask voters in 
the next election whether they want to keep the Hosokawa 
government in place or put the LDP back in power." He adds the 
coalition partners should unite in the next election. 
  Asked by Yamamoto to comment on a stalemate in the 
deliberations of the political reform bills in the House of 
Councillors, Hoshikawa says: "I believe that since the Hosokawa 
government has staked its fate on the passage of the political 
reform bills in the Diet, the bills should be passed in the Diet 
at all costs." Discussing the realignment of the political 
parties, Hoshikawa says he supports forming a multiparty 
government to counter the LDP. 
  The series of interviews with heads of the ruling parties 
end 
at 0058 GMT. 

