Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Marichu A. Villanueva] </F>
  [Text] The Senate yesterday ratified two Philippine 
treaties with India which will ease the exchange of economic and 
technical information and enhance the transfer of technology 
between the two countries. Senator Blas Ople, chairman of the 
Senate foreign relations committee, secured the passage in 
second reading of the two Philippines-India treaties, bringing 
to 25 the total number of treaties so far ratified by the Senate 
since the 9th Congress started in July, 1992. 
  Ople also pushed for the Senate ratification of the 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the 
Convention on Assisting in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency. In his sponsorship speech for the Senate 
concurrence of the two Conventions related to nuclear accidents, 
Ople cited that this international agreement will place the 
Philippines within the protective umbrella of an international 
commitment to provide assistance in case of nuclear accidents. 
  The first treaty with India concurred in by the Senate, 
involves economic and technical cooperation in research and 
design, delivery and installation of plants, machineries and 
equipment and technical assistance in the field of industrial 
research, nuclear energy, engineering, telecommunications, 
agricultural and industrial research. 
  The other treaty with India ratified by the Senate calls for 
the scientific and technological cooperation which provide for 
the exchange of scholars, training programs and information 
exchange on metallurgy, silkworm culture, textile development, 
and low level technology which could be applied to countryside 
development program. 
  Ople said that even before the two treaties were ratified by 
the Senate, the Philippines and India have already put them into 
effect when Filipino scholars and trainees went to India to 
participate in research programs in agriculture, nuclear energy 
generation, industrial chemicals and health programs. 
  Meanwhile, Ople urged his colleagues at the Senate to also 
ratify with dispatch the two Conventions related to nuclear 
accident in the light of dangers it poses to mankind. Ople 
specifically pointed out the presence of nuclear reactors in 
neighboring countries of the Philippines within the 500 miles 
range. These countries, he said, include Taiwan which is 240 
kilometers from Laoag, 795 kilometers from Manila with six 
nuclear reactors in operation and is building two more, Japan 
has 42 nuclear power plants, including two fueled by "highly 
dangerous" plutonium; China has one nuclear power plant and 10 
research reactors; South Korea has five nuclear reactors, and 
North Korea with seven nuclear reactors and which continues to 
resist UN inspection on the real status of its nuclear 
facilities. 
  Under the two Conventions in which the Philippines is a 
signatory, the government would be in a position to demand from 
the erring country, through the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) or its neighbor for technical and technological 
assistance to prevent the effects of radiation from nuclear 
accidents. 
  "The early notification would allow us to protect our people 
and our land from the spreading nuclear poison," Ople pointed 
out. "It is imperative that we become a party to these two 
conventions," he stressed. Ople recalled the Chernobyl accident 
in Russia where radioactive emissions were wind-carried to 
neighboring countries and demonstrated to the world the horrors 
of a nuclear accident. 

