Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nikolay Kishkin: "What To Think About in the </F>
Duma: The First Post-Soviet Parliament Will Begin Its Work Next 
Week"] 
  [Text] The Central Electoral Commission of Russia has 
finally published the final results of the election. Behind us 
are the tension and confusion of the preelection weeks and the 
dissonance of the first, frequently excessively emotional 
postelection assessments. It is already possible to take a 
calmer look at what has happened and to think about what to 
expect from the new parliament and how its activity will be 
reflected in our life. 
  The first conclusion to be drawn from looking at the lists 
of 
elected deputies is perhaps simple: There were no winners in 
these elections. No single bloc and no single party received a 
majority in parliament or even an appreciable preponderance. The 
preelection predictions of almost all of them were two to five 
times greater than what they actually received. 
  Perhaps only Zhirinovskiy's LDPR [Liberal Democratic Party 
of 
Russia] (with all of its ambitions) was not counting on such an 
impressive number of votes. So the "Zhirinovskiy phenomenon" 
consists not in his victory (as it turned out, in terms of 
general results he did not have one) but in the unexpectedness 
of his success. Right after the fact, this success was explained 
by a multitude of factors, including extreme ones--from an 
affinity for neo-Nazi slogans on the part of a low-life and 
young "supermen" to mass "hypnosis" by the Kashpirovskiy method. 
But the essence probably consists in the fact that while there 
was no single reason for the success of the LDPR, finally what 
was decisive was the dissatisfaction of a considerable part of 
the population with the current situation and their standard of 
living. 
  Of course, questions immediately arise. Why did this voter 
give his vote to Zhirinovskiy and not, for example, to Travkin, 
who, with Govorukhin's help, was criticizing the government 
almost down to his last words, and, in spite of this, barely 
passed the 5 percent mark? Why did this voter not see the danger 
of the neo-Nazi slogans and recoil from their author? Why did he 
"buy" these promises which he knew could not be kept? And the 
answer is simple and obvious: Because several generations of our 
people have been educated in a belief in simple and clear 
solutions, and these are what Zhirinovskiy offered. After all, 
did we not believe at the beginning of almost any five-year plan 
that at the end of it there would be a burst of prosperity? Were 
there not many people who believed Nikita Sergeyevich when he 
said that communism would arrive in 20 years? So why not believe 
Vladimir Volfovich now? "Thanks to the party and the 
government"--this is not simply a slogan of "those" years; it is 
a level of belief in the idea that someone will give us 
something, it is the way of thinking of the masses of people. Of 
course, one can say that a certain part of the voters did not 
have enough political sophistication to figure all this out. 
Yes, one could say that, but it is wrong to blame the voters for 
this: For decades they had no political choice when they went to 
vote. And if now, without getting into the intricacies of 
politics, a person has made his choice at the level of a naive, 
everyday awareness, it is his choice, and now the politicians 
will have to deal with it. 
  The paradox of the recent elections consists in that while 
there are no winners, there are still losers. And, 
unfortunately, they are the reform blocs. If after counting on a 
majority in parliament they do not receive it, you cannot call 
it anything but a defeat. And now all parliamentary tactics will 
have to be arranged in a new way, based on existing realities. 
How will the breakdown of political forces in the Duma look and 
how will the blocs behave? 
  Let us stipulate at the outset that a final conclusion about 
the alignment of forces will not be possible until after there 
have been two or three votes on fundamental issues. In the first 
place, a considerable share of the deputies were elected as 
independents, they are not bound to any bloc, and therefore 
their propensities may be revealed only during the process of 
the parliament's work. In the second place, even those who ran 
under the banner of a specific bloc will certainly not 
necessarily vote on one question or another in line with this 
bloc's program. It is now possible to construct suppositions 
about the tactics of these blocs as a whole with a greater or 
lesser degree of probability. 
  Russia's Choice, according to initial estimates, will be the 
largest faction, including more than 100 deputies, which, 
however, is clearly not enough to confidently defend the course 
of reforms. Therefore this course can be maintained without 
special fluctuations only with cooperation with the Yavlinskiy, 
Shakhray, and Women of Russia blocs along with independent 
deputies. The leaders of the Russia's Choice bloc have already 
announced their readiness to interact in parliament "with all 
political forces." But even then a majority is not guaranteed. 
In search of this majority, the bloc will obviously be prepared 
to make partial concessions except for those that would mean a 
rejection of the reforms that have been started. And this 
presents a major difficulty, for even the blocs of Yavlinskiy 
and Shakhray, which are kindred in spirit, diverge from Gaydar's 
bloc fundamentally with respect to a number of economic 
problems, particularly concerning the speed of the reforms and 
social priorities. 
  An extremely impressive force is represented by the team of 
the Agrarian Party and the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation, which together received more than 110. One can 
obviously argue about this, but I lump them together because, to 
be honest, I see no special differences in their political 
positions. Their orientation toward "socialist values" binds 
them firmly together in their voting. It is from this team 
(retaining reformist phraseology) that there may come proposals 
that essentially exacerbate inflation, such as price regulation, 
support for failing enterprises in the city and country--that 
is, the very proposals that could mean an end to the reforms and 
"Ukrainianization" of the Russian economy. The danger of such 
proposals is fairly great if one considers that on the surface 
they appear to be concern for the public good and can attract a 
certain part of the deputies. 
  Strange as it may be, with respect to a number of issues 
this 
team might be joined by the Democratic Party of Russia, which is 
headed by anticommunists Travkin and Govorukhin. Having assumed 
during the election campaign a tone that was not simply critical 
but abusive to the reformers, the government, and the president, 
these leaders sharply reduced the playing field. In general, 
judging from the election battles, the impression was created 
that Travkin's party is not going to parliament to work but to 
fight, unmask, and brand people. If this tone is assumed by the 
communists as well, nothing good awaits our parliament--we will 
simply get another copy of the Supreme Soviet and further 
heightening of the confrontation in society. 
  And what about Zhirinovskiy's party? I shall allow myself to 
make the suggestion that Vladimir Volfovich has kept all his 
ultranationalistic slogans that shocked Russia and the world "in 
reserve" and will not use them in parliament; he will save them 
for better times, hoping to gain all the power. He will quite 
probably regard the next two years as a campaign stretched over 
the time until the 1996 presidential elections. He will try to 
create for himself the image of the pike that lives in the lake 
to keep the small fish alert. From his standpoint it is a 
win-win situation. If things get better in the economy, he will 
take credit for it; he will say look: My party came to office 
and things were straightened out. If it becomes harder to 
live--again he has a ready explanation: You did not allow me to 
create a government and this is what you get. Although in his 
heart I think that the last thing Zhirinovskiy would like would 
be to end up in government: Because then he would have to be 
responsible for everything he promised. Incidentally, he is not 
being offered a position in the government, of course: That 
would be too much of a price to pay to see how a soap bubble 
filled with empty promises might burst... 
  Another scenario looks surprising but it is worth 
mentioning: 
The LDPR could end up as the least stable parliamentary 
formation. During the election campaign Zhirinovskiy made one 
tactical error: In response to the question of how the deputies 
of his party would vote in the Duma, he said: The way their 
leader tells them to. As long as Vladimir Volfovich was playing 
the role of a steamship and pulling several dozen completely 
unknown politicians into parliament, he was forgiven everything. 
But now, looking at the list of deputies of the LDPR, you would 
think that they would not be willing to play the role of extras 
while their leader is bucking for president. A split in the 
party has already been noted: Zhirinovskiy's former close ally 
and his candidate for vice president, A. Zavidiy, announced that 
he was going to break with the boss, stop financing him, and 
lead his people away from him. So the LDPR faction (and it 
includes about 70 people) with various votes could have the most 
unexpected versions of forming a bloc. 
  And so the new parliament will begin its work in a couple of 
days. What are our hopes and concerns in this connection? 
  We have but one hope, and it is that from the first days all 
the political forces will reject confrontation and political 
accusations against one another and will understand that this 
path has already been followed to the end and has led to nothing 
but trouble. It has led to bloodshed. Our hope is that the 
deputies have come to the Duma to work, and that means, above 
all, not to seek that which separates them but places where they 
come together, decisions that are mutually acceptable, even if 
they involve concessions. If they approach things reasonably 
they must understand that there simply is no other path. With 
the current alignment of forces not only no single faction but 
not even any conceivable combination of them can produce a 
majority. And this means that with any other approach the 
parliament might not be able to decide anything at all. 
  And we are alarmed by the still remaining possibility, 
albeit 
theoretical, of rejecting the course of reforms with a 
subsequent collapse of the entire economy. Parliament could 
adopt some antireform law, but it would be extremely difficult 
to do so: In the first place, any draft laws that in one way or 
another affect expenditures from the federal budget may be 
submitted only with a recommendation from the government. So any 
populist resolutions to increase expenditures without actually 
covering them will be practically impossible to pass. In the 
second place, any law adopted by the Duma will have to be 
monitored by the Council of the Federation, whose disapproval 
will have to be overcome not by a simple majority of Duma votes 
but by two-thirds. In the third place, the president, who even 
after the elections confirmed the unchanging course of the 
reforms, still has the right to a veto, which also can be 
overridden only by two-thirds. And proponents of reforms and 
those who support them do have a third of the votes in the Duma. 
True, further advancement of the reforms will require new laws 
that work in their direction which the deputies are quite 
capable of blocking. Proponents of reforms have only one way of 
preventing this: working constantly with the deputies, 
especially the centrist part of them, convincing them that they 
are right and, with all the difficulty of the situation, showing 
unwavering concern for the social direction of the reforms. 
  It is assumed that the Federal Assembly will begin its work 
with a joint session of the two chambers at which they will hear 
the message from the president. Then they will have to adopt 
their regulations, a draft of which has been drawn up by the 
commission on legislative proposals, and elect speakers and 
their deputies. We are no longer threatened by the return of a 
"chief of all deputies" like Khasbulatov. There will simply be 
no such position; each chamber will have its own chairman whose 
role will be to conduct the meetings and take charge of the 
daily routine. And he will have no power over the parliamentary 
committees. The speaker of the Duma, his two deputies (all three 
from different factions), and delegates from the factions and 
groups with voting power in proportion to their numbers will 
make up a Conference for purely organizational 
business--determining the agenda, convening extra sessions, 
sending draft laws to committees, etc. The Conference will make 
none of the decisions the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet 
essentially allowed itself. 
  The question of the speaker of the Duma has already been 
hotly discussed in the press, even in spite of this figure's 
obvious weakness as compared to the recent past. There are many 
in the running--each faction would like to see its own 
representative. Many well-known politicians would be willing to 
occupy this position: Even if the speaker has basically 
representative functions, they allow him to be constantly in 
view, which is of no small importance for politicians who are 
working out far-reaching plans. At various times interest in 
this post has been expressed by S. Shakhray and V. Zhirinovskiy; 
V. Lukin would not reject it; and Russia's Choice would not be 
against recommending S. Kovalev. It will not be possible, of 
course, to decide on a mutually acceptable candidacy at the 
session itself. This will be done through preliminary 
consultations, which are proceeding with difficulty so far. It 
seems that none of the influential factions will achieve 
success. It will be necessary to agree on some neutral figure 
who has not plainly announced his political sympathies. We will 
not guess--there is not long left to wait. 
  Now the main thing is to get ready for productive work so 
that parliamentarism in Russia will finally acquire features 
that are attractive to society and will actually become a real 
means of creating a new Russia. 

