Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] New York, March 23 KYODO -- North Korea is ready to 
reopen talks with the United States over its alleged nuclear 
weapons program provided Washington makes some concessions, a 
North Korean official said here Wednesday. 
  In an interview with KYODO NEWS SERVICE, the official with 
North Korea's mission to the United Nations said Washington must 
cancel plans to hold joint military exercises with South Korea 
and demonstrate that it seeks to solve the nuclear controversy 
in negotiations. 
  The U.S. and South Korea earlier this week agreed in 
principle to resume the large-scale maneuvers known as "Team 
Spirit." 
  The move came after the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA) reported that its inspectors had not been allowed to 
carry out certain measures at North Korea's nuclear facilities 
and the IAEA referred the matter to the UN Security Council. 
  The official also said Pyongyang would allow the IAEA to 
hold 
follow-up inspections to make sure that North Korea has not 
diverted any nuclear material for military purposes, provided 
high-level U.S.-North Korea talks take place. 
  In an earlier deal, Washington had agreed to such talks on 
condition that North Korea allow full nuclear inspections and 
exchange special envoys with South Korea. 
  Washington called off the talks that were to have started in 
Geneva on Monday and Pyongyang then said it would not attend. 
  The official declined to reveal whether Washington and 
Pyongyang had made any unofficial contacts since the IAEA on 
Monday referred the North Korean issue to the UN Security 
Council. 
  Pointing to "40 years of friendly relations" with China 
"dating back to the hard times of the Korean War," the official 
expressed confidence that Beijing would not support any move to 
force North Korea to comply with the inspection demands. 
  The five permanent members of the Security Council on 
Wednesday conferred privately on a resolution urging North Korea 
to accept unrestricted inspections, but the Chinese envoy on 
Tuesday declined to discuss the text on grounds that such a 
measure is premature. 
  Wednesday was the third day in a row that Britain, China, 
France, Russia and the United States met over the issue. 
  China could use its veto power to block any council action 
aimed at bringing North Korea into line. 
  Asked after the talks if China would abstain or vote against 
the U.S.-proposed resolution, China's envoy Li Zhaoxing said 
that he does not intend to comment on the matter "at the present 
stage." 
  British Ambassador David Hannay, however, voiced 
expectations 
that China will abstain, pointing to China's constructive 
attitude in preparing the resolution. "China is not blocking 
the drafting procedures," Hannay said. 
  China abstained together with Pakistan when the Security 
Council adopted a resolution last may urging North Korea to 
reconsider its suspended decision to withdraw from the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty. 

