Language: <F P=105> Kazakh </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Today an agreement was signed between the 
governments of Kazakhstan and Japan with regard to cooperation 
in elimination of the nuclear weapons due to be dismantled in 
the Republic of Kazakhstan as well as setting up of a 
cooperation committee for this purpose. The document was signed 
by Foreign Minister Tuleutay Suleymenov and the Ambassador of 
Japan to Kazakhstan. This is a comment given by the Kazakh 
minister : 
  [Begin Suleymenov recording] We have signed an agreement 
with 
[word indistinct] and the Lisbon Protocol in accordance with 
which we are a part of an agreement [words indistinct] weapons 
which we have inherited from the former USSR. 
  We need tremendous sums of money for which our young 
republic 
has no finance, and our economy can not cope with it. The 
agreement we have just signed represents good will on the part 
of the Japanese government and the Japanese nation who put 
forward this initiative to Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, and 
Kazakhstan and which want to render financial assistance, to 
participate in the process of elimination of nuclear weapons 
located on these territories. 
  The Japanese government is allocating a total of about $100 
million for all four states -- for Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, 
and Belarus. Kazakhstan was the last to sign this agreement. 
In the near future, at the end of this month, the Japanese 
government will examine the matter. The share to be received by 
each country will depend on the decision taken by the Japanese 
government. We cannot say now whether these shares will be 
equal. It will depend on the country, on the type of nuclear 
weapons in these states, and the expenses connected with 
dismantling. [words indistinct] 
  Besides, it is essential for Kazakhstan that this agreement 
envisages facilitation in tackling relevant environmental 
problems in the area of deployment and testing of nuclear 
weapons. In particular, this relates to the Semipalatinsk 
region. 
  In the second half of March a group of experts of the 
Japanese Foreign Ministry is expected to visit Almaty to study 
the problem in full detail and meet relevant ministries and 
departments. This is a positive development on the eve of the 
official visit to Japan by our president in the first 10 days of 
April. 

