Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Parkin, PRESS ASSOCIATION] </F>
  [Text] IRA violence will not deter Irish prime minister 
Albert Reynolds' belief in the two-month-old Anglo-Irish 
Northern Ireland peace declaration, he insisted today. 
  As terrorist experts investigated the cause of the fires 
which broke out at seven stores in central London this morning, 
Mr Reynolds again stressed there was still no deadline for an 
IRA response to December's joint initiative. 
  The Dublin premier was speaking before new talks at Downing 
Street with John Major on prospects for ending the terrorism -- 
against a background of the Oxford Street firebombings at the 
end of last month and renewed IRA violence earlier this week. 
  The new IRA attacks -- including the first murder this year 
-- were being seen as a thumbs-down for the talks process. 
  But Mr Reynolds said: "If somebody thinks I'll just give up 
because we have another unfortunate killing or attacks, they 
should know it is not going to stop me. 
  "We are on a mission of peace and will continue with it 
until 
we are absolutely satisfied there is no hope left. That is the 
way I feel at the moment -- and I am going to continue on that 
road." 
  Mr Reynolds arrived in London last night with Deputy Premier 
and Foreign Minister Dick Spring for their first meeting with Mr 
Major and Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew since 
the December 15 signing of the Ulster declaration. 
  Early indications were that this morning's store attacks 
were 
carried out by the IRA. The outbreaks were caused by incendiary 
devices which bore "all the hallmarks of the Provisional IRA", 
said Scotland Yard. 
  But the Irish team made clear they were more determined than 
ever to keep alive the prospects for peace. 
  As Mr Reynolds consulted officials before heading for 
Downing 
Street, he agreed the renewed terrorism -- demonstrated by both 
the IRA and loyalist paramilitaries in Belfast this week -- was 
"disappointing". 
  He asserted, however: "I am still very hopeful of the 
chances 
for peace. There has been considerable progress already as I 
see it. I have said from the very start that I did not believe 
there would be a quick decision on the part of the republican 
movement. 
  "Their decision is of historic proportions, and it will 
inevitably take time. There is an intense debate going on in 
Ireland north and south among the republicans." 
  Mr Reynolds said he thought there was considerable support 
from members of the IRA and Sinn Fein for the peace declaration 
in the run-up to their annual conference in Dublin next weekend. 
  "I have no intention of setting a deadline. That is not the 
way we are going to get a result at the end of the day," he 
added, basing his assessment on contacts he has had with 
community leaders on both sides of the Ulster border. 
  After their talks, Mr Major and Mr Reynolds will join the 
crowd at the England-Ireland rugby international at Twickenham. 
  Later, in what sounded like a direct message to Sinn Fein, 
Mr 
Reynolds said there was sufficient in the explanations and 
clarifications of the Downing Street Declaration "to enable the 
debate to come to a conclusion". 
  Considerable progress had been made towards peace since the 
publication of the declaration in mid-December, he told BBC 
Radio 4's Today programme shortly before his Downing Street 
talks. 
  "I have said from the start I did not believe there would be 
any quick decision in this regard. I think the intense debate 
that is continuing in the republican movement is what I expected 
it to be -- very intense. For them to come to a decision of 
historic proportions will inevitably take time." 
  While he thought there was growing support among 
nationalists 
for peace "a slim majority would not really be acceptable among 
the republican movement. 
  "Nobody wants a split in that movement again -- the split in 
the 1970's brought the last 25 years of violence and we do not 
want another 25 years of violence. 
  "Whatever time it takes to finish that debate and to ensure 
a 
very large majority of republican supporters would go along with 
the peace process -- that is what we want and that is what we 
are going to try to achieve." 

