Language: <F P=105> Danish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen by </F>
Lisbeth Knudsen and Ole Lorenzen; place and date not given: "The 
Criticism You Learn From"] 
  [Text] After one year as prime minister, the fight against 
unemployment and the effort on behalf of the less privileged 
still has top priority. Poul Nyrup Rasmussen will never abandon 
his hope of getting a job for everyone. But the prime minister 
would rather promise too little than too much. 
  He has said many of the same things for a year. And he has 
thought about persisting in saying them. 
  In 1994 and 1995 as well, Danes will hear a prime minister 
talk about whether we will do something about unemployment. 
  Despite public opinion polls and politicians -- from the 
parties that make up the coalition government as well -- that 
say that we will never again see full employment, that is an 
opinion to which Poul Nyrup Rasmussen will not subscribe. 
  "The Social Democratic Party [SDP] will never abandon its 
hope of creating a framework in our country within which 
everyone can be active. Regardless of whether economic 
conditions turn up or down, it is our basic point of departure 
that everyone should be able to work," said Poul Nyrup Rasmussen 
in advance of the government's first anniversary next Tuesday. 
  Employment was the main issue when the government came into 
office and it will be the main issue for many years to come. 
  "But we are talking about full employment that is different 
from what we knew in the 1960's. Work will be better 
distributed. We can indeed get everyone working, but it should 
be clear that that means joining with the change in values that 
has occurred. People also want to have time left over just to 
have things. If we just want to have more things, then that is 
when the pinch will come," the prime minister said. 
  [DET FRI AKTUELT] But do you believe that a reduction in 
unemployment from 350,000 to 330,000 by the end of this year is 
enough to convince people that we can achieve full employment? 
  [Rasmussen] It is true that at the end of 1993 unemployment 
had not come down enough. But there is so much force in this 
that if we have a chance to continue our work, then it will 
succeed. 
  All the same, I do not exclude the possibility that the 
numbers will get better because there is so much spring coming 
in the economy. But in contrast to the former government, I will 
not predict anything that cannot be achieved. I would rather 
give a realistic, cautious view. 
<H5>  A Better Daily Life </H5>
  But even if employment is still the main issue, the 
government's agenda is not exhausted. 
  Poul Nyrup Rasmussen has a number of points that Danes will 
hear about in the months to come: 
  [Rasmussen] The first thing is that the reforms must work in 
practice. It does not surprise me that with such major reforms 
there are administrative problems. Everything cannot work from 
day one. So, together with the cities, we must see to it that 
everyone gets the message. With regard to tax reform, I can very 
well sit here and say that 770,000 retirees out of 800,000 will 
get tax cuts. That is no help. It is each individual who should 
know what the changes mean. 
  [DET FRI AKTUELT] But has your government been good enough 
about informing people about this? 
  [Rasmussen] No, we haven't. We have to work on this 
throughout all of 1994. But for example, with regard to 
retirees, it is important for me to emphasize that they will get 
their money. There will be a shift in the timing, but they will 
get it. 
  The government's second task will be to come up with visible 
improvements in people's everyday lives in selected areas. 
  [Rasmussen] We have just started. With regard to child care, 
I mentioned the child care guarantee in my opening speech [to 
the Folketing]. This has not been forgotten. In negotiations 
with the cities, we will see to it that by the end of 1995 
everyone will be able to have their child cared for from the 
time it is one year old. Second, there is the health sector. We 
want to bring the waiting period down to three months. We want 
to get the beds out of the corridors. 
  The third point is service to the elderly and those living 
alone, where we will see to it that people come and visit them. 
This is not just a matter of whether there are enough home care 
helpers, but of making sure there are a number of other 
important people nearby who can help. 
  Fourth, those people who live quiet lives in the shadows -- 
regardless of whether they are mentally ill or handicapped -- 
will have better daily lives. We will create frameworks so they 
will have a better life. 
<H5>  Real Results </H5>
  He is pleased with the way this first year has turned out. 
  Tax reform, labor market reform, and leave of absence 
provisions are the "biggest reforms to have been implemented in 
the past 10 years." And the prime minister does not agree with 
criticism within his party about the lack of a Social Democratic 
profile and the talk that the government is still nonsocialist. 
  [Rasmussen] I have heard voices from that chorus. I would 
say 
two things about this. History has also taught us that Social 
Democratic minority governments do not have difficulties 
achieving a profile, but sometimes they have difficulties 
turning the profile into real results. Basically I have been 
concerned -- after 10 years in the opposition -- with one single 
thing: Social Democratic positions should be turned into 
practical results. Not 100 percent. Things have really never 
been that way -- nor were they in our earlier history -- but 
good progress in the right direction. That I believe we have 
achieved. 
  The worst thing that could happen between 25 January last 
year and the election at the end of this one would be if people 
could say to a government headed up by the Social Democrats: 
Well, you promised a lot but you didn't do anything. 
  [DET FRI AKTUELT] So you aren't afraid that the outcome of 
the election for the SDP will be affected by the fact that you 
as prime minister have had to agree to an awful lot of 
compromises to get the government to stay together? 
  [Rasmussen] No, I'm not afraid of that. Social Democratic 
voters -- and voters, generally speaking -- have a very good 
sense of what the working conditions are. The SDP has always 
been willing to cooperate with other parties. 
  Social Democratic voters know full well that results come 
about only through conscious cooperation. If I seem optimistic, 
it is because what we put our effort into we have implemented. 
And now the results are starting to show. 
  We will be very careful to see to it that the systems that 
are now set up do not get defended just for the sake of the 
systems. We want to be ready to listen and make adjustments 
where that is necessary. 
<H5>  No to a Presidential Election </H5>
  [DET FRI AKTUELT] But supposing we turn things around. There 
are two parties in the government that look as if they will be 
wiped out as consequence of being part of the coalition 
government. Won't you have to be very considerate of them? 
  [Rasmussen] I am convinced that the Center Democrats [CD] 
will see an increased influx of voters. The CD has a joint 
responsibility for economic policy and social policy. The CD is 
also a socially aware party that will not go along with 
extensive social cuts. So combined with their preoccupation with 
business policy, the CD voters will also acknowledge that. With 
regard to the Christian People's Party, from the beginning the 
party has put great emphasis on family policy. The Christian 
People's Party can rightly point out that the party has had a 
lot to do with the changes that are now occurring for families 
with children. 
  [DET FRI AKTUELT] Will there also be room for them in an 
election that is about Poul Nyrup Rasmussen or Uffe 
Ellemann-Jensen? 
  [Rasmussen] Here there is a bit of an influence from the 
wave 
we have been seeing from the United States, this preoccupation 
with individuals. The upcoming Folketing election has been 
called a presidential election between Uffe Ellemann-Jensen and 
myself. I do not look upon it that way. On the one hand, I will 
show up any time when we have to discuss policies, positions, 
and platforms. What does the Liberal Party want, what do the SDP 
and the government want? I very much want to take part in 
discussing this, and there will be no shortage of involvement 
and appearances. On the other hand, I will have to back out if 
Uffe Ellemann-Jensen wants to engage in mudslinging. If so, 
he'll have to find someone else to play with. 
  Personalizing [issues] has its unavoidable place in the 
modern media picture, but it must never gain the upper hand. A 
discussion between the Liberal Party on the one hand and the SDP 
on the other is a much too simplified picture of Danish 
politics. There should be room for all parties. My effort will 
always be to have every shade of opinion represented that exists 
in the picture. There should also be room for the CD to have its 
profile, for the Christian People's Party to have its, and the 
Radical Liberal to have its. 
<H5>  You Shouldn't Get Shaken Up </H5>
  [DET FRI AKTUELT] Nevertheless, don't you think some when, 
as 
prime minister, you see your party dip under 30 percent in the 
opinion polls? 
  [Rasmussen] In a job such as this, you think long and hard. 
Primarily you say to yourself that one week's opinion polls, two 
weeks' opinion polls, the summer of 1993's opinion polls can be 
hard to take. A bit of concern and alarm can spread. But deep 
down inside you tell yourself: You've got time for yourself and 
what you're doing. Go to the trouble of explaining what we're in 
the process of doing. It's clear that there were times during 
the summer of 1993 when there were major demands placed on my 
own sturdiness. It may well be that nice things will not always 
be written, but that's now the way it is in Danish politics. You 
shouldn't get shaken up by a little negative criticism. But I 
make a major distinction between whether it is personal 
criticism or criticism because of the job you have. The latter 
you can put up with, and you've got to learn from it. 
  [DET FRI AKTUELT] Have you thought about celebrating the 
anniversary on Tuesday? 
  [Rasmussen] We'll celebrate with a government meeting -- an 
evening meeting -- at which we will first discuss politics and 
then we'll sit down with one another. Have a drink and have a 
good time. 

