BFN 

  [Text] Lima, 3 Apr (EFE) -- Abimael Guzman, founder and 
leader of the Maoist gang Shining Path [SL], has gone on an 
indefinite hunger strike in his cell at the Callao Naval Base in 
Lima. Carlos Gamero Quispe, one of the lawyers who are defending 
Guzman, told the Lima newspaper LA NACION that Guzman is 
striking for medical care. In the statement published by LA 
NACION on 3 April, Gamero said: "My defendant is seriously ill, 
and the military have refused permission for two Red Cross 
International doctors to visit him in prison and treat him for 
the various diseases he has." 
  For 10 years now, Abimael Guzman has had psoriasis, a skin 
disease that causes patches of skin to be covered by white 
scales. Guzman's health has been deteriorating lately because of 
an inflammation of the throat that prevents him from swallowing 
prison food, Gamero explained. 
  Carlos Rolando and Delia Carrasco, Abimael Guzman's father- 
and mother-in-law who live in Sweden, hired Gamero. The lawyer 
explained that his defendant has decided to go on an indefinite 
hunger strike to protest the Supreme Court of Military Justice's 
decision to not allow two International Red Cross doctors to 
visit him in prison. 
  "Guzman's psoriasis has worsened lately because of the 
humidity the pervades the premises of the Callao Naval Base, 
which is located on the La Punta peninsula just off Lima. The 
inflammation of Guzman's throat is also due to this humidity," 
Gamero explained. He added: "He is also suffering from the 
confinement he has to endure. All this has made him lose weight, 
to the point that he now looks like a human scarecrow." 
  The Fifth Criminal Court has ruled against the writ of 
amparo 
or plea of "habeas corpus" that Guzman's lawyer filed, asking 
that Guzman be allowed to receive "private medical care." The 
lawyer said: "Since the rulings prevent my defendant from 
receiving medical treatment, he has decided to go on an 
indefinite hunger strike to the bitter end, and it is obvious 
that whatever the outcome, the government will be to blame." The 
lawyer explained that he will go to the Supreme Court to appeal 
the ruling that prevents Guzman from receiving medical care "so 
that the highest court can decide on this matter." 
  On 29 March, the 25th Criminal Court of Lima reported that 
Guzman was in good health, and that Red Cross International 
doctors visited him regularly in prison. According to current 
Peruvian criminal laws, people sentenced to life for high 
treason, as in Guzman's case, can be visited by their relatives 
only once a month. 
  Abimael Guzman was arrested on 12 September 1992 in a 
housing 
development in Santiago Surco, a Lima neighborhood. Other key 
Shining Path leaders were also arrested on that occasion. On 7 
October 1992, a Naval court judge sentenced Abimael Guzman to 
life imprisonment for high treason for the deaths of over 20,000 
people during 10 years of terrorist actions, and for destroying 
state property worth more than $28 billion. The Supreme Court of 
Military Justice upheld the life sentence on 15 October 1992. 

