Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Senator Dirceu Carneiro, Brazilian Social </F>
Democracy Party-Santa Catarina State, coordinator of the nuclear 
safeguards bill and second vice president of the Budget 
Committee] 
  [Text] The Executive Branch's position regarding nuclear 
safeguards has been causing controversy in the national media, 
which has been unable, so far, to supply society with useful and 
clarifying information on the issue. The nuclear safeguards are 
being examined by the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, but it 
is a complex matter and demands that the Foreign Ministry hold 
exhaustive negotiations at the international level. 
  The consequences of signing this sort of treaty are, 
theoretically, permanent in the history of a country. Before 
signing it, therefore, society must meditate and debate the 
issue and the government must disseminate information on it. In 
such cases, the Legislative Branch digests all the information 
and assigns to it the period of political and social time 
required to allow all areas of society to give their opinion on 
the issue. It is legitimate that the Legislative Branch does so: 
It is its right and duty. 
  Brazil did not sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty 
(TNP), and will not do it in the future either, considering it 
discriminatory and unfair. The Brazilian Constitution, however, 
forbids the construction of atomic bombs, and I believe Brazil 
is the only country to have done so. Nonetheless, the 
international community conveniently included Brazil in the 
group of countries that did not sign the TNP because they do not 
have the bomb, side by side with India, Pakistan, and Israel. It 
thus punished the country and made it difficult for us to have 
access to sensitive technologies. 
  To overcome this discrimination, Brazil and Argentina 
created 
the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control 
(ABACC), which is a regional agency similar to the EC's Euraton. 
The establishment of ABACC and the signature of the 
Quadripartite Accord by Brazil, Argentina, ABACC, and the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) reduced foreign 
pressure on Brazil and allowed it to join the international 
community. 
  To comply with these agreements, we must offer guarantees to 
the safeguards but we also can prevent foreign organizations, 
which comprise more than 85 countries and have differing 
interests, from using the "special surveys" argument and harming 
our country. These agreements may be used as tools to exert 
political pressure over matters absolutely unrelated to nuclear 
energy. This is what we want to prevent by better analyzing the 
text of the safeguards agreement. 
  So far, we have corrected certain vague parts of the text of 
the Supplement Adjustments to the Quadripartite Accord on 
control of nuclear energy use. All the Senate has to do now is 
approve the agreement, and it probably will do it without 
difficulties. 
  Anyway, the world already expected Brazil to adopt the 
safeguards. This is why I deem absurd the news reported by the 
press, which I believe to be fake news proposed by a lobby 
[preceding word in English], that Germany plans to break the 
nuclear agreement signed with Brazil and oppose our 
participation in the UN Security Council, unless we approve the 
Quadripartite Accord and the Tlatelolco Treaty. 
  Our agreement with the Germans, which is independent, 
already contemplates safeguards with Germany. The Germans have 
no relation whatsoever with the Tlatelolco Treaty, which is a 
regional agreement. The Quadripartite Accord, however, is a 
claim by the entire developed world that, through the news of an 
alleged threat by the Germans, seems to be interested in 
exerting pressure on Brazil to transform it into a captive 
market. 
  Nowadays, there is a basic problem that must be solved 
before 
the safeguards are voted on. Otherwise, we may take from Brazil 
its right to sovereignty. We must eliminate an amendment to the 
Tlatelolco Treaty that forbids the construction and use of 
atomic weapons in Latin America because it clashes with one of 
the objectives Brazil sought to maintain in the text of the 
Quadripartite Accord, i.e., the prohibition on conducting 
special surveys based on charges made in the national territory. 
The amendment that must be eliminated allows this sort of survey. 
  Through this amendment, the IAEA experts could come to 
Brazil 
to survey any facility, reported or not to IAEA, and take 
possession of industrial information that could be used to stop 
our development. Learning about progress in a specific research 
project, the developed countries could harm Brazil by failing to 
transfer technology to us that would allow us to advance in that 
research and begin manufacturing the same products they do. As a 
result of commercial interests and other sorts of interests, 
these countries would struggle to maintain international 
preservation of their products. 
  These concerns, which are known to all Brazilians, have been 
guiding the Brazilian Foreign Affairs Committee's analysis of 
the issue. 
  The first positive result of this position was Brazil's 
obtaining the approval of the Supplemental Adjustments even 
before ratification of the quadripartite agreement. This gave 
acknowledged, obvious benefits to Brazil. 
  Other results were the formal statements by the IAEA and the 
Organization to Ban Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL), 
confirming that the supplemental adjustments of the 
quadripartite agreement apply to the Tlatelolco Treaty. The text 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty, unlike that of the quadripartite 
agreement, permits inspections in any country under suspicion. 
After the Persian Gulf war, this instrument became a dangerous 
tool used by the IAEA, especially for inspections prompted by 
the pressing of charges, a method that is unacceptable to Brazil. 
  The responsibility of Congress is to obtain the best for 
Brazil. Despite the desires of some government officials, who 
are efficiently lobbying through the press, we will not 
deliberate before the matter is fully clarified. Ratifying the 
treaty -- which has already been signed -- one week earlier or 
one week later will make no difference. Consequently, the 
Brazilian position has been clearly outlined to the 
international community; it is a fact. Within this context, 
ratifying and adjusting are mere details. 

