Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Controversial Breeder Reactor Will Be Converted </F>
Into Radioactive Waste Incinerator"] 
  [Text] No fewer than three ministers--Gerard Longuet 
(Industry), Michel Barnier (Environment), and Francois Fillon 
(Research)--tried yesterday to justify the surprising decision 
Edouard Balladur made on Tuesday [22 February] regarding the 
future of Superphoenix (see yesterday's edition). "Superphoenix 
will no longer be operated as a nuclear power plant but will 
become a research and demonstration reactor." More precisely, 
one of the world's most controversial nuclear facilities (after 
Chernobyl and Kozloduy) will henceforth be used as a 
"sub-generator" for research on incineration of nuclear waste. 
  All the three of the ministers clamored to emphasize the 
provisional nature of the decision ("we will have the 
opportunity to reconsider it later on," they said again and 
again), a fact that is instructive on two counts. First, by 
converting Superphoenix into an incinerator, France is 
abandoning, after five years of wavering, a controversial field 
of research--electrical generation by breeder reactors, which 
produce more fuel than they consume--thus leaving Japan 
virtually the single proponent of the technology. Superphoenix 
was built to be a breeder reactor, and only that. Second, 
Edouard Balladur's team believes in the economic recovery it has 
been heralding. For the first time since the 1970s (the first 
oil shock), the French Government is committing itself to a 
major new research project, at the same time admitting it is 
"not in a position to say how much it will cost." There is talk 
it will amount to billions of [French] francs, and all for the 
sake of results which, at least according to independent nuclear 
experts, will be of little interest around the world. 
  There are no current industrial applications for 
Superphoenix 
as a "sub-generator." Assuming it operates at full power (which 
it has not done since 1988), a Superphoenix reactor can consume 
only 200 kilograms annually of the plutonium end product (a 
highly toxic waste) produced by ordinary nuclear reactors. 
France's 60 reactors create 11 tons a year of it. Thus if one 
were to use the incineration technique to solve today's nuclear 
waste problem, one would have to build 60 Superphoenixes. No one 
wants to do that; indeed, Parliament in 1991 prescribed a quite 
different nuclear waste disposal policy: burial. 
<H5>  Incineration </H5>
  The government believes however that an in-depth study of an 
alternative to burial would be useful. Michel Barnier explained 
that the Environment Ministry "was happy to see a research 
program on incineration of cumbersome nuclear wastes." The 
parliamentarian from Rhone-Alpes said nothing about his lack of 
enthusiasm for reactivating the breeder reactor. But he betrayed 
the same squeamishness as fellow Alps-region representative 
Bernard Bosson regarding the political sensitivity of the 
"Creys-Malville problem" in Ain. Among their colleagues, only 
Alain Carignon, another local deputy and member of the 
government, does not share their discreet repugnance; of course, 
his district is also reaping dividends from the reactor's 
presence. But Edouard Balladur's decision implies that the very 
small Alpine lobby carried very little weight against the 
massive nuclear industry lobby. Indeed, what Gerard Longuet and 
Francois Fillon said yesterday was largely derived from a 1993 
report submitted by Jean Teillac, former high commissioner for 
the Atomic Energy Commission (CEA). 
  From a strictly technical perspective, Superphoenix posed a 
serious question for the government: Will there be any need for 
breeder reactor technology over the next two or three decades? 
The Creys-Malville reactor was designed in the 1970s to make 
France self-sufficient in nuclear fuel, at a time when the first 
oil crisis was bringing to an end the Thirty Glorious Years 
[i.e. after World War II]. Since then, the market for such fuel 
has taken a permanent nosedive, and enthusiasm for nuclear 
energy waned following the implosion at Three Mile Island 
(United States, 1979) and the explosion at Chernobyl (Ukraine, 
1986). Finally, from a technical standpoint, the Creys-Malville 
prototype has been nothing but trouble. The most recent debacle 
(July 1990) led to a "temporary" shutdown of the reactor. It has 
never been restarted. And as a result of various juridical 
maneuvers, it was deprived in July 1992 of its legal status, 
which only recently has been restored. 
<H5>  Opposition </H5>
  Superphoenix has served above all as a focal point for the 
never-held debate on the general directions of a French nuclear 
policy that has diverged from European norms. A debate first of 
all within France itself and in the countries on its borders; in 
traditionally antinuclear Italy, of course--although the 
country's scruples never prevented it from buying French 
electricity--but also in Switzerland. Geneva state counselor 
Claude Haegi said yesterday that if "the decision is ultimately 
made to restart it, Geneva would express its opposition." Most 
reactions yesterday were predictable. Localities near the power 
plants (and so dependent on them economically) expressed 
satisfaction. On the other hand, all the country's 
environmentalist movements (Greenpeace, the Europeans Against 
Superphoenix association, etc.) noisily expressed their 
indignation. The government is gambling that opponents will not 
be able to forge an effective coalition. 
  And there were two arguments that outweighed other 
considerations. For the government--obviously sensitive to the 
vulnerability of a nuclear industry that is as unhappy as its 
opponents are about Creys-Malville and what it has come to 
symbolize--it was simply unthinkable for Superphoenix to be shut 
down. In the final analysis, as the EDF [French Power Company] 
and CEA have constantly reaffirmed since 1989, the facility was 
indispensable to France's future--first for research into 
breeder reactor technology, subsequently for production of 
electricity, and finally, in 1994, for sub-generation. Secondly, 
NERSA, which operates Superphoenix, is owned 51 percent by the 
EDF, 33 percent by Italy's ENEL [National Electric Power Board], 
and 16 percent by Germany's RWE [Rhine-Westphalian Electric 
Works]. 
  Shutting down the reactor would require a reimbursement of 
the foreign partners who supplied some Fr50 billion of the money 
the reactor has already consumed. No one yesterday was able to 
provide a precise figure, but the partnership contract 
reportedly was crafted carefully enough that Fr18 billion of 
that money probably would have to be paid back. The government 
calculated that it would be less costly to complete the 
obligatory replacement of the current (breeder-reactor) core, 
followed by the second (isogenerating) core in 1998, so the 
facility in the end can be used for research. 
  Lastly, one thing is sure: Given all the legal and 
administrative hurdles ahead, the reactor is not likely to be 
back up to power before the first half of 1995. Very probably 
after the presidential elections. 

