CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Candidate of Naval Sciences, Retired </F>
Admiral Nikolay Nikolayevich Amelko, under the rubric: "Time and 
the Navy": "The Russian Navy's Structural Development 
Problems"] 
  [Text] Concern with regard to the current state of 
the Russian Navy and its future, especially on the threshold of 
the 300th anniversary of the native navy, prompts many people to 
express, through the mass media, their points of view on the 
resolution of the problems of its preservation and 
development. 
  We offer for your attention the opinion of Retired 
Admiral N.N. Amelko on a series of aspects of this problem. 
Admiral Amelko commanded the Pacific Fleet from 1962-1969, was 
Navy deputy commander-in-chief from 1969-1978, and was deputy 
chief of the General Staff of the USSR Armed Forces for the Navy 
from 1978-1988. It is possible that not all of the conclusions 
and suggestions of the author of this article are indisputable 
but Nikolay Nikolayevich's sincere interest in preserving a 
strong Russian Navy and also his many years of service 
experience make the position he is defending worthy of special 
attention. 
  At the present time, the issues of the development of the 
Russian Navy are acquiring greater urgency and the attention 
that our professional magazine is paying to them is not 
surprising. Other magazines, newspapers and television are also 
broaching this topic, although not always thoroughly and 
frequently in the well-known combination of "the Army and Navy". 
  To my great regret, even in such an important government 
document as the presentation of "Osnovnyye polozheniya voyennoy 
doktriny Rossiyskoy Federatsii" [The Main Provisions of Russian 
Federation Military Doctrine], one small paragraph is devoted to 
the Navy which prescribes: "Step up the dialog on the 
preparation and adoption of effective international agreements 
in the sphere of the reduction of naval forces and weapons and 
the limitation of naval activity".[.sup]1[/] And that is 
everything that concerns the Navy. 
  Admittedly, this is only a presentation of the doctrine and 
maybe there is something in the full text about our Navy's role, 
place, and missions in the defense and protection of Russia's 
interests, otherwise we can understand that paragraph as the 
intention to eliminate the Navy in general as a service of the 
Armed Forces. Moreover, the impression is being created that the 
Government and the president have no advisors on the Navy's 
problems and they are not being seriously dealt with. We know 
that the president had an advisor on military issues -- former 
Deputy Chief of the Main Political Directorate for Ideology, 
Colonel-General D.A. Volkogonov -- whose competence in the 
operational-strategic issues of the employment of the Armed 
Forces and, all the more so their component -- the Navy -- is 
very doubtful. 
  Currently, many of the country's leaders, including the 
minister of defense, visit our fleets but we haven't heard or 
read about the results of their visits, assessments of the state 
and current activities of naval forces, perhaps with the 
exception of the establishment of the serious housing situation 
for seamen and especially statements on the prospects for their 
development. In this context, we cannot pass over in silence the 
presentation of this magazine correspondent's interview with 
First Deputy Minister of Defense Andrey Afanasyevich Kokoshin 
that appeared in MORSKOY SBORNIK No 11, 1993, which was titled 
"Rossii nuzhen dostoynyy ee flot" [Russia Needs a Proper Navy]. 
A number of the thoughts expressed in the responses to the 
correspondent were perceived with great surprise by myself as a 
veteran who devoted 57 years to service in the Navy and as a 
participant of two wars, yes and by many of my colleagues. 
Obviously, we need to perceive what A.A. Kokoshin said as the 
views of the Ministry of Defense leadership on our Navy's 
present and future. 
  In my opinion, the main thing in the interview was the 
presentation of the missions that the Navy must be ready to 
accomplish for the purpose of Russia's security and defense. It 
appears to us that the missions were correctly set forth and, 
indeed, we would like for them to have been worded not in such 
general terms but in more specific terms. 
  However, there is something contained in A.A. Kokoshin's 
responses that puts us on guard. I was especially concerned by 
A.A. Kokoshin's statement: "I would not say that we have a new 
shipbuilding program in its traditional sense. I think that 
there must be a weapons development program on the whole where 
the Navy will be a component". It's obvious that the 
understanding of this component was engendered by an 
underestimation of the Navy's role in the system of defense and 
protection of Russia's interests under contemporary conditions, 
its complexity and essence. This is confirmed by other 
statements: "... Due to our geostrategic position, we 
traditionally are more a land than a naval power, yes and 
Russia's military fate, as a rule, has been decided on land". 
The reason why adequate attention is not being devoted to the 
Navy in the current military doctrine is certainly contained in 
these two quotes. 
  I don't know if it is worth repeating that Russia's maritime 
border is approximately 40,000 kilometers which is more than two 
times its land border and more than the coast line of all of 
Europe and we also need to protect and, when necessary, defend 
this border. Or recall the rapidly increasing significance of 
the continental shelf, maritime economic zones, etc., the 
protection of which is becoming a very important mission just 
like ensuring safety of navigation and fishing. Consequently, 
the statement that Russia is more a land than a naval power is 
not only groundless but also contains a distortion of Russia's 
geostrategic position and a disparagement of our Navy's role. 
  We can agree with the fact that Russia's military fate, as a 
rule, has been decided on land. But we must not forget that in 
all wars the Navy was not only the Army's loyal assistant but 
also an active participant of many joint, with ground troops and 
aviation, battles for the sake of victory. To disparage the 
Navy's role and significance -- means to cancel out its 300-year 
history and to forget its achievements under the leadership of 
Peter I, Spiridov, Ushakov, Senyavin, Lazarev, Nakhimov, Essen, 
Kuznetsov, and to forget its innovators and the discoverers of 
new lands. We must also remember that during the Great Patriotic 
War the Navy conducted 105 different amphibious assault landings 
and that all enemy-occupied ports and coastal cities were seized 
by the enemy not from the sea but from land. Recall the Navy's 
role in defending and lifting the blockade of Leningrad, and the 
defense of Odessa, Sevastopol and Zapolarye. The Northern 
Fleet's provision of escorts for allied convoys. The fact that 
our ships, submarines, naval aviation, and coastal artillery 
destroyed 1,245 combatants and auxiliary ships and 1,307 
transport ships of Fascist Germany and its allies during the 
war. The enemy's irretrievable losses on them totaled thousands 
of seamen, soldiers and officers, hundreds of thousands of 
weapons and tonnes of strategic cargoes. 
  Despite the warming of relations between the former 
irreconcilable enemies on the whole, all kinds of military 
conflicts have not subsided in the world in the contemporary 
international situation. NATO is maintaining and expanding its 
activity as a military organization which is even replacing the 
UN Security Council's Military Committee and is attempting to 
resolve emerging conflict situations using arms and sometimes 
even outside the bloc's zone and without taking into account the 
opinions of the members of the UN Security Council itself. 
Therefore, it is extremely rash to assert that there is no 
threat -- if not of war, than of the emergence of armed 
conflicts into which Russia and the other CIS countries could be 
drawn. 
  At the same time, the experience of all of the latest most 
serious conflicts points toward an increase of the significance 
of the operations of aviation and naval forces in them which 
attests to the increase of the danger precisely from the 
maritime axes. In an article published in NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA on 
8 February 1994, the author criticizes our military doctrine 
because it does not indicate a specific enemy against whom we 
are creating the armed forces. But do we need to repeat previous 
errors? In my view, we must not seek specific enemies but build 
the armed forces from the calculation that they could appear 
from any direction. And because we must put a stop to any 
infringement on the sovereignty and integrity of Russia and the 
CIS countries, we must be ready to accomplish that mission 
because it is simply impossible to restructure anything, 
especially the Navy, in a short period of time. 
  Proceeding from what has been stated above, in my opinion, 
it 
is advisable to word our Navy's missions as follows: 
  1. Ensuring the security of Russia and the CIS countries 
from 
the naval axes. In my view, we must consider the primary danger 
to be strikes by sea-launched long-range cruise missiles, the 
platforms of which are surface combatants and submarines. Today, 
this is the Tomahawk sea-launched long-range cruise missile with 
a launch range of approximately 3,000 kilometers. This permits 
them to destroy targets located on the European territory of 
Russia to the Urals, all targets in Belorussia [Belarus], 
Ukraine, Moldova, North Caucasus, and Central Asia during 
launches from the Barents, Norwegian and Mediterranean seas, 
from the North Atlantic and even from the Indian Ocean. From the 
areas of the Sea of Japan, Sea of Okhotsk, and the Pacific Ocean 
-- all targets of Russia to the Irkutsk meridian. Carrier-based 
and strategic aviation are another danger from the maritime 
axes. We can compare the destruction radius of carrier-based 
aircraft, especially with the utilization of airfields of 
contiguous states upon their return with the launch range of 
sea-launched long-range cruise missiles and even strategic 
aviation. 
  The most effective weapon to repel sea-launched long-range 
cruise missile and carrier-based aviation strikes -- is to bring 
pressure to bear against their platforms and only an effective 
Navy, that has been deployed during the threatened period in the 
detected areas of their combat maneuvering, is capable of 
combating them. 
  2. Constant maintenance of naval strategic nuclear forces at 
a high degree of readiness. Considering their very important 
function of deterring aggression, paramount attention must be 
devoted to ensuring their high combat readiness, the reliability 
of command and control and disseminating combat command and 
control signals, and also the defense of basing and dispersal 
areas and patrol areas because they become the "number 1" 
targets of destruction with the initiation of combat operations. 
  3. Defense of external and internal maritime lines of 
communications and other economic and scientific activity in 
remote areas of the seas and oceans. Here lately, isn't it 
strange, the struggle with piracy on the high seas is once again 
becoming urgent and, according to data of the London Center for 
Combating Piracy, in the first half of 1993 alone, of the 83 
attacks against civilian ships that were taken into account, 24 
attacks were against Russian ships. 
  4. Participation of some of our fleet forces in peacekeeping 
actions based upon UN Security Council decisions to put a stop 
to armed conflicts. 
  All of the indicated missions for the defense of Russian and 
the CIS states from the maritime axes are timely even today. 
Their accomplishment requires daily readiness and aggressive 
activity from our fleets because only they are capable of 
accomplishing them with the required effectiveness. And to do 
that we need a "proper" navy and not only in support of Russia 
but also in support of all of the Commonwealth of Independent 
States. It seems to me that today the need for the creation of 
Unified Naval Forces in support of the CIS, with shared 
participation in this matter of all Commonwealth countries, is 
already quite obvious because practically all of them separately 
are incapable of creating modern, even if small, national naval 
forces or of maintaining them. Incidentally, I did not make a 
slip of the tongue when I employed the term "Yedinyye 
Voyenno-Morskiye Sily SNG" [CIS Unified Naval Forces]. All the 
same a navy is only ships, submarines and support ships. 
However, today besides that, it also has at its disposal naval 
aviation, coastal missile and artillery units, naval infantry 
and coastal defense units, and also arsenals, ship repair plants 
and shops, engineer units and rear services organs. Therefore, 
currently the Navy, besides the weapons that are purely specific 
for it, has at its disposal practically all of the weapons that 
the other services of the Armed Forces have which makes its 
Naval Forces designation more correct. 
  I am in total agreement with A.A. Kokoshin that we don't 
need 
"traditional shipbuilding programs" in that sense and with those 
approaches as we previously understood them. We should have long 
ago oriented ourselves on the development of integrated combat 
systems that organically combine ships of various classes, their 
weapons and support systems which, incidentally, Navy 
specialists have dreamed of for years. Then we would not have 
that large collection of ship and submarine designs, types of 
weapons for them and other similar shortcomings. But along with 
that, while considering the technical complexity of the 
structure of the Navy, we need not a separate component of 
common weapons but an independent "Naval Forces Development 
Program" that meets the new conditions. In the process, 
specialists --naval professionals -- must be involved with its 
development, the Russian Government must approve it and the CIS 
Heads of State Council must approve it for the Unified Naval 
Forces. 
  During the course of this work, each design for a ship, 
weapons system or support system must be based upon its need, 
compatibility and, of course, "cost-effectiveness" criteria. But 
to prevent a return to the customary past, the approval of 
decisions on these issues must occur at the Governmental level 
based on the conclusions of an independent committee of experts. 
We must enlist the appropriate naval experts, practitioners at 
the level of commanders of fleets and flotillas, both active 
commanders and those who held these posts in the past, and also 
scientists, designers, manufacturers and other experts in the 
work of the committee of experts, only they must mandatorily be 
independent of those departments which have vested interests in 
obtaining more expensive, and therefore profitable, orders that 
do not always satisfy the Navy as this frequently occurred in 
the past. A small team of consultants on naval affairs could be 
formed from them, the absence of which is already being felt. 
Its functions must include the organization of that independent 
committee of experts and preparation of findings and the 
appropriate governmental decrees based upon it... 
  As for ships, submarines, and naval weapons, here obviously 
the reduction of their noise level and weight and dimensions 
specifications of all systems, the development of missile ships 
on new maintenance principles merit the most rapt attention. We 
already had these designs and experimental models but some of 
them were discarded as unprofitable for the Ministry of the 
Shipbuilding Industry. The development of a low-noise nuclear 
multi-mission [mnogotselevaya] submarine (it is precisely a 
multi-mission submarine) is required in order to rid ourselves 
of multiple types of ships when a separate design was developed 
and built for each mission and their number reached two dozen in 
the fleets. There is also a similar situation with surface 
combatants. A ship with a displacement of 5,000-10,000 tonnes 
must be both missile, antisubmarine warfare, convoy and escort. 
Multiple types of ships dramatically increase expenditures both 
during construction and during operation. The 
military-industrial complex, and especially the Ministry of the 
Shipbuilding Industry, were interested in a large number of 
increasingly new designs because they received colossal bonuses 
and thousands of awards for each of them and the highest leaders 
of departments even received the rank of Heroes of the Soviet 
Union or Heroes of Socialist Labor. 
  A.A. Kokoshin correctly states that, while considering our 
state's serious economic situation, we need to rationally spend 
even minimally allocated resources. Unfortunately, we still 
haven't rid ourselves of mismanagement and we even encounter 
outright thievery. He correctly tasks our fleets with the 
mission for the next 2-3 years -- this is a struggle for 
survival. We understand that today there is no possibility to 
allocate appropriations for the Navy based upon the actual need. 
But at the same time, the Navy must not be doomed to 
"self-survival" in order for it to survive. Preservation Of the 
Navy is a task not only for the Navy or the Ministry of Defense 
themselves but also for both the Government and the president. 
Footnotes 
  1. KRASNAYA ZVEZDA, 19 November 1993. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Morskoy sbornik", 1994. 

