BFN 

<F P=106> [By Bruce Gilley] </F>
  [Text] Beijing has set a high-level party inspection team 
to Hunan to investigate the case of a mayor who illegally 
imprisoned a local councillor for nearly a year. The case, 
which may have been a factor in the recent leadership shake-up 
in Hunan province, could set an important precedent by limiting 
local cadres' power to abuse security organs as a tool to 
intimidate political enemies and critics. 
  Yan Yueming was put under lock and key in the detention 
centre at Loudi in central Hunan in March 1992 after he gathered 
signatures from 100 local cadres to dismiss the mayor, Zhao 
Bodong, on grounds of incompetence. The decision to send a 
special investigation team to look into the case is a victory 
for the plucky Yan, who took on local Communist Party officials 
during his two-year crusade for justice. Yan was held 
incommunicado for more than nine months until the Hunan 
government-prodded by those who had signed the petition -- 
demanded his release in early 1993. 
  Three senior leaders -- Tian Jiyun, a politburo member, an 
NPC vice-chairman, Wang Hanbin, and the Supreme Court president, 
Ren Jianxin -- have been appointed to oversee the investigation. 
"The central government disagrees with the province's handling 
of the case," a party propaganda official in Beijing told 
Eastern Express. "They will carry out a supplementary 
investigation and likely reach a new conclusion," the official, 
one of eight cadres sent to look into the case last December, 
said. 
  A provincial investigation team which issued an internal 
report last November meted out no punishment to Zhao. Instead 
he was promoted to head the Loudi district public security 
office. Frustrated by the lack of justice, Yan trekked to the 
capital in March this year to make his case before delegates to 
the National Peoples' Congress (NPC). 
  He was roughed up by unknown assailants at a Beijing hotel 
when he tried to circulate a letter to NPC delegates accusing 
the Hunan government of complicity in the case. "Yan's deep 
sincerity in trying to circulate the letter proves there is 
something wrong," the propaganda official said. 
  The official said the setting up of the team virtually 
ensured the provincial decision would be overturned. "The 
straws are in the wind. The central government is going to 
reach a new conclusion and arrest Zhao." 
  Reached by telephone in Loudi, Yan Yueming said he would not 
give up the fight until Zhao was punished. "There was no reason 
to detain me. As a local councillor, I must be given a fair and 
legal response for this injustice," he said. 
  Yan was promoted to head the Loudi district finance and 
trade 
commission in late 1993, but he said this was merely a cynical 
attempt by the provincial government to shut him up. "Even 
though my position has changed, I still feel the same way," he 
said. "I will continue to struggle." He said he had not yet 
been informed of the central government's decision to reopen the 
case. 
  "I had almost given up hope for a change in their attitude," 
he said. Yan indicated the replacement of the Hunan party 
secretary last October may have cleared the way for a 
reappraisal of the incident. 
  When eight Beijing party propaganda officials sent to look 
into the case visited the province last December, they were 
given a sympathetic reception by the province's newly-appointed 
party secretary, Wang Maolin. The former party secretary, Xiong 
Qingquan, who is thought to have supported Mayor Zhao, was 
stripped of his post and put into semiretirement as a 
vice-chairman of the provincial peoples' congress last October. 

