BFN 

  [Text] Prague, May 24 (CTK) -- The Slovak Government is 
interested in the "non-standard and privileged relations, in the 
good sense of the words, with the Czech Republic and in good 
communication with Czech trade representatives, Slovak 
parliament Deputy Chairman Peter Weiss said today. [no closing 
quotation mark as received] 
  Speaking at a press conference following his meeting with 
Czech parliament officials and representatives of Czech 
political parties, Weiss said that he had come to the conclusion 
that the time had come to extend, along with regular meetings on 
the governmental level which are being held, direct political 
dialogue between representatives of Slovak and Czech political 
parties. Weiss is chairman of the government coalition 
Democratic Left Party (SDL). 
  Weiss met today with Deputy Premier and Chairman of the 
Coalition Christian Democratic Union-Czechoslovak People's Party 
(KDU-CSL) Josef Lux, the Czech Parliament Deputy Chairmen, 
Executive Deputy Chairman of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS) 
Peter Cermak, Deputy Chairmen of the Civic Democratic Alliance 
(ODA) Daniel Kroupa and Libor Kudlacek, Chairman of the Czech 
Social Democratic Party (CSSD) Milos Zeman and Deputy Foreign 
Minister Alexandr Vondra. 
  Weiss said that the meeting were interesting and frank and 
he 
was satisfied with his visit to the Czech Republic. "I have 
become convinced that there is the space and the will for 
dialogue between our independent republics to extend," he said. 
  He described the CSSD as the SDL's naturally closest 
partner. 
"We are interested in cooperation with Czech Social Democrats," 
Weiss said, adding that both political parties intend to 
cooperate with social democratically-orientated parties in the 
Visegrad group countries (Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, 
Poland). 
  Commenting on his one-hour talk with Zeman, Weiss said that 
the SDL and CSSD wanted the trend visible in Poland and Hungary 
-- the shift of the political focus to the social 
democratically-orientated parties -- to establish itself also in 
the Czech Republic in two years. 
  "We joked, not only with Zeman, but also with Cermak and ODA 
representatives that the current Czech Government is actually 
pursuing, in many aspects, a pragmatic social democratically- 
orientated policy, though using different outward rhetoric," 
Weiss said. 
  The difference in the political orientation of the governing 
parties in the Czech Republic and Slovakia could not be an 
obstacle to mutual relations if basic rules of democracy are 
respected, Weiss said, adding that for him the most important is 
a good political will and greater pragmatism. 
  Weiss's meeting with Vondra focused on what prevents 
relations between the two republics from expanding and on the 
questions concerning internal political situation in the Czech 
Republic and of how the new Slovak Government is accepted in the 
Czech Republic, Weiss told CTK. 
  During a working lunch with the parliament deputy chairmen 
the preparation of the new procedural rules of both parliaments 
was discussed. It was agreed that the two parliaments would 
exchange draft rules, Weiss said. 

