BFN 

<F P=106> [Sergey Leskov report: "As a Reward for Its Long-Suffering, </F>
`Gazprom' Hopes To Receive the Port of Odessa From Ukraine"] 
  [Text] Apart from everything else, the development of the 
conflict between "Gazprom" and Ukraine will make us delighted 
with the surgical genius who bound the economies of the 
fraternal republics together in such a way that it would be more 
correct to call them "Siamese twins." This conclusion can be 
drawn from the results of the Moscow talks between Ukrainian 
First Vice Premier Valentin Landyk and "Gazprom" Chairman Rem 
Vyakhirev. 
  They agreed that Ukraine's debt to the Russian gas industry 
is now $600 million, and that it will be paid off in the second 
quarter of 1994. However, you can read between the lines that 
neither of the sides is particularly relying on regular debt 
payments from Ukraine's empty budget pocket. For the first 
time, "Gazprom" did not threaten its neighbor with discontinuing 
supplies, and it did not mention the International Court. Gas 
is flowing through the pipeline, and will continue to flow. It 
is now obvious to everyone that it would primarily be Russia, 
which receives longed-for currency from the West for the export 
of gas, that would suffer from turning off the tap. 
  In this connection, the increasingly frequently mentioned 
possibility of "Gazprom" receiving property on the territory of 
Ukraine rather than money is acquiring particular significance. 
This time, apart from underground tanks and gas pipelines, 
Valentin Landyk has promised to give "Gazprom" a pretty fair 
part of the port of Odessa. The only thing that puts you on you 
guard is the simple fact that as the generosity of Kiev's 
proposals to the Russian gas industry increases, the clearer it 
becomes that these promises are unrealizable in practical terms. 
Foreign property on Ukraine's territory is not protected by 
legislation, and parliament has already had a sharply negative 
reaction to "Gazprom" having a share in a previous, narrower 
list of enterprises. As a result, the joint working group which 
is to coordinate the mechanism for turning the enterprises 
promised to "Gazprom" into joint-stock enterprises is getting 
practically nowhere in its activity. 

