Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Analysis" by JORDAN TIMES staff reporter Nirmin Murad] </F>
  [Text] Amman -- Jordan's ultimatum to the Palestine 
Liberation Organisation (PLO) this week was a last-ditch attempt 
to bring back the concept of comprehensiveness to the 
Arab-Israeli negotiations, analysts and observers believe. 
  In his address Tuesday [4 January] to senior officers from 
the Public Security General Intelligence and Civil Defence 
departments, His Majesty King Husayn expressed his "hope (that) 
we will reach a comprehensive peace with the help of all 
parties." 
  Jordanian officials privately say that the Kingdom was 
worried that the lack of coordination among the Arab parties to 
Middle East peace negotiations was leading to the disintegration 
of the concept of comprehensiveness, on which these negotiations 
were initially based, allowing Israel a chance to divide and 
rule. 
  According to those officials, the Kingdom has come under 
Syrian pressure to drop attempts to bring the PLO back into Arab 
coordination ranks and work instead towards 
Syrian-Jordanian-Lebanese coordination without the Palestinians. 
  In view of the fact that the "separate Oslo accord" is going 
nowhere, the message from Syria was that the upcoming summit 
meeting in Geneva between Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad and 
U.S. President Bill Clinton could be the the right opportunity 
for the three countries to show PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat that 
they have the upper hand. 
  But the question, according to officials and analysts, was 
whether Jordan would join such a coalition and give up on 
attempts to convince the PLO to coordinate with the Kingdom. 
  Analysts believe that this development placed Jordan in a 
difficult position since Mr. 'Arafat had been continually 
procrastinating over sending his aides to Amman to attend 
coordination committee talks scheduled to have started last June 
but which never did. 
  This sentiment was actually expressed by Minister of 
Information Jawad al-'Anani this week when he said Jordan feared 
that the lack of Jordanian-Palestinian coordination would force 
the country "to react in a way that is not in line with its 
overall policy." 
  To drop the idea of a comprehensive settlement and allow 
different Arab parties to reach separate peace accords with 
Israel would have defied Jordan's policy of waiting until all 
tracks have concluded their negotiations with Israel 
successfully before signing accords simultaneously. 
  Since Jordanians feel almost certain that President al-'Asad 
will get something from his meeting with President Clinton on 
Jan. 16, they felt that they were running out of time in 
bringing Arab parties to the talks to coordinate their steps and 
exchange information on developments on their tracks. 
  Senior Jordanian officials are constructing scenarios for 
progress on the Syrian front. They believe that while Syria is 
not expected to give in on its declared intention to accept full 
withdrawal, it may accept a time-tabled agenda leading to that 
conclusion if it receives American assurances that would 
guarantee its economic and security interests. 
  If this turns out to be true, one seasoned analyst said, 
Syria might be seen to be willing to give up its Arab leadership 
role if the Americans can station American or international 
troops on the border, maintain Syrian interests in Lebanon and 
allow Damascus to reap economic benefits of peace. 
  But Jordan also believes that if this happens without 
achieving tangible progress on the Palestinian front, there will 
be the risk of Arab-Israeli negotiations running into two 
separate "courses" -- Syrian-Lebanese-Israeli and 
Palestinian-Jordanian-Israeli -- instead of the four streamlined 
tracks. 
  The Jordanians fear that such a scenario, if it actually 
develops, will further weaken the Arab position and give Israel 
the opportunity to "hunt down" each Arab party individually. 
  This fear was also expressed by Dr. al-'Anani when he told a 
group of journalists earlier this week that the Kingdom feared 
ending up "with separate courses rather than tracks." 
  And while Dr. al-'Anani was willing to concede that these 
separate courses are historically present because of common 
interests, he feared that lack of coordination among the 
Jordanians and Palestinians would create inertia by making (the 
parties) rivals and competitive in dealing with Israel at the 
expense of each other. 
  In a statement he made Tuesday, Syrian Vice President 
'Abd-al-Halim Khaddam referred to the comprehensiveness of the 
negotiations by saying "the concept of comprehensiveness cannot 
be ignored (and has to come) in coordination with Lebanon and 
Jordan." 
  Mr. Khaddam did not mention the PLO as part of the 
comprehensive solution but criticised it for signing the 
declaration of principles (DoP) and predicted that "Israel would 
emerge the winner" as a result of this move. 
  The Syrians did not hide their displeasure with Jordan over 
the latter's agenda agreement with Israel, which was signed in 
Washington on Sept. 14, not only because they might have thought 
it was a prelude to reaching a separate peace treaty with the 
Jewish state, but also because it gave a diplomatic and 
political cover for the Sept. 13 agreement between the PLO and 
Israel. 
  Syrian Foreign Minister Faruq al-Shar', at the time, issued 
what was seen as a warning to Jordan, but the issue was diffused 
soon afterwards when King Husayn visited President al-Asad in 
Damascus and reportedly assured him that Amman would not go it 
alone despite all the pressures it faced from the Americans and 
Israelis. 
  Officials and analysts here believe that Jordan cannot forge 
coordination with Syria and that this was made clear in His 
Majesty's statement Tuesday when he said that he had spoken 
about coordination with Syria, Lebanon and Egypt. "We have 
proven our commitment to work together. No one should believe 
that we will go it alone in this regard." 
  But while the Kingdom is committed to coordination with 
Syria, politicians agree that Jordan could not respond 
positively to dropping the PLO from coordination efforts because 
"it is a complicated and intricate relationship." 
  The King's virtual ultimatum to the PLO, while indicative of 
"tension" in relations between the two leaderships, can and 
should "serve interests of both Jordan and the PLO without 
hurting relations with Syria," one official said. 

