BFN 

<F P=106> ["Tiananmen Five Years On" feature from the "Agenda" </F>
section: "Crackdown Continues"] 
  [Text] Five years after tanks thundered into Tiananmen 
Square and troops fired a hail of bullets at protesting 
students, many of the survivors are still suffering in Chinese 
jails. Those arrested after the 1989 campaign were sentenced to 
"reform through labour" for supporting democracy and sitting 
cross-legged with fellow campaigners in the centre of Beijing. 
Today the former idealists are gaunt figures in labour camps, 
beaten and tortured in alleged violation of Chinese law and out 
of the reach of Western aid. 
  But their long, enforced silence may soon be broken. One 
group of 40 former June 4 protesters will publish an 
international appeal for justice this week, contained in a 
letter from Hanying prison to be included in an Amnesty 
International report. "Most of the pro-democracy dissidents are 
still in prison and continue to suffer various kinds of inhuman 
torture," the group wrote to Amnesty. "(Prison authorities have) 
violated the fundamental human rights of prisoners as well as 
international standards on the treatment of political prisoners." 
  The students, workers and intellectuals jailed in the 
aftermath of Tiananmen claim the slaughter of civilians by 
troops acting under martial law has become the violent 
forerunner of more sweeping punishments. Since 1989, while 
China has continued to enjoy Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trading 
status with the United States, there has been no official 
statement of regret concerning the killings and no qualification 
of the "rioter" tag slapped on each victim. 
  The appeal comes from Hanying prison, officially known as 
Hubei Provincial No 1 Reform Through Labour Detachment, a large 
camp near Wuhan. It documents incidents of beatings, denial of 
medical care, grim meal rations and systematic crushing of 
attempts at protest. The signatories claim prison guards use 
electric batons and police whips to beat up political prisoners, 
saving their most severe bashings for June 4 democracy activists. 
  "Since the Tiananmen incident of 1989, the Chinese 
authorities have imprisoned tens of thousands of students and 
citizens who were involved in the pro-democracy demonstrations 
and sentenced several thousands," the letter claims. "From the 
day of arrest we are threatened and tortured by the police to 
extract confessions. 
  "In court, political prisoners are deprived of the right to 
defend themselves and given no time to make any statement. 
After being sent to the detention centres or collective 
training stations, we are treated extremely harshly, we are 
underfed and forced to work even when seriously ill. Some 
people become mentally disturbed under such conditions." 
  The prisoners' tale strikes a sharp contrast with last 
week's 
claims by Wang Mingdi, a bureau director in the Justice 
Department, that prison conditions are so good, inmates have 
access to karaoke lounges and art salons. 
  The Hanying prisoners' testimony describes the torture of 
former student Jiang Pinchao, 25, and former writer Lin Zhiyong, 
31, who refused to work and wrote a letter of protest against 
the ill-treatment of a fellow political prisoner. "(They) were 
taken to the brigade office which was often used for physical 
punishment and interrogation of prisoners," the letter reports. 
"One prison officer named Li and several others interrogated 
and beat them both in turn from 9 pm to 1 am the next morning. 
They used police whips and electric batons to rain blows on 
their backs and legs. 
  "They also forced Lin and Jiang to stand with their arms 
raised against the wall for three hours. The two young 
prisoners eventually became so weak that they collapsed and 
fainted. Then the prison guards ordered two criminal prisoners 
to drag them by the hands along the ground for several hundred 
metres. 
  "This caused Jiang's toenails to split, reducing his toes to 
bloody stumps. After the beating they were put into solitary 
confinement. They were both made to wear heavy foot shackles 
and kept in a filthy cage, less than three square metres in 
size." 
  Two days later another prisoner 24-year-old Feng Haiguang, 
was tortured from 7 am to 1 pm for "resisting reform through 
labour". "Feng's legs were so swollen that he was not able to 
walk. He could not sit straight because his back was whipped 
too hard. His body was swollen and bruised, his face was gaunt 
and he claimed that (one of the guards) Peng had beaten him 
until his front teeth were loosened," the inmates wrote. "When 
we saw blood flowing out of his mouth and his clothes which had 
been torn to ribbons during the torture, we could not help 
crying." 
  One democracy activist, shortsighted former student Ye 
Youwen 
26, had failed to stop walking in response to a guard's signal, 
the writers report. The irate guard battered Ye with his 
electric baton until he collapsed, inflicting such damage he was 
unable to eat or drink the next day. Other political detainees 
demanded Ye receive medical treatment, but prison bosses ignored 
the request, they said. 
  "Treatment of political prisoners at Hanying prison compares 
badly even with other prisons in China," the group writes. "For 
breakfast the prison authorities provide about 50 grams of bread 
and some rice gruel, lunch and supper consist of 150 grams of 
rice and a bowl of thin soup. 
  "The small quantity and poor quality of the food, on which 
prisoners are forced to do eight hours heavy labour each day, 
means that many of us are suffering serious health problems. 
  "Our faces have turned yellow and our bodies are thin and 
weak. Those who were ill before they went to prison and those 
who have caught infections in prison suffer physically and 
psychologically. 
  "They have not been given the necessary medical treatment, 
and struggle on the brink of death." 
  Each grim bowl of rice gruel foreshadows a day of sweating 
before a fiery 180 degree furnace, moulding plastic products 
with blistered hands. There are no rest days, no holidays, 
little hope of reprieve, the prisoners report. "We stand at our 
machines in an atmosphere full of poisonous gases and dust, our 
hands protected only by rubber gloves, constantly turning high 
polythene flexible plastic products over a fire which can reach 
180 degrees. 
  "The hands of all of us are covered in huge blisters. We 
work...soaked with sweat...and often have to work at night." 
  The Amnesty International report, titled "China: Human 
Rights Violations Five Years After Tiananmen," to be released on 
Wednesday [1 June], urges Chinese authorities to launch an 
independent inquiry into the reports of torture and 
ill-treatment of prisoners, particularly into conditions and 
treatment at Hanying prison. "In April 1993, Chinese Government 
representatives stated before the United Nations Committee 
Against Torture that all cases of torture were `rigorously' 
investigated in China. There is evidence, however, that few 
cases in fact are," Amnesty reports. 
  The international document will also identify, for the first 
time, scores of civilians shot dead or crushed by tanks in 
Tiananmen Square. As international television cameras rolled, 
troops cut a bloody swathe through crowds of unarmed 
demonstrators, many in their teens or early 20s, who had walked 
or cycled to sit in the square. 
  The new Amnesty list names 75 people -- including a 
nine-year-old boy -- out of the hundreds killed when troops 
"cleared" Tiananmen Square. "Though five years have elapsed 
since the massacre, no public inquiry has yet been held into the 
circumstances in which individuals were killed and the official 
verdict about the `turmoil' is still the same," the human rights 
group reports. 
  It includes details of people shot in Muxidi, a residential 
neighbourhood in west Beijing, of almost a dozen students 
crushed by tanks at dawn on June 4, and of students shot during 
daylight while offering no resistance. Xinhua (New China News 
Agency) trainee Chen Laishun, 23 was shot in the head as he took 
photographs of the scene from the rooftop of the Great Hall of 
the People above Tiananmen Square. 
  Dong Xiaojun, 19, was crushed by a tank as he walked back to 
university after leaving Tiananmen Square. Chemistry student 
Duan Changlong, 24, was bicycling near Mimu Palace on the night 
of June 3 when he came across a confrontation between soldiers 
and crowds. Duan began to mediate in an attempt to defuse the 
stand-off, but a soldier blasted him in the chest with a handgun 
at close range. 
  Journalism graduate Lin Keqin, 22, had been dragging the 
wounded from the gateway of a Muxidi hotel when he was shot in 
the chest. Soldiers sprayed bullets into the head, chest and 
back of nine-year-old Lu Peng as he stood near a bridge at 
midnight on June 3. Men and women, some in their 60s and late 
70s, were shot dead in their homes at Muxidi as troops fired 
indiscriminately on their way to Tiananmen Square. 
  Families who collected their dead were forced to sign forms 
identifying their relatives as "ruffians". In the years since 
Tiananmen, relatives of those killed have been harassed, 
intimidated or dismissed from their jobs for being uneasy with 
the official verdict. 
  The international body urges Beijing to launch an inquiry 
into the killing of unarmed civilians in early June 1989 and 
compensate the scores left crippled or injured after martial law 
took effect on May 20, 1989. "The protests, which were 
essentially peaceful...were officially described after the 
crackdown as a 'counter-revolutionary riot'," Amnesty reports. 
"This official verdict has not been reviewed and is still used 
to justify the imprisonment of many people who are the victims 
of human rights violations." 

