Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Kobe Steel, Ltd. (Kobe Steel), has successfully 
developed the technology for forming thin diamond films with a 
high degree of orientation on a silicon single crystal. The 
achievement was made by the joint group representing Kobe 
Steel's Kobe General Technical Research Institute and its U.S. 
research institute, Electronic Material Research Center (North 
Carolina). The group used the microwave plasma CVD (chemical 
vapor deposition) method to form highly oriented, extremely 
smooth, thin films of diamonds. Thin diamond films have drawn 
worldwide attention because of their potential as 
next-generation substrate material, although it has been 
difficult to produce highly oriented, flat, thin films. The 
development by Kobe Steel is expected to spur development and 
implementation of diamond semiconductor devices. 
  The diamond thin-film formation technology developed by Kobe 
Steel was the result of the application of the microwave plasma 
CVD method. The technology involves the epitaxial growth of an 
SiC layer on a silicon single-crystal wafer and the bias growth 
of a diamond nucleus before the deposition of a diamond thin 
film. Previously, such a film had been grown hetero-epitaxially 
on cubic boron nitride (cBN). However, Kobe Steel's technology 
is unique in that it epitaxially forms an SiC film on a silicon 
wafer. The group was able to obtain an extremely high degree of 
crystalline orientation by depositing a diamond thin film on a 
bias nucleus. 
  Because of their excellent hardness, optical transparency, 
thermal conductivity, and electrical insulating capability, 
diamond thin films are expected to become the next-generation 
substrates in place of the current silicon single crystal 
substrates. Thus, development of electronic devices using 
diamond substrates has been actively pursued. The only problems 
with the development have been the crystalline orientation and 
smoothness of the diamond thin film. 
  Kobe Steel, the world leader in the field of diamond thin 
film, has established a three-base research system within itself 
to carry out R&amp;D concerning diamond thin films: the bases 
have 
been the Kobe General Technical Research Institute, in charge of 
thin film formation; the U.S. Electronic Material Research 
Institute, in charge of thin film evaluation; and the U.K. 
research institute, in charge of the analysis of thin-film 
characteristics. The latest achievement, which resulted from the 
R&amp;D system, is expected to accelerate diamond 
semiconductor-device development. 

