Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Davlat Usmon, Tajik Opposition Leader, by </F>
Ra'fat Yahya in Islamabad, date not given: "Ready to Negotiate 
With the Russians and Friendly Sides for Settlement"] 
  [Text] Tajik Opposition Leader Davlat Usmon has told 
AL-HAYAH that he is ready to negotiate about the Tajik crisis on 
condition that it be with the Russians, rather than with what he 
called "the agent government" in Dushanbe. Davlet Usmon, who is 
considered the organizational brain of the Tajik opposition, 
said that the opposition's readiness to negotiate had resulted 
from pressure from "several friendly parties" he did not name. 
He may have been referring to Pakistan and Afghanistan. He added 
that the Tajik opposition had always sought to solve problems 
through peaceful means; it was the communists who had driven 
them to bear arms. 
  Davlat Usmon said that he was not fighting the Tajik army, 
but Russian forces--25,000 soldiers and officers. He said that 
there were other forces from Uzbekistan, who, he said, "were 
also taking an active part fighting against us." Davlat Usmon, 
who recently came from the front, said that his forces had 
inflicted large human and material losses on the Russian army, 
with 900 killed and the destruction of a large number of tanks, 
guns, and ammunition dumps. Davlat Usmon is seen as the number 
two man in the Islamic Revival Party; he had taken the post of 
deputy prime minister in the coalition government formed by 
democrats and Islamists before the communists took power. 
AL-HAYAH conducted the following interview with him in 
Islamabad, where he was en route back to his country from Sudan, 
where he had been attending a conference. 
  [Yahya] Two years ago, we met you in Dushanbe, and you said 
that communist forces in Tajikistan were finished, and that the 
Tajik people supported the Islamic forces led by the Revival 
Party. But the current situation in Tajikistan would suggest the 
opposite. 
  [Usmon] I still stand by what I said. The Tajik people still 
stand by us. We now control 70 percent of Tajikistan. The 
military situation is in our favor, and we still retain the 
fighting initiative. 
  [Yahya] But military reports say that the Tajik Government 
is 
in control of the situation, and that your losses are mounting. 
  [Usmon] I came back a few days ago from inside Tajikistan 
after having spent about four months supervising the course of 
military operations. We have achieved major victories in this 
period, which I can summarize for you as follows: 

  -  More than 960 Russian troops were killed, among them an 
officer with the rank of brigadier general, named Alexeyev, and 
another with the rank of colonel, named Merkulov. We have 
videotapes of these operations, in which the two Russian 
officers were killed. 
  -  We destroyed large quantities of heavy weapons and captured 
many of them from the Russian forces fighting us. 
  -  We destroyed a number of Russian observation points along the 
Afghan-Tajik borders, making it easy for us to cross the borders 
safely. This reflects the extent of the Russian forces' retreat 
and their entrenchment in the cities after being repeatedly 
defeated. 

    [Yahya] And yet doesn't the Tajik Government's continued 
control of the situation thus far mean that its position is 
still strong? 
  [Usmon] That is an incorrect deduction, because we are not 
fighting Tajik armies. We are fighting more than 25,000 Russian 
troops and other forces from Uzbekistan. 
  Tajikistan, as you know, has no regular army, and prior to 
this there were only 5,000 Russian troops in the country. With 
the outbreak of fighting, the Russian Government summoned 
Division 201 to Dushanbe. These were the forces that had 
formerly been based in the countries of Eastern Europe. This 
means that the present government in Dushanbe is an agent 
government, whose ability to remain in power depends upon the 
Russian army in Tajikistan. In spite of all this, we have 
achieved major victories, as I mentioned, and Russian forces 
often surrender with their weapons to our forces. These forces 
have accumulated military experience from their participation in 
the Afghanistan war. We find no hardship in our struggle with 
the Russian forces, who, from their behavior, appear to be on 
the verge of nervous breakdowns. 
  [Yahya] You said that there are forces from Uzbekistan 
supporting the Tajik Government. What is the volume of these 
troops? How do you explain their participation? 
  [Usmon] Yes, there is a brigade from Uzbekistan based in the 
capital Dushanbe, and it was assigned the task of protecting the 
country's vital installations. Besides that, the Uzbekistan 
Government itself is firing missiles at our positions near the 
Uzbek borders. I believe that this position of Uzbekistan's is 
direct interference in our internal affairs, and not in 
Uzbekistan's interest. 
  Perhaps Uzbekistan's motive for this policy is its ruling 
regime's fear of the Islamic forces in Uzbekistan. It accuses us 
of funding these forces against the regime, which is not true. 
We have special circumstances, and neither at present nor in the 
future have we any ambition to interfere in the affairs of other 
countries. We want to establish good neighborly relations with 
our various neighbors, including Uzbekistan and Russia itself. 
  [Yahya] There are military reports that you have obtained 
U.S. Stinger missiles, which Afghan fighters used against the 
Russian army. What is your comment? 
  [Usmon] That is a slander we have already proved false. I do 
not know in whose interest it is to concoct these fantastic 
stories about us. We have heard of these missiles only in the 
media. If the Afghans had these missiles, it would not be easy 
to get them; and they are busy with their own internal affairs. 
It has never happened, that we have tried to obtain these 
missiles. 
  [Yahya] It was attributed to the Tajik military command, 
that 
you have Stinger missiles. 
  [Usmon] I told you it is not true, and Mohammadsharif 
Himmatzoda [name as transliterated], to whom it was attributed, 
has denied the truth of what was attributed to him. 
<H5>  Sources of Arms </H5>
  [Yahya] So where do you get your arms from? 
  [Usmon] You know that we spent six months in power before 
the 
communist forces conspired with the Russians and others against 
us. We were able to obtain some weapons. With the continued 
fighting against the materially collapsing Russian forces, we 
got many spoils. We do not need the Afghans or others to give us 
arms. We have enough. 
  [Yahya] You have said that you have returned from Tajikistan 
recently after spending about four months there. Do the arms you 
have and the standard of your fighters permit you to fight a 
regular war? Or will you resort to a war of nerves, as the 
Afghans fought before you? 
  [Usmon] We are fighting a regular war. As I have already 
said, we have tanks, armored vehicles, and missiles, and we have 
a large number of fighters. There are many fronts on which the 
Russian forces face our forces from a short distances--no more 
than one kilometer. But we are fighting a war of nerves in the 
east and south of the capital, Dushanbe. 
  [Yahya] It is known that there are democratic and socialist 
forces working with you to confront the Tajikistan Government. 
Is there a unified command to which the fighting forces are 
subject, or are there independent fronts? 
  [Usmon] I can tell you that there is a single command 
directing military action inside the country, and all fighting 
forces belonging to the various outfits in Tajikistan are 
subject to it. But what I would like to emphasize is that there 
are no democratic or socialist forces worth mentioning. The real 
power belongs to the Islamic front, and it is what as a rule 
leads military action in Tajikistan. 
  [Yahya] But don't you think--in light of the Afghan 
experience--that the disparity in ideological directions in your 
ranks might, in the long term, cause an internal split? 
  [Usmon] I don't think so. We are perfectly aware of the 
Afghan experience and what makes it unique. We are eager to 
learn from the mistakes that the Afghan leadership made there. 
That is why we formed a single command to direct military and 
political action, without partisanship or tribalism. There is 
unanimity among the present leadership in its various sides. 
<H5>  Thoughts of a Settlement </H5>
  [Yahya] Have you a specific idea of how a settlement to the 
current Tajik crisis might be reached? Have you held any talks 
with the Dushanbe Government? 
  [Usmon] We have never before held talks with the Russians or 
their Tajik allies, but the Russians want to talk. The secretary 
general of the United Nations recently sent a letter to the 
Dushanbe Government asking them to hold talks with us. Many 
Western countries have shown great interest in working to remedy 
the situation in Tajikistan before it gets serious. They think 
we intend to export our thinking to the other Muslim republics 
in Central Asia. 
  We are ready to enter into negotiations with the Russians, 
but we have refused to join a coalition with the communists, 
because they have no influence with the people. 
  [Yahya] But what is your view of the possibility of a 
peaceful settlement to the current crisis? 
  [Usmon] We were compelled to fight; we did not start it. It 
was the communist elements who took up arms against us, and for 
us there was no alternative to self defense. We spent six months 
in power with the democrats, but the communists hindered all the 
efforts for reform and construction that we had begun. They 
tried to paralyze our government's activity by coordinating with 
the Russians, Uzbeks, and others. 
  They kept on attacking the leaders of the Islamic and 
democratic movement. They never ceased until they forced us to 
leave power, seeking help in doing so from the Russian Army. Our 
only option was to take up arms in self-defense. We want peace 
and stability to return to our country, and for the more than 
100,000 Tajik emigres outside the country to return. There are 
many friendly parties urging us to pursue the road to a 
settlement. 
  [Yahya] You attended the Sudan meeting organized by Dr. 
Hasan 
al-Turabi. Did you get any promises that Sudan would provide 
material or military aid? 
  [Usmon] I attended that conference because al-Turabi invited 
me. My part in it was like that of many others of various 
[political] directions. My going to Sudan does not mean I 
support Sudanese policies, nor does it mean I reject them. As to 
what Sudan has to offer us, as you know, Sudan is a poor 
country, and can barely take care of itself, so how can it 
support others? 
  [Yahya] What is your position on Iran? Have you received 
military assistance from Iran? 
  [Usmon] Iran was the first country after America to 
acknowledge our independence. It offered much aid to Tajikistan 
while we were in power, and opened cultural centers in the 
country, based on the ethnic and linguistic relations that bind 
us. We both speak Persian, unlike the other Muslim republics in 
Central Asia. Despite that, we welcome any aid from any country. 
Iran's aid to us does not mean that we agree with its policies. 
  [Yahya] There is a Tajik majority in the northern region of 
Afghanistan, which emigrated there at the time of the communist 
revolution in 1917. Does this ethnic connection have an effect 
on your struggle with the Dushanbe Government? 
  [Usmon] No one is denying that we receive great material 
support from our Tajik brothers in northern Afghanistan. At the 
official level, the Afghan Government is unable to offer us any 
aid; we understand the conditions they are going through because 
of the fighting Kabul is experiencing now and then. 

