BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Husayn Sounds the Alarm of Regional Disaster"] </F>
  [Text] The Austrian president's visit to Jordan and his 
successful talks with His Majesty King Husayn and his pursuit of 
increased bilateral cooperation and a more dynamic Middle East 
peace process all amount to a positive step on the part of 
Austria -- a friend of Jordan. The Austrian president called 
for a more pronounced European role to propel the peace process 
forward on the basis of UN resolutions. 
  At yesterday's news conference, the Austrian leader 
applauded 
Jordan's leading role in the effort to bring a just and 
comprehensive peace to the Middle East, thereby confirming the 
respect in which Jordan, led by His Majesty King Husayn, is held 
in Europe and internationally. 
  Appearing at the same news conference, his majesty called 
for 
reactivating the peace process, which he warned is now in a 
critical condition that threatens to plunge the region into a 
disaster, should the peace process unravel. His majesty 
reiterated that Middle East security impinges on European 
security and vice versa. 
  His majesty openly called for lifting the unjustifiable 
blockade of the Port of al-'Aqabah, and reiterated that Jordan's 
continued participation in the bilateral multilateral talks, 
slated to reconvene this month, is contingent on removal of the 
blockade, which is taking a heavy toll on the country's economy. 
  His majesty's warning about a regional disaster if the peace 
process is not put gack on track was made against the backdrop 
of disappointment over the lack of progress on all fronts. His 
majesty also indicated that the pressures and harassments 
directed at the Arab parties involved in the peace process, 
including Jordan, can hardly advance the peace process or 
promote a just, lasting, and comprehensive peace in the region. 
  It does not stand to reason that the blockade should be kept 
in place and thus hurt Jordan's economy, trade, and well-being, 
and, in the meantime, to expect it to exert itself on behalf of 
the peace process. It is all the more absurd that Jordan should 
be treated thus, when it has fully complied with UN Security 
Council resolutions on Iraq. 
  The peoples of the region want to see peace established 
along 
the lines of Resolutions 242, 338, and 425 and the 
land-for-peace formula. 
  It is hoped the European Union and the United States, as 
well 
as Russia and the other permanent members of the Security 
Council, will grasp the significance of his majesty's remark 
about the need to reactivate the peace process and put it back 
on track on all fronts, before a disaster strikes, when 
contrition will be unavailing. 

