Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Sergey Ostanin] </F>
  [Text] Moscow January 13 TASS -- Documents on problems on 
nuclear arms in Ukraine are expected to be signed at a 
tripartite summit of Russia, the United States and Ukraine on 
Friday. A mechanism of the implementation of Ukraine's decision 
on the withdrawal of nuclear warheads from its territory will 
also be worked out, ITAR-TASS learned from informed sources on 
Thursday. 
  This applies to 176 intercontinental ballistic missiles and 
some 1,500 warheads. Weapons that, in opinion of the U.S. side, 
are the most dangerous ones, SS-24 and SS-19 missiles, are to be 
dismantled within three years under an agreement that is to be 
signed. 
  The signing of the documents on dismantling the entire 
Ukrainian nuclear potential is to end a prolonged debate on the 
destiny of the Soviet nuclear arsenal that remained in the 
Ukrainian territory after the Soviet Union's dissolution in 
1991. This will mean keeping to the schedule outlined in the 
1992 Lisbon protocols. Under the protocols two other former 
Union republics with nuclear arms -- Kazakhstan and Belarus -- 
supported the nuclear nonproliferation treaty and agreed to 
destroy nuclear arms, turning them over to Russia for the 
purpose. 
  But the Ukrainian parliament, ratifying the Strategic Arms 
Limitation Treaty on November 18, 1993, made a number of 
reservations: on the control of strategic nuclear forces in the 
Ukrainian territory, on the elimination of extra carriers and 
charges, on control over disassembly and destruction of nuclear 
charges. Ukraine made its non-nuclear status and stage-by-stage 
elimination of nuclear weapons conditional upon guarantees of 
its national security by nuclear states. 
  Several rounds of tripartite talks of Russia, Ukraine and 
the 
United States were held last month. The foreign press notes 
they were held until President Clinton said in Brussels on 
Monday that an agreement on problems of nuclear arms in Ukraine 
became a reality. 
  The compensation and splitting between Ukraine and Russia of 
proceeds from the sale of enriched uranium was among central 
problems at the talks. The United States pledged itself to form 
a semi-state corporation which will buy uranium contained in 
warheads for nuclear power plants to make up for the 
expenditures for nuclear arms destruction. In the runup to the 
President's visit to Moscow, the U.S. Congress earmarked a sum 
of 175 million dollars as a step to promote the destruction of 
nuclear warheads in Ukraine, to compensate for the dismantling 
of nuclear arms. The U.S. Congress also endorses economic aid 
to Ukraine amounting to 155 million dollars. 
  Participants in the tripartite negotiations believe the 
signing of documents on problems of nuclear arms in Ukraine must 
ease tensions that have complicated relations between the United 
States, Russia and Ukraine of late. New agreements in Moscow 
will promote the establishment of peace and tranquility in the 
world and a greater cooperation of the three countries. 

