BFN 

  [Text] Botan (KURD-HA) -- The ARGK [People's Liberation 
Army of Kurdistan] headquarters has announced the list of 
operations for March. According to the ARGK statement, 483 
soldiers, 106 village guards, 91 policemen, and 86 guerrillas 
were killed during operations and clashes in March. 
  ARGK headquarters' Statement No. 35 indicated that 
"Considering that we are still alive now in spring and judging 
from the battle casualty figures for March, the Turkish 
Republic's Special Warfare Administration's claim that `we will 
destroy every single guerrilla in the mountains by spring' has 
proved to be nothing but a hollow and ridiculous claim. It 
proves that any attempt to wipe out the guerrillas on the 
mountains can only lead to self-destruction." 
  The statement notes that the guerrilla activity, which never 
ceased this winter, has sharply increased with the onset of 
spring and that the army units in Botan [Hakkari, Sirnak, Cizre 
regions] were imprisoned in their garrisons during the elections. 
  Referring to the elections, the statement says: 
"Participation in the elections in the rural areas was almost 
zero, and it never surpassed 40 percent in the cities." 
  The statement lists the following ARGK operations for March: 
  ``1. A total of 252 operations in different localities were 
carried out in March, 21 of which were road checks. As a result 
of these operations: 
  ``a. Some 483 soldiers, including 21 officers, were killed 
and 172 soldiers were wounded, including two officers. 
  ``b. Some 106 village guards, three of them cadres, were 
killed and 57 were wounded. 
  ``c. Some 91 special warfare personnel -- counterguerrillas, 
agents, government officials, collaborationists, informants, 
police chiefs, policemen, and others -- died, and 78 were 
wounded. 
  ``d. Some 39 special warfare operatives captured by the 
guerrillas were tried, after which they were either given 
various sentences or released. 
  ``e. Three helicopters, five tanks, eight police armored 
cars, and 35 military-civilian vehicles were damaged by mines or 
rockets; numerous installations used in the construction of 
bridges and roads were destroyed; and various oil wells and 
pipelines were repeatedly smashed. 
  ``f. A substantial amount of arms, ammunition, magazines, 
and military hardware were seized. Some 115 sheep and goats, 
and 52 million Turkish lira were confiscated from the village 
guards. 
  ``2. In the context of the PKK's two-month amnesty for 
village guards decreed on the occasion of the Newroz holiday, 
the inhabitants of two villages and 559 village guards from 
various other villages laid down their arms. 
  ``3. Some 86 guerrillas died and 13 others were wounded in 
guerrilla activity in March. Two guerrillas were taken prisoner 
by the Turkish Republic because they were on the verge of 
freezing due to winter conditions. 
  ``4. Popular uprisings took place in many places in protest 
of the Turkish Republic's military operations and its policy of 
bombing villages, evicting village inhabitants, detentions, 
oppressions, and torture. In general, the overwhelming majority 
of the people protested against state authority and policies 
during the elections and Newroz. 
  ``5. In the meantime, efforts to form a Kurdistan national 
assembly have been stepped up all over Kurdistan; provincial 
conferences were held in red zones [areas where liberated zones 
exist or can now be created], and there is a gradual move toward 
people's rule in areas free of the Turkish Republic Army and 
under effective guerrilla control.'' 

