BFN 

  [Text] We have just received an announcement from the 
Information Service of the General Staff of the Yugoslav Army 
that says the following: 
  On the occasion of the explosion in the depot of training 
and 
instructive explosive equipment in Lisicji Potok on 13 June at 
2330, the Information Service of the General Staff of the 
Yugoslav Army points out the following facts: 
  The public has already been told that Jelena Djordjevic was 
injured in the explosion, that she has been hospitalized at the 
Army Medical Academy, and that she is successfully recovering. 
Nobody was injured among the officers and soldiers. 
  A commission of the head of the General Staff of the 
Yugoslav 
Army has been on the site of the accident since the explosion to 
establish all the circumstances under which the explosion took 
place. It was indubitably ascertained that the explosion was 
caused by lightning and that any possibility of a diversion, 
sabotage, or any other cause is excluded. 
  The fire has been localized and is expected to be completely 
extinguished soon. The site of the accident is under control 
and there is no possibility of any further explosions or the 
spreading of the fire. There is no danger to the population and 
there are no reasons for alarm or fear of the incident repeating. 
  Further on, the report says the following: Expert teams of 
the Yugoslav Army and the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Serbia 
have been clearing the site and removing all objects that can 
present a danger to people's life or health. In this respect, 
citizens are expected to show cooperation. 
  The General Staff of the Yugoslav Army expresses thanks to 
the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Serbia, the Belgrade 
fire-fighting teams, and the citizens for their cooperation, 
constructivity, calmness, and vigilance and asks them to 
eliminate rumors among themselves about nonexistent causes for 
explosion. The moment conditions for secure work are created, 
access to the site of the explosion and contact with 
eyewitnesses of the explosion and officers who can provide 
expert explanation will be made available to journalists. 
  The General Staff of the Yugoslav Army points out that as a 
consequences of the explosion, a certain quantity of material 
that may be dangerous was scattered and therefore it asks 
citizens not to touch any objects that seem to them to be 
suspicious, but to report any such case to the General Staff 
Commission, the military authorities, or the bodies of the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, it is said in the announcement of 
the Information Service of the General Staff of the Yugoslav 
Army. 

