BFN 

<F P=106> [Address to the nation by President Itamar Franco from </F>
Planalto Palace on 9 May -- live] 
  [Text] Mr. President of the Federal Senate, Mr. President 
of the Chamber of Deputies, Mr. President of the Federal Supreme 
Court, Mr. Government Leader at the Chamber of Deputies, Messrs. 
Federal Senators and Deputies, Messrs. Ministers, ladies and 
gentlemen, young men and young ladies: We are nearing a very 
important moment in Brazilian life. The moment at which we will 
change our currency, our money. Like a country's flag, the 
currency of a country is a symbol of its sovereignty. The 
currency represents the country's power, the confidence it 
awakens in everyone. This is the importance of our efforts to 
give Brazil a currency that will really symbolize our 
independence and the will of our people. 
  This is why the three branches of the Republic are meeting 
here. The executive, legislative, and judicial branches are 
gathered in this decisive moment of our nation. Brazilian 
workers in May, for the second consecutive month, received their 
salaries in Real Value Units, URV's. They saw that their salary 
had been compensated against the April inflation rate. This, 
however, is not enough. A great deal more must be done and this 
is what we are doing now. 
  Through the implementation of the URV, we have taken a very 
important step, but now is the time to take a decisive step 
against inflation and in favor of development. This will happen 
with the implementation of the real, which will be the new 
Brazilian currency. The real will enter our daily lives and 
replace the real cruzeiro and the URV, which was simply a 
stepping-stone from a devaluated currency to a strong one. 
  With all prices and utility rates converted into the new 
currency, our salaries will not loose their purchasing power 
during the month and we will learn the genuine value of things. 
The real will be the currency of a Brazil that will not have an 
inflation rate as high as the current one. In addition to 
defeating inflation, the real will solve the problems that 
workers and retirees still have when salaries in URV's are paid 
in real cruzeiros. Why does this occur? Because the URV 
protects the salaries until payday. From then on and until the 
next payday, salaries converted into real cruzeiros continue to 
be eroded by inflation unless they are invested in the banks. 
Through the real, the money in the workers' pockets will 
preserve its value. This is why, like other Brazilians, I wish 
to see the real implemented soon. 
  I came here today to tell you that the real will be the 
Brazilian currency as of 1 July. I would have preferred to 
announce the arrival of the real after the provisional measure 
had been approved by the Congress. This approval remains 
essential. The government has rewritten the provisional measure 
hoping it may be approved soon, as most Brazilians wish. 
  As everyone knows, the government committed itself to 
announce the arrival of the real at least 30 days before the 
implementation date. I am announcing the implementation of the 
real 52 days before the implementation date to give the people 
more time to prepare for its arrival calmly and securely. I 
have asked the finance minister to release, as soon as possible, 
an agenda of the measures that we will adopt along the path that 
leads to the implementation of the real. The most important 
rules about the real will be announced well in advance. They 
will be announced during the month of June. I am personally 
interested in giving all Brazilians enough time to prepare for 
the change and to allow all of them to learn everything possible 
about the new currency. 
  We will make a great effort to explain the real. I have 
instructed the finance minister to tour the country and to 
explain everything about the plan that implements the real and 
about the new currency itself. Everything will be carefully 
reported and explained. Nothing will be done through surprises 
or frights. This is the main characteristic of this 
administration's economic policy. We know well what is at 
stake. We know that not just figures, which very few can 
understand, are at stake. We know that our daily life, our 
purchasing power, the food that we place on our tables, our 
children's education, and the wellbeing of the elderly are at 
stake. We know that the health of all Brazilians and everything 
else will improve when we manage to finally defeat inflation. 
  Brazil knows me. It is known that I am of the people. 
Brazil knows that I share all Brazilians' distress about 
inflation. This is why I have confidence in our economic plan 
and am committed to its success. I want to hand the president, 
whom the Brazilian people will elect this year, a country with 
its economy in order; a well organized country that will allow 
the government to fulfill its duties and in which workers will 
no longer be distressed by inflation. 
  We now have the indispensable conditions to make this 
happen. 
I have many reasons to believe that. We have solved the 
foreign debt problem that harmed Brazil for more than 10 years. 
We have balanced the federal budget. The government no longer 
spends more than it collects, and we no longer have to issue 
money which in turn creates inflation. Many sectors of our 
economy are again growing. This year we will harvest the 
largest crop in history. The URV is fulfilling its role of 
ensuring the average purchasing power of salaries and of 
stabilizing prices prior to the arrival of the real. Industry 
and the government have converted most of their prices and 
utility rates into URV's. 
  I normally do not promise things that I cannot fulfill or 
commit myself to projects in which I do not believe. If I am 
here today to ask the country to believe in the real it is 
because I believe in it, it is because I am certain that we are 
now ready for it, and it is because I know that only when the 
economy is in order can everyone begin to profit, particularly 
the most destitute and the workers who live on their wages and 
have no means to protect themselves from inflation. 
  We are all part of a large family, a large nation. We must 
be strong; we must be firm; we must be specially determined. It 
is our responsibility to make Brazil the prosperous and generous 
country that we all want it to be. Let us then believe in the 
real plan. This plan was drafted during former Minister Fernando 
Henrique Cardoso's days at the head of the Finance Ministry and 
is now being implemented by Minister Rubens Ricupero. Thank you 
very much. 

