Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Japan Electronic Industry Development Association 
(JEIDA) and others have established a guideline controlling 
low-frequency electromagnetic interference generated by computer 
displays. This action is taken in response to user anxiety 
expressed over possible hazardous effects of an electromagnetic 
wave on human body. The association's member firms will 
self-impose the standard on products destined for the domestic 
market. Sweden's MPR-II standard is used as reference in 
formulating the regulations. Targeted products are CRT and 
liquid crystal displays. 
  The question of possible hazardous effects of low-frequency 
electromagnetic interference on human body, generated by 
computer displays, had surfaced many times during the past 10 
years or more. Until now, however, no definite conclusion has 
been offered. Perhaps, it is not the type of question which can 
yield a clear-cut conclusion. Under such circumstances, a 
short-cut to dispelling user anxiety is to control a level of 
emission of low-frequency electromagnetic interference 
considered hazardous to health. 
  In October 1993, JEIDA and Japan Business Machine Makers 
Association established ``A Guideline concerning Low Frequency 
Electromagnetic Interference Generated by Displays Used in 
Information Processing Equipment'' (Hereinafter, referred to as 
the guideline). The guideline designated allowable emission 
levels to control the intensity of electromagnetic interference 
generated by computer displays. The established guideline is 
applicable not only to CRT but also to liquid crystal and plasma 
displays. Measurement procedures and conditions of electric and 
magnetic interference also will be regulated. 
<H5>  Application of Guideline Will Begin in 1996 in Stages </H5>
  Japan Electronic Industry Development Association will treat 
the guideline as the industry's self-imposed regulatory control. 
For now, firms which are members of the association, will 
self-impose the guideline on their products sold on the domestic 
market. 
  Ample time is allowed before the regulatory guideline 
becomes 
effective. It has been stated that the guideline will be 
applicable only to those products manufactured after January 
1996. After January 1998, however, all products are said to be 
subject to the regulatory guideline. 
  In October 1991, moreover, the JEIDA has established a 
standard regulating display's static electricity . At that time, 
the Electronic Industries Association of Japan's name appeared 
as one of those involved in developing specifications. In 
establishing a standard this time, however, JEIDA has deferred 
the participation of the Electronic Industries Association of 
Japan. 
<H5>  Japan Trying to Catch Up with U.S. and Europe </H5>
  Japan lags somewhat behind the United States and Europe in 
the regulatory aspect of handling low-frequency electromagnetic 
interference. In the United States and Europe, it is becoming a 
common practice for both end users and computer makers to ensure 
that products satisfy designated emission levels in accordance 
with the established regulations similar to Japan's guideline. 
MPR-II, established by Sweden's official organ, SWEDAC (Swedish 
Board for Technical Accreditation), is the standard most 
frequently consulted. Especially in Europe, this is becoming 
essential, to the point that ``no matter how inexpensive 
products are, the market demands that products adhere to the 
standard established by MPR-II.'' (according to a technician 
working for a display maker). 
  Although the number of MPR-II products for the domestic 
market has been increasing in Japan, still there are a large 
number of products to which no standard has been applied. One of 
the reasons is that Japanese users are not as demanding in this 
respect as their European and American counterparts. However, 
the situation may change overnight. Anticipating this, the JEIDA 
made a move to establish a guideline. 
<H5>  Lenient on Regulating of Electric Fields Emissions </H5>
  In many ways, the guideline follows MPR-II. MPR-II standard 
products, therefore, will be automatically given the seal of 
approval. The low-frequency range of electric and magnetic 
fields allowed by the regulation, as well as the method of 
measurement, basically is the same as those of MPR-II. 
  Levels of electric interference allowed by the Japanese 
guideline and MPR-II, however, differ widely. Those established 
by Japan Electronic Industry Development Association are 50V/m 
or 250V/m with band I (5Hz-2kHz) and 10V/m for band II 
(2kHz-400kHz), which are considerably more lenient than the 
MPR-II's designated values of 25V/m (band I) and 2.5V/m (band 
II). The association's target value for band I varies depending 
on whether grounding is possible or not. The target values for 
the magnetic field are the same as MPR-II's. 
  In setting the allowable levels of interference, Japan 
Electronic Industry Development Association considered 
standardization movements other than MPR-II. At present, the 
United State's IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers, Inc.) and Europe's ECMA (European Computer 
Manufacturers Association are studying similar guidelines. The 
association used the figures appeared in a draft of the ECMA-172 
Standard. 
  Difference between the Japan Electronic Industry Development 
Association's standard and MPR-II lies in cost involved to 
achieve target values. 
  The target value of MPR-II has been determined by 
considering 
two factors, that it is within the range of the technically 
feasible and that this can be achieved without spending a 
substantial amount. Since effects of electromagnetic 
interference on human body is not clear at this time, the target 
values are determined purely on a technical basis. 
  The target values established by Japan Electronic Industry 
Development Association are aiming for the level which enables 
Japan to manufacture displays at lower cost than that of the 
MPR-II products. Even at these target values, since they are 
substantially lower than the standard set in fields other than 
displays, we believe that it will be easy for JEIDA to achieve 
its goal. 
  Reason why only the target values of electrical interference 
are set high is ``electrical interference is more difficult to 
mitigate than magnetic interference'' (a technician from a 
display maker). In order to control electrical interference 
generated by displays, we have either to lower internally 
generated electrical interference itself or to use shielding. 
For instance, with CRT, we can use a shielding method by mixing 
coating with a conductive material and apply it to a tube 
surface. However, this method can be extremely costly if 
materials with superior shielding characteristics are to be 
developed. 
Reference 
  1) Nakamori, Imai, Eda. ``Technology Gentle to Human Body: 
Reexamine Effects of Electromagnetic Wave and Light,'' Nikkei 
Electronics, 21 June 1993 issue, No. 584, pp 85-113. 

