BFN 

  [Text] Bonn (DPA) -- All parties represented in the 
Bundestag most harshly condemned the arson attack on the 
synagogue in Luebeck three weeks ago and called it a disgrace 
for the FRG. Citizens are called upon to clearly oppose 
anti-Semitic and xenophobic phenomena in everyday life, speakers 
of all Bundestag groups stressed during a Question Hour in the 
Bundestag on Thursday [14 April]. The debate had been requested 
by the Party of Democratic Socialism [PDS]. 
  Bundestag President Rita Suessmuth, Christian Democratic 
Union [CDU], said that the attack during the night into 25 March 
-- the first arson attack on a synagogue since World War II -- 
was "aimed not only at the Jews but was also an attack against 
ourselves." She opposed "actionism," as well as the urgent call 
for new, stricter laws and demanded to demonstrate the 
commitment to tolerance and against violence in everyday life. 
  FRG Justice Minister Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger 
(Free 
Democratic Party of Germany) advocated making the "Auschwitz 
Lie" punishable in general; she said that the necessary 
amendment to the constitution must be discussed thoroughly. 
Criminal prosecution, which has been without a result in the 
Luebeck case despite great efforts, can, however, not be the 
only response: "We must make it clear that people like 
Schoenhuber have no place in an open and enlightened society," 
the minister said. 
  Anke Fuchs, deputy chairwoman of the Social Democratic Party 
of Germany Bundestag group, called for taking the "intellectual 
arsonists" in Germany to task. She accused the CDU/Christian 
Social Union of being partly responsible for the current 
development in Germany, because it made right-wing extremist 
slogans "acceptable" through "revealing language and cozying up 
to the right." Under strong applause by parliament, she praised 
Ignatz Bubis, chairman of the Central Council of Jews in 
Germany: He "acted in a particularly good and noble way in 
these days." 
  PDS Chairman Gregor Gysi complained abut a change in the 
intellectual climate in Germany, in which the inhibition 
threshold for right-wing extremist statements and acts of 
violence has been lowered. One must ask the question why in 
1994 actions are committed that would not have been dared in the 
past. Wolfgang Ullmann (Alliance 90/Greens) stated: "anyone 
who sets fire to synagogues and defiles Jewish tombstones, 
attacks the honor of this nation, tries to make its name stink 
again in the international community, and break this people out 
of the international community." 

