Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Hrvoje Kacic, head of the State Commission </F>
for Borders, by Vado Rajic; place and date not given: "The 
Sovereignty of Croatia Must Not Be Jeopardized"] 
  [Text] Just a couple of days after Croatia and Slovenia 
signed a package of intergovernmental agreements, a mixed 
commission for borders met in Bled. Is there any symbolism in 
that, considering the complexity of Croat-Slovene relations? 
For, until now, those border conflicts were presented as the 
cause of strained or tense relations between the two countries. 
The new head of the Croatian delegation in that 
intergovernmental body, Hrvoje Kacic, talked to VJESNIK about 
the reverberations and effects of the Bled meeting. 
  [Kacic] First of all, one can get the impression that we are 
starting from zero in state-border matters as well. That is 
only partly true. Indeed, the work of the commission was 
interrupted and the break was unnecessarily long. The Croatian 
side of that body has, in the meantime, changed quite a lot. I 
succeeded Davorin Rudolf almost three months after he stopped 
leading the Croatian delegation, because of other obligations. 
There are other new members of the delegation. Introducing new 
participants to the achieved level of the negotiations took 
time. Expert groups did much to help that introduction and, 
relying upon cartographic data, they did much of the work. Out 
of 252 cartographic charts, the data were precisely determined 
in 206 of those zones, so as not to open any other additional 
questions that would have to be discussed at a political level. 
Even in the remaining 46 cartographic zones, it is possible to 
determine the mutual border without difficulty in most cases. 
However, in some areas, experts will not be able to solve all 
the open questions alone. Diplomatic commissions will take up 
the work that the experts are not able to. 
<H5>  Facts and Consequences </H5>
  [Rajic] The impression that you are starting from zero was 
also supported by the content of the Bled meeting, where rules 
of procedure of the mixed commission was the only item on the 
agenda. 
  [Kacic] Rules of procedure are a technical aid in our work. 
The effectiveness of our future work depends on determined rules 
of procedure. Your remark is correct in that the basic 
principle of rules of procedure is consensus, that is, the 
agreement of both delegations on every question. Consequently, 
we will have to invest a lot of time and effort to coordinate 
mutual interests and views. Internal and foreign affairs 
experts, geodesists, and experts on international public law are 
entrusted with determining the facts. Parliament has the final 
say. From the level of experts and the diplomatic commission to 
parliament, there are many extremely important participants in 
that work. The foreign minister, the prime minister, the 
government in its entirety, and even the president of the 
republic will definitely participate in solving open questions 
that cannot be agreed on the level of mixed commission, that is, 
its diplomatic part. 
  [Rajic] Is it true that, at the press conference held during 
the break of the Bled meeting, one could see differences with 
regard to principles on which the two sides intended to work in 
establishing their joint border? The Croatian side advocated a 
mixed principle of various criteria for establishing the border, 
while the Slovene side insisted on the data which contain 
geodesic charts of areas of the joint Slovene-Croat border. 
  [Kacic] Such an interpretation, even showing the alleged 
conflict of principles, is a simplification of what has been 
done in the commission. After all, we did resume work, which 
already disproves the hypothesis that there was a conflict about 
principles. I have mentioned information that makes it obvious 
that a good part of the job was done. Furthermore, recent 
statements of [Prime Ministers] Valentic and Drnovsek, though 
made at the declarative level, contain the principles in 
question. All this shows that the two sides are gradually 
getting closer. The impression of the press, on the other hand, 
advocates the absolutization of just one principle and becoming 
a slave to it, which I am convinced would never produce a good 
or final result. For our task is not only to establish the 
facts but also to predict the consequences, should any of the 
principles be applied to every single open question. Therefore, 
giving the principles a special status is out of the question, 
for we must still establish the facts, whose content will 
reconcile the represented principles. 

<H5>    Without Conflicts Only With Hungary </H5>
  [Rajic] Speaking about impressions, here is another one: Is 
it true that the outcome of negotiations on the state border in 
the Bay of Piran will determine the outcome of the entire border 
problem between Croatia and Slovenia? 
  [Kacic] The Bay of Piran is undoubtedly one of the main 
points of these negotiations. It is also true that this is the 
main bone of contention in the present work regarding borders. 
However, in order to solve that question, we must finish the 
work on the land border and say where it comes out, at which 
point, to the Bay of Piran. I think we should proceed as 
follows: We must first solve the question of who controls the 
Bay of Piran. It is not an ambition of Croatia to change the 
name of the bay, but the name itself says that is an area in 
which the Slovene interest is more intensively present. 
Moreover, I do not believe that, in addition to Croatian 
maritime resources in, for example Limski Kanal, Croatia has any 
interest for the shells in the Bay of Piran itself. 
  However, one advantage of the Slovene negotiating team has 
hitherto escaped our notice. Slovenia borders four countries: 
Italy, Austria, Hungary, and Croatia. It does not have any 
border disputes with the first three countries, so it seems that 
it has a problem only with "the bad guys from Croatia," for 
border conflicts exist there. Croatia, on the other hand, has 
no border conflict only with Hungary. With regard to all other 
borders, from Slovenia to Serbia, from Bosnia to Montenegro, 
Croatia will have to put much effort into solving all the 
problems and settling the border disputes. 
  Furthermore, one must have some understanding for the 
Slovene 
side, which used to have the right of tramp navigation to the 
open sea from its part of the coast. According to the 
government that became effective after Croatia and Slovenia 
gained independence, the territorial waters of Croatia and Italy 
were connected, because of the configuration of the area and the 
proximity of the Italian and Croatian coasts. Naturally, that 
imposes certain limitations. The quality of navigation for 
ports in the Slovensko Primorje [Slovene Riviera], according to 
the valid norms of the Convention on the Law of the Sea, grants 
the so-called right of inoffensive way, and that is different 
from the regime of tramp navigation. Those who are responsible 
for solving that problem must find a solution that would not 
make our Slovene neighbors claustrophobic. I do not think that 
is in the interest of Croatia either. But the sovereignty of 
Croatia on its territory must not be jeopardized. 
  [Rajic] In that context, what does the demand for preserving 
the integrity of the Bay of Piran mean? 
  [Kacic] In my opinion, it is significant as being a future 
solution that will be established by determining all the 
elements of Slovene and Croat interests, which will be our 
connecting point. For, the Bay of Piran and the choice of 
solutions acceptable to both sides puts both Croatia and 
Slovenia to the test, testing their maturity and readiness to 
become part of Europe. I, therefore, do not accept that even 
now, before ending the discussion, we should refer to final 
solutions as if it were really not possible to reach an 
agreement. 
<H5>  Arbitration Is Unacceptable </H5>
  [Rajic] Do you also think arbitration is one of the final 
solutions? 
  [Kacic] I think it is pointless to talk about arbitration at 
this stage, although it was mentioned long ago in the work of 
this commission. As far as I have grasped the content of open 
questions in mutual demarcation, I understand that asking 
someone else to settle our dispute would prove the lack of 
maturity of one or the other, or both countries, and their 
inability to evaluate all the relevant circumstances of this 
sensitive matter. 
  [Rajic] To what extent does a positive political 
atmosphere in relations between the two countries influence the 
work of the border commission? 
  [Kacic] That is a great help in this stage of our work. Our 
commission is not only the first joint body to convene after the 
Valentic-Drnovsek package, but we also scheduled another meeting 
"somewhere in Croatia" for 17 and 18 March. Both the Croatian 
and the Slovene side refused to solve problems by postponing 
them. Especially as, in those "postponed circumstances," we run 
the risk of possible incidents, even verbal incidents with 
regard to where our border begins and where their border ends. 
I can laugh at, become sad about, or get furious about the 
expression "Alpine Croats," with which our Slovene neighbors 
sometimes treat themselves, having a clearly defined goal in 
mind. The same reaction is possible regarding the expression 
"Slovene Istria," as a replacement for the hitherto common terms 
for Slovensko Primorje, Slovene Riviera, and so on. How to 
react to "Slovene Istria"? By mentioning Hrvatine ["Hrvat" means 
Croat], the first village that one passes through after entering 
Slovenia from Italy? Will either side be trying to gain some 
advantage on that level? 
  [Rajic] Is the fact that you were appointed head of the 
Croatian negotiating delegation and head of the State Commission 
for Borders, which is attributed to your political "color," on 
that level too, and has the fact that you are actually an expert 
with years of experience, that you have many academic degrees in 
that field, been neglected? 
  [Kacic] Yes, it is something like that, for one is 
speculating about my status as an independent candidate at the 
first elections, my status as a deputy, some alleged offers for 
state functions and the like. It is all partly true, but the 
other part makes it relative. For example, as an independent 
candidate in Dubrovnik, at that time I would not have succeeded 
without the support of both the Croatian Democratic Community 
and other, then opposition, parties. 
  Regarding my expertise, let me tell you this. My entire 
professional career has been dedicated to maritime law, but 
mostly in the domain of commercial relations. What I am 
entrusted with in this case obliges me to study the problem 
thoroughly. Therefore, it is not something I could use to 
praise myself. 

