BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed JPH/KVB: "Netherlands Police Issues Radio </F>
Warning to Illegal Immigrants"] 
  [Text] Rotterdam, 5 Apr (ANP) -- The Netherlands police 
broadcast an advisory on Italy's Radio Milan to Pakistanis not 
to come to the Netherlands for a residence permit. The 
broadcast was in response to the arrival Tuesday morning [5 
April] at the Rotterdam aliens police office of 1,000 illegal 
Pakistani immigrants, who attempted to obtain permits. They 
came from Italy, Belgium, France, and Germany. 
  According to a spokesman for the Rotterdam-Rijnmond police, 
attempts are being made to broadcast such appeals in the 
countries of origin of the illegal immigrants. "We want to 
reach as many people as possible through the media," the 
spokesman said. In its English-language broadcast, the 
Netherlands world service also has devoted some attention to the 
matter. 
  The Rotterdam police have learned from several illegal 
immigrants that they paid unspecified fees to be transported to 
Rotterdam. 
  The first Pakistanis arrived in Rotterdam on Monday. They 
had travelled by bus from France and were stopped on Coolsingel 
Avenue. Ten of them were expelled from the country on Tuesday. 
"That is still a viable operation, but we cannot take 1,000 
people and expel them," the police spokesman said. 
  The Rotterdam aliens police is drawing up a pamphlet which 
explains in various languages that it is no longer possible to 
obtain a residence permit in the Netherlands. Since 1 April, 
applications for permits of this kind must be submitted to the 
Netherlands Embassy or Consulate in the country of origin. The 
pamphlets will be hung up outside the police station. There are 
also plans to allow police in the country's three other major 
cities to use the pamphlet. 
  The confusion may have arisen as a result of the tightening 
up of the Law on Aliens on 1 April. The law now stipulates that 
for any stay in the Netherlands longer than three months, aliens 
must apply for a temporary residence permit in their country of 
origin. A fee is charged for such applications. After they 
have arrived in the Netherlands, the aliens must still apply for 
a temporary residence permit. 
  According to the Netherlands Center for Foreigners (NCB), 
the 
Justice Ministry made a mistake in its announcement on the new 
legislation. The immigrants know far too little about it and 
are spreading rumors. Furthermore, the fact that applications 
have to be paid for is probably leading many aliens to believe 
they can simply buy a residence permit. The NCB claims that at 
the same time justice officials are showing no interest in 
helping the foreigners understand the complicated new 
legislation. 
  Secretary of State for Justice Kosto rejected the criticism 
on Tuesday. He claims that the NCB has been involved in the 
information campaign all along and that information material is 
available in seven different languages. "However, if people do 
not wish to believe the information and jump at any opportunity 
they can to obtain a residence permit, then there is not much we 
can do about it," Kosto said. According to Kosto, aliens who 
knew they were residing here without a permit thought that they 
could set things straight. 

