BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with National Assembly Speaker Dr. Frene Ginwala </F>
by correspondent Conrad Burke in the Cape Town studio -- 
recorded.] 
  [Text] [Burke] In the studio, Dr. Frene Ginwala, speaker of 
parliament, a pivotal position. How are you going to approach 
this? 
  [Ginwala] I don't think I have a ready-made formula, partly 
adjust slowly, understand what's involved, but also move in the 
direction of processes that are already in place in the country 
and try and make sure that parliament moves along with those. 
  [Burke] Breaking new ground, though? People who have seen 
parliament for many years saw new ground broken down. 
  [Ginwala] It must break new ground because parliament has 
got 
to be representative of the changes; it's got to lead them; it's 
got to reflect them. So it will break new ground. There is a 
tradition in this country which came out of your British 
Parliament, came out of a particular South African experience. 
Now parliament has to reflect, and as I said before, drive the 
new South Africa -- a democratic experience, an African 
experience. 
  For me one of the most fulfilling moments of today was 
watching the members of parliament being sworn in, and I 
happened to be sitting in a way which I could see their faces. 
Some of them I knew. But when you looked at them, they 
reflected South Africa, and it was really marvelous. It was 
marvelous to watch. 
  [Burke] Now to large extent, parliament does use precedents 
set by previous parliaments. To what extent will you be using 
precedents set by the old parliament? 
  [Ginwala] When we really have to look at precedents, where 
they come from, what their purpose is. [sentence as heard] We 
do need to move in directions that will be new, but you don't 
make changes for the sake of change. And I think in each case 
one will have to look at it, the members will have to look at it 
because it's got to be a parliament in which they can function, 
in which they are comfortable. If there is a rule which has no 
meaning for them, which comes out of a tradition which they know 
nothing about, and which serves no useful purpose, we will have 
to change that. I think that's the way we need to approach any 
changes we make. 
  [Burke] So you're looking at flexibility? 
  [Ginwala] Yes. 
  [Burke] With discipline? 
  [Ginwala] I think discipline is going to be important. 
Hopefully one would not need to exercise it because one of the 
things about the present process is the way people have worked 
together over the last two years. And one hopes that same sort 
of atmosphere will continue in parliament. But parliament 
should not be seen as a rubber stamp. It's got to be creative; 
it's got to make an input. It's not there simply to say aye to 
every piece of legislation. It's got to look at that and add to 
it. So you got to find a mixture of all of that. 
  [Burke] How do you encourage debate? 
  [Ginwala] Well, I have a feeling with the composition of 
this 
parliament one would not need to encourage it. I think we have 
people who have experience in articulating, whether it is a 
political party conference or in parliament, whether it has been 
out of the past debates that have happened or the debates that 
happened within the mass democratic movement, that happened 
within political parties within the liberation struggle; and all 
of that will feed in -- I hope -- to a new vigorous democratic 
debate, where ideas will [pauses].... There will be a thrust of 
new ideas. There will be challenges. That's what we need to 
aim for. How one would encourage it if it doesn't happen, I 
honestly don't know, but I feel they won't need encouraging 
  [Burke] Have you had experience? Have you seen other 
parliamentary systems in operation? 
  [Ginwala] I have seen them, but I haven't studied them. I 
mean I lived in exile for many years, so I have seen how they 
function. I had an interest because I am interested in politics, 
but never dreaming that I would be speaker of a democratic South 
African parliament. 
  [Burke] How does the British or the American system strike 
you? 
  [Ginwala] There are some things -- both of them are moving 
in 
particular directions which personally I would want us to move 
in terms of greater openness, greater transparency, a greater 
engagement with the public. How you would do that here -- again 
I think it's too early for me to say. I would need time to look 
at it. Members themselves will have to decide how they want 
parliament to function. I think that's for me the crucial 
thing. They must set the pace. They must make the decisions. 
They've got to feel that they can work there, and that they can 
engage with the public through parliament. 
  [Burke] Women's emancipation has been something very close 
to 
your heart. How do you see your appointment? A milestone 
perhaps on the road? 
  [Ginwala] It's a very important step, it's a milestone. I 
think it was very encouraging for women that this could happen. 
I know from the responses that rang out in parliament -- cries 
of malibongwe [let it be thanked] -- were reflective of that. 
But I must admit that today was for me a triumph for democracy. 
Of course that should encompass women. 
  [Burke] Just give us a glimpse, a little glimpse of the 
parliamentary program for the rest of the year. 
  [Ginwala] I believe the Senate, well this goes beyond the 
House of Assembly, the Senate is due to meet on the 20th, and 
the first step that we have to do is the houses have to 
constitute themselves, which is what we did today with the 
National Assembly. It elected a speaker. Similarly the Senate 
will have to meet and constitute itself, elect its officials. 
Then the next step will be -- I think it's on the 23d, the 
morning of the 23d, when the Constituent Assembly, the body that 
will write the new constitution, will constitute itself and 
elect its officials, and immediately later that day on the 23d 
the president will come again to today's National Assembly, and 
will give his address to Parliament, set the program for the 
year. We will have a debate at that point for three days. 
Thereafter there is a brief adjournment. We come back in early 
June for the first reading of the budget -- for a few days. And 
then effectively the major sessions of parliament will be 
adjourned till about early August. 
  Of course as the new government puts out legislation, select 
committees will be meeting to process the legislation. 
  [Burke] Well, in your new term, we wish you well. 
  [Ginwala] Thank you very much. 

