Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vasiliy Kryukov: "Guns Backing Up to the Market: </F>
Who Benefits From the Reorganization of Arms Exports in Russia"] 
  [Text] Not all of what is stated below can be 
attributed to the adventure genre, nevertheless the past and 
subsequent events may serve as a good basis for the writing of a 
very "intense" detective story. I will begin my story on a by no 
means noteworthy date--10 September 1993.... 
  Precisely on this date at about 10 in the morning, three 
uninvited citizens entered the office of Maj-Gen Valeriy 
Braylovskiy of the State Foreign Trade Company [GVK], 
"Spetsvneshtekhnik" [SVT] of whom he remembered only one very 
well--V. Goncharov, senior justice adviser and investigator of 
especially important matters under the Procurator General of the 
Russian Federation. This visit ended with the forced 
transmission of several documents of a very delicate nature and 
the formulation of an official paper with the following content: 
  Protocol of a seizure [of documents]. 
  Moscow, 10 September 1993. 
  The investigator of especially important matters under 
the Procurator General of the Russian Federation, senior justice 
adviser Goncharov, with the participation of witnesses....seized 
documents confirming the transfer of $2.5 million to the firm 
"Telamon Ltd." in Switzerland. 
  The seizure began at 1015 and ended at 1110. 
  The documents shown by V.G. Brayloskiy were turned over 
voluntarily. 
  The following documents were confiscated for inclusion 
in the case: 
  1. A contract (agreement) between the GVK 
"Spetsvneshtekhnika" and the firm "Petromex Commodities Ltd" on 
the redemption of 50 percent of the shares of the firm "Artan 
Ltd.", No. 287 (25)93 from 4 March 1993 on two pages.... 
  3. Agreement No. 25 on intentions from 1 March 
1993; 
  4. A letter from 4 August 1992 No. 3-171 on the 
transfer of $2.5 million on one page; 
  5. Letter No. 01-T-19 to the firm "Telamon Ltd." from 
"Petromex Commodities Ltd." on one page; 
  6. The letter of the GVK "Spetsvneshtekhnika" from the 
firm "Petromex Commodities Ltd." on the transfer of $2.5 million 
to the firm; 
  The letter of the firm "Telamon Ltd." to "Seabeco 
Group" on the recript of $2.5 million from the GVK 
"Spetsvneshtekhnika" on one page.... 
  V.G. Brailovskiy, president of the GVK 
"Spetsvneshhtekhnika," made the following statement: "The GVK 
'Spetsvneshtekhnika' informs the representative of the 
Procurator General comrade Goncharov of the confidentiality of 
the information contained in the confiscated documents and takes 
no responsibility for the subsequent divulgence of information 
set forth in these documents...." 
  As a matter of fact, Valeriy Georgiyevich Braylovskiy had no 
interest in divulging the details of this deal, because to begin 
with the company of Mr. Leybovich "Petromex Commodities Ltd." 
that belongs to the holding group "Seabeco" used money belonging 
to "SVT" to cover its debt to the company "Telamon Ltd." 
  It may be that the Procurator General will answer the 
questions of what later happened to this $2.5 million and how it 
benefited the business people there as well as other questions. 
  In general, it it not so important what financial jungles 
our 
businessmen got into from the arms business. Something else is 
of interest: Who put through this dubious undertaking and how, 
with what advantage for himself? As for the person of the 
initiator or most active participant in the adventure, 
knowledgeable people name Dmitriy Yakubovskiy, the legendary 
witness of the infamous Interdepartmental Commission Against 
Corruption. 
  The confidentiality of the information, about which the 
president of "SVT" was so insistent, also involved something 
else: Vladimir Shumeyko, first vice-premier of the Government of 
Russia, took part in the story about the "Seabeco Group." 
  I quote one curious document from 16 March 1993 (style and 
spelling retained): 
  To First Deputy Chairman of the Government of the 
Russian Federation V.F. Shumeyko. 
  Esteemed Vladimir Filippovich. 
  At the present time, our organization faces 
qualitatively new tasks in the export and import of arms and 
military equipment to foreign countries, including the countries 
of Western Europe. 
  The solution to this task foresees the displacement of 
traditional suppliers from new markets, which forces us to apply 
nonstandard methods such as action through third firms 
accompanied by deals in general-purpose output (metals, 
fertilizers, etc.). This is dictated by the complex 
foreign-policy situation in the world with respect to the export 
of arms in general and in the Russian Federation in 
particular. 
  For this purpose, we chose the holding company "Seabeco 
Group," Switzerland, which is presently carrying out a large 
volume of export-import operations involving general-purpose 
output from the territory of the former USSR. 
  In connection with what has been stated, I ask your 
consent to the establishment of a distributor network through 
the acquisition of 50 percent of the shares of one of the 
companies of the indicated holding for the sum of $5 million, 
attributing the expenditures (considering their productive 
nature) to overhead expenses for exports while reducing the 
compulsory sale of foreign exchange proceeds to the 
state.... 
  V.G. Brailovskiy, president of the GVK 
"Spetsvneshtekhnika." 
  Let us put aside the verbal camouflage such as "nonstandard 
methods" or "complex foreign-policy situation in the world and 
in the Russian Federation" (?!) and let us ask ourselves one 
very simple question: how did the GVK "SVT" benefit from the 
acquisition of shares and the establishment of a joint company 
in Zurich on the basis of the firm "Seabeco Group," which 
Leybovich, Brailovskiy and others had joined even before that (4 
March 1993). After all, initially by no means the main role was 
assigned to "Spetsvneshtekhnika" in this game--it could not 
control anything and the only use that it had from the shares 
that it acquired was the fact that they served as a kind of 
guarantee for the return of the loaned sum. At least that is how 
one can understand point three of the contract from 4 March 
1993: "The indicated sum of 5 (five) million U.S. dollars is 
compensated by the firm through the transfer to the company of 
50 percent of its (the firm's) profit obtained from the 
activities of the joint firm in the course of the time necessary 
for the compensation of the $5 million. 
  But whether the assistants of Vladimir Filippovich who first 
dealt with the question failed to see these reefs or whether 
some other considerations influenced the decision that he made, 
the first vice-premier was favorably disposed to the idea of the 
president of the GVK "SVT." Here is his resolution from 24 March 
1993: "Concur with the proposals of `Spetsvneshtekhnika.' 
Proceed as instructed and present proposals on execution." That 
was a very specific instruction but it was in violation of all 
the canons of administrative ethics--it by-passed the Ministry 
of Foreign Economic Relations, which included 
"Spetsvneshtekhnika," and Vice-Premier Aleksandr Shokhin, who 
was supervising the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations at 
the time. Also unnoticed was the fact that juridically the deal 
had already been made and they are either substituting the first 
vice-premier or he is helping out someone else. 
  In this philanthropy (the sending of money to Switzerland), 
one can clearly see someone's enormous personal interest rather 
than noble intentions. What we have is deception of the state 
and also of domestic producers of weapons, to whom the "SVT" has 
long been in debt. 
  It seems that the destruction of the former system for the 
export and import of arms in accordance with the President's 
Edict No. 1932-c from 18 November 1993 will leave this question 
unanswered, for the established state company for the export and 
import of arms and military equipment ("Rosvoorusheniye") will 
hardly want to take on the responsibility for the previous 
obligations of specialized foreign economic organizations to 
Russian weapons manufacturers. And they number more than 4 
million people, of whom more than 800,000 work in science. It is 
70 Russian city-plants and entire regions such as Udmurtia and 
Perm, Nizhegorod, Chelyabinsk, Sverdlovsk, and other oblasts. 
  It is very problematical whether the new structure can 
return 
to Russia the debts of foreign countries--and they amounted to 
$120 billion over the last few decades. Or whether it can pay 
off our debts to suppliers of arms and military equipment. In 
any case, the current minister of foreign economic relations 
does not see any prospects for the domestic arms business. Under 
his proposals, the volume of military-technical cooperation will 
decline. 
  The primary influence on this is the clearly the untimely 
structural reorganization of the export of weapons. Solid 
contracts for the sale and servicing of combat aircraft 
equipment, surface-to-air missile, tanks, and ships were 
endangered. They amounted to almost $2 billion. 
  Officials who know what is really behind the above-mentioned 
edict do not deny that it is above all a number of officials at 
the highest level of power who are interested in removing 
specialized foreign economic associations from the control of 
the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations. But precisely who 
are they? 
  To answer this, it is necessary to see who has been 
entrusted 
with the management of the new "Rosvooruzheniye." For this post, 
the President of the Russian Federation appointed Lt-Gen Viktor 
Samoylov, the foreign military adviser of Vladimir Shumeyko. 
Once an instructor at a military academy and later senior 
officer at the Main Directorate for Cadres of the Ministry of 
Defense of the USSR, he dealt with the reorganization of the 
armed forces in the Committee for the Preparation and 
Implementation of Military Reform. 
  It can be assumed that one of the first foreign trade 
operations of "Rosvooruzheniye" will be the attempt to free up 
the $4.3 for 4.666 million tonnes of aluminum from Kemerovo sold 
by "Oboroneksport" to the Belgian firm "R.D.I." in April 1993, 
money that is blocked in a special account of the Rotterdam 
District Court. The Belgian firm had once shown farsightedness 
in finding a job for the daughter of the future president of 
"Rosvooruzheniye." 
  "R.D.I.," being unable to fulfill its payment obligations 
under the contract and not wishing to lose the valuable 
strategic raw material delivered to it ("Oboroneksport" quickly 
resold the aluminum to the English from "Optmarr"), organized 
the attachment of the shipment. How it was able to do this can 
be seen from a latter of the deputy administrative head of 
Kemerovo Oblast to Oleg Davydov, first deputy minister for 
foreign economic relations (No 23-55/88 from 5 July 1993): 
  A difficult situation arose in Rotterdam because of the 
operational and active support given to the firm "R.D.I." by its 
influential friends in Russia.... One of the main documents 
influencing the decision of the court was information from the 
main administrative desk of the organization of the president of 
the Russian Federation sent to the firm "R.D.I." with Shumeyko's 
fax machine, putting in doubt the right of individual officials 
of the foreign economic association "Oboroneksport" to sign 
contract documents. 
  Just think who these "influential friends in Russia" are who 
have unhindered access to the fax machine of the second man in 
the government. 
  The person of the second individual in "Rosvooruzheniye," 
Sergey Oslikovskiy, is known only to specialists in the Ministry 
of Foreign Economic Relations and "Oboroneksport," from where he 
was driven (sent to the disposition of the Ministry of Defense) 
on 24 November of last year for his independent attempt to take 
control of intermediary functions between "Oboroneksport" and 
the company "Terimon Industrial Establishment" in organizing the 
delivery of special goods from Russia, negotiations, the 
implementation of contracts, etc. Not without remuneration, of 
course, but for a commission of 20 percent. Here are some 
"strokes" from his business biography: 
  2 February 1993. An agent agreement and supplementary 
agreement were signed between the foreign economic association 
"Oboroneksport" and the firm "Terimon Industrial Establishment" 
for a period of 12 months with automatic extension. 
  From the preamble of the agent agreement: "The Russian 
state foreign economic association "Oboroneksport," 
...hereinafter called "Association," and...the company "Terimon 
Industrial Establishment" represented by Mr. S.N. Oslinovskiy, 
hereinafter called "Consultant," concluded the present 
agreement...." 
  Commission compensation will be remitted to the 
Consultant at one of the banks of his choice in accordance with 
a written instruction that the Consultant will send to the 
Association. These payments will be proportional to the payments 
received by the Association and will be made in the currency of 
the received payment.... 
  From the supplementary agreement: "The commission 
compensation due to the Consultant will be paid out in the 
course of 60 days from the date of the actual receipt of the 
corresponding payments in the account of the 
Association...." 
  From a letter from the managers of "Terimon Industrial 
Establishment" to the management of the foreign economic 
association "Oboroneksport": 
  "On 27 February of this year, S. Oslikovskiy left 
Geneva for Tripoli after holding a number of meetings there with 
people to whom it was declared that he represents S. Karasglanov 
(former manager of the foreign economic association 
"Oboroneksport"--the editor). At Dzherba Airport (Tunis), there 
was no car to take S.O. (Oslikovskiy--the editor) to Tripoli and 
he returned to Geneva on Monday, 1 March of this year. This fact 
says quite a lot about his specific possibilities. 
  "We would like to appeal to S.K. to remove S.O. from 
these matters in a way that is convenient for him so that he 
cannot have a negative influence on the course of events.... 
  "It is possible that S.K. understands that S.O. visited 
Libya with a proposal on the delivery of materials for the sum 
of about $50 million...." 
  Indeed, one could not find a better candidacy for the 
position of deputy manager of "Rosvooruzheniye." He is very 
enterprising. 
  I will not call the reorganization of the system for the 
export of weapons absurd. Only it is a pity that the president 
did not listen to the opinion of the main designers of arms, the 
directors of the largest defense enterprises, who tried to stop 
the process. Or did someone save this letter until the right 
moment? 
  Meanwhile, the domestic defense industry is in its last 
throes. If only it had the strength at least to rearm its own 
army. 

