Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development 
Corporation (PNC) and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) have 
agreed to cooperate in research on next-generation technology 
concerning the reuse of spent nuclear fuel. This is ``actinide 
recycling'' technology, the use of use fast breeder reactors to 
burn plutonium and radioactive waste that is extracted from 
spent fuel from nuclear power generation. Because the plutonium 
and waste can be burned together, the plutonium will be used in 
a form that is difficult to convert to military use. This also 
will reduce the amount of long-lived waste which is a disposal 
problem. The research cooperation is aimed at establishing 
nuclear fuel technology that is sensitive to non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and conservation of the environment. 
  U.S.-Japan cooperation concerning actinide recycling already 
was discussed during talks in Vienna between Science and 
Technology (STA) Director General Eda and U.S. Energy Secretary 
O'Leary in September. The decision to proceed was made at the 
end of October, when prospects looked good that about $37.3 
million would be budgeted by the U.S. Congress. PNC and DOE will 
conclude a cooperation agreement at the beginning of 1994. 
  Forms of cooperation being studied include the use of DOE 
research facilities by both U.S. and Japanese researchers and 
provision of test data using PNC's fast breeder reactors (FBRs) 
``Joyo'' and ``Monju.'' 
  PNC has become more convinced that in the current atmosphere 
of concerns about nuclear proliferation and a trend of excess 
supply of plutonium, it would not be realistic in the short term 
to pursue the development plan of extracting high-purity 
plutonium from spent fuel and increasing it in FBRs. That was 
why, only recently, it had decided independently on full-scale 
development of actinide recycling as a technology with high 
resistance to nuclear proliferation. 
  On the other hand, the United States stopped commercial 
reuse 
of spent fuel and development of FBRs after the Carter 
Administration strengthened the U.S. policy on nuclear 
non-proliferation in the latter half of the 1970s. Even after 
that, however, DOE promoted the project to develop an advanced 
liquid metal cooled reactor (ALMR), a type of fast reactor. 
Under the Clinton Administration, it was decided to continue an 
actinide recycling project in which spent fuel would be reused 
in the form of metallic fuel. 
  France, the world leader in FBR development, has decided to 
change its FBR research policy goal from plutonium breeding to 
actinide burning. PNC already has strengthened research 
cooperation in this field with France's Atomic Energy Agency. 
The PNC-DOE agreement has provided a clear picture of 
cooperation among Japan, the United States and France on using 
fast reactors for actinide recycling. 
<H3>  Editorial Comment: Makes Conversion to Weapons Difficult and 
Lightens U.S. Disposal Burden </H3>
  Actinides is the general name for 14 elements from thorium, 
with an atomic number of 90, to lawrencium, with an atomic 
number of 103. Sometimes actinium, with an atomic number of 89, 
is included. All are radioactive elements, and long-lived 
transuranic elements (TRU) that are created by nuclear fission 
reaction in a nuclear reactor, such as neptunium, plutonium and 
americium, are typical of actinides. 
  The nuclear fuel cycle -- the reprocessing and reuse of 
spent 
fuel from nuclear power generation -- so far has focused on 
plutonium and unburned uranium, and high-purity plutonium is 
being extracted at reprocessing plants. In contrast, actinide 
recycling is a new method in which various types of TRU that 
were unburned and were treated as waste would be burned along 
with plutonium. 
  The United States is disposing of spent fuel directly 
without 
reprocessing, but it is facing the problem of inadequate storage 
facilities. DOE is stressing that if actinide recycling can 
reduce the amount of waste with a half-life calculated in 
increments of tens of thousands of years, only waste with a 
half-life in increments of several hundred years will need to be 
controlled, thus lightening the burden of disposal. 
  PNC, on the other hand, focuses on the fact that actinide 
recycling will extract plutonium along with ``impurities'' and 
make it difficult to convert the plutonium to use in nuclear 
weapons, and that, moreover, it will make annihilation disposal 
of excess plutonium possible. In these days of heightened 
opposition to plutonium breeding, PNC sees actinide recycling as 
``the ultimate nuclear fuel cycle technology'' that cuts the tie 
to military technology and that will have international appeal. 

