BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following review of the 12 April 
issue of Cairo AL-SHA'B summarizes articles that are Islamic in 
nature. 
<H5>  CONTENTS: </H5>
  1. Opposition Condemns Arrest of Islamic Preacher al-Sharif 
  2. Islamic Professor Presents Case Against Mufti Tantawi 
  3. Human Right Organization Reports Torture of Detainees 
  4. Trial of AL-SHA'B Journalists Assailed 
  5. Writers Discuss Dialogue, Urge Muslim Brotherhood 
Recognition 
  6. Youths Urged To Reject Anti-Islamic Policies 
  7. Hamas Attack in 'Afula Praised 
  8. Al-Ghazali Criticizes Muslims' Reaction to Hebron 
Massacre 
<H5>  OPPOSITION CONDEMNS ARREST OF ISLAMIC PREACHER AL-SHARIF </H5>
  An 800-word report by Jamal Imbabi on page two claims that 
"all parties and political forces in the al-Daqahiliyah 
Governorate have condemned the arrest of Islamic preacher Shaykh 
Muhammad al-Sharif and increasing indiscriminate arrests." 
Addressing a seminar organized by the Labor Party Secretariat 
in the governorate, speakers from the Labor Party, the Nasirite 
Arab Democratic Party, and Wafd Party reportedly praise the 
shaykh's distinguished thought and assail the government for its 
undemocratic conduct. Dr. al-Husayni Rayhan, member of the 
Labor Party Executive Committee is cited as strongly attacking 
the call for national dialogue. He says: "What dialogue are 
they talking about when a number of sincere people are arrested 
every day? And they still talk about stability." He adds: 
"The government, which is now talking about terrorism, is 
responsible for creating it because it closed all doors to 
dialogue and change and gave absolute powers to police under the 
shameless emergency law." According to the report, participants 
in the seminar issued several recommendations, with the 
following being the most important: 
  "Releasing the political and Islamic detainees, including 
Shaykh Muhammad al-Sharif. 
  "Stopping indiscriminate arrests of Islamic trends 
supporters. 
  "Implementing political reforms and stopping violence and 
counterviolence. 
  "Setting up a committee from parties and political forces to 
take care of detainees affairs." 
<H5>  ISLAMIC PROFESSOR PRESENTS CASE AGAINST MUFTI TANTAWI </H5>
  In an approximately 1,200-word article on page two, Dr. 
Sha'ban Muhammad Isma'il, head of the Islamic Shari'ah 
Department in al-Azhar University and member of the Higher 
Council for Islamic Affairs, presents his case against Shaykh 
Muhammad Sayyid Tantawi, the mufti of the Republic. A court 
ruling had been issued blaming the writer and two others for 
libel against Tantawi. The writer says he had always respected 
and been on good terms with Shaykh Tantawi until the latter 
ruled that bank interest was religiously lawful and, later, that 
it is also religiously lawful to import alcohol to sell to 
tourists and to allow gambling in hotels. The writer says that 
Tantawi "turned from a dignified man into somebody else" when 
the writer contested his rulings and asked him why, before he 
became mufti, he used to say that bank interest was unlawful and 
that now he had changed his mind. The writer notes how Tantawi 
published articles in Egypt and abroad full of "attacks against 
ulema, and especially those who oppose his ideas." He says: "He 
[Tantawi] went so far as to encroach upon his eminence the grand 
al-Azhar imam, the Awqaf minister, and the president of al- 
Azhar university." Because Tantawi passes fatwas [religious 
rulings] without enough knowledge, the writer says, "a number of 
al-Azhar university professors sent a memorandum to his eminence 
the grand al-Azhar imam, in his capacity as the highest Islamic 
authority, because his opinion in religious matters is binding. 
They asked him to work to dismiss the mufti from his post in 
order to preserve the dignity of ulema and to protect the 
homeland from the sedition that has increased due to his fatwas. 
His fatwas violate shari'ah and help widen the gap between the 
youths and the government because the youths--wrongly--think 
that the mufti implements what the government dictates to him." 
<H5>  HUMAN RIGHT ORGANIZATION REPORTS TORTURE </H5>
  The paper publishes on page three an approximately 
2,000-word 
report by the Egyptian Human Rights Organization about the state 
of prisons and how political and Islamist detainees are treated. 
According to the report, prisoners are often subjected to 
torture and collective punishment and are deprived of their 
fundamental rights. "From information it received and 
testimonies it gathered, the organization noticed that the State 
Security intelligence controls all prisons where political 
detainees are kept. Detainees are either tortured in prison or 
taken to the offices of the State Security intelligence in Cairo 
or other security agencies in the governorates to be tortured 
there." The organization became convinced, the report adds, 
that "security agencies have launched repeated campaigns of 
collective punishment against prisoners under the pretext of 
keeping order and maintaining health and hygienic conditions, 
especially in prisons where detainees or convicts from the 
political Islam groups are kept." The report says that security 
forces used tear gas, clubs, whips, and dogs in those campaigns. 
<H5>  TRIAL OF AL-SHA'B JOURNALISTS ASSAILED; CORRUPTION </H5>
HIGHLIGHTED 
  The paper features several articles on the interrogation of 
AL-SH'AB journalists for their campaigns against "corruption" 
and in defense of freedoms. At the end of an approximately 
2,500-word article in which author 'Abd-al-Sattar Abu-Husayn 
describes how he was taken to be interrogated and then to prison 
for an article he had written about corruption in a military 
factory, Abu-Husayn says: "I wanted to tell my story without 
discussing its legal dimensions or the contents of the 
indictment. I only wanted to stress that we will not be 
intimidated by such restrictions, and we will not retreat from 
the gains we made in the field of freedom of the press, which is 
the only field in which we made progress over an entire decade." 
  --A 500-word article by columnist Muhammad 'Abd-al-Quddus on 
page 12 urges Defense Minister Muhammad Husayn Tantawi to 
investigate "the human rights violations" to which AL-SHA'B 
journalist 'Abd-al- Sattar Abu-Husayn was subjected. The writer 
notes that Abu-Husayn was put in a military jail, was 
interrogated secretly in the absence of the Journalists 
Association or any lawyer, and remained for two days without 
anyone knowing his whereabouts or the charge against him. 
  --In an approximately 3,000 word article on page five, Labor 
Party deputy leader Dr. Muhammad Hilmi Murad discusses the 
legalities of court cases against AL-SHA'B. He maintains that 
the aim of such interrogations is "to frighten writers and 
journalists so that they will abandon their campaign against 
corruption and their exposition of the corrupt." 
  --An approximately 1,300-word article by Muhammad Mutawalli 
'Awad on page six maintains that "the vicious onslaught" against 
the Labor Party is part of "government terrorism" against its 
opponents. Expressing confidence in the fairness of the Egyptian 
judiciary, the writer calls on AL-SHA'B journalists not to fear 
trial. He writes: "They have poured their anger onto the Labor 
Party and the Islamic trend since the Islamic awakening became a 
fact not only in Egypt, but also throughout the Islamic world." 
He adds that the Islamic awakening triumphed even in Turkey, 
which the infidels took as a model of secular civilization. 
"The Islamic trend in Turkey," the writer goes on to say, 
"achieved a dazzling victory in the country's largest cities, 
Ankara and Istanbul. This made the enemies of God's shari'ah 
who were educated at the hands of the West, especially the 
ruling party [in Egypt], go berserk. The ruling party feared 
the inevitable fate that awaits it when free and clean elections 
are held in Egypt, elections that are not controlled by the 
Interior Ministry's computer, the security agents, or bullies. 
The opposition parties, foremost of which is the Islamic trend 
represented by the Labor Party and the Muslim Brotherhood, will 
challenge the National Democratic Party to score even a relative 
success." 
  --A 700-word article by Ahmad al-Suyufi on page two notes 
that almost all AL-SHA'B journalists have been interrogated. 
"We have never known in Egypt's entire history a political 
group that was pursued and brought before this immense number of 
prosecutors and courts in such a way," he says. The writer 
defends AL-SHA'B's policy and says the trials "will not prevent 
us from adhering to our cause; they will not intimidate us, will 
not resolve your crisis, and will not provide support for you." 
  --A related 400-word report by Ashraf Khalil on page one 
says 
that the Freedoms Committee of the Journalists Association has 
called for a sit-in on 14 April "to protest the recent flagrant 
violations of press freedoms." The committee condemned measures 
against the AL-SHA'B military editor 'Abd-al-Sattar Abu-Husayn. 
<H5>  WRITERS DISCUSS DIALOGUE, MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD </H5>
  An approximately 1,500-word article by Chief Editor Majdi 
Ahmad Husayn on pages one and two discusses the upcoming 
national dialogue and conditions for its success. The writer 
says the dialogue must concentrate on political reforms, as this 
is "the real beginning for eliminating violence and terrorism." 
He says participants in the dialogue need to agree on the 
nature and mechanisms of the political system. Husayn also 
stresses the need for "a healthy climate" for the dialogue, such 
as giving the opposition free access to radio and television and 
abolishing the state of emergency in the country. He contends 
that "violence flourished and grew in the lab of the emergency 
law." He adds: "Dealing with the Islamic groups in the logic 
of a continuous state of emergency has made the situation worse. 
Issuing a law on combating terrorism is one thousand times 
better than imposing government terrorism--through the state of 
emergency--on everybody." Calling for the inclusion of all 
political forces in the dialogue, Husayn says: "The opposition 
parties should insist on the representation of the Muslim 
Brotherhood in the dialogue, and the ruling party should 
reconsider its position in this regard." Finally, Husayn urges 
that the issue of corruption be placed high on the agenda of the 
national dialogue. 
  --A related 800-word article by Muhammad Jamal Hishmat on 
page eight says that freedoms should be unleashed so that the 
dialogue can be held among equal parties. The writer argues: 
"The terrorism from which all of us are suffering grew and 
prospered in prisons and detention centers, when freedoms were 
absent, and when the voice of bullets was louder than the voice 
of right, justice, and humanity." 
<H5>  YOUTHS URGED TO REJECT ANTI-ISLAMIC POLICIES </H5>
  An approximately 3,000-word article by Muslim Brotherhood 
figure Ahmad al-Malat addresses the youth, telling them to raise 
the banner of Islam and reject corruption. He discusses the 
problems of the country and maintains that Islam has the 
solution to all of them. Noting that "Egypt is up to its ears in 
usury debts" that greatly burden the nation, al-Malat says that 
the Islamic economic system "can save the country from the chaos 
of debt, and put the state's economy in the hands of the people, 
not in the hands of the IMF or the World Bank." Al-Malat then 
discusses corruption and deviation, saying that while the 
government fails to take measures against the corrupt, it takes 
honorable journalists who expose this corruption to court and 
prison. Turning to other anti-Islamic campaigns, al-Malat says 
that "the Islamic curricula in schools have suffered under the 
pretext of enlightenment, the role of al-Azhar in showing people 
what is good and what is bad for them has been dwarfed, and 
those who falsely claim knowledge have encroached upon ulema." 
Al-Malat then urges youths to read Islamic books and 
literature, to pursue science and knowledge, to propagate the 
message of Islam, and not to "leave the field to the secularists 
and infidels." In an implicit criticism of the government's 
Middle East policy, al-Malat addresses the youths saying: "Do 
not expect good from those governments that have agreed to 
remain idle, evaded their responsibilities, sold out the land 
and honor, and stretched out their hands to God's enemies, 
befriending them while preventing the owners of the usurped land 
from defending their lands, as if they were captives on the land 
of Egypt, unable to bear arms to defend their land and honor. 
It is as though their cause was not ours, and we are trying to 
mediate between a displaced people and those who inherited their 
land, gave it their name, decided that its borders extend from 
the Nile to the Euphrates, and, moreover, declared holy 
Jerusalem as its capital." Speaking of the rulers, al-Malat 
says: "They struck the word jihad from their dictionaries and 
hid it from children's school books." He urges the youths to 
rebel: "Tell them that jihad will continue until the day of 
judgment, and that the youths who sold themselves to God are 
more eager for death than you are for life." He adds: "Tell 
them: We will not accept your humiliating life, we will live on 
the bare minimum, and we will boycott all their industry and 
trade. We will eat what we grow and wear what we make. We will 
remain the soldiers of right, and a new Saladin will emerge from 
among us, avenging wounded Jerusalem so that God's word will 
remain the highest. Conclude whatever treaties the evil in you 
may want to conclude, and run after the mirage of peace that 
will never come, but we will not abide by the treaties you 
conclude and the restrictions with which you chain our people." 
<H5>  HAMAS ATTACK IN 'AFULA PRAISED </H5>
  An approximately 2,000-word article by columnist Mahjub 
'Umar 
praises the attack of Islamic Resistance Movement-Hamas against 
Israelis in 'Afula on 6 April. The writer discusses Israel's 
"repeated massacres" against Palestinians since the 
establishment of Israel and says that the 'Afula attack "came to 
shatter their [the Israelis] self-conceit and instill horror in 
their hearts." He says the attack is a martyrdom-seeking 
operation, with its hero "opening doors to a great future for 
his Arab and Islamic nation and his heroic Palestinian people." 
<H5>  AL-GHAZALI CRITICIZES MUSLIMS' REACTION TO HEBRON MASSACRE </H5>
  In his "This Is Our Religion" 250-word column on page 12, 
Islamic preacher Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazali discusses and 
laments the Islamic situation following the al-Ibrahimi Mosque 
massacre. He notes how the Israelis glorified the attack on 
Muslim worshipers and how the U.S. President wanted to delay a 
Security Council condemnation until after the Arabs agreed to go 
ahead with the peace talks. Commenting on this position by 
President Clinton, al-Ghazali says: "What do you expect from a 
man who sat for two hours chatting with Salman Rushdie in 
support of his freedom of opinion? And what opinion? Insulting 
Muhammad, may peace and prayers be upon him, and his family." 
Al-Ghazali then criticizes Arab writers: "Some of them said 
that the regrettable incident should not stop the peace process! 
The Arabs have come to their knees begging for peace--which is 
actually capitulation." He says Muslims were expected to cancel 
their feasts after the massacre and discuss their plight locally 
and internationally, but "secret forces" wanted them to forget. 
Al-Ghazali concludes: "If media in the Islamic countries 
continue to pursue these treasonous policies, the Islamic world 
will be on its way to loss." 

