Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio debate with National Party Transvaal leader and </F>
Foreign Affairs Minister Pik Botha and ANC National Chairman 
Thabo Mbeki chaired by SABC announcers Lester Venter and Tim 
Modise, assisted by panelists "Agenda" announcer Freek Robinson, 
CCV TV announcer Leslie Mashokwe, SABC radio news announcer 
Ferial Haffajee, and RAPPORT journalist Anna-Marie Mischke, on 
the "Agenda" program -- live] 
  [Text] [Modise] On a day of tragic events in Johannesburg, 
we bid you welcome and good evening to this preplanned special 
broadcast on Radio Sesotho, Radio Metro, and TV 1's Agenda. I'm 
Tim Modise. 
  [Venter] And I'm Lester Venter, good evening. Tonight, we 
bring you an election debate between Thabo Mbeki, national 
chairperson of the African National Congress [ANC], and Pik 
Botha, Transvaal leader of the National Party [NP]. 
  [Modise] Lester and I will moderate the debate and we are 
joined by a panel of four journalists who will put the 
questions. They are Anna-Marie Mischke of RAPPORT, Ferial 
Haffajee of the SABC radio news, Leslie Mashokwe of Newsline, 
and Freek Robinson of Agenda. 
  [Venter] Earlier, the two parties drew lots to determine who 
would make the opening statements and who would have the last 
word. Mr. Botha's name came up first, so he will have the first 
three minutes in which to make his opening statement and then 
Mr. Mbeki will do the same. Both candidates will have an 
opportunity to make closing statements of three minutes, and Mr. 
Botha will make his, last. 
  [Modise] Let's go to the ground rules briefly. Freek 
Robinson will ask the first question of Mr. Botha, and Mr. Botha 
will then have two minutes in which to reply. 
  [Venter] Mr. Mbeki will then have two minutes to respond. 
Mr. Botha will then have the floor for one more minute and Mr. 
Mbeki will have another minute to reply. 
  [Modise] The second question will then go to Mr. Mbeki and 
the same rules apply. Candidates will begin speaking on the 
green light which is in front of them, a yellow light will flash 
at 30 seconds before time up, as a warning, and time up is when 
the red light flashes. 
  [Venter] Those are the rules of the game, so without any 
further ado, Mr. Botha, you have three minutes to make your 
opening statement. 
  [Botha] Thank you very much. We are indeed meeting here and 
participating in this event under the somber and depressing 
cloud of the events that occurred in Johannesburg today. I 
would first of all wish to express, and I think everybody here 
present this evening would wish to express our condolences to 
the bereaved families and friends of those who died, 
irrespective of which party or political persuasion they belong 
to. I believe that the most important issues, matters of deep 
concern -- there are many but the most important ones comprise 
the following, first of all, the violence I believe is uppermost 
in the minds of just about all our people. Secondly, I believe 
the high crime rate -- because despite the multitude of deaths 
that have occurred because of political motive -- I understand 
that 90 percent of the violence is still attributable to crime, 
coupled with that, unemployment, no jobs, not sufficient jobs 
for our people, and then education and training, better 
education, better training to equip our people for the strenuous 
circumstances that the New World Order will require of South 
Africans, and then of course housing, proper housing, the 
provision of housing, as well as medical and health care. Now 
let me make it very straight: The one party that is not involved 
in violence is the National Party. The only party that has been 
advocating that the leaders should get together is the National 
Party, and the Goldstone Commission has made a very clear and 
categoric finding as to the main cause of the violence. It is 
the war between Inkatha and the ANC. As far as crime is 
concerned the ANC would now like rapists to vote. They would 
like the gangster of Cape Town, if caught and found guilty, to 
vote. 
  [Venter] Thank you Mr. Botha. I'm afraid gentlemen we are 
going to have to be inflexible with our time allotments. 
  [Modise] Well, the first opportunity went to Mr. Pik Botha 
there. The opening statement this time around will be made by 
the national chairperson of the ANC, Mr. Thabo Mbeki. Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Mbeki] Well, let me say this, that our country has reached 
a 
decisive point in its history. We are very close to the point 
where the political order in this country should be changed, and 
that's important. This is an objective for which many people 
have sacrificed. Thousands of people have died. Thousands of 
people have been injured to produce a united, nonracial, 
nonsexist democracy. It's an important moment in our history, 
and we believe that such is its importance that all South 
Africans need to be involved in bringing about that kind of 
South Africa. Now there are many challenges to that process, 
some of...some of which were demonstrated today. There are 
people who are opposed to change, who don't want democracy, who 
want a perpetuation of apartheid, a white minority rule. We 
believe that all of us as South Africans ought to join hands to 
solve that problem, not to say this one is to blame, the other 
is to blame, I'm innocent -- but to say as South Africans, what 
do we do in order to ensure free and fair elections. As South 
Africans what do we do to ensure peace. That's important, 
because apart from ensuring free and fair elections part of what 
we've got to do is to create the circumstances, when it would be 
possible for us to rebuild the economy of this country. You 
can't rebuild it in conditions of violence and instability, and 
it doesn't help -- it doesn't help that anyone of us in 
responsible positions blame the other. What we should be doing 
is to say: What should I do? What should my party do to 
contribute to this climate of peace? That's very important. 
It's going to be very important that we have a program to 
create an economy which provides jobs, which provides housing, 
which addresses these enormous imbalances that exists in South 
African society, apartheid imbalances, whether they are racial 
or gender or regional. All of that has to happen. Now I'm 
saying that in the end, here you have an African National 
Congress, which for eight years plus has fought for these ideas. 
We are at the point where we are saying that that victory for 
which so many people have sacrificed is about to be scored, and 
I do believe that a party and organization such as the ANC, 
which for more than 80 years has sacrificed people in pursuit of 
these objectives -- this is an organization that should be 
trusted. 
  [Modise] Mr. Mbeki, thank you very much and now time for 
us...[crowd jeers] time for us to take the first question. Mr. 
Freek Robinson of Agenda, and the question to Mr. Pik Botha. 
  [Robinson] Mr. Pik Botha, I want to relate my question to 
the 
events of the day and not about policy matters. You have 
referred to violence as a major problem in the country today. 
Mr. Thabo Mbeki referred to the fact that we must have all the 
people of this country involved in the process and to ensure 
that there will be free and fair elections, but I want to put it 
to you that people in the right-wing and Inkatha supporters say 
that you are in an unholy alliance with the ANC, and that you 
are going to stick to an arbitrary election date, irrespective 
of the cost to lives and that you are doing so for political 
expediency, to get a few more votes. Will you therefore, in the 
climate that we have today, consider postponing the election so 
that temperatures can come down and we can have the conditions 
for free and fair elections with an inclusive political 
settlement? 
  [Botha] The decisive question is: Will it become better? 
Will the circumstances in this country be better if the 
election is postponed? That is a very, very important question. 
I doubt it. With the cycle of violence rising as it does, I 
have severe doubts that the climate will be better after 27 
April, so it would seem to me at this moment of speaking to you, 
that the sooner we get the election behind us the better, 
because perhaps a lot of the stress and strain and tension can 
be attributed to the fact that the country has not had an 
election -- and then this date was not an arbitrary date. This 
date was set long ago when all the parties of this country had 
the opportunity to make a contribution and had an opportunity to 
make suggestions as to a proper date. It is not our fault if 
parties did not make use of the opportunities that were open and 
available to them at the time, and this day was decided upon, 
and the whole world is expecting us to stick to it. The whole 
world is expecting South Africans now to come to peace with each 
other, otherwise the world will turn its back against all of us, 
and then it wouldn't matter who wins the election, or it 
wouldn't matter what will happen next year. We will be 
marginalized. The world will lose interest in us. The world 
will say, you've had your chance. You have been negotiating for 
three years. You cannot make peace with yourself. You are like 
Yugoslavia. As a matter of fact, you are a doomed country. 
[applause] 
  [Modise] And this opportunity now goes to Mr. Thabo Mbeki of 
the ANC. 
  [Mbeki] Let me say this also. I agree with Mr. Botha that 
elections.... [crowd jeers] I agree with Mr. Botha, the 
elections must go ahead as planned and as agreed, but in order 
to ensure that the elections go ahead as planned and as agreed, 
there are certain responsibilities that fall on all of us -- to 
create the climate so that those elections are free and fair. 
Now you cannot have, you cannot have a situation where the ANC 
books a stadium, legally, pays its deposit, does all of that, 
and some people come and occupy that stadium with arms the 
previous day. The result is that the ANC can't use the stadium. 
Mr. Botha's government does not say to the security forces of 
the country: You cannot allow that kind of thing to happen. Mr. 
Botha is correct. The election must go ahead but I am saying 
that the responsibility is on the part of government, to ensure 
that this climate for free political activity exists. It has to 
happen. It's their responsibility. The statement is correct, 
but the actions, the actions, the actions are undermining the 
possibility -- the actions of the South African government are 
undermining the possibility for free and fair elections. That 
has to be addressed. 
  [Modise] Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Mbeki. And another 
response from Mr. Pik Botha to what Mr. Mbeki has said. 
  [Botha] The point is just that there is now a Transitional 
Executive Council [TEC]...[applause] on which we have agreed, 
and there is a subcouncil on law and order, and one on defense. 
It is not the responsibility of the government any longer 
alone. It never was the government's responsibility alone. 
[crowd jeers] The United Nations and the whole world and the 
international observers here will make it clear to you that they 
expect all parties.... President de Klerk is thrown against his 
head with a stone, President de Klerk can't address a National 
Party meeting, the National Party can't open offices in Transkei 
and what is happening about it? Nothing. There is uneven 
handedness and the TEC should attend to this matter urgently and 
seriously. Judge Kriegler should not only fly to kwaZulu. He 
should also fly to Umtata. He should also talk to the other 
leaders. There is now structures. There is a structure in this 
country to take care of this. 
  [Modise] Mr. Pik Botha, thank you very much. Another 
minute...[crowd jeers] Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Mbeki] The lights here, they are already showing red. What 
I'm saying is this. If somebody comes and occupies Umlazi 
stadium illegally, with guns, the commissioner of police should 
say to the police force, if necessary to the defense force: Can 
you please go and remove those people so that the meeting that 
was permitted can take place. That's simple, straightforward. 
The TEC cannot instruct Gen. Johan van der Merwe because you 
insisted that when the TEC was set up it was not replacing the 
present government. Government must instruct Johan van der Merwe 
to say: Remove those people and that has not happened, and we 
have the crisis we have today. [crowd jeers] 
  [Venter] Just before we go to the next question, which will 
be from Leslie Mashokwe of Newsline, may I remind our 
encouragingly lively audience that the candidates have no 
flexibility in the times allotted to them, whatsoever. Bear 
that in mind with your responses. You are taking their time 
away. Leslie, it's your turn. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. Mbeki, the ANC speaks of jobs, peace, and 
stability. If you look at today's action, particularly the 
action of the security personnel around [ANC headquarters] Shell 
House, one wonders whether it would contribute towards creating 
a climate of job creation, peace, and stability, if we look at 
how they reacted to whatever pressures that faced them. 
  [Mbeki] Leslie, there are many outstanding problems in terms 
of the political process. It's been our view that whatever the 
problems are that any of the parties have, those problems need 
to be resolved through negotiations. The IFP walked out of the 
negotiations. We nevertheless said, never mind that, to find a 
solution, let's talk to them. The Afrikaner Volksfront 
[National Front, AVF] walked out of the negotiations. We said, 
nevertheless, let's sit with them and find a solution. It is 
our genuine belief that, let's find a peaceful negotiated 
settlement. The matter of the king, the king of the Zulus -- we 
have not met, up to now, the delegation of the king. Not 
because we didn't want to, but that delegation hasn't come. We 
are ready to discuss each and every single question that is an 
obstacle to a peaceful resolution of their problems facing the 
country as a starting point. You can ask anyone of these people 
that I'm talking about. You can ask [former Bophuthatswana 
president] Lucas Mangope what he wants, where he is now. We sat 
with him in five meetings, to resolve whatever issues that he 
had. Now, we wanted a peaceful resolution to these matters. We 
want a peaceful resolution to the questions that the IFP faces. 
What happened today had nothing to do with any of that. We 
would have thought, given the fact that even today there was a 
tripartite meeting -- the South African Government, IFP, and the 
king, and ourselves -- [as heard] that it was not necessary to 
march on ANC offices in Johannesburg. ANC headquarters, Shell 
House, is at least eight blocks away from the venue of the 
rally.... 
  [Venter, interrupting] Mr. Mbeki, thank you very much. Mr. 
Botha, a two-minute response. [crowd jeers] 
  [Botha] Jobs will only be created if this country attracts 
sufficient capital, if new factories, mines, and job 
opportunities are created. The South African economy does not 
have in itself, healthy as it is at present -- and it has 
recovered remarkably, as we are now following the conditions of 
the International Monetary Fund -- but it's as simple as that. 
To create more jobs, you're going to need increased training. 
You are not going to get money unless....[pauses] Overseas 
investors are scared and frightened by the violence and by 
statements made, inter alia, also by senior ANC members -- not 
Mr. Mbeki, I agree, but this is what Mr. Ben Turok said: A new 
South Africa will need to defend its interests against the 
predating actions of international capital and its institutions 
like the IMF and World Bank, etc. Their intentions to the Third 
World are clear enough; to instal bourgeois democracy and a new 
world order which recolonizes, integrates, subordinates, the 
Third World in a system of so-called free market. I say this 
with all respect to my ANC friend: Stop talking like this. This 
is Marxist-communist talk. Stop talking like this. [crowd 
jeers] This is what is chasing away investment, in addition to 
the violence. We must first overcome the violence, but then we 
must get in line with the IMF, because African countries who now 
subscribe to the conditions of the IMF have shown economic 
growth; those who did not, show economic decline. [applause] 
  [Venter] Mr. Mbeki, you have a one-minute response to that. 
  [Mbeki] Mr. Botha, let's not move away from the question 
that 
was posed. The question that was posed was events today which 
might have an impact on jobs, peace, and stability. What I'm 
saying is that what happened today was not necessary. The 
reason it happened was, you have people who are not intersted in 
peace, who are not interested in the creation of the conditions 
which make that investment possible. People were supposed to be 
demonstrating halfway across the town, were never supposed to 
have been at the ANC headquartes. They came to cause trouble. 
Second, the police were warned on Sunday to say, this was going 
to happen, and no action was taken to block these people, to 
disarm them, and you had the problem that you had. We want 
peace, we want jobs. I was saying this. We've been bending over 
backwards to find resolutions.... 
  [Venter] Thank you, Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Botha] I spoke to.... 
  [Venter, interrupting] Sorry, Mr. Botha, we have to move to 
the next question. Forgive me. 
  [Mbeki] He's got one minute. Give him his minute. 
  [Venter] Oh, I'm sorry. My mistake. 
  [Botha] You see what has become of the SABC? [laughter] 
  [Venter] You have me there, Mr. Botha. Your minute, please. 
  [Botha] No, Mr. Mbeki is absolutely right in saying what 
happened today was unnecessary, but it's more complicated. It 
is almost impossible for the police when, in a march, a group 
splits up into other groups. You can't have police on every 
street corner. What I want to say emphatically this evening -- 
and we have said it before -- mass action in general is not 
needed. If the ANC feels that it has such an overwhelming 
majority, then why should it resort to mass action? If they 
believe they have such an overwhelming majority, help us to 
arrange the election peacefully and you can prove your 
overwhelming majority. Where there's intimidation, there are 
threats. It is this fight between Inkatha and the ANC that must 
stop. The mass action by both parties must stop. 
  [Venter] Mr. Botha, thank you. 
  [Modise] Thanks to Mr. Pik Botha there. Now the opportunity 
will go to Ferial Haffajee of the SABC Radio News to pose a 
question to Mr. Pik Botha. Ferial? 
  [Haffajee] Mr. Botha, just to move way from the events of 
today. The homelands are collapsing like dominoes. They cost 
many billions to create. Do you agree that it was a foreign 
policy failure, and did any good come from the homeland system? 
  [Botha] No, its not a foreign policy failure, it's an 
internal policy failure. The Department of Foreign Affairs 
never created the independent states. [laughter] Those which 
have collapsed, yes, I believe today that had they followed 
different policies they would have been in a better position 
because, even if they had never got independence, then still you 
would have to administer the areas, they still would have needed 
hospitals, clinics, a police force, road building, agriculture, 
they would have needed to have dams built in those regions. I 
predict here today that the cost of administration of the region 
would perhaps exceed the cost of administration of the 
independent states. Not that I prefer the independent states; 
we have long ago decided that all of them should return to the 
jurisdiction of South Africa, because of the economic 
integration and the reality of our situation. What happened in 
those two states is that the public service turned against the 
governments of the day, and although a lot of instigation and 
intimidation might have taken place, I think I must put the 
record straight, and that is, that also National Party 
supporters in Bophuthatswana were intimidated by members of the 
Mangope government, and in the case of Ciskei, I'm surprised 
that it took so long before we could make the change. [laughter] 
  [Modise] Thank you. Right now the opportunity goes to Mr. 
Mbeki to respond. 
  [Mbeki] What has happened in this particular area is an 
illustration of the wrongness and the bankruptcy of the system 
of apartheid. The bantustans, the homelands, whatever name you 
want to give them, are very typically apartheid, and what we've 
seen happen is a general rebellion -- the minister is correct. 
The civil service and other people said, We don't want this 
thing, in much the same way as the overwhelming majority of the 
population doesn't want apartheid. [jeers and applause] No, no, 
it's true. The minister and myself have spent a long time 
talking together. He has been administering these areas. 
[laughter] He has been financing them, but at least he has the 
decency to say, This thing has failed. 
  [Modise] Thanks, Mr. Mbeki, and we give another minute to 
Mr. 
Pik Botha. 
  [Botha] Yes, the big danger facing South Africa is that 
South 
Africa as a whole may fail if the policies are followed of the 
Communist Party in this country, and there are elements within 
the ANC who would wish to do exactly like that. Writing in THE 
GUARDIAN yesterday or the day before, it was stated 
categorically that what the Communist Party wants to do is to 
set up a completely centralized, totalitarian regime. That is 
the surest way to get this country into a catastrophe 
economically speaking. The country has done well economically 
over the past year, despite its isolation position. It has the 
strongest economy south of the Sahara. There are investors who 
are interested, but they wil only.... 
  [Modise] Mr. Pik Botha, thank you very much, and another 
minute...[jeers]...a final comment on this issue from Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Mbeki] Minister, the Communist Party did not create the 
bantustans. [laughter] The National Party created the 
bantustans. That's a matter of fact, you don't have to dispute 
that. What the people of this country are saying is that 
they're against apartheid. It's not South Africa that will 
collapse, it's apartheid that must collapse, and our common 
responsiblity is to create a nonracial democracy. 
  [Modise] Thank you, Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Venter] Our next question is from Anna-Marie Mischke of 
RAPPORT. 
  [Mischke] Mr. Mbeki, during the past decade or even a bit 
longer the ANC, and before it the Mass Democratic Movement, have 
abundantly and very often, very effectively, used mass action as 
an instrument to get what it wants. We have seen examples of 
this during the past week once more, in the toppling of some of 
the homeland governments. But after 27 April, we're going to 
have, presumably, a democratically elected government, most 
probably with the ANC as a majority party in that government. 
[jeers, applause] If this culture of mass action and what we 
more and more see, political intolerance, is going to prevail 
after the election, what is the ANC's attitude going to be to 
mass action, not only from your own people but from other 
parties who obviously are following the example? 
  [Mbeki] Anna-Marie, it's very important to protect, in any 
political settlement, the rights of the people to take peaceful 
action. The ANC will say, and insist on this, that even when it 
is government, all conditions must be created, such that the 
people can take such mass action as they wish. If they are 
opposed to what an ANC government is doing, they must take that 
action. So it is a fundamental democratic right. It's a right 
of the people to go out into the streets and say, We protest, we 
demand the following... [jeers] No, no, no. No, you say AK-47? 
Let me tell you what happened. In Durban, a huge demonstration 
over the weekend, and what happened? The police put barbed 
wire, and ANC people walked up and down very peacefully. 
Nothing happened...[jeers]...and you had a demonstration in 
Johannesburg today, when the government and the police were 
warned that it was going to be violent, and people came into the 
center of Johannesburg, as demonstrators with guns. ANC people 
didn't come with guns in Durban...[jeers] Anna-Marie, what I'm 
saying is that we shall defend the right of everybody to engage 
in mass action against an ANC government. It's a fundamental 
democratic right. [jeers] 
  [Venter] Thank you very much. May I remind the audience of 
their obligation to the candidates. Mr. Botha, you have two 
minutes. 
  [Botha] I do not doubt the good intentions of Mr. Mbeki. 
What I say is, that those intentions are not translated into 
reality in practise. The fact of the matter is that we have 
warned time and again both Inkatha and the ANC that in a tense 
atmosphere you should not organize mass action, because criminal 
elements are joining this mass action, innocent people are being 
attacked, cars are being burned, human beings are being burned, 
and then it's too late to come and say, later, that this was 
intended to be a peaceful march. But let us look at the overseas 
commentators. I invite the SABC to make a summary of reports in 
all the influential newspapers all over the world, of the past 
two to three weeks. Then you will get the answer, and that 
answer is simply this one, that the ANC and Inkatha are to blame 
for the violence. Yes, you have a right to protest, but 
ordinary citizens also have a right to be protected. You cannot 
march and then burn down people's cars. You cannot march and 
then break into shops and steal goods from shop owners. And as 
I said before, if the ANC is so sure of victory -- and someone, 
I think you, implied that most probably they weren't -- we have 
not yet had the election. Let us first have the election. The 
National Party has every intention to come out as the strongest 
party, and the way the ANC now conducts itself, we will come out 
as the strongest party...[jeers] 
  [Venter] Thank you very much, Mr. Botha. Thank you very 
much. We appreciate a lively audience. I remind you that a 
courtesy would be to give the candidates the time that's still 
alloted to them. Mr. Mbeki, you have 1 minute left. 
  [Mbeki] Mr. Botha, we need to understand, the NP needs to 
wage a campaign to win elections. I understand that. But let's 
look at the actuality. You know, the actuality of this country 
is like what, for instance, the Goldstone Commission said. You 
know, there are very serious charges that have been made about 
who is behind this violence. [jeers] No, really, seriously, who 
is behind this? The Goldstone Commission does not make those 
charges lightly. I think we need to address those questions 
seriously. I concede the objective you have of battling to win 
elections. That's fine, but we must not, in the process of 
that, turn our backs on the truth. 
  [Venter] Your final minute, Mr. Botha. 
  [Botha] There is all over the world, in all responsible 
circles, today, it's accepted that apartheid is gone. That is 
why the Nobel Peace prize was awarded also to President de 
Klerk. That is why the UNESCO peace prize was awarded also to 
President de Klerk, that is why the Philadelphia Peace Medal and 
Liberty Medal was also allocated or awarded to President de 
Klerk, In other words, it is only the ANC -- I think they feel 
extremely sorry that apartheid was abandoned, because they've 
lost their platform. Certainly the Communist Party feels that 
apartheid should have continued a little longer. I have now 
reached the stage where we must really objectively analyze our 
situation. Unless we fall in line with the modern and 
successful industrialized economies of the world, it wil not be 
a pleaseant thing to govern this country, and the ANC have not 
yet taken that step. 
  [Venter] Thank you, Mr. Botha. 
  [Modise] Again, the opportunity to ask the next question is 
still with Anna-Marie Mischke of RAPPORT newspaper, and this 
time the question goes to Mr. Pik Botha. 
  [Mischke] Mr. Botha, four years ago when the ANC and the 
SACP 
were unbanned, one of the reasons that were given by your 
government was that the communist threat had disappeared, or 
diminished to such an extent that you felt free to unban them, 
because of what happened in Eastern Europe. Now, very soon, 
members of your party will probably be in the same cabinet as 
some communists. But suddenly a campaign against the Communist 
Party and against communists has become a very definite feature 
of your election campaign. What I'd like to know now: Has the 
National Party had second thoughts about the communists? 
[laughter] Or is it just very useful to take the old bogeymen 
of the total onslaught years back from under the bed, where you 
have always had the reds? What is the situation around the 
communists in the National Party? 
  [Botha] No, we have never had second thoughts about the 
South 
African Communist Party [SACP], but the moment you decide to 
legalize an organization, then you need not change your view -- 
you need not start liking them. You then put your hopes in the 
people of the country to reject it. That is the democratic way, 
and that was the basis of our decision. Our concern now is that 
we were challenged by the SACP -- here I must say, not the ANC, 
but the SACP -- to prove that more than 16 of the candidates on 
the ANC's national list are communists, and we did so; 25 of 
them are, and this is of major concern -- not suddenly -- to the 
South African Government. Professor Johnson, an Oxford 
academic, wrote three days ago in the LONDON TIMES that the SACP 
had too strong an influence on the ANC, and that is posing a 
danger for South Africa's economic growth. This is coming from a 
well known and reputed expert on southern Africa. But what is 
more, IMF economists share the same view. So this is not just 
something that the NP suddenly have drawn into the debate. This 
is there all the time, and our concern is that not even the ANC 
will be able to resist this firm grip which the SACP now has on 
the ANC... [jeers] ... and that will preclude investment. 
There's not a single country in the world today where a 
communist party is participating in an election. This is the 
point I want to start making. The ANC has the wrong ally. We 
shed apartheid. We got rid of that burden. We admitted the 
mistake that it was. I'm waiting for my ANC friend to take the 
same bold step. 
  [Modise] Mr. Botha, thank you very much. We give a 
two-minute opportunity to Mr. Thabo Mbeki. 
  [Mbeki] The problem.... Can I appeal...? 
  [Modise, interrupting] Let me appeal to the members of the 
various organizations, please, give the representatives of your 
organizations the opportunity to state their cases, please. 
Thank you. 
  [Mbeki] Can I appeal to the NP? Can you listen to what I'm 
going to say? If you disagree with it when I've said it, please 
object, but please listen. You see, the problem about this 
issue is that the NP has gone back to old ways. It's gone back 
to old ways. The NP does not say: This is what we find to be 
wrong and communist in the program of the ANC -- which would be 
legitimate -- to say we believe that what you say about this or 
that or the other is communist, and therefore bad for the 
country. The NP does not say that, which you can then debate. 
The NP says: You've got secret files which show the following 
about people. I'm saying, it goes back to what it has always 
done, and what it's trying to do. The NP is, I think, very 
unfortunate. It's trying to demonize the ANC, to say to the 
people out there, its constituents, that this is a demon which 
must be destroyed. That is precisely what produced the killers 
that we have on our streets. [jeers] Brian Mitchell, who was 
responsible for Trustfeeds, said: We did what we had to do 
because we were told that it was an anti-Christ, and we had to 
destroy it. The NP, without a shred of evidence in terms of 
policy, is saying that the country is going to disaster 
because.... 
  [Modise, interrupting] Mr. Mbeki, thank you very much, and 
now the next minute's opportunity is for Mr. Pik Botha. 
  [Botha] I would like to repeat Mr. Mbeki's appeal also. Give 
us a chance to put our viewpoints, and then disagree or agree. 
I do not need to rely merely on NP points of view on communism; 
it's a failed system the world over. It created misery in 
Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, in Bulgaria, in Albania, in the 
15 republics of the former Soviet Union. It is a failed system. 
It has brought misery to millions of people, economic misery, 
and social misery, and misery in every sphere of life. So I need 
not defend the NP policy in this respect. We say it is 
inherently a bad policy, just as apartheid was one, and we are 
strong enough and bold enough to say: Apartheid was wrong. We 
shed it, we're thrown it off, and now we say to South Africans: 
Please, let us move forward. 
  [Modise] Mr. Pik Botha, thank you very much. Your minute is 
up. [jeers, cheers] Last opportunity, this minute to Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Mbeki] Minister, you have absolutely every right to talk 
about Poland and Bulgaria and this and that and the other. What 
I'm saying is: I haven't heard one single thing said by the NP 
to say: In terms of the ANC policy as we understand it, this 
element is communist, that element is communist, the other is 
communist. Nothing. All that is happening is that the NP is 
going back to its old ways; the new NP is going back to its old 
ways, demonizing, invoking fear in people, without a single 
shred of evidence to say: This is the communist policy that the 
ANC is going to implement, because it's not there. That is not 
true. 
  [Venter] Our next question from Ferial Haffajee of SABC 
Radio. 
  [Haffajee] On to money matters, Mr. Mbeki. This country's 
debt burden is well over 114 billion rands. We pay 1 billion 
rands a month in interest alone. How are we going to pay our 
debts and create jobs, and build schools, and improve health 
care? 
  [Mbeki] You are quite correct, there are enormous challenges 
that face us as a country, because we inherit an economy that 
has been in decline for a long time. It is an economy that made 
millions of people unemployed, an economy that's made millions 
of people homeless, an economy that makes children die of 
hunger. Now, central and critical to what has to happen to this 
economy is, we've got to ensure that new investment, 
considerable investment, takes place. Part of what you've got 
to do with regard to that issue is, you've got to create the 
political circumstances, the peace and the stability. That's 
important. You've got to create the economic policies which say 
to the investors? This is a safe place to invest. You've got 
to bear in mind that South Africa is in competition with the 
rest of the world in terms of foreign investment or investment 
generally, including domestic investment. That's a matter on 
which we've got to focus -- to create the political and economic 
climate for that investment to take place. That's the first 
thing, and that is what we're battling now. You've got to 
create the policies, and that's the policies that the ANC is 
putting forward, in terms of an economic policy framework which 
makes that investment possible. And then you've got to address 
this issue of the millions of the people who are deprived, so 
that they feel comfortable with this change, it's bringing them 
something. I'm saying it's possible to do it. 
  [Venter] The time has caught you, Mr. Mbeki, I'm sorry. Mr. 
Botha has a two-minute response. 
  [Botha] The fact of the matter is that South Africa, this 
bad place, this bad place is producing 40 percent of the GDP of 
sub-Saharan Africa consisting of 42 countries with a total 
population of 500 million. The fact of the matter is that the 
economy of this country is the envy of the whole of Africa. The 
fact of the matter is that when General Obasanjo, a Nigerian 
leader who landed here for the first time, and he flew the 
helicopter over Pretoria, Witwatersrand area, when I greeted 
him, he said to me: I am suffering from shock, I am suffering 
from shock. I didn't know such a wonderful industrial area 
existed south of the Sahara. The fact of the matter is that ANC 
members who go to other parts of Africa can confirm this. They 
can confirm that this country is the hope of Africa. Africa 
wants us to succeed. Africa said we have achieved so much, and 
the fact of the matter is the removal of apartheid alone will 
not bring stability and economic growth. Only sound policies 
and being in line with the industrialized economies of the world 
today, and this the National Party can do, and only the National 
Party can do this. That is why government delegations one after 
the other say to me, unless the National Party continues to have 
a decisive role and a strong position after the election, South 
Africa will not attract any investment. That is a simple fact. 
[applause] 
  [Venter] Allow Mr. Mbeki a minute's comment, please. 
  [Mbeki] The fact of the matter is that we have in this 
country a higher infant mortality rate than Botswana has. It is 
a fact of the matter. The fact of the matter is that Zimbabwe 
has got more black engineers than we have here. That is a fact 
of the matter. The fact of the matter is that this economy. with 
all the potential that it has, has produced, I was saying, at 
least 5 million unemployed people [laughter]. I wouldn't 
consider that a success. I think it is failure. It has got 
potential. Despite what the National Party has done, despite 
what the National Party has done. It has the things that the 
minister says it does, because, in reality, this economy is much 
larger than any of these other economies. 
  [Venter] Thank you, Mr. Mbeki. Mr. Botha, could you wrap 
that up? 
  [Botha] I would just like to give the facts as they exist: 
adult literacy rate for sub-Saharan Africa 45 percent, South 
Africa 76 percent; life expectancy at birth -- sub-Saharan 
African 52 years, South Africa 63 years; infant mortality 
rate--sub-Saharan Africa 107, South Africa 56. The fact is that 
we have not made 5 million unemployed. Across the world, you 
have world tides of recession, etc. The fact of the matter is 
we have 2 million citizens from our neighboring countries that 
have flocked to this country for jobs, for training, for 
education, for a better life. If we have to send back those 2 
million, we would virtually have no unemployment problem. The 
fact of the matter is the world and Africa is waiting for this 
country to produce a success story. The world opinion today is 
that the National Party and President de Klerk is essential if 
South Africa is to survive. They are essential to play a 
decisively important role in the next election and that is why 
the people, particularly the black people, must vote for 
President de Klerk. That will ensure for them a better (?life). 
[jeers] 
  [Modise] Thank you again, and right now the opportunity to 
ask the next question goes to Mr. Leslie Mashokwe of NEWSLINE, 
and the question to Mr. Botha. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. Botha, you narrated the occurrence of 
violence 
in this country and you were stating categorically that the 
National Party was not involved in that. The question is: Which 
government is in place? Is it the National Party government 
whose police generals are now implicated in third force 
activities by the Goldstone Commission. Who is in charge of the 
security process in South Africa. It would appear that whilst 
you are busy wooing votes from black people you forget that they 
are important and they need to be protected, seemingly you would 
want dead bodies to vote for you. That is how your political 
foes regards your views with regards to this. 
  [Botha] I'm very glad you put this question because I think 
it is a question uppermost in the minds of many of our people, 
particularly our black brothers. The fact of the matter 
is....[laughter] No, but this is a serious matter, and if you 
are really seriously concerned, you will heed Mr. Mbeki's appeal 
and mine. The commission found and said it would like to stress 
that the persons named in this report have not been found guilty 
of the allegations made against them. Not me saying it, Judge 
Goldstone. The evidence, much of it strong remains prima facie 
until proven by a normal judicial process, but then commission 
went on to say this: The commission earnestly appeals to all 
South Africans to recognize and appreciate that as serious as 
the alleged misconduct by some members of the SAP may be, there 
are over 100,000 members of the police force, without the 
courage and honesty of Majors van Vuuren and du Plessis, 
Brigadier Schoeman and Colonel Piet Botha -- not all the Botha's 
are that bad [laughter] -- the commission would have been unable 
to discover the evidence pointing to the network of criminal 
activity. In other words, what I am saying is: there is only 
one police force. The majority are not white policemen. We are 
not going to have two police forces. And I am saying here this 
evening, I appeal, like the judge, let us not, because of a 
report implicating and not yet proving, not yet proving in the 
words of the judge, condemning the whole police force. They are 
there to protect all of us, and this is what the judge said and 
I want to emphasize that here this evening -- we have been 
demoralizing the police by doing this sort of general accusation 
and condemnation of the South African Police. [applause] 
  [Modise] Thank you, Mr. Botha, and now two minutes response 
to Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Mbeki] The problem is implied in the question. The problem 
is that government has not done what it is supposed to do. The 
government today was supposed to issue an instruction that the 
police would set up roadblocks so that nobody comes in the 
Johannesburg city center carrying weapons. That was not done. 
[jeers] People occupy stadia in order to block meetings from 
taking place. The government does not say: Please go and 
remove those people so that we can have a climate of free 
political activity. It doesn't happen. Yes, indeed, yes, 
indeed, we are quite certain, very many police, people -- men 
and women -- very many members of the South African Defense 
Force are very conscious of their duties and very committed to 
ensuring that this change take place, but what happens, day in 
and day out is that the government does not discharge its 
responsibilities to protect this process of a peaceful 
transition to a democratic South Africa. It doesn't give the 
proper direction. It doesn't give the necessary instructions. 
It does not support this honest Botha in the police. [laughter] 
And that's the failure. And there's a real, real serious 
problem: The third force issue that we raised for many years 
was denied by government: No it doesn't exist. As a result of 
this government did not move when it should have moved. Then we 
would not have had this crisis. That's the problem. [applause] 
  [Venter] Thank you, Mr. Mbeki, and a minute to Mr. Botha. 
  [Botha] I am afraid I totally disagree. This is again 
typical of the ANC blaming everybody else. The common 
denominator in all violent activities in this country is the 
ANC. It is the ANC and APLA [Azanian People's Liberation Army]. 
It is the ANC and DP. It is the ANC and Inkatha. Always, the 
common denominator is the ANC. The fact of the matter is they 
have a responsibility, and I think this evening the minister 
declared 10 districts in Johannesburg to be under unrest areas. 
The moment he wants to do that, the ANC is against it. The 
police does need certain powers, but we must act in terms now of 
the TEC legislation. Every time the police needs additional 
powers it is denied them. Why are these powers denied? It is 
because the ANC sees some sinister motive in some of these 
additional powers. And you may well reach the stage where we 
may have to give far more powers to the police, but then it must 
be done in terms of the TEC. 
  [Venter] Mr. Botha, thank you very much. Your minute is up. 
And this time, an opportunity to Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Mbeki] Part of the problem with this discussion is the 
minister is avoiding the specifics. What I am saying, having 
discussed this matter yesterday with the government about what 
was likely to happen in Johannesburg today and having agreed 
that roadblocks would be put and people searched so that they 
could come and demonstrate without weapons -- why was it not 
done? Having discussed all matters of things for government to 
say: There must be free political activity. People must not 
occupy stadia with guns. They must be stopped. Why is it not 
done? I am saying that any number of specific instances where 
there has been failure of government -- as a result of which 
people have died, and that is reality. 
  [Venter] Thank you, Mr. Mbeki. Well, a final question then 
from Freek Robinson of Agenda to Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Robinson] Mr. Mbeki, my first question: I have tried to 
come 
down to the underlying reasons for the violence and it is clear 
to all of us basically that this political framework in which we 
operate, including the basis for the elections and the basis of 
the government in the next two years after the election, it is 
something that is contested by other people. There are many 
fears among the smaller parties, in particular about the 
constitution and what might happen after the elections. The 
fear is that you might win the election convincingly, even with 
a two-thirds majority, and that you might scrap the interim 
constitution completely. Can you give me a clear indication 
tonight what exactly is it that you would like to change in that 
constitution, delete, or add to it? 
  [Mbeki] The first thing that I need to say, Freek, is that 
the ANC, with regard to these constitutional matters that you 
raised, the ANC is bound by two documents which were agreed in 
the multiparty negotiations. One of them is the Declaration of 
Intent that was agreed right at the beginning of this multiparty 
process. We are bound by that document. Secondly, there are 
constitutional principles which are contained in the interim 
constitution. The ANC is bound by those principles. What do 
they do? That first document and the second one, they spell out 
a united, democratic, nonracial, nonfascist South Africa, 
entrenched human rights for everybody, regular elections, a 
multiparty political system, an independent judiciary, all of 
these questions. That is what they spell out, all of these 
provisions. That is what the ANC bound to. Now, the interim 
constitution that we have is a product of the process of 
negotiations. It does not reflect, necessarily, ANC views, but 
I am saying that the ANC would be bound to those basic 
principles. It would also be bound to the notion that we need 
to take the country, not just ANC supporters and ANC members, 
that is to draft a constitution, it must be based on acceptance 
by the majority of the people in the country, so that, even if 
the ANC got a two-thirds majority it would want to proceed in a 
manner that takes national consensus. Clearly, there are many 
things in the constitution that need to be looked at. There 
have been many debates about many issues. There is an 
outstanding debate.... 
  [Venter, interrupting] Thanks, Mr. Mbeki. I am sorry, Mr. 
Botha now has a two-minute reply to it. 
  [Botha] I am aware of the fears, the concerns, particularly 
the smaller parties and of certain communities, and not 
necessarily white communities, also black communities of this 
country. They say to us openly at times: We were ANC. We know 
them. But fact of the matter is we believe it is a good 
constitution, and all constitutions the world over, it is not 
the end of constitutional development. As far as I am 
concerned, it is beginning of the new era. That is what 27 
April means and I have the firm belief that the international 
community, this new world order, with its new conditions, will 
simply not allow the future South African Government, and we are 
going to be part of that government, not because of favoritism 
but that is the agreement between us and the [laughter] -- no 
but it's a fact -- we are going to be part of it and a strong 
part of it because a vast number of black people are of the 
conviction, yes, they would like to vote for the ANC, I say this 
openly, but they also say: But then the National Party must be 
part. An overwhelming majority of black South Africans want a 
government of national unity in this country and this is 
important, but the constitution, basically, is a good 
constitution. It is a reasonable constitution. It does 
recognize a federal system and it does make it possible for all 
the provinces to retain a large measure of autonomy and to be 
federal states and to preclude the interference of the central 
government in those matters which have been allocated to the 
provinces. This is how we must start. There is no other way. 
We must now go into the elections, test our relative support 
and start the new South Africa so that we can get investments on 
condition that the National Party is still part of the 
government. 
  [Venter] Sorry, to cut you off Mr. Botha. Mr. Mbeki, you 
have a one-minute reply. 
  [Mbeki] As far as the small parties are concerned, we have 
throughout this process made sure that they were party to these 
decisions. The whole multiparty process has involved them. If 
you look at, for instance, what is now called the ANC election 
list you'll see many small parties there and part of the reason 
they are there is so that we can ensure that they are 
represented in Parliament. If they stood on their own they 
would not win, but precisely to make sure that their voice is 
heard we put them on our own list. So I am saying the ANC -- 
Mr. Pik Botha is correct, the National Party will be a minority 
party. [laughter] But we are saying that never mind that it is a 
minority party, it ought to be part of this new government 
because it is important that they make a contribution on the 
construction of this new South Africa. 
  [Venter] Thank you, Mr. Mbeki. Mr. Botha, you have one 
minute to close the issue. 
  [Botha] I sincerely believe that the best thing that can 
happen to South Africa is that there should be no majority party 
after the elections, that all of us must not only be -- if I may 
put it this way -- be forced by the constitution to form a 
government of national unity. But it must always be the choice 
of the majority of South Africans that there should not be one 
strong dominating political party, and that is why I say again: 
There is only one way to achieve that in the elections and that 
is to vote for the National Party and to ensure that this 
country will not be dominated. But I do not share those fears. 
As I said before, the new world order will not allow the future 
South African Government, in my opinion, to do as it likes. 
What is the danger is that irresponsible elements within the 
ANC might exercise too strong an influence in the ANC. 
  [Venter] Mr. Botha, thank you very much. That closes off the 
question section of this debate. Thank you. [applause] 
  [Modise] Well, obviously, very enthusiastic members of the 
political parties who are here tonight. Right now, we are 
coming to the end of the program. We are giving the 
opportunity, a three-minute opportunity to Mr. Thabo Mbeki to 
make a statement on various issues that he feels need to be 
known. 
  [Mbeki] Well, I really need to say this that, as I was 
saying 
at the beginning, the country is faced with a great opportunity 
and a great challenge. We understand the heats that gets 
developed around election campaigns, but we believe that it is 
the common responsibility of everybody, who in the country 
consider themselves a leader of any significant section of the 
population of our country, to approach these matters in a 
responsible manner. We do indeed believe that we need to 
develop a national consensus around a number of basic issues. 
One of those issues has to be that it is a right of every South 
African to vote, to elect a government of their choice. 
Therefore, it cannot be permitted that there is somebody out 
there who considers themselves part of a leader of some people 
who wants to block that process. I think the country needs to 
unite to say nobody should be blocked from exercising that 
democratic right to decide what government they want. That is 
an important thing. The question of violence. The question of 
violence is important. We need all of us, I am saying again, to 
act together to resolve this matter so that the ANC has the 
responsibility to say to its own members: This is not allowed. 
Any other party that is involved needs to do the same thing, 
but also the government. 
  The government needs to approach this matter to resolve the 
issue and not tie it to party political advantage, to say it is 
always the ANC and the IFP that are fighting if they meet and so 
on. Why are the police allowed to watch as people are killing 
themselves, simply because this matter is defined as party 
political. There is an intervention by government that has to 
be made. I am saying that is a common national responsibility, 
wherever the violence comes from, whether from the ANC people or 
whoever, that we must all of us act very firmly and decisively 
to address this issue. I think, finally, I do not know what my 
time is like, I think it is fundamentally wrong, fundamentally 
wrong to say of an organization, like the ANC, that it's a 
demon. It is the same ANC that has stood for nonracialism, for 
democracy, and all of these things which must bring the majority 
of the people of this country into the settlement, to turn round 
and say they are a demon, because what you are doing, you are 
creating a situation where we will not be able to resolve the 
problems of this country. If you take that attitude toward the 
ANC, you will then get that demon. I think it is 
irresponsible... 
  [Venter, interrupting] Mr. Mbeki, thank you very much. Mr. 
Botha a similar three minutes. Thank you. 
  [Botha] It is quite clear to me that South Africans have a 
stark choice to make on 27 April, a stark choice between those 
parties, and particularly the ANC that finds itself in alliance 
with the wrong party, an ANC that cannot discipline its own 
followers -- cannot control them during mass actions, an ANC who 
allows individuals to attack the industrialized nations of the 
world, to attack the industrialized economies of the world, and 
to say derogatory things about the IMF and the World Bank 
because in the new world order that is coming the ANC would have 
no choice -- and Mr. Mbeki quite rightly, earlier on, about 
specifics -- the whole issue of the mineral rights that must be 
restored to the state of the people -- I wonder whether the ANC 
realizes what that has done to the economy of this country and 
to investment of this country. I want to warn the ANC: A 
government cannot run a mine. Stay out of it, but in the end I 
am encouraged by the news that there might soon be a meeting 
between President de Klerk, Mr. Mandela, the king of the Zulus, 
and Dr. Buthelezi, and that I see that in the spirit in which 
Mr. Mbeki offered -- with that I agree. We are all South 
Africans. We only have one South Africa. Let us come to peace 
with ourselves and let us pray that these four leaders will find 
a way to reduce the tension that has been created in this 
country and let us pray for that and hope and hold thumbs that 
that meeting will be successful. We all need it. We have only 
one country and we are going to share it and history will 
condemn all of us if we do not share this responsibly. There, I 
agree with my friend and colleague, Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Venter] Thanks to Mr. Pik Botha there. Before we leave the 
debate, we are going to ask each of the candidates for a quick 
impression of the discussions we have just had, starting with 
Mr. Mbeki. 
  [Mbeki] Well, Lester I think we should say congratulations 
to 
the SABC for affording this kind of opportunity. I don't think 
there is sufficient time given for real debate. I hope that it 
would be possible to organize so that we do indeed have real 
debate, so that I talk to my friend Pik Botha there, so, instead 
of promoting the National Party, actually debates issues. 
  [Venter] Thank you very much, Mr. Mbeki. Can we come back to 
Mr. Botha, please? 
  [Botha] I am glad this could take place in that we could 
openly canvass our views, but perhaps, I don't know, perhaps we 
should do it in a more relaxed atmosphere. I do not want to 
reduce the enthusiasm of the audience, but I think we tend to 
lose some of the value of arguments on both sides if the two 
speakers cannot really be heard. It is not a complaint. And 
then lastly, those who are supporters of the National Party 
please drive carefully home. Those who are not, who am I to 
tell you how to drive. 
  [Venter] Thank you very much for participating, Mr. Mbeki 
and 
Mr. Botha. 
  [Modise] And before we say good night the leaders of the two 
parties, the National Party and the African National Congress, 
Mr. F.W. De Klerk and Mr. Nelson Mandela will meet in a debate 
similar to this one on 14 April. 
  [Venter] Don't miss that. Good night. 

