Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 15 (XINHUA) -- Deputies to China's 
top legislature said that China has met conditions for the 
resumption of its membership of the General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade (GATT) and is able to assume responsibilities required 
of a GATT member. 
  At the ongoing session of the National People's Congress 
(NPC) here, deputies also expressed concern over China's 
most-favored-nation (MFN) trade status with the United States. 
  Li Hao, vice chairman of the NPC's Financial and Economic 
Committee, said China has had seven years of arduous talks since 
it officially applied for the resumption of its GATT membership. 
China's foreign trade system has undergone profound changes and 
now complies with basic principles of the GATT, he said. 
  "Conditions are mature for China to resume its GATT 
membership," he said. 
  Said Tsang Hin Chi, vice president of the Chinese General 
Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong: "There isn't a single country 
in the world whose foreign trade system fully complies with GATT 
requirements. The degree of China's openness has in fact far 
surpassed that of some GATT members." 
  "It would be quite unreasonable for GATT and its future 
substitute to keep China, a big trading nation with a population 
of 1.2 billion and a fast-developing economy, outside the world 
trade organization, neither will it be beneficial for world 
economic growth. Exclusion of China would also pose a problem 
for GATT as a world trade organization." 
  Wai Kee Shun, chairman of the New Hong Kong Federation, said 
that, since China has become the eleventh largest trading 
country in the world, it is good for China to rejoin GATT. 
  "But," he said, "China is able to continue developing its 
economy even if it fails to resume its GATT membership." 
  Referring to China's MFN trade status with the U.S., many 
deputies said the U.S. should abandon its practice of 
interfering in other country's internal affairs by using trade 
as a weapon. 
  Canceled Kee Shun said [as received]: "If China's MFN status 
were canceled, China would not be the only one to be hurt, the 
U.S. will suffer more losses, because Sino-U.S. economic and 
trade relations are highly complementary." 
  Said Tsang Hin Chi: "MFN is purely a trade issue. The 
United States' use of MFN as a way to assert political pressure 
on China will only shed a shadow on bilateral economic and trade 
relations, and will even affect the expansion of bilateral 
relations between the two governments. This is obviously in 
contradiction with the common view reached between U.S. 
President Bill Clinton and Chinese President Jiang Zemin at the 
Sino-U.S. summit in Seattle last November." 
  He said the Chinese Government is right in opposing the U.S. 
to attach any political conditions to its MFN treatment for 
China, expressing the hope that the U.S. will solve the problem 
once and for all by granting China a permanent MFN status. 

