BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with correspondent Christophe </F>
Boisbouvier in Kigali by Donaig Ledu in Paris--live] 
  [Text] [Ledu] What is the situation like this morning as 
far as the military side of things is concerned? 
  [Boisbouvier] There is still no cease-fire in the country. 
General Dallaire, the Canadian officer in charge of the UN 
forces in Rwanda, is doing his best. He moves to and fro 
between the Kigali government and the rebels in their Mulindi 
headquarters, in the north of the country. 
  For the time being, the two sides have been unable to reach 
any agreement. On one side, the government is demanding a 
cease-fire throughout the country. On the other, the RPF 
[Rwandan Patriotic Front] only wants a cease-fire in the 
capital, Kigali. As a result, fighting is continuing. I can 
hear it, everyone can hear it in Kigali. For instance, around 
noon, still in that famous zone between the town and the airport 
where 600 RPF rebels have been surrounded for several days, they 
seem to be trying to gain some ground and thus be able to try 
and make a sortie. This is why we had fighting last night in an 
area close to their previous headquarters. Less than one hour 
ago, there was more violent fighting close to the building of 
the former parliament. A lot of smoke came up, probably from a 
petrol tank hit by a shell. There is shooting with light 
armored cars and mortars. This is serious fighting as you can 
see. 
  As for the north of the country, it is very difficult to 
know 
what is happening there because there are few eye-witnesses. We 
do not know whether the rebels are still marching. What we know 
is that they are not close to the capital. The interim 
government said that the progress of the rebels has been stopped 
on the three northern fronts, that is to say in front of 
Ruhengeri, Byumba, and in the Moutara region. Independent 
sources, including colleagues who were on the scene 48 hours 
ago, have confirmed that on Saturday [9 April] the rebels were 
surprised by the regular army's ability to resist thanks to its 
artillery. They were believed to be disorganized and, as a 
result, unable to take Byumba. May I remind you that this took 
place the day before yesterday; things may now have changed. 
Everything is happening very quickly. The country is small, 
Byumba is only 80 km from the capital. 
  [Ledu] Christophe, you were out in the streets of Kigali 
this 
morning. What did you see? 
  [Boisbouvier] There are no vehicles except those of the 
French and UN soldiers and a few diplomatic cars. People are 
still hiding inside their homes. There are still some corpses 
in the streets, including in the working-class districts. Every 
now and then, you pass small groups of machete-toting people who 
look quite nervous. 

