BFN 

  [Text] In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. 
A responsible military source at the Defense Ministry and the 
General Staff Command has stated the following: 
  For the fourth day, the heroes of our valiant Armed Forces, 
the forces of the people, unity, and Constitutional legitimacy, 
and protectors of democracy, have continued their splendid 
victories in all fields of confrontation with the forces of evil 
and rebellion against legitimacy and disavowal of the people and 
unity. They draw success from God, supporter of the brave 
soldiers who are loyal to their people, homeland, and unity. 
  At 1300 yesterday, the 2d Armored Brigade managed to advance 
and join the al-'Amaliqah Brigade to form a heroic combat bridge 
toward the attainment of the main objectives in the last chapter 
of the battle for unity and democracy. They are now confidently 
advancing, supported by the 13th and 56th Brigades and the 
al-Wahdah Brigades in the direction of Aden Governorate. They 
are confronting the desperate and defeatist remnants of the 
secessionist gang forces. 
  These forces are currently waging brave battles in the 
al-'Alam area, 20 km from the beloved economic and commercial 
capital, Aden, approaching the last dens of the gang of plotting 
and secession in the Socialist Party leadership. 
  These forces managed to besiege the misguided elements of 
the 
Shamsan Brigade. A large number of the brigade's officers and 
soldiers surrendered and their weapons, equipment, and vehicles 
were captured. 
  In the Lahij Governorate, the 6th al-Wahdah [Unity] Brigade 
and the 2d Independent Armored Brigade waged heroic and brave 
battles during which they managed to destroy the (?retreating) 
units of the 'Abbud Brigade and the secessionist gang militias. 
More than 40 troops and 200 militiamen surrendered and joined 
the forces of unity and Constitutional legitimacy. 
  In Abyan Governorate, and in an effort to fortify our Armed 
Forces in this patient, glorious governorate, the heroic 
al-Wahdah Brigades -- infantry, artillery, and armor -- managed 
to destroy the 30th Brigade, which was recently moved from 
al-Maharrah Governorate to besiege and attack the al-'Amaliqah 
forces. Thus, this brigade met the dark destiny to which it was 
pushed by the gang of rebellion and secession. All of its 
commanders, officers, and soldiers surrendered to the forces of 
legitimacy and the Constitution, the protectors of democracy. 
All weapons, equipment, and vehicles, which are kept by the 
elements of that rebelling gang for plotting in the Abyan 
Governorate, were captured. 
  Our Armed Forces in the southwestern axis of the 3d Infantry 
Brigade and units from the Khalid Camp and the Reserve Brigade 
continued to carry out their fixed missions and achieve 
successive victories while continuing their advance toward the 
al-'Anad Camp and the capital of Lahij Governorate. 
  While these decisive battles are positively progressing, 
the Air Force within our valiant Armed Forces assumed a heroic, 
unique, and brave commando role in confronting the attackers' 
aircraft and completing the missions and targets they had been 
assigned on all battlefronts with high efficiency. They carried 
out more than 20 air sorties, fulfilling their objectives with 
complete success. 
  The following are among the most important military tasks 
they successfully carried out: Destroying the runways and 
facilities of the al-'Anad airport, destroying and sinking a 
missile gunboat which tried to shell our armed forces in Abyan 
Governorate, destroying large quantities of the military 
hardware of the 30th Infantry Brigade while it was advancing to 
(Lubyan) Directorate in Abyan Governorate. They also succeeded 
in hitting and destroying the Aden airport runway so the rebel 
secessionist clique will not be able to use it to pursue the 
aggression against our Armed Forces, or to escape outside the 
country. 
  While the comprehensive bloody war that was arranged by the 
rebel and secessionist forces is nearing its end, their rancor 
excacerbates and their bloody and terrorist actions intensify. 
The secessionist gang fired missiles on populated areas in 
al-Rahibah, Ta'izz Governorate, and al-Mukha, targetting the 
power plant, and against Al-Hudaydah, targetting the power plant 
in the Ra's Kabir area. Many defenseless citizens were 
martyred, although these missiles failed to destroy the vital 
installations they had as targets. The rancorous will swallow 
their rancor. 
  Within the unique and brave operations that the forces of 
unity and legitimacy have carried out, our air defense forces 
confronted with great ability the enemy aircraft on all fronts, 
downing one aircraft over Abyan, another over Ka'kaba, and a 
third over Ta'izz Governorate. 
  The military source concluded his statement by saying: There 
is no need today to rebutt the media falsehoods and lies by the 
defeatist secessionist forces of the YSP command because their 
lies speak for themselves and are refuted by the stable security 
state of affairs in all cities, where the rancorous have tried 
to ignite the sedition, to destroy, and harm their citizens. 
  The source praised the confidence all the sons of the Yemeni 
people have demonstrated toward the victories their Armed Forces 
and Public Security Forces are scoring, their pride in them, and 
their waiting for the important victory over all the forces of 
oppression, apostasy, and secession so that the new history of 
our people and country will put an end to the last page of their 
rancorous and desperate conspiracy in spite of the military 
hardare and lethal weapons the rancorous and conspirators had 
prepared and which they purchased with money that was to be used 
to feed the people and at the expense of the people's 
development aspitations for progress and construction. They now 
are receiving the just punishment. History has discarded them, 
away from our people's lives, so they may not sully their 
unionist and democractic march and so that they may not tarnish 
the ray of hope in all the hearts of the Yemenis. Fighting is 
prescribed for you, and you dislike it. But it is possible that 
you dislike a thing which is good for you. [Koranic verse] 

