BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, May 29 (CTK) -- Russian Interior Minister 
Viktor Yerin and his Slovak counterpart Ladislav Pittner, on a 
short official visit to Moscow, signed an inter-ministerial 
agreement on cooperation today. 
  Yerin told journalists that the document "envisaged joint 
operations and information exchanges in fighting the most 
dangerous kinds of crime such as organised crime, economic 
crime, illegal trade in narcotics and arms. 
  Pittner said that by its content the agreement did not 
differ 
from those Slovakia concluded with other countries. "The only 
difference is that it has been worked out more quickly and in 
greater detail and I can say that we have met with far greater 
willingness here than in other cases," he said. 
  The Czech Republic has not yet concluded such an agreement 
with Russia. Czech Interior Minister Jan Ruml negotiated the 
preparation of such a document in Moscow last October. A 
Russian Interior Ministry high-ranking official told CTK today 
that Prague "was not efficient enough during the talks." "The 
Slovak interior minister tabled the question as soon as he took 
office. The agreement was prepared very quickly. The Slovaks 
have been more prompt," the official said. 
  Pittner noted that the transformation of the civic systems 
in 
Russia and Slovakia is bringing both countries similar problems. 
"We are interested in cooperation in solving the whole packages 
of problems such as narcotics, dirty money laudering, trade in 
the `white flesh,' prostitution, and the forgery of passports 
and other documents. We seek to solve these problems jointly 
without unnecessarily prolonging the process," he said. 
  Pittner said that beside the so-called Balkan route of drug 
smuggling there appeared an influx of narcotics from the Central 
Asian republics of the former Soviet Union and here we "can 
obtain very valuable information from the Russian Police," he 
said. Pittner pointed out that many citizens from Chechnya and 
the Central Asian countries illegally stay in Slovakia and that 
the agreement creates pre-requisites for solving this problem. 
  Yerin noted that the agreement envisaged joint operations 
aimed at the abolition of the channels of illegal trade in 
narcotics. "New and still little investigated channels of 
narcotic smuggling from Afganistan and the Central Asian 
republics of the former Soviet Union have recently appeared. We 
have gathered great experience of cooperation with our 
colleagues in these countries and all the information will be 
undoubtly provided to our colleagues in Slovakia," the Russian 
minister said. 
  "We have similar agreements with Western countries and their 
importance will be the greater, the better our cooperation with 
the Russian Police, Pittner said. 

