BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Too Much at the Restaurant Table"] </F>
  [Text] For the mayor's election in Woelfersheim in Hesse, 
the parties were offered -- without making any efforts -- a 
forum close to the citizens. At the beginning of the year, the 
local newspapers invited the local candidates of the Christian 
Democratic Union/Christian Social Union [CDU/CSU], the Social 
Democratic Party of Germany [SPD], and the Free Democratic Party 
of Germany [FDP] for a discussion. The offer fit into the 
political trend; the dialogue with the citizens is concurrently 
recommended by politicians as an "expression of democratic 
culture." 
  In Woelfersheim, however, the dialogue became deadlocked and 
SPD politician Joachim Arnold canceled his appearance. The 
reason: The candidate of the NPD [National Democratic Party of 
Germany] was not invited, which would have turned him into a 
martyr. 
  The obvious solution, namely to invite the NPD man after 
all, 
was also rejected by Arnold. This would elevate the reputation 
of the right-wing extremist, argued the SPD candidate, who was 
later elected mayor. The FDP colleague was undecided and the 
CDU candidate would have had to hold a discussion with himself. 
The discussion was canceled. 
  Woelfersheim is everywhere. From the local associations to 
the Bonn party leaderships, the democratic politicians disagree 
among each other and among themselves about how they should deal 
with right-wing extremists. The result: They are not talking 
to them at all. 
  Only with great difficulty do politicians manage to hide 
their speechlessness in view of outbreaks of right-wing 
extremist violence as in Magdeburg or antisemitic attacks behind 
empty formulas and excuses. Germany is burning and the 
Constitutional Protection Offices and internal affairs experts 
are warning against new attacks, but politicians and policemen 
are helpless against the terrorist actions of groups of rightist 
brawlers. 
  A ghastly parallel is obvious: "It is as in the worst times 
of the SA [Nazi storm troopers]," Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen 
(FDP), Bonn's commissioner for foreigners, says. 
  There would have been time to take precautions. However, the 
old parties in Bonn did not use the years of hate campaigns by 
the rightists against asylum-seekers to deal jointly with the 
instigators. Instead, they used the instigation against 
foreigners as an opportunity to quarrel for years about 
restrictions to the right to asylum. 
  "Asylum-seekers' party" then-CDU Secretary General Volker 
Ruehe called the SPD, which had political problems with keeping 
persecuted foreigners out. 
  The SPD headquarters in Bonn had already presented five 
years 
ago "recommendations for dealing with the extreme Right"; the 
title: "Neither Playing Down nor Demonizing." The demand for 
"confrontation by means of arguments," because Social Democrats 
must not "back down to the Republikaner," was repeated last year 
in the "SPD 2000" reform commission. However, the "active 
dealing" (planning official Malte Ristau) with the issue is 
still missing after the many changes in leadership. 
  "The debate among the people's parties," Heidelberg 
education 
expert Micha Brumlik criticizes, has had the effect of "a mock 
fight for the benefit of the rightist populists." Because 
"young men, who tend toward violence anyway," are confirmed in 
their attitude, according to Brumlik, if politicians play up the 
asylum issue and, thus, are chiming in with the voters at the 
right fringe just to complain about the evil rightist spirit 
afterwards. The parties cannot "switch xenophobic emotions off 
and on like a lamp" (Brumlik) without consequences. 
  "The politicians should think more thoroughly about what 
they 
say and do," confirms Ingo Hasselbach, 26, former chairman of 
the East Berlin right-wing extremist National Alternative, who 
has left the neo-Nazi scene. 
  Hasselbach, the son of SED [Socialist Unity Party of 
Germany] 
journalists, who had slid into GDR neo-Nazi circles because of 
conflicts with his family, went underground last year after his 
former comrades tried to kill him. "If it is said again and 
again that the number of foreigners should be limited," he says 
now, some people might understand this as a justification for 
the attacks. 
  The attitude of the parties is characterized by election 
tactics. Munich political scientist Elmar Wiesendahl, 48, says 
that while "the seriousness of the situation indicates that the 
preservation of democratic basic values and human rights" is at 
stake, the political style continues to be characterized by 
"rivalry, tactics, and unfairness" -- "a strange atrophy of view 
and sensitivity in dealing with social challenges." 
  Even more fatal is the fact that politicians hardly counter 
even violent right-wing extremists with a militant spirit, that 
they do not spontaneously show feeling for their fellow citizens 
and compassion for the victims. Hamburg sociologist Ulrich 
Bielefeld angrily noted that politicians "do not sit too little 
but too much at the proverbial `restaurant tables.'" What would 
be needed at least as much as political arguments is personal 
dedication and a credible example. 
  The conflict with right-wing extremism is repugnant to the 
classical understanding of politics because it is basically a 
unpolitical, highly irrational movement. The opponents are so 
difficult to pin down because they do not have any clear 
political goals apart from the destruction of democracy. The 
ultimate wisdom of the neo-Nazis is, as in the past, the 
"fuehrer principle" -- so far only within the close-knit 
individual groups. However, their interlacement in a network 
has already started. 
  The weakness of rightist fanatics "to say what they stand 
for" is described in a documentation of the Duessledorf Interior 
Ministry on right-wing extremist agitation, which was presented 
in the spring. It reflects the "lack of program of the 
right-wing extremists," whose "political passions" are nurtured 
by vague enthusiasm for the Nazis and "the belief in the 
superiority of the German virtues," the study says. 
  The paradoxical fact that right-wing extremists are fighting 
brutally for their convictions without knowing what they 
actually want distinguishes them from other ideologies that are 
supported by social theories, such as Marxism. Therefore, 
sociologists Erwin K. Scheuch and Hans-Dieter Klingemann in the 
past presented the theory of a "special development" of the 
intellectual history of the radical Right, which proceeds from 
everyday stress in modern life. 
  The 1967 study, which has again become topical after such a 
long time, stresses two elements of the extremist danger: 
  -- From this viewpoint, "rigidity in thinking" is the result 
of social contradictions -- for example, tensions between 
traditional upbringing and modern industrial society, between a 
family's everyday life and the company, authorities, politics. 
The flight of confused people into a rigid system of values, 
which promises relief of internal tensions, excludes other 
systems of values as "hostile" -- a "pathological form of this 
kind of thinking." 
  -- Susceptibility of thinking results from the superficial 
political interest of many people, "for whom politics is only 
one special field." Intensified by individual or collective 
crises, individual right-wing extremist topics affect the 
awareness of "unarticulated ideas" of political life as -- often 
emotional -- "temptations." 
  Particularly susceptible to such temptations are children 
and 
young people, which is shown in the difficult situation of 
upheaval after unification. Their problems of adjustment result 
from the increased contradictions between individual hopes and a 
sad reality. 
  This has been realized by social pedagogic experts who want 
to gain trust and influence on young people through personal 
close contacts. 
  How "strenuous and exhausting" such contacts are was 
experienced by Bielefeld education scientist Klaus Hurrelmann in 
discussions with skinheads. In contrast to blocked rightist 
ideologists, one could at least talk to them. However, 
Hurrelmann admitted that he did not get the feeling that "any 
kind of consensus was achieved," even though the skins "had 
declared their readiness to talk within the framework of a 
research project," the youth researcher says. 
  Such projects are risky. This was learned by Marita 
Schieferdecker-Adolph, the commissioner for foreigners in 
Dresden. Last year, she took 19 youths, including right-wing 
extremist group functionaries, on a pedagogical trip to Israel, 
where some participants engaged in provocative behavior. 
However, the official is convinced that the attitude of some 
participants has indeed changed as a result. 
  Politics could effectively support the initiatives at the 
local and institutional level, which are often difficult to 
predict -- here the term of a state-supporting task really has a 
point. What is needed is a change in the political trend: 
steadfastness instead of populism, talking about the situation 
in Germany instead of stubborn silence. 
  Similar insights are sprouting in some politicians. Former 
SPD Federal Manager Peter Glotz calls for dealing actively with 
right-wing radicals, such as German Franz Schoenhuber, Austrian 
Joerg Haider, or French Alain de Benoist. 
  In "large debates," politicians like Schoenhuber "must be 
refuted by democratic politicians with the better arguments," 
Glotz demands. A "culture of political controversy" deserves its 
name only if it denies the enemies of democracy their influence. 
However, this is precisely what is missing: Instead of a 
culture of debate, there are only "tricks of mere symbolic 
policy." 
  Once before, after the arson attacks in Moelln, it seemed 
possible to break through the paralysis of public debate. 
Millions of protesting citizens gathered for chains of lights 
in the large cities. 
  The catchword of personal courage, of the citizens' 
interference in politics, was discovered anew at that time. 
President Richard von Weizsaecker has now again called for more 
personal courage after the riots in Magdeburg. However, the 
attempt to change the political culture from below has failed 
for the time being because of the political speechlessness from 
above. 
  In addition, one cannot counter a hard core of convinced 
militant Nazis with the cities' courage alone. Ex-Nazi 
Hasselbach says that any attempts to convince them will 
certainly bounce off such people. 
  In Hasselbach's view, democratic attempts at dissuading them 
should start, in particular, with the "endangered and still weak 
youths, potential violent criminals at the age between 13 an 
18," an age "where a democratic basic attitude without a 
inclination toward violence could still be achieved in many of 
them." However, only tough punishment helps against the 
leaders, the former Nazi thinks. 
  More teachers and criminologists resign themselves to the 
idea that counterviolence is the only language that is still 
understood by the ideologists, who are fanatically committed to 
violence. Through pressure of prosecution and the risk of being 
sentenced, they must be urged at least to do without open 
violence. Right-wing extremist thinking does not rule out 
"flexibility" and adjustment to the "requirements of everyday 
life," Scheuch and Klingemann say. 
  The message of the researchers is that the open industrial 
society can live with a group of crazies -- as long as they do 
not set buildings on fire. 

