Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sarah Womack, PRESS ASSOCIATION lobby correspondent] </F>
  [Text] Labour today demanded clarification from Foreign 
Secretary Douglas Hurd after a senior Russian arms industry 
official confessed to spying for Britain. 
  Official Russian news agency TASS said the man, who was not 
named, had been supplied with invisible writing materials and 
means of secretly supplying information to intelligence agents 
at the British Embassy in Moscow. 
  Embassy officials in Moscow and a spokesman for the Foreign 
Office in London had no comment on the report. 
  Labour frontbench foreign affairs spokesman with 
responsibility for intelligence matters, Allan Rogers -- 
referring to the arrest in the U.S. of a top CIA official last 
week on charges of spying for the Kremlin -- said: "There is a 
large element of tit-for-tat in these arrests and exposures. 
  "Russia has probably known about this man for a long time. 
We (Britain) are paying the price for the so-called special 
relationship with the United States. Russia sees us as wearing 
the same clothes." 
  He said Mr. Hurd should "clarify" the matter. 
  The information that the spy passed on contained facts about 
the latest Russian research into development of new weapons, as 
well as information about Russia's prospects of cooperation with 
other countries on defence projects, Interfax news agency said. 
  Bob Cryer, Labour MP for Bradford South, said: "This casts a 
little light on the murky world of spying. Worse still, it is 
connected with the even murkier world of international arms 
sales. 
  "This may well strain international relations with Russia, 
particularly since President Yeltsin is now losing his position 
in Russia and will be looking for external difficulties to 
divert attention from domestic crises." 
  News agency TASS reported: "On January 25 the detainee was 
charged with high treason in the form of espionage, which he 
admitted fully." 
  The agency quoted Russia's Federal Counterintelligence 
Agency 
as saying the man had been arrested on January 15. "On 
assignment for British intelligence for monetary reward, this 
Russian citizen collected and handed over information of a 
secret military and economic nature." 
  The arrest by the Federal Counterintelligence Agency came 
one 
day after President Boris Yeltsin sacked the agency's chief, 
Nikolay Golushko. 
  A presidential decree said that Golushko, who headed the 
successor organisation to the old communist KGB secret police 
since September, had been dismissed. 
  It gave no reason for the sacking. But TASS, quoting sources 
in the counterintelligence agency, cited the freeing of seven 
jailed opponents of Yeltsin from a prison under the agency's 
control last weekend. 
  A Downing Street spokesman refused to comment, saying: "You 
would not possibly expect me to comment on such a matter." 

