BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 30 KYODO -- A Beijing family whose son 
was shot dead five years ago during pro-democracy demonstrations 
in Tiananmen Square when the army marched on the city has 
demanded that police stop harassing them and let their son rest 
in peace. 
  Jiang Peikun, professor at the prestigious People's 
University, sent a letter to the Standing Committee of the 
National People's Congress demanding that plainclothes police 
end a 10-day vigil outside his apartment. 
  In the letter, Jiang and his wife said they would stage a 
hunger strike from Thursday if police surveillance was not 
stopped. 
  Jiang Jielian was killed by a bullet in the back on the eve 
of June 3, 1989, a day after his 17th birthday. 
  His death was one of what could have been thousands of 
people 
killed by soldiers of the People's Liberation Army which was 
ordered by the Chinese Government to quell six weeks of 
pro-democracy protests. 
  "We demand a little human sympathy, we demand to know what 
humanity is. Who cannot understand the significance that a day 
like this holds for us? The love parents have for their son is 
known by all," the letter said. 
  "This year marks the fifth anniversary of the death of our 
son, his ashes and other belongings still remain in the house. 
Is there not even one peaceful place where his spirit can rest? 
Cannot his parents have even a little peace?" It said. 
  Jiang said the police harass everyone who visits their house 
and that even his son-in-law was followed and then searched by 
police who suspected him of smuggling papers or information 
concerning the names and addresses of other victims of the 
killings out of the house. 
  Ding Ziling, Jiang's wife, is believed to have made efforts 
to find out who and how many people were killed in those fateful 
June days, press reports said. 
  The government has said some 300 people were killed, 
including police and soldiers torn apart by angry citizens, but 
five years after the killings a name list has yet to be 
published. 
  Police presence in Beijing has been tight since March and is 
expected to increase this week as the anniversary of the June 
event falls on Friday and Saturday with government fears of 
renewed protests mounting. 

