BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "zr": "Loyalty Verging on Servility; Miklos </F>
Duray Interferes in Hungarian Election Campaign"] 
  [Text] Miklos Duray, chairman of the Egyutteles 
(Coexistence) movement, has recently aroused controversy in 
Hungary and among ethnic Hungarians in Slovakia. Istvan 
Szent-Ivanyi, foreign policy spokesman of the Alliance of Free 
Democrats, currently the largest opposition party in Hungary, 
accused Duray of interfering in the Hungarian election campaign. 
  It is evident, according to the spokesman, that Duray played 
a part in the cancellation of an invitation for Gabor Kuncze, 
the Free Democrats' (Liberals') candidate for prime minister, by 
the mayors of four communities in southern Slovakia. Gabor 
Kuncze was supposed to attend the festivities marking 15 March, 
the day of the memorable revolution of 1848, which is Hungarian 
national day. Duray denies, however, that he was behind the 
cancellation of this invitation and told a correspondent of the 
[Hungarian-language] Bratislava daily UJ SZO: "Someone wanted to 
use this against me politically." 
  Tension was to be felt already when Duray spoke out against 
the Hungarian Socialist Party on Budapest television, and it 
escalated after a statement in which Duray claimed that, in the 
coming May parliamentary elections, 60-70 percent of Hungarians 
in Slovakia would vote for the leading party of the present 
government coalition, the Hungarian Democratic Forum [MDF], if 
they could vote. 
  UJ SZO commentator Mihaly Toth protested against this 
statement late last week when he wrote, among other things: "We 
must understand this statement to mean that, in the opinion of 
Hungarians in Slovakia, an accommodating attitude (in policy 
toward neighbors--editor's note), which was repeatedly 
emphasized by the Hungarian liberal parties in the course of the 
preceding year and which has also been assimilated by the 
Hungarian Socialist Party, is actually misguided because it does 
not tally with the MDF foreign policy concept. The main 
difference between the "neighborly policy" of the MDF, on the 
one hand, and that of the Hungarian Liberals or Socialists, on 
the other, is that, whereas the present policymakers were not 
able to take even one step toward Hungarian-Slovak 
rapprochement, the present opposition parties have indicated 
that, if they manage to get into the government, they are ready 
to conclude a treaty on the absolute unchangeability of 
Hungarian-Slovak borders in exchange for guarantees of ethnic 
Hungarians' rights in Slovakia. I suppose that I am not 
exaggerating when I contend that, in this matter (which is of 
the greatest relevance to us), at least 70 percent of Hungarians 
in Slovakia agree with the Liberals or the Socialists in 
Hungary." 
  The commentator writes that Duray's loyalty to the MDF is 
comprehensible from an individual and narrowly conceived party 
viewpoint--"this loyalty has ideological and material roots." 
However, this loyalty, which almost "verges on servility," has a 
clearly harmful influence on the effectiveness of ethnic 
Hungarians' policy in Slovakia. 

