CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Akakiy Mikadze, MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI </F>
correspondent in the Transcaucasus: "After the Fight"] 
  [Text] Last month proved less than tranquil for me. Friends 
and colleagues express sympathy; strangers and people who do not 
wish to introduce themselves call me and promise to kill; more 
cautious acquaintances prefer to avoid contact. 
  The cause of such attention to my persona is that a month 
ago, in the Georgian parliament building, former minister of 
defense Tengiz Kitovani attempted to settle a score with me in a 
fistfight. I have no illusions regarding the mores of today's 
Georgia, where threats, violence, and murder have become a norm 
both in everyday life and in politics. I know Mr. Kitovani well 
enough to believe that they were not idle threats I heard from 
him and his bodyguards. But I very much want to understand why 
it is precisely now that the antipathy of this man toward me has 
become so strong that he could not--or would not--restrain it. 
  As a journalist I could not possibly bypass this figure 
during the past two years--national guard commander, minister of 
defense, member of the Military Council, parliament member, the 
closest confederate of Zviad Gamsakhurdia. The role this man 
plays in the life of Georgia, of which we are both citizens, is 
just too important. 
  In my account of Kitovani's biography I did not find it 
necessary to hide his criminal past, but I never reproached him 
for the prison term he served. I did not blame him for becoming 
one of the organizers of overthrowing his patron 
Gamsakhurdia--after all, a man has a right to see the light. I 
did not pick on Kitovani's personal traits, but I did have a 
problem with the results of his political activities. 
  I will not take back what I have written and said over the 
past two years. The civil war in South Ossetia and Abkhazia 
became for Kitovani a means for taking care of his political and 
financial affairs. The criminal divvying up of the nearly 
extinct Georgian economy turned out to be much more important 
for him than its revival. He is unprincipled with respect to 
Russia: One day he talks about the threat of Russian imperialism 
and under this banner robs military warehouses, the next day he 
declares that Georgia is ready to become Russia's outpost in the 
Caucasus and warmly greets Zhirinovskiy. He is doing everything 
he can to remove Eduard Shevardnadze from the country or at 
least nullify his efforts... 
  ...Kitovani, however, has heard and read it all before. So 
why did he lose his temper now, of all times? 
  Well- and ill-wishers alike offer this explanation: The 
cause 
of Kitovani's exacerbated emotional response is my article 
"Georgians of Russia" published in MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI half a 
year ago. It deals with the Georgian diaspora in Russia, its 
most prominent figures--for instance, Nina Ananiashvili, or 
Archil Gomiashvili, or Zurab Tsereteli. As I am told, it is the 
details of the business and political activities of some Moscow 
residents of Georgian descent--Kitovani's friends and 
partners--that caused such an explosion of emotions. It would 
have been better not to have done this, I am told. Kitovani 
tolerated attacks against himself, but when the interests of 
"such" people are brought into it... you have to understand... 
  I do understand. And I do not intend to admonish Kitovani by 
saying that these things are better handled in court rather than 
with fists. And I will no longer appeal to the head of the 
Georgian state: It appears that his relations with Kitovani are 
no easier than mine. I can only fulfill my professional duties: 
Say loudly what I know for a fact. 
  Quite possibly, Tengiz Kitovani will interpret the latter as 
a threat. He should not. I am not "digging" or collecting 
compromising materials either on him or on other figures. First, 
this method of self-defense is no better that a six-against-one 
fight. Second, everything I knew I have already said and 
written. And what? Kitovani still remains one of Georgia's 
masters. He is still received by high-ranking politicians in 
Moscow, just like before. In Georgia people still keep silent, 
as they did before, recognizing the right of the strong. In some 
strange way, Kitovani's fate and the attitude toward him remind 
me of another "hero" in Georgian history--General Igor Rodionov, 
who was in command of the massacre of demonstrators in Tbilisi 
on 9 April 1989. How many angry words were said about him; how 
many substantiated accusations advanced; how many conclusions 
issued by official commissions--but General Rodionov remains 
head of the General Staff Academy of the Russian military. 
  Still, I believe that the proverb "the dog barks, but the 
caravan moves on" is a consolation for cowards. As everywhere, 
in our country the word comes first; it is just it takes us 
longer for the word to translate into the deed. 
  I have to admit that Kitovani and I have identical feelings 
toward one another, and the cause of the antipathy is similar. 
Kitovani believes that with my publications I am interfering in 
his plans. He interferes with mine, too. I do not intend to live 
in a country engulfed in a civil war, where there are more 
beggars than workers, where, finally, a parliament member uses 
his bodyguards to beat up a journalist. By his actions, Mr. 
Kitovani is interfering with my plans. 

