BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chen Yaobang, vice minister of the State Planning </F>
Commission: "Intensify Efforts To Build Cash Crop Production 
Bases"] 
  [Text] Achievements of Last Decade 
  From 1983 onward, the central and local authorities began to 
choose counties with favorable natural conditions and greater 
grain output potential from among the 11 provinces (regions) of 
Jiangsu, Anhui, Henan, Hunan, Hubei, Jiangxi, Jilin, 
Heilongjiang, Liaoning, Inner Mongolia, and Guangdong to launch 
a pilot program of establishing cash crop bases there. They 
found 60 such counties, made joint investment in the pilot 
programs, and scored outstanding results. By 1992, the state 
had invested and built 362 cash crop bases, 144 quality-cotton 
production county bases (farms), five sugar production county 
bases, and 261 good oil-bearing crop, fruit, vegetable, tea, and 
flower production bases; and 529 famous, special, and superior 
farm products, plus hundreds of livestock-related and aquatic 
products had also been developed. Beginning in 1993, they made 
arrangements to establish another 117 cash crop production 
bases, 33 quality-cotton production county bases, and 12 sugar 
production bases. 
  The development of cash crop production bases is a key 
measure in raising comprehensive agricultural production 
capacity more quickly. 
  First, it has improved agricultural production conditions, 
strengthened the technological base for agriculture, improved 
the quality of agricultural products, and saved and retrieved a 
large number of rare and valuable agricultural items. Cash crop 
production bases have vigorously promoted good crop strains and 
advanced and practical cultivation techniques. Now, both grains 
and cotton are improving in quality and cultivation areas for 
good strains of rice, wheat, rape, and tea have increased. 
  Second, they have increased market varieties and raised 
agricultural returns. Cash crop production bases, especially 
those specialized in famous, special, or superior farm products, 
concentrated on products in high domestic demand and competitive 
on international markets and gave them priority. Many of these 
products have filled the gaps in domestic markets. Superior 
farm products required by many of the country's high-standard 
guesthouses and hotels, such as lemons, Chinese plums, cherries, 
longan, and leechee, are now being supplied by cash crop 
production bases. The development of a group of modern farm 
product processing enterprises has greatly boosted the storage, 
transport, and packing capacity of farm products, reduced their 
perishability, and raised the post-production processing 
standards. 
<H5>  Some Basic Experiences </H5>
  We have gained a great deal of experience in the decade-long 
development of cash crop production base, which can be summed up 
as follows: 
  1. To overcome the problem of diffused investment, counties 
have become the investment bases, while projects are jointly 
financed by the central and local governments and peasants. 
Cash crop base investment ratio between the central and local 
governments in the Sixth Five-Year Plan was 1:1 but in practice 
it came to 1:1.36. The Seventh Five-Year Plan maintained 
central-local joint investment and, furthermore, opened 
financing to a variety of channels and methods, further 
stimulating enthusiasm for building cash crop bases. During the 
Seventh Five-Year Plan, the local authorities invested 150 
million yuan in developing famous, special, and superior farm 
products versus the 68 million yuan injected by central 
government, more than twice the central amount. 
  2. Central planning and a full role for regional advantages. 
Cash crop production bases in our country have assumed a basic 
pattern which will greatly help the progress toward 
specialization and regionalization. There are about 500 large 
counties across the country currently producing over 75 million 
kg of commercial grain, with another 479 counties under 
construction; and 300 counties boasting 100,000 mu of 
cotton-producing areas and producing over 100,000 dan of cotton, 
with a further 177 under construction which will also be 
producing famous, special, and superior farm products. 
  3. The construction combined long-term and short-term plans, 
highlighted key areas, and focused on infrastructure projects 
which had a direct bearing on agricultural production. A lot of 
effort went into tackling agricultural infrastructure 
construction, especially supporting project packages in pre- and 
post-production stages and during the production. All these 
will increase the reserve strength for developing agriculture 
and they will have a long-term effect. 
  4. The integration of production, supply, and sales, and the 
introduction of comprehensive services at the pre- and post- 
production, as well as the production, stages. The following 
were the major forms: One, offering information and technical 
services centered on production and construction and making 
direct production-sales links; two, instituting economic 
corporate bodies and easing products from production bases into 
the circulation realm; three, developing these bases into 
institutions with business organizations with the goal of moving 
toward the integration of trade, industry, and agriculture; and 
four, building a nationwide federation for developing farm 
products to facilitate transfers of bulk farm products over wide 
areas. Facts show that the integration of production and sales 
can open up channels for both sectors and encourages bases to 
plan commodity production according to market demand. 
  New Construction Goals 
  As a strategic move in developing high-yield, superior, and 
high-efficiency agriculture, cash crop production bases must be 
continued with for a long time. In the future, these bases must 
strive to achieve the following targets: 
  Make obvious improvements in agricultural production. First, 
raise the comprehensive agricultural production capacity and 
comprehensive services; second, achieve sustained and stable 
growth in agricultural production and win for the production 
base a key role in the development of national agricultural 
production; third, raise the quality and the percentage of 
commercial farm products, stabilize domestic market supply, 
gradually expand international markets, and increase exports to 
earn more foreign exchange; and four, through the construction 
of production bases, develop production and raise economic 
returns to increase peasants' income and promote the economies 
of county bases. 
  Further consolidate and perfect commercial grain and cotton 
bases. These are generally troubled by high output, low 
efficiency, low earnings for peasants, financial difficulties, 
and slow economic development. The state has decided to start 
arranging special loans in 1994 for large cash crop and quality 
commercial cotton county bases and concentrate efforts on 
supporting them by suitably increasing investment in their 
construction. 
  Expand the scale of developing famous, special, and superior 
farm products. It is necessary to increase efforts to promote 
new products recently marketed by localities, import and absorb 
a wide range of good foreign strains and advanced technology, 
and develop, using selective focuses, a number of new 
internationally competitive products. Regarding improvement, we 
must extend our efforts into the processing, packaging, storage 
areas and raise the standard of post-production treatment of 
commodities to increase their additional value. In terms of 
ways of improvement, we must integrate production with 
distribution services, expand the construction of 
post-production facilities, and actively develop new production 
systems such as those integrating production, supply, and sales; 
or trade, industry, and agriculture; or growing, breeding, and 
processing. In terms of the scale of development, we must 
pursue serialized set-quantity production, develop competitive 
products, encourage horizontal integration between production 
bases and development groups. 
  Perfect the management of cash crop production bases. The 
management structure must be headed by a general coordination 
department, which centralizes bases' construction funds and 
channels social funds toward such construction projects. We 
must build and perfect management organs to oversee the 
construction of production bases. 

