Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chin Hsuan (6855 5503): "Chinese Financial </F>
Circles Discuss Orientation of Chinese Financial System Reform 
and Make Concrete Suggestions"] 
  [Text] In China's recent 
increased macrocontrol, financial reform is an issue of general 
concern. Since we entered the summer, Chinese financial circles, 
led by the People's Bank of China [PBOC], have conducted 
wide-spread discussions centering on this issue and it has 
received serious consideration from the upper echelon of the 
Chinese government. It is reported that a plan for reform of the 
financial system is being firmed up and will be implemented next 
year. 
<H5>  Direction of Financial System Reform </H5>
  In the discussions, consensus has been obtained that 
financial system reform should properly determine the 
relationship between the central government and the central bank 
and should properly determine the relationship between the 
Ministry of Finance and the banks. We should establish a 
commercial banking system, while accelerating the development of 
financial laws and regulations. 
  Based on the consensus discussed above, it is generally 
recognized that the direction of reform should be to establish a 
central bank that can independently implement a monetary policy; 
establish a separation between policy finances and commercial 
finances with state commercial banks as its mainstay and a 
financial organizational system where numerous financial 
organizations coexist; and establish a centralized financial 
market system that is strictly administered with open, orderly 
competition. 
  The PBOC as the central bank should convert from its present 
function to become an authoritative organ for the state to 
administer finances and to take control of currency issuance, 
basic currency income and outgo, and adjustment in the scale of 
credit to conduct a unified national currency policy. 
  One suggestion believed that the central bank should report 
directly to the People's Congress and break with the structure 
of having the central bank set up under the leadership of the 
State Council and change the past procedure of the central 
government sometimes relaxing its authority and sometimes 
tightening its authority. Although it is estimated that this 
kind of suggestion would now still be difficult to realize, 
clearer provisions should first be made on such issues as how 
the State Council directs the central bank, giving the central 
bank greater authority, and the relations of the central bank 
with various departments of the State Council. Certainly at the 
same time, the central bank itself should improve its ability to 
manage finances, especially its capability for comprehensive 
macroeconomic analysis. It also should be supervised to better 
carry out its own functions. 
  If we are to establish a central bank with strong control 
functions, we also must have an improved currency policy system 
and a complete set of financial laws and regulations as a base. 
  As regards reforming and improving the currency policy 
system, it was recognized in the discussions that in formulating 
a currency policy three goals can be determined. The ultimate 
goal is to maintain a stable currency and use that to promote 
economic growth; the intermediate goal is to control the 
currency supply; and the operational goal is to regulate the 
ratio of bank reserves. At the same time, the clarified choices 
that the central bank should have regarding such currency policy 
tools as deposit reserve rates, rediscount interest rates, 
credit limits, central bank deposit interest rates, central bank 
loans, and central bank foreign exchange operations, and 
operation of the open market should be more fully utilized. 
Correspondingly, the central bank also should enhance its 
macroeconomic analysis and forecasting and establish an improved 
statistical survey system and currency policy advance warning 
system to provide a scientific basis to the formulation of 
currency policy. 
  Financial circles also are paying attention to the 
formulation, improvement, and enforcement of financial laws and 
regulations. It is reported that among the laws that they are 
preparing to pass next year are a Central Bank Law, a Commercial 
Banking Law, a Negotiable Instruments Law, and an Insurance Law. 
Various oversight and administrative standards and regulations 
also are being firmed up. In the discussions, it was believed 
that as to how to ensure the enforcement of financial laws, the 
central bank should improve its investigative and oversight 
forces and effectively supervise and administer banks and 
non-bank financial organizations. 
<H5>  Establish Policy Finance Organizations </H5>
  In the discussions three suggestions were proposed: 
  The first was to establish a national long-term development 
credit bank, the main task of which would be long-term policy 
loans and using state allocated capital for equity investment in 
key state construction projects and exercising the functions of 
a holding company. It is reported that the bank could be ready 
to be established by the last half of this year. In the initial 
stage the People's Construction Bank of China would temporarily 
assume the task. 
  But on the issue of who would select what projects to invest 
in, there is a difference of opinion. One opinion is that the 
selection of investment projects would still be determined by 
the government planning commission. But some financial people 
believe that this would cause responsibilities to be unclear. If 
a problem came up, who would take responsibility? But this 
suggests that the banks also should be responsible for the 
selection of projects. At the same time, the point that profit 
taxes should not be levied on policy banks, but it should take 
the form of government interest deductions also needs to be 
further clarified. 
  The second suggestion is that the current Agricultural Bank 
of China be converted to the Rural Policy Bank of China. In 
addition to treasury appropriations, its capital could mainly be 
raised from financial bonds issued by financial organizations. 
It is reported that its former tasks will be undertaken by the 
newly organized Chinese Agricultural Cooperative Bank. 
  The third suggestion is that an import-export credit bank be 
established. This is a policy bank that would provide credit for 
buying and selling imports and exports and provide credit 
guarantees for imports and exports. But it must be separated 
from the Ministry of Foreign Trade and could not engage in 
commercial banking. 
<H5>  Sound State Professional Financial Organizations </H5>
  In the discussions it was suggested that after policy 
financial tasks are divided, the Industry and Commerce Bank of 
China and the Bank of China again be converted to state 
commercial banks and operated in accordance with modern 
commercial bank operating mechanisms, while coming under the 
supervision of the central bank. This demands that these banks 
establish new mechanisms, engage in autonomous operations, take 
responsibility for their own profits and losses, seek their own 
balancing funds, take responsibility for operating risks, have 
their own self-restraint mechanisms, and seek their own 
development opportunities and levels of development. But the key 
to this reform is the need to resolve the issue of property 
rights. 
  At the same time, such current commercial banks as the 
Jiaotong, Zhongxin Shiye, Guangda, Huaxia, Zhaoshang, Fujian 
Xingye, Guangdong Development, Shenzhen Development, and Pudong 
Development must be further developed. 
  It also was recognized in the discussions that when 
conditions are ripe, we also should gradually develop a new 
group of commercial banks. But it should be emphasized that 
commercial banks themselves are only short-term currency markets 
and the main object of their services are industry and commerce 
and they cannot rush into the investment market. Otherwise it 
could be chaotic. The present tendency of some commercial banks 
to convert to a pattern approximating professional banks should 
be corrected. 
  It was affirmed in the discussions that commercial banks are 
a product of reform, that their operations suit the demands of 
the market economy, and that they make a contribution to 
economic development. It is just that their own mechanisms still 
are not sufficiently perfected and they are limited in several 
respects, affecting their further development. So, not only must 
we have a correct understanding of commercial banks, but we also 
should give them a great deal of support and provide them with 
the opportunities and the environment for fair competition. And 
in constantly perfecting themselves, commercial banks should 
strive to gradually link up their internal system and business 
operations with international practice. 
<H3>  How To Establish a Strictly Administered Centralized 
Financial Market With Open and Orderly Competition </H3>
  The suggestions in this aspect of the discussions can 
generally be summarized as: 
  1. Increase control of the currency market and sever the 
direct connection between the currency market and the capital 
market so that the currency market can become a currency policy 
tool for the central bank to use and the main place for the 
adjustment of the base currency and the money supply. 
  2. Reasonably resolve the issue of the relationship among 
savings deposit interest, loan interest, and interest on 
negotiable securities and gradually form an interest system with 
central bank interest as the base. 
  3. Increase supervision of financial activities among 
financial organizations. 
  4. Gradually improve the state bond market and the stock 
market. 
  Some people in financial circles believe that the present 
development of China's financial market mechanisms is still very 
weak and some are still shrinking. Reform should be increased 
and limitations reduced to help the financial market to develop 
and enliven finances. 
  As regards marketization of foreign exchange controls, it 
was 
proposed in the discussions that a national network with a 
unified price and a foreign exchange adjustment market for 
centralized exchange be established. Later when conditions are 
ripe, the Bank of China, the Chinese Industry and Commerce Bank, 
and Jiaotong Bank, already converted to commercial banks, would 
be permitted to engage in foreign exchange market business for 
themselves and as agents. 
  As to how to further develop non-bank financial 
organizations, it was proposed in the discussions that with 
clear-cut requirements regarding the funds and administrative 
personnel and the scope of the business of various types of 
non-bank financial organizations, and with strict approval and 
control, various types of financial organizations such as 
professional insurance companies and insurance funds, securities 
companies, trust investment companies, financial leasing 
companies, and enterprise group finance companies could be 
developed as appropriate. Branches could be formed in the 
insurance business, the securities business, the trust business, 
and the banking business. 
  The continued introduction of foreign investment financial 
organizations and the establishment of joint venture financial 
organizations also were talked about in the discussions, along 
with other issues related to reform of the Chinese financial 
system. 
  In the discussions, quite a few people brought up that 
reform 
of the Chinese financial system should begin from reality. The 
current situation is that the Chinese economy is becoming more 
marketized every day, the prices of productive elements are 
generally freed up, and enterprises are beginning to enter the 
market. With this background, reform of the financial system 
cannot simply stop at tightening or loosening authority, nor can 
it stop at some temporary measures of the current rectification 
of the financial order that only cope with the symptoms. We 
should pay attention to eliminating the influences of the 
planned economy and achieving radical changes in the financial 
system. Certainly financial reform cannot be separated from 
improving the entire economic environment. So, it should be a 
part of a series of reforms, including that of the public 
finance system, and we need to have sound laws and regulations 
to set standards for our conduct and comprehensive oversight 
mechanisms (some have proposed the establishment of a bank 
oversight system). In the discussions, it also was proposed that 
in reform of the financial system sufficient consideration be 
given to the degree of openness of finances and their tie in 
with international finances. Shanghai especially should be 
established as a financial center. Without some special 
policies, it would be difficult to accomplish this. Some people 
also pointed out that in reform of the financial system, we 
should give serious consideration to cultivating talent and 
developing modern methods. 

