BFN 

<F P=106> [By Raimundo Lopez] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 1 Jun (PL) -- During today's International 
Children's Day celebrations, Cuban children affirmed that they 
are confident about their future and asked the U.S. Government 
to lift the three-decade-long blockade imposed against their 
country. 
  I foresee a future in which all my friends have jobs, and I 
am a commercial pilot, said Reinaldo Rodriguez, one of dozens of 
children questioned this morning by Radio Rebelde about how they 
would like to celebrate this day dedicated to them. 
  I would also like our neighbor to the north, the United 
States, to lift the blockade that has caused my family, friends, 
and country so many difficulties, added Rodriguez, a sixth grade 
student who attends school in Havana. 
  Many other youngsters said they enjoy a happy childhood, 
despite the adverse economic situation the island has 
experienced during the last four years following the loss of its 
main trading partners in the now-vanished socialist camp, which 
was led by the former Soviet Union. Official reports gathered 
by PRENSA LATINA indicate that Cuban children, despite the 
critical economic situation, maintain education and health 
standards equal to those of the world's most developed nations. 
  Cuban officials said that even in 1993, described as the 
most 
difficult year of the so-called special period, infant mortality 
was 9.4 per 1,000 births, ranking Cuba among the 20 nations with 
the lowest infant mortality rate. The officials added that the 
preschool mortality rate was reduced to 5.9 per 10,000 in 1993, 
one of the lowest rates internationally. 
  They stressed that up to five years of age, Cuba has one of 
the highest survival rates in the world -- 98.8 percent, while 
in the 5 to 14 year range the mortality rate has remained very 
low for five years -- 0.4 per 1,000 residents. 
  The Health Ministry pointed out that deaths caused by 
diarrheic infections and acute respiratory ailments have been 
noticeably reduced to an average of between 0.3 and 0.7 percent 
in infants up to one year old and between 0.3 and 0.8 percent in 
children up to five years old. 
  The Health Ministry reported the main causes of infant 
mortality in Cuba are similar to those in developed countries: 
perinatal afflictions and congenital defects, adding that young 
Cubans are immunized against 11 diseases, often using vaccines 
developed exclusively on the island. The Health Ministry 
specified the hepatitis B and the meningitis meningococcus type 
B vaccines, and this year protection was intensified against 
measles -- a disease whose transmission has been curbed in Cuba 
since mid-1993. 
  Meanwhile, the Cuban Education Ministry today said that the 
likelihood of all Cuban children continuing their education is 
guaranteed. 
  The national budget assigns education and health together 
2.440 billion pesos -- at the official exchange rate on par with 
the U.S. dollar -- out of a total budget of 12.502 billion pesos 
allocated for the current year. 
  Cuban children also sent greetings via fax to all of the 
world's children from the UNICEF's office in Havana. May 
friendship and love among children fill every corner of the 
world like the rays of the sun, because we are the hope of the 
world, says the text, which is accompanied by a drawing of 
children holding hands surrounded by flowers. 

