BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 17 KYODO -- The leader of the main 
opposition Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) told Prime Minister 
Tsutomu Hata on Tuesday [17 May] that the LDP plans to demand 
his resignation after the Diet enacts the fiscal 1994 national 
budget, a senior LDP official said. 
  "When the budget is acted upon, we will again call on you to 
shape up," LDP President Yohei Kono said in a meeting with Hata, 
an indication that the party will submit a no-confidence motion 
against the three-week-old Hata cabinet. 
  Describing the Hata administration as "a government under 
abnormal circumstances," Kono pressed the premier to be aware 
that his government is a minority one, LDP Secretary General 
Yoshiro Mori told a news conference. 
  The remarks apparently reflect Kono's notion that the Hata 
cabinet will have completed its duties when the key budget 
clears the diet. 
  The encounter between Hata and Kono, the first since Hata 
took office April 28, was the first in a series of meetings with 
leaders of political parties outside the governing coaliton. 
  Later Tuesday, Hata also met Social Democratic Party (SDP) 
Chairman Tomiichi Murayama, new party Sakigake leader Masayoshi 
Takemura and Michihiko Kano, head of new party Mirai, in efforts 
to seek cooperation on such major issues as the Diet budget 
debate, political reform and tax system reform. 
  In response to the premier's call for the LDP's cooperation 
in Diet debate on the budget, Kono made it clear his party is 
ready to extend a helping hand if the government admits its 
responsibility for the delay in budget discussion, Mori said. 
  The heads of the SDP, Sakigake and Mirai also expressed a 
desire to cooperate in passing the budget, now overdue by one 
and a half months, Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary Naoto Kitamura 
told a separate news conference. 
  On political reform, however, Murayama told reporters he has 
expressed his concern about the ruling parties' apparent move to 
give higher priority to debate on a yet-unformulated bill that 
demarcates new constituenies for House of Representatives 
elections. 
  Takemura, the chief cabinet secretary under former prime 
minister Morihiro Hosokawa, also said he has told Hata the 
government should leave the matter of a new electoral map up to 
an independent council of seven experts established within the 
Prime Minister's Office. 
  During a talk with Murayama, Hata reportedly sought the 
SDP's 
cooperation on policy issues and renewed his call for the party 
to return to the ruling coalition. 
  The SDP, the largest contingent in Hosokawa's ruling 
coalition, departed the union after other coalition partners 
abruptly formed a new parliamentary group, excluding the SDP. 
The move forced Hata to form the first minority government in 
39 years. 
  Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiroshi Kumagai, who accompanied 
Hata 
in the series of talks, told a news conference he has a feeling 
the leaders of the four parties "are warmly evaluating Hata's 
efforts" to tackle a number of challenges. 
  "Spring has come today, that's how I feel right now," the 
top 
government spokesman said. 

