BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "No Foreign-Owned Media in Indonesia] </F>
  [Text] Liberal-minded media proprietors and executives in 
this country had long yearned for a total free market-oriented 
media industry unbridled by any intervention in both editorial 
and management matters. Opposition to such a demand from 
concerned officials, leaders, and members of the media community 
itself had been equally strong. 
  Then, last week, three cabinet ministers (the information 
minister was not one of them) declared that the gate to foreign 
investment in the industry, which had been shut tight since the 
government banned Dutch and other foreign-owned press in the 
late fifties, was henceforth opened. As the announcement was 
like thunder under a sunny sky, heads shock in utter disbelief. 
  The decision was more than what the majority of domestic 
critics of the existing regulated media policy had bargained 
for. Under the new policy as outlined in Government Regulation 
No. 20/1994 dated May 19, foreign investors are freed from the 
previous minimum capital requirements and compulsory equity 
divestment for joint ventures and offered ownership in seaports, 
telecommunications, power, railways, civil aviation, nuclear 
power, and the mass media. 
  Without any scruple, the ministers laid open the reasons for 
the revolutionary reform in the government's foreign investment 
policy. The primary objectives, as they pointed out to newsmen, 
are to draw the mammoth sum of U.S. $305 billion in new 
investments during the current five-year plan and provide jobs 
for a sizeable share of the estimated new 2.5 million-strong 
labor force. 
  With the exception of the hitherto non-existent commercial 
nuclear power facility, the other industries are technically 
already in operation around the country, but some of them are 
handicapped by lack of funds and professional expertise to 
expand. Hence, the rapidly growing private sector involvement 
in what were once under full state monopoly. 
  But to those voicing their disappointment with the new 
policy, commercialism and professionalism are not the issue. The 
issue is whether their constitutional designation as protected 
fields should now be so radically compromised. 
  The decision to open up the mass media field to foreign 
investment is easily the most controversial and disturbing. How 
can the media industry be offered to foreign ownership in 
complete defiance of the principles envisaged in Law No. 21/1982 
[year as published] which compels the media to uphold the 
national philosophy, constitution, state policy, national 
journalistic canons, and Indonesian societal customs and norms, 
and for these reasons any involvement of foreign capital and 
personnel in the national media management and development is 
prohibited? 
  If in the unthinkable likelihood the three ministers were on 
the right road, we might then next expect the new policy to lead 
to a revision of the existing national law to suit the dictates 
of globalisation. If so, regulations regarding publishing 
permit, the constitutions and codes of ethics of the veletant 
[as published] professional organisations, and the provision 
giving journalists and media employees a 20-percent share of 
company stocks will also have to be revoked. 
  The new deregulation measures affecting the media contains 
an 
undeniably serious flaw harmful to the national interest. Its 
ominous defect, which could only be caused by unbelievably 
simple ignorance, presents the government with no alternative 
but to revert to a media policy consonant with Law No. 21 as 
demanded by both the publishers and journalists associations 
soon after the controversial government regulation was made 
public. 

