BFN 

  [Text] United Nations, New York, April 28, IRNA -- The 
foreign ministers of the contact group of the Organisation of 
Islamic Conference (ICO) [Islamic Conference Organization -- 
ICO] on Bosnia-Herzegovina in a declaration here Wednesday [27 
April] termed the arms embargo imposed on Sarajevo as illegal, 
unjust and in direct contradiction to Article 51 of the UN 
Charter. 
  The foreign ministers of the ICO contact group comprising 
Iran, Pakistan, Turkey, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Senegal and 
Malaysia who held an emergency meeting here Wednesday to discuss 
the deteriorating situation arising from the Serbian unabated 
atrocities in Bosnia-Herzegovina, made the remark in their final 
declaration. 
  Stressing the implementation of the Security Council and 
General Assembly resolutions on Bosnia-Herzegovina, the 
statement said that justice, humanity, morality and 
international law should not be ignored in settling the Bosnian 
plight. 
  The foreign ministers urged the international community, 
particularly ICO member states to extend their fullest 
cooperation to the Government of Bosnia-Herzegovina in the 
exercise of its inherent and inalienable right of individual and 
collective self-defence under Article 51 of the U.N. Charter. 
  The contact group will table a draft resolution to be handed 
over to the Security Council to proclaim that the provisions of 
Security Council Resolution 713 did not apply to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, the declaration said. 
  Expressing regret over the U.N. inability to preserve the 
inviolability of the "safe areas" designated by the Security 
Council, the declaration said that brutal Serbian atatcks on 
Gorazde once again proved the failure of all international 
efforts to deter and end the Serbian aggression. 
  The foreign ministers held "the Belgrade regime and its 
surrogate in Bosnia-Herzegovina" responsible for the cold 
blooded massacre in Gorazde of over 700 innocent civilians, the 
maiming of more than 2000 others and the forced displacement of 
more than 20,000 people. 
  Condemning the brutal Serbian offensive on Gorazde, they 
expressed support for the international war crime tribunal and 
called for the prosecution of those responsible for organizing 
and perpetrating the atrocities. 
  The foreign ministers welcomed the decision of the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) for extending the "Sarajevo 
exclusion zone model" to other U.N. declared "safe areas" in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and stressed the necessity of employing 
massive air-power, in accordance with Security Council 
resolutions to deter and interdict Serbian military supply lines. 
  Stressing the full and complete withdrawal of Serbian heavy 
weapons from Gorazde, as specified in NATO ultimatum of April 
22, they called for the removal of all heavy weapons in the 
possession of Bosnian Serbs to Serbia-Montenegro as called for 
in the Security Council Resolution 752. 
  Stressing the necessity for strengthening of UNPROFOR [UN 
Protection Force] in Bosnia-Herzegovina, the declaration urged 
the U.N. to avail itself of the proposal made by several Islamic 
countries for contributing troops to the UNPROFOR. 
  Expressing support for the convening of an international 
peace conference on former Yugoslavia, they emphasized that such 
a conference has to be formally based on the purposes and 
principles of U.N. Charter and consistent with the provisions of 
relevant Security Council resolutions. 
  However, they stressed that such a conference should not be 
utilized by the Serbs as a cover to execute or legitimize their 
war objectives and annexationist designs. 
  The declaration stressed that the Serb withdrawal from 
Gorazde and the establishment of "exclusion zone" must precede 
the holding of the conference and the member states of the ICO 
contact group should be invited to attend the conference as 
participants as well as any other peace initiative on 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The declaration welcomed the Washington agremeent between 
the 
Muslims and Croats and the confederal arrangements with the 
Republic of Croatia and said that it considers the initiative as 
an important step towards an overall political settlement of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  It called for tightening of the existing sanctions against 
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) until 
they comply with the Security Council resolutions and 
establishment of a comprehensive peace settlement. 
  The declaration called on international community to 
intensify humanitarian relief efforts in Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
called for urgent steps to reopen the Tuzla airport on regular 
basis. 
  Calling for the establishment of an ICO trust fund for the 
reconstruction of Bosnia-Herzegovina, it urged member states to 
contribute generously to this fund. 
  The declaration touched on the situation of Muslims in 
Sanjak 
and Kosovo and called on the international community to provide 
them with effective international protection. 
  The foreign ministers reaffirmed their decision to continue 
to review their economic relations with those governments, which 
continue to impede the achievement of just settlement by acts 
and policies aimed at rewarding the aggressor and legitimizing 
the fruits of aggression and decide to evolve a joint ICO 
position on this important question as soon as possible. 
  The declaration stressed the necessity to peserve the unity 
and indivisibility of Sarajevo as the capital of the Republic of 
Bosnia- Herzegovina and called on the United Nations to review 
the mandate of the UNPROFOR. 
  It also supported Algerian Government's proposal on holding 
an emergency ministerial meeting of the full membership of the 
ICO. 

