Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Junichi Taki, editorial staff writer] </F>
  [Text] A symposium, ``Why Plutonium Now,'' where both 
proponents and opponents of plutonium use sat down at the same 
table, was held in Osaka City on 25 September. This was realized 
for the first time under the joint auspices of the Japan Atomic 
Industrial Forum, Inc. (JAIF) and the nuclear energy data and 
information office, a group opposed to plutonium use. Plutonium 
use is under international scrutiny, not just from the viewpoint 
of energy supply and safety, but also from the viewpoint of 
prevention of nuclear proliferation. It was hoped that the 
symposium would be a step in the path toward a policy decision 
made by the people, not an imposition of the government's 
thinking, but the arguments did not necessarily mesh up. 
<H3>  Europe and United States Abandon Use of Plutonium, Nuclear 
Energy </H3>
  The government and the electric power industry are promoting 
a recycling (nuclear fuel cycle) policy, in which plutonium will 
be extracted from spent nuclear fuel and reused as fuel. 
Construction has begun on a plant to reprocess spent nuclear 
fuel, and it also will be a plutonium extraction facility (in 
Rokkasho-Mura, Aomori Prefecture). The fast breeder reactor 
``Monju'' (Tsuruga City, Fukui Prefecture) will start operating 
next spring. It is a prototype of the next-generation nuclear 
reactor that will burn plutonium and other nuclear fuels to 
produce electricity. 
  Although plutonium enables effective use of uranium 
resources 
through recycling, it also requires protection because it is 
used in nuclear weapons. The United States and the European 
countries have abandoned the policy of recycling for a variety 
of reasons, including fiscal difficulties, high operational cost 
and nuclear non-proliferation. 
  This is the environment in which the symposium was held. 
<H5>  Calm Exchange of Views </H5>
  The arguments of the proponents of plutonium use were: (1) 
nuclear fuel recycling is necessary to ensure a stable supply of 
energy and for effective use of resources; and (2) from the 
viewpoint of disposal of waste as well, it is better to separate 
spent nuclear fuel than dispose of it as is. 
  The arguments of the opponents were: (1) The energy gained 
from recycling is not as great as it has been played up to be; 
(2) Plutonium use is dangerous because the unknown quantity in 
the technology is too great; (3) it will lead to proliferation 
of nuclear weapons; and (4) overly stringent control of 
information may be the result of the need to protect nuclear 
materials. 
  The debate itself ended with both sides sticking to their 
respective positions. At the outset, JAIF Representative 
Director Kazuyuki Mori urged the participants to ``discuss 
matters frankly and calmly, putting aside labels.'' One could 
say that the debate was ``calm'' because it ended without anyone 
taking a contentious attitude, but the participants did not put 
aside their labels. Even questions from the audience were in the 
form of attempts to pin down panelists as representatives of 
their organizations, and it is unfortunate that it turned out 
differently than intended by the hosts. 
  The symposium was held in a hall that holds 300 people, and 
there were about 100 in the general audience. There were about 
5,300 requests to attend, but since there probably were many who 
sent in multiple postcards requesting admission, one cannot 
assume that this number of requests is directly represents the 
degree of general interest. In fact, many appeared to be 
participants in pro-nuclear or anti-nuclear activities and could 
be regarded as people involved in this issue in a broad sense. 
  It will take a lot more effort before the plutonium issue is 
debated more widely by the Japanese people, especially to 
involve the residents of large cities who enjoy the benefits of 
electric power supply. 
<H5>  Continuity Will Build Trust </H5>
  Despite its being a pressing problem impacting on energy and 
the environment, this issue is difficult to understand and 
remote from the experience of the general populace. One can 
sympathize with Nisaburo Takagi, representative of the nuclear 
energy data and information office, who pointed out that ``The 
national government should bear the cost'' of efforts to arouse 
debate. 
  Although the government may explain policy decisions to the 
people, it does little to actively provide materials or the 
environment in which these can be challenged. One wonders if it 
really is a good thing that dissenting opinions are not raised. 
Dissension is necessary in order to achieve understanding. 
  Michiko Ogiso, a panelist from the anti-nuclear faction, 
said, ``I agree with Mr. Kikuike (pro-nuclear side) on the point 
that a relationship of trust that has an element of tension is 
needed.'' Continuity should create trust, and should result in 
finding words that can be used to discuss these issues with the 
general populace. Many in the audience expressed the hope that 
this sort of opportunity would continue to be provided. One 
hopes that it will continue. 
  List of participants: Michiko Ogiso, secretary of the Fukui 
Prefecture citizens against nuclear power generation; Futaba 
Ono, assistant professor, nuclear engineering research facility, 
engineering department, Tokyo University; Saburo Kikuike, 
director, planning department, Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel 
Development Corporation; Keiji Kobayashi, assistant professor, 
nuclear reactor test center, Kyoto University; Nisaburo Takagi, 
representative of the nuclear energy data and information 
office; Mitsuhiro Yokote, director, nuclear fuel department, 
Kansai Electric Power Company; and Hiroyuki Torii, editorial 
staff, Nihon Keizai Shimbun Inc. (moderator). 

