BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by station editor (Yu Xin): "Taiwan </F>
Businessmen's Zeal for Investment on the Mainland Remains 
Unchanged"; from the "News and Current Events" program] 
  [Excerpts] Taiwan's Minister of Economic Affairs Jiang 
Bingkun [Chiang Ping-kun] said recently that since the Qiandao 
Lake boat incident had gradually cooled down, the Ministry of 
Economic Affairs had resumed its normal routine in handling the 
mainland affairs. On 22 April alone, the Investment Examination 
Committee of the Ministry approved 91 applications for 
investment on the mainland, with a total investment of more than 
1.4 billion new Taiwan dollars. In addition, it also approved 
for the first time three requests for importing technology from 
the mainland. These were the first batch of investment 
applications approved by the ministry since the Qiandao Lake 
boat incident. They show that the cross-strait economic 
exchanges and trade cannot be cut off by the boat incident. 
Figures for the first quarter published recently by Taiwan's 
Ministry of Economic Affairs show that Taiwan businessmen's zeal 
for investment on the mainland remains unchanged and the 
investment has not decreased, despite certain man-made political 
factors. 
  A Taiwan official said: The attractiveness of the mainland 
market and investment is so great that it is very difficult for 
the government to discourage the investment. If the government 
tries to control the investment by mandate, tens of thousands of 
Taiwan businessmen will go underground and become unmanageable. 
[passage omitted] The cross-strait economic exchanges and 
cooperation have become irreversible. [passage omitted] 
  In recent years, the Taiwan authorities have spared no 
efforts to advocate a southward venture policy, encouraging 
enterprises to invest in Southeast Asia. The purpose of the 
policy is to disperse Taiwan businessmen's investment and to 
curb their investment and reduce their economic dependency on 
the mainland. The policy is also designed to serve the 
political purpose of creating two Chinas or one China and one 
Taiwan. 
  Taiwan Legislative Yuan member (Yu Mu-lin) recently made an 
urgent interpellation about the anti-Chinese riot in Indonesia 
and pointed out: The southward venture policy is, out of a 
political consideration, designed to curb the mainland 
investment craze. However, under such a policy, the investment 
is made in high-risk regions and the people are bound to suffer 
inestimable losses in the future. 
  Some power holders in Taiwan are taking advantage of the 
Qiandao Lake boat incident to instigate hatred among the people 
for the mainland and are calling for suspension of the 
cross-strait exchanges. Their purpose is to dampen the 
enthusiasm for cross-strait economic exchanges, and there is 
also a political objective behind this purpose. Neither the 
people of insight nor the media in Taiwan want to see the 
escalation of the Qiandao Lake boat incident to a political 
event between the two sides. If the cross-strait exchanges go 
backward in an all-round way due to the tourism mishap, many 
problems will crop up. For one, Taiwan will be unable to cope 
with a situation in which the mutually complementary and 
mutually beneficial cross-strait relations are restored to 
relations of confrontation. A situation like that is definitely 
not what the people on both sides of the strait love to see. 

