Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Standpoint" column: "U.S. Double-Dealing Once Again" by </F>
'Isa Isma'il al-'Abbadi] 
  [Text] The U.S. decision to supply "Israel" with the most 
advanced F-20 and F-16 combat aircraft shows that Washington is 
determined to continue down its present dangerous course of 
dealing with international issues and hotbeds of tension in the 
world. "Israel" is known for its expansionist policy and its use 
of all means of force and armed military aggression to entrench 
its occupation of Arab and Palestinian territories. It is also 
known for its armed aggression against Arab countries that are 
not directly adjacent to Palestine, as was the case of its 
aggression on Iraq and other Arab countries. 
  Washington openly speaks about U.S. commitment to maintain 
"Israel's" qualitative military superiority over the Arabs, yet 
it presents itself as a peace "broker" between "Arab" regimes 
and Tel Aviv. Now how can this happen? How can Washington 
convince the Arabs that it can be an honest peace "broker" while 
it help entrench Zionist aggression and ensure Zionist 
superiority over the Arabs? Not only that, Washington also 
speaks about democracy and human rights while it wages wars and 
kills thousands of human beings annually in various parts of the 
world in the name of democracy and human rights. Furthermore, 
its unlimited military support for Israel ignores "Israel's" 
long record of oppression and violation of Palestinian human 
rights. The Zionists besiege dozens of Palestinian towns and 
villages, blow up Palestinian homes, confiscate hundreds of 
acres of land, kill Palestinian demonstrators protesting the 
occupation, and drive hundreds of Palestinians to prisons and 
detention camps daily. Yet, the United States overlooks this 
criminal record of the Zionists. It supplies Tel Aviv with new 
modern weapons and pledges to back its military superiority 
while at the same time it deprives the Arabs of the means of 
self-defense. 
  The United States would not have been able to push further 
along this course had it not found among "Arabs" those who are 
ready to squander Arab funds on the crumbs of American tables, 
those who are willing to receive any old useless weapon or 
aircraft that is thrown to them. Otherwise, how can we explain 
Washington's supplying the most update military aircraft to Tel 
Aviv versus the sale of old F- 15 aircraft to Saudi Arabia? 
Against whom would Riyadh use these aircraft? And, who could 
be threatening Saudi Arabia when it has strong relations with 
"Israel," both in secret and in the open? 
  Anyone who follows the list of U.S. weapons that have been 
sold to Saudi Arabia over the past two decades will find that 
the United States had "swallowed up" tens of billions of dollars 
(other than the billions spent on the 30-state aggression). One 
would assume that all that money had gone toward selling Saudi 
Arabia leftover weapons from World War II. Nobody knows 
anything about the fate of those weapons and whether they 
actually arrived in Saudi Arabia, or if all those deals were 
merely fiction. What is certain, however, are the billions of 
dollars that Washington has received in return for one real 
thing; namely, maintaining "Israel's" military superiority. 
  While pointing to U.S. double-dealing and Washington's 
double 
standards in dealing with international issues and areas of 
tension in the world, we call upon the other "big powers" to 
tackle the same international issues with a good measure of 
evenhandedness and justice. Isn't it unreasonable for the 
United States to insist, through international organizations and 
all illegal means, on depriving countries of even a knife to use 
in self-defense while providing Israel with the most modern and 
high tech weapons? 
  Even the concept of "friendship" is different in Washington. 
Egyptian President Husni Mubarak and King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, 
who are supposed to be the friends of the United States, are not 
getting the sophisticated weapons received by Washington's other 
friend Yitzhaq Rabin. Still, Mubarak and Fahd are sweating and 
working day and night in order to please the United States. Not 
only that, they are also trying to pressure others, weaken their 
position and drag them into the American camp. 
  The big powers, especially the United States, are called 
upon 
to adopt more balanced stands in dealing with states and issues 
relating to international peace and security. It is 
unreasonable for these powers to prolong the unfair blockade on 
Iraq when it has fulfilled all its obligations under UN Security 
Council Resolution 687 and while Washington continues to 
strengthen Zionist military capabilities with more sophisticated 
weapons, knowing full well that "Israel" is sitting on an 
arsenal of nuclear weapons and aiming the warheads at the Arab 
countries. 

