CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Daniel Chabbert: "Rapid Prototyping: Process </F>
Adapted to Conventional Machinery"--first paragraph is L'USINE 
NOUVELLE introduction] 
  [Text] At the heart of the process is software that 
analytically decomposes fabrication of the component before 
reconstituting the finished prototype... 
  A rapid prototyping process that does not require 
specialized 
machinery for component fabrication: This is the solution 
offered by a research team from Cirtes--the Essin Center for 
Engineering, Research, and Transfers at Saint-Die, Vosges. 
Dubbed "Stratoconception," it is adapted to work with 
conventional equipment such as milling and boring machines and 
digitally-controlled cutting machines. What's new is that the 
Stratoconcept software can also work with any CAD/CAM 
[computer-assisted design and manufacture] software on the 
market. "For the moment, we're focusing our efforts primarily on 
the Catia CAD/CAM, in partnership with IBM," says Claude 
Barlier, director of the center and holder of the patent. 
  Stratoconcept inputs the specifications for the 
computer-designed part, decomposes it into a number of basic 
surfaces (of constant or variable thickness) called "strata," 
and identifies the reinforcements and inserts necessary for the 
final piece to do its job correctly. These items are then 
identified and fabricated directly, using two-and 
three-dimensional processes performed on plating materials 
(steel, plastic, wood, etc.). Like a three-dimensional puzzle, 
the various constituent elements are then lined up and assembled 
(bonded, welded, screwed, etc.) into a real part that embodies 
all requisite design specifications. The assembly technique, 
calculated by decomposing the part, takes into account the 
mechanical stresses it must tolerate during utilization. "In the 
future, we will not need glue or mounting attachments," Barlier 
explains. "We're working now on the parameters for strata that 
can be fitted together automatically." 
<H5>  Commercialization </H5>
  Cirtes has already put its technology to work for Eclatec, 
producing an operational PVC prototype of a lighting mechanism 
housing--a part that is 400 mm in diameter and embodies complex 
internal and external shapes. "The prototype took only a week to 
produce, whereas in the past they took 3 weeks," says Barlier. 
  But Cirtes can do more than provide customized services for 
it clients. It is also marketing the Stratoconcept software 
itself, alone or as part of a turnkey solution. The rapid 
prototyping platform includes a CAD/CAM work station and a 1,000 
x 1,250 mm cutting machine for micromilling, priced under 
800,000 French francs. 

