Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Commentary" by political observer Lev Korneshov: "History </F>
Dangerous To Repeat"] 
  [Text] Over the holiday period we were shown "Cabaret," a 
wonderful movie by U.S. director Bob Fosse, on television. Let 
me remind you that the events in it take place in Germany 1931 
during the Nazis' ruthless rise to power. 
  The analogies are too obvious to ignore. But "Cabaret" came 
to the screen in 1972, many years after the end of World War II, 
and now we are being offered instant conclusions that may serve 
as a basis for action in certain circumstances. 
  The first of these conclusions, one which must be 
immediately 
dismissed, is that the situation in "that" Germany and "this" 
Russia is similar: impoverishment, prices, inflation, economic 
recession, etc. But this is only an "outward" resemblance. 
Regrettably, it is on this that many articles and people 
organizing the creation of antifascist committees, "fronts," and 
so forth are focusing their attention. The very idea that the 
Russian people may be infected by the bacilli of fascism, that 
voters who voted for V. Zhirinovskiy and his party are suffering 
from the fascist plague is a blasphemous idea insulting to the 
Russian people, who made countless sacrifices for the sake of 
victory over fascism. 
  There is also a second conclusion: The democratic stratum in 
our society has proved all too thin and barren. During the 
years of the triumphal routing of totalitarianism the small 
number of true democrats has been swelled by a vast number of 
fellow travelers and timeservers, and all together they have 
been unable to take advantage of the unique opportunity that 
they have been given by the people and history. And panic and 
hysteria are now springing up among certain people as a result 
-- owing to the realization that Russia today does not need 
them. Especially since the new constitution does not envisage 
any "eternal" sentinels under democracy -- it is itself the 
guarantor of democracy. 
  In this connection I would like to remind you that the 
coming 
parliamentary battles that some politicians are craving so much 
cannot be of crucial importance for Russian citizens' lives. If 
the Federal Assembly adopts sensible, necessary laws, they will 
be grateful. If not, well, vast sums of the people's money have 
been wasted and people may be called to account.... In any case 
the parliament has its own functions strictly defined by the 
Constitution and those who are trying to overstep them will be 
running a very great risk. That is the third conclusion, with 
which of course by no means everyone agrees. 
  Finally, a word about something that must be discussed, 
picking one's words as carefully as possible. There are just 
two or three men along with the president today (perhaps a few 
more) who are real Russia-wide figures in terms of character, 
erudition, and their understanding of the real problems and ways 
of resolving them. That is lamentable since a commander's 
strength lies in his marshals, and Russia is a burden that one 
man alone cannot bear. 
  I think that the elections were a litmus test measuring not 
verbal effusions of personal devotion but various politicians' 
true significance and clout and their popularity with the 
people. To be blunt, the voters did not see anyone worthy of 
universal trust among those for whom they were asked to vote. 
And had Vasiliy Ivanovich Chapayev suddenly appeared in this 
situation, 99.99 percent of the voters would quite probably have 
voted for him.... 
  It is also bad that the president is running the risk of 
losing such a devoted ally as the mass media, in particular the 
newspapers, not only the big, but also the "small" publications, 
which are simply collapsing under the pressure of Decree No 
1233. Democracy without freedom of speech is an empty shell, 
demagogy. 
  It seems that there are now plenty of people in countries 
near and far from Russia wanting to exploit the uncertain 
situation in our vast country. 
  Today the weather is foul in our country, but I would like 
to 
believe that the storm won't last long. At the end of "Cabaret" 
the main protagonist leaves Germany as it plunges into the 
insanity of nazism -- for him it is a foreign country, he can 
afford the luxury of evading fascist passions. But we Russian 
citizens must not remain on the sidelines when democracy won at 
the price of such hardship and pain is in jeopardy. 

