Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Dili, E. Timor, Jan 03 (OANA-ANTARA) -- Former East 
Timor governor Mario Viegas Carrascalao said that a camp backing 
the East Timor security disturbance group leader Xanana Gusmao 
has exploited the spirit of Christmas and the new year to 
attract the attention of the international community. 
  "They intentionally circulated the letter, in which Gusmao 
had sought the Portuguese Government and UN Law Commission's 
help to obtain freedom and repatriation to Portugal, to the 
international community with the hope that he be freed on 
Christmas day," he told ANTARA here on Sunday. 
  Carrascalao said they had timed the release of the letter on 
the belief that Christians would be more sympathetic during 
Christmas and the new year. 
  "They hoped to corner Indonesia by playing on the world's 
sympathy during the religious season," he added. 
  Commenting on the authenticity of the letter, he said it was 
not that important to determine if Gusmao's letter was indeed 
genuine because it would not have an impact on the country. 
  "Whether Gusmao had written the letter or not, they would 
have engineered anything to lure the international sympathy," 
he added. 
  The letter is being investigated to ascertain its 
genuineness. 
  Presently the Indonesian ambassador to Romania, Carrascalao 
said those who backed Gusmao and his anti-integration group from 
Darwin, Sydney and several Portuguese cities had "kitchens" to 
cook up "any materials" to discredit Indonesia. 
  He noted that these supports such as the one led by leading 
activist Ramos Horta were well organised. 
  "It was possibbe and easy for them to forge Gusmao's 
handwriting and signature," he added. 
  News about Gusmao had faded since he was transferred to 
Jakarta's Cipinang correctional institution, said Carrascalao, 
adding that the distance forced his backers to think twice 
before raising the issue. 
  Carrascalao said if the probe concluded that the letter was 
leaked by Gusmao himself, it proved that Indonesia had treated 
the convicted leader well. 
  "It goes to show that the government has given Xanana Gusmao 
a lot of space to conduct his daily chores such as writing 
letters," he added. 
  Gusmao was tried and sentenced to life imprisonment in May 
last year by the East Timor court in Dili. 
  President Suharto granted him clemency and converted his 
life 
sentence to 20 years in jail. 

