BFN 

  [Text] Weihai, April 2 (XINHUA) -- Long Na, a villager in 
the Rongcheng city area in Shandong Province, is proud of her 
only daughter, for the teenager has done well both in school and 
in after-school training such as piano and calligraphy. 
  Long is one of over 5,400 rural women in the region who 
refuse to have a second child in this rich city on the eastern 
tip of China. 
  The city has been in the forefront of China's "family 
planning" campaign since the government spread the message 
throughout the country ten years ago. 
  The city's mayor, Lin Lexin, said that in 1993 the major 
indexes of population development, including the natural growth 
rate of 1.31 per thousand, were all lower than the national 
average. On the other hand, the average life expectancy of 74.6 
years was as long as that in developed countries. 
  So far, about 70 percent of the rural areas under the city's 
administration have seen a drop in population growth. 
  Lin said its successful birth control has paid off in many 
areas. 
  Last year, the city, with a population of less than 800,000, 
registered 2,005 yuan in annual per capita income, jumping to 
the leading place among the cities of similar size in north 
China. 
  Lin said that he imagined that the city would not have 
achieved that if it had had an extra 400,000 mouths to feed. 
That number is calculated on the supposition that the 
population had kept growing at the same pace as it was doing 
before enforcing family planning. 
  Long and her husband are living in a three-storey building. 
They earned 15,000 yuan last year. 
  "Men no longer look down upon us, because we women earn 
bread 
and butter to support the family as they do. And we also get 
self-confidence in our work," said Long, who is now employed as 
an accountant in a township enterprise. 
  In 1993, 98 percent of local women were working in various 
spheres. 
  Experts considered that the local residents have broken with 
the old concept which looked to offsprings for support in their 
old age. 
  A recent sample survey shows that 35 percent of women of 
child-bearing age intend to have only one child, and 80 percent 
of households welcome girl babies as well as boy babies. 
  A population of reasonable size also results in better 
education. Last year, 99 percent of primary-school-age children 
studied in classrooms. The rate of those passing higher 
education entrance exams is in the top ranks in the country. 
  It seems that in most cases, it is easier for the 
economically strong regions like Rongcheng city to fully 
implement birth-control policies. 
  According to a recent national conference on this issue, the 
coastal areas in east China like the provinces of Shandong and 
Zhejiang and the cities of Shanghai and Tianjin have seen a 
birth rate below 15 per thousand. 

