BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, June 15 (CTK) -- Miklos Duray, chairman 
of the Hungarian minority movement Egyutteles [Coexistence], 
today told CTK the Hungarian parties would manage to compromise 
with the other government coalition parties on Friday [17 June] 
on the use of bilingual names for towns in which the Hungarian 
population makes at least 5 percent. 
  "The maintenance of the government coalition majority 
position in parliament will depend on this compromise," Duray 
said. "We are for compromise whereby the official names of the 
communities are not changed but the Hungarian name is also used 
on road signs," he said. 
  Two weeks ago three deputies from Egyutteles did not support 
the draft bill on place names. A bill which would put a full 
stop to a year-long dispute on bilingual place names was thus 
not passed with only one vote lacking. 
  The bill, rejected by the Slovak Parliament on June 3, would 
have enabled the use of bilingual (Slovak and Hungarian) names 
for towns and villages in which the ethnic minority populations 
make up at least one fifth. 
  In spite of promises made to the Council of Europe by 
ex-Premier Vladimir Meciar, the president and parliament 
chairman, the situation has not changed since last October when 
residents of the village of Marcelova erected a road sign of 
their own with the Hungarian name of the village -- 
"Marczelhaza." This provoked a prompt reaction by the then 
Transport Minister Roman Hofbauer who ordered the removal of the 
sign. 
  The government of Premier Jozef Moravcik which relies on 
Hungarian deputies for a majority in parliament, has already 
fulfilled its promise -- Slovak Hungarians may now use the 
native language form of their first and second names. 
  However, parliament failed to pass the agreed version of the 
place names law because nationalist-orientated coalition 
deputies protested against the inclusion of villages and towns 
named after historical Slovak figures into the list of more than 
500 communities which would have to use bilingual signs. These 
deputies along with the three of 13 Hungarian deputies voted 
against the law. 
  Duray said that not only were former members of the Slovak 
National Party (SNS), who joined the government camp under the 
name of the National Democrats, responsible for the failure but 
also some deputies from the Democratic Left Party (SDL). 
  "Although they justify their stand by the election campaign 
their position has deeper roots," Duray said. "The SDL 
maintains that it would lose voters in northern Slovakia should 
it approve the law and agree to the use of Hungarian names also 
for 16 villages," (where 40,000 Hungarians live) which are named 
after famous Slovaks. 
  Duray said that the government should count on the failure 
of 
its further plans if it were not be able to solve this issue. 
"I hope the government is wise enough to find an acceptable 
compromise in order we continue to support it," Duray said, 
adding that the position of Egyutteles deputies at the next 
parliamentary session would depend on the future of the place 
name law. At this session parliament is to discuss projects 
which are of key importance for keeping the budget deficit 
within the limits acceptable to the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) and obtaining a highly-desirable loan. 
  "One of the deputies from the Hungarian Christian Democratic 
Movement (MKDH), Pal Farkas, admitted at a Coalition Council 
meeting today that Hungarian deputies would not necessarily vote 
together with the government coalition," Duray warned. He 
assured, however, that he personally would assess economic 
questions pragmatically and would not link them to the road sign 
law. 

