Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The recently concluded Asean Senior Officials' 
Meeting (SOM) agreed in principle to enhance the regional body's 
role in security cooperation in Asia and the Pacific. The SOM 
was to lay the important groundwork for the Asean Foreign 
Ministers' Meeting and the Asean Regional Forum (ARF) in July 
with Thailand acting as host. While touching on potential 
regional flashpoints in the South China Sea, Korean peninsula, 
Burma and Cambodia, discussion of details was avoided due to the 
perceived sensitivities of certain powers. 
  Now for the first time since the end of the Cold War, Asean 
countries are thinking of their security concerns as mature 
nations responsible for their own fate. However, the regional 
grouping still lacks a sense of greater vision with regard to 
security, and adheres to the notion that economic development is 
the panacea for all problems. 
  There is no doubt that economic growth makes certain kinds 
of 
conflict less likely. But it does not solve everything -- for 
example the risk of an ethnic explosion for instance. Politics 
and economics have to be tied together in a security association 
and neither Asean nor the ARF offers this. The three major 
Asia-Pacific actors are very quiet now, but this may not last. 
  Japan has almost all the attributes of a superpower, and it 
has the ability to develop full capability, including nuclear 
weapons and missiles, within a short time. 
  China wants to be on good terms with the generally thriving 
Asean members to maintain stability and provide opportunities 
for its modernization drive. The country's outward-looking 
economy benefits enormously from regional trade and investment. 
At the same time, Beijing has territorial and security ambitions 
that it is tempted to pursue, even if they irritate or upset its 
regional partners. The most significant is its declaration of 
sovereignty over a large expanse of the South China Sea. Asean 
is aware that China used force to evict the Vietnamese from some 
of the Paracel and Spratly Islands in 1975 and 1988. These 
island archipelagos extend across important shipping lanes. 
  However, the regional grouping should also note that the 
Chinese didn't show the same kind of aggression in pursuing 
their claim to the Senkaku Islands, northeast of Taiwan, 
controlled by militarily superior Japan. In Burma, China has 
become one of the closest foreign allies of the thuggish State 
Law and Order Restoration Council, supplying the military junta 
with arms destined to be used against domestic opponents. 
  The United States, which previously had a high-profile 
military presence in Southeast Asia, is yet to decide on its 
role in the region. 
  The much asked question now is: How will Asean react when 
these three powers wake up and stretch? 
  Clearly, if Southeast Asia has not created a credible and 
cohesive multilateral security system by then, the smaller 
countries will be prey to traditional balance of power politics 
among the key actors. The ARF, proposed to be formed in July, 
runs the risk of just being an empty framework if fears of 
offending regional powers and partners inhibits discussion of 
internal problems. 
  It is completely baffling how security threats can be 
identified and diffused if they are not even discussed in 
detail. For a start, the Spratly Islands issue and other 
connected disputes in the South China Sea -- from piracy to 
poaching of fisheries resources -- must be taken up by the ARF. 
Asean must send out a clear message that it does not condone 
what Beijing is doing in the South China Sea and China should 
make good its promise of joint development in the disputed 
territory to dispel Southeast Asian anxiety. 
  In Asean, collective security is still in its infancy. Arms 
control, confidence-building measures, satellite surveillance 
and the verification of chemical weapons possession have not 
even been thought of yet. What is needed first and foremost in 
the region is an overall political framework that is strong 
enough to contain disorder and survive changes in member 
countries. A security mechanism for quick and effective action 
will have to follow. 
  The ARF must prepare not for clashes two years from now, but 
for the politics of the 21st century. 

