Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Yesterday Governor Ma Zhongchen chaired a 
provincial government executive meeting to analyze the 
province's economic situation and discuss policies. All 
departments directly under the provincial authorities were asked 
to send cadres to grass-roots units to help resolve practical 
problems. The provincial planning and economic commission, the 
provincial finance department, the provincial taxation bureau, 
and the provincial agricultural and animal husbandry department 
reported to the meeting on industrial production, revenue, and 
wheat production. 
  Since the beginning of this year, the province has 
registered 
a speedy growth in industrial production, the market has been 
brisk, and revenue has been better than expected. But there are 
also some problems, such as unideal economic results of 
enterprises, an increase in nonoperational enterprises, some 
localities' failure to issue wages, and wheat production being 
inferior to last year. 
  Governor Ma Zhongchen pointed out: There is a need to make 
great efforts to deepen reform and overcome the above 
difficulties. 
  Governor Ma Zhongchen continued: The guiding principle for 
this year's economic work is to comprehensively carry out the 
decisions of the 14th CPC National Congress and the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee and the 
instructions of the Eighth Plenary Session of the Fifth 
Provincial Henan CPC Committee, to speed up the establishment of 
the socialist market economic structure, to seize the 
opportunity, to deepen reform, to widen the scope of opening up, 
to promote development, and to maintain stability. In 
accordance with this guiding principle, an important task facing 
all levels of government is to thoroughly understand the 
situation at the grass-roots level, to bring focal points into 
prominence, and to ensure the implementation of policies. In 
the field of reform, this year all kinds of reforms will develop 
simultaneously and break through focal points, with a powerful 
reform impetus and heavy reform tasks. Now plans and proposals 
have been worked out for reforms of the enterprise system, the 
taxation and revenue system, the financial system, the 
investment system, and the foreign trade system. The most 
important thing is to seriously implement them. The provincial 
economic structural reform commission, the provincial planning 
and economic commission, and other relevant departments should 
carry out reform experiments on the establishment of a modern 
enterprise system in 100 enterprises throughout the province, 
form several guidance teams to be sent to enterprises to ensure 
the establishment of a modern enterprise system. The provincial 
finance department and the provincial taxation bureau should 
send their office personnel to different cities and prefectures 
to help with the implementation of the new taxation and 
financial system, to form a convergence between the new and old 
taxation systems, and to ensure the fulfillment of taxation and 
financial tasks. Provincial people's banks and professional 
banks should send personnel to grass-roots units for 
investigation and should raise funds through various channels to 
alleviate fund shortages. Other relevant departments should 
resolve new problems in reform in light of their specific 
conditions and promote reform in a down-to-earth manner. 
  In industrial production, we should seriously implement the 
instructions of the provincial economic work meeting, 
meticulously organize all kinds of work, and make coordinated 
efforts to resolve contradictions in work. It is necessary to 
uphold the principle of production being guided by market 
demands, to frequently adjust the product mix, to produce 
marketable products, and to improve the economic results of 
industrial products. It is necessary to guide enterprises in 
such a manner that they pay attention to their internal 
operation and strengthen management over production and 
operation. Comprehensive coordination of industrial economic 
operation should be strengthened so as to gradually form a 
coordination system and method which correspond with socialist 
market economic demands. In addition, efforts should be made to 
make up deficits and increase surpluses and to send personnel to 
major loss-incurring enterprises to help resolve their problems. 
In agriculture, localities should strengthen their management 
over wheat fields. All levels of governments should assign 
principal leaders to take charge of wheat fields. They should 
regard wheat field management as the central task in rural work 
and concentrate human and material resources on this task. It 
is necessary to resolve the peasants' difficulties in spring 
farming, to provide material service for combat against drought 
and plant diseases, as well as for wheat field management and 
drinking water supply. The departments of electric power, 
cooking oil, seeds, chemical fertilizers, and finance should 
also consider the peasants' interests and take the initiative in 
resolving the peasants' practical problems. 
  In conclusion, Governor Ma Zhongchen asked leading comrades 
at all levels to change their work style, to go to grass-roots 
units and enterprises, to stay among the masses, to go wherever 
there are difficulties to find out about their demands, to help 
resolve their problems, and to think out methods to resolve the 
difficulties in life and arrears of wages for staff members and 
workers in enterprises which have stopped production. 
  All vice governors attended and addressed the meeting. 

