Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by the press service of KBR [Kabardino-Balkaria </F>
Republic] MVD: "MVD: Year's Results"] 
  [Text] The results of the work performed by the internal 
affairs agencies in 1993 attest to the fact that the crime 
situation in republic as a whole is being monitored. 
  During the past year 7681 crimes were recorded in the 
republic. This is 0.6 percent less than during the preceding 
year. 
  There was a drop in the number of crimes committed on the 
streets and in other public places (decrease by 8 percent); and 
in thefts of state property (decrease by 5 percent) and personal 
property (decrease by 10 percent). A larger number of economic 
crimes (increase by 68.7 percent) were revealed, including an 
increase in heinous crimes by a factor of 3.6. 
  Definite positive shifts were achieved in a very important 
work indicator -- the revealing of crimes. As compared with 
1992, that indicator increased by 6 percent, including an 
increase by 6.4 percent in the rate of revealing of crimes of a 
general nature. 
  For purposes of improving the interaction with the internal 
affairs agencies of the Chechen, Ingush, and North Ossetinian 
republics, a coordination conference was held with 
representatives of the internal affairs agencies of those 
republics, where specific joint measures were worked out for 
combatting interregional criminal groups, and for exposing and 
cutting off the channels for the distribution of firearms in the 
North Caucasus. During 1993, a total of 289 cases involving the 
illegal carrying, storage, purchase, manufacture, and sale of 
weapons, ammunition, or explosives were initiated. This is 73.1 
percent more than in 1992, and the rate of exposing thefts of 
means of transportation increased by 5.3 percent. 
  Efforts were undertaken to intensify the fight against 
organized crime. In the course of implementing the tasks posed 
in the Decree of the KBR President, entitled "Measures to 
Intensify the Fight Against Organized Forms of Crime and 
Corruption," and the corresponding orders of the RF [Russian 
Federation] MVD, agencies in the republic revealed and brought 
to criminal responsibility 34 organized criminal groups, from 
which 49 firearms were confiscated, including 36 with rifled 
barrels. A total of 20 thefts on an especially large scale were 
established, and thefts with a total of approximately 1.5 
billion rubles were prevented. 
  Eighteen persons were brought to criminal responsibility as 
a 
result of their corrupt ties, and two representatives of the 
state authority were removed from their jobs for the same reason. 
  There was an increase in the intensity of combatting the 
illegal turnover of narcotics. Eighty-five areas of wild hemp 
were destroyed; 195 persons were brought to criminal 
responsibility; and 213.5 kilograms of narcotic substances were 
confiscated (as compared with 90 kilograms in 1992). 
  The investigators' work had a higher rate of success. 
  There was a 3.5 percent decrease in the crime level in the 
subdivisions of the corrective affairs and social rehabilitation 
service, and jobs were found for the entire special contingent. 
  The situation improved somewhat on the republic's roads. 
There was a reduction (by 13.7 percent) in the committing of 
road-transportation incidents, and a reduction in the number of 
persons killed or injured. 
  At the same time, in a number of areas the republic's 
internal affairs agencies have not only shortcomings, but also 
unresolved problems. There has been an increase by 23 percent in 
the number of heinous crimes of a general criminal nature. They 
became especially widespread in Sovetskiy, Prokhlanenskiy, 
Mayskiy, Chegemskiy, and Baksanskiy rayons, as well as in 
Promyshlennyy Rayon in the city of Nalchik. The exposure rate 
for this type of crimes remains low. 
  For purposes of reacting appropriately to the negative 
processes that have been occurring in the republic's economy, 
there was a quantitative and qualitative reinforcement of the 
subdivisions involved in fighting economic crimes, and an 
improvement in their interaction with other law-enforcement and 
monitoring agencies. In 1993, a total of 543 crimes of an 
economic nature were revealed. This is 64.5 percent more than 
the similar indicator in 1992; 251 heinous crimes were revealed 
-- this is an increase by a factor of 3.6 as compared with the 
previous year. Attempts to commit thefts with the use of 
falsified letters of advice with a total of 2.34 billion rubles 
were thwarted. Six criminal groups of counterfeiters, consisting 
of a total of 26 persons, were detained. Counterfeit money with 
a total value of 16.2 million rubles was confiscated from them. 
Approximately 13 tons of stolen alcohol and 1400 bottles of 
counterfeit vodka were revealed. A considerable number of crimes 
(62 percent of the total of all crimes revealed) continue to be 
committed at economic institutions with the state form of 
ownership. A number of problems linked with this require 
resolution at the governmental level. In particular, it is 
necessary to raise the question of creating under the government 
or the Ministry of Finance an independent auditing apparatus 
that would guarantee the execution of the instructions issued by 
the law-enforcement agencies. This is linked with the 
elimination of the departmental apparatuses, which creates 
serious complications when carrying out documentary audits of 
the economic and financial activity of enterprises where crimes 
are being committed, and without the existence of an official 
document from which, as a rule, criminal cases are not 
initiated. It is also necessary to enact normative documents 
that regulate the procedure for guaranteeing state monitoring of 
the proper use of the credit appropriations from the budget that 
are allocated to enterprises and organizations from the Russian 
budget, and to develop a statute governing the responsibility 
borne by officials for their illegal use. As a result of the 
large increase in the use of counterfeit banknotes and other 
securities and the removal since 1989 of reproduction equipment 
from projects in the resolution system, it would be desirable to 
develop and enact a document governing the procedure for the 
registration and functioning of print shops, companies involved 
in the manufacture of presses and stamps, and private 
individuals and legal entities having copying and reproduction 
equipment, and to take steps of a technical nature to increase 
the degree of protection of monetary denominations, especially 
with a value of from 5000 to 50,000 rubles. 
  There has been a re-examination of the organizational 
principles and tactics for conducting the patrol-post service 
and a search nature has been given to their operation. 
  Militia precinct inspectors revealed 26,326 administrative 
offenses. At the same time they eased up on the positions in 
such an important matter as the fight against drunkenness and 
alcoholism. 
  Improvement in the effectiveness of the operation of the GAI 
[State Motor Vehicles Inspectorate] was aided by the 
introduction of new informational-search systems. At the present 
time they make it possible to resolve completely the task of 
registering means of motor transportation. But it is necessary 
to raise the level of professional training among the GAI 
employees. 
  Despite the preventive steps being taken, in 1993 there was 
an increase in the number of registered fires (increase by 24.8 
percent), the damages from which came to more than 167 million 
rubles. The main cause is the fact that the State Fire 
Inspectorate employees are insufficiently demanding and are lax 
in questions of reinforcing the fire-prevention methods at 
structures that are various forms of property, and also that 
there is weak monitoring of their work by the administrators of 
the fire and emergency rescue service. 
  There was a sharp decrease in the effectiveness of the work 
performed by the Administration of Nondepartmental Protection. 
And this is despite the fact that in 1993 the administration 
personnel rolls were augmented by 178 militiamen. 
  It must be admitted that the overwhelming majority of the 
personnel have been conscientiously executing their official 
duties, frequently displaying, in their fight against crime, 
high moral and professional qualities. In 1993 incentive awards 
were given to almost two-thirds of the personnel; three 
employees were awarded state decorations; Senior Lieutenant of 
Militia A. B. Bitsuyev was posthumously nominated for the Order 
of Personal Bravery. Nevertheless, the number of violations of 
legality that have been committed by employees remains high, as 
is attested to by instances of illegal detention, red tape 
methods, and other violations that were revealed. 
  In 1993 the number of registered illegal acts that were 
committed by citizens against militia employees increased by a 
factor of 6. For 566 of these incidents, the materials were sent 
to the court so that administrative measures could be applied to 
the violators; 16 criminal cases were initiated, 13 of which 
were linked with an attempt on the life of militia workers. 
During the past year three militia employees died as a result of 
these circumstances. 
  An extremely acute problem is the problem of providing the 
personnel with housing and with apartment telephones. A total of 
933 MVD workers are in need of housing; 1520 employees do not 
have home telephones. A way out of the situation can be seen in 
the creation and implementation of a comprehensive long-range 
program that has been approved by the republic government and 
the RF MVD, for the social development of the republic's 
internal affairs agencies in the next two or three years. 
  The results of the operational service activities were 
analyzed in all the city rayon agencies, services, and 
subdivisions of the MVD, and specific measures to improve their 
operation have been planned. There are grounds for assuming that 
the execution of what has been planned will make it possible to 
achieve a considerable improvement in the public and political 
situation in the republic and to intensify the fight against 
crime. One would like to hope that these goals will be 
maintained by the political parties, public movements and 
associations, and the entire population of the republic. 

