Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Dmitriy Kuznets report under the "Factions" rubric: "Duma </F>
Debates: Winner To Be Named by Zhirinovskiy? `Big Four' Unable 
To Reach Agreement"] 
  [Text] Strange as it may seem, the parliamentary debates 
scheduled to begin on 11 January may turn out to be very 
predictable. A parliamentary mechanism hitherto unheard of in 
Russia -- decisionmaking by consultations among key faction 
leaders -- is taking shape at the State Duma. The very first 
three weeks after the elections have enriched Russia's political 
vocabulary with the term "The Big Four." The four largest 
factions -- the LDPR [Liberal Democratic Party of Russia], RFCP 
[Russian Federation Communist Party], the Agrarian Party, and 
"Russia's Choice" -- as expected, will continue to mold the 
parliament's policy. 
  "Small" factions, to all appearances, will be unable to 
pursue their own line and will give their backing to one of the 
"Group of Four" members. At the same time, the votes of these 
backers will be split approximately equally between the two 
irreconcilable foes -- the bloc of the communists and agrarians 
on one hand and "Russia's Choice" on the other. 
  Neither the Democratic Party of Russia [DPR], nor "Women of 
Russia," nor "Yabloko" have so far entered the consultations, 
PRUA [Party of Russian Unity and Accord] leader Sergey Shakhray 
being the only one displeased with the fact that "the four large 
factions have usurped the rights of the other deputies." 
  The round of talks on the candidacy of the speaker to which 
representatives of "small factions" were invited has shown, 
however, that an increase in participants does not affect the 
outcome of the consultations. Mr. Shakhray's "dissenting 
opinion" appears to have been prompted by the decision of the 
"Group of Four" that chairmanship be given only to a deputy from 
a "large faction." The PRUA leader, however, lays claims to the 
office himself. 
  The first consultations devoted to the election of the State 
Duma speaker have shown that the standoff between the communists 
and "Russia's Choice" rules out any agreement within the "Group 
of Four" and thus gives Zhirinovskiy's party unlimited room for 
maneuver. This is why the LDPR's stance on key matters the 
parliament plans to considers is becoming crucial. 
  To all appearances, the LDPR has decided to give its backing 
at the vote to elect a speaker to Ivan Rybkin, a candidate from 
the Agrarian Party. It seems that in other "organizational" 
matters, such as approving the rules of procedure and forming 
committees and commissions, the "Zhirinovites" are also intent 
on voting with the opposition. So, the first objective of the 
RFCP and the Agrarian Party -- "to seize the State Duma's 
organizational structure" -- is likely to be achieved. 
  It is also evident that Zhirinovskiy will disappoint the 
RFCP, which is planning to "abrogate the Constitution," which 
the LDPR has embraced wholeheartedly. The communists may 
expect, however, that their other endeavors will succeed. For 
instance, to all appearances, the LDPR will support the adoption 
of the law on land as it was proposed by the Agrarian Party, 
thus disavowing the famous presidential edict and restricting 
private owners' rights. 
  "Russia's Choice" can hardly count on the successful 
adoption 
of the budget, either. In this particular case the PRES and, 
possibly, some part of "Yabloko" may join Yegor Gaydar's 
hard-line opponents from among the communists and nationalists. 
  Still, all "ill-conceived" State Duma decisions could be 
blocked by the parliament's upper chamber. But there, too, the 
position of "Russia's Choice" is far from perfect -- judging 
from last year's experience, "regional elites," which won a 
majority at the Federation Council, are not very favorably 
disposed toward the federal authorities. The pro-presidential 
forces at the Federation Council, to all appearances, will be 
too preoccupied with reigning in separatism to take on the State 
Duma's majority. All the more so because territorial "elites" 
are inclined to join forces: Former Sverdlovsk Oblast Governor 
Eduard Rossel is already setting up the "Deputies from the 
Urals" organization. 

