Language: <F P=105> Armenian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Armine Ohanyan: ``Drug Addiction Is a Growing </F>
Evil''] 
  [Text] I heard about drug addiction for the first time 
during my student years, when I unexpectedly found out that the 
father of a respected, cultured family had himself acquired 
narcotic substances for his adult son with a family of his own 
(in order to protect him from bad batches and other dangers). As 
amazing as the story is, it is also emotion-charged. The subtext 
noted the almost magical, devastating power of the so-called 
narcotic substance. 
  Questions linked to this monstrous phenomenon, however, are 
not in the center of the public's attention at the present time. 
These issues are constantly being passed over in a kind of 
sickening fear or puzzling silence. In elite circles even 
talking about this terrible ailment is looked upon as ignorance 
of refined conduct and decency, as a manifestation of bad 
manners. It is essential to talk about it, however. It is 
essential, since in the opinion of people who deal with this 
issue, who are intimately familiar with the problem, it is 
growing to an international level, is directly threatening the 
future of our nation, and places in question the very 
preservation of our genetic resources. The Directorate for 
Combating Drug Trafficking and Drug Addiction of the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs has avoided releasing statistics on this 
problem, citing as a reason the fact that this directorate was 
just recently formed (``It has not yet been in existence even a 
year. We are just beginning to develop record keeping 
mechanisms''), as well as the fact that the figures of different 
agencies are not in agreement with one another (public 
prosecutor's office, Ministry of Health, etc), that figures fail 
to show the true picture, etc. Agencies have refused to draw 
parallels or make comparisons with previous years (on the basis 
that the true picture had been falsified in the past). They have 
noted, however, that the number of drug addicts in Armenia in 
relation to the size of the territory and population is quite 
substantial, very close to being characterized as disastrous. 
David Mantashyan, a section chief in the directorate, has 
stressed the decline in employment and moral decline as reasons 
for this phenomenon. Especially the second factor: an 
abandonment of moral standards, decline in the desire to study, 
and a worshipping of money. The moral decline has reached a high 
point today: there is no social blame, and therefore virtually 
everything is permissible and tolerable. As a consequence there 
has been a severe increase in drug addiction among young 
females. The age group 20-22 is most susceptible to drugs, 
although the first signs begin to appear between the ages of 15 
and 16, when the emerging young adult is more vulnerable, is 
highly curious, and is in a hurry to ``live,'' to enjoy the 
pleasures of life. 
  The professionals have explained that the rapid growth of 
drug addiction in Armenia is due to a number of factors, first 
and foremost among which is Armenia's geographic location. The 
fact that Armenia lies at the crossroads of transit routes on 
the shortest well-traveled route linking Asia with Russia and 
Europe is an adverse factor in this regard, playing a most 
favorable role in the spread of drug addiction. The easiest and 
most profitable route for moving drugs to Russia and Europe from 
the Golden Crescent countries (Iran, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 
-- the principal suppliers of drugs) runs through Armenia. The 
route to Russia from Central Asia crosses four national borders, 
while the route through Armenia crosses only two. Another route 
leading to Europe--through the Balkans--is closely under 
surveillance by Interpol and other organizations. And, most 
important, in the Balkans drug trafficking brings severe 
penalties, while in Armenia the maximum penalty is 10 years in 
prison (while in Iran, for example, one can expect the death 
penalty for possession of 5 grams of hashish). The laws in 119 
countries specify the most severe punishments for drug 
trafficking, up to and including the death penalty. 
  As a consequence of failure to enforce the law and due to 
Armenia's convenient geographic location, as well as due to a 
lax job performed by the customs service and due to the war 
situation, Armenia has become a transit country for the 
transport of drugs, a country which has readily taken upon 
itself the ``thankless'' role of transporter of narcotic 
substances. At this end of the route they find out about the 
transported drugs when they reach their destination and are 
discovered at that point. The Directorate for Combating Drug 
Trafficking and Drug Addiction proposes to assign personnel to 
the customs service, to the international airport and 
border-adjacent areas for the purpose of assisting customs 
officials. The directorate should work in cooperation not only 
with the counterpart CIS agencies, but also with its 
opposite-number agencies in foreign countries, including the DEA 
in the United States. Many years of experience have been amassed 
in combating drugs at the world level. There exist 
well-developed mechanisms and agencies, and specialized 
organizations with drug interdiction personnel and drug sniffing 
dogs are maintained, but their effectiveness has not yet reached 
a satisfactory level. We, on the other hand, show a less than 
urgent attitude toward this important international problem. 
  Opium and hashish make their way to Armenia from Central 
Asia 
and Azerbaijan. Last week, on 13 August, a criminal gang was 
arrested in Gyumri, a gang which had for quite some time been 
transporting large quantities of narcotic substances to Armenia. 
On this occasion 30 million rubles worth of opium had been 
brought in from Turkmenistan (one of those transporting the 
drugs was an Armenian female). Drug trafficking provides 
``businessmen'' with extreme profits (as a rule these 
``businessmen'' do not use drugs themselves). A single kilogram 
of opium purchased abroad for 3000 rubles is sold for 15-16 
thousand rubles, generating a 400-500 percent profit. 
  By decision of the Supreme Council this past May, Armenia 
acceded to an international convention to combat drug addiction. 
The process of bringing the campaign in Armenia into conformity 
with the requirements of the convention has now commenced. First 
of all, international experience must be taken into 
consideration. A draft national plan to combat drug trafficking 
is presently being formulated: it provides for the formation of 
certain structures, legislative enactments to assist the efforts 
of government agencies, and the securing of participation by 
public organizations and the press. Drug rehabilitation clinic 
activities must also be restructured with this aim in mind, as 
in the current situation the clinic is hard put to conduct 
effective treatment activities. It is also essential to 
establish a rehabilitation center. Effectiveness of treatment 
has been very poor to date, due to the lack of such a center, 
since treatment ends up by necessity being incomplete. 
  Requirements of the international convention include 
revision 
of legislation and separation of drug addiction from drug 
trafficking in a country's laws. Drug addiction should be viewed 
as a sickness and should be treated, while drug trafficking 
should be punished more severely. Application of penalties up to 
and including the death penalty is anticipated, as well as 
standardization of penalties (for example, for illegal 
possession of 100 grams of an illegal narcotic substance, 
punishment runs anywhere from a monetary fine to three years in 
prison). Sergey Aslanyan, head of the Directorate for Combating 
Drug Trafficking and Drug Addiction, is convinced that combating 
drug trafficking must begin with making the law stricter and 
with ``cleaning up'' internal affairs agencies. It is essential 
to put an end to the widespread abuses and illegal actions 
connected with drug trafficking which for years were carried out 
by law enforcement agencies. The campaign will never be 
successful, however, without the participation of the public as 
a whole. The fact is that members of the public, with a false 
sense of love of their fellow man and in the fear of being 
labeled a ``squealer,'' are in fact carrying out betrayal of the 
entire nation and its future. Even today 20 percent of all cases 
involving drugs come to the attention of authorities through 
telephone calls, including anonymous tips. The fight against 
drugs is not that of one individual or of a few individuals, but 
is a common fight by all of us. The enemy will not readily yield 
or surrender. And we must make haste, before Armenia is engulfed 
by the evil monster of international drug trafficking. 

