BFN 

  [Text] Baku, June 11 (TURAN) -- Today Azerbaijan President 
Geydar Aliyev has met Russia Defense Minister Pavel Grachev, who 
is in Baku at Aliyev's invitation. Geydar Aliyev noted that 
"such meeting is necessary because Azerbaijan and Russia are 
neighbours and friendly countries". He noted that in order to 
make the cooperation more successful both countries need further 
contacts "including military contacts for strengthening Russia's 
and Azerbaijan's security". 
  The President noted that the question about the biggest 
military object in Transcaucasia -- Gabala radio-location 
station situated in Azerbaijan remains unsolved. "The station 
belongs to Azerbaijan and we should discuss the terms of its 
usage by Russia", said Aliyev. He noted that there are some 
other issues of military character to be solved. 
  Pavel Grachev said that according to the agreement the 
commandant of Russia's anti-aircraft defense forces 
Colonel-General Prudnikov and the commandant of Azerbaijan 
anti-aircraft defense forces Colonel Mamedov will leave for 
Gabala. On their return they will brief the specialists of both 
sides in order to carry out common decision on the usage of the 
object. 
  "Despite some difficulties in our relations the situation is 
going to be change. We want that our military relations with 
Azerbaijan be closer", said Grachev. 
  Then the meeting was held behind the closed door. As TURAN 
was told by the informed people accompanying Aliyev, Pavel 
Grachev proposed Azerbaijan to sign Moscow Protocol from May 17 
about the deployment Russia's peacemaking troops into the 
Armenian-Azeri conflict zone as soon as possible. According to 
Grachev sending of the troops to the zone of military actions 
will take place in 2 or 3 days after signing the Protocol. 
  Concerning the Gabala radio-location station Grachev said 
that Russia would like to use this object free of charge. At 
the same time he proposed Azerbaijan to enter the unique 
anti-aircraft defense system with Russia. He motivated this 
proposal by the fact that both countries are the members of the 
Agreement for joint security of CIS countries. 

