BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow May 20 TASS -- NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA on a new 
spiral of confrontation between Simferopol and Kiev: 
  "The first session of the newly-elected Crimean parliament, 
resumed on May 19, began in a stormy manner. Before an agenda 
was formulated, the floor was given to Valeriy Kuznetsov, 
Crimean acting minister of the interior, at the request of 
President Yuriy Meshkov. 
  "Kuznetsov told the deputies that a plane with 
Colonel-General Valentin Nedrigailo [Valentyn Nedryhaylo], 
Ukraine's first deputy minister of the interior, and 
special-purpose troops on board had landed in Simferopol on the 
night from May 18 to 19. 
  "An unambiguous military coup is looming with the dismissal 
of Crimean Acting Interior Minister Kuznetsov from his post, 
speakers at the session maintained." 
  NOVAYA YEZHEDNEVNAYA GAZETA (NEW DAILY NEWSPAPER) on the 
Crimean parliament session: 
  "The rather smooth session of the Crimean parliament was 
unexpectedly interrupted when Major-General Valeriy Kuznetsov, 
Crimean acting interior minister, took the floor, telling the 
deputies that a plane with General Nedrigailo and 15 
special-purpose troops had secretly arrived in Simferopol on the 
night of May 18 to 19. The unwelcome visitors immediately tried 
to seize the Crimean Interior Ministry building. But they 
attempt was repulsed." 
  The newspaper SEGOGNYA (TODAY) points out that, despite 
denials by the press centre of the Ukrainian Defence Ministry 
and the Navy, a ranking officer at the headquarters of the Black 
Sea Fleet confirmed information that Ukrainian National Guard 
and special- purpose units, at an aggregate strength at about 
1,000, had landed near Sevastopol in two groups, at Belbek and 
Chersonesus Cape airfields, after which they dispersed among 
Ukrainian naval units. 
  "The officer said a Ukrainian field military hospital had 
been set up in Chernobayevka village in Kherson region. 
Hospital personnel do not conceal from anyone that they prepare 
to receive the wounded with bullet and shrapnel wounds." 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA (RED STAR) on possibility of seizure of 
Black 
Sea Fleet facilities by Ukrainian troops: 
  "According to data available with the editorial office, 
Ukrainian armed forces consider the possibility of yet another 
action to seize Black Sea Fleet facilities, this time those of 
the Izmail-based brigade of river ships. 
  "The First Ukrainian Air Mobile Brigade, which is notorious 
for its involvement in the seizure of a Black Sea Fleet naval 
unit based in Odessa, is taking a number of preparatory measures 
in this respect. 
  "To all appearances, the Ukrainian Defence Ministry has not 
abandoned hopes to resolve Black Sea Fleet problems by force, in 
defiance of the agreements, reached by the presidents of Russia 
and Ukraine in Moscow on April 15. The command of the brigade 
of river ships and local authorities have been warned about a 
provocation which is being prepared (and which, according to the 
newspaper SEGODNYA, is slated for May 25 -- note by ITAR-TASS)." 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA reports that an Azerbaijani Defence 
Ministry delegation, led by Minister Mamadrafi Mammadov, 
returned to Moscow on May 19 to carry on the discussion at the 
Russian Defence Ministry about a ceasefire accord in 
Nagorno-Karabakh and disengagement of the warring sides. 
  Mammadov is due to meet Pavel Grachev on Friday. The 
Azerbaijani delegation, after consultations in Baku, suggests 
that the agreement (which has already been signed by the defence 
ministers of Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh) be visaed in a 
package with an overall settlement plan which envisages a 
time-frame for the withdrawal of Karabakh troops from occupied 
territories". 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA carries an article by Zbigniew 
Brzezinski, former assistant to the U.S. President on national 
security affairs, about an erroneous U.S. strategy with regard 
to Russia. 
  For a number of years, U.S. policy with regard to Russia 
fluctuated between indulging in wishful thinking and cold 
realism. A dose of tough geopolitics, mixed with friendly 
sentiments towards the Russian people and also with sympathy for 
the aspirations of non-Russians, stands much more chances to 
fashion a worthy continuation for an earlier and historically 
successful strategy of deterrence, Mr. Brzezinski writes. 
  ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI runs an interview with Yevgeniy Kozhokin, 
director of the Russian Institute for Strategic Studies, who 
singles out the following main areas of the institute's 
research: Russia's national security, the ex-Soviet states, 
European security, Russia's economic priorities, military policy 
and defence industry conversion to civilian production, and 
ecology. 
  KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA carries the first instalment of an 
extensive interview with former Russian Vice-President Aleksandr 
Rutskoy who makes an evaluation of the October 1993 events. 
  In the second instalment of the interview, which is to be 
published in the newspaper's next issue, he describes in detail 
the "Lefortovo period". 
  TRUD runs an interview with Nikolay Gonchar, head of the 
Federation Council's committee on budget and finance, and former 
chairman of the Moscow city Council. 
  "We have no such danger as fascism (this notion has been 
taken liberties with). The danger is in something else: The 
people begin to wait for a dictatorship and want a 'strong arm'. 
The wounded sense of pride and the humiliation of the country 
are the main reasons. Not even the decline in the people's 
living standards", Gonchar said. 

