BFN 

<F P=106> ["Qiandao Lake Grim Murders Unfolded"] </F>
  [Text] The Zhejiang provincial prosecutor on April 19 
approved the arrest of three suspects involved in the March 31 
robbery and murder of 24 tourists, six crew members and two tour 
guides on March 31 on the province's Qiandao Lake. 
  Further investigations are under way, the provincial public 
security bureau said on April 22. 
  The criminals Wu Lihong, Yu Aijun and Hu Zhihan, all local 
residents, were friends and they shared the aim of making money 
without honest labor. 
  Wu Lihong first proposed robbing tourists on Qiandao Lake. 
When he discussed it with Hu and Yu, they immediately agreed to 
join him. They then planned the time, place and means to carry 
out the robbery, according to the three men's confessions. 
  In the early evening of March 31, the three took their motor 
boat out to the waters at Huangmiling, where they knew there 
would be few boats and ships at night. 
  At that time, two tourist boats, Qiandaohu No. 6 and 
Huangshan No. 3 passed by. The three did not dare to move for 
it was still dusk and there were a few other boats passing by. 
  When the tourist boat named Hairui came into the area, it 
was 
dark and raining, and there were no other boats in the vicinity. 
The three intercepted it. 
  As soon as they boarded the Hairui, they threatened the crew 
with hunting guns and an ax, forcing them to go down to the 
lower cabin of the boat. They then asked all the passengers to 
hand over their cameras, jewelry, watches and money, and forced 
them to move into the cabin, saying that they would not harm 
them. 
  After the robbery, the three attempted unsuccessfully to 
sink 
the boat by opening the water valve. They then set fire to the 
boat killing the tourists and the crew, and then fled. 
  Two hours later when the Hairui did not show up as 
scheduled, 
the local department concerned immediately sent out speed boats 
to look for it. Because there was a heavy fog, they were unable 
to find the boat until 0800 the next day. 
  They immediately reported to the local government, which 
organized people and boats to explore the area, since no 
survivors were found on the deck of the burning boat. 
  Firemen extinguished the flames and towed the boat to shore, 
where they found that all the tourists, guides and crew had died 
in the lower cabin. 
  After the incident, the Central Committee of the Chinese 
Communist Party and the State Council ordered the Zhejiang 
provincial authorities to deal promptly with the case and 
uncover the facts behind the incident. 
  The provincial government and Hangzhou city government 
formed 
a group to handle the matter. They took measures to help the 
relatives of the Taiwanese victims identify the remains and 
personal articles and arrange for mourning according to 
Taiwanese customs. 
  Proper arrangements were also made with regard to the crew 
and tourist guides who died in the incident. 
  Meanwhile, the Public Security Bureau of Zhejiang Province 
assigned more than 300 policemen to investigate the case. 
  After a 17-day investigation, they apprehended the three 
suspects. In their search of the three men's houses, the police 
recovered U.S.$5,250 and 154,620 new Taiwan dollars, seven 
cameras, eight rings, one jade bracelet and two watches. 
  They also tracked down the instruments used to commit the 
crime, such as the motor boat, hunting guns and an empty fuel 
can. 
  Sources said that the property and money will be returned to 
the relatives of the deceased. 

