BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug seizures and arrests related to drug trafficking 
monitored through 12 May. 
<H5>  Argentina </H5>
  Salta Province Federal Police personnel seized 15 kg of very 
pure cocaine and arrested two drug traffickers in the township 
of Pocitos. The drugs were hidden in powdered milk cans. The 
National Border Police seized 20 kg of cocaine and arrested two 
Bolivian women in the township of Tartagal. The drugs were 
concealed in the gas tank of their car. (Buenos Aires NOTICIAS 
ARGENTINAS in Spanish 1938 GMT 10 May 94) 
  Federal Police personnel on 9 May seized 2 kg of cocaine and 
arrested Eduardo Fernandez during a raid of his apartment in the 
Retiro neighborhood, in Buenos Aires. An unidentified person 
who was arrested in Bariloche reported that Fernandez was in 
possession of the drugs. (Buenos Aires CLARIN in Spanish 11 May 
94 p 48) 
  Federal Police personnel arrested two drug traffickers and 
seized more than 2 kg of very pure cocaine, chemicals, and two 
precision scales during a raid of a restaurant in Ciudadela 
District, in greater Buenos Aires' western area. (Buenos Aires 
LA PRENSA in Spanish 12 May 94 p 14) 
<H5>  Bolivia </H5>
  Gerardo Catacora, regional narcotics commander in Puerto 
Suarez, reported that antidrug forces seized 2.5 kg of cocaine 
in a factory that had been abandoned by drug traffickers as a 
result of police control in Puerto Quijarro. The forces seized 
an undetermined number of 10-liter jerry cans containing acetone 
and ether in Puerto Suarez while they were being unloaded from a 
train coming from Santa Cruz. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 
29 Apr 94 p 13) 
  The Special Antinarcotics Force, FELCN, on 29 April seized 
27 
kg of cocaine sulphate base and arrested two people during an 
operation conducted 12 km from the city of Oruro. The drugs 
were about to be taken to Chile. (La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 
30 Apr 94 p 7) 
  In Chapare and Carrasco Tropical, the FELCN dismantled "a 
network for the production, processing of, and distribution of 
cocaine" which had been under the protection of "union labor 
actions" in support of local coca growers. The forces seized a 
considerable amount of cocaine, and arrested five people, 
including a woman who was closely linked to coca growers leader 
Evo Morales. (Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS in Spanish 4 May 94 p A6) 
  Santa Cruz antinarcotics agents on 2 May arrested Carlos 
Mendez Vaca, who was carrying 64 cocaine capsules in his stomach 
as he was about to leave for Buenos Aires. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO 
in Spanish 5 May 94 p 13) 
  On 29 April the police arrested Teofilo Tecana, Yola Zurco 
Pilco, Justina Ulpano Tupa, and Sonia Marino Mamani and seized 
3.9 kg of cocaine sulphate during a traffic control in Yapacani. 
The forces also reported that 6.3 kg of cocaine were seized in 
a train traveling from Santa Cruz to Quijarro. (Santa Cruz EL 
MUNDO in Spanish 5 May 94 p 13) 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
  The Federal Supreme Court on 4 May authorized the 
extradition 
of Japanese criminal Hitoshi Tanabe, who is a member of the 
Yakuza criminal organization and has been charged with narcotics 
trafficking. The Japanese Government has 60 days to arrange his 
release from the Army Police garrison where he is under 
protective custody. (Rio de Janeiro O GLOBO in Spanish 5 May 94 
p 8) 
<H5>  Chile </H5>
  The police have arrested four drug traffickers who were 
trying to ship 2 kg of cocaine to Europe hidden in furniture. 
Two of them were arrested in the Santiago airport when they 
were about to leave for Spain. The police also arrested the man 
who made the furniture and the one who provided the drugs. 
(Santiago Television Nacional de Chile Imagen Internacional in 
Spanish 1800 GMT 9 May 94) 
  State Defense Council Prosecutor Carlos Bonilla on 10 May 
reported that the Antofagasta Criminal Court will indict Juan 
Arce Noriega, son of a high-ranking Peruvian antidrug police 
officer, on charges of drug trafficking. He was arrested with 
240 grams of cocaine during a traffic control in Baquedano, 
1,443 km north of Santiago, late in February. (Madrid EFE in 
Spanish 1510 GMT 10 May 94) 
  During a routine patrol, Arica Carabineros officers arrested 
three suspicious looking Bolivian citizens who had crossed the 
border on foot, and confiscated 41 kg cocaine paste that the 
drug traffickers confessed to having buried in the Chaca valley 
south of Arica. (Santiago Television Nacional de Chile Imagen 
Internacional in Spanish 1100 GMT 11 May 94) 
<H5>  Paraguay </H5>
  National Narcotics Directorate agents seized 2 kg of cocaine 
and 28 kg of marijuana during a control of two buses in the 
township of Carayao, Caaguazu Department. The forces arrested 
Luis Magin Duarte, 25, drivers Hermogenes Mendieta Garcia, 
Gregorio Castillo, and Jose Genaro Portillo, and a Bolivian 
citizen identified as Gualberto Morales Farfan. (Asuncion ABC 
COLOR in Spanish 5 May 94 p 104) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  On 17 April antinarcotics agents arrested Jaime Ruando 
Lizarraga Dolcin, 44, and his wife Luz Briceno Munoz, 28, with 5 
kg of very pure cocaine hydrochloride as they were about to 
board a plane for Miami. Lizarraga has leprosy, and the police 
suspect that an international gang of drug traffickers are using 
people with infectious diseases to carry the drugs. (Lima 
EXPRESO in Spanish 22 Apr 94 p A14) 
  Personnel from Interpol, DEA, and Bolivian and Peruvian 
Police dismantled a gang of drug traffickers and U.S. dollar 
counterfeiters during a raid of a house in the Ciudad Nueva 
district in Tacna. The forces found 2 kg of cocaine and 
counterfeit dollars, and arrested Juan Aurelio Choquezongo 
Maquera, 33, Ignacio Choquezongo Maquera, 40, and Julian Pilco 
Quispe, 27. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 24 Apr 94 p A14) 
  Antidrug Police arrested in Ayacucho a gang of five drug 
traffickers as they were about to transport chemicals to the 
Apurimac River valley. In Chiclayo, the forces also arrested 
three people with 5 kg of cocaine hidden inside pineapples. The 
detainees are Mariano Chachapoyas Rojas, 28, Cristobal 
Montenegro Ramos, 20, and a 14-year old youth. The police also 
arrested Humberto Valencia with 4 kg of cocaine paste in the 
city of Tumbes. (Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 25 Apr 94 p A12) 
  National Police antidrug personnel arrested Eladio Acosta 
Dominguez, 33, aka Cholo Eladio, and seized 5.5 kg of very pure 
cocaine paste during a raid of his house in the city of Huaraz, 
Ancash Department. Acosta is member of a gang of drug 
traffickers operating in the Callejon de Huaylas zone. (Lima LA 
REPUBLICA in Spanish 2 May 94 p 13) 
  Twenty-six policemen of the Special Operations Directorate, 
Dinoes, were arrested in Lima and placed at the disposal of the 
Tingo Maria Criminal Court on charges of drug trafficking, among 
other irregularities. They were from a group of 80 Dinoes 
personnel who went to Tingo Maria two months ago to carry out an 
antidrug operation in Tulumayo, 15 km from Tingo Maria. (Lima 
EL COMERCIO in Spanish 4 May 94 p A14) 
  The Antidrug Division arrested two members of a ring of drug 
traffickers who smuggled cocaine in concrete blocks. They are 
Jose Luis Gonzalez Garcia, 17, aka Pepe, and Gabriel Tuesta 
Gutierrez, 27, aka Gabicho. The police found 1.3 kg of cocaine 
distributed in several packages hidden in the blocks, which were 
taken from Aguaytia to Puerto Maldonado. (Lima EXPRESO in 
Spanish 4 May 94 p A14) 

