CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jana Dorotkova: "The Babicka Factor"] </F>
  [Text] Bratislava--When the crowd, consisting as usual 
almost wholly of retired adorers of Vladimir Meciar, shouts 
angrily for civil war, or throws eggs and yells "Fuj!" at 
Hungarian politicians, or waves pictures of World War II Slovak 
clerico-fascist leader Josef Tiso, most young people just walk 
by and laugh. 
  "They will die out," said Roman Hric, a 24-year-old 
mathematician, with a shrug. 
  With their green hair, their angry, slack eyes and their 
inability to maintain a threat of logic through their ranted 
monologues, the cartoon-like protesters who take to the streets 
to support Meciar's political fortunes are easy objects of 
ridicule. 
  "Many of the people who have been demonstrating on squares 
and calling for my resignation are not sufficiently aware of the 
country's political situation," President Kovac told a March 14 
news conference. "Perhaps among them there are some who will 
never be aware of it, and they will always stand behind Mr. 
Meciar." 
  But while their numbers rarely push over 300, the "Geriatric 
Ward," as they are commonly referred to, strike a chord of dread 
in many Slovaks--and not just in Stefan Hrib. 
  Hrib, a longtime critic of the recently ousted premier, is a 
Radio Free Europe journalist who was attacked by an anti-Kovac 
mob in mid-March, suffering "injuries to his head, neck and 
chest and bloody welts on his back consistent with being beaten 
by a large number of people," according to his doctor. 
  Much more frightening for young Slovaks and journalists than 
the chances of the odd physical attack, though, is the danger 
that these people, and the generation they represent, will 
return Meciar to power for a third time. 
  Popular political commentator and humorist Robert Kotian of 
the daily SME said the Sept. 30-Oct. 1 election results would be 
positive "only if the voters were under 40." 
  Meciar's return to power would be the last straw for many of 
Slovakia's best and brightest. "[It] would be a big trauma for 
those who want Slovakia to be a democratic country," said 
Frantisek Miklosko, vice chair of the Christian Democratic 
Movement (KDH). 
  "If he wins the elections in September, I'm packing my 
bags," 
said Michal Balan, a 25-year-old scientist. 
  For Balan, this is no idle worry. The latest poll released 
by 
the Slovak Statistics Office, taken in March, showed that 
despite an ever-growing dossier of corruption allegations, the 
most trusted politician in Slovakia is...Vladimir Meciar. The 
man who, in the immortal words of ex-Foreign Minister Milan 
Knazko, "uses lies as a working method," was trusted by 25 
percent of 1,237 respondents--more than any other politician. 
  One Bratislava taxi driver said he couldn't figure out where 
the Statistics Office found so many Meciar supporters. 
"Everybody I give a ride to hates the man," he said, adding that 
it was the same for other taxi drivers. "No way is he ever going 
to go win the elections again." 
  Think again, said 65-year-old Augustin Marian Huska, a top 
leader of Meciar's Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS). 
"We will win no matter what. And all those who think we won't 
would do better to forget about that," he said. "Each time they 
throw us to our knees, we become stronger." 
  This is exactly what worries Meciar's opponents. The last 
time he was removed as premier, in March 1991, Bratislava was 
rocked by protests of up to 50,000 people. With Slovaks 
increasingly uncomfortable in the Czechoslovak federation, 
Meciar seized the nationalist banner, accusing those who ousted 
him of being "federalists," or "mafia." Much of the media warmed 
to Meciar's stirring calls of "Slovaks to your feet!" and the 
bumbling nature of the lame-duck government helped bring Meciar, 
the wronged under-dog, the prize he had lost so shamefully just 
15 months earlier. 
  Then, as now, Meciar's rough charm, his street-wise 
political 
diction and his avuncular charisma made him a huge hit with the 
elderly, especially in rural areas. Intellectual parties were 
unable to reach these voters, and they were trounced. HZDS won 
37 percent of the vote in the June 1992 elections, while the 
heroes of the 1989 revolution, the Public Against Violence 
movement, didn't even make it into Parliament. 
  For the older generation, many of whom remember Czech 
arrogance prior to World War II and the glories of Slovak 
nationalism during Tiso's Nazi-sponsored republic, the triumph 
represented good over evil, destiny over history, Slovaks over 
their oppressors and--worse yet--traitors. The younger 
generation largely saw the vote as the defeat of decency and 
intelligence by crude nationalism and opportunism. 
  The gap between them hasn't narrowed since. Only 12 percent 
of voters aged 18 to 25 support Meciar, while he draws more than 
30 percent of those over 60, who make up 21 percent of 
Slovakia's electorate, the Slovak Statistics Office reported. 
  Tomas Pitonak, a 22-year-old university student, said he 
convinced his grandmother not to vote for Meciar last time. 
"Look, Granny," he said he told her. "You're going to die soon. 
But I'm going to be living in this country for the next 40 
years." 
  But the animosity can get a lot nastier than that. The 
Geriatric Ward is fed daily with the high-charged attacks of the 
pro-Meciar nationalist daily REPUBLIKA and its editors, who says 
Meciar was ousted by a "Czechoslovakist, Communist and Hungarian 
conspiracy" in ways that recall Czechoslovakia's February 1948 
Communist coup. 
  Editor Jan Smolec and his REPUBLIKA argue in apocalyptic 
tones, using violent images and frequently invoking destiny. 
"The hope that the young Slovakia would be accepted also by 
those who originally did not want it has been trampled in the 
dust," Smolec wrote March 19. "Communists, Czechoslovakists and 
Hungarian irredentists will end up in the dustbin of history, 
but Slovakia and Slovaks will remain." 
  Such tones have Jozef Moravcik worried. At his government's 
first press conference, the new premier said one of his main 
tasks would be to lessen "the incomprehensible and dangerous 
hostility between various groups of citizens." 
  With election campaigns in both Hungary and Slovakia this 
year, many in Slovakia and in the international community are 
worried that the rhetoric could topple things into real 
conflict. Not Knazko. "I think that as [Meciar] gets more 
radical, the number of his supporters becomes smaller," he told 
the Czech daily EXPRES March 17. 
  Peter Weiss, chair of the strongest party in the new 
governing coalition, the Party of the Democratic Left (SDL), 
said this time around things would be different because "people 
now have some experience from two years of HZDS rule, including 
great dissatisfaction with its economic policy," he told the 
Czech daily PRACE March 14. 
  But with elections six months away, supporters and 
detractors 
alike are asking the same question: What's Meciar going to do 
this time? 
  "He managed to turn his defeat into a victory once already," 
wrote the Germany daily DIE PRESSE March 11. "The very criticism 
from politicians in Bratislava and from abroad could bring him 
people's sympathy. The Slovak problem does not lie merely in 
Meciar's psychology, but in the psychology of his voters." 

