Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement issued by the Shura Council of the Muslim </F>
Brotherhood in Syria dated "January 1994;" --read by announcer] 
  [Text] In the name of God, the merciful, the 
compassionate. Praise be to God the Almighty, and prayers and 
peace be upon the noblest prophet and his family, companions, 
and those who righteously follow him, until the day of judgment. 
  The Shura [Consultative] Council of the Muslim Brotherhood 
in 
Syria held its third ordinary session amid serious domestic, 
regional, and international circumstances. The Council 
discussed urgent Brotherhood issues and important internal 
affairs. It adopted the appropriate measures, and made 
decisions and recommendations on each of these affairs. 
  The Council also studied the longstanding and recent crises 
in the Syrian arena in particular and in the Arab and Islamic 
arenas in general. The Council began with the issue of Syria, 
which has become private real estate for members of the al-Asad 
family, so they can do whatever they please, loot the food of 
Syria's sons, and demoralize its generations in a way that will 
help weaken the nation, so that they will maintain control of 
its destiny. Moreover, the al-Asad family members are selling to 
the enemies the Syrian territory which they deem necessary to 
sell in order to entrench their thrones in the remaining 
territories. 
  Generally, human sentiments become more sympathetic in the 
event of death. However, these sentiments take another form 
when death becomes a cheap merchandise, which politicians trade 
in, so they can obtain popular gains and consecrate the theft of 
public property; namely, the ruling of the country. This was 
watched by the sons of Syria and the entire world on the Syrian 
television screens. Kings, emperors, ingenious men, and 
historic leaders have died, but was life paralyzed in any world 
country due to the death of one man in the same way it was 
paralyzed in Syria for more than a week? 
  Does this not simply mean that a single son of Hafiz al-Asad 
is actually more important than all Syria and the areas of life 
that were obstructed throughout Syria--agriculture, industry, 
commerce, science, education, and politics? Does the 
fabrication of marches and the massing of tens of thousands of 
people from Syria, Lebanon, and other countries not mean that 
the al-Asad regime is totally bankrupt and that it needs booster 
doses to restore some of its shaken prestige? 
  Death is no reason to rejoice over others' grief, because it 
is the destiny of everyone. However, given that his son has 
died, the tyrant [Hafiz al-Asad], will taste the bitterness of 
losing a dear one, something al-Asad has caused for thousands of 
fathers and mothers. Knowing that Hafiz al-Asad had prepared 
his deceased son to succeed him in ruling and running the 
al-Asad ranch, Syria, the way he pleases, should al-Asad 
continue to repeat worn-out words such as the people, democracy, 
and freedom? 
  If people are asked to believe such words, can the Syrian 
people in particular be asked to do so, knowing that this people 
is denied the freedom of expression, and that the Syrians were 
forced into voicing something contrary to what they feel and 
believe? What is important for al-Asad is to reiterate such 
words as the people, freedom, and democracy, so some European 
and U.S. politicians as well as the masters of the new world 
order will hear them and pretend to believe them in the presence 
of some intellectuals who care for human rights. Based on these 
words, these masters would pay funds and extend aid to the 
al-Asad regime and help him entrench his throne which is built 
on human skulls. They would also enhance his distinguished role 
in finalizing the suspect deal [reference to the Middle East 
peace process]. 
  Palestine is part of the Middle East and the entire Islamic 
world and its cause was planned to be very complicated. 
Therefore, it is not strange to see that the settlement of this 
cause is taking place in many phases and through many deals. 
Part of the price is paid before the settlement takes place, 
another part is paid during the settlement, and other parts are 
paid at the end of the settlement. How will Hafiz al-Asad pay 
the price? Will he pay it from the accounts of Syria, 
Palestine, or Lebanon? In exchange, the throne will be kept and 
bank accounts will increase. 
  The Clinton-al-Asad meeting is clear evidence of this; and 
the assistance of Europe, which has ignored human rights, is 
further strong evidence. Hafiz al-Asad's practices over the 
past 25 years in Syria, Lebanon, and in the Palestinian arena 
are a fact which expresses all this. So, what now? The sons of 
the Syrian people know how to remove their shackles and to break 
the gates of their big jail now that they have become aware of 
the dangers of the game and its terrible dimensions. 
  If Hafiz al-Asad wants the Syrian people to believe his 
calls 
for freedom and democracy he is required to convince the people 
-- through some practical moves -- of the soundness of his 
claims. The prisons are still full of victims who have a right 
to freedom; the thousands of displaced people also have rights 
in their homeland; the thousands of starving people have the 
right to an honorable life; and the freedom of thinking must see 
the light. The people will not believe any call by the regime 
before the return of their usurped rights. 
  O sons of our lofty people in beloved Syria; O sons of the 
Arabs and Muslims: The philosophy of the new world order has 
become known to all and its basic features are seen by every 
wise man. The new world order simply aims at crushing Islam and 
its people in the Islamic world, in fact, in the entire world. 
The new world order wants America -- at the instructions of 
world Zionism -- to unilaterally make the decisions of the 
entire Islamic world. The new world order wants the Muslims to 
kill each other and to destroy each other -- Islamists against 
nationalists, extremists against moderates, and rulers against 
people. Each of those is required to crush the other party or 
remove it from the arena so that this injured Islamic world 
remains fumbling in the whirlpool of violence, blood, fire, 
ignorance, and destruction. They want the Islamic world to 
remain fragmented; they want the fighters to continue to beg for 
weapons; and they want the starving people to continue to beg 
for morsels of bread so that the masters of civilization and 
human rights will bestow morsels of bread on them. Proof is 
everywhere -- to the East of the Islamic world and its West, 
Asia and Africa. 
  We do not need to mention the ongoing massacres in Somalia 
and Afghanistan as well as the small and big whirlpools between 
them. All our nation must be fully aware of the surrounding 
dangers, otherwise, nobody will survive the shipwreck. 
  When will those fighting each other understand this? When 
will they understand that the besieged children of Iraq are the 
children of the nation? When will they understand that the 
unity of Iraq -- land, people, and entity -- is part of this 
nation's unity and an important pillar of its existence which is 
threatened now and in the future? When will they understand 
that the people of Sudan, who are besieged and threatened 
because they adhere to their doctrine, territorial integrity, 
and independent decisionmaking, are also a big asset for the 
dignity of the entire nation? 
  The other tragedy is that of our Muslim brothers in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and the tragedy of our steadfast militant 
people in occupied Palestine. Defenseless people are fighting 
with stones against armies equipped with the most sophisticated 
lethal weapons, against the plots of the international 
community, and against biased, silent, and maneuvering parties. 
It is not strange to see that the jihad of the fedayeen of the 
Hamas organization and the militants of Bosnia-Herzegovina are 
achieving the victory of defenseless justice over armed 
falsehood even if the price is very high. 
  In order to stop the bloodshed of our people at the hands of 
enemies and their agents; and in order to save the nation from 
the [Indian] Ocean to the [Atlantic] Ocean, the Muslim 
Brotherhood in Syria calls on all parties to hold genuine 
national dialogue -- and we underscore the word genuine -- to 
place the higher interests above all interests in Algeria, 
Tunisia, and in Egypt as well as in every country and in every 
part of our nation. The Muslim Brotherhood in Syria calls for a 
constructive and meaningful dialogue that turns the conflict 
among brothers within the same country, the one people, and the 
one nation into a battle against the external enemies who do not 
differentiate between a ruler and the people. 
  We have great hope that awareness will return to this nation 
and its warring parties. The evidence of this is the success of 
a number of democratic experiments in many Arab countries, such 
as Jordan and Yemen. Further evidence is the increasing number 
of voices calling for political pluralism, public liberties, and 
human rights in every Arab and Islamic part. We should here 
recall the effects of the Gulf crisis on the economic situation 
in Jordan and the unjust blockade of the al-'Aqabah Port because 
of its concern for the unity of the Arab ranks. 
  What strengthens the hope is the growing spirit of 
solidarity 
among the sons of the nation and the close viewpoints among its 
intellectual and political currents. The support, which our 
oppressed group received over the past 14 years, is another sign 
of the general awakening and the continuation of the values of 
wellbeing and justice. 
  On this occasion, the Shura Council expresses its thanks and 
gratitude to all the states, parties, organizations, and 
individuals who gave support and provided shelter. 
  Let us raise our voices and call for putting an end to the 
wars of the brothers and shutting the mouths of those who 
beautify injustice in front of unjust people and degrade science 
in front of rulers. Let us unite minds and arms to champion 
human rights everywhere. Let us strengthen Islamic awakening to 
lead the nation to dignity, unity, and full liberation. Let us 
work together to build a new world whose slogan is dialogue, not 
injustice, plotting, or domination. 
  O mankind! We created you from a single pair of a male and a 
female, and made you into nations and tribes, that ye may know 
each other not that ye may despise each other. Verily the most 
honored of you in the sight of God is he who is the most 
righteous of you. And God has full knowledge and is well 
acquainted with all things. [Koranic verse] 
  [Dated] Sha'ban 1414 Hegira, corresponding to January 1994 
  [Signed] The Shura Council of the Muslim Brotherhood in 
Syria 

