BFN 

  [Text] Industry and Commerce Minister Ubaldo Scavone 
yesterday warned that without macroeconomic stability Paraguay 
will not receive the foreign financial assistance it needs to 
finance productive activities. He said this during his routine 
working lunch at the Paraguayan-American Chamber of Commerce. 
  The minister said that, contrary to past practices, the 
current government has decided to use new foreign loans to 
provide long-term financing for private activities. The minister 
said funds will be used to capitalize the Industrial Development 
Fund and the Peasant Development Fund. 
  Scavone said the government will use resources from an 
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) "Sectorial Investment 
Program" loan. The minister said negotiations to obtain these 
funds means the fulfillment of rather harsh requirements on 
inflation control, the reduction of public spending, fiscal 
surplus, etc. 
  The government must take firm steps in the area of financial 
reform, the reorganization of the private banking system based 
on concrete indicators on risk and solvency, the creation of a 
capital market regulatory framework (to increase market 
credibility and to assure the trading of long-term titles), and 
the reform of the social security system. 
  The minister said: "Within the context of logical delays for 
such ambitious structural reforms, Paraguay will receive the $80 
million it now has on free availability status. The country will 
also become eligible for numerous financial transactions that 
were denied us in the past." 
  Scavone said our financial system has many distortions that 
are expressed in high interest rates and short-term financial 
applications. He said distortions create high profit margins, 
high risk investment financing, and the neglect of projects that 
are needed for the country's development. 
  The minister regretted that everything that has been seen so 
far to improve the system has not encouraged more reforms or 
reduced financial costs. He said the system's inefficiency is 
strongly dependent on the regulatory framework, which is totally 
inappropriate for the development of a competitive banking 
system. 
  He cited as an example the fact that the total of $1.2 
billion in deposits is distributed among 100 financial 
institutions, each one having an average deposit of $12 million. 
This makes it impossible to establish a competitive financial 
entity in Latin America today. 
  Scavone criticized: "This is largely due to the unequal 
treatment of financial entities which have fragmented the 
market, created unfair competition, and made efficient bank 
supervision difficult." 

