BFN 

  [Text] Lima, 26 May (EFE) -- Peruvian Foreign Minister 
Efrain Goldenberg said today that trade, integration, 
investments, and social issues are the basic issues that should 
be discussed at the fourth Ibero-American Summit to be held in 
Cartagena de Indias (Colombia). 
  Goldenberg, who is also Peruvian prime minister, said 
cooperation in the drug enforcement and antiterrorist areas are 
other important issues that must be discussed at the 
Ibero-American presidential summit to be held in June. 
  He added that the overall political agenda also should 
broach 
the subjects of limited arms spending and renewed support for 
the prompt signing of an agreement banning nuclear tests. 
  Goldenberg told EFE: "Peru is willing to discuss and find 
common viewpoints on all these issues and others that may come 
up during the negotiations." 
  He later stressed the importance of the Ibero-American 
summits and added that all the ones held so far -- in Mexico, 
Spain, and Brazil -- "have strengthened ties between our peoples 
and governments and have helped us to better understand our 
situations and potential." 
  Goldenberg added that this is also true of the financial 
system and that "our increasing trade in Europe should be viewed 
as a natural result of this." The Peruvian foreign minister said 
trade will be one of the main issues to be discussed at the 
Cartagena de Indias summit and this will allow us to continue 
improving in this area. 
  Goldenberg believes that instead of adopting joint positions 
on priority issues -- such as democracy, poverty and social 
development, integration, investment and trade -- for the 
upcoming Presidents of the Americas Summit to be held in Miami 
by the end of the year, Ibero-American countries should try to 
perfect their viewpoints. 
  He said Ibero-American and Caribbean countries have been 
holding informal discussions in this regard within the Rio Group 
and that he believes it will be "interesting and useful" to 
exchange views at the fourth Cartagena de Indias summit. 
  Goldenberg said he believes regional integration processes 
will be able to develop when it is understood that in principle 
the integrationist model is not the same as before, that it is 
not conceived as a means to protect inefficiency "or even less 
to artificially subsidize closed markets." 
  He said: "The issue in question now is to compete in 
international markets. To achieve this we need open and free 
integration mechanisms, and this will be viable when 
macroeconomic and national policies are sufficiently harmonized." 

