BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Peter Almond: "Gulf Troops Were Ill-Equipped for </F>
Chemical Attack"] 
  [Text] British troops in the Gulf war might have had to 
face attack by chemical and biological weapons without adequate 
protection, it was disclosed yesterday. 
  In a report on the implementation of the lessons of the war, 
the Commons all-party Defence Committee said it was disturbed 
that at the start of the operation to free Kuwait, Britain's 
soldiers lacked chemical alarm detectors, biological warning 
systems, specialist decontamination equipment and a full range 
of medical counter-measures. 
  Iraq had built up a terrifying array of chemical and 
biological weapons, including mustard gas, nerve agents, anthrax 
and botulinum toxin by the time the war was launched in January 
1991. 
  But the Ministry of Defence [MoD] admitted protection was 
"inadequate" and the effectiveness of treatments against certain 
nerve gases was uncertain. 
  Older reconnaissance vehicles and armoured personnel 
carriers 
lacked seals and filters to protect those inside from 
contamination. No vehicles had chemical agent monitors to 
establish whether areas had been hit. 
  The committee called for Government action to ensure 
defences 
against chemical and biological weapons were kept fully 
effective. 
  It said: ``We are concerned that it was only when there was 
a 
real possibility that our troops would be subjected to the 
chemical and biological attack that a number of important 
deficiencies and gaps were identified and rectified where 
possible in the time available. 
  ``It is a matter of great concern that these deficiencies 
were not identified and corrected by normal peacetime 
procedures. Next time we may not have the time to put things 
right before hostilities commence.'' 
  The MPs were also critical of the Army's battle-readiness. 
They said the condition of Challenger 1 tanks sent to the Gulf 
from Germany in 1990 was "scandalous," and criticised attempts 
to develop an effective friendly identification system as "a 
debacle." 
  The availability of Challenger 1 tanks in Germany in 1990 
was 
so bad that 77 per cent were out of commission at any time. In 
the six months they had time to get ready in Saudi Arabia, 
availability had increased to 98 per cent, but at a cost of 279 
engines changed during Operation Granby, most stripped out of 
tanks remaining in Germany. 
  "We are pleased that the ministry is now taking steps to 
correct the situation but disturbed that what must have been an 
obvious problem was left unresolved until a crisis emerged," 
said the report. The committee was pleased that Vickers and the 
MoD had taken trouble to apply the lessons learned from 
Challenger l's shortcomings to the new Challenger 11's. 
  There were also problems with medical equipment, including 
the inability to send armoured ambulances to the Front. Some 
equipment was outdated and up to 40 per cent of stretchers could 
not be used in air evacuations. 
  "We are disturbed that normal peacetime training and 
exercises did not identify serious deficiencies in medical 
equipment," said the committee, recommending that the MoD 
investigate why the shortcomings went uncorrected until the 
threat of war galvanised it into action. 
  As to Britain's air strength in the war, the committee said 
it was surprised that the RAF [Royal Air Force] was so 
unprepared for offensive actions at medium altitudes: it had 
focused almost entirely on low-level attacks in Central Europe. 
  CRV-7 rockets had to he bought from Canada, CBU-87 cluster 
bombs had to be bought from the Americans for Jaguars, and Rolls 
Royce engines were not adequately designed for the Gulf heat. 
  On shortcomings in electronic warfare, the committee said it 
was not convinced that enough was being done in this area by the 
MoD, and it was particularly concerned about IFF (Identification 
Friend or Foe) equipment, the failure of which cost several 
British lives when they were mistakenly attacked by American 
aircraft. 
  "The shortcomings of IFF equipment must be addressed as a 
matter of the greatest urgency," said the report, noting that 
attempts to develop an effective system had been a "debacle" up 
to now, costing Britain 50 million pounds for a system abandoned 
before the Gulf war. 
  Contractors did well in supporting British forces in the 
Gulf, but the contrast between 14 weeks to get modifications 
done in emergency, and three years in peacetime, was so stark 
that lessons must be applied to save taxpayers' money. 
  The MPs blamed excessive secrecy by the Ministry of Defence 
for the lateness of their report. 
  The MoD had produced its own classified internal Gulf war 
evaluation by Air Chief Marshal David Parry-Evans in December, 
1991, but had refused to pass it to the committee despite the 
MPs' security clearance. It was only in late autumn last year 
that the MPs received a classified report prepared for the 
Pentagon and foreign nations in NATO. 
  "At best this decision demonstrates a failure on the part of 
the MoD to accept reasonable scrutiny by a Select Committee of 
the House of Commons, and at worst it could indicate that the 
ministry is concealing embarrassing information," concluded the 
committee. 

