Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wu Qingping, affiliated with the policy research </F>
office of the CPC Yueyang Municipal Committee, edited by Xi 
Ling: "The General Political Demands of the Market Economy and 
Party Construction"] 
  [Text] We must study the issue of doing a good job of 
carrying out party construction under the situation 
characterized by the development of a socialist market economy 
in view of the general political demands of the market economy. 
<H3>  I. Party Construction Must Meet General Political Demands of 
Market Economy </H3>
  According to Marxism, politics is a concentrated 
manifestation of economics. The market economy is a social 
system which is based on the unity of economics and politics. 
The self-construction of our party, as the political group 
exercising leadership over the development of a socialist market 
economy, must certainly meet the general demands of the market 
economy. If we reject the idea that party construction must meet 
the general demands of the market economy, we will not be able 
to truly do a good job of carrying out party construction, nor 
can we develop a true market economy, reaping the victory of 
reaching a socialist market economy. 
  As a creation in human history, the politics of a socialist 
market economy does not have a ready-made model to follow; on 
the other hand, over the several hundred years since it was 
born, the market economy has acquired a rather mature form of 
politics and accumulated rich political achievements. With 
regard to the questions of how to discover the general political 
demands of the market economy through examining the varied and 
complex political phenomena of market economy countries, and of 
how to consult and draw on what is discovered in view of the 
actual situation regarding the construction of our party, I 
believe that emphasis should be given to grasping three key 
points. 
  First, we must discover the general political demands 
of the market economy through examining particular 
situations. Mao Zedong has pointed out: "In terms of the 
order of its movement, human knowledge always grows by changing 
gradually from being knowledge about individual and particular 
things into being knowledge about general things." (Footnote 1: 
Mao Zedong Xuanji, p 285) Whether in analyzing the 
general political demands of the market economy or in exploring 
the ways to enhance party construction in view of such demands, 
it is always necessary to persist in achieving knowledge about 
the particular before achieving knowledge about the general. 
This requires us to clearly understand the situations and 
political characteristics of the market economy countries and to 
analyze the development tracks of those countries' market 
economies as well as their political experiences and lessons, so 
as to derive the general political demands of the market 
economy. Such general demands should be considered to represent 
the essential elements and a rough outline of the rich political 
practice of each country. The general political demands of the 
market economy to be discussed below include the three elements 
of "the rule of law, democracy, and checks and balances," which 
represent just the rough summarizing of the common elements of 
the politics of the developed market-economy countries. 
  Second, we must persist in being creative. Being 
creative represents the spirit of the era of opening up and 
competition. If party construction is to meet the general 
demands of the market economy, we must try hard to be creative, 
rather than simply copying the specific political form of a 
particular country. To try hard to be creative, we must have a 
master spirit characterized by a high sense of responsibility to 
the party and the people, handling "traditional" things in a 
scientific way. On the one hand we must realize that we have 
many fine traditions which still need to be carried forward and 
developed under the new situation; on the other hand we must 
also realize that under the condition of the market economy 
party construction we cannot rely on traditions alone, and that 
we must dare to think, dare to break a new path, and dare to 
take risks. On an overall level, we must regard "the three 
benefits," a notion proposed by Deng Xiaoping, as the goal of 
creative efforts; we must make bold designs, carry out bold 
practical activities, and make timely adjustments on the basis 
of being guided by that goal, so as to ensure that there are new 
breakthroughs and improvements in party construction. 
  Third, we must persist in gradually implementing 
things. Making party construction meet the general demands 
of the market economy is a major reform, and the relevant 
process involves various spheres. Therefore, we must overcome 
impatience and proceed with this work in a step-by-step manner. 
We must formulate work plans in a scientific way, and do a good 
job of managing the reform trial points. We must make a greater 
use of modern communication means in the effort to spread 
information about reforms to various places around the country. 
<H3>  II. Do a Good Job of Carrying Out the Party's System 
Construction in Accordance With the Demands of the Legal System </H3>
  The market economy is an economy based on a legal system. 
Under a market economy, the productive forces are greatly 
liberated, people's enthusiasm and creativeness have greatly 
increased, and competition in society is especially fierce. To 
ensure equal competition and overall efficiency and to prevent 
encroachments upon other people's rights, we must impose norms 
on people's conduct through establishing and maintaining social 
contract relationships. 
  For a long time we have failed to give sufficient emphasis 
to 
legal system work. Party construction has mainly consisted of 
ideological construction, while system construction has been 
neglected. As should be pointed out, the party's ideological 
construction led to tremendous achievements in the war years and 
in the early period of the PRC, as well as many achievements 
after the start of reform and opening up. For instance, 
activities such as the large-scale discussion of the criteria of 
truth in 1978 and the emancipating thinking movement of recent 
years surrounding Deng Xiaoping's speech on "three benefits" 
played a very large role in educating, uniting, and improving 
the whole party. However, the attempt at mainly relying on 
ideological construction without carrying out system 
construction is unlikely to suit a modern society, or to result 
in party construction being carried out in a satisfactory 
manner. First, fundamentally, the superstructure is conditioned 
by the economic base; in general the effectiveness of 
ideological construction is determined by the level of 
development of the productive forces of society and by the 
degree of rationality of social relations among people. 
Therefore, in developing a socialist market economy, it is all 
the more necessary to give emphasis to system construction, and 
to maintain and improve the standards of party construction 
through relying on the infrastructure which imposes norms on 
relations among people in a scientific way. Second, from an 
operational perspective, there are many difficulties in 
ideological construction. For instance: Theoretical development 
is lagging behind, and it is thus difficult to improve people's 
understanding; interest relationships intersect each other and 
are complex; people's minds are getting increasingly 
complicated, and some are not matching their words with their 
deeds, resulting in difficulty in grasping the real result; and 
as the relevant work is greatly affected by personnel turnover, 
it is difficult to consolidate results. In comparison, system 
construction involves relatively small operational difficulties, 
and is conducive to ensuring order and stability. As early as 
1980, Deng Xiaoping made the sorrowful summarizing comment: "Our 
past mistakes of various kinds surely had much to do with some 
leaders' thinking and styles, but the problems in the 
organizational system and the work system were even more 
important." He also pointed out: "The issue of system has a 
bearing on whether the party and state will change their colors, 
and must elicit high attention from the entire party." (Footnote 
2: Deng Xiaoping Wenxuan, p 293) As recently as 
during the southern inspections last year, Deng Xiaoping again 
sincerely admonished us: "It remains necessary to rely on the 
legal system, and it is more reliable to use the legal system 
approach." 
  The issue of how to do a good job of carrying out the 
party's 
system construction needs to be continuously explored 
theoretically and in practice; roughly two aspects should be 
given special emphasis: 
  One aspect is the setting of criteria. The system 
represents the norms governing conduct of all in the party, and 
there must be some criteria used for determining what kind of 
system can be considered satisfactory. 1) Requirements should be 
scientific. Times are changing, and there should also be system 
changes. Requirements on party members in times of war should be 
different from those in times of peace. In times of peace, 
requirements on party members under the situation of a planned 
economy should be different from those under the situation of a 
market economy; and emphasis should be placed on different 
things in different stages of market economy construction. There 
should be systematic scientific rules on all those matters. 2) 
The contents should be concrete. That is, there should be 
specific, clear, and easily grasped rules on what everyone is 
required to do, what everyone is required not to do, how one is 
to do the required things, and which approaches are not to be 
used. 3) The procedures should be without loopholes. We must 
formulate regulations which dovetail each other closely so as to 
reduce as much as possible the impact of the human factor in the 
course of enforcing the regulations. 
  The other aspect is the formulating of a systems 
framework. Presently, it is proper to consider dividing the 
party's framework of systems into three blocks. 1) 
Organizational systems. They mainly include some basic rules on 
organizational forms and changes at the various levels in the 
party. For instance, the organizational command system, the 
election system (encompassing such things as enhancing 
election-district rules as well as inner-party speech-making and 
question-answering), the question system, the evaluation system, 
rules on dismissal and impeachment procedures, rules on 
personnel arrangements concerning the executive organs of 
organizations at various levels, and regulations on the party's 
full-time workers (the party's lawyers and professional party 
cadres). 2) Meeting-related systems. Meetings constitute an 
important form of our party's activities, and must be 
standardized. In view of the overall situation at present, the 
main task for the present time should be to press ahead with the 
construction of the six meeting-related systems, that is, the 
party committee system, the plenary meeting system, the system 
of the congress of party members' representatives, the annual 
party-member conference system, the party-member 
discussion-meeting system, and the democratic-life meeting 
system. 3) Work-related systems. The party's work involves many 
things. As far as inner-party work is concerned, the systems on 
which work should be done include: The party-member study and 
training system, the system of reporting on one's work, the 
system of leading cadres's work at the grass roots and job 
rotation, the personal-wealth declaration system, the 
examination and evaluation system, the system of 
party-discipline sanctions, the system of relaying information 
on the party's internal affairs, the party organ and party 
journal system, the system of protection of party members' 
rights, and the party's internal financial management system. 
<H3>  III. Do a Good Job of Carrying Out the Party's 
Organizational Construction So As To Meet the Democracy Demand </H3>
  Democracy is one of the major components of political 
modernization, and also a fundamental political characteristic 
of the market economy. In a broad sense, democracy refers to 
letting people themselves decide matters affecting their own 
self-interest, and to the full realization of "autonomy" on the 
part of various social actors within the scope defined by law. 
Why does a market economy have more vigor than a planned 
economy? A fundamental difference is that while a market economy 
contains innumerable highly "autonomous" functioning actors, a 
planned economy follows a model characterized by a "unified" and 
centralized way of doing things, and the micro-level actors in 
such an economy are extremely lacking in autonomy and would 
function only when given various commands by the "superiors," 
and that therefore such an economy shows many diseases of 
"ossification." 
  To make the party's work meet the demand for democratic 
politics raised by the market economy, we must focus such work 
on the party's organizational construction. Organization refers 
to a system's internal structural relationships and the relevant 
subsystems. Whether the system is functionally strong, and 
whether the system is powerful, are to a large extent determined 
by whether the internal relationships are proper and by the 
amount of vigor of its subsystems. Enhancing organizational 
construction according to the democratic spirit is undoubtedly 
conducive to rectifying the structural relationships in a system 
and to invigorating the subsystems. Enhancing the party's 
leadership does not just mean enhancing national leadership; 
under a situation characterized by the development of a market 
economy, it is even more important to enhance the concrete 
leadership exercised by party organizations of all levels in all 
sectors. "When there is order in the provinces, there is order 
nationwide." Only by giving full play to the initiative of all 
party organizations and arousing enthusiasm on the part of all 
sectors would it be possible to truly do a good job of 
developing our social and economic cause, to have a solid 
foundation for the party's leadership, and to have the effort to 
enhance the party's leadership produce real effects. Tens of 
thousands of party organizations are scattered around in all 
corners of social life; the enhancement of their 
self-construction through democratic means and their presenting 
themselves as living models before the masses will be of very 
profound and far-reaching significance to accelerating the 
political and economic democratization and the modernization 
process of China. 
  With regard to the issue of how to meet the democracy demand 
and do a good job of carrying out the party's organizational 
construction, it seems proper to consider the following several 
points: The first is to delegate power so as to increase 
the combat effectiveness of organizations. In the current 
period of transition from a planned economy to a market economy, 
the overall task remains to adjust and delegate the powers which 
have been characterized by excessive centralization. We must 
turn each party organization which is directly engaged in 
practical work into an autonomous power center so as to enhance 
its combat effectiveness. The second is to maintain 
inner-party transparency so as to strengthen the cohesiveness of 
the organizations. We must ensure smooth information 
exchanges within the party, especially between the superiors and 
subordinates. Inform all party members of important matters 
inside and outside the party and hold regular and nonregular 
discussion meetings of party members, encouraging party members 
to speak their minds freely and to share the party's cares and 
burdens. Make representatives to party congresses permanent 
representatives, and clearly define their terms of reference and 
duties. Hold relevant meetings regularly to discuss the relevant 
work. To improve the quality of democratic life meetings, we 
must have representatives of subordinate organizations attend 
the democratic life meetings of superior organizations. 
The third is to make the relations between the party and 
the masses closer, so as to increase the vitality of the 
organizations. We must do a good job of conducting 
investigations and study. It is proper for leading party cadres 
to work at the grassroots jobs under their supervision on a 
regular basis, while retaining their positions, and leading 
party cadres currently holding office should meet the masses on 
a regular basis. 
<H3>  IV. Do a Good Job of Building the Party's Supervision 
Mechanisms So As To Meet the Demand Concerning Checks and 
Balances </H3>
  Power is an ability to control matters. Power in human 
society is a human ability to control social objects. As the 
market economy entails the most extensive fair competition and 
contains different kinds of self-interested economic actors, it 
must be equipped with comprehensive and complete checks on and 
balances against all powers in society, and will in no way allow 
self-interested actors, not governed by the principle of 
fairness, to control society in an unconstrained manner; only in 
this way would it be possible to ensure that society is lively 
but not chaotic, with things in order. 
  A concrete analysis will show that there are checks on and 
balances against power everywhere in a market economy society: 
As far as the numerous commodity producers are concerned, their 
highly autonomous business decisionmaking is fundamentally 
constrained by market demands and the production factor 
conditions enjoyed by the producers; as far as the various local 
powerholding actors are concerned, their high degree of autonomy 
is constrained by the law of the state and the state's 
regulation and control means (mainly fiscal) as well as by the 
wishes of the people under the respective jurisdictions; as for 
the "supreme" central powerholding actors, they are also 
effectively supervised and constrained by various parties. An 
example would be the phenomenon of the "three-way separation of 
powers" in the United States. 
  Our party is the ruling party and the central representative 
of the state power of all levels. Therefore, a key to meeting 
the market economy's demand concerning checks on and balances 
against power is to do a good job of building the party's 
supervision mechanisms. 
  From an overall perspective, the party's supervision 
situation was in the past characterized by supervision 
relationships based on supervision exercised by superiors over 
subordinates, or "superior-centered" supervision relationships, 
while horizontal supervision and supervision exercised by 
subordinates (the masses) over superiors (leaders) were 
relatively rare. Through reform in recent years, the highly 
centralized system has been gradually dismantled, and 
"superior-subordinate type" supervision relationships have been 
greatly weakened, while other supervision relationships have not 
been strengthened. The present state of affairs characterized by 
a lack of supervision and power imbalances has inevitably 
created tremendous difficulties for our cause. First, corruption 
becomes unavoidable. The history of political development, 
whether ancient or contemporary and whether Chinese or foreign, 
shows that "unconstrained power will inevitably lead to 
corruption." There is no denying the fact that we do have many 
excellent Communists who, because of their firmly held party 
spirit, are able to resist corruption and remain uncorrupted; 
but there are also many party members who, because of a lack of 
supervision, are more or less corrupted by their inflated 
selfish desires under the impact of the tides of the market 
economy. The news media's reports on ten cases of crimes 
committed by degenerate party members collected by this author 
in a casual manner show that those involved in nine of the cases 
had such positions as "factory director," "manager," "section 
chief," and "division chief," as well as such enviable honor 
titles as "the advanced," "model" "shock worker," "holder of the 
May First Medal," constituting a share of 90 percent. This 
example can more effectively demonstrate that it is difficult 
for unsupervised power not to lead to corruption. Second, it has 
become difficult to deepen the reform. As must be pointed out, 
an important error in past reform efforts has been that 
attention has been given only to the delegating and 
recentralization of power but not to checks on and balances 
against power. Such an error has to a large extent created the 
situation in which reform is unstable and difficult to deepen. 
In terms of root causes, such current problems as those of 
localism, formalism, the growing strength shown by sectoral 
interests, enterprise mechanisms' not being invigorated, low 
efficiency, embezzlement and corruption, financial disorder, and 
counterfeit and shoddy goods are all closely related to the 
error. Third, it is difficult to consolidate the party's power. 
From a long-term and developmental perspective, whether the 
party's leadership can be solidified does not mainly depend on 
whether the party now holds power or not, but is more 
importantly determined by how power is used and by how the 
reform and construction cause led by the party progresses. If 
corruption is widespread, leading to a great deal of problems, 
it would be very difficult to keep the party's leadership power 
solidified, and the cause of establishing a socialist market 
economy in China would be facing great dangers. 
  If one is to do a good job of carrying out the construction 
of the party's supervision mechanisms so as to meet the market 
economy's demand concerning checks on and balances against 
power, it seems necessary to change the framework of the 
party's supervision mechanisms from being a "plane triangle" 
into being a "solid triangle." The past "superior-centered" 
power system in the party can be seen as a "plane triangle." 
Each powerholding actor who is part of the triangle is in 
general constrained only by its superior. When there are changes 
in the power structure (that is, power delegation) or when the 
checks and balances at the superior level are not working in a 
fair manner (leading to phenomena like the bureaucratic tendency 
and the small group tendency), powerholding actors would be in 
an unsound situation characterized by the "absence of 
constraints." On the other hand, as the structure of power 
assumes the shape of a plane figure, the structure as a whole 
would be lacking in stability. A complete and proper system of 
checks on and balances against power should be in the shape of a 
"solid triangle." That is, each powerholding actor is 
constrained both by its superior and by the relevant 
powerholding actors on the same level. In this way the power 
system as a whole will be consolidated. Specifically there are 
two aspects to be discussed: 
  First, do a good job of carrying out the superiors's 
supervising and constraining of the subordinates. In terms 
of the overall situation, it is necessary both to delegate power 
and enliven the situation so as to accommodate the market 
economy, and to satisfy modern society's need for orderly 
management. 1) Keep control over provinces and release cities. 
For provinces are large, while cities are small. The province 
represents the highest level of local power, and the city 
represents a lower level of local power. A province's situation 
is much more complex than a city's situation, and therefore we 
must keep comprehensive control over the appointment of members 
of the provincial leadership teams, while keeping control over 
only the chiefs of the municipal leadership teams. 2) Weaken 
vertical sectoral controls. Most of the existing powerholding 
agencies of various levels and their vertical ways of control 
all have to a great extent the color of a planned economy. In 
the future, except such necessary vertical controls as those 
over taxation, customs, the military, and the police, vertical 
controls should be weakened as much as possible, and some 
agencies should be dismantled on the basis of consideration of 
the relevant situations. 3) The means of control should be 
changed as soon as possible. Except for the cases of the 
appointment and dismissal of leading personnel and vertical 
controls mentioned above, the use of administrative means should 
be reduced as much as possible; "campaign" and "focus" work in 
particular should be reduced. We must perfect legal means and 
strengthen economic means; particularly, we must resolve the 
problem of the weakness of central fiscal means. 
  Second, do a good job of carrying out horizontal 
supervision exercised by party organizations of the same levels 
over each other. 1) Fully develop the function of 
disciplinary commissions. During the period when such 
institutions as the people's congresses are still lacking in the 
capability for supervision, it is necessary for disciplinary 
commissions to become powerholding actors (checking and 
balancing against power) and to supervise party committees of 
the same levels. We must study and increase the supervision 
tasks of each disciplinary commission in view of the need to 
abide by party discipline and the law of the state as well as 
the needs of the development of the local reform and 
construction cause; we must merge disciplinary commissions with 
such agencies as the supervisory and anticorruption agencies so 
as to improve overall efficiency. 2) The secretary of a 
disciplinary commission should be elected by all the party 
members of the party organization of the same level, and the 
candidates should, as much as possible, go through the relevant 
entry, speechmaking, and question answering procedures according 
to usual election practices. The secretary of a disciplinary 
commission should be subjected to periodical elections, and be 
able to get re-elected consecutively. 3) Scientifically define 
the task and working methods of disciplinary commissions. We 
must clearly give disciplinary commissions various inspection 
tasks and make personnel arrangements in view of the amount of 
work to be done. In addition to routine inspections, 
disciplinary commissions must also be given the task of 
conducting random inspections; they should do a good job of 
keeping records so as to facilitate the truthful evaluation of 
the work of the party organizations of the same levels as well 
as the disciplinary commissions' own work. 4) A disciplinary 
commission should report to permanent representatives of the 
party members on its work. The secretary of a disciplinary 
commission and relevant responsible persons should report to all 
the party members on their work every year, and answer the 
questions raised by party members. 

