Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Anthony Bevins exclusive report: "Dublin Bids To Win IRA </F>
Ceasefire"] 
  [Text] Irish Foreign Minister Dick Spring has broken with 
the Anglo-Irish demand that there can be no peace moves with 
Sinn Fein until the IRA agrees a permanent cessation of violence 
. 
  Mr Spring said in an interview that the Dublin Government 
would want to build on a temporary IRA ceasefire to help Sinn 
Fein "inch away from violence." 
  A Sinn Fein leader has told THE OBSERVER that if talks were 
on offer, he believed the IRA "would react quite positively." 
Pat Doherty, Sinn Fein's vice-president, said: "Obviously, 
it's an opening up of the whole peace scenario, and it is to be 
welcomed, and it is to be explored and built upon." 
  He added: "If we see a real and genuine possibility of a 
serious, all-encompassing peace process developing, then Sinn 
Fein would be prepared -- in the correct scenario, without 
preconditions being laid down -- to go to the IRA and put it to 
them that they should facilitate this development." 
  That had happened before, during the secret 1992 contacts 
between British Government go-betweens and Sinn Fein, when the 
IRA had been asked for, and had offered, a 10-day ceasefire. 
  If a temporary ceasefire did break the current deadlock, it 
could help Dublin and Sinn Fein by-pass John Major, who appears 
politically paralysed by his reliance on the Commons votes of 
the Ulster Unionist Party [UUP], given the Government's slender 
majority. 
  But Mr Doherty insisted that in the last analysis, Mr Major 
was the problem. 
  "It is the British Government that holds the power and has 
the authority and no matter how well-meaning Dublin may be, 
that's the reality that Sinn Fein has to look at. If they had 
the political will, they could deliver." 
  Nevertheless, if an IRA ceasefire became more enduring as a 
result of Dublin talks, it is possible that troops could be 
withdrawn to barracks -- because they are only on Ulster's 
streets in response to the terrorist threat. 
  In his interview with NEW CENTURY, a new left-wing 
quarterly, 
Mr Spring said he did not see any short-term dramatic 
development that would allow Sinn Fein to become involved in the 
political process because, for that to happen, the IRA would 
have "to put down the guns." 
  He then said: "I see violence withering away rather than 
being guillotined." 
  But he added: "I believe Sinn Fein is inching away from 
violence. I am not even sure that they know what they are 
inching towards. But I do believe they are inching away from 
violence." 
  Mr Doherty told THE OBSERVER: "I am talking about inching 
forward towards peace. As we inch towards peace, we have to 
take on board the fact that there is violence coming from all 
quarters; not just the IRA." 
  Mr Spring said in his interview: "I think they will try to 
work out some kind of modus operandi that allows them to get 
into political debate with Irish political parties before having 
to make any concession to the British, before halting the 
violence. We have to guard against that." 
  But he then added: "I think it is possible they will offer 
some temporary cessation of violence in order to sit down round 
the table with other nationalist parties. 
  ``They haven't done that yet, either publicly or privately, 
but it seems that's the way their strategy is working. That's 
going to pose a bit of a dilemma. 
  ``If they offer a temporary ceasefire we will want to find a 
way of building on that without making any concessions to them. 
  ``All these processes are slow and painstaking, nothing is 
going to happen that suddenly says to people, `It's over. Now 
you can start to live your lives properly.''' Mr Doherty said 
of the possible link between a temporary ceasefire and talks: 
``I think Sinn Fein would take it very seriously, but I could 
not predict or tell you now what the outcome of that would be.... 
  ``If it's serious and if it is perceived as moving the peace 
process forward, I think that all that would be looked at 
extremely seriously.'' 
  Meanwhile, James Molyneaux, the Unionist leader, told a 
Belfast meeting of his party council yesterday that December's 
Downing Street declaration had run its course. 
  It had been suggested that the declaration could be 
developed 
or built on, and that it was only a starting point, but Mr 
Molyneaux said: "You can't hang much on a dead Christmas tree." 
  However, Sir Patrick Mayhew, Secretary of State for Northern 
Ireland, told a Conservative meeting in Sussex that the 
declaration embodied fundamental principles of constitutional 
and political reality. 
  "They are principles that will endure. They are not 
dependent on acceptance or rejection by Sinn Fein and the IRA. 
  ``For the two governments to have declared their common 
acceptance of them is an event of historic significance. 
  ``They are now recommitting themselves to the political 
talks 
process which the Joint Declaration complements and underpins.'' 
  But the interview with NEW CENTURY, to be published at 
Easter, indicates that Dublin is still pursuing its own peace 
agenda; the Heathrow attacks and continuing murders in the North 
have not killed off their efforts to construct other 
opportunities. 

