BFN 

  [Text] Information Minister Dr. Jawad al-'Anani has said 
that His Majesty King Husayn's visit to the United States and 
his talks with U.S. President Bill Clinton and senior U.S. 
officials were successful by all standards and opened new 
horizons for relations with the United States based on mutual 
understanding and respect. 
  Speaking to the Jordanian News Agency, the information 
minister said the talks underscored Jordan's independent 
character vis-a-vis the basic political decisions as well as 
Jordan's efforts to maintain distinguished Arab relations in the 
region and its eagerness to promote coordination among the Arab 
parties to the highest possible level. 
  He added that the visit has deepened the relationship 
between 
His Majesty King Husayn and the U.S. President as the talks gave 
them a good opportunity to read the ideas of each other and 
enabled his majesty the king to explain the Jordanian position 
in a comprehensive and accurate manner which helped the U.S. 
President better understand the Jordanian position and realize 
Jordan's basic role in the peace process. 
  Dr. al-'Anani said that by his meetings with senior U.S. 
officials at the State, Commerce, and Defense Departments and 
the House of Representatives, Senate, U.S. press, and several 
influential U.S. figures, His Majesty King Husayn sought to 
secure an understanding of the Jordanian position in order to 
meet the Jordanian demands to conclude the procedures on lifting 
the siege of al-'Aqabah, proceed along the peace process on the 
basis of the Jordanian-Israeli agenda and the appreciation 
expressed for the Jordanian democratization experiment and 
respect for human rights, and improve economic and social 
conditions in Jordan in spite of the large volume of foreign 
debt and the increasing burdens on the Jordanian economy. 
  The information minister said Jordan managed to obtain an 
unequivocal promise from the United States to increase its 
economic aid to Jordan and to seriously consider writing off 
Jordan's official debts to the United States and to cooperate 
with Jordan toward rescheduling Jordanian debts during the Paris 
Club meetings, slated to begin on 27 June, so that the other 
creditors will reduce Jordan's debts to them. 
  Asked about the Jordanian role in the regional peace 
process, Dr. al-'Anani said: In talks with the strongest 
country, it is useful to explain the Jordanian position, 
especially since its decisions, whether on the peace process or 
within the rich group of states, are important and very 
influential. Dialogue with a state like the United States is 
required to explain the Jordanian position and acquire U.S. 
support for this position. 
  He said: Because the U.S. arena is open for all countries, 
maintaining contacts with it emphasizes Jordan's identity, 
legitimate rights, and principled stands. This is what I felt 
took place during the talks held during the visit. 
  The information minister stressed that Jordan has sovereign 
demands which it should obtain through the peace process. These 
are land and water. He said Jordan is perseveringly and 
continuously seeking to secure the rights of refugees and 
evacuees without adversely affecting Jordan's demographic or 
geographic unity. He added that the U.S. side fully understood 
all these points. He said the U.S. side naturally has demands; 
it wishes to see Jordan and the other Arab countries reach a 
peace agreement with Israel. However, this U.S. position does 
not mean that the U.S. political agendas should be imposed on 
Jordan; Jordan should explain its position on the need to have a 
comprehensive peace. This is what took place during this visit. 
  Dr. al-'Anani said: We in Jordan joined the peace process in 
order to restore our rights and help the other Arab parties 
obtain their rights. This is the concept of a comprehensive 
peace which was underscored by President Clinton after his 
meeting with His Majesty King Husayn. 
  The information minister said: It is also obvious that some 
U.S. parties would like to see a meeting between ranking 
Jordanian officials and officials in Israel. However, Jordan's 
position was clear. It said these meetings should not merely be 
symbolic, but must have substance and lead to resolving the 
basic problems. Therefore, timing such meetings depends on the 
course of events and this is what His Majesty King Husayn 
stressed in his meetings with the Congress and the press. 
  He said one of the main dimensions of the results of His 
Majesty King Husayn's visit to the United States is the United 
States' readiness to enable several Jordanians to increase their 
exports to the United States, which constitutes the largest 
market for any country in the world. He said: According to the 
agreement reached between His Majesty King Husayn and President 
Clinton, the Jordanian-U.S. committee held its first meeting at 
the U.S. State Department yesterday. Agreement was reached that 
the committee meetings should be held regularly once every six 
months. During the meeting, Jordan's debts to the United States 
and other creditors and the means to ease them were discussed, 
in addition to increasing U.S. aid to Jordan and increasing 
Jordanian exports to the United States. 
  The information minister said the U.S. side showed an 
understanding of Jordan's defense needs and promised to meet 
them. He added that it is clear that Jordan's reputation among 
the U.S. officials and the U.S. people is high. All of them, he 
said, expressed their admiration for Jordan's wise leadership 
and the democratization process, which is considered an example 
to be emulated and a pioneering experiment in the region. All 
officials also expressed admiration for the respect for human 
rights in Jordan. This is attested by the concerned independent 
international institutions and organizations. In this regard, 
Dr. al-'Anani referred to the World Bank report, which praised 
the Jordanian economic policy in restructuring the economy and 
increasing economic growth as well as Jordan's continuous 
endeavors to improve the citizens' standard of living. The 
report also stressed that Jordan, which is doing its best to 
rectify its economic situation, will need to ease at least 
one-third of its foreign debts so that the volume of debt will 
reach an internationally reasonable level. 

