BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Topical Talk" by Editor Vu Dinh Vinh] </F>
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted on the growing trend toward 
peace and cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region] The situation 
in the Eastern Sea also directed regional and international 
public attention to us as various incidents have occurred right 
on the continental shelf of Vietnam and its exclusive economic 
zone. The above situation requires that all countries, be they 
big or small, resolve their differences and disputes. This 
includes their current territorial disputes, which must be 
resolved through peaceful negotiations on the basis of respect 
for each other's independence, sovereignty, and territorial 
integrity and respect for international law in line with the 
common trend toward refraining from the use of force or the 
threat of force and the creation of pressure in international 
relations. 
  Vietnam has been and will be working according to the motto 
cited in ASEAN's Manila Declaration of July 1992 and in the 
statement of the 10th Nonaligned Conference in Jakarta in 
September 1992. Vietnam also hopes that all the parties 
concerned will also follow these principles. 
  Regarding the Eastern Sea situation, we categorically assert 
the sovereignty of Vietnam as a coastal country and the 
Vietnamese people's determination to protect their sovereignty 
over their continental shelf and their exclusive economic zone 
in accordance with international law, especially with the United 
Nations' 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea. We also affirm 
Vietnam's stance of good will, that is its desire to resolve all 
differences in accordance with the above principles and to call 
on those parties concerned to avoid further complicating the 
situation. 
  Everyone knows that security and stability in the Eastern 
Sea 
is a decisive factor for the collective security and stability 
of the entire Asia-Pacific region, for the safety of sea routes, 
and for trade development in one of the world's bustling 
regions. The Eastern Sea has great significance for the 
interests of many countries and it is hoped that this will 
inspire those parties concerned to resolve and deal with their 
differences in a scrupulous fashion. For our part, Vietnam 
pledges to do the same. 
  We will be providing a brief review of the situation in the 
region to show the course of diplomatic activities of our 
country during the first six months of 1994: 
  -- The scope of the already close relationship between 
Vietnam and Laos has been broadened, thus improving the 
effectiveness of the all-around cooperation between the two 
countries. 
  -- The visit of Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet to Cambodia in 
early April this year brought Vietnamese-Cambodian relations 
into the orbit of substantive cooperation with the signing of a 
series of agreements on trade, economic, cultural, scientific, 
educational, training, and transit cooperation, and on the 
establishment of a joint commission. As for the two pending 
issues, namely the border issue and the issue of foreign 
nationals, Vietnam and Cambodia have agreed to set up a 
subcommittee to resolve these issues through negotiations. 
  -- With ASEAN countries, recent inexorable exchanges of 
visits between high-ranking Vietnamese leaders and the leaders 
of ASEAN countries testified to the vigorous growing trend of 
cooperative relations between Vietnam and the ASEAN countries. 
Apart from those agreements on cooperation in various domains, 
especially in economic, trade, cultural, scientific, and 
technological fields, on a bilateral basis, a new trait of the 
situation is that the multilateral relations between Vietnam and 
ASEAN have been raised to a new level. 
  All the ASEAN countries have supported the idea of promptly 
granting ASEAN membership to Vietnam. As an immediate step, 
they have allowed Vietnam to participate in five committees and 
six cooperation programs and in the regional forum to be held in 
Bangkok in July to exchange views on measures to be taken to 
guarantee regional security. 
  -- Worthy of note is that following President Ho Chi Minh's 
first visit to Myanmar [Burma] in February 1958, our prime 
minister also paid an official visit to Myanmar -- a Southeast 
Asian country which has great sentiments for us and has long 
provided assistance to our people's struggle -- in May 1994. 
  -- The Vietnamese-Chinese relations have been marked with 
the 
extensive exchanges of various delegations from all sectors and 
echelons, including a Vietnamese National Assembly delegation 
led by the National Assembly chairman. The two sides have 
signed various agreements on transit shipping and have opened 
various border gates such as the Mon Cai and Dong Hung border 
gates. These measures are aimed at putting their business and 
exchange activities on the right track. Various talks at the 
expert level on overland boundaries and on the delineation of 
the Bac Bo Gulf in accordance with the agreement on basic 
principles for resolving border and territorial issues on land 
and at sea were signed between the two countries in October last 
year. The territorial border issue is, of course, not simple 
and has, at times, been very complicated. We need patience and 
good will and we must refrain from doing anything that may 
further complicate the situation. [passage omitted reviewing 
various trips and state of relations with countries] 
  Proceeding from the desire to see a peaceful and stable 
Korean Peninsula and with its consistent support for the cause 
of peaceful unification of Korea, Vietnam has always striven to 
consolidate its friendly relations with the DPRK and broaden its 
mutually beneficial relations of cooperation with South Korea. 
In this direction, our party and the Korean Workers' Party have 
exchanged visits at the party central committee secretarial 
level. The South Korean foreign minister officially visited 
Vietnam in mid- May 1994 while a high-level Vietnamese military 
delegation led by Senior General Doan Khue, minister of national 
defense, has been on an official friendly visit the DPRK since 
mid-June. [passage omitted] 
  Dear comrades and friends, it can be said that the first 
half 
of 1994 saw inexorable diplomatic activities by Vietnam. Not 
only did these activities contribute greatly to the cause of 
peace, stability, cooperation, and cooperation with countries in 
the region and the world but they also demonstrated the positive 
character of Vietnam's efforts to stabilize and develop its 
socioeconomic, security, and national defense activities. These 
new traits have been all the more a source of encouragement for 
our Army and people to remain firm in the cause of building and 
defending their socialist fatherland. 

