BFN 

  [Text] The provincial government held a provincial meeting 
at Nanhu Guesthouse on 1 April on profoundly launching the 
activities of transforming mechanisms, strengthening management, 
tapping potentials, and improving efficiency. Vice Governor Wei 
Minxue presided over the meeting. Governor Gao Yan made a 
report entitled "Fulfilling All Tasks on This Year's Industrial 
Economy." (Zhu Tao), deputy secretary general of the State 
Economic and Trade Commission, made a speech in which he called 
for efforts to launch the activities among all enterprises in 
the country. 
  This meeting was devoted to extensively mobilizing all 
enterprises in the province to profoundly launch the activities 
of transforming mechanisms, strengthening management, tapping 
potential, and improving efficiency, which should be combined 
with all items of this year's industrial work. The purpose of 
the activities is to guide all enterprises to voluntarily 
transform operational mechanism around the establishment of the 
modern enterprise system, to consciously strengthen and improve 
management and operation, to promote technological progress, to 
comprehensively improve the quality and economic efficiency, and 
to enhance the adaptability to the market and the abilities to 
copy with changes and participate in market competition in order 
to effect a sustained, rapid, and sound development of the 
province's economy under the new situation of comprehensively 
deepening reform and opening even wider to the outside world. 
  Governor Gao Yan offered four opinions on the basic tasks of 
this meeting and on the realization of the objective of pushing 
the economy onto a new height this year. 1) The opinion on the 
current economic situation of the province; 2) launching the 
activities of transforming mechanisms, strengthening management, 
tapping potential, and improving efficiency by regarding it as 
the major task of this year's industrial economy; 3) going all 
out to organize well the industrial production in the second 
quarter; and 4) strengthening leadership and paying attention to 
implementation. 
  Governor Gao Yan stressed: Transforming mechanisms, 
strengthening management, tapping potential, and improving 
efficiency are interrelated. The transformation of mechanisms 
is the foundation for establishing the modern enterprise system. 
Only by transforming mechanisms can enterprises turn the 
pressures from the market into the internal motivation to 
strengthen management, promote technological progress, and 
improve the expertise of laborers and economic efficiency. 
[Words indistinct] launching the activities is an important 
part to establish the modern enterprise system and is a useful 
exploration to guide enterprise work under the new situation. 
The launching of the activities is of great immediate and 
strategic significance in promoting the province's reform, 
opening up, and economic development, in maintaining the 
province's social stability, and in building a developed border 
near-the-sea province. 
  The meeting also pointed out the goal of the activities as 
follows: Autonomy should be put in place among the 428 large 
and medium-sized state-owned enterprises, that are covered by 
the three-year plan, and the inventory and check of the 
stockpiles and capital of these enterprises should be completed. 
State enterprises should begin to carry out the program of 
making their management embark on a new height in three years, 
and a good foundation should be laid. Among state-owned 
enterprises, the enterprises with advanced management should 
account for 20 percent, the enterprises up to standard in 
management should account for 50 percent, and the enterprises 
under standard in management should account for 30 percent or 
lower. Most enterprises should establish the policymaking, 
information, development, and other management systems and 
should enhance their abilities to overcome unfavorable factors, 
to keep breast of the changes in markets, and to restrict 
themselves. The profit- and tax-yielding rate of the capital of 
the industrial enterprises exercising independent accounting 
should be raised by 2 percentage points. The per capita labor 
productivity of these enterprises should be raised by 14 
percent, the comprehensive energy consumption for each 10,000 
yuan of output value should drop by 3 percent, the turnover of 
the funds retained from their profits should be accelerated, and 
the marketing rate of their products should reach 97 percent. 
The range of unprofitable industrial enterprises covered by the 
budget should drop by 5 percentage points, and the amount of 
deficits should decrease by 10 percent. 

