BFN 

<F P=106> ["(joe)"-signed report: "The Army: The Number of Interested </F>
Parties Is Increasing, the Number of Apartments Has Declined"] 
  [Text] Prague -- Almost 1,000 people have shown an 
interest in serving in the rapid deployment brigade since the 
start of the Czech Army's recruitment drive. Defense Minister 
A. Baudys said at yesterday's news conference that this is 
approximately one-third of the number required for this unit, 
which should have 3,000 men. Not all applicants, however, meet 
the standards required. The minister also referred to the talks 
with representatives from the Slovak Army, with which the Czech 
Army has concluded an agreement on mutual cooperation, and the 
talks concerning the Partnership for Peace plan. However, 
instead of a meeting involving the Visegrad Group defense 
ministers, which was proposed by the Slovak side, A. Baudys 
thinks it is more purposeful to hold expert consultations on 
specific common issues. 
  The minister praised the recent government decision that 
enables the Czech Army to sell surplus military materials and 
property in its ownership. Baudys estimated the book value of 
the discarded materials to be 1 billion korunas [Kc]; however, 
he pointed out that this often involves property that it is 
difficult to sell. The property is offered to the state 
administration and, as long as the right of first option is not 
utilized, it is sold at auction by real estate agencies. The 
facilities vacated by the Czech Army in the cities are usually 
turned into apartments for soldiers. Thus, the army is 
partially resolving the situation whereby -- by the adoption of 
the new housing law -- it lost, according to A. Baudys, the 
right to administer roughly 30,000 apartments. The Czech Army 
contributed Kc1.8 billion to the state budget last year by 
selling its property. At the same time, the cost of protecting 
and upkeeping its property, which placed a burden on the Army -- 
that is, on the state budget -- has been reduced. 
  [Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech on 4 May on page 2, under the 
headline "The Public Can Be Unconcerned," carries the following 
"(jis)"-signed report: "According to Defense Minister Antonin 
Baudys, all the viral strains kept by the Army have been 
destroyed. He issued an order to destroy the viruses in February 
on the basis of a recommendation from an interdepartmental 
commission made up of experts from the Army and the Health 
Ministry. It had come to the conclusion that it was not 
necessary to continue to store the viruses. The commission's 
task is to assess all the materials on the research work carried 
out in the Czech Republic with various bacteriological 
materials."] 

