Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Wu Xingdu: "Closer Ties Draw More ROK </F>
Cash"] 
  [Text] The Republic of Korea President Kim Yong-sam's 
visit to China will send the flourishing trade to a new high. 
  Kim's visit, which kicked off on Saturday, coincides with a 
new investment boom in China by more ROK companies. 
  Investment by large companies, such as Hyundai, Lucky 
Goldstar, Daewoo and Sunkyoung, has surged in particular. 
  Chances are good that these companies will win bids for 
China's major infrastructure projects. 
  The projects include the Beijing subways, dams on the Yellow 
and Yangtze rivers, railways in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous 
Region, telecommunication facilities and offshore oil 
development. 
  Aside from energy, environmental protection and 
pharmaceutical sectors, ROK companies are also competitive in 
electronics and machinery industries. 
  The two countries still enjoy good co-operation in the 
aerospace industry. 
  The Republic of Korea has listed 36 products as its top 
exports, which include freight cars, auto parts and 
refrigerators. 
  In September last year, the two countries convened a 
high-level meeting to discuss the reduction of tariffs on ROK's 
exports to China and the proportion of products by joint 
ventures to be sold back to ROK markets. 
  The meeting paved the way for more ROK investment in China's 
technology and capital-intensive projects. 
  The two sides also have agreed to set up a special work 
panel 
to oversee co-operative plans. 
  According to the agreement, ROK is responsible for 
industrial, commercial, joint venture and energy projects, while 
China takes on technology, information and market development. 
  Despite this progress, China has suffered a deficit in the 
past few years, as much as $2.5 billion in 1993. 
  Chinese officials have complained that while ROK exports to 
the mainland enjoy favourable terms, Chinese exports face 
deteriorating conditions. 
  ROK has restricted imports of grain and other agricultural 
products from China to protect its domestic market from being 
squeezed. 
  And it still restricts Chinese business people from entering 
its territory. 
  But on the Chinese side, the undesirable trade systems have 
yet to be improved to further meet international demands. 
  China has in many cases imposed non-tariff measures to limit 
imports, and such measures are not known to the outsiders. 
  But China has agreed to make public all its regulations to 
rejoin the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) this 
year. 
  It has become the largest overseas market for ROK 
investment. 
Most of the investment has ended up in shoes, leather, garments, 
furniture, electronics and building materials sectors. 

