BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by correspondent Alves Antonio in Lusaka] </F>
  [Text] Good afternoon! Delegations from the government and 
the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola [UNITA] 
did not meet this morning. The negotiators from the government 
and UNITA were scheduled to meet this morning to continue to 
discuss the future of the Voice of Resistance of the Black 
Cockerel [Vorgan], but the meeting did not take place. 
  It is believed that the (?failure) to hold the meeting is 
connected with a letter the UNITA negotiating team addressed to 
Alioune Blondin Beye, special representative of the UN secretary 
general in Angola and the mediator at the peace talks, over the 
weekend. In the letter, UNITA asks for clarification on its 
role in the government at all levels. 
  Observers say that without this reply UNITA is not 
interested 
in progress on any other debate. Angola Radio Nacional learned 
that the government has already informed the mediator of its 
stand on UNITA's demands. It is hoped that this reply will be 
transmitted today by Alioune Blondin Beye, who left for Luanda 
yesterday for contacts with representatives of the U.S. Senate. 
Alioune Blondin Beye is expected to return to Lusaka at 1330 or 
1430. 
  The peace talks are therefore back to square one. The 
government wants to conclude discussions on the future of Radio 
Vorgan while UNITA says no, demanding first to know what posts 
it will have in the government. The talks have been 
characterized by progress and setbacks. 
  This afternoon, something will be defined, however, as long 
as UNITA receives the reply it desires. Unless the negotiators 
and mediators find a way out, everything will become 
complicated. A solution must be found however because it is 
imperative to advance firmly forward to bring peace to the 
Angolan people, who still trust in their officials, who in 
Lusaka are trying to find more just, viable, and lasting 
solutions for a better future for all. All that the delegations 
from the government and UNITA were able to do today was to hold 
internal meetings. 

