BFN 

<F P=106> [Column by Ferai Tinc: "Clinton Should Not Have Met </F>
Papandreou" -- punctuation as published] 
  [Text] President Clinton's decision to meet Greek Prime 
Minister Andreas Papandreou was a tactical error. His talks 
with Papandreou in the White House when the Serbs were 
threatening to massacre 65,000 people in Gorazde and reject the 
warnings that have been made to them has weakened not only the 
U.S. approach on the developments in Bosnia but also the policy 
of all the allies. 
  In an article in THE NEW YORK TIMES, Robert Kaplan, who is 
the author of "Balkan Ghosts," said that Clinton has sent the 
wrong message to the Serbs by receiving Papandreou. He also 
recalled the developments that preceded the Gulf War. It will 
be recalled that the U.S. ambassador to Iraq held talks with 
Saddam Husayn and conveyed the wrong message to him prior to the 
war. Saddam Husayn was convinced that the United States 
approved his intention to occupy Kuwait. 
  It has been 15 days since NATO's first operation over 
Gorazde, which was unsuccessful. The second operation last week 
was even worse. Consequently, the Serbs began to play with the 
residents of Gorazde, just like a cat plays with a mouse. 
  Let us consider the developments that took place during the 
past week. The UN officials convened with great difficulty 
after the UN organization was insulted and described as "a 
useless organization" by everyone. The NATO officials met the 
next day. The only specific decision that was adopted was that 
an operation against the Serbs would not be launched before 
Russia was consulted. 
  The Serbs shrugged at NATO's ultimatum at the moment it was 
conveyed to them. 
  The weak political will in the two organizations is the main 
reason for the failure to implement NATO's decisions. Halting 
the Serbs by bombing one or two of their positions as a warning 
is impossible. However, it must be noted that the NATO 
countries are required to provide additional aircraft and troops 
for an extensive operation. Meanwhile, a need may arise for an 
extensive ground operation. However, no one is prepared for 
that. Obviously, the international community is helpless 
against the Serbs. 
  Under the circumstances, Russia and Greece are doing 
everything they can to further weaken the international 
alliance, which is already fragile. 
  Papandreou is the only leader who opposed NATO's ultimatum 
on 
Sarajevo. He is also the leader who has violated the 
international embargo on former Yugoslavia most by maintaining 
the supply of fuel and other commodities to Serbia. Considering 
that, Clinton's decision to hold talks with Papandreou on the 
question of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia when a 
resolute stand is required against the Serbs was a very wrong 
approach. 
  Clinton's talks with Papandreou on the Cyprus problem were 
even more meaningless. 
  Is it not possible to inform those who ask Ankara to make 
concessions so that they can encourage a reconciliation between 
Turkey and Greece to regard Greece's approach on Bosnia and the 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia as an example? As far as 
talks with that country are concerned, Turkey has its own 
conditions. 

