Norway 

<F P=102>   94WS0290C Paris L'USINE NOUVELLE in French 24 Mar 94 p 47 </F>
<F P=103> 94WS0290C </F>
<F P=104>  Paris L'USINE NOUVELLE </F>
<F P=105>  French </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jean-Michel Meyer: "Elf Creates an </F>
Anti-Pollution Center"; first paragraph is L'USINE NOUVELLE 
introduction] 
  [Text] The group's Norwegian subsidiary houses its 
new laboratories to study marine hydrocarbon pollution and ways 
to combat it. 
  The 19 March inauguration in Norway of the Akvamiljo center 
to study marine hydrocarbon pollution was a watery one, marked 
by snow, rain, and hail showers. Built by Elf Petroleum Norge 
(EPN) at the mouth of the Boknafjord on the west coast, the 
center is only five kilometers from EPN's headquarters in 
Stavanger. The center's mission, explains its assistant director 
Bertrand Gaudebert, is "to learn more about the risks of our 
industry's impact on marine environments, and to devise ways of 
cleaning up pollution and restoring sites." 
  Akvamiljo is the second research center, after its 
geophysics 
institute in London, that the petroleum group has established 
outside France. "We found the scientific marine environment 
expertise we needed in Norway," adds Bernard Gaudebert. EPN and 
Rogalandsforskning, Stavanger county's semi-public research 
institute, have signed a 10-year collaboration agreement that 
calls for the latter to supply nine of the 11 researchers that 
will work at Akvamiljo. The specialists will be drawn from the 
fields of chemistry, marine biology, zoophysiology, immunology, 
and microbiology. 
  Elf will pursue the EUREKA Bioren project to study 
hydrocarbon biodegradation--on which it has been laboring for 
several years--in Norway. The program is underwritten by EPN, 
Elf France, the French Petroleum Institute, and 
Rogalandsforskning. Bioren aims to refine our knowledge of the 
mechanisms involved in hydrocarbon biodegradation, and to 
improve the effectiveness of biological treatments as a function 
of ocean conditions, the salt content of the water, the type of 
hydrocarbon pollution, and so on. It also seeks to model the 
effects of the additives used to biodegrade hydrocarbons, in 
keeping with the characteristics of the polluted site. 
  The bulk of the center's marine ecotoxicology work will 
consist of helping devise standard microtoxicology tests in 
conjunction with other European research laboratories. The tests 
will measure the impact of chemicals employed in offshore oil 
work on living organisms such as crustaceans, turbot larva, and 
algae. 
  To gauge the effects of marine pollution on animal and 
aquatic life, Akvamiljo researchers are putting together 
biosensors. The scientists' goal is to find a marker of past 
pollution "carried" by living organisms. Such a marker might 
consist of DNA damage or fish otoliths--that is, mineral stones 
of the calcium carbonate that is present naturally in living 
organisms. Powerful analytical tools such as laser or 
electron-scanning microscopes could then be used to detect heavy 
metals or other substances that had accumulated in the stones. 
  Improved techniques to clean up drilling refuse aim to 
extract the hydrocarbons in drillings and oil sludge (introduced 
through the drag bit, they do not dissolve salts and thus 
prevent the formation of cavities in the rock). An extraction 
and cleanup process using supercritical CO2 is under 
study. The technique will enable oil companies to send drilling 
waste from which all traces of hydrocarbons have been removed to 
the bottom of the ocean. 
  The center's final goal is the development of 
technologies--notably techniques to prevent accidental 
spills--to combat hydrocarbon pollution. Specific sensors acting 
as sentinels in the buoys of offshore or port areas could be 
used to detect abnormally high hydrocarbon rates. 
<H5>  Studies with the Group's Ocean-Drilling Subsidiaries </H5>
  The Akvamiljo center, which is wholly financed by the oil 
group's Norwegian subsidiary at a cost of Fr32 million, is open 
to any Elf entity. It will conduct joint studies with the 
southwestern laboratories; with Atochem's fresh water research 
center and its subsidiary Ceca, which has developed a nutrient 
that speeds up the biodegradation of hydrocarbons; and with any 
Elf subsidiary that drills at sea, from Norway to Guinea, 
Angola, or Gabon. 
<H5>  Elf Akvamiljo's Facilities </H5>
  The center's 11 researchers work in 4 research laboratories 
that occupy 1,700 square meters of buildings housing 
sophisticated equipment. 
  The chemical analysis lab, for instance, can measure 
infinitesimal traces of pollutants in tissue through the 
combined use of gas or liquid chromatography and mass 
spectrometry. 
  The center also boasts a fermentation and microbiology 
laboratory with classic tools such as autoclaves, etc. It allows 
researchers to work in a controlled atmosphere. 
  Finally, the ecotoxicology lab can recreate cold, tropical, 
or warm atmospheres. It includes an experimental building for 
reproducing various marine conditions such as tides, rocky or 
sandy beaches, and so on. The water required for research is 
drawn from the fjord at a depth of 80 meters and a rate of 12 
cubic meters an hour. After use, it is treated in a wastewater 
station and returned to sea. 
  Akvamiljo has an operating budget of Fr16 million a year. 
<H5>  Biodegradation Know-How That Works </H5>
  Name: Inipol EAP 22. 
  Creator: Ceca (Elf group) 
  Feat of arms: made it possible to speed up the natural 
breakdown of hydrocarbons (bioremediation) spilled on Alaskan 
beaches following the wreck of the Exxon Valdez in 1989. Inipol 
EAP 22 is a nitrogen and phosphorus nutrient that stimulates the 
growth of many microorganisms in the marine environment which 
are capable of breaking down hydrocarbons. 

