Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ulaanbaatar, January 8 (OANA-MONTSAME) -- The 
newspaper ARDIYN ERH informs that the State Great Hural (SGH) 
session finished consideration in the first reading of the draft 
law on struggle with hard drinking. The draft law envisages 
production of strong drinks, except the traditional milk vodka, 
only with permission of the government on the basis of 
suggestions of corresponding state and professional organs. 
  Permissions on sale of standard strong drinks will be given 
by aymag and city administration heads. 
  The draft law envisages measures on anti-alcohol propaganda. 
In connection with the expected adoption of the law on struggle 
with hard drinking an issue about additions and amendments in 
the law on administrative responsibility was discussed. 
  The draft of the corresponding law is agreed in the main. At 
the session an information of the Chairman of the Constitutional 
Court G. Sobd was heard. He informed that the court has 
considered as groundless the complaint of the two citizens of 
the capital, concerning the elections of the State Great Hural 
in 1992, these citizens considered that the elections have been 
conducted with violations of the Constitution. The session 
approved the resolution on recognition of the conclusion of the 
Constitutional Court. The parliament set to consideration of 
the draft law on regulation of foreign currency activities. 
Discussion of the draft law in the first reading finished at 
the yesterday's sitting. 
  As the newspaper notes, moulding of bronzea monument to D. 
Suhbaatar on the central square of the capital, seemingly, is 
postponed for an uncertain period of time. The chief painter of 
the capital N. Vanchig, the chief architect T. Jadambaa and 
other persons write in the newspaper about this issue. The main 
reason for this is the lack of financial means. 
  The chief painter of the city N. Vanchig expresses 
confidence 
that the moulding of the monument of bronze will be 
accomplished, when it will become possible. The newspaper 
informs about the planned realization of some projects on 
reconstruction of the country's railway transport at the expense 
of assistance and credits of foreign countries and international 
organizations. With a gratis assistance of Japan works on 
expansion of the border railway station Zamyn-uud have started. 
Japan agreed also to grant credit worth of 71 mln [million] US 
dollars on favourable terms for development of railway 
transport. An agreement on granting in the first instance 30 
mln dollars within the next two years was signed between the 
governments of the two countries. 
  Besides that, credits for renewal of the rolling stock will 
be granted by the World Bank. The newspaper points out to the 
necessity of an effective use of credit means, in an interview 
with the newspaper correspondent an official of the National 
Development Department P. Danspanjav announces that for building 
a hydroelectric power station on the River Egiingol 268 mln US 
dollars are needed, the Asian Development Bank agreed to allot 
700 mln US dollars. The rest of means should be allotted by the 
Mongolian side. The issue, as it is supposed, will be 
considered in the first quarter of the current year. The 
hydroelectric power station project is accomplished by Mongolian 
specialists jointly with the Swiss company "Electrowatt". As P. 
Dansranjav considers, capital investments in building the 
electric power station, in all probability, will be allotted 
starting from 1995. 
  The agricultural newspaper MONGOLYN HUDOO publishes an 
interview of the Chief of the Food Department of the Ministry of 
Food and Agriculture B. Alzahgui. He tells about measures on 
realization of the government programme "Food '93". B. Alzahgui 
tells that in 1993 measures have been taken on mobilization of 
internal resources for improvement of food supply of the 
population, involving in this work all citizens. In 7993 many 
families started breeding cattle, pigs, raising poultry, growing 
vegetables. According to the preliminary data, more than 40 
thousand families and 1000 economic units started being engaged 
in agriculture. Approximately the same number of families and 
organizations in cattle pig-breeding, poultry farming, at many 
places in rabbit breeding and bee-keeping. For these purposes 
the state has granted to aymags and cities 180 mln tugriks 
credit on favourable terms. Realization of the projects on 
production of vegetable oil and granulated sugar in the country 
has begun. B. Alzahgui notes that there are all opportunities 
for supplying the population with food at the expense of 
internal sources, the newspaper publishes an interview of its 
correspondent with the administration head of Ulaanuul Somon of 
Hubsgul Aymag D. Seseer, he notes that in the majority of bags 
(primary administrative units) [word indistinct] persons are 
elected their chairmen. The new persons, notes D. Seseer, are 
striving to work in a new fashion. D. Seseer notes that the 
local authorities have to face also many difficulties, lack of 
means, premises, transport, he considers the administration 
heads as the main support for local authorities. 

