CSO 

<F P=106> [Roundtable discussion under the rubric "Roundtable in GOLOS </F>
ARMENII"; material prepared by Marina Grigoryan: "The National 
Idea in the Party Program"] 
  [Text] That was the wording of the topic of the 
roundtable discussion held in the editorial offices of GOLOS 
ARMENII to which representatives of various political 
forces-parties and organizations were invited. Participating in 
the discussion were: Ashot Navasardyan--chairman of the 
Republican Party of Armenia, Aram Sarkisyan--chairman of the 
Democratic Party of Armenia, Igor Muradyan--from the 
sociopolitical organization Zharang, Sergey Badalyan--secretary 
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Armenia, 
Grant Khachatryan--chairman of the union Constitutional Law, 
Karlen Torosyan--chairman of the executive committee of the 
Union of the Sports World, and Vaan Ovanesyan--chairman of the 
National Democratic Union. Let us note that representatives of 
the ARF Dashnakiutyun, the RamkavarAzatakan, the AOD [Armenian 
National Movement], and the ONS [expansion not identified] were 
also invited but, unfortunately, they did not consider it 
necessary to participate in the discussion. 
  A. Sarkisyan: Apparently to begin with we need a 
small amount of representative information about what 
unification around a national idea should be, taking into 
account the fact that our people have already proved that such a 
unification is possible and is a powerful consolidating force. 
This includes the problem of Karabakh, which, unfortunately, has 
degenerated into something else. This idea simply does not exist 
today, which is obviously a disaster for our entire society. In 
our view, this is the fault of the ruling force that came to 
power as a result of the consolidation of the people around a 
single idea. 
  As concerns the national idea in the program of the 
Democratic Party, it is fundamental and emerges from the 
following concept. We are faced with the problem of restoring 
the national image of the nation, which might also be the idea 
that holds things together in the matter of revival of the 
Armenian nation as a civilized one that respects human values 
and is developing in this direction. The restoration of this 
kind of image, in our view, presupposes the existence of many 
programs around which the most diverse political forces can 
rally. Above all it is necessary to determine national 
priorities--the range of these tasks and the possibilities of 
carrying them out. We see a number of them that could quite 
possibly be carried out even under current conditions. 
  But this is not being done. We have not created an 
integrated, constructive program, which, incidentally, is 
natural, taking into account the fact that the people who have 
come to power are not of a constructive inclination but, on the 
contrary, are working only for the idea of rejecting the 
communist one. As a result their actions have included so little 
that is positive that the effect is purely destructive. 
  Our party has developed a program in which Armenia's 
external 
priorities, its position and role in the modern world, have been 
worked out along with the domestic policy ensuing from this. It 
is even somewhat awkward for me to say that the difference 
between the national and the nationalistic is not only 
methodological but also practical in nature, while the president 
of the Republic of Armenia in his speech tried hard to prove 
that the end point of a national ideology is nationalism or 
fascism. One must assume that the failure of the program that 
they supposedly had required an ideological "packaging" of a 
bankrupt policy, because to try to prove that national ideology 
and national accord are false concepts is simply absurd. 
  In our program the national credo follows from common human 
values that, in our view, are in harmony with national ideas. 
Every people also has specific peculiarities that, of course, 
must be taken into account. And I do not know of a single 
democratic country that does not have a national program. 
According to the president's logic, for example, France would 
have to be considered a fascist state since there 
everything--beginning with the constitution and ending with 
politics--is subordinate to national interests, which in no way 
contradict the interests of other peoples. It is appropriate to 
recall that even General de Gaulle was put into power only after 
the society's democratic institutions were formed. Moreover, he 
initially became prime minister only so that he would not have 
the opportunity to concentrate an immense amount of power in his 
own hands, and only several years later was he allowed to become 
president. 
  GOLOS ARMENII: I would like to draw the attention 
of those present to the next point: If we think that in 1988 we 
had a consolidating national idea, how and why has it become so 
degraded that today we speak of its absence? Would the easiest 
path not be to heap the responsibility for this on the 
authorities alone? 
  A. Navasardyan: To deny the national idea means to 
deny the existence of the nation in general, to reduce all of 
our life to a process of liberation from prejudices. It turns 
out that we simply reject absolutely all values created and 
respected by nations and consider ourselves on this side of the 
barricade while on the other side there is nothing but falsity, 
illiteracy, idolatry, and prejudice. The so-called centrists can 
only run--from time to time serving on one side of the barricade 
and then on the other. In essence, this is the environment in 
which essential factors operate. In this sense the Republican 
Party is purely nationalistic since it is fairly well grounded 
in its world view and has its own ideology based on the priority 
of national values, considering them the highest ones after God. 
Naturally, national interests are the highest for us, and our 
defining concepts are the motherland, the nation, and the state. 
At the same time the creation of the state is by no means an end 
in itself but a necessary condition for the existence and 
development of the people, which should embody the most 
essential particularities of the nation. 
  In our view, in the world, on the one hand, there is a war 
with the purpose of destroying nations conditioned by the clash 
of various political and ideological concepts, and, on the other 
hand, there is a struggle for the survival of the species. 
Between these two poles there are a multitude of forces of the 
most diverse trends. We include ourselves in this range of 
sociopolitical trends that values highly the national gene pool 
and national peculiarities. Hence our idea of a state that 
contributes to the greatest degree to their preservation, 
development, and flourishing. In our view, today the Armenian 
people are considerably removed from a true self-evaluation, 
alienated from it, and therefore we set as our goal improvement 
of the society, interpretation of the path that has been 
traveled, and a striving for the future. As for the loss of the 
national idea we had previously, it has essentially dissolved in 
the worldwide ideology that has pervaded Armenia. But our 
society is searching again today--this roundtable is evidence of 
that--and it is trying again to find the foundation on which our 
national idea should be built. 
  G. Khachatryan: It seems to me that in our 
discussion it is impossible to avoid the existing background, 
which is, undoubtedly, the president's assertion that "the 
national ideology is a false political category." It is very 
important to understand why he said that. I am convinced that 
this was said not because the president himself thinks this way 
and not even in order to please someone outside Armenia. There 
was a different purpose: To weaken our ability to oppose the 
virus of extreme liberalism brought in from outside Armenia, 
against which our people have not yet developed an immunity and 
proponents of which are the ruling elite headed by L. 
Ter-Petrosyan. 
  This is where we must begin. And when we try to prove the 
opposite associations arise with a certain fable to the effect 
that one fool threw a rock into a hole and 100 wise men were 
unable to pull it out. Therefore, I consider it superfluous to 
prove that national ideology does indeed exist--that was proved 
long ago, and not by us. More essential for me is another part 
of the question--how the national idea is reflected in our 
party's program and actions. 
  The Constitutional Law Union program was written in 1989 and 
at that time the existence in the party program of points 
pertaining to national categories did not surprise anyone. They 
amounted to the following: 
  First of all, we declare our support for and devotion to 
absolutely all national values. Other points in the program 
pertain to national structures and, to a certain degree, they 
reflect the circumstance that the party skeleton was made up of 
people with a technical education. In our view, the best way of 
organizing the nation is to develop national structures. For our 
individuality, our personality, is sufficiently well formed just 
as are the following degrees of organization: The Armenian 
family, the concept of the Armenian community, which was 
flattened to a certain degree in the former USSR but was 
nonetheless preserved in the Western diaspora; the concept of 
the Armenian party has also been formed. In order to move on to 
a new level of sovereignty it is necessary, consequently, for 
the state to develop those national structures that are not yet 
sufficiently formed. 
  Unfortunately I must say that since the first days of the 
creation of our statehood, to our own surprise we have ended up 
in the ranks of the political opposition and have a greater 
opportunity to fight not "for" something, but against the policy 
that is aimed at the destruction of national structures. This 
can be rectified only if there is a radical change in the 
attitudes of the people in the direction of creative activity. 
Then we will have broader possibilities of participating in it. 
  S. Badalyan: I do not agree that there was no 
national idea--it was only because of it that our people 
survived. This is the idea of survival, the creation of our own 
statehood, an individual society, briefly, the idea of national 
and social liberation. 
  Let us recall where the notion of the lack of a national 
idea 
came from. The problem of Nagorno-Karabakh did not come up out 
of the blue. The forces that wanted to destroy the country, 
particularly the Armenian Republic, to get the Communists out of 
power, introduced the idea of the absence of a national idea in 
the Communist Party of Armenia, accusing it of departing from 
national approaches and betraying national interests. Hence 
there arose speculation about the need for a national idea, a 
national program. The falseness of this premise led to today's 
impasse. 
  For it turns out that the period from 1920 until 1988 was 
not 
the realization of a national idea, it was promised in 1988 but 
it was not found, and we ended up, as it were, at the 
crossroads. I do not think that the people today are unaware of 
the way out of the impasse. Do not count on political 
propaganda; the policy and program will become national not from 
frequent repetition of this word but from real activity on the 
part of one political force or another. The Armenian people have 
become civilized in a European way with the corresponding level 
of statehood--perhaps with a certain limited sovereignty--as a 
result of the policy conducted by the Communist Party of 
Armenia. All values toward which we are oriented, about whose 
salvation and restoration we are speaking, originated as a 
result of this policy--with all the shortcomings of the latter. 
  We do not see national self-isolation as a way out for the 
Armenian people. Over 70 years it has become clear that the real 
spirit, the potential of Armenians has been manifested only 
because of close contacts with other peoples of the former USSR. 
Only because of this has our people risen out of nonexistence. I 
want to remind you that during the war years it was around 
Soviet Armenia, fighting along with other states against 
fascism, that all progressive Armenians united--both inside and 
outside the republic. It was Soviet Armenia that became the 
embodiment of the Armenian people for a sufficiently independent 
existence, the development of culture, science, and economics. 
And today we think that the national program can be implemented 
in close connection with the historical surroundings of our 
existence throughout the past 200 years. We see the only way out 
of the existing impasse in the creation of a union of 
independent states--with preservation of all the attributes of a 
subject of international law. This is our historic destiny. If 
the largest states of Europe strive for integration, we have 
needed this for a long time. The collapse of the Union hit us 
Armenians hardest of all. Therefore we must be among the first 
to strive for the restoration of the union of states--taking our 
past mistakes and omissions into account. 
  It would be wrong to reduce all of our problems to Karabakh 
alone. But here, too, we have taken certain steps along with 
Russia so that when we create a new union it will include not 
only the former Union republics but also all disputed 
territories. If we want to be realistic and find a solution we 
must join together into a new union under a new name with a new 
content. There is no other way for the Armenian people--this is 
our national idea and our national program. In our view it is 
inevitable--and the sooner this unification takes place the 
sooner we will solve our national problems. 
  GOLOS ARMENII: Are we to understand that unless 
this new union occurs our people have no future? 
  S. Badalyan: I am fairly familiar with the 
processes occurring on the territory of the former USSR. These 
processes are going on and we must manage to be among the 
architects of the new plan. There are no other options for 
Armenia. Otherwise we will simply exist at the level of some 
kind of African country--Somalia, for example. And this, 
incidentally, would suit Turkey just fine. 
  I. Muradyan: Nationalism is a political method of 
preserving traditions. The Armenian tradition, the 
land-motherland was given to Armenians by the Lord God and 
Armenians must exist as a nation to work their land. These are 
the ends that must be served by the national system for survival 
and life support. This is what the Lord God wants. The national 
system of survival and life support must include as a totality 
the state organization, economic and social structures, and 
ethical norms. This system must not be based either on liberal, 
one-world, or on totalitarian-communist principles, it must not 
adopt either the left or right ideology, but must be based on 
the ideology of revolutionary conservatism, which presupposes a 
national, nonclass revolution for the preservation of tradition. 
  As a political method nationalism is identical to socialism 
and corporativism, at the bases of which lie the principle of 
subordination of the interests of the individual to the 
interests of the nation, on the basis of protection and 
preservation of the possibilities of the individual as the 
bearer of tradition. In the present historical conditions 
corporativism is a form of existence of those social groups 
whose vital activity is based on the life of the nation in the 
native land. That is, the motherland is for them a spiritual and 
material means of existence to which there is no alternative. 
The social base of national corporativism is the majority of the 
peasant-land owners and many of the most skilled hired workers 
and intelligentsia, and also part of the bourgeoisie, whose 
existence as a social group is conditioned by activity in the 
motherland. Unfortunately, only a small part of the diaspora is 
spiritually and materially interested in national corporativism. 
  The concrete conditions for Armenia's existence do not allow 
socialist or corporative methods that are based on the "theory 
of large enclosed autarchic spaces," whose ideologists are 
Leibnitz, Friedrich List, and Fichte, since Armenia will 
automatically be a part of either Russia or a liberalist 
supersystem. Corporativism is a guarantee of Armenia's 
independence under the conditions of its active participation in 
international division of labor and the struggle for an economic 
place in the sun. 
  Regardless of how politically attractive and aesthetically 
irreproachable one might find the truly traditionalist world 
line of conservatism, running from Plato and Thomas Aquinas to 
Leibnitz, Fichte, and List and brilliantly carried on by Werner 
Zohlvart, Artur Leclerc, Vandenbruk, and Alain Benois, the 
essence of nationalism lies in the fact that no ideology, 
regardless of how true, may be applied by a nation in 
cosmopolitical form. There is no nationalism without recognition 
of the unconditional priority of Armenian blood over any 
ideology. 
  Therefore the eastern Armenian national-conservative club 
Zharang sets as its task to develop a national ideology based 
not on conservative social concepts that are ultimately 
cosmopolitical but on the basis of an understanding of the 
essence of the national tradition that proceeds from the Lord 
God. 
  Political nationalism is unthinkable without the formation 
of 
a certain mentality, ethic, and style. This stereotype of 
behavior becomes national when an entire generation responds to 
the question "To whom does Armenia belong?" by saying "Armenia 
belongs to us." If the nation is truly viable and the Lord God 
is willing for it to express itself precisely as a nation and 
not a bearer of some alien cosmopolitical mentality or idea, 
this nation is capable of nationalizing any ideology. I do not 
see in Armenia any parties that would be bearers of any specific 
ideology. But if I am told that in order to save the life of one 
Armenian, in order to prevent one drop of Armenian blood from 
being spilled I have to accept some party--then I will do that. 
  A. Sarkisyan: Allow me to disagree with the idea 
that parties today unite people according to their mentality, 
etc. Perhaps this is not so clearly expressed in our reality, 
but still, parties unite people around ideologies. A party that 
does not express a national ideology simply does not have the 
right to exist. Let me give a concrete example. 
  The democratic party expresses the interests of the hired 
worker. If we are denied this right society will lose a good 
deal because there will be no parties expressing the interests 
of social segments. There is no need to jump from one extreme to 
the other. Cosmopolitanism is the same kind of utopia as 
communism. Incidentally, now, because of our president's efforts 
we are trying to insert ourselves into some kind of created new 
world order. This too is a utopia. But we are speaking about the 
fact that we must have a national program and the nation must 
carry it out. Today the idea exists; it is another matter that 
it is not of a consolidating nature. 
  V. Ovanesyan: The very fact of our discussion is 
evidence that this question is still open. It is not even that 
there is no national idea--in addition there is no understanding 
of what a national ideology is. In my view it is a fairly 
complex construct that should include the mysticism of the world 
view, cultural and historical values, economic formulas, social 
structure, and civil relations. It is not a text that can be 
placed in the program of some party--it is simply that in this 
organic "edifice" there are individual blocks that must be 
reflected in the programs of various parties. 
  In essence, a discussion of national ideology must be not of 
a party but of an economic nature. It is no secret that the 
primary cause of this discussion was the president's speech. Let 
us try to understand why such a speech was possible. 
Additionally, let us recall the background against which the 
national movement was born in 1988. In the large scheme of 
things at that time academic thought had not provided ready-made 
formulas, and the study of the history of Armenian ideological 
thought convinces us that we did not have the necessary basis 
for creating an effective modern national ideology. Rather, 
there was an ideological crisis, certain mothballed systems with 
respect to which we would have liked to express ourselves. 
  There are several integral systems. The Dashnak ideology of 
Aydat has a pyramidal nature that presupposes a supertask. As a 
counterbalance to this the opposite pole was formed, which has 
already been discussed here--liberalism that opposed all 
existing stereotypes. But neither of the poles, as it turned 
out, worked in reality. I wish to draw attention to the 
following: We criticize and reject liberalism, but have we seen 
it in action? Are the forces speaking today from liberal 
positions--particularly the president--actually liberals? Must 
we evaluate liberalism precisely from the results of their 
activity? 
  In reality the problem is that we still have not revised our 
past, our history. Nor do we have an interpretation of the 
events that have occurred during the past six years or provided 
an academic assessment of these processes. I would like to 
recall another of the president's speeches on the occasion of 
the 50th anniversary of the Academy of Sciences where he said 
that academic thought is not fulfilling its function. One can 
agree with this in part. That is, under the conditions of the 
universal vacuum, are said opportunistic purposes and we are 
trying in response to build some kind of "edifice" of our own. 
But there can be no serious "edifice" because our culturalogical 
and political evaluations are fragmentary, there is no organic 
binding thread, we have not clarified for ourselves what 
nationalism is or what liberalism is, and we need to reinterpret 
all concepts. 
  Thus one can state that Armenia is faced with an ideological 
crisis with two parameters: First--there is no consolidating 
ideology and second--there is no agreement about the issues that 
compose one. Several approaches are being offered: Absolutely 
nationalistic and to a certain degree socialist formulas which 
are not revealed since their bearers themselves do not 
understand their essence; spineless liberal democracy, which 
does not exist as such-in reality a groundless state is being 
created. Mr. Byadalyan offers another version--to place basic 
responsibility on Russia again and work together, but then the 
center of gravity shifts as well. 
  All of these constructs are imperfect since with respect to 
any of them there arises a multitude of questions for which 
their apologists have no answers. There is no ideological 
construct today that is capable of rallying the society around 
itself and hence the lack of economic, foreign political, 
social, and other programs. 
  I would call the field within which the National Democratic 
Union is seeking a solution a synthesis of two opposing 
currents. The first is a reformation of the national supertask 
in issues related to Aydat, and the second--nationalization of 
the liberal-democratic system of values. But generally speaking 
parties cannot within themselves or in interparty contacts 
resolve problems of creating a national ideology since academic 
circles have not yet been drawn into this process. In the press 
today you will not find material of a conceptual nature, they 
are rather of a situational nature--that is, in essence the 
edifice has no first floor. It is by taking advantage of this 
vacuum that the president can allow himself to say absolutely 
absurd things. I envision the national ideology in the form of 
an open construct in which it is possible to unite around 
questions and separate in their answers. But we do not have an 
integrated idea of the range of these questions and therefore we 
cannot speak of answers yet. 
  A. Navasardyan: It is unthinkable to draw any 
conclusions today. The political parties are trying to adapt to 
the situation without any ideology and trying only to achieve a 
certain harmony of existing forces. I think that this is 
actually only a desire to adapt, but based on what and in order 
to preserve what? That in and of itself is already an ideology. 
Ultimately everything amounts to the main question: for the sake 
of what? For the sake of what are we striving to have a state 
and a competitive society? It is this question that lies at the 
basis of ideology while the other one--how?--determines the 
mechanisms. 
  K. Torosyan: We agree with many of the ideas 
expressed here, but our party's ideology is closest to what I. 
Muradyan said. I would very earnestly ask you not to scornfully 
view the concept of the sports world as people who engage only 
in sports. That is not true. The area of sports has produced 
many outstanding people--bearers of national ideology. They have 
always been bothered by the fact that they do not represent 
their motherland, Armenia, in the world arena, even during the 
times of the Soviet Union. Today they are acting under the flag 
of Armenia and, naturally, each of them would dream of acting 
under the flag of Great Armenia. Nonetheless sportsmen 
necessarily must bear a certain ideology--without it they cannot 
represent either their homeland or their nation. 
  We consider the main thing to be to preserve national 
traditions arising out of the depth of centuries and bearing a 
moral principle. What is a man in our understanding. He is above 
all a soldier for the motherland, which presupposes a high 
degree of physical, moral, and spiritual development. This is 
one of the postulates of our ideology. For us it is very 
important to have, if you will, knightly qualities of Armenian 
men, including devotion, a sense of duty and responsibility, etc. 
  When speaking of the problems bothering our people today we 
must not, of course, fail to mention first of all Artsakh. Here 
our position is simple: We are in favor of what the people of 
Artsakh want and choose for themselves--freedom. Exactly the 
same thing is true with questions of Aydat: These lands were 
given to us by God and we shall always look at the map with hope 
and faith. These are more future problems, as it were, as 
distinct from those of the present day. They amount to the 
following: Structures have been destroyed, we need new 
approaches, and in these conditions strong and courageous people 
must influence the rest with their ideology so that the people 
will achieve their goals. I would not want to criticize anybody 
but it seems to me that any party must be an advocate of the 
idea of a strong Armenia. How to achieve this is another 
question. 
  Many question the need for the creation of our party. But 
the 
people gathered in it are famous, they are bearers of the 
national ideology, and they are capable of leading. We would 
like very much for our ideology to be aimed at the creation of a 
national school where patriotic education would be at the very 
highest level. For us it is very important to have close 
contacts with other parties and on this plane today's roundtable 
has done a great deal for us. We need joint efforts of all in 
order to bring the people out of the crisis. 
  S. Badalyan: Meetings like this are indeed very 
necessary and not only for exchanging ideas. In essence our 
major and common idea today is the existing crisis of power and 
the need to constitutionally remove the ruling grouping from 
power and hold early elections. And on the plane of preparing 
for these elections a permanent roundtable would be very useful. 
  I liked V. Ovyanesyan's analytical approach to the problem. 
But I want to ask one thing: In your attitude toward the 
Communist Party do not be guided by the stereotype that we want 
to shift the responsibility to Russia once again. We are 
speaking only about a voluntary association of states with equal 
rights. The first such experiment, with all its minuses, 
provided for the flourishing of our people and therefore we want 
to be among the architects of the new union. 
  V. Ovyanesyan: I, too, have a request of that 
nature. You spoke of a stereotype with respect to the Communist 
Party. But there is also another stereotype--anti-Russism which, 
in my view, is of a mythical nature. Let us agree that in 
Armenia there are no nonpragmatic, anti-Russian vectors, there 
are only differences in approaches. And only on the basis of 
this will we hold further discussion, in any case, the image of 
the enemy should not be created on this soil. 
  GOLOS ARMENII: In concluding our discussion, let 
us return to the question as initially posed. In principle we 
all agree that in 1988 there was a national consolidating 
idea--Karabakh. But while six years ago this idea brought almost 
a million people out into the square, if it was capable of 
ousting the communist regime from power, today's sad realities 
are that in parliament there were not even 123 votes for 
including on the agenda a discussion of the Karabakh problem in 
light of the latest events. 
  Nonetheless one can state that the Karabakh movement has not 
solved all of its problems. We suggest giving a brief answer to 
this question: Is it possible today to revive the Karabakh idea 
and rally the nation around it? 
  S. Badalyan: I am absolutely certain that it is 
unthinkable to solve the problems facing our people without 
solving the problem of Nagorno-Karabakh. This is a necessary 
constituent part of both the national ideology and the national 
program. 
  A. Sarkisyan: I think that the consolidating idea 
for today could be the problem of ways of establishing the 
state. As for the model, we see it as social democracy taking 
our national specifics into account. 
  Moreover, we have to get away from revolutionary romanticism 
in any case. It seemed to me that we had already gotten over 
this disease but, unfortunately, this approach still exists. In 
any case we must deal with reality and proceed from the fact 
that national interests must be subordinated to existing 
political realities. 
  A. Navasardyan: The accusation of romanticism 
probably proceeds from the fact that I may have understood the 
topic of the roundtable incorrectly since several of the 
statements heard here pertained rather to mechanisms than a 
truly national idea. As for the ideological vacuum, it seems to 
me that there is none since every party has its own ideology, in 
any case, its activity must clearly show which ideology is 
served by one party or another. On this plane the Republican 
Party has a very clear ideology. 
  G. Khachatryan: The only consolidating idea there 
can be is freedom of the nation, which also guarantees freedom 
to each of its representatives. Why does the idea that worked in 
1988 not exist today? The people's mass awareness has received 
the idea that slavery is valued more highly than freedom. The 
idea may work again, in the first place, when people are 
convinced that slavery certainly did not reward everyone with 
the same generosity and, in the second place, when those who are 
rewarded understand that material goods are certainly not a 
criterion for freedom. 
  I. Muradyan: I consider romanticism to be the 
presumption that the people can be the bearer of a national idea 
in a formalized way. This is a harmful and dangerous illusion. 
People must have certain stamps, they must have a clear idea of 
who is an enemy and who is a friend. As seen by the people the 
national idea should be expressed by certain tabulated concepts 
and categories. For example: Karabakh must not be betrayed. This 
is a taboo and if we go against it, it will be the beginning of 
degradation. And the task of political parties is to understand 
and interpret the processes taking place and be able to present 
them to the people. 
  G. Ovanesyan: It is difficult for me to give a 
simple answer to such a large question. In any case, today the 
consolidating idea could be that of a leader who is capable of 
showing us the way into the 20th century as a strong state with 
a free Karabakh, a self-organization of Armenians on a worldwide 
scale. 
  K. Torosyan: I think that under conditions where a 
considerable part of the society is deprived of any hope and is 
apolitical, our task is to be able to inspire and unite people 
within the framework of the national idea that has been 
discussed today. As for Karabakh, this has already become a 
question of national honor for our people. There is no other 
solution but the expression of the will of the people. 
  GOLOS ARMENII: We thank you all for participating 
in our roundtable and we hope the discussion was useful to you 
and interesting to the readers. 

