Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Xu Yang: "Chinese Women Enjoy Equal Say"] </F>
  [Text] A recent survey has found that most Chinese women 
now have equal standing with their husbands on family affairs. 
  This marks a substantial improvement in the status of women 
since the founding of New China in 1949. However, there still 
exists a profound imbalance between rural and urban women, 
researchers from the Institute of Population Studies reported at 
an international conference in Beijing last week. 
  The two-year survey was financed by the United Nations' 
Population Fund and conducted by social scientists under the 
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. The study involved 11,200 
couples living in rural and urban areas in 10 provinces, 
municipalities and autonomous regions. 
  The report stated that urban women and those in wealthier 
regions have marched further down the road to equality than 
their rural sisters. 
  Family income is increasingly under the control of women in 
urban areas, but the opposite is true in the countryside. 
  About 76 per cent of the urban couples manage their family 
incomes together. But women lead men by 6 per cent if one 
family member is overseeing the budget. 
  Rural couples who share responsibility account 81 per cent. 
But 4 per cent more men than women manage the income if only 
one person oversees finances. 
  Urban husbands and wives usually discuss major spending 
outlays together. The rate varies from 52 per cent to 67 per 
cent in buying products like washing machines or refrigerators. 
  However, on occasions when one side makes the decision, the 
person tends to be the husband. 
  The proportion of rural couples discussing expenditures 
ranged between 57 per cent and 73 per cent when buying farm 
animals or building a house. 
  Nearly 80 per cent of the couples in cities and 83 per cent 
in the countryside discuss whether to have a child. 
  The data seems to suggest the impending attainment of 
equality between Chinese women and men, the researchers said. 
<H5>  Optimistic </H5>
  However, since many sample families were located in the 
economically advanced regions, the results may be a little too 
optimistic, said Sha Jicai, head of the research group. 
  China has long been a male-dominated society. 
  According to centuries-old Confucian doctrines, women should 
unequivocally obey their husbands. 
  The researchers said their survey finds that modern women 
have far more lights and influence concerning their families 
than women during their mother's generation. 
  But the traditional roles of men and women are very much a 
part of their way of thinking. 
  Most parents expect their sons to receive better education 
and attend school longer than their daughters. 
  Nearly 73 per cent of women in cities and 81 per cent in the 
rural areas believe that wives should sacrifice for their 
husbands' success. 
  The survey found that men's average monthly income is 45 
yuan 
($5.20) higher than women's in cities where 80 per cent women 
earn between 100 and 300 yuan ($11.60-$34.50) monthly. 
Researchers said this might give men a slight advantage in 
family affairs. 
  The average urban male receives 10.75 years of education, 
almost a year longer than females. In the countryside, the gap 
is 1.15 years. 
  The research group conducted one-on-one interviews with 
5,500 
urban couples and 5,700 rural couples. These randomly sampled 
couples were scattered throughout the country. 
  Conditions were strictly dictated for the surveys. Spouses 
had to live together and wives had to be between the ages of 20 
and 54. All participants answered standardized questionnaires. 
  Questions concerned women's educations, marriages, incomes, 
jobs, family decision-making, childbirth and birth control, as 
well as their attitudes toward these issues. 

