BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Anatoliy Prokopyev of the Russian Federation </F>
Border Troops Press Bureau: "`Traffic Lights' Installed Near 
Khabarovsk. Temporary Navigation Procedure Introduced in Far 
East Border Rivers for Chinese Vessels and Ships"] 
  [Text] Since navigation began in the border sectors of the 
Amur and Ussuri Rivers Chinese ships, including warships, have 
made repeated attempts to travel along Russia's internal waters 
near the city of Khabarovsk. All this was attributed to the 
practice that has evolved in recent years. 
  The point is that Article 8 of the Agreement Between the 
USSR 
and the PRC on the State Border of 16 May 1991 stated that 
"various types of ships, including warships, can sail unhindered 
from the Ussuri River to the Amur River past the city of 
Khabarovsk and back. Navigation rules will be drawn up by the 
sides' competent departments." But until recently all talks on 
this question were unsuccessful. 
  Being perfectly well aware that it is not advantageous to 
Russia to have foreign ships sailing in its waters, Khabarovsk 
administration decided do something itself to try to speed up 
the inordinately protracted process of the Russian-Chinese talks. 
  As a result our border guards have started to prevent the 
illegal passage of Chinese ships past Khabarovsk. At the 
diplomatic level our eastern neighbor was informed that Russia, 
while observing its adherence to the spirit and letter of the 
agreement of 16 May 1991, is establishing a temporary procedure 
until work on specific navigation regulations has been completed 
and hopes that these measures will be met with understanding 
from the Chinese side. The appropriate directive on monitoring 
the temporary navigation procedure has been issued to Khabarovsk 
Kray Administration, the Amur River Shipping Company, and the 
Far East Military District. 
  The third round of Russian-Chinese talks on drawing up 
navigation rules will take place 13 June in Beijing. One would 
like to hope that it will bring progress in solving the existing 
problem. 

