Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional guerrilla activities and clashes with 
government military units monitored through 28 December. Source 
is cited in parentheses following each item. 
<H5>  Colombia </H5>
  Alleged ELN guerrillas murdered 33-year-old Aguazul Mayor 
Juan Hernando Urrego Cristancho yesterday afternoon. Aguazul, 
called the Golden Door, is one of the municipalities that will 
receive more oil royalties because the Cupiagua and La Liria oil 
fields are in its jurisdiction. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in 
Spanish 20 Dec 93 p 3a) 
  Another report indicates that ELN guerrillas detonated 
dynamite charges on the Cano Limon-Covenas oil pipeline again 
yesterday. The charges had been placed on the pipeline at the 
397 km marker in Los Balzos, El Tarra municipality, Northern 
Santander Department, and caused an oil spill of approximately 
15,000 barrels. The pipeline has still not been repaired. 
(Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 20 Dec p 3a) 
  Soldiers of the 3d Brigade killed Alvaro Martinez Baena, 
chieftain of the Sixth Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia 
(FARC) Front, in Monteloro de Tulua. There was a 40 million 
pesos reward for Martinez Baena who, according to official 
reports, was one of the commanders in charge of obtaining money 
by kidnapping and extortion of the cattlemen and ranchers in the 
area. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 21 Dec 93 p 6a) 
  Approximately 20 ELN guerrillas ambushed a police patrol 
that 
was going to destroy a poppy plantation in El Tigre, Bolivar 
Municipality, Cauca Department. The guerrilla killed four 
police officers and injured four more. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL 
TIEMPO in Spanish 22 Dec 93 pp 1, 6a) 
  Alleged ELN guerrillas dynamited a section of the Cano 
Limon-Covenas oil pipeline in the northeastern Cesar Department 
this morning. The state-owned Ecopetrol firm sent workers to 
repair the pipeline and stop the oil that is spilling into 
Cristo lake. (Mexico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 2125 GMT 25 Dec 93) 
  Alleged Simon Bolivar Guerrilla Coordinating Board, CGSB, 
guerrillas murdered Maria Millan, the mayor of the Labranza 
Grande municipality, Boyaca Department, today. (Santa Fe de 
Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 1800 GMT 26 Dec 
93) 
  The Ibague Police Department reported that CGSB guerrillas 
today attacked a group of civilians who were meeting in the 
Puerto Saldana municipality, Tolima Department. The guerrillas 
killed one person and injured four. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 1819 
GMT 26 Dec 93) 
  The Jaime Bateman Cayon group, which is a dissident group of 
19 April Movement, M-19, guerrillas, recently attacked the 
police substation in Lumbarco corregimiento, Sevilla 
municipality. The policemen, however, repelled the attack and 
killed one of the guerrillas. FARC guerrillas ambushed a police 
group on the outskirts of the Santa Fe de Antioquia municipality 
and killed two policemen. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in 
Spanish 26 Dec 93 p 6a) 
  FARC guerrillas attacked the police station in the Cestillal 
corregimiento in Canasgordas municipality with rockets and bombs 
on 26 December. The policemen repelled the attack and did not 
surrender the station. It was also reported that ELN guerrillas 
murdered Danilo Alfonso Baquero Sarmiento, radio commentator of 
the Emisora Bolivariana radio station in Tame. FARC guerrillas 
also attacked La Ocasion community in Rioblanco, Tolima, and 
killed one peasant and injured five. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL 
TIEMPO in Spanish 27 Dec 93 p 8a) 
  The Armed Forces have confirmed that Jorge Gutierrez, alias 
Ramiro, who is the top commander of the ELN (Yaridies) Front, 
was arrested in Barranca Bermeja. (Santa Fe de Bogota Emisoras 
Caracol Network in Spanish 1200 GMT 28 Dec 93) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  Police sources have reported that three Shining Path 
terrorists and one policeman were killed on 25 December in a 
clash in Pitec, Ancash Department. The clash erupted after 
police engaged terrorists who had occupied the village of Pitec. 
During the operation, the police seized weapons, explosives, 
propaganda material, and a plan to attack Piscobamba. (Madrid 
EFE in Spanish 2339 GMT 25 Dec 93) 
  Alleged Shining Path terrorists on 27 December attacked the 
Army Recruitment Office and the Town Hall in Lampa, Puno 
Department, with explosives. The attack caused casualties but 
resulted in heavy material damage. The rebels also launched 
attacks on Christmas Eve against police garrisons and police 
positions in the city of Huancavelica, in southeastern Peru. 
(Lima Radio Programas del Peru Network in Spanish 1800 GMT 27 
Dec 93) 
  A large portion of Ayacucho Department was left in darkness 
on Christmas Eve when Shining Path rebels dynamited four high 
tension power pylons along the Cobriza-Ayacucho power circuit. 
The rebels killed two people during the terrorist operation. 
Peruvian police sources said that it has been over a year since 
the last similar attack. Self-Defense patrols and Army troops 
launched a search operation as repair crews managed to restore 
power on 26 December. Police also reported that a bomb was 
hurled at the home of Presidency Ministry adviser Carlos Chiri, 
in Lima. No one was wounded but the facade of Chiri's home was 
seriously damaged. (Paris AFP in Spanish 1614 GMT 27 Dec 93) 
<H5>  Venezuela </H5>
  Edgar Sayago, the governor of Amazonas State, reported that 
Colombian guerrillas use Puerto Ayacucho, the regional capital, 
as a place to replenish their supplies and strength. He said 
that the population is in constant contact with the guerrillas 
and he, specifically, has met with the leaders of the ELN and 
FARC. He reported that the guerrillas have even helped the 
local authorities to locate planes hijacked over Venezuela. 
(Caracas EL NACIONAL in Spanish 26 Dec 93 p D-1) 

