Language: <F P=105> Hindi </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Amitabh Kautilya: "America's Interest in Playing </F>
the Kashmir Game is Increasing"] 
  [Text] Pigeon raising and kite flying are hobbies like 
running for elections, as are addictions to heroin, charas, and 
hashish. Countries, just like humans, have their weaknesses. For 
example, playing with Kashmir is becoming a new addiction for 
the United States. Only politicians know the political reasons 
for it. Our knowledge about it is very different. Professor 
Ronald C. Kessler, chairman of sociology department at Michigan 
University, has written in the latest issue of the 
Archives of General Psychiatry, that he is not afraid 
or hesitant in admitting that about half the U.S. population is 
suffering from one or another form of mental sickness. 
  It is important to note that a female official Raphel in the 
U.S. State Department who had visited India last year had went 
as far as to say that the documents about Kashmir's joining 
India are dubious in nature. If someone talks like this, we 
cannot call her anything but insane. There have been elections 
in Kashmir several times and the Kashmiri people had taken part 
in them. 
  Now another U.S. official has insisted that a plebescite 
must 
be held in Kashmir. Earlier, another gentleman had said that 
representatives of Kashmiri people should be included in talks 
between India and Pakistan. Pakistan has been demanding a 
plebiscite in Kashmir for a long time. Its voice was subdued as 
long as we kept holding elections. However, when it managed to 
make half the Kashmiris flee the land though its terrorist 
activities, it has increased its demand for a plebiscite 
considering it an appropriate time for it. This time, the United 
States is not only becoming an unwanted guest while agreeing 
with Pakistan, it is establishing itself where it does not 
belong. 
  China also became very alert when it saw the increasing 
romance between Pakistan and United States over Kashmir. 
Similarly, the way Janata Dal legislators are becoming 
disillusioned with Imam Buhkhari, China's romance with Pakistan 
is also breaking off. China has made it clear that no other 
party should be involved in the Pakistan-India talks, 
  It seems that the Indian Government has concluded the same 
thing as my own Sheikh Chilly [dunce] brand intelligence has 
determined. The Indian Government has contracted an American 
specialist firm to counter the Kashmiri and Khalistani 
propaganda in the United States. This professional organization 
has been contracted only for six months beginning from 15 
January. 
  Evidently the Indian Government had to take this step when 
it 
had no alternatives left. The Pakistani embassy already has been 
using this strategy. This firm is not only presenting Pakistani 
claims to the U.S. Senators and those who form public opinion, 
but is also is spreading this deplorable propaganda that India 
is violating human rights in Kashmir. It was just such a firm 
that had pulled the miracle of making Indian rugs untouchable 
things in U.S. and European markets under the pretext of human 
rights violations and abuse of child labor. 
  It happens in mental sickness, that a deranged person 
understands only what is told to him. A crazy person will 
believe that he is an owl or the president, This is because 
either he lacks the brain cells that can distinguish fact from 
fiction or these are as weak as the BSP-SP [Bahujan Samaj 
Party-Samajwadi Party] coalition in Uttar Pradesh. 
  This survey has brought to light the fact that half of the 
U.S. population is crazy, therefore, we should not be surprised 
if half of its population believes that Kashmir is a part of 
Pakistan and India has illegally occupied that region just like 
Iraq had occupied Kuwait. 
  I was getting depressed thinking about it all, especially 
because according to the agreement signed recently, the Russian 
cannons will be aimed at other targets than the United States of 
America. In this time of crisis, if there is a ray of hope then 
it comes from China which has become very alert to the U.S. 
attitude. May God keep it on the alert. Someone was perfectly 
right when he said that a drowning man reaches for straws to 
save himself. China is on the alert also because if the United 
States gets to China in this monkey distribution system, China 
may lose a lot. 
  The other reason for worry is that the 1.2 million talented 
and rich Indians who live or study in the United States might 
import to India mental sickness in addition to AIDS. We have one 
example of it. Despite this large population of Indian people 
living in the United States, India had to hire a private firm to 
counter the Pakistani propaganda. It is possible that patriotism 
and love for India disappears just like moustaches once one 
lands in the United States. 
  The game played in Kuwait increased the U.S. prestige and 
inspired fear in Asia. It appears that the United States wants 
to play the game of Kashmir because of it. It is important to 
mention here that some habits are so strong that they go with 
one's funeral. The Kashmir game might take the United States in 
that direction. We think that far ahead because a soothsayer 
said 400 years ago that there will be a divine incarnation in 
1999 that will establish India's dominance all over the world. 
India is moving toward that moment very fast. 
  Just like this huge country does not have even one athlete 
who could win even one gold medal in the Olympics, we do not 
have even one Goebbels with a powerful brain to have the ability 
to prove truth as lie and lie as truth. If we had such a 
brilliant person born here, the Indian Government would not have 
to knock at the doors of a private firm. There still is no idea 
how we will benefit from it. It is possible that this firm might 
have contracts with Pakistan and the so-called Khalistanis to 
get popular support for them. Lawyers have the ethical 
requirement that they cannot represent the defendant and the 
plaintiff at the same time. A business organization does not 
have such restrictions. The same firm can print posters for the 
Samajwadi Party and the BJP [Bharatiya Janata Party]. One 
publicity firm can make a publicity film for the Congress (I) 
and the National Front! 
  If the U.S. craze continued then it is possible for it to 
have the opportunity to impact on Kashmir. What can we say about 
our government as we do not know in which world it is. It is 
still following the Article of the Indian Constitution which 
allows separate laws for Kashmir. This Article is causing a 
major problem. We cannot send new people to work in the 
positions vacated by the patriots who are fleeing Kashmir. Would 
not Kashmir be replete with patriotic brave people if we did not 
have this law? 
  The Indian Government spokesmen repeatedly say that Kashmir 
is India's integral part, however, India does not have the 
courage to remove the discrepancies within the Constitution. Had 
it that much courage, we believe then the United States would 
not have been so eager to play the Kashmir game, and Pakistan 
had to worry about creating a new strategy and setting off a new 
squib to the world. If Pakistan is eager for a nuclear war then 
it will have it. One benefit of it will be that when the new 
century arrives, there will be no Pakistan left and all the 
neighbors will be enjoying peace. We have to make as much 
sacrifice for peace and goodwill in the next century as we did 
by living in hapless conditions for the last 45 years in the 
name of progress. 
* 

