Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 13 Feb (AFP) -- Colombian and 
international cocaine cartels are now resorting to using 
minisubmarines to smuggle cocaine, the Colombian police 
disclosed today. 
  Colombian police seized seven of these minisubmarines in 
1993, according to a report released by the Administrative 
Department of Security (DAS--the secret police) and published 
today by the Santa Fe de Bogota daily EL ESPECTADOR. According 
to the report, the DAS and Interpol have determined that the 
submarines used for shipping large amounts of drugs to Europe 
and the United States are manufactured in Santa Marta and 
Barraquilla, two Colombian ports on the Caribbean coast. 
  EL ESPECTADOR disclosed that these minisubmarines are five 
meters long and equipped with electronic systems that allow them 
to navigate just a few meters deep and as shallow as one meter 
below the surface of the water. Colombian authorities first 
seized submarines that were smuggling cocaine a few months ago, 
and this allowed them to determine that the shipments were 
leaving Santa Marta and Barranquilla en route to black markets 
in the United States and Europe. 
  DAS Director Fernando Brito explained that with these 
minisubmarines, drug traffickers avoid radars and naval convoys 
patrolling international waters. He said that after the use of 
these minisubmarines was discovered in 1993, authorities 
intensified their efforts in fighting drug trafficking at sea, 
which is conducted by way of cargo ships and the minisubmarines. 
The minisubmarines are made of fiberglass, which insulates them 
from the sea's temperatures. 
  Investigations by Colombian authorities warn that the 
Italian 
and Colombian drug cartels are taking advantage of the political 
turmoil in some European countries and their lack of resources 
for fighting drug trafficking. EL ESPECTADOR emphasized that 
the capos of the Cali Cartel are closely linked to the Italian 
Mafia and some Israelis, warning that their presence was 
detected in Colombia in 1993. 
  EL ESPECTADOR also pointed out that recent investigations 
have established that the Cali Cartel is using Ecuador and 
Venezuela as transshipment points. In these two nations, the 
Cali Cartel has established front companies that it uses to ship 
containers to Europe and the United States. 
  The newspaper concluded by saying the DAS will forward a 
report to the Interpol Secretariat headquartered in France with 
a description of the labels the drug traffickers use on packages 
that contain drugs. This document will be distributed in 167 
countries affiliated with Interpol, along with a list of names 
and codes used by the drug traffickers. According to a DEA 
report, the Cali Cartel is responsible for 80 percent of the 
world's cocaine trafficking. 

