Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Mar 15, BNS -- Finnish Prime Minister Esko 
Aho, who today began a visit to Estonia, met at noon with his 
Estonian counterpart Mart Laar. 
  The premiers stated at the meeting that the relations 
between 
the two countries are very good, Jaakko Laajava, head of the 
Finnish Foreign Ministry political department, told the press. 
  Aho and Laar discussed at the meeting the withdrawal of 
Russian troops from Estonia and Latvia. Laajava said Aho 
expressed hope that Russian forces will be pulled out from the 
two Baltic countries as quickly as possible. The withdrawal of 
Russian troops is important not only from the point of view of 
Estonian-Russian relations, but also for the security of the 
Baltic Sea countries, Laajava stated. 
  The Finnish diplomat said the premiers touched on border 
guard and customs cooperation between the two countries, the 
construction of a gas pipeline linking the Nordic and the Baltic 
countries, and the Via Baltica highway project. The Baltic 
states' association with the European Union also came under 
discussion. 
  Toivo Klaar, head of the Estonian Foreign Ministry political 
department, added that the premiers touched on the problems 
connected with the small capacity of the bridge linking Narva 
with Jaanilinn (Ivangorod), which complicates the crossing of 
the control line between Estonia and Russia. 
  The Finnish premier and culture minister attend today the 
inauguration of the new premises of the Finnish Institute in 
Tallinn. Aho then departs for Tartu, where he is scheduled to 
meet with the municipal government and the rector of Tartu 
University. The Finnish premier delivers a speech at the 
university and tours the sights of the city. 
  Aho is scheduled to visit Narva tomorrow. The program of the 
visit includes meetings with members of the municipal government 
and the city council, and tours of the city and the Baltic 
Electric Power Station. 
  The Finnish premier is accompanied by Finnish Ambassador to 
Estonia Jaakko Kaurinkoski; his aide, Pekka Huhtaniemi; Laajava; 
and other high-level officials. 
  Aho leaves Estonia on Wednesday [16 March]. He gives a press 
conference at the Tallinn Airport before his departure. 

