Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sophia Coudenhove: "A Ministerial Surprise"] </F>
  [Text] Journalists applauded as an earnest and soft-spoken 
Pavel Tigrid entered his first press conference as minister of 
culture. But the first thing the 76-year-old told them was that, 
as a former newspaper columnist, he'd rather be sitting on their 
side of the table. 
  "I hesitated a lot," he said, adding that he had always been 
of the opinion that today the country should be governed by the 
young. 
  Nevertheless, Tigrid returned from Paris after almost 46 
years of living abroad in time to start his new post at the 
ministry, Jan. 24. Since November 1989 he has made frequent 
visits back to Prague and served as chief advisor to President 
Vaclav Havel from 1990-1992. 
  While Tigrid's appointment as minister of culture was almost 
universally welcomed, it surprised artists and politicians 
alike. In nominating Tigrid, the Christian Democratic 
Union-Czech Peoples' Party (KDU-CSL) gave up their right to 
nominate someone from their own ranks for the post. 
  Party chairman Josef Lux said Tigrid, who is not a member of 
any party, was chosen for his skills and not for his politics. 
  "We absolutely respect the fact that the minister is not a 
member of any political party," Lux said. "We feel a closeness 
in our life philosophies and we perceive a closeness of opinion 
on basic political questions and on the world around us. This is 
more important than a [party] membership card." 
  The appointment is also unusual because, Tigrid is one of 
the 
few emigres to attain an important position in post revolution 
governments. But unlike many others, he has always been 
intimately involved in Czech politics and culture. A regular 
columnist for the Czech daily LIDOVE NOVINY and commentator for 
Radio Free Europe, he also founded the emigre quarterly 
Testimony, which under Communism was smuggled from Paris to 
Czechoslovakia. 
  But to Havel and many others, Tigrid's contribution to his 
country went much further. 
  "It has to be said that [Tigrid's] impact in exile was not 
just that he once ran Radio Free Europe and then published 
Testimony," Havel said on his weekly radio broadcast, Jan. 23. 
"His role was much broader. He was a vital integrating 
personality and a center of political and spiritual life in 
exile." 
  Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus also said the government 
supports 
Tigrid and sees him as a capable manager able to handle 
administration and to communicate with the public. He praised 
the new minister for his ability to work in several different 
fields at once, without limiting himself to one particular area. 
  While Havel also gave Tigrid his full support, he denied 
speculations that Tigrid would merely be a mouthpiece to the 
castle. 
  "Pavel Tigrid, who is loyal to the government, is loyal to 
the president because he is loyal to the state," Havel said. 
"But he is a man who has his own judgment and a man who cannot 
be manipulated." 
  Tigrid's predecessor, Jindrich Kabat, resigned Jan. 17, 
allegedly for personal reasons. He also said he was frustrated 
at tension in the government. 
  Klaus, however, said he did not believe these were the real 
reasons for Kabat's resignation. "A resignation is never a 
one-sided act," he said. "It's always two-sided and then 
sometimes from the outside the one-sided argumentation can be 
emphasized more." Many had expected Kabat to resign following 
widespread accusations of inefficiency. (see related article, 
page 2a [not reproduced here]). 
  As the reins of power are shifted from intellectuals to 
technocrats, Tigrid and Interior Minister Jan Ruml are the only 
former dissident ministers in the Czech Republic. 
  Promising that his aim as minister would be to serve and to 
listen, Tigrid also pledged maximum honesty to the press. 
  "This ministry will be transparent and it will be 
penetrable," he said, "that means I won't scheme and I won't lie 
much, even though sometimes that absolutely has to be. I think 
the ministry of culture shouldn't have any secrets whatsoever." 

