Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Thai and Cambodian authorities eventually settled 
the dispute over the boundary of the two countries's territorial 
waters, which broke out 10 days ago when a Thai navy patrol boat 
sunk a Cambodian ship and arrested 14 Cambodian crewmen. 
  A high-level source in Trat Province informed PHUCHATKAN 
that 
a third round of talks between the Thai and Cambodian sides was 
held at the Trat provincial seat at 1430 on 1 March. The 
Cambodian side was represented during the meeting by Prasoet 
Siri, the kamnan of Tambon Hat Lek of Muang District, while the 
Thai side included Phairot Priyarat, provincial governor of 
Trat; Phairot Khaokhom, owner of the two ill-fated fishing 
trawlers -- Chok Prinya 1 and Chok Prinya 2; and Major General 
Rattanachaloem Saenyakon, deputy director of the Army Operation 
Department. 
  No reporters or officials from any other agencies were 
allowed to attend the closed-door meeting which lasted over one 
hour. As a result of the meeting, the Cambodian side agreed to 
pay 1.5 million baht as compensation to the owner of the two 
fishing trawlers. Earlier, compensation for the two fishing 
vessels was estimated at 5 million baht. At 1600 the military 
handed over 14 Cambodian crewmen, who were detained in Trat 
Province after the incident. The crewmen were handed over to 
Cambodian Navy Commander Vice Admiral Tea Vinh [name and title 
as published] and Rung Phlamkesan, governor of Cambodia's Kho 
Kong Province, at the border crossing at Ban Hat Lek Village. 
  Phrairot Khaokhom told PHUCHATKAN that he agreed to take the 
amount as compensation for his two fishing trawlers because he 
was concerned about good relations between the two countries and 
wanted to see the problem settled as quickly as possible. He 
said he will not get involved in the fishing business as long as 
there is no clear demarcation line of the territorial waters of 
the two countries. He anticipatated that more problems of this 
nature will arise in the future. 
  Somchai Chairatchanukun, chairman of the Fishery Association 
of Khlong Yai District, Trat Province, disclosed that the 
problem has been settled only to a certain extent. The two 
countries should expedite the drawing of the clear demarcation 
line to avoid the recurrence of the problem and prevent the 
situation from worsening beyond control. However, the 
province's sluggish fishing industry and related businesses are 
expected to pick up soon. 

