Language: <F P=105> Azeri </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of statement from Azerbaijani Ministry of Foreign </F>
Affairs; place and date not given--read by announcer] 
  [Text] In accordance with Russia's invitation, President 
Geydar Aliyev dispatched his representative to Moscow on 2 March 
to hold talks on the peaceful solution of the dispute between 
Armenia and Azerbaijan through the Russian Federation's 
mediation. However, Armenia's representatives and those of the 
Armenian community in Azerbaijan's Daghlyk [Nagorno] Karabakh 
region failed to arrive in Moscow. As such, they undermined yet 
another effort Russia made to mediate to end the combat 
operations in the region. 
  The Armenian side's behavior has indicated that the Armenian 
leaders' claims that Azerbaijan does not maintain a practical 
approach to the peace proposals made by Russia within the CSCE 
framework and that Azerbaijan expects [words indistinct] are 
baseless. 
  On 3 March the Armenian Armed Forces violated the agreement 
reached by the sides to the dispute, which was included in the 
protocol the Azerbaijan, Armenian, and Russian defense ministers 
signed in Moscow on 18 February. The Armenian military units 
launched a wide-scale attack in Azerbaijan's Fizulinskiy Rayon 
and intensely pounded Azerbaijan's rayons on Armenia's border 
with rockets and artillery guns. 
  [Words indistinct] and many peaceful people have been killed 
as a result of Armenia's armed aggression against Azerbaijan 
during the past six years. 
  The latest incidents have taken place when a CSCE delegation 
headed by Minsk Group Chairman Jan Eliasson was in the region. 
The Armenian side has demonstrated once again that it does not 
wish to comply with the political methods required to end the 
dispute, heed the norms and stipulations of international law, 
and fulfill the responsibilities it has shouldered in accordance 
with the UN Security Council resolutions and the protocol that 
was recently signed, which called for the withdrawal of the 
occupationist forces from Azerbaijan's territory. 
  Reaffirming Azerbaijani support for ending the dispute 
through political talks, the Azerbaijan Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs holds Armenia's leaders fully responsible for the 
violation of the cease- fire agreement and the latest upsurge of 
military operations in the region. 

