BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest ROMPRES, 16/6/1994 -- For several weeks 
the Chamber of Deputies has debated the Education Act, seen as 
the second most important law of this country after the 
Constitution. The law will pass when key provisions, such as the 
ones regulating education in minority languages, are solved. To 
these, the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania [UDMR] has 
many objections in their draft form. 
  The chapter in question, the thirteenth, being the most 
difficult to adopt, a Parliament member came the other day with 
the idea that the chapter should be skipped over and remanded to 
a special group formed of the senior members of the [Chamber of 
Deputies] Education Committee and the leaders of the 
parliamentary groups, while the plenum goes on with the debates 
on the following chapters. 
  So, while the chamber tackled other sections of the draft, 
negotiations took place in what the daily newspaper ADEVARUL 
calls "the less transparent corners of the Education Committee 
and the chamber's permanent bureau," and "maybe even between the 
ruling Social Democracy Party of Romania [PDSR] and the UDMR." 
  The bone of contention are two articles of this Chapter 13, 
namely the one stipulating that at all school levels the history 
and geography of Romania should be taught in Romanian language, 
and the other says that objects of study specific for the 
technical, medical, agricultural, juridical, and economic 
streams, whatever the level, should be taught in Romanian. 
According to press news, the ruling party is reportedly 
favoring the provisions above for various reasons, one of them 
being the insistent request by some of its political allies (the 
National Unity Party of Romania, the Greater Romania Party), and 
some independent members of parliament, namely that "the history 
and geography of Romania be taught exclusively in the official 
language of the Romanian state," that is, in Romanian. 
  Commenting the first round of talks on this issue, CRONICA 
ROMANA remarks that "it ended with an agreement on the teaching 
of geography and civic education in the languages of minorities, 
and of teaching only history in Romanian language." A second 
and a third round of consultations have failed so far to bring 
the sides' positions any nearer. 
  With the consultations going on until late, the following 
morning (Thursday, 16 June), the plenum debates started two 
hours later than scheduled. 
  The same morning, a UDMR press release informed that its 
presidium had reached the conclusion, at its latest meeting, 
that the articles so far adopted from the draft of the education 
act "do not help solve the problem to the effect desired by the 
UDMR," and that the still valid education law, enacted during 
the communist regime, was "more permissive than the draft 
currently under debate." 

