BFN 

<F P=106> ["Report on the Implementation of the National Economic and </F>
Social Development Plan for 1993 and the Draft Plan for National 
Economic and Social Development for 1994" -- delivered by Chen 
Jinhua, minister in charge of the State Planning Commission, at 
the Second Session of the Eighth National People's Congress 
(NPC) on 11 March 1994] 
  [Text] Beijing, 24 Mar (XINHUA) -- Fellow Deputies: 
  Entrusted by the State Council, I now submit a report on the 
implementation of the National Economic and Social Development 
Plan for 1993 and the Draft Plan for National Economic and 
Social Development for 1994 for your examination and approval, 
and also for suggestions from the members of the National 
Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference [CPPCC] and other personnel present at the session as 
observers. 
<H5>  1. The Basic Situation in the National Economic and Social </H5>
Development in 1993 
  In 1993, under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory 
on building socialism with Chinese characteristics and the 
guidelines of the 14th National Party Congress, the people of 
all nationalities across the country united, worked hard, and 
continued to march forward triumphantly. On the whole, the 
National Economic and Social Development Plan for 1993 was 
implemented satisfactorily. Various reforms designed to 
establish a socialist market economy are being carried out in 
depth, step by step, and in a planned way according to the 
decision of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee, and have made important progress. China further 
opened its doors wider to the outside world; achieved sustained, 
rapid, and healthy national economic development [guo min jing 
ji chi xu kuai su jian kang fa zhan 0948 3046 4842 3444 2170 
4958 1816 6643 0256 1660 4099 1455]; and made sweeping progress 
in various social undertakings. 
  1) Social production continued to increase 
rapidly. The gross domestic product [GDP] reached 3.138 
trillion yuan in the whole year, up 13.4 percent over the 
previous year and 8 percent higher than the planned growth rate. 
The year's GDP growth rate breaks down into 4 percent for 
primary industry, 20.4 percent for secondary industry, and 9.3 
percent for tertiary industry. The rural economy saw overall 
growth. The output of grain and oil-bearing crops hit an 
all-time high. Grain output reached 456.4 million tonnes, 103.1 
percent of the planned figure and 13.8 million tonnes more than 
for the previous year; the output of oil-bearing crops totaled 
17.61 million tonnes, 106.7 percent of the planned figure and 
1.2 million tonnes more than the previous year. The output of 
cotton and sugar dropped and failed to fulfill the plan due to a 
decrease in the cultivated area, plant diseases, and insect 
pests. The farming structure developed along the direction of 
producing high yields of fine quality crops with maximum 
efficiency. The output of animal husbandry and fishery posted 
comparatively rapid growth. The total output of meat increased 
10.2 percent over the previous year; and the output of aquatic 
products grew 14.6 percent from the previous year. Village and 
township enterprises continued to enjoy vigorous development, 
and their development accelerated especially in the central and 
western regions of China. The nation's industry produced a 
total added value of 1.414 trillion yuan, up 21.1 percent over 
the previous year. Within this figure, heavy industry grew 22.2 
percent; and light industry, 19.9 percent. The output of major 
products continued to increase. China produced 1.141 billion 
tonnes of coal, up 2.2 percent over the previous year; 144 
million tonnes of crude oil, up 1.3 percent; 820 billion kwh of 
electricity, up 8.8 percent; 88.68 million tonnes of steel, up 
9.6 percent; 2.039 million tonnes of ethylene, up 1.8 percent; 
3.298 million tonnes of 10 kinds of nonferrous metals, up 10.2 
percent; 360 million tonnes of cement, up 16.8 percent; 1.31 
million automobiles, up 22.8 percent; and 2.215 million tonnes 
of chemical fiber, up 3.9 percent. The production of washing 
machines and refrigerators increased by more than 20 percent. 
The industrial sectors saw an improvement in their economic 
returns. 
  The sales rate of industrial products increased from 95.5 
percent to 96.4 percent; the profit and taxation rate of funds 
increased from 10.1 percent to 10.6 percent; the turnover number 
of circulating funds increased from 1.66 to 1.71. The output 
and business volume of the construction industry continued to 
grow; new results were achieved in geological prospecting; new 
development was made in the tertiary industry. Efforts were made 
to exploit the potentials in the transportation and 
communications industries to meet production needs and needs in 
daily life. The railway cargo turnover volume reached 1,193.6 
billion tonnes-km, an increase of 3.1 percent over the previous 
year; the business volume of the posts and telecommunications 
industry totalled 46.1 billion yuan, an increase of 58.9 percent 
over the year before. The financial, accounting, auditing, 
information, consultation services, and other trades providing 
direct services to the people also developed quite rapidly. 
  2) Key Construction Projects and Technological 
Transformation Were Strengthened The country's total fixed 
asset investment amounted to 1,182.9 billion yuan in 1993, or 
147.9 percent of the annual plan, up 50.6 percent from the 
previous year. Taking price factor into consideration, the 
actual work volume increased 22 percent. Of the total fixed 
asset investment, investment in state- owned units' capital 
construction projects totalled 464.7 billion yuan and investment 
in technological upgrading and transforming totalled 219.2 
billion yuan. To alleviate the constraint on economic 
development caused by the "bottleneck," greater increase was 
given to the investment in the transportation and communications 
industries -- the investment in these two industries increased 
from 14.7 percent of the total investment in state-owned units' 
capital construction projects in 1992 to 20.2 percent in 1993. 
The amount of investment and work progress in railway 
construction were unusually high compared with those since the 
founding of the Republic. Preparations for the construction of 
the Chang Jiang Three Gorges key water control project, which 
has been decided by the NPC, were carried out in all areas. 
Construction of the first- phase earth and stone cofferdam 
project and the water diversion and canal dredging work were 
carried out smoothly; resettlement work has being carried out in 
full swing; good results were achieved in raising and securing 
funds for the project; new progress was made in the study of 
relevant major equipment and technical problems. Completion of 
key state construction projects was better than previous years 
-- a number of backbone projects of restructuring nature were 
completed and put into use. A total of 133 large and medium 
capital projects were completed and put into operation in 1993 
and 128 major technological upgrading and transformation 
projects were completed. Generators capable of generating 14.38 
million kw of electric power were installed and the petroleum 
exploitation capability was increased by 15.42 million tonnes. 
A total of 1,019 km of new, multiple-track, and electrified 
railroads, and 3,556 km of highway were put into use; sea ports' 
handling capacity increased by 37.52 million tonnes; 3.672 
million households were installed with telephones. A number of 
other projects for public interests were also put into use. 
  3) Foreign Trade and Economic and Technical Exchange 
Further Increased 
  Opening up of the coastal areas developed toward improving 
local industrial structures; Shanghai's Pudong New Area 
quickened its development and opening up pace; a number of 
economic and technological development zones were established in 
some frontier and coastal cities and cities along Chang Jiang. 
Foreign trade continued to grow -- import and export volume 
totalled $195.8 billion, an increase of 18.2 percent over the 
year before. Of the total import and export volume, $91.8 
billion were of exports, up 8 percent from the previous year, 
and $104 billion were of imports, up 29 percent from the year 
before. The export product mix was further improved -- 
percentage of manufactured industrial products increased, of 
which machinery and electric appliances, which have a higher 
added value, increased to 24.7 percent. Utilization of foreign 
funds increased sharply -- a total of $36.77 billion of foreign 
fund, an increase of 91.5 percent over the previous year, was 
actually used in 1993. Of the total foreign fund utilized, 
$25.8 billion, an increase of 1.3 times over the previous year, 
were of foreign companies' actual direct investment. A total of 
$10.8 billion, up 36.9 percent from the year before, of foreign 
loan were utilized in 1993. Foreign companies' investment 
pattern changed to some degree -- investment in long- and 
medium-term development projects increased, investment by large 
companies and consortia outside the country increased, the 
investment gradually shifted to the construction of 
infrastructural facilities and basic industries, and investment 
in central and western parts of the country increased. Good 
results were achieved in the international tourism industry and 
the foreign exchange income from the industry increased 
considerably. The state's spot exchange reserve amounted to 
$21.2 billion at the end of 1993, up 9 percent from the 
beginning of the year. 
  4) The Domestic Market Was Brisk and Active The 
total retail sales volume of consumer products amounted to 
1,223,7 billion yuan in 1993, 26.1 percent more than the 
previous year. Taking price factor into consideration, the 
actual growth was 11.6 percent. Supply of consumer products was 
ample and the variety was great. A balance was maintained 
between supply and demand, or the supply outstripped the demand 
for more than 90 percent of commodities. The circulation volume 
of capital goods increased -- the total sales of capital goods 
by material supply and marketing enterprises at and above the 
county level amounted to 779.6 billion yuan in 1993, an increase 
of 32.3 percent over the year before. The retail sales of 
capital goods for agricultural production use totalled 135.6 
billion yuan -- taking price factors into consideration, this 
actually is a drop of 7.8 percent from the previous year. 
  5) Science, Technology, Education, and Other Social 
Undertakings Developed Robustly New results were achieved 
in the state's key science and technological projects -- a total 
of 33,000 major science and technological results at the 
provincial and ministerial levels were achieved in 1993 and 781 
results were awarded by the state. New progress was made in 
transforming research results into practical productive forces. 
New varieties of major grain crops were grown on more than 20 
million mu of land. Relatively good economic results and social 
benefits were achieved in developing and applying new industrial 
products and new technologies. A set of heavy-duty railway 
transportation technologies were put into use on some trunk 
railroads; optical fiber communication technology has entered 
the industrialization stage -- "four-track" [si ci qun, 0934 
2945 5028] optical fiber communication lines were completed and 
put into use between Beijing, Wuhan, and Guangzhou. New- 
generation well-drilling technology played a role in exploiting 
special oil reserves; important technological breakthroughs were 
made in developing the "Shu Guang No. 1" computer. The state 
increased investment in the study of basic sciences and results 
of the current international standards were achieved in the 
study of superconductivity, botanical gene engineering, 
atmospheric sciences, geoscience, and information technology. 
The technology market developed in a healthy manner -- the 
volume of technology transaction totalled 20.76 billion yuan in 
1993. 
  Education further developed and the fundamental education 
was 
strengthened. About 97.7 percent of children at the primary 
school ages attended school; new development was made in 
secondary vocational education of various kinds. Ordinary 
institutes of higher learning enrolled 924,000 undergraduate 
students, up 22.5 percent from the previous year; students 
attending school totalled 2.536 million, 16.1 percent more than 
the year before. About 42,000 postgraduate students were 
enrolled in 1993, an increase of 27.3 percent over the previous 
year. New results were achieved in the cultural sector, in 
journalistic work, in the publication industry, and in radio 
broadcasting, film production, television, public health, and 
sports. New progress was made in family planning work -- the 
natural population growth was 1.145 percent, or 0.243 percentage 
points lower than the planned target. New results were achieved 
in controlling environmental pollutions. 
  6) Lives of Urban and Rural Residents Continued to 
Improve In general, residents' incomes continued to 
increase. The annual per capita living-expense income of urban 
residents was 2,337 yuan -- an increase of 10.2 percent over the 
previous year after taking price factors into consideration. 
The net per capita income of rural residents was 921 yuan -- an 
increase of 3.2 percent after taking price factors into 
consideration. The balance of savings deposit of urban and 
rural residents reached 1,476.4 billion yuan, up 321.9 billion 
yuan from the end of the year before, representing an increase 
of 27.9 percent. Company shares, treasury bonds, and other 
financial assets owned by residents also increased considerably. 
Cities and towns across the country found jobs for 7.05 million 
people; the unemployment rate of urban areas was 2.6 percent at 
the end of 1993. The living conditions in urban and rural areas 
continued to improve -- new residential houses with a total 
floor space of 836 million square meters were built in 1993, of 
which 266 million square meters were in urban areas, and 570 
million square meters were in rural areas. 
  Important achievements and progress were made in national 
economic and social development, and in the reform to establish 
a socialist market economic structure in 1993. All sectors of 
the economy, with the public sector as their mainstay, continued 
to develop. The degree of application of market prices in the 
national economy was further heightened. Rural reform continued 
to deepen. New progress was made in reforming state-owned 
enterprises following the further implementation of the 
"Enterprise Law" and the "Regulations on Transforming the 
Operating Mechanisms of Industrial Enterprises Owned by the 
Whole People." Price relationships were further straightened 
out as a result of big strides made in pricing reform. In the 
majority of the areas across the country the purchasing and 
marketing prices of grain and oil- bearing crops, and the prices 
of state-distributed coal and steel products were decontrolled, 
while the contract purchasing prices for some crude oil, railway 
freight transport, electric power, and cotton were increased. 
The markets for labor, capital, technology, information, and 
other basic means of production grew rapidly. Programs were 
studied and drawn up for deepening reform of the banking, 
financial and taxation, investment, planning, foreign trade, 
labor, wages, housing, and social security systems, some of 
which have been implemented while others will be gradually 
implemented. 
  These achievements were able to be achieved in 1993 because 
the people of the whole country, guided by the party Central 
Committee, continued to implement the important remarks of 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping and the guidelines of the 14th CPC 
National Congress, and seized the opportunities to accelerate 
reform, opening to the outside world, and the modernization 
drive. At the same time, the achievements were made because the 
party Central Committee and the State Council promptly adopted 
the measures to deepen reform and to strengthen and improve 
macroeconomic regulation and control to deal with the notable 
contradictions which had emerged in the operation of the 
economy. Practice in 1993 has proved that to realize sustained, 
rapid, and healthy development of the national economy, and to 
accelerate the building of a socialist market economic 
structure, we must not only give full play to the basic function 
of market forces in the allocation of resources but also 
strengthen and improve the state's role in exercising macro 
regulation and control over the economy. Macroeconomic 
regulation and control should suit the new situation. It is 
necessary to exercise indirect regulation and control by mainly 
adopting economic and legal means. 
  In 1993, while important achievements were made in the 
national economy, some major contradictions and problems 
remained in the economy. They are: excessive scale of fixed 
assets investment; irrational investment structure; the 
structural contradiction in economic growth is still very 
serious; infrastructural facilities and basic industries such as 
transportation, communications, petroleum, and electric power 
remain the "bottlenecks" restricting national economic 
development. Some state-owned enterprises were faced with 
fairly great difficulties. Their deficits were quite huge, and 
the number of losing enterprises continued to grow. Worthy of 
particular attention is that price rises were fairly high, 
considerably exceeding the target set by the macroeconomic 
regulation and control plan. The country's general index of 
retail sale prices rose 13 percent over that of 1992; the 
cost-of-living price index increased 14.7 percent, but in 35 
large and medium-sized cities the cost-of-living price index 
went up 19.6 percent. Governments at all levels have expressed 
serious concern over these problems encountered in the course of 
advance and have taken, or are taking, positive measures to 
solve them. In the area of prices, the State Council convened a 
meeting to stabilize the prices of grain and cooking oil, and 
also held a "vegetable basket" working conference to put grain 
and other important goods on the market, to stabilize market 
prices, to increase effective supply, and to strengthen 
supervision of market prices so as to stabilize the living 
conditions of the residents. 
  2. The Major Targets and Tasks of National Economic 
and Social Development in 1994 
  This year is a crucial year for us to establish the 
socialist 
market economic structure, as well as an important year for us 
to continue the good development trend of the national economy. 
To seize the opportunity, deepen reform, open up wider, promote 
development, and maintain stability is the overall task of the 
whole country. The 1994 plan for national economic and social 
development should be formulated and implemented in such a way 
as to serve the overall task. We should work under the guidance 
of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and the party's basic line, implement in 
an all-around way the guidelines of the 14th National Party 
Congress and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee, accelerate the pace of building a socialist market 
economic structure, open China wider to the outside world, 
strengthen and improve macroeconomic regulation and control, 
vigorously adjust the economic structure, promote technological 
progress, actively open new markets, enhance economic 
efficiency, control inflation, and maintain a sustained, rapid, 
and healthy development of the national economy. 
  In accordance with the above requirements, the major 
macroeconomic regulation and control targets for the national 
economic and social development in 1994 are as follows: 
  -- Gross domestic product is to increase 9 percent over the 
previous year. That breaks down into 3 percent for primary 
industry, 10.7 percent for secondary industry, and 11 percent or 
higher for tertiary industry. 
  -- Total investment in fixed assets is expected to reach 
1,300 billion yuan. That breaks down into 875 billion yuan for 
state- owned enterprises and institutions, and 425 billion yuan 
for collective enterprises and institutions, and the private 
sector. 
  -- The deficit for 1994 is expected to reach 66.9 billion 
yuan. Counting the principal and interest of internal and 
external debts and external loans for key projects due to be 
paid back in 1994, total internal and external debts for this 
year will amount to 129.2 billion yuan. 
  -- Banks will grant 470 billion yuan in new loans. 
  -- Total retail sales are expected to reach 1,600 billion 
yuan in value, including 149 billion yuan in the sales of 
agricultural capital goods. 
  -- Imports and exports are expected to reach $200 billion in 
value, with $100 billion for exports and the same amount for 
imports. 
  -- Inflation will be controlled under 10 percent for the 
whole of 1994. 
  -- Efforts will be made to improve the economic efficiency 
of 
enterprises. That will include increasing the sales ratio of 
their products, boosting their ratio of profits and taxes to 
capital, improving their labor productivity, increasing their 
capital liquidity, and raising their energy-saving efficiency. 
  -- The natural population growth rate is to be controlled at 
about 1.3 percent for the year. 
  In setting the above macroeconomic regulation and control 
targets, we have taken into consideration the needs in 
maintaining a sustained, rapid, and healthy development, the 
needs to create a more relaxed environment for starting major 
reforms this year, and the needs to create the necessary 
conditions for keeping a steady growth next year and even in 
several subsequent years, following this year's rapid and 
healthy economic development. 
  The major tasks of the national economic and social 
development for 1994 are as follows: 
  (1) Persistently put agriculture in the position of 
prime importance and develop the rural economy in an all-around 
way 
  We will continue to strengthen the agricultural base, 
invigorate the rural economy and increase peasants' income, all 
of which has a bearing on the overall situation of the nation's 
economic development and social stability. We will make every 
effort to obtain good agricultural harvests and ensure steady 
and increasing outputs of such principal products as grain, 
cotton, and oil bearing crops. Our plan projects an annual 
grain output of 450 billion kilograms, a cotton output of 4.85 
million tonnes, and an output of oil-bearing crops of 17.65 
million tonnes. We will comprehensively implement the 
guidelines of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee and the national rural work conference, continue to 
carry out the party's rural economic policies, and implement 
"Agriculture Law," "Law on Popularizing Agricultural 
Techniques," and "Program of China's Agricultural Development in 
the 1990's." We will further deepen reform; stabilize and 
improve the household contract responsibility system with 
remuneration linked to output as the main form, as well as the 
dual management system that combines household with collective 
operations; and gradually switch agriculture and the rural 
economy onto the track of socialist market economy. 
  This year, we must do a good job in the following areas: 
(1) Protect the arable land and see to it that the area planted 
with the principal crops is not diminished. We should see to it 
that 1.65 billion mu of land is planted with grain and do what 
we can to raise the area for cotton to 90 million mu. We should 
pay close attention to high-yield crops including early 
long-grained nonglutinous rice and try our best to raise the 
per-unit output. (2) Develop farming, forestry, animal 
husbandry, sideline production, and fisheries in line with local 
conditions; develop a diversified economy that includes 
processing of agricultural products, manufacturing, and service 
trades; and raise the added value of agricultural products to 
increase peasant incomes. Continued efforts should be made to 
slash the financial burden on farmers. (3). Appropriately raise 
purchasing prices of grain and cotton when new crops are going 
on the market. (4) Help the major grain and cotton producing 
areas develop their economies. State support will be given to 
500 major grain producing counties and 150 counties known for 
producing high quality cotton in developing their economies. 
(5) Develop a type of farming that provides high yields of 
fine quality with maximum efficiency, build a number of 
demonstration counties each with its own characteristics, and 
organize input in terms of new technology, funds, and materials 
in a well coordinated manner. (6) Step up construction of 
agricultural infrastructure facilities and improve the 
conditions for agricultural production. We should harness large 
rivers and lakes in an all-round manner, step up construction of 
key projects, and make preparations for projects of water 
diversion from south to north. We should continue constructing 
irrigation and water conservancy projects. Efforts should be 
continued to build large environmental protection projects 
including the shelterbelt networks in northwest, north, and 
northeast China and projects along the upper and middle reaches 
of the Chang Jiang and Huang He and along the coast. We should 
do a good job in conserving water and top soil along the upper 
reaches of the Chang Jiang and Huang He. (7) Increase 
agricultural input. This year, there will be a 35.6 percent 
hike in the central government's budgeted appropriation and bank 
credit for construction of farmland irrigation and water 
conservancy projects over last year. Local governments at all 
levels must also increase input in agriculture and, at the same 
time, guide the peasants to increase investment in terms of both 
labor and capital. (8) Speed up the dissemination of advanced, 
applicable technology. In 1994, we should expand the area 
planted with hybrid rice to 230 million mu; hybrid corn, 270 
million mu; the area using prescription fertilizer, 650 million 
mu; the area using straw compost to fertilize farmland, 400 
million mu; the area using polyethylene mulch, 70 million mu; 
and improve 50 million mu of waterlogged lowland and saline 
soil. We should popularize the technology of applying chemical 
fertilizer deep in the soil, the pattern [mo shi hua 2875 1709 
0553] crop cultivation technique, and technology for preventing 
plant diseases and insect pests in crop farming, stock breeding, 
and fish farming. It is necessary to improve forecasting and 
monitoring of disastrous weather. A collectivized service 
system for agriculture should be developed. (9) Provide 
continued guidance to help village and township enterprises 
optimize their structure and improve efficiency in line with 
state industrial policy. It is necessary to implement the 
central government's policy of helping the central and west 
regions and minority regions develop village and township 
enterprises. We should strengthen planning and guide township 
enterprises to concentrate appropriately, make full use of the 
existing small cities and townships, and build up new ones. 
(10) Implement the plan adopted by the CPC Central Committee 
and State Council to solve, within seven years, the problem of 
inadequate food and clothing for 80 million impoverished people. 
In 1994, the state will make available manufactured goods and 
foods worth 6.1 billion yuan -- up 19.6 percent over last year 
-- to work-relief programs to help old revolutionary base areas, 
areas inhabited by minority nationalities, border areas, and 
poverty-stricken areas develop their economies. 
  (2) Vigorously readjust the structure, improve 
management and operation, raise efficiency, and run large and 
medium state-owned enterprises well 
  Irrational economic structure and low economic efficiency 
are 
prominent problems in China's economic development today. In 
1994, industries must truly focus on optimizing structure, 
improving efficiency, and maintaining an effective growth rate 
through deepening reform, opening new markets, strengthening 
management, and accelerating technological progress. Toward 
this goal, special efforts shall be made to carry out the 
following tasks: First, we shall actively increase the output 
of basic industrial products that are in short supply and 
enhance our ability to maintain sustained and rapid growth of 
the national economy. We project the output of raw coal in 1994 
to be 1.16 billion tonnes; crude oil, 144.1 million tonnes; 
electricity generated, 890 billion kwh; steel, 91 million 
tonnes; the 10 kinds of nonferrous metals, 3.3 million tonnes; 
and ethylene, 2.1 million tonnes. Second, we shall promptly 
adjust product mix in light of market demands, actively support 
the production of readily salable goods, do a good job of 
limiting the production of overstocked goods and promoting their 
sales, and vigorously open and expand domestic and overseas 
markets, particularly the rural market. We shall actively 
develop new products, designs, colors, styles, and varieties to 
meet different levels of consumer demands. Third, we shall 
truly give top priority to improving product qualities, perfect 
quality control and warranty systems, initiate a quality 
certification system, and bring into full play the role of 
market forces in raising product quality and ensuring survival 
of the fittest. We shall resolutely deal with the manufacturing 
and selling of fake and substandard products in accordance with 
the law. Fourth, we shall strive to reduce consumption of 
energy and raw and semifinished materials, accelerate the 
turnover of funds, and reduce production cost. We shall take 
further steps to halt losses and increase profits. We demand 
that for the whole year, electricity consumption for every 
10,000 yuan's worth of industrial products drop 8-10 percent; 
the sales rate of manufactured goods be maintained at over 96 
percent; the turnover rate of circulating funds increase from 
1.71 to 1.75; overall labor productivity, the ratio of profits 
and tax to capital, and ratio between production cost and profit 
increase further; and both the number of money-losing 
enterprises and the amount of money lost drop. 
  State-owned enterprises, particularly large and medium-sized 
enterprises, are the pillar of China's economic development and 
revitalization. Therefore, we must make greater efforts to 
improve their performance. In line with the requirement to 
change enterprise operating mechanisms and establish a modern 
enterprise system, we shall deepen enterprise reform, ensure 
that enterprises truly have the rights and interests as well as 
responsibilities due to them, increase their vitality, and raise 
their ability to compete and develop new products and 
technologies to meet changing market demands. We shall 
earnestly implement the "General Financial Rules for 
Enterprises" and the "Guiding Principles for Enterprise 
Accounting" and establish a standard financial and accounting 
system. We shall earnestly strengthen the management of 
state-owned assets, and make enterprises responsible for 
preserving and increasing the value of the state assets to 
prevent their losses. We shall bring into active play the role 
of large enterprise groups in readjusting the industrial 
structure and enterprise organizational structure. We shall 
attach great importance to and earnestly strengthen safety in 
production. 
  (3) We shall maintain a rational scale of investment 
in fixed assets and vigorously optimize the investment structure 
  In light of the currently overextended scale of investment 
in 
fixed assets that are under installation, we must strictly 
control excessive investment growth this year, shifting the 
focus of our work to optimizing the investment structure and 
improving investment returns. Capital construction, technical 
upgrading, and real estate development will receive 485 billion 
yuan, 250 billion yuan, and 80 billion yuan, respectively, in 
fixed-assets investment by state- owned units in 1994. In 
accordance with the demands of industrial policy, we shall 
increase investment in infrastructure, basic industries, and 
backbone industries, mainly devoting additional state investment 
to agriculture, water conservancy, transportation, 
communications, energy, major raw and semifinished materials, 
electronics, science and technology, and education. We shall 
expand investment in exploiting resources in the west-central 
region. In investing in key construction projects, we shall 
first concentrate on projects that have been completed and put 
into operation, projects that must be continued, and key 
projects in the "Eighth Five-Year Plan" that must be launched. 
Specifically, we shall concentrate on a number of major 
projects which affect overall interests. These include projects 
to harness the Huai He, Tai Hu, and Dongting Hu; the Xiaolangdi 
water control project and other water conservancy projects on 
the Huang He; the Beijing-Jiulong and Lanzhou-Xinjiang railways; 
key port projects in Qinhuangdao, Dalian, and Shanghai; the 
Beijing-Shenyang-Harbin, Beijing-Wuhan-Guangzhou, and 
Xining-Lanzhou-Urumqi fiber-optics cables; and key projects such 
as large coal bases, hydroelectric stations, thermal power 
stations in the eastern region, Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, and 
Shaanxi. We shall intensify efforts to complete automobile 
projects selected by the state, the Wuxi microelectronics 
project, and special projects on application-oriented 
satellites. We shall make preparations for the early stage of 
the Three Gorges project on the Chang Jiang, simultaneously 
starting construction on both banks of the river. We shall 
begin full-scale construction of transportation projects leading 
to other places and the Xiling bridge. We shall complete land 
requisition in the dam area and the resettlement of residents. 
We shall continue preparations for the early stages of Phase 
Three of the Baoshan Iron and Steel Complex and other key 
projects. We shall strictly control investment in processing 
industries with excess production capacities. We shall launch 
infrastructure and basic industrial projects in accordance with 
the principles of overall state planning, rational distribution, 
efficiency, and acting within our means, and in order of 
importance and urgency. We shall give priority to key state 
projects that have a bearing on overall interests, and avoid 
launching redundant projects indiscriminately. This year, we 
will not approve various types of new development zones. The 
construction of tourist facilities, guesthouses, and office 
buildings essential for opening up to the outside world must be 
reported for approval in accordance with prescribed state 
procedures, and they must be strictly controlled. 
  We shall make further efforts to upgrade the technological 
levels of existing enterprises, particularly large and medium 
state-owned enterprises, as well as old industrial bases. To 
improve economic returns, we shall improve enterprises' capacity 
for self-development and encourage them to pursue expanded 
re-production. To meet the requirements of readjusting the 
investment structure and improving economic returns, we shall 
mainly funnel investment in technical upgrading to developing 
new products, improving product performance and quality, 
upgrading products, reducing consumption of energy and raw and 
semifinished materials, and promoting production safety and 
environment protection. We shall increase financial inputs in 
upgrading the technological levels of industrial enterprises in 
the communications, transportation, energy, and raw and 
semifinished materials sectors. 
  The key to controlling the investment scale, optimizing the 
investment structure, and improving investment returns lies in 
accelerating reform of the investment structure. We shall 
gradually institute a risk responsibility system for corporate 
and credit investment. We shall adopt different investment and 
financing methods for differing investment fields, and gradually 
turn enterprises into principal investment vehicles. We shall 
rationally delineate the scope of investment in infrastructure 
and public welfare by governments at all levels, as well as 
their responsibilities for such investment. We shall give full 
rein to the National Development Bank's functions in 
policy-related investment and funding. We shall guide 
localities and enterprises to funnel more funds toward 
infrastructure and basic industries through various means, such 
as joint investment and stock investment, in accordance with 
state policies, laws, and regulations. And we shall institute a 
system by which representatives of legal entities will assume 
responsibility for construction projects, as well as a bidding 
system and a system of reporting and registering construction 
projects. 
  (4) Open wider to the outside world and make active 
and efficient use of foreign funds, resources, technology, and 
markets 
  We shall seize the current favorable international climate 
to 
further expand foreign trade and economic and technological 
exchanges. Through the restructuring of the foreign trade and 
foreign exchange systems, we shall promote an increase in 
exports and allow a reasonable flow of imports to achieve a 
balance between foreign exchange revenues and expenditures for 
the year. In export trade, it is necessary to unswervingly 
implement the strategy of market diversification with product 
quality as a top concern, and open up new markets while 
maintaining and developing existing ones. It is necessary to 
continue to improve the mix of export products, accelerate a 
switch from exporting semi-processed goods to 
intensive-processed goods, and encourage and promote the export 
of high- and new-tech products. It is necessary to integrate 
technology, production, and trade; and vigorously expand the 
export of mechanical and electrical products and complete sets 
of equipment that are competitive on the international market, 
rely heavily on modern technology, and have a high added value 
and good export potential. It is imperative to speed up the 
establishment of a quality certification system. It is 
necessary to encourage and support stronger large and 
medium-sized enterprises with good credit to move into foreign 
markets with quality products and good after- sales services. 
It is imperative to develop integrated trade companies in the 
form of enterprise groups for different industries to engage in 
international trade. It is necessary to strictly implement the 
system of making settlements and sales in foreign exchange for 
exports, raise the settlement rate for exports, and improve the 
system of tax refunds on exports. It is imperative to 
strengthen control over imports and optimize the import mix. We 
shall continue to severely crack down on smuggling. We shall 
tighten supervision over enterprises located abroad by 
exercising strict control over the outflow of foreign currency 
in investment and capital accounts outside the country. We 
shall continue expanding international tourism and increasing 
foreign exchange revenues from non-trade sources. It is 
necessary to diligently check trade and non-trade collection and 
payment of foreign exchange, and to strengthen supervision over 
and examination of the collection and payment of foreign 
currency to prevent leaks resulting from arbitrage and evasion 
of state control over foreign currency and from capital drain. 
  We shall continue to operate in an efficient way special 
economic zones, the Pudong New District in Shanghai, open 
coastal cities, and economic and technological development 
zones, and open up more central cities in border regions, along 
the Chang Jiang river and in the interior. It is necessary to 
further improve the investment climate in China, expand the 
scope of projects using foreign funds, improve the performance 
and quality of projects using foreign funds, and make efficient 
use of foreign funds. It is necessary to absorb more direct 
foreign investment in line with the country's capacity to 
provide supplementary funding and increase the proportion of 
foreign investment committed to projects. It is imperative to 
guide the orientation of foreign investment in accordance with 
the state's industrial policies, directing more foreign 
investment towards infrastructure and basic industries, key 
projects and technology upgrading in existing enterprises, in 
particular towards projects that make foreign-exchange-earning 
products. It is necessary to support the central and western 
parts of the country in using foreign capital to develop local 
resources. Sino-foreign joint ventures and cooperative 
enterprises should strictly abide by the principle of sharing 
both benefit and risk, and work to achieve a balance of payments 
in foreign exchange. State-owned enterprises must evaluate 
their assets before they sell stock rights or use existing 
assets to establish joint ventures or cooperative enterprises 
with foreign businesses so as to prevent the loss of state 
assets. It is imperative to strictly control the use of 
international commercial loans, continuing to keep it under 
mandatory planning control. It is necessary to encourage and 
support localities, departments, and enterprises with heavy 
foreign debts to establish a system of debt repayment financing 
to ensure that foreign debts are repaid on schedule. 
  (5) Earnestly shift economic construction onto the path 
that relies on scientific and technological progress, and 
further develop educational undertakings 
  We shall continue to implement the guiding ideology that 
science and technology constitute the primary productive force, 
and the "National Medium- and Long-Term Science and Technology 
Development Programs." We shall focus this year's science and 
technology- related work on the following areas: First, it is 
necessary to vigorously promote advances in industrial 
technology. Through the technology market and the support of 
necessary credit and investment, we shall popularize the 
application of a number of scientific and technology research 
results that have a high added value and that can cover a wide 
range of areas and promote many others and can yield good 
economic returns, to facilitate better and faster application of 
scientific and technology research results in production and 
construction. Second, it is necessary to continue to promote 
key scientific and technology research projects that have a 
major impact on economic and social development, and to apply 
major scientific and technology achievements in industries. We 
shall organize a number of key state industrial experimentation 
projects in some leading industries and high-tech areas; 
continue to implement high-tech research and development plans 
and the "Torch Program"; and accelerate the commercialization, 
industrialization, and internationalization of high- and 
new-tech products. Third, it is necessary to strengthen the 
construction of basic scientific research facilities and improve 
the quality of scientific and technical personnel. We shall 
build new and expand a number of engineering technology research 
centers and key state laboratories, and further carry out the 
"Climbing Program." Fourth, it is necessary to help enterprises 
become the mainstay in technological development. We shall 
bring into further play the role of market forces to promote the 
integration of science and technology with the economy. We 
shall encourage and guide scientific and technology development 
institutes to gear their operations to markets and to set up 
high- and new-tech enterprises. We shall encourage enterprises 
to cooperate with institutions of higher learning and scientific 
research units in establishing technology development 
organizations of various types, and shall support qualified 
enterprise groups, and large and medium-sized enterprises in 
establishing technology development centers. In assigning 
talented scientific and technology personnel and utilizing 
science and technology development funds, we shall increase the 
proportion of enterprises and form a system for promoting 
technological progress which closely integrates market, 
research, and production. 
  We shall continue to place education in a strategic 
position and earnestly implement the "Program for China's 
Educational Reform and Development." We shall further 
strengthen elementary education, make concentrated efforts to 
implement the nine-year compulsory education, and provide 
greater support to outlying and poverty-stricken regions to help 
them implement compulsory education. We shall develop secondary 
vocational education and different types of adult education. We 
shall steadily develop higher education, provided conditions for 
setting up and operating school are there and teaching qualities 
can be guaranteed. Regular colleges in the country will enroll 
895,000 regular and special program students and 42,000 
post-graduate students in 1994. Schools of different types and 
at all levels shall pay attention to raising teaching standards 
and improving performance. We shall continue to increase 
investment in education. The government shall assume primary 
responsibility for investing in compulsory education. At the 
same time, the general public and nongovernment sectors are 
encouraged to raise funds at different levels and in different 
forms to invest in schools. Vocational and adult education 
shall orient more to market demands so as to arouse the 
initiatives of all quarters of society to build and operate 
schools. We shall reform the structure of higher education to 
encourage joint operation of schools and to gradually institute 
a system of managing higher education at the central and local 
levels. Greater decisionmaking power shall be granted to local 
and school authorities to set up and operate schools. Schools 
in different categories and at all levels shall attach 
importance to and improve moral education. We shall earnestly 
implement the "Teachers Law," strive to improve teachers' pay 
and benefits, and take further steps to strengthen the building 
of teachers' ranks. 
  (6) Continue to improve the people's livelihood and 
develop various social undertakings 
  We shall continue to improve the living standards of the 
people on the basis of economic growth and increased labor 
productivity. We shall work hard to increase the peasants' 
income, making it an important task in this year's economic 
work. We shall develop the rural economy in an all-round way 
and appropriately increase the procurement prices of grain and 
cotton so that there will be a considerable increase in the 
peasants' income. State-owned enterprises shall appropriately 
increase workers' wages as production increases and economic 
returns improve. We shall continue implementing the civil 
service system reform and the reform of the wage system in 
public institutions. We shall concern ourselves with and 
properly provide for the livelihood of retired personnel, 
workers in enterprises having problems operating, and peasants 
in poor areas. We shall adopt measures to help them overcome 
difficulties. We shall continue to open new avenues to broaden 
the labor market, guide the rational movement of surplus 
personnel in public institutions, enterprises, and rural areas, 
and increase urban employment. We shall actively promote reform 
of urban commercial housing, reduce housing construction cost, 
and increase residential housing construction. To meet the need 
of continued reforms and maintain social stability, we will 
gradually establish a multi-form, multi-tier social security 
system. 
  Promoting all-round progress in social undertakings is an 
important task of macro-controls by the state. We will further 
strengthen socialist spiritual civilization as well as actively 
develop cultural, press, publishing, broadcasting, film and 
television, health care, and sports sectors. We should increase 
input, in different forms and through different channels, for 
improving the infrastructure facilities for social development. 
We will continue to earnestly and effectively tackle family 
planning by paying more attention to rural areas and the migrant 
population, and work to control the natural population growth 
rate within macroeconomic control targets. We should further 
strengthen environmental protection, control pollution, plant 
trees, and improve the ecological environment. We will protect 
and rationally utilize natural resources such as land, minerals, 
forests, and water. This year, the state will also draw up an 
outline for the development of national social undertakings to 
guide work in this regard. 
  3. Strengthen and Improve Macroeconomic Regulation and 
Control; Comprehensively Accomplish the 1994 Plan for National 
Economic and Social Development 
  The task of reform and development for 1994 is onerous. To 
accomplish this year's economic and social development plan in 
an all-round manner, we must do hard, solid work in many areas. 
One of them is to strengthen and improve macroeconomic 
regulation and control in line with the needs of establishing a 
socialist market economic system, deepening reforms in major 
areas, and maintaining the momentum of sustained economic growth. 
  (1) The basic point of departure in carrying out 
macroeconomic regulation and control is to maintain balance and 
unity between reform, development, and stability. We are 
faced with a rare historic opportunity for speeding up the 
reform, opening up, and modernization drive. On the one hand, 
we are advancing economic restructuring amid fast economic 
growth; on the other hand, we need to maintain a fast economic 
growth -- social stability as well -- while establishing a 
socialist market economic system. Reform is the motive force of 
development, and development is the foundation of reform and 
stability, and stability, in turn, is a prerequisite for 
economic and social development. Without social stability, 
nothing can be accomplished. 
  After two consecutive years of fast economic growth, the 
"bottleneck" industries have become an even greater restraining 
factor, and pressure for inflation has risen. Under these 
circumstances, it is necessary to pay close attention to the 
following in order to properly balance the relations between 
reform, development, and stability: First, we should maintain 
the momentum of fast economic development and, at the same time, 
keep a watch on the tightened situation in terms of 
macroeconomic regulation and control. We must not blindly 
pursue high growth rates in disregard of actual conditions. 
Nationally, the 9 percent growth rate set for this year is 
appropriate. Instead of vying with one another for the highest 
growth rate, localities should set their growth rate rates in 
the light of their respective conditions. Development is the 
last word. To develop we must have new ideas. It is crucial to 
place the emphasis on optimizing the economic structure, 
quickening technological progress, strengthening operations and 
management, and upgrading economic efficiency. Second, work out 
well-considered plans for reform in such sectors as finance, 
taxation, banking, investment, foreign trade, and the enterprise 
system in accordance with plans announced by the CPC Central 
Committee and State Council. We should do a good job in 
coordinating the various reform measures, execute well the 
transition from an old system to a new one, and do a good job in 
providing guidance through the media, and in propaganda and 
ideology work. Meanwhile, we should closely watch -- and tackle 
in a timely fashion -- the new situations and problems arising 
in the course of reform. Third, we should bring inflation under 
control and maintain market stability. This is a major concern 
affecting the steady growth of the economy and the immediate 
interests of the broad masses of the people. All localities and 
departments must take it seriously, coordinate their efforts, 
and employ a combination of economic, legal, and when necessary, 
administrative means to ensure the healthy operation of the 
economy. 
  (2) The main task of macroeconomic regulation and 
control is to maintain an overall balance of the total supply 
and demand of society. To fulfill this task, it is 
imperative to use all means to increase effective supply and 
prevent overall social demand from rising too rapidly. 
  First, it is necessary to exercise strict control over 
investment in fixed assets. We shall earnestly implement the 
"Circular on Continuing to Strengthen Macroeconomic Regulation 
and Control Over Investment in Fixed Assets" issued by the State 
Council last January. No locality or department should be 
allowed to go beyond the state-approved investment scale of 
fixed assets and to resume without authorization construction of 
projects suspended or postponed last year. Banks at all levels 
must strictly abide by state plans on loans for fixed assets 
investment, must exercise strict control over loans for fixed 
asset investment, and should refuse to finance any new projects 
not approved by the State Council or the State Planning 
Commission, or any projects outside state plans. It is 
necessary to standardize operations and strengthen the 
supervision over inter-bank loan markets, strictly implement 
state plans for issuing stocks, and resolutely check illegal 
fund-raising activities. It is necessary to effectively prevent 
the resurgence of development zone, and housing and real estate 
crazes. Housing and real estate development should be focused 
on building commercial residences in conjunction with housing 
reform. No locality should be allowed to expand fixed assets 
investment scale in the name of residential housing 
construction. To guard against haphazard and redundant 
construction, the State Planning Commission shall work together 
with departments and localities concerned in expeditiously 
drawing up a number of special programs on products and projects 
in great demand, so as to more effectively use both market and 
planning to optimize the distribution of resources. 
  Second, it is necessary to rationally control and guide the 
growth of consumer demand. We shall earnestly implement the 
"Circular Concerning Wage Reform of Staff Members of Offices and 
Institutions" issued by the State Council last year, and 
strictly control the volume of wage increases. We shall take 
effective measures to ensure that the total payroll of workers 
and staff of an enterprise grow at a lower rate than the 
enterprise's economic returns, and the growth rate of average 
wage of workers and staff is lower than the increase of labor 
productivity. We shall guard against draining state assets to 
increase individual incomes. We shall use economic means to 
regulate individual incomes and strengthen tax collection and 
management, especially the collection and management of 
individual income taxes. We shall firmly check indiscriminate 
issuance of bonuses and subsidies. We shall encourage an 
atmosphere of advocating thrift and actual results, and working 
hard to start a new undertaking in the whole society, and shall 
resolutely overcome the widespread practice of waste and 
extravagance. 
  Third, it is necessary to continue to keep money supply and 
credit under control, and tighten budgetary restraint. Through 
the restructuring of banks, we shall strengthen the central 
bank's functions for regulating and controlling currency and 
supervising various banking institutions, and shall exercise 
strict control over the basic volume of currency in circulation. 
All banks and other banking institutions must strictly control 
the volume of loans, and energetically optimize the pattern of 
loans to ensure needs for key production and construction 
projects and increase the efficiency of using funds. We shall 
continue to consolidate order with regard to money. We shall 
actively promote fiscal and taxation reform, go all out to 
broaden sources of income and cut back expenditures, increase 
financial revenues, control financial expenditures from growing 
too rapidly, reduce the balance between revenues and 
expenditures, and control financial deficits within the targets 
of macroeconomic regulation and control. 
  (3) Macroeconomic regulation and control should focus 
on controlling the margin of overall price rises. To 
further rationalize prices, cultivate and expand the market 
system, and promote economic restructuring and development, this 
year we shall appropriately readjust the prices of energy, 
grain, and cotton after fully taking into account what the 
state, the enterprises, and the masses can tolerate. In view of 
the high price rises since the beginning of last year, there 
will be intense pressure with regard to price hikes this year. 
Therefore, while pushing ahead with price reform, we must use 
every possible means to keep the margin of price increases 
within the targeted range of macroeconomic control and 
regulation. To this end, it is necessary to take the following 
measures: 1) We should work hard to increase effective supplies 
of goods and make every effort to promote the production and 
supply of daily necessities, especially the production and 
supply of such major farm products as grain, cotton, edible oil, 
sugar, and meat and the "vegetable basket" project in cities. 
2) We should, in line with the central authorities' 
arrangements, carefully organize the implementation of price 
adjustment measures formulated by the state. No department or 
locality should be allowed to exploit the chance to drive up the 
prices of goods and service charges. Meanwhile, we shall 
correctly implement the new taxation system and shall not allow 
anyone to take advantage to increase the current prices of 
factory, wholesale and retail goods. 
  3) We should establish channels that permit the free flow 
of commodities, eliminate various barriers to commodity 
distribution, reduce intermediate stages in the distribution 
process, lower costs, establish long-term and stable relations 
of supply and marketing between areas producing nonstaple 
foodstuffs, and those marketing them in the cities, and improve 
the allocation and transportation of grain, cooking oil, and 
other essential commodities. 4) We should establish a sound 
reserve system for grain, cotton, cooking oil, meats, sugar, and 
other major farm products; establish a full-fledged risk-control 
fund for grain and nonstaple foodstuffs; improve market 
regulation; and control prices. 5) We should improve the 
market-based monitoring and control system. We should step up 
supervision and control over the prices of daily necessities and 
basic services. While keeping their actual conditions in mind, 
all localities should specifically produce lists of essential 
commodities whose prices are subject to monitoring and control. 
Moreover, we should establish and implement a system under 
which prices for goods and services are clearly marked, as well 
as a system for registering and reporting price increases for a 
few important commodities. All localities must seriously 
implement the "Circular on Strengthening Efforts To Monitor and 
Review the Prices of Daily Necessities and Services" promulgated 
by the State Council and the "Provisions on Clearly Marking the 
Prices of Goods and Services" promulgated by the State Planning 
Commission. We should continue to overhaul all kinds of 
unwarranted fees; stop monopoly industries from increasing 
prices indiscriminately and covertly; give full rein to the 
roles of media departments and consumer and trade organizations; 
and enlist public opinion and the masses in tightening 
supervision over commodity prices. 6) We should set standards 
governing market order and improve market administration. We 
should accelerate the process of enacting laws on markets and 
prices, encourage fair competition, oppose monopolistic 
practices, protect legitimate profits, and stop the practice of 
making staggering profits through fraudulent means. We should 
also step up the inspection of price-related law enforcement 
efforts. The State Council has decided to conduct two 
nationwide general price surveys during the first and second 
halves of this year, and to investigate and sternly deal with 
illegal price increases and actions disruptive to market order. 
7) Administrative departments in charge of prices, as well as 
industry and commerce, at all levels should earnestly step up 
their efforts to monitor and inspect market prices and order, 
and better perform their functions of monitoring and controlling 
prices and markets. 
  (4) The macroeconomic regulation and control system 
needs to be improved continuously during the course of deepening 
reform. To develop the socialist market economy and 
maintain sustained, rapid, and healthy development in the 
national economy, we must gradually establish a sound 
macroeconomic regulation and control system in accordance with 
the "Decision on Some Issues Concerning the Establishment of a 
Socialist Market Economic Structure" of the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee. 1) All departments 
and localities must maintain the state's authority in exercising 
macroeconomic regulation and control, ensure the fulfillment of 
this year's goals and tasks for state macroeconomic regulation 
and control, and carefully consider and serve the overall 
requirement for the state to exercise macroeconomic regulation 
and control when drawing up their work plans. 2) We should 
establish a mechanism by which planning, banking, and finance 
will restrain each other; improve the overall coordination of 
economic operations; promote the integration of various 
macroeconomic policies; and encourage the comprehensive 
application of economic, legal, and essential administrative 
means, so that the different components will work closely with 
each other and combine to form a joint force. We should conduct 
fine-tuning on a timely basis to avert the buildup of 
contradictions, prevent drastic economic upswings and 
downswings, and improve the effectiveness of macroeconomic 
regulation and control. 3) We should step up efforts to monitor 
economic trends and issue advance warnings and forecasts of such 
trends. We should closely track economic trends, study 
potential contradictions and problems in economic activity, 
issue advance warnings on a timely basis, and adopt practical 
and effective policy measures. We should strengthen and improve 
the system of collecting, analyzing, and releasing information 
on the national economy and on various markets, giving full 
scope to the role of information-based guidance in promoting the 
healthy operation of the national economy. 4) We should 
continue to deepen reform of the planning system and let state 
planning play its due role in macroeconomic regulation and 
control. In accordance with the requirements of the decision of 
the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, we 
should stress the macroeconomic, strategic, and policy aspects 
of planning work; draw up long-term, mid-term, and annual plans; 
and set forth rational strategies, goals for macroeconomic 
regulation and control, and industrial policies for national 
economic and social development. We should devise plans for the 
major components of the economic structure, for the distribution 
of productive forces, for land conservation, and for key 
construction projects. We should coordinate the application of 
macroeconomic policies and levers in an all-around way. 
  Fellow deputies: Successful planning for this year's 
economic work carries important implications for expediting the 
pace of building a socialist market economic structure; for 
maintaining sustained, rapid, and healthy development in the 
national economy; and for promoting overall social progress. We 
should rally more closely around the party Central Committee 
with Comrade Jiang Zemin as the core, emancipate our minds, seek 
truth from facts, take overall interests into account, work in a 
down-to-earth manner, and make great efforts to fulfill the 1994 
national economic and social development plan under the guidance 
of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and of the party's basic line. 

