Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yelena Vasilyevna Zavatskaya, deputy head </F>
physician at the Maritime Kray Center for the Prevention and 
Treatment of AIDS, by Vladimir Isakov; from the "Lunch Hour 
Break" program -- recorded] 
  [Text] AIDS has been called the Bubonic Plague of the 20th 
century. What action is being taken in the Maritime Kray to 
prevent the spread of this disease? Our correspondent, Vladimir 
Isakov, spoke to Yelena Vasilyevna Zavatskaya, deputy head 
physician at the kray Center for the Prevention and Treatment of 
AIDS. [Begin recording] 
  Isakov: Yelena Vasilyeva, I have a question for 
you: When and why was our center established? 
  Zavatskaya: The kray AIDS center was established 
in 1989. It is unusual because, with the exception of Moscow, 
there is no equal to it in Russia. 
  We have identified seven cases of HIV in the Maritime Kray, 
five of these in just the past two years. This is far more than 
in any other Far East region. There is one case each in Magadan 
and Kamchatka Oblasts, and one in Khabarovsk Kray. 
  Isakov: What do you think is the reason? 
  Zavatskaya: The fact that HIV infected people in 
the northern regions have had sexual partners in Vladivostok and 
Nakhodka. However, they do not know their names and surnames, 
and they simply have not shown up here yet. We want people to 
seek medical advice. We have discreet examination, treatment, 
and consulting rooms and a crisis center with a round-the-clock 
crisis telephone line. We will preserve the anonymity of 
patients. We urge people who suspect they may have contracted 
AIDS to call us by telephone on 236311. We have an outpatients' 
clinic where they can be examined by such attending specialists 
as a [termotrenerologist], a gynecologist, a physiotherapist, an 
infectious diseases specialist, and a pediatrician. 
  Isakov: If, for example, someone becomes an HIV 
carrier, how soon should they come to you? 
  Zavatskaya: People with HIV generally go rather a 
long time before they become unwell, but they can still infect 
others through sex. People should simply be aware that this 
disease does not run a course like most other diseases and if 
there is any reason to suspect they may have contracted it, they 
must have themselves checked. 
  Isakov: Is there criminal liability if an 
HIV-infected person knowingly has sex with another person? 
  Zavatskaya: They sign an undertaking not to 
spread the disease, as with any other venereal disease. 
  Isakov: Yelena Vasilyevna, do you have modern 
equipment that can diagnose HIV infection? 
  Zavatskaya: We have a laboratory which can 
diagnose the presence of antibodies in the blood. There is no 
need to be afraid because there are HIV-infected people at the 
center; in fact, I would like to say that, in general, 
HIV-infected people are no cause for general concern. For 
instance, on 1 December I felt bad when I read in the NASH 
VLADIVOSTOK newspaper that here in Maritime Kray, [journalist] 
Marina Sokolova calls them AIDS carriers when the rest of the 
world refers to them as HIV-infected. The whole world is 
battling to protect these people. In principle, it is possible 
for anyone to become infected through sexual contact, yet here 
we call them AIDS carriers. There is no protection for them. 
Young people are committing suicide because it is impossible to 
live with the stigma of this in our society. That is what I 
wanted to stress: There must be protection and there must not be 
such aggression. As things stand, if there is an information 
leak, the carriers do not have a chance to live and work. 
  Isakov: Can you tell us if is any medicine which 
can bolster the immune system? 
  Zavatskaya: There is the world-renowned 
azidothymidine [AZT]. The Russian name for this preparation is 
(kimozit) and if patients need it, they will receive it free of 
charge. 
  Isakov: And finally, what is your wish for our 
listeners? 
  Zavatskaya: I have a big favor to ask. If you 
suffer any change in bodily function, or if something is 
worrying you, please come in. The round-the-clock crisis 
telephone number is 236311, or you can visit our examination, 
treatment, and consulting rooms at 50 Botisenko [Street] between 
0800 and 1800 hours daily and give a blood sample. You do not 
need to use your name. We will test it for HIV and Wassermann 
reaction, and you need not even come back for your results -- we 
can advise you by telephone if you wish. [end recording] 

