BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 4 (XINHUA) -- The Chinese Government 
and people expressed congratulations to South Africa on the 
smooth progress of its first all-race election and to the 
African National Congress (ANC) for its election victory, a 
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said here today. 
  Preliminary election results show that the ANC, led by 
Nelson 
Mandela, has built an insurmountable lead, which indicates that 
South Africa will form a new government of national unity 
centered around the ANC. 
  The election has provided South African black people their 
first chance to exercise democratic rights in the history of 
South Africa, the spokesman noted. 
  The birth of a new South Africa where all races are equal 
marks a new epoch in the country, he said. 
  The victory is the result of the hard, long-time struggle of 
the South African people, supported by the international 
community. The ANC and other black liberation organizations 
have played a crucial role in propelling South Africa toward 
this historic change, he said. 
  "We appreciate the positive contributions made by the 
National Party led by F.W. de Klerk, in moving with the tides 
and implementing reforms," he said. 
  The Chinese Government and people sincerely hope that under 
the leadership of the government of national unity, all parties 
there will strengthen unity and cooperation and make joint 
efforts in the building up of a new South Africa enjoying racial 
equality, stability, democracy and prosperity, he said. 
  The Chinese Government and people have firmly supported the 
just struggle of the South African people against apartheid and 
are proud of the historic victory of the South African people, 
he noted. 
  "China is willing to establish and develop friendly ties of 
cooperation with the new South African Government on the basis 
of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence," he stated. 
  He expressed the belief that the traditional friendship of 
the Chinese and South African peoples will be consolidated and 
developed on a new basis. 

