BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS diplomatic correspondents Nikolay Geronin and </F>
Aleksandr Kopnov] 
  [Text] Moscow, 2 Jun -- Russia will firmly uphold the 
international nuclear nonproliferation regime, Russian President 
Boris Yeltsin announced today at a state reception in the 
Faceted Hall of the Grand Kremlin Palace in honor of South 
Korean President Kim Yong-sam. One of the primary goals of this 
is to guarantee a nonnuclear status for the Korean peninsula, 
the Russian head of state stressed. 
  Yeltsin recalled that Russia has proposed an international 
conference on this issue, which could find a comprehensive 
solution to the nuclear issue and in particular bring about 
specific agreements making it possible to reduce and 
subsequently remove the dangerous confrontation on the Korean 
peninsula. The main aim is to begin a movement toward trust and 
cooperation. 
  Moscow is ready to play and will play an active part in 
creating international mechanisms aimed at strengthening a 
climate of trust, security, and cooperation in relations between 
the states of the Asia-Pacific region, the Russian president 
said. 
  Yeltsin expressed confidence that close interaction between 
Russia and the Republic of Korea would help to strengthen 
stability in the Asia-Pacific region. In his words, relations 
with Seoul are one of Moscow's top priorities in the 
Asia-Pacific sphere. 
  Russia, the Russian president pointed out, has historically 
been deeply involved in the affairs of the Korean peninsula. In 
July it will be 110 years since the establishment of relations 
between Russia and Korea. Ties are developing well at the 
present time too. But there is a need to move on and give the 
"green light" to all cooperation projects in all spheres of 
life. This applies first and foremost to the economic sphere, 
the more so since opportunities and reserves do exist for this. 
  Russia wants the speediest possible reunification of Korea 
by 
peaceful democratic means, Yeltsin said. One of the most 
dangerous threats in Asia and throughout the world will thereby 
be eliminated. We want to see Korea as a unified, peace-loving, 
democratic, nuclear-free, and prosperous state and a reliable 
partner of Russia, the president pointed out. I believe that 
the way to achieve this will be found by the Koreans themselves. 
Russia is ready to facilitate the accomplishment of the Korean 
people's cherished goal of unification as soon as possible. 

