BFN 

<F P=106> [by reporter Zhang Rongdian (1728 2837 0368)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 8 Apr (XINHUA) -- Chinese Vice Premier and 
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen held talks with French Foreign 
Minister Alain Juppe at the Diaoyutai Guesthouse this morning. 
The French foreign minister is accompanying Premier Balladur on 
a visit to China. 
  Qian Qichen said the two prime ministers held very good 
talks 
yesterday and had reached an extensive agreement on many issues. 
Juppe said the two prime ministers held very positive and 
constructive talks, adding the French side was satisfied with 
the results. 
  In a friendly atmosphere the two foreign ministers exchanged 
views on bilateral relations and on some international and 
regional issues. 
  Touching on the Cambodian issue, Qian Qichen said that China 
and France have cooperated very well on the question of Cambodia 
and both have made contributions to the settlement of the issue. 
He said: The United Nations' actions were successful in 
Cambodia where a new government has been formed. China has 
consistently supported King Sihanouk as the leader of Cambodia 
and will continue to do so. The Cambodian issue has now been 
settled as an international issue, therefore the domestic issues 
are internal affairs of Cambodia and those issues should be 
settled by the Cambodian people themselves. 
  Juppe indicated he shared Qian's view. He said France and 
China have cooperated very well on the Cambodian issue, 
expressing the hope that such cooperation should continue. 
  Briefing Qian on the latest development in the Bosnia and 
Herzegovina region, Juppe said a new situation has emerged in 
Sarajevo where the residents have begun to live a normal life. 
However, there is still a long way to go before the final 
settlement of the problems, and an overall view is needed by all 
the parties concerned. 
  Qian Qichen said he hoped that the efforts for a settlement 
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina question make new progress through 
negotiations. 
  At the request of the guest, Qian briefed Juppe on China's 
position on the question of Hong Kong. 

