BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 20 May (EFE) -- Today Bolivian authorities 
once again contradicted themselves regarding the alleged 
existence of guerrilla groups linked to drug trafficking and the 
entry of Army troops into the main coca leaf production area in 
Bolivia. 
  While Bolivian Social Defense Secretary Mario Soliz 
confirmed 
the military presence in the Chapare to investigate reports on 
the alleged presence of illegal armed groups linked to drug 
trafficking, Bolivian Interior Minister German Quiroga said: 
"There is no such presence (nor) is the Chapare going to become 
militarized." 
  Soliz explained: "A situation that may be the beginning of a 
guerrilla movement has been detected through (Army) 
intelligence. Therefore, military troops must carry out the 
necessary investigations to prevent it." 
  On 17 May, the Army leadership issued a communique 
"categorically" denying press reports on the alleged deployment 
of troops to the Chapare region to "prevent `narco-guerrillas' 
from getting organized." 
  The coca peasant unions rejected the official version, 
stating that the "`narco-guerrilla' is something made up by the 
government to intimidate the region's peasants" and voiced their 
concern over a possible "militarization" of the Chapare. 
  The Bolivian interior minister asserted that reports on 
"narco-guerrillas and militarization" in the Chapare are 
"smokescreens" with which the peasant leaders intend to "save 
their colleagues who were arrested" after drugs were found in 
their homes. 
  Quiroga held the peasants responsible for the version of the 
surfacing of a guerrilla movement linked to drug traffickers and 
the entry of Army troops in the Chapare, where most of the coca 
earmarked for the illegal production of cocaine originates. 
  On 26 April, Bolivian President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada 
warned that in the Chapare "there is a climate that could lead 
the drug cartels to a `narco-guerrilla' process." The peasants 
interpreted this warning as an "insult" and reacted by insulting 
the chief of state. 
  According to Quiroga, some coca growers intend to distract 
the peoples' attention from the growing protection they grant 
drug traffickers they supply with illegal coca production. 
  He explained that last weekend, during operations carried 
out 
by drug enforcement forces in the Chapare, maceration pits were 
found on the land of coca growers "and, in the specific case of 
a woman leader, we found 20 kg of drugs in her home." 
  Bolivia is the second-largest coca leaf producer in the 
world 
after Peru, and experts believe it has become the second-largest 
country refining drugs in the world after Colombia. 

