Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Progress made at the talks in Lusaka, where the 
government and the National Union for the Total Independence of 
Angola [UNITA] have reached agreement on two out of the five 
points in the negotiating agenda is not yet enough to cause the 
Angolan people to believe that Jonas Savimbi's organization is 
about to renounce its warmongering stance. In Cuito, capital of 
Bie Province, UNITA troops yesterday resumed attacks on 
government forces to conquer the city in order to influence the 
talks tomorrow in the Zambian capital. 
  Reports from Cuito say that UNITA has once again used 
everything at its disposal to take over the city. To achieve 
its aims it is indifferent to the fact that its actions cause 
more innocent victims. Dozens of bodies are already spread out 
on the roads of the martyred and destroyed city of Cuito. Our 
correspondent Abel Abreu reports from the area: 
  [Begin Abreu recording] A total of 48 people were killed and 
62 others wounded, mostly children, the elderly, and women in a 
number of houses which became [word indistinct] is the 
preliminary figure of the shellings by UNITA since yesterday in 
the martyred city of Cuito. Cuito is once again dressed in 
black. The capital city of the province [word indistinct] is 
characterized by blood, powder, and mourning. The number of 
shells launched by UNITA against the afflicted Cuito residents 
is estimated at more than 4,000. The smile, which was beginning 
to show on the lips of thousands of people who survived the 
recent nine-month war, was abruptly extinguished yesterday with 
the renewed sound of 120, (B30, 106), B12 cannons [words 
indistinct], and 60-mm and 81-mm mortars from UNITA. 
  The Angolan Armed Forces [FAA], the National Police, and the 
civilian defense caused considerable losses to the enemy, 
killing 47 UNITA bandits and capturing assorted war materiel. 
The great victory scored by the government forces is not 
limited to the killing of UNITA soldiers and the capture of war 
materiel. The FAA, the National Police, and the civilian 
defense went further and were able to take over more than 85 
percent of the city. They also occupied some outlying wards -- 
namely, Camacuto, Pinguita, Guija, and Gabreio, areas which 
until yesterday were under UNITA control. 
  In an exclusive interview with our reporters, [name 
indistinct] 2d commander of FAA in Bie, said his troops are more 
than ever prepared to teach the enemy a lesson and finish them 
off. He said, quote, the story of Huambo, Uige, and Soyo will 
not be repeated here in Cuito. If UNITA hopes to take over 
Cuito because of victories scored in those areas, it is 
deceiving itself, for we swear to defend Cuito to the last, and 
we are fulfilling the legacy of the deceased Lieutenant General 
Alfredo Cutumbua, unquote. The clashes continue, but everything 
is under the control of government soldiers. [end recording] 

