Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sanaa, Feb 12 (AFP)--Three French tourists held 
hostage since January 23 in north Yemen arrived here Saturday 
after being freed by their captors, French diplomats said. [see 
SELECTED VIDEO REPORTS in front of this Terrorism Report for 
footage of interviews with released hostages] 
  Henri Heslot and his wife, Jeanne, both aged 72 and retired 
agriculture professors, as well as cardiologist Brigitte 
Fontaine, 42, arrived in a Yemeni Army helicopter from the 
village of Al-Madhan where they were held by Ahnum tribesmen 
trying to force the government to build a road through their 
region. 
  "France is very happy they have been released and thanks the 
Yemeni authorities as well as the elders who personally 
intervened to help free them," said a French Foreign Ministry 
spokesman in Paris. 
  He said the three who were in good health had been received 
by the French ambassador to Yemen, Marcel Laugel, were to return 
Sunday to France on a regular flight. 
  Earlier, Yemeni Interior Minister Yahya al-Mutawakkil told 
AFP the kidnappers had released the three tourists in the north 
of the country. 
  The French tourists were accompanied by a delegation of 
negotiators sent earlier in the week by the government to secure 
their release. 
  The three had been detained near the village of Al-Madhan, 
200 kilometers (124 miles) northwest of the capital. They had 
been abducted in Hajjah province while on a tour organized by 
Club Aventure (Adventure Club), the company's director in Paris 
had said. 
  On February 1, reliable Yemeni sources said the authorities 
had told the captors in a letter they would look into demands 
for a road into the tribesmen's remote mountain fief. 
  The powerful Hashid tribes, whose land surrounds the Ahnum, 
had altered the direction of the contested road. 
  The Ahnum were demanding that a road be built to bypass 
Hashid land, so that their goods could be delivered to other 
parts of the country safely. 
  Last month the English-language YEMEN TIMES reported that 
the 
ministry of public works had come under strong pressure from the 
Hashid tribal chief, Shaykh 'Abdallah al-Ahmar, who is the 
parliamentary speaker, to re-route the road so as to skirt the 
Ahnum enclave. 
  Hashid tribesmen had cut off supplies to the remote mountain 
village in northwestern Yemen where the French tourists were 
held to force the kidnappers' surrender. 
  President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih recently warned kidnappers in 
Yemen they would not escape unpunished following the detention 
of the French tourists. 
  Mutawakkil said the release of the three hostages was thanks 
to mediation efforts, notably by chiefs of the Bakil tribal 
group of which the Ahnum are members. 
  Tribes frequently kidnap foreigners, particularly western 
oil 
workers, as leverage in dealing with the government. 

