Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by M.D.Z.: "The Fight for Principles"] </F>
  [Text] "We see the need for the establishment of a strong 
right-wing party, including all of those who accept the view 
that Poland can no longer be a territory for socialist 
experiments and that freedom, property, and respect for our 
nation's traditions are the foundation of its social order," 
stated Aleksander Hall, Janusz Korwin-Mikke, Pawel Laczkowski, 
and Jozef Slisz, in a joint programmatic declaration. 
  The leaders of the Conservative Party (PK), the Union for 
Real Politics (UPR), the Party of Christian Democrats (PChD), 
and the Christian Peasant Party (SLCh) on Friday [17 December] 
signed a declaration that, according to Pawel Laczkowski, is 
aiming at a "clear description of programmatic criteria for 
acceptance to the right side of the political scene." 
  The four parties of the "economic right" support, among 
other 
things, a presidential-parliamentary system of governing, with 
the president elected through popular elections. "It is very 
important for the group `Poland After 1980' to be able to 
support a single candidate for president, but this will first be 
discussed in our own circle," said Aleksander Hall. The current 
head of state is treated by the four parties with some distance. 
Janusz Korwin-Mikke, when asked whether the group counts on 
cooperation with the president in building a strong right, said 
"The right must be able to stand on its own feet. Many thanks, 
but I think we can manage." As for cooperation with the BBWR 
(Nonparty Bloc in Support of Reforms), "The bloc has four 
`legs'; we'll see with which one of them we can talk, and which 
one will kick us." 
  The signers of the agreement emphasized their attachment to 
the Christian tradition and the need for church-state 
cooperation. They favor restrictions on trade unions and on 
state intervention in the economy. They prefer the limitation of 
overly liberal concessions granted to radio and TV, and they are 
against state control over the economy, saying that "the state 
monopolies and concessions are in fact making criminal 
activities possible." Their program also supports competition in 
agricultural production. 
  The UPR, the PK, the PChD, and the SLCh insist on the 
lowering of most taxes, the reprivatization of property seized 
under the communist regime, and extensive privatization of the 
public sector without delay. In the declaration, there are 
specific principles such as the abolition of the inheritance tax 
and the gift tax. 
  The "Agreement of Four" supports Polish aspirations to be 
included in the Atlantic Alliance structures. However, NATO is 
not mentioned by name in the document. There was a passage on 
"the need for pursuing a security guarantee from already 
existing military structures that defend the principles of our 
civilization." RZECZPOSPOLITA reporters were told that this 
particular statement was forced out because of the aversion of 
some UPR members to an explicit declaration for NATO. 
  "This is a program of the Polish Right," Aleksander Hall 
recapped. The agreement was reached according to Hall so "that 
no one from the rightist electorate will be lost--neither those 
who are attracted by UPR radicalism nor those who value KP 
moderation." What makes this group different from the alliance 
of the PC (Center Accord), the ZChN (Christian-National Union), 
and the PL (Peasant Accord) is the "new style in conducting 
politics." 
  Integration cannot be based on the party leaders' fears of 
the party members, said Laczkowski. "Political configurations 
may change, but our views will not," underscored Hall. "The 
`acceleration concepts' did Polish politics much harm. It is 
better to build understanding on a solid foundation," maintained 
the Conservative Party leader. Korwin-Mikke and Hall agreed that 
the beginning must be the creation of a program rather than the 
signing of tactical agreements. 
  "The Right--and this is what distinguishes it from the 
Left--is a struggle for principles and not for [government] 
jobs," contended the UPR leader. 

