Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Taysir 'Aruri, member of the Political </F>
Bureau of the Palestinian People's Party by 'Abd-al-Rahman 
al-Khatib; place and date not given] 
  [Excerpt] [Al-Khatib] In your opinion, why have the Taba 
talks faltered, and what solution do you propose? 
  ['Aruri] I think that the impasse in the Taba negotiations 
is 
caused by the very nature of the agreement reached in Oslo 
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides. This agreement 
allows for many interpretations. In addition, the Declaration 
of Principles was drafted hastily, since the negotiators in Oslo 
were in a hurry to announce it. Moreover, the impasse is a 
result of the way the negotiations are being conducted and the 
fact that the Israeli side is seeking more and more concessions. 
We should not be surprised if the negotiations in Taba and 
elsewhere face similar problems and if the Palestinian side 
offers more concessions. I hope that this will not happen. 
  What worries me most about the ongoing negotiations is the 
question of the Israeli settlements in the Oslo agreement. I am 
not playing down the question of the crossings and others, since 
this question has to do with sovereignty. However, transforming 
the Gaza settlements from an isolated, separate area into a 
connected area, regardless of the name, will certainly entrench 
the existence of these settlements on the ground. Let alone the 
territories that will be added to these settlements to form a 
so-called security belt. This is the most serious question in 
the Taba talks. I regret to say that this question is not being 
given enough attention. 
  [Al-Khatib] So you are not optimistic at all? 
  ['Aruri] The way the negotiations are being conducted by the 
Palestinian side bodes an uncomfortable future which raises many 
fears regarding the progress of negotiations and the future 
solution. 
  [Al-Khatib] The Palestinian People's Party has a certain 
view of President Yasir 'Arafat's unchallenged control of the 
negotiations. This prompted your party to withdraw from the 
negotiations committee. What are you going to do if President 
'Arafat continues to pursue this approach? Do you have any 
plans to talk to the 10 factions? 
  ['Aruri] You should not forget that our position originally 
stems from our party's support for the peace process and the 
negotiations as a means of resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict. 
We also subscribe to the Madrid terms. We still think that the 
peace process could lead to a Palestinian state and to national 
independence if the Palestinian side acts wisely. Therefore, 
our dispute with President 'Arafat and the parties to the 
negotiations has to do with the approach and how the 
negotiations are being conducted. If the negotiations are not 
carefully conducted, then this will have dire consequences for 
the Palestinian people. We support those who are against the 
Declaration of Principles, since this idea is open to all 
possibilities, starting with bolstering occupation and ending 
with independence and the establishment of a state. It is our 
job, therefore, to change the way the political process is being 
conducted and to change the decisionmaking process. Toward this 
end, we are prepared to talk to our allies in Fatah and to talk 
to all other Palestinian forces. We do not believe in boycott 
as a form of political action. We are prepared to talk to 
everybody, including the 10 factions. However, we will talk to 
them as one faction and not as a group. Our party does not plan 
at all to join the group of 10. [passage omitted] 

