BFN 

  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] In its meeting today, the 
Council of Ministers reviewed a number of agenda issues. Our 
correspondent for political affairs met with Information 
Minister Dr. Jawad al-'Anani, who spoke about the council 
decisions. 
  [Begin recording] [Al-'Anani] The first issue discussed was 
preparations for the expected visit to Jordan by Syrian Prime 
Minister Mahmud al-Zu'bi, who will head a delegation on a visit 
to Amman early next week to attend the meetings of the Joint 
Jordanian-Syrian Higher Committee. The Council of Ministers 
also discussed preparations for this expected visit since His 
Majesty King Husayn and His Excellency President Hafiz al-Asad 
asked the two governments to enhance bilateral relations to be 
in line with the agreement between the leaders of both 
countries. The Council of Ministers made preparations for 
political, economic, and financial files in order to develop 
relations with the brothers in Syria. 
  The second subject discussed by the Council of Ministers was 
a reconsideration of the local government and administration in 
Jordan. As a first step within the framework of a comprehensive 
reorganization system, it was agreed to promote four districts 
into governorates. These are 'Ajlun, Jarash, Ma'daba, and 
al-'Aqabah. This decision will be followed by other future 
decisions in order to complete this system. 
  [Correspondent Salim 'Ali Dhiyab] What are your views on 
[Israeli Foreign Minister Shim'on] Peres' statements on the 
fixed borders in the Dead Sea area, and the meetings of the 
tripartite committee in Washington? 
  [Al-'Anani] Actually, the Israeli foreign minister's 
statement deals with the instability of the surface of the Dead 
Sea, which makes it difficult, in his view, to define or 
demarcate borders in that area. On the one hand, his statement 
may contain a positive sign that he accepts the concept or 
principle of demarcation of borders, and this is something we 
understand positively. As for placing technical obstacles for 
border demarcation, we believe this is something that should be 
left for technicians to assess. I think that there are 
technicians in Jordan who are fully aware of these issues, and 
know the reason for low and changing water levels in the Dead 
Sea, which is the Israeli excessive pumping from the sources of 
the River Jordan. 
  [Dhiyab] But why this statement at this very time, the 
beginning of the committee meetings? 
  [Al-'Anani] I don't know the exact reasons that he has said 
this, but we can now decide our position on his statement. We 
do not accept such statements as a reason for delaying the issue 
or for not adhering to the Jordanian rights to specify our clear 
share in the Dead Sea. [end recording] 

