Article   Type:CSO 

  [Text] Japan's Mitsubishi has manufactured a new model of 
the 3000GT 
automobile, to which the definition of "leading technology" has 
been totally applied. This is an all-wheel drive automobile with 
a V-shaped twin-engine with a turbocharger, an antilock braking 
system, electronically controlled suspension, and an aerodynamic 
shape that can be adjusted depending on speed. Comfort, safety, 
and ease of driving is ensured thanks to the use of all of the 
systems listed above. 
  The new automobile is capable of reaching speeds of up to 
250 
kph and can accelerate from 0-100 kph in 5.9 seconds. This 
automobile demonstrated the capability to move at a speed of 56 
kph in fifth gear in anticipation of the moment when road 
conditions would permit it to reach normal speed on the heavily 
traveled roads of Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire. 
  The engine operates quietly with the drive shaft at more 
than 
1,000 rpm and a speed of 48 kph and emits a melodic hum when 
shifted into the upper gears at 6,000 rpm and higher. The 
Mitsubishi 3000GT has surprisingly low road noise for an 
automobile with 17-inch (432 mm) wheels and very low-placed 
tires (SP 8060 tires specially developed for the sports car by 
Dunlop). 
  The automobile is equipped with an air conditioner and 
driver-side air bag. The rear seats play an auxiliary role and 
do not provide adequate comfort; the rear portion of the coupe 
is designed more for storing baggage, for which the rear hatch 
can be raised. 
  The Mitsubishi 3000GT is being offered in a four-seat 
variant 
for &pound;35,500, which is &pound;20,000 cheaper than Honda's 
NS-X 
two-seat model of that same class and nearly &pound;4,000 cheaper 
than a Porsche-968. However, the Mitsubishi 3000GT is more 
expensive than Nissan's 300ZX (&pound;32,775) and the just 
produced 
Subaru SVX model (&pound;27,996). 
  One hundred 3000GT automobiles will be shipped to Great 
Britain in 1992 and orders have been received for more than half 
of the shipment. 
  The English market for sports cars and coupe models with 
high 
specifications went down from 11,100 vehicles in 1990 to 7,481 
vehicles in 1991. A total of 2,965 vehicles of that type were 
sold during the first half of 1992. Experts think that the 
overall economic decline, increased insurance payments, and also 
the stricter actions of law enforcement agencies with regard to 
individuals who exceed the speed limit is the cause of the 
decline in demand. 
  FINANCIAL TIMES, 1 August 1992, p. VIII. 
<H5>  Sale of Allison Transmission </H5>
  General Motors has decided to sell its Allison Transmission 
subsidiary, which specialized in the production of transmissions 
for heavy trucks, to the West German company ZF Friedrichshafen. 
The deal must be approved by the governments of both interested 
parties and, according to plans, will enter into force at the 
end of 1992. Details of the agreement are not being released. 
According to General Motors Vice President L. Royce, his firm 
will continue to count on deliveries from Allison Transmission. 
  The ZF Plant, with headquarters in Friedrichshafen, is 
valued 
at $4 billion and specializes in deliveries of transmissions, 
suspensions, and control devices to the world market. 
Acquisition of the Allison Transmission subsidiary will assist 
ZF to develop a long-term strategy for the production of 
world-class power plants for a wide circle of purchasers 
throughout the world. 
  An official ZF spokesman said that the German company plans 
to retain Allison's leadership and staff of workers 
(approximately 5,000 people) and will continue production of 
automatic transmissions for trucks, buses, off-road vehicles, 
and military vehicles in Indianapolis. 
  Thirty three thousand people in 49 of the world's countries 
work at ZF plants and the company made an annual income of $3.8 
billion in 1991. 
  General Motors is offering another subsidiary for sale in 
Indianapolis--Allison Gas Turbine--however, a purchaser has not 
yet been found. The activities of Allison Gas Turbine depended 
primarily on military contracts, but this subsidiary has been 
increasingly oriented toward the civilian market in the last 
several years. Allison Gas Turbine develops aircraft engines for 
new aircraft that are being operated on regional airlines and 
also for personal business aircraft, that is, it specializes in 
a sphere where obtaining profits is only possible after several 
years. 
  General Motors has already informed the personnel of Allison 
Gas Turbine about the shutdown of production. 
  AP, 5 August 1992. 
<H5>  Robot To Replace Oil in Automobile Engine </H5>
  On 16 September, the Japanese firm Idemitsu Kosan began to 
sell an innovation for automobile owners--the Oiru Robo device 
for automatic replacement of oil in an automobile engine. 
  The entire operation is carried out in three steps, and the 
participation of an individual ends at the first stage when the 
"on" button is pushed. After that, the "oil robot" pumps the old 
oil out of the vehicle and pumps in exactly the same amount of 
new oil. Replacement of 3.5 liters of oil takes five minutes. 
Utilization of the new device will permit a reduction of 
one-third in the time a client needs to stay at a gas station 
where these types of services are offered. 
  ITAR-TASS, 19 September 1992. 

