CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nikolay Modestov: "`Generals' of the Crime </F>
World"] 
  [Text] [begin boxed item] "Listen, something has to be 
done. Last year Globe was shot, Arsen and Givi died... And how 
did this year begin? Bobon was killed--who, what for..." 
  "It is time to get together and think about what to do next. 
We cannot put up with this..." 
  --From a telephone conversation between Yaponchik, a crime 
boss, and Tayvanchik, an authority in the crime world, who now 
live abroad. (From Interpol radio intercept) [end boxed item] 
<H5>  Where Did You Get It? I Bought It! </H5>
  Gray, pale-faced, in typical dirty pea jackets, the 
prisoners 
appear to be a monotonous mass only to the uninitiated. Special 
laws exist that are consistently and rigorously observed by 
everyone without exception in the "world behind prison bars." 
There is a unique hierarchy here, where everyone knows his place 
and value. The elite of the criminal world--the "crime bosses" 
["vor v zakone"]--are at the very top in the rank of untouchable 
authorities who are considered the main custodians of criminal 
traditions and the "correct" way of life. 
  According to information of the USSR Ministry of Internal 
Affairs, the number of "crime bosses" ["vor"] on the territory 
of the former superpower was approaching 600. There are fewer in 
Russia today. It is difficult to name an exact figure--"crime 
bosses" ["zakonnik"] do not have a union, and militia employees 
use operational information and agent sources exclusively. The 
number of crime bosses from the Baltics to the shores of the 
Pacific Ocean is numbered at about 200 today. The drop in the 
number of "generals" in the crime world is explained not only by 
the collapse of the Union (some of the crime bosses live outside 
Russia) and their death (not always natural). Many, hiding from 
law enforcement organs after accumulating a considerable amount 
of capital, moved to the West happily, which however does not 
hinder them from carrying out their main function--overseeing, 
managing, and performing the role of arbitration tribunal of the 
criminal brotherhood. 
  By far not everyone can become a crime boss. It is not 
enough 
to have the reputation of a "hard-boiled" person and a long 
"service record" under various articles of the Criminal Code. 
(Although a crime boss is obliged to have "walks"--that is, to 
spend time behind barbwire.) The main thing is esteem and a 
respectful reputation among criminals, and the authority and 
ability to "resolve problems." According to unwritten rules, in 
the old days a crime boss did not have the right to create a 
family, under no circumstances was he supposed to work, and he 
was forbidden from engaging in hoarding money. He could satisfy 
any desire, taking money from the common fund--a kind of 
thieves' open account. Once, for observance of these canons, the 
crime bosses entered into a conflict with camp and prison 
administrations, and they even cut off their fingers so that 
they would not have to go to work. But in recent decades the 
traditions, while retaining the main ingredients, have 
experienced significant changes. 
  Today a crime boss is not obliged to be above making money. 
The crime bosses of the new "call-up," to the indignation of 
authorities inclined to nostalgic grumbling over the past, did 
not always spend a lot of time in a camp; in other words--they 
did not have the equivalent experience of camp life of the crime 
boss. But the main thing, in the opinion of informed operatives, 
is that the procedure of the "coronation" itself is already far 
from ideal. It is known, for example, that in recent years many 
wealthy representatives of the criminal Caucasus even bought 
prestigious ranks. (The Georgians, as the detectives think, 
especially transgressed in this way, receiving their countrymen 
for an appropriate payment to the criminal common fund.) 
Incidentally, the last circumstance partly explains the less 
respectful attitude toward the title of "crime boss" on the part 
of young people who have chosen "life outside the law." 
<H5>  Chocolate and Cognac--to the Cell </H5>
  The arrival of a crime boss in the prison area or solitary 
confinement cell is known long before his appearance. The 
world's most reliable communications system operates between 
transit prisons. The esteemed guest is properly met--he is given 
the best place in the cell or barracks, he is assigned a special 
person--something in the nature of an orderly. 
  The administration of the camp also eagerly accepts this. A 
strong crime boss, with whom contact is made, helps maintain 
order among the criminals, and guarantees that the necessary 
number of "muzhiks" appear for work and the necessary 
productivity. Thus, Perm crime boss Yakutenok had in Colony No. 
12 in Nizhniy Tagil (where he spent his last term) a clean room 
in the medical block, cognac, tea, chocolate, and drugs. What is 
more, Yakutenok directed his countrymen from the zone by 
telephone, determining the "policy" of the criminal world. On 
his release from the zone an apartment with an armor-plated door 
and a brand new Zhiguli passenger car awaited Yakutenok. 
  How the crime bosses conduct a court of "honor" can be 
imagined from the situation in Sailors' Rest Prison. As I was 
told by an acquaintance detective, whose ward is now sitting in 
the famous investigative solitary confinement cell No. 1, two 
crime bosses there call the shots. On their orders, the 
good-for-nothings who committed an offense, gave false 
information, or are militia accomplices, or suspected of being 
informers, are thrown from a double bunk bed onto a cement 
floor. After such "falls in their sleep" (of course, not one 
victim will tell the real reason), the person is sent to the 
infirmary for a long time and, if he survives, it is unlikely 
that he will remain healthy. But what is to be done? Not only is 
the crime boss supposed to live according to the "law," but also 
to watch over its fulfillment by the brotherhood. 
  It is interesting that in cases of disrespectful treatment 
toward himself the crime boss is supposed to prove his 
superiority. How and with what methods is his business, but a 
lapse denotes in the eyes of others a loss of authority for the 
crime boss, and consequently his loss of title. In this sense 
the history of the well-known crime boss Kalin, whose godson was 
Yaponchik, an even more famous patriarch of the criminal world, 
is indicative. 
  Kalin did not enjoy any special respect. He was a musician, 
he respected the "laws" and was proud of it. But according to 
the opinion of many, he was not drawn to becoming a real crime 
boss. One day he was enjoying himself in the Olympus Restaurant 
in Luzhniki. At the next table, to his misfortune, a certain 
Mansur Shelkovnikov was relaxing in a civilized way--he was a 
very "tough" authority and the leader of one of the Moscow 
groups, and in addition had a black belt in karate. When Kalin 
got especially noisy, Mansur made a comment to him. Things went 
from bad to worse, a verbal altercation ensued, insults were 
thrown, which for a crime boss who respected himself were 
dishonorable. Kalin, understandably, was not in comparable 
physical condition to Shelkovnikov. Indeed, why did he need to 
be? He took out a knife, and with one blow laid him out on the 
spot. He killed him. Then he got up and left, taking advantage 
of the turmoil and confusion. He was accused of murder and 
arrested, but... 
  Nevertheless, the story ends sadly for Kalin. Within two 
years he was killed by a shot in the head from a Makarov pistol. 
Some frail lad in a sports cap pulled down over his eyes did the 
shooting. He performed his deed and left quietly in the 
direction of a residential area. The name of the murderer is not 
known to this day. 
<H5>  It Is Simply that "Crime Bosses" Are Not Killed This Way </H5>
  Kalin's death seems to have opened up a series of 
sensational 
and always unexpected murders of crime bosses and authorities of 
the crime world. 
  Of course, various ones were killed previously as well. But 
it goes without saying, not in such numbers, and the main thing 
is that they were not as influential and noticeable in our 
normal lives. However, the situation in Russia has changed, 
economic policy has changed, and a majority of mafiosi, not 
wanting to lag behind the times, have thrown themselves into 
commerce, racketeering, and questionable and openly criminal 
business; they have become a real force. Therefore the death 
of any one of them is turned into an event not only for 
criminals but also for business people, the "new Russians," and 
even the politicians. 
  In Vladivostok crime boss Banin, nicknamed Bandit, a former 
sportsman and serviceman, has actively engaged in commerce. 
During a "showdown" competitors killed Bandit and two of his 
bodyguards, and the corpses were burned. Crime boss Ankundinov, 
nicknamed Mistress, a native of Saratov Oblast, was killed. The 
day before, literally sensing death, he transferred the right of 
law enforcer to Banin and Kitayev (nicknamed Chinaman). Vasin, a 
native of Chita and well-known as "Gem," became a crime boss, 
and until recently controlled a huge territory in the 
Trans-Urals. Crime boss Yablochko took control over Samara, 
Togliatti, Novokuybyshevsk, Chapayevsk... 
  The largest concentration of crime bosses, as might be 
expected, is in the capital region. Even those who control the 
remote areas prefer to live closer to the capital. It is here 
that the paths of the authorities cross in the event of the 
resolution of questionable territorial financial questions, and 
it is from here that many famous names--Yaponchik, 
Tayvanchik--left to go abroad, and Isayev, nicknamed Signature, 
one of the crime bosses of the new formation, left to cross the 
ocean. He is worth talking about in more detail. 
  It is said that Signature was crowned on the recommendation 
of Yaponchik especially to squeeze the Caucasus element out of 
Moscow. And Signature took on the job smartly. As he said 
himself during one of his arrests: "I do not do anything bad. I 
only shoot off `Papuans.'" Some operatives think that the famous 
attack on the Chechens at Ostankino, where four Caucasians died 
instantly, can be attributed specifically to Isayev's fighting 
groups. But, in addition, the "feats" are not that celebrated 
and effective. 
  It must be admitted that Signature is a courageous person. 
His heroic conduct did not go unnoticed among people at the top, 
and he fell into serious scrapes twice. The first time during a 
shootout, Isayev was lucky--the bullet was stopped by a 
bulletproof jacket. The second time a hired killer, it seems, 
did everything, and the bullet hit Signature's liver. But 
luckily for him, Sharapov--Signature's bodyguard--was between 
the sniper and the liver. He took the main hit, and died on the 
spot. Isayev, in grave condition, was taken to hospital, and 
afterwards flew to the United States where he was operated on 
again; he is now once again in the capital, full of strength and 
plans. 
  The fate of other kingpins of the criminal world, who became 
Signature's countrymen long ago, was much worse. Givi Rezanyy 
disappeared--he said goodbye to his wife and went into the yard 
to his modest Zhiguli and... Sometime later people in militia 
uniforms came to his wife and politely returned the car keys. No 
one has seen Rezanyy since that time. But what is most curious 
is that no one in either the MVD [Ministry of Internal Affairs] 
or the counterintelligence organs can give any explanation 
regarding Givi's disappearance. 
  According to generally accepted concepts in the criminal 
environment, unknown persons audaciously made short work of 
countryman Givi and the young Georgian crime boss Pipiya. The 
33-year-old, who was repeatedly convicted and is the owner of 
four cars (including cars that are the dreams of eccentric 
Porsche millionaires, which can cost up to $700,000), did not 
work anywhere, and, according to operational data, worked in the 
drug trade and lived in a rented apartment in Moscow. What 
brought him to Moscow's suburban Zelenograd? Now the Criminal 
Investigation Department and the Procuracy are interested in 
this question, because Pipiya and his brother were found with 
their heads shot through accurately at No. 9 on one of 
Zelenograd's streets next to the GSM [cooperative garage] Malino. 
  The fate of yet another crime boss--well-known Georgian 
crime 
boss Mikeladze, nicknamed Arsen, is also tragic. On 22 June of 
last year employees of Petrovka 38 arrested him at Hanoi 
Restaurant. The 50-year-old authority settled matters, and was 
the arbiter in the conflict between the Georgian and 
Solntsevskiy groups. The operatives found 34.5 grams of 
marijuana on Arsen, and after observing pertinent "ceremonies" 
released him on bail. Alas, Mikeladze lived about six months 
after this. 
  At the beginning of winter he and an acquaintance drove to 
Tbilisi for a friend's birthday. It was a small gathering: six 
or seven people. By the way, the popular artist Kikabidze was 
among the guests. At about 2100, on Mikeladze's recommendation, 
they started to break up. Arsen and his friend came out of the 
doorway, got into their Mercedes, and got ready to drive off. 
Suddenly two men with AKM's got out of a Zhiguli that was nearby 
and literally riddled them as they sat in the Merc... 
  One other well-known authority--the crime boss Globe--was 
also shot in masterly fashion last year. He was hit with a 
sniper's bullet from a rifle with an optical sight while coming 
out of the discotheque ULIS'S. And at the very beginning of the 
year, in January, one of Globe's closest contacts was shot--one 
of the toughest mafiosi with the nickname Bobon. The reasons for 
Bobon's murder were more than adequate, and the operatives also 
do not rule out the shootout in connection with a series of 
deaths of well-known mafiosi and businessmen, behind which were 
Bobon's people. 
  The list of crime bosses and authorities is smaller, and 
those who have fallen in the mafia wars of Russia can be 
continued. Although it is clear even so: It is becoming more and 
more dangerous to be a crime boss these days. A lot has changed, 
including in the crime world. You cannot hide from a bullet 
because of authority... As for the activities of the 
"patriarchs," gatherings of crime bosses can be expected in the 
near future, at which the security problems of the "godfathers" 
will be discussed. It is dead certain that they will arrive at 
appropriate organizational conclusions, and they will give 
strict instructions to someone, and someone... It is obvious 
that we will not learn about this from a resolution published in 
the press. We will see the results of the "gathering" and new 
sensational criminal deeds in operational summaries of the 
militia. 
  When this material was being prepared for press, 
several showdowns occurred again between the "generals" of the 
criminal world. In Balashikha the only Chechen representative--a 
crime boss, well-known under the nickname Sultan, was shot. His 
bodyguard was also killed. And literally within several days 
another attempt was made on the life of a crime boss--a 
representative of Signature's Russian mafia. A bomb was placed 
in a car parked next to where he was walking, and it exploded. 
This time also, Signature did not die on the spot. He was taken 
to hospital in serious condition, but it is too early to 
guarantee that he will live. 
  We will recount the details and reasons for these 
crimes in forthcoming issues of this weekly. We think that new 
names will be added to the obituaries by that time. 

