Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Kristina Michaelles] </F>
  [Text] Sao Paulo -- With a single pen stroke Brazil may be 
throwing away the equivalent of $18 million which had been 
earmarked for the demarcation of indigenous reservations, and 
wasting three and a half years of difficult negotiations, as the 
funds have already been approved by the German Government. 
According to Environment Ministry figures for February, the 
Brazilian Government has already spent $84,000 on technical 
missions for negotiating this project. 
  The request for the exclusion of the indigenous reservations 
project is contained in a letter sent by the Foreign Ministry to 
the German Government on 23 February. In the letter, the 
Foreign Ministry suggests modifications in the memorandum about 
bilateral participation within the framework of the Pilot 
Program for the Preservation of Brazilian Tropical Forests, 
which totals 68 million German marks ($40 million). The 
Indigenous Reservations Demarcation project had already been 
approved by an interministerial commission to which the Foreign 
Ministry also belongs. 
<H5>  Protest </H5>
  The fax sent to the Germans has elicited a strong protest 
from Dinarte Nobre de Medeiros, president of Funai [National 
Indian Foundation], who defined the Foreign Ministry decision as 
"inappropriate and untimely." In a fax sent on 3 March to the 
Environment Ministry, which is responsible for negotiating the 
overall Pilot Program, Medeiros said: "We would be entirely 
paralyzed as far as the regularization of indigenous territories 
is concerned." 
  The Brazilian Government's refusal to accept money from 
abroad for the demarcation of indigenous lands has taken place 
only a few days before the 20 March meeting to be held in 
Brussels. The main donors of funds for the Pilot Program (the 
World Bank, the Group of Seven wealthy countries, and the 
European Union) will participate in the Brussels meeting. This 
refusal could irreversibly affect other projects in the program. 
  Roberto Smeraldi, who coordinates Amazon region matters for 
the organization Friends of the Earth, said: "This is a serious 
matter, because the Germans are the main financial backers of 
the Pilot Program for the Amazon Region, and this attitude could 
end up damaging Brazil in the eyes of the other donors." In his 
opinion the consequences of this attitude regarding the Pilot 
Program could be "unthinkable." 
  The Indigenous Rights Nucleus, Friends of the Earth, and the 
Amazon Region Work Group have already sent a joint letter to 
German and Brazilian authorities warning them about the unusual 
unilateral decision made by the Foreign Ministry. 
<H5>  Battle </H5>
  The Foreign Ministry fax reveals that there is a hard battle 
going on inside government between the sector opposing the use 
of foreign resources for the demarcation of Indian lands, in the 
name of national sovereignty, and those who did their best to 
obtain foreign help to compensate for the budget cutbacks 
conducted a few weeks ago, which have practically eliminated the 
resources earmarked for the demarcation of indigenous lands. Of 
the $39 million requested by Funai, only $1.8 million (5 percent 
of the overall amount requested) was approved by the Federal 
Government Budget Department. 
  This is one more chapter preceding the political-juridical 
battle over the constitutional revision process. There are 
already 232 proposals and amendments related to Indians' rights. 
Some of them even seek to prevent the demarcation of indigenous 
lands on the border strip, where nearly 200 reservations are 
located. 

