Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prior to 1988, the man who today has "cocaine 
falling like rain" on northern Valle del Cauca was simply an 
active police officer with no rank. 
  [Victor Julio Fomeque] Patino, who was subsequently assigned 
to the Secret Police Division in Buenaventura from the F-2's 
[Judicial Police and Criminal Statistics Office] official 
garrison, began to promote a private justice squad. With the 
help of a police officer named Benavides, his brothers, and 
other police officers, Patino -- against whom an arrest warrant 
has been issued by faceless prosecutors from Cali -- became a 
member of the group that operated in Buenaventura under the name 
"Thief Killers" [Los Mata Ladrones]. 
  Although his leadership in the "Thief Killers" gave him some 
clout, a different episode began his drug trafficking career. 
  Promoted to personal bodyguard of Captain Beltran in the 
Police Intelligence Service, Patino finally had the opportunity 
to truly demonstrate his power and courage. 
  Patino saved the life of Capt. Beltran by helping him to 
escape unharmed from an attack. The compensation was not long 
in coming. Capt. Beltran, connected to an important Cali drug 
trafficker, offered Patino the opportunity to send small amounts 
of cocaine "pinned" [apuntados] to shipments in which the 
captain participated. 
  This situation continued for some time until Beltran decided 
Patino was ready to meet their mutual benefactor, a drug 
trafficker whom the DEA has been trailing for years and who has 
always been one of the top five men in the Valle del Cauca drug 
trafficking organization. 
  The contact allowed Patino to advance from meager amounts of 
cocaine to up to 2 to 3 kg on the northern Valle del Cauca 
traffickers' route to Miami (Florida). 
  Patino's prosperous career, however, served to separate him 
from his former allies the "Thief Killers." 
  The new business among Patino, the police official, and the 
drug traffickers ended with Benavides' transfer to Bogota and 
his subsequent death a few months later. 
  A few weeks later, Patino resigned from the force and began 
to advance in the organization until he became an associate of 
two other powerful drug traffickers. The three began to ship 
cocaine on their own account. 
  Their ambition, however, exasperated the Cali Cartel's top 
brass, which held a meeting and decided to geographically divide 
northern Valle del Cauca Department among themselves and to 
assign routes, markets, and responsibilities. 
  One group was given the center of the department, and the 
other was assigned northern Valle del Cauca, Tulua, Salonica, 
Canon de Las Garrapatas (limits between Valle del Cauca and 
Choco Departments) and southern Risaralda Department. Still 
others assumed direct control over finances and the main 
contacts abroad. 
  Patino apparently was under the direct command of two chiefs 
of the northern Valle del Cauca cartels. He could no longer 
ship cocaine on his own behalf, but he was given control over 
and participation in all reception and shipment operations. 
This included several shipments of heroin made last year from 
the Buenaventura and Choco coasts. 
  There in the bowels of the cartel, Patino assumed the alias 
"El Quimico" or "El Papi," and in a short time he substantially 
reduced the cartels' dependency on Bolivian and Peruvian cocaine 
paste. 
  In turn, he promoted the expansion of plantations in various 
parts of Colombia and established an important coca paste 
processing laboratory in Tapon del Darien [Panama]. The 
laboratory was only a 25-minute flight from the border with 
Panama and an exactly one hour flight from Cali. 
  Two additional processing centers with the capacity to 
refine 
500 kg of cocaine were installed near the border between Valle 
del Cauca and Choco on the banks of a stream that flows into the 
Cauca River in Saija district. 
  The possibility of turning Choco into a center for drug 
trafficking prompted Patino to illegally hire a Peruvian 
engineer to draw topographic maps of the area. At the end of 
last year, Patino was waiting for a man known in Cali as "Zapato 
Blanco" to provide him with false but quite realistic 
identification documents to conceal the Peruvian's nationality 
and thereby allow the man to be linked to a front company. 
  At the same time, Patino was putting the finishing touches 
on 
the process to introduce psychotropic and chemical substances 
through Buenaventura, Barranquilla, and the Ecuadoran border. 
  Patino's current prominence in the business is only partly 
due to his ability to supervise the shipping and receiving of 
cocaine. Patino also coordinates an impressive organization that 
includes a 34-ship fleet, a complex network of informers, hired 
killers, money launderers, cocaine trafficking contacts abroad, 
and several hundred business fronts. 
  The maritime flotilla comprises four boats; six pleasure 
yachts with diesel motors; two cargo vessels for transporting 
supplies and merchandise; and seven fishing boats with a 7-meter 
draft, 11-knot speed, VHF and UHF communications systems, and 
72-mile radars. There are also shrimp boats and tuna fishing 
boats up to 1,200 tons each. 
  Although most of the yachts, boats, and small draft vessels 
currently appear in the name of individuals or of a Colombian 
consortium, the Valle del Cauca traffickers have been able to 
hide larger draft ships registered under Honduran, Mexican, and 
Ecuadoran flags. There is even one registered under a South 
Korean flag. 
  Patino is also an organizer of sophisticated and complex 
cocaine and weapons caches. Between August and September 1992, 
Patino arranged for the construction of a multilevel building in 
Valle with caches between the floors. Television cameras and 
sophisticated Super Bland alarm systems were hidden between the 
first and second floors, and false access doors constructed of 
steel and concrete reinforcements and operated by remote control 
were installed in the building. 
  The Prosecutor's Office, the police, and the Armed Forces 
intelligence services had access to information on Patino and 
other drug traffickers' activities. 
  The Prosecutors' Office had access to two witnesses, and the 
Armed Forces, within the framework of a weapons-trafficking 
investigation, had access to informers' statements. 
  Nevertheless, it was not until August 1993 that the 
Prosecutor's Office and the intelligence services turned their 
attention to the man whom they point out as the chief of the 
drug business in the northern part of Valle del Cauca. 
  A hired killer shot four times Captain Juan Carlos Alvarez, 
Armed Forces intelligence, from behind on 6 August 1993. 
Alvarez had been assigned to the Armed Forces intelligence 
network in Buenaventura; he was subsequently transferred to the 
petroleum port of Barrancabermeja and finally to Cartagena. 
  Although Captain Juan Carlos Alvarez had obtained in 
Buenaventura valuable information on the structure of the 
organizations in northern Valle del Cauca, it was in Cartagena 
where he saw the opportunity to bring these before the law. 
  A former motorcyclist, Victor Patino came to Alvarez' office 
in Cartagena one morning at the end of June and confirmed part 
of the information he had. 
  Realizing the information he had lacked value, Alvarez 
contacted the intelligence network in the Pacific. The idea was 
to coordinate presentation of the witness before the District 
Attorney's Office; this was done. 
  Nevertheless, the Armed Forces and the District Attorney's 
Office, believing they had a witness who had charges against 
Patino, received a bitter surprise. After making his 
deposition, the witness vanished. 
  The Armed Forces' investigation initiated in the first week 
of July led to another witness who disclosed how the missing 
witness was now back in the organization, reprimanded by Patino. 
  Subsequently, Alvarez was murdered on 6 August. At this time 
the authorities decided to establish one by one Patino's 
connections and those of his organization. 
  Thus, the state's intelligence services had identified in 
December 1993 five cocaine production and processing leaders; 
eight coordinators in the shipping of drugs via wood, frozen 
chicken, fuel tanks, fruits, fish, and other exports; and seven 
organization contacts in Caracas, Panama City, and New York, as 
well as 22 members of the organization's network of security and 
hired killers. 
  The Armed Forces' informers have attributed to this last 
group--which is comprised of former military institutions' 
noncommissioned officers and retired officials, police agents, 
former M-19 [19 April Movement] guerrillas, and even a former 
Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement terrorist--the murder of two 
of the organizations' links named Duran and Alzate. 
  Duran and Alzate, who were charged with transporting a 
cocaine shipment to a landing strip near Tulua, had decided to 
sell the drugs and say the police had seized the merchandise. 
  Two hired killers named Riascos and Jairo tended this 
account. The bodies of Alzate and Duran--with a shot in the nape 
and their stomachs slit and weighted with stones to prevent the 
bodies from floating--were thrown in the Cauca River, on the 
right bank at the entrance of Yotoco. 
  The drug purchaser, a trafficker named Perez who had been an 
Ochoas agent, was also sentenced to death; nevertheless, given 
his past, his death was less harsh. 
  "Arandela" [not further identified] and a man named Ordonez 
surprised Perez at an establishment en route to the sea. They 
started an argument and then killed him. 
  According to judicial sources the identification of the 
organization administered by Patino is only the tip of the 
iceberg of the drug traffickers' business in Valle del Cauca. 
  Patino's network consists of retired policemen, gunmen, and 
former M-19 guerrillas who were contacted by "El Quimico" after 
that guerrilla group's demobilization. 
  "NN Duran:" Peruvian, former member of the Tupamaros [Tupac 
Amaru Revolutionary Movement] Group, expert in handling 
explosives, responsible for an attack against a DEA agent in 
Kennedy Neighborhood and perpetrator of an attack against the 
Monaco Building, owned by the late Pablo Escobar Gaviria. 
  "Bolo Negro:" One of Patino's men of confidence and first in 
hierarchy in personal security. He is 1.70 m high, has a tanned 
complexion and brown eyes and has no upper teeth. 
  "Rangel:" Former professional army soldier, chief of 
bodyguards. 
  "Jairo:" Former M-19 guerrilla. He survived the sinking of 
El Karina, which transported weapons, in charge of settling 
accounts. 
  "Gallego:" Former policeman in charge of purchasing 
Israeli-made weapons and ammunition at the Ecuadoran border. He 
has a cervical problem. 
  "NN Hernan:" Former policeman, 1.90 meters high, 38 years 
old, gunman at Patino's service. 
  "Mincho:" Associate of a sports promoter, manager of a 
Customs agency that handles cocaine shipments. 
  "El Tuerto:" Patino's bodyguard and man of confidence, has 
an 
artificial eye. 
  "Arandela:" In charge of collecting taxes from small drug 
traffickers. 
<H5>  National Distribution: </H5>
  "Rigos:" Ships drugs to Miami, New York, and Belgium. 
  "Balseros:" Two brothers who work in Buenaventura. They are 
in the lumber business. 
  "Medina:" Peruvian. Sends drugs by ships from Buenaventura. 
  "Alexander:" Worked with Patino in the distribution of drugs 
from Buenaventura to Panama until late 1992, when he decided to 
work on his own. Seven months later he was killed. 
  "Castrillon:" Since "Alexander's" death, in charge of the 
distribution of drugs to Panama. 
<H5>  International Distribution </H5>
  "Condorcito:" Chief of distributors in Buenaventura, travels 
with drugs to Panama, returns with ammunition he negotiates in 
the Pacific. 
  "El Flaco:" Handles "Condorcito's" finances. 
  "Reyna:" Lives in New York, contact with Patino's drug 
traffickers. 
  "El Tocayo:" Lives in Europe and coordinates drug 
distribution in the Netherlands and Belgium. 
  "Navarro:" Spanish citizen, lives in New York, has quarterly 
meetings with Patino and Cali Cartel leaders. 
<H5>  Navy: "This Is A Setup" </H5>
  Navy Lieutenant Colonel Rodrigo Quinonez, accused, along 
with 
three other officers, of organizing a network to murder 100 
people including leftist and civilian leaders in 
Barrancabermeja, testified at the 109th Criminal Military Court 
last Wednesday. 
  The officer had requested days before that he be allowed to 
testify so as to clarify the reported incident. 
  As did Quinonez, Majors Jairo Osorio and Rafael Colon and 
Lieutenant Mauricio Varon had already testified. In addition, 
the offers have testified before investigators of the Prosecutor 
General's Office and the Attorney General's Office. 
  Even though the defense's arguments have been kept secret so 
far, EL TIEMPO has consulted with different judicial sources and 
has learned the officers have answered each of the accusations 
against them. They said this is a setup prepared by an 
organization of Valle del Cauca drug traffickers. 
  Former Navy Noncommissioned Officers Carlos Lopez Maquilon 
and Saulo Segura Palacios, for whom two arrest warrants have 
been issued, filed criminal charges against the colonel, the two 
majors, and the lieutenant at the end of last year. 
  The former noncommissioned officers said they had evidence 
Quinonez and the other officers directed a network of hired 
assassins that murdered at least 100 people in Barrancabermeja. 
  To confirm their reports, the former noncommissioned 
officers 
presented recordings of coded conversations between Navy 
intelligence officers. 
  EL TIEMPO has learned the officers told the Prosecutor 
General's Office, military criminal justice, and the Attorney 
General's Office that only drug-trafficking groups were capable 
of intercepting communications between high-ranking Navy 
officers and manipulating the tapes. 
  The contents of the recordings, the officers stated, did not 
mention illegal activities, rather, investigation activities 
conducted in the Pacific area. 
  In their statements and interrogations before regular and 
criminal military justice, the officers said the Navy launched 
intelligence plans in 1991 to control the entry of weapons 
through the Pacific and managed to discover several networks of 
drug traffickers. 
<H5>  The Investigation </H5>
  Members of the Pacific intelligence network led by Captain 
Juan Carlos Alvarez have discovered these weapons traffickers 
supply the FARC [Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia] and ELN 
[Army of National Liberation] guerrilla groups, as well as 
drug-trafficking organizations. 
  Transferred from the Pacific to the Cartagena intelligence 
network, Alvarez contacted a man who claimed to have information 
on the Norte del Valle Cartel. 
  In exchange for a reward, this informer went to the Valle 
Regional Prosecutor's Office and spent four hours testifying 
against the leader of the drug-trafficking ring in Valle. The 
next day, when he should have continued his testimony, however, 
the witness disappeared. The witness had testified against 
Victor Julio Patino Fomeque. Members of the intelligence 
networks and the Regional Prosecutor's Office began the 
unsuccessful search for the witness. 
  Meanwhile in Cartagena, two hired assassins killed Captain 
Alvarez on 6 August--the day of his birthday. It was then an 
order for a complete inquiry came from the Intelligence 
Directorate in Bogota to help the Prosecutor's Office find 
Alvarez' killers. 
  The authorities' inquiries led ultimately to another Navy 
informer who affirmed he saw the missing witness inside a car 
that belonged to Victor Patino and that Patino was accompanying 
him. This second informer added he had proof this man had 
returned to the cartel. 
  Meanwhile, a Prosecutor's Office secret witness came to 
Barranquilla and identified the alleged hired assassin who had 
apparently been paid by the drug traffickers. The Regional 
Prosecutor's Office issued a warrant a few weeks later for 
Patino's arrest based on statements by one of his bodyguards. 
  EL TIEMPO has established several witnesses have stated at 
the Prosecutor's Office Lopez Maquilon and Segura Palacios (the 
plaintiffs) were offered money to testify against the Navy's 
intelligence officers and participate in illicit actions. 
  "NCO Carlos Lopez Maquilon," one of the witnesses, "on 
several occasions prodded me to engage in dirty deals (...) for 
money so we could get rich." Another witness, in turn, said "in 
mid-February 1993, Carlos Lopez came to Magangue as the person 
in charge of the network and asked me to leave this work, 
because he had some mafioso keeping an eye on me." 
  The same witness testified Lopez "asked me to go to the 
Prosecutor's Office to accuse the intelligence director (...) 
that he would take care of counseling me, and that I would make 
good money with the Prosecutor's Office. Finally, he told met 
if I did not accept it would be better if I left the 
institution, because he would kill me along with his people." 
  The two witnesses told the investigators the drug 
traffickers 
had deceived the NCOs, telling them if they declared themselves 
guilty the Prosecutor's Office would pardon them and give them a 
huge reward. According to witnesses, the people who hired the 
NCOs also told them that, given they had left the institution 
(Lopez asked to be discharged when he filed the complaint), the 
Prosecutor's Office could not investigate them, because they 
were not servicemen but civilians, and the Attorney General's 
Office has no jurisdiction over them. 

