BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary] </F>
  [Excerpts] Certain foreign media organizations have 
frequently fabricated deceptive news reports and repeated 
allegations that cast doubts on the victories of the Armed 
Forces defending unity and Constitutional legitimacy against the 
units controlled by the gang of apostasy and secession. 
  The objective of this cheap, mercenary propaganda circulated 
by the enemies of the Yemeni people -- who believe in their 
unity and rally behind their legitimate leadership -- is to 
trespass on the psychological state of the entire Yemeni people. 
  However, our people, who can sense the hostility of the 
reports circulated by some foreign media, know very well that 
these reports lack credibility and contribute to the 
psychological war the gang of apostasy and session is waging to 
hide facts and deceive people into believing it is still 
powerful and able to reinstate its control of the homeland. 
But, the people are aware. They know the objective behind 
these fabricated news reports circulated by some foreign media 
agencies about the illusionary victories of the gang of apostasy 
and secession. This protects them from this filthy 
psychological war. [passage omitted] 
  Needless to say, our Armed Forces, who are fighting battles 
for the sake of unity and in defense of Constitutional 
legitimacy, know the intent of broadcasting such deceptive and 
fabricated reports by the foreign news media. 
  First, the Armed Forces are living the battles and know the 
truth about their achievements in the military operations they 
are fighting in various areas. Second, they are confident of 
their combat ability and their resources of weapons, equipment, 
and ammunition. Third, they believe in the great cause they are 
fighting for, that is, the unity that is the most precious 
national achievement of our people. Fourth, our Armed Forces, 
who are defending unity and Constitutional legitimacy, 
understand very well the evil intentions of some of the foreign 
media who are repeating the lies and deception circulated by the 
media of the gang of apostasy and secession. And, above all, 
our Armed Forces are certain that the masses of the people are 
standing behind them, supporting them, and providing them with 
everything that will help them achieve victory and soon decide 
the battles against the forces of apostasy and secession, whose 
inevitable end is known in advance. 
  In a nutshell, we say: The Yemeni people have grown up. 
They have enough awareness and faith to protect them against 
the campaigns of deception, regardless of their nature or 
source. The Armed Forces, who are protecting unity and 
Constitutional legitimacy, have not and will not be affected by 
the cheap psychological war. They know themselves. They know 
their great goal is to triumph over the forces of apostasy and 
secession, the enemies of the people and their unity. 

