BFN 

    [Editorial Report] PRC media monitored by Okinawa Bureau 
carried the following reports on PRC central leadership 
activities from 22 April to 28 April 1994. The source is noted 
in parentheses after each report. 
  Yang Shangkun Inscribes Biography -- The Xinhua Publishing 
House on 22 April published a book on the life, success story, 
and patriotic spirit of Hong Kong Tycoon Henry Fok Ying-tung 
which is the first volume of a series entitled "The World's 
Chinese." The book has Yang Shangkun's inscription which reads: 
"Mr. Fok Ying-tung is a patriot who took the lead in supporting 
the cause of reform and opening up to the outside world." 
(Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0727 GMT 22 Apr 94) 
  Li Lanqing Opens Festival -- The Second Chinese Children's 
Culture and Art Festival opened in Tianjin on 24 April. Li 
Lanqing, member of the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau 
and vice premier of the State Council, cut the ribbon at the 
opening of the festival. Gao Dezhan, secretary of the Tianjin 
Municipal CPC Committee, and Tianjin mayor Zhang Li attended the 
opening ceremony. (Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 
0125 GMT 25 Apr 94) 
  Li Ruihuan Inscription -- A statue of famous cancer expert 
Dr. Jin Xianzhai was unveiled at the Tianjin Cancer Hospital on 
26 April. Li Ruihuan, member of the standing committee of the 
CPC Central Committee Political Bureau and chairman of the 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference National 
Committee, wrote an inscription for the statue, which reads: "A 
man of noble character and excellent medical knowledge." 
(Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0441 GMT 26 Apr 94) 
  Li Peng Inscribes -- The Ministry of Public Health and the 
Ministry of Personnel held a commendation meeting on 23 April. 
Zhao Xuefen, a doctor of the Shanxi Provincial People's 
Hospital, received a "Bethune Medal" during the meeting. 
Premier Li Peng wrote an inscription in praise of Zhao -- 
"Rescue people from death and injury and make selfless 
dedication." Qian Zhengying and Peng Peiyun attended and 
addressed the meeting. (Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in 
Chinese 1151 GMT 23 Apr 94) 
  Song Jian Named Society Honorary President -- The China 
Society of Geographic Information Systems was inaugurated in 
Beijing on 25 April. Song Jian, state councillor and minister 
of the State Science and Technology Commission, serves as the 
honorary president of the society. (Beijing XINHUA Domestic 
Service in Chinese 0941 GMT 25 Apr 94) 
  Wu Bangguo Reviews Naval Units -- The Shanghai Naval Base 
held a grand military review at Wusong naval port on 23 April to 
mark the 45th anniversary of the Navy of the People's Liberation 
Army. Wu Bangguo, member of the CPC Central Committee Political 
Bureau and secretary of the Shanghai Municipal CPC Committee, 
and Shanghai Mayor Huang Ju were among those party, government 
and military leaders who reviewed the naval units. (Shanghai 
People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 GMT 23 Apr 94) 
  Rong Yiren, Song Jian Inscribe for Park -- A 
foundation-stone-laying ceremony for the China International 
High-technology Textile Industrial Park was held in Shanghai's 
Qingpu County on 23 April. Vice President Rong Yiren and Song 
Jian, state councillor and minister of the State Science and 
Technology Commission, wrote inscriptions (no details provided) 
for the industrial park. (Shanghai People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 23 Apr 94) 
  Li Peng Writes Banner for Anhui Show -- An exhibition of 
Anhui's economic achievements will be held in Beijing soon. The 
exhibition site is being prepared. Hung over the entrance of 
the exhibition hall is a banner inscribed with "Exhibition of 
Anhui's Economic Achievements" in Premier Li Peng's handwriting. 
(Hefei Anhui People's Radio Network in Mandarin 1100 GMT 25 Apr 
94) 
  Wei Jianxing Lauds Shanghai's Anti-Corruption Drive -- "Wei 
Jianxing, member of the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau, 
secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, 
and president of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions, 
recently conducted an investigation and study in Shanghai. He 
pointed out during his stay there: `The Shanghai Municipal CPC 
Committee and Government have been adhering to the principle of 
building both material and spiritual civilizations and attaching 
equal importance to both. As a result, Shanghai has laid a 
comparatively good foundation for its anti-corruption struggle. 
Shanghai is urged to proceed from reality and continue to 
explore new experiences in improving party style and building a 
clean and honest government under the new situation, so as to 
play an even greater role in promoting reform, development, and 
stability.' During his stay in Shanghai from 16 to 25 April, 
Comrade Wei Jianxing had a conversation with Wu Bangguo, member 
of the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau and secretary of 
the Shanghai Municipal CPC Committee, and with Shanghai Mayor 
Huang Ju." (Shanghai People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 
GMT 25 Apr 94) 
  Jiang Zemin, Others Inscribe for PLA -- Jiang Zemin, 
general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, president of 
China, and chairman of the Central Military Commission; and vice 
chairmen of the Central Military Commission Liu Huaqing and 
Zhang Zhen separately wrote inscriptions for the "Eighth Steel 
Company of the Nanhai Outpost" of a unit of the Guangzhou 
Military Region. Jiang Zemin's inscription reads: Promote the 
Eighth Steel Company's Work Style; Build a Mighty and Civilized 
Troop. Liu Huaqing's inscription reads: Promote the Hardworking 
Spirit and Build Up All Companies. Zhang Zhen's inscription 
reads: Inherit and Carry Forward the Red Army's Good Traditions 
and Enhance All Companies' Combat Capabilities. (Beijing XINHUA 
Domestic Service in Chinese 0606 GMT 27 Apr 94) 
  Li Lanqing Inscribes for Educational Project -- Teachers, 
students, and workers of the Beijing University today 
enthusiastically donated money for the Hope Project. Vice 
Premier Li Lanqing of the State Council wrote an inscription for 
the Beijing University's Hope Project Propaganda Day. (Beijing 
XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1305 GMT 27 Apr 94) 
  Wei Jianxing, Ni Zhifu Attend "May Day" Reception -- The 
All-China Federation of Trade Unions this evening held a 
reception at the China Workers Home to mark the "1 May" 
international labor day. Wei Jianxing, member of the CPC Central 
Committee Political Bureau; and Ni Zhifu, vice chairman of the 
National People's Congress [NPC] Standing Committee, attended 
the reception. (Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1302 
GMT 28 Apr 94) 
  Rong Yiren Inscribes for Exhibition -- The 1994 China Sports 
Goods Exhibition opened in Fuzhou today. The exhibition is 
jointly sponsored by the State Physical Culture and Sports 
Commission, the China National Light Industry Council, the China 
National Textile Council, and the Ministry of Internal Trade. 
Vice President Rong Yiren wrote an inscription for the 
exhibition. His inscription reads: Develop the Sports Goods 
Industry to Inject Vitality in the Socialist Market Economy. 
(Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1337 GMT 28 Apr 94) 
  Song Jian Addresses Ceremony -- Twenty five research 
projects 
of 19 Chinese universities and research institutes today were 
selected as the first projects of the "Ford-China Research and 
Development Fund." At a ceremony held today at the Great Hall 
of the People to announce the selected projects, Song Jian, 
state councillor and minister in charge of the State Commission 
for Science and Technology, said: "Establishment of the 
`Ford-China Research and Development Fund' sets an example of 
cooperation in basic research between China and a foreign 
enterprise. China applauds Ford Company's decision to sponsor 
cooperation of this kind. Ford Motor Company is one of the 
world's most important automobile companies. It has played a 
very important role in boosting the development of U.S. and the 
world's automotive industry. The China State Natural Science 
Fund Committee is a product of reform of China's science and 
technology establishment, and has provided aid for advanced 
basic scientific research projects undertaken by various Chinese 
natural science research units. High-standard research results 
have been achieved by these research units. Therefore, 
cooperation between Ford Company and the committee is very 
meaningful." (Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1403 
GMT 28 Apr 94) 
  Peng Peiyun Participates in Inoculation Activities -- Today 
is the national children's inoculation propaganda day. This 
afternoon, State Councillor Peng Peiyun took part in activities 
in (Zhaohegou) Township in Hebei's Sanhe City to mark the day. 
(Beijing Central Television Program One Network in Mandarin 
1100 GMT 25 Apr 94) 

