BFN 

<F P=106> [By A. Rachel] </F>
  [Text] Genting Highlands, Sat -- ASEAN Trade Ministers have 
agreed to review the implementation of the ASEAN Free Trade Area 
(AFTA) which includes extending its scope to cover other sectors 
and shortening its time frame. 
  The meeting also decided to set up a policy exchange 
mechanism (PEM) to informally discuss policies and issues of 
common interest in economic development on a regular basis. 
  The first PEM session, which will discuss industrialisation 
policies of ASEAN member countries will be held together with 
ASEAN Economic Ministers Meeting in Chiang Mai in September. 
  At a press conference after the informal two-day ASEAN Trade 
Ministers' meeting today, International Trade and Industry 
Minister Datuk Sri Rafidah Aziz said: "If there is a need to 
shorten the time frame for AFTA, we will look into it." 
  With the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to be 
implemented next year and the growing importance of the services 
sector, the ministers agreed to look into the possiblity of 
developing an ASEAN framework of co-operation in this sector. 
  This will include non-financial services such as 
transportation and tourism. 
  The ministers also agreed to look into the possibility of 
including raw agricultural products under AFTA. 
  At present, the 15 groups of manufactured products that come 
under AFTA are manufactured and processed agricultural products. 
  AFTA will see trade barriers in ASEAN countries dropping to 
as low as zero to five percent over a 15-year period. 
  The ministerial meeting also agreed that the ASEAN Geneva 
committee will undertake a study on the implications and impacts 
of the various new issues that have been proposed to be 
introduced into the work programme of the World Trade 
Organisation (WTO) which will take over from GATT as of next 
year. 
  "In addition, the ministers have agreed to recommend to the 
WTO that future negotiations on trade and services be carried 
out on a sectoral basis in view of the difficulty and time 
required to deal with many sectors at one time," said Rafidah. 
  The ministers also reiterated ASEAN's stand to strongly 
oppose any attempts to link trade with social issues and labour 
standards as these should be dealt by the appropriate 
international organisations. 
  Other issues that were discussed included the benefits of 
linkages between regional groupings to further enhance 
multilateral trade and the globalisation of trade. 
  The senior economic officials' meeting has been given the 
task of reviewing AFTA. It will make recommendations to the AFTA 
Council. 
  The AFTA Council, which would meet before the Chiang Mai 
meeting, would decide on the various issues and submit a report 
to the Economic Ministers' meeting, Rafidah said. 
  Among those who attended the meeting were Brunei's Minister 
of Industry and Primary Resources Pehin Datuk Abdul Rahman, 
Philippine Secretary of Trade and Industry Rizalino Navarro, 
Indonesia's Co-ordinating Minister for Industry and Trade 
Hartato Sastrosunarto, Indonesia's Minister of Trade Professor 
Dr. S.B. Judono and Singapore's Minister of Trade and Industry 
Yeo Cheow Tong. 

