Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 15 (XINHUA) -- China's railway 
departments have withstood a severe test in the past month since 
the spring festival, the biggest Chinese traditional festival, 
that fell on February 10 this year. 
  During this period tens of millions of migrant rural 
laborers 
from Sichuan, Hunan, Anhui, Henan, Hubei and other relatively 
poor provinces and autonomous regions in the central and western 
parts of China travelled by train to the more developed eastern 
and coastal areas, hoping to find employment there. 
  The interflow of rural laborers brought about heavy pressure 
on the railways. On February 16 the Zhengzhou railway station, 
the country's largest railway transit station, handled 140,000 
passengers, but there were still more than 20,000 passengers 
stranded there on that day. Some rural laborers had to line up 
for several days and nights for tickets. 
  Guangdong Province in south China, which was the first part 
of China to open to the outside world and is now one of the 
country's most economically developed areas, absorbs about ten 
million or nearly half of the country's total floating rural 
laborers from all parts of the country. Statistics show that 
the migrant population accounts for over 70 percent of the total 
population in some cities and towns in Guangdong. 
  Cai Shengli, 20, a rural laborer from central China's Henan 
Province, told a XINHUA reporter at the railway station that he 
was working in an arts and crafts factory in Xinhui county, 
Guangdong. Among the 700 workers and staff members in the 
factory over 500 are from other provinces and autonomous regions. 
  Experts note that these migrant rural laborers have 
contributed greatly to the province's rapid economic growth, 
which has stood at 13 percent a year for 15 years in a row. 
Liang Guiqun, director of the institute of development under 
the Guangzhou City Academy of Social Sciences, explained that 
the large numbers of migrant rural laborers have enabled the 
rapid development of labor-intensive industries in Guangdong, 
especially the Pearl River Delta. Besides, they have boosted 
the internal market and made the economy of the area prosperous. 
  Sociologists point out that the migrants, mostly from 
backward inland areas, help promote economic development in 
their home regions by making remittances to their families and 
taking new and scientific ideas on economic development back 
home. 
  Cai Shengli, a graduate of junior middle school, told XINHUA 
that he is planning to work in Guangdong for two more years to 
save enough money to study the techniques of processing farm 
products and then return to his home village to set up an 
enterprise. 
  Of course, the sociologists admit, the interflow of rural 
laborers has also brought about many social problems. Besides 
the heavy pressure on transportation, the floating population 
increases difficulties in handling of law and order, and 
environmental hygiene and puts a great strain on urban 
facilities. 
  In order to bring the interflow of rural laborers under 
control, the Chinese central government and some local 
governments have taken various measures, which include the 
setting up of registration centers in both the areas exporting 
rural laborers and the areas absorbing them, and establishing 
job-introduction centers. 
  However, some experts point out, the key to the solution of 
the problem of the nationwide interflow of rural laborers lies 
in reducing the differences in economic development between town 
and country and between the coastal and the inland areas. They 
predict that it will take up to ten years for this to happen. 

