CSO 

    [Editorial Report] The following items on economic 
developments in former Yugoslavia are from the Belgrade daily 
POLITIKA: 
<H5>  Revival of "Srpska Republic" Economy </H5>
  The government of the republic of Srpska [RS], the 
self-proclaimed Serbian state on the territory of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, set up a group of experts "a few days ago" 
to work with counterparts from Serbia in preparing the 
groundwork for linking the economic system of the RS to that of 
Serbia, POLITIKA reports on 18 March. The experts will create a 
"consortium of reputable RS businessmen" who live and work in 
Belgrade. "Again this spring," the daily points out, agriculture 
has priority in revitalizing the economy. A diesel oil allowance 
of 50 liters per hectare is being distributed to RS farmers at a 
price of one German mark per liter. POLITIKA reports that the 
fuel was imported, but that "it is officially not known how it 
came from Italy, whether it came via Croatia, and what the 
arrangements were." "At this moment," the daily reports, 60 to 
70 million dinars would be sufficient to get production moving 
in the RS. Svetislav Mudrenovic, vice president of the RS 
Economic Chamber and president of the Banja Luka Economic 
Chamber, said that in addition to securing the needed funds, 
workforce issues should be resolved, and "specialists" should be 
brought back from the army. Moreover the customs duties between 
the "Serbian lands" [Serbia and RS] should be lifted, Mudrenovic 
said, pointing out that customs fees in Sremska Raca (Serbia) 
and Bosanska Raca [Bosnia] are so high that they are harder to 
endure than the international sanctions. 
<H5>  Protest by "Cheated" Bank Depositors </H5>
  Depositors of the Inos Bank in the Serbian city of Paracin, 
whose owner, Boro Kostic, allegedly defrauded them of their 
savings, have announced a large protest to take place in the 
center of Paracin, the 18 March POLITIKA reports. Although the 
municipal court in Paracin has issued a decision in favor of the 
3,800 complainants against Kostic and the Inos Bank, the 
depositors will be unable to collect their claims. This is 
especially true of people with small deposits of 100 to 500 
German marks, who, if property belonging to Kostic and the Inos 
bank is sold, will be able to collect only about 50 dinars each, 
enough to cover the cost of their court fees, POLITIKA states. 
The paper notes that Kostic, "formerly a producer of window 
blinds," registered houses and businesses he bought in the names 
of relatives, and such properties cannot be confiscated. The 
paper claims that depositors with large accounts were able to 
withdraw their money in time. It is believed that the Inos Bank 
collected about 100 million German marks from "naive" 
depositors, POLITIKA reports. 
<H5>  Bank's Loans To Aid Agriculture </H5>
  The Vrsac (Vojvodina) Bank, a branch of the Beogradska 
(Belgrade) Bank, has purchased 1,000 metric tons of fertilizers 
for the Vrsac wheat-producing agricultural enterprises Elan, 
Panonija, and Agrovrsac, according to the 18 March POLITIKA. The 
daily explains that the Vrsac Bank had paid the Pancevo Azotara 
fertilizer company 360,000 dinars and granted short-term loans 
to the farmers, with payment deferred until the completion of 
the harvest. According to the bank's director, it has approved 
about 700,000 dinars' worth of loans to support the region's 
agriculture and revive its economy. 
<H5>  Karic Bank Loan to Serbian PTT </H5>
  On 8 March, representatives of the Karic Bank signed a 
contract with the Post, Telegraph, and Telephone [PTT] Public 
Enterprise of Serbia on a $13.5 million loan, POLITIKA of 9 
March reports. These funds will be used for the purchase of 
"indispensable components and supplies" for the PTT, thus 
enabling this enterprise to remain technologically at the top of 
the Yugoslav market, POLITIKA states, adding that with this loan 
the Karic Bank continues its "investment cycle" in the Yugoslav 
economy. Karic Bank representatives, according to POLITIKA, 
consider this contract to be among the safest of the bank's 
investments. 
<H5>  New Brewery, Factories </H5>
  A new brewery, Inventing-Roganovic, was inaugurated on 7 
March in Temerin near Novi Sad, Vojvodina. The ceremony was 
attended by federal, republic, and provincial officials, 
including the governor of the National Bank of Yugoslavia, Dr. 
Dragoslav Avramovic, reports the 8 March issue of POLITIKA. 
Avramovic praised the brewery's owner, Slobodan Roganovic, 
declaring that "people like Roganovic are our future." POLITIKA 
observes that "during the time of crisis, [Roganovic] decided to 
build three factories." In addition to the brewery, he has just 
finished building Invent Durvin in Temerin, a plant that 
produces and processes polyvinyl chloride, and Invent Poliplast 
in Beocin, which manufactures bathtubs and shower stalls. Before 
the "international blockade," states POLITIKA, Roganovic's 
"Invent" plumbing-fixture factory in Rakovac exported more than 
one-third of its production. 

