Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By RENMIN GONGAN BAO reporter Sun Baoye (1327 1405 0673), </F>
staff correspondent Li Bingtian (2621 3521 1131) and staff 
reporter Sun Chunying (1327 2504 5391): "Eradicate All Vices--a 
Record of How Guns and Drugs Are Seized in the Southwest Border 
Areas"--first three grafs are FAZHI RIBAO introduction] 
  [Excerpts] Material provided by authoritative departments 
shows that gun and drug trafficking in the southwest border 
areas has tended to become increasingly rampant. Despite a 
sustained, continuous, and severe crackdown on such activities, 
they are still spreading. 
  In 1992, the public security organs of Yunnan and Guangxi 
Provinces uncovered 36 armed drug trafficking gangs. The 
gangsters openly resisted inspection and arrest. Gun fights 
occurred on several occasions and seven policemen and officers 
died while 26 were wounded. 
  Guns and drugs originate from the same source and go side by 
side. Drug trafficking protected by gun trafficking has 
gradually become more conspicuous and there is no end of trouble 
for the future. The Ministry of Public Security has determined 
to adopt extraordinary measures and will strive to stop the 
smuggling of guns and drugs within the boundary of the southwest 
border areas within three years in a bid to provide a basic 
solution to the problem of gun and drug trafficking. 
<H3>  I. Guns and Drugs Come From Abroad and Are Trafficked 
Everywhere in China </H3>
  China's southwest borders on the world's biggest source of 
drug production, the "golden triangle." In the past few years, 
the area of land growing opium poppies in the "golden triangle" 
has been enlarging. The output of opium has constantly 
increased and drug processing has developed very rapidly. In 
1992, the output of opium was already as high as 2,500 tonnes 
and there were more than 60 heroin processing plants. The 
international drug trafficking syndicates have tried by every 
means to open up a "passageway in China." Some lawbreakers in 
China have put money before everything else, colluded with drug 
lords outside our borders, taken part in the transfer of drugs, 
and aggravated the vicious development of drug trafficking. 
Armed separatist regimes in Burma regard drug trafficking as 
the main source of their operational funds and the amounts of 
drugs entering China from Vietnam and Laos are increasing. This 
has resulted in the expansion of the drug "market" and has 
abetted the development of drug trafficking in China. According 
to statistics, in the early 1980's, the number of drug 
trafficking cases cracked in China was less than 1,000 a year 
but in 1992, the number of drug trafficking cases cracked 
reached as many as 14,000. 
  Guns and drugs originate from the same source and they go 
side by side. Because of war and armed separatist regimes, a 
large number of military weapons are scattered among the people 
in Vietnam, Laos, and Burma and these guns are sold in the 
border areas of China. Some domestic criminals and criminal 
gangs in Hong Kong, Macao, and Taiwan have tried very hard to 
obtain guns from the southwest border areas in China. According 
to statistics, 1,205 cases of gun trafficking occurred across 
the country in 1992, of which 464 were filed in Yunnan, Guangxi, 
and Hainan, accounting for 39 percent of the total. 
  According to reports, half of the military weapons seized in 
Yunnan Province in 1993 came from the Sino-Vietnamese border 
areas. [passage omitted] 
<H3>  II.The Criminal Gangs Have Combined Supply, Transportation, 
and Sales </H3>
  The amount of weapons and drugs trafficked by individuals is 
far less than that by criminal gangs. At present, most gun and 
drug trafficking activities are international criminal 
activities. Domestic criminals have colluded with criminals 
outside to form professional and international syndicates and 
they have combined supply, transportation, and sales. This has 
an abominable impact on the society. 
  [Passage omitted] It is said that a considerable amount of 
drugs are sold to Taiwan via the mainland. On 13 May 1993, a 
border defense detachment in Quanzhou, Fujian Province, found 36 
kg of heroin on a Taiwan ship. The heroin originated in the 
southwest border areas. 
  The Longgang Border Defense Station in Shantou, Guangdong 
Province, unexpectedly seized during inspection 34.2 kg of drugs 
on a Taiwan fishing boat. [passage omitted] 
  In 1992, Yunnan cracked 15 major cases of heroin 
trafficking, 
in each of which over 30 kg of heroin was seized. All such 
heroin trafficking was carried out by criminal gangs. 
<H3>  III. The Southwest Border Areas Have Become "Areas Seriously 
Infested" With Gun and Drug Trafficking: "When the City Gate 
Catches Fire, the Fish in the Moat Suffer" </H3>
  The boundary line between Yunnan and Guangxi on the one side 
and the neighboring countries on the other is very strange. A 
road, a small river, or a low bank of earth between fields can 
be a national boundary. The national boundary even passes 
through a building and one part of the building is in one 
country and the other part in the other. When the local people 
start cooking their meals and find they have no more soya sauce, 
they can go and buy soya sauce from the other country and return 
to continue their cooking. It can thus be seen that under such 
circumstances, infiltration can hardly be prevented. Much less 
is it easy to stop the activities of international criminal 
syndicates which are trying to open up a passage, an entrepot 
market, and a consumers market in China in an organized and 
premeditated manner. 
  According to reports, gun and drug trafficking in the 
border areas of Yunnan and Guangxi is very conspicuous and such 
areas have become the most seriously infested gun and drug 
trafficking areas in China at present in terms not only of the 
increasing number of gun and drug cases but also of the abrupt 
growth in the number of major cases. 
  According to reports, in 1992, the public security organs 
cracked 5,609 drug trafficking cases in Yunnan and Guangxi, 14 
percent more than the previous year and accounting for 38.2 
percent of the total number of drug trafficking cases in China; 
3,974 kg of heroin was seized, 1.5 times more than in the 
previous year and accounting for 88.5 percent of the total 
amount seized in China; and 1,190 military weapons were seized, 
1.9 times that in the previous year and accounting for 80 
percent of the total seized in China. From January to December 
1993, the number of military weapons seized by the public 
security and border defense departments in Guangxi was more than 
2 times over that for the whole of 1992. In Yunnan alone, 68 
major cases of drug trafficking involving over 10 kg of drugs 
each were cracked in 1992, 84 percent up on the previous year; 
and from January to September 1993, 81 major cases of this kind 
were cracked, 20 cases more than the same period the previous 
year. [passage omitted] 
<H3>  IV. Gun and Drug Trafficking Has Led to a Lot of Problems in 
Social Order </H3>
  The easy access to guns and drugs in the southwest border 
areas has led to a series of problems in social order: 
  The number of drug addicts has increased by a large amount. 
In 1992, over 40,000 drug addicts were registered in Yunnan and 
Guangxi. 
  Gun trafficking, drug trafficking, and drug abuse have 
induced a rise in various other criminal cases in the border 
areas. In 1992, the shocking number of nearly 100,000 criminal 
cases occurred in Guangxi. 
  Drug trafficking has caused serious damage to the national 
economy in the border areas. In 1992, over 100 million yuan 
flew out of the country because of drug trafficking. 
  Large stockpiles of guns held in the border areas in the 
course of drug trafficking have become an extremely important 
hidden danger to local social order. The rising prices of guns 
will also increase by a big margin the number of cases of 
illegal manufacture of guns. 
  [Passage omitted] In China, the number of criminal cases 
involving the use of guns has increased annually and the number 
of cases where guns have been used to murder or rob has 
increased by a big margin. This is directly related to the 
rampant gun trafficking activities in the southwest border 
areas. The gun used in the "1.31" case to kill a Beijing taxi 
driver in March 1993 was bought in Yunnan. In 1992, several 
hundred cases of using guns to commit crime occurred in 
Guangdong and Hainan. Of the 130 military weapons seized in 
Guangzhou City alone, 72 were bought by criminals from Guangxi, 
34 from Vietnam, and six from Yunnan. 
  At present, over 600 cities and counties have discovered 
drugs or guns trafficked from Yunnan or Guangxi. Some of them 
have gone to Hong Kong and Macao for bank robberies and 
kidnappings. This has not only adversely affected the social 
order of Hong Kong and Macao, but also seriously damaged China's 
image. 
  [Passage omitted] It is high time we resolutely made our 
minds up to thoroughly resolve the problem of gun and drug 
trafficking in the southwest border areas. At the beginning of 
1993, Tao Siju, minister of public security, chaired two 
ministerial work meetings to specially study work in this 
respect. In June 1993, the Ministry of Public Security held a 
work meeting on seizing guns and drugs in the southwest border 
areas and explicitly put forward the task of adopting an 
extraordinary attitude and measures and striving to basically 
stop guns and drugs from entering the territory within three 
years. 
<H3>  V. Three Defense Lines Have Been Set Up To Stop Gun and Drug 
Trafficking in Border Areas of Yunnan and Guangxi </H3>
  [passage omitted] 
<H3>  VI. Work To Seize Guns and Drugs Develops With Irresistible 
Force </H3>

  In the fight against gun and drug trafficking, the public 
security and border defense departments of Yunnan and Guangxi 
Provinces have mobilized the strength of the whole society and 
have waged a people's war with great efforts. At present, a 
struggle by the masses of people to seize guns and drugs has 
been extensively launched in the southwest border areas. There 
have been numerous incidents of people reporting information 
about drug crimes and assisting public security organs to arrest 
criminals. On 31 August 1993, after a village cadre of Fengyi 
Town, Dali City, Yunnan, discovered a drug trafficker, more than 
50 common people helped the policemen to search the hills 
despite the rain. They arrested the criminal and seized 6.8 kg 
of heroin. Since June 1993, the public security and border 
defense departments have received 213 reports on gun trafficking 
made by the common people. Thanks to these reports, 12 military 
weapons and several handgrenades were seized and 15 gun 
traffickers were arrested. 
  Since the June 1993 Ministry of Public Security meeting on 
work to seize guns and drugs in the southwest borders, reports 
on victories scored by the "three defense lines" in the 
southwest border areas have come one after another. 
  On 28 June, the Dongfengqiao Checkpoint at Baoshan, Yunnan 
Province, seized 3.6 kg of opium from a car from Tengchong and 
arrested a drug trafficker. 
  On 13 July, the Longzhou Border Defense Headquarters in 
Guangxi Province cracked a gun trafficking case and seized a 
U.S. weapon, 40 rounds of ammunition, and a handgrenade. 
  In eight days from 3 to 10 August, the Nasuo Public Security 
Border Defense Checkpoint in Guangxi cracked seven gun 
trafficking cases, seized 10 military weapons and 12 antitank 
grenades, and arrested 14 gun traffickers. The checkpoint also 
cracked a drug trafficking case, seizing 360 g of heroin and 
arresting two drug traffickers. To commend the checkpoint, the 
Ministry of Public Security awarded it the Merit Citation 2d 
Class and awarded all the personnel in the checkpoint and other 
people concerned merit citation and material rewards. 
  On 25 September, the Mengdong Border Defense Substation in 
Yunnan seized a light machine gun, a heavy machine gun, and a 
"40" [as published] rocket launcher. On 27 September, the 
Dehong Border Defense Detachment cracked a major drug 
trafficking case at Jiegao, Ruili County, and seized 14.5 kg of 
drugs. 
  By the end of September, the Yunnan Border Defense 
Headquarters had cracked 501 drug trafficking cases, of which 20 
were major cases involving 10 kg of drugs each, arrested 595 
drug traffickers, and seized over 510 kg of heroin and over 550 
kg of opium. The headquarters also had cracked 57 gun 
trafficking cases, seized 75 military weapons, 12 rocket 
launchers, and 9,789 rounds of ammunition. 
  On 15 December, the Aidian Border Defense Work Station in 
Guangxi laid an ambush on the Chinese side of a certain boundary 
tablet and seized 13 military weapons and 39 rounds of 
ammunition. 
  On 24 December, the Ningming County Border Defense 
Headquarters in Guangxi cracked a major case of gun trafficking 
and seized 10 military weapons and 40 rounds of ammunition. 
  Up to December, the Guangxi Border Defense Headquarters had 
cracked over 100 gun trafficking cases, seized over 200 military 
weapons, 845 handmade guns, 5,600 rounds of ammunition, and 146 
antitank grenades, and arrested 129 criminals. The headquarters 
had also cracked 42 drug trafficking cases, seized over 3,000 kg 
of opium and 7 kg of heroin, and arrested 50 drug traffickers. 
  [passage omitted] 

