BFN 

  [Excerpts] Cairo, May 3 (AFP) -- Israeli Prime Minister 
Yitzhaq Rabin arrived here Tuesday [3 May] to finalise the 
Palestinian self-rule accord with PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat as 
officials said a last-minute crisis threatening Wednesday's 
signing had been resolved. 
  Israeli Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres said as he arrived 
with Rabin: "We are going to sign tomorrow, I feel great." 
  They still had to solve outstanding problems and "time has 
its limits," but he dismissed talk of any postponement, saying 
"we need a crisis before the signature." 
  The PLO had warned Wednesday's ceremony was under threat 
after Israel backtracked on several points of the historic deal 
for self-rule in the Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho. 
  But Ahmad al-Tibi, an Israeli Arab and 'Arafat adviser, said 
that the "crisis" was over and the final points would be dealt 
with by the two leaders on Tuesday night. 
  'Arafat and Rabin have still to agree on the size of the 
autonomous Jericho area and on Palestinian demands for the 
presence of a symbolic policeman on the Allenby bridge from 
Jordan to the West Bank. 
  A PLO official said they would also have to resolve two 
other 
undisclosed issues as Israel prepared to hand over control of 
part of the territories it seized in its 1967 war with the 
Arabs. [passage omitted 
  Meanwhile on the ground, Israeli soldiers were given new 
orders not to shoot at Palestinians unless they were in "real 
danger" and to let them celebrate freely after Wednesday's 
signing, an army spokesman said. 
  And the redeployment of Israeli forces moved up a gear as 
equipment was pulled out from bases across Gaza. 
  The Israelis are to redeploy to protect the Jewish 
settlements in Gaza, according to the September 13 Declaration 
of Principles on autonomy, and pull out from Jericho altogether. 
  A first contingent of 1,000 Palestinian policemen were set 
to 
cross into Gaza on Thursday from the 9,000-strong force which 
will be deployed in Gaza and Jericho, a spokesman for the new 
force said. 
  The army declared Jericho out of bounds to avoid trouble 
after settlers called a demonstration Tuesday evening at the 
ancient Jewish synagogue in Jericho. A large number of rabbis 
intended to camp in the building. 
  The army also planned to cut off the main roads into the 
West 
Bank and Gaza to prevent Jewish settlers from protesting. 
  In the Gulf, a session of multilateral peace talks in Qatar 
began with the country's Foreign Minister Hamad Bin-Jabbur Al 
Thani warning that Israel's nuclear potential was a threat to 
stability in the Middle East. 

