BFN 

<F P=106> [Tony Walker Commentary: "N. Korea Repeats Its Case To Our </F>
Man in Beijing"] 
  [Text] Australia's Ambassador in Beijing, Mr Michael 
Lightowler, received an unusual visitor last week in the person 
of North Korea's senior representative in the Chinese capital. 
  At the end of a lengthy restatement of North Korea's 
position 
on nuclear inspections -- that it opposes the International 
Atomic Energy Agency's "unreasonable" demands for access to its 
nuclear facilities -- Australian officials were none the wiser 
about the purpose of the visit. 
  They discerned nothing new in the official's remarks. No 
requests were made for Australia, the current IAEA 
[International Atomic Energy Agency] chair, to use its good 
offices on North Korea's behalf. 
  There was certainly no hint of a change in Pyongyang's tack, 
which threatens the worst international crisis since Saddam 
Husayn sent his legions into Kuwait in August 1990. 
  While that crisis risked the West's economic well-being and 
raised the ugly spectre of Iraqi domination of oil-rich Gulf 
States, the latest threat to international order is hardly less 
grave, and solutions are certainly more complex. 
  At this stage, prospects appear slim of an international 
consensus emerging in favour of all-encompassing sanctions such 
as those applied against Iraq. Agreement on limited economic 
penalties will also test American diplomacy. 
  China last week indicated that it was reluctant to support 
sanctions when a Foreign Ministry spokesman said that Beijing 
"did not favour the resort to means that might sharpen the 
confrontation". 
  However, in the past few days there has been a slightly 
sterner tone in China's public references to the crisis. 
  XINHUA, the official Chinese newsagency, reported that the 
IAEA was "running into obstacles" in determining whether 
weapons-grade material had been diverted. Previously, Chinese 
media had refrained from using words that might in any way be 
construed as perjorative by Pyongyang. But none of this can be 
interpreted as an indication that China is about to change tack. 
  Russia, too, is wavering. President Yeltsin told South 
Korea's President Kim last week that Moscow would not support 
sanctions until a Russian-proposed international conference on 
the issue was held. This would seem a recipe for prevarication. 
  Meantime, suspicions continue to harden into near certainty 
that North Korea has on two occasions (the first was in 1989) 
diverted weapons-grade plutonium for bomb-making. Western 
intelligence believes it built one and possibly two nuclear 
devices after the first diversion. 
  The latest would give it the capability to add up to half a 
dozen bombs to its existing arsenal, according to Western 
estimates. But numbers are hardly the most relevant issue. 
  With even one nuclear device and, just as important, the 
means to deliver it, Pyongyang is in a position to terrorise 
South Korea and blackmail other States in the region. 
  Without doubt, this is potentially, if not actually, the 
gravest foreign policy crisis of the Clinton presidency, and one 
for which, judging by Mr Clinton's performance as far as Haiti 
and the former Yugoslavia are concerned, he is ill-equipped. 
  The stakes could not be higher. Failure to curb North 
Korea's nuclear ambitions: 
  -- Risks the collapse of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation 
Treaty (NPT) which is due for renewal next year. 
  -- Threatens to destabilise further the already 
combustible Korean peninsula. 
  -- Risks setting off a nuclear arms race in north Asia 
with Japan, South Korea and Taiwan bidding for their own nuclear 
capabilities. 
  -- Raises the alarming prospect of Pyongyang exporting its 
nuclear know-how to mid-eastern States, including Iran, Syria 
and Libya. 
  So what should the international community do in the face of 
North Korean defiance? 
  The US, with the support of both the South Koreans and the 
Japanese, is moving towards proposing limited sanctions that 
would further isolate Pyongyang economically. But for sanctions 
to bite hard, China's agreement would be needed to shut off oil 
supplies for both North Korea's domestic use and, more 
importantly, for its military machine. 
  Similarly, without the cooperation of China and Russia, a 
sea 
and air blockade of North Korea, as proposed by some, is not 
feasible. 
  The danger for the Americans, and for Mr Clinton in 
particular, is that lack of international consensus will leave 
the Administration again looking ineffectual in the face of a 
rogue regime's defiance. 
  The unpalatable prospect for the West is that in the end it 
might be obliged to swallow the fact that North Korea has become 
the latest nuclear power and hope that Pyongyang, having 
achieved that position, would agree to "capping" arrangements to 
contain further development of its nuclear arsenal. 
  North Korea might, so thinking goes, endorse such a deal in 
return for Western undertakings to relieve its economic and 
diplomatic isolation. "Rewarding" North Korea for its 
recalcitrance would be a bitter solution. But, equally, the 
alternatives are extremely unappealing, such as the ultimate 
sanction -- war. 

