BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] Blessed be the forces of unity 
and constitutional legitimacy as they storm the strongholds of 
the apostasy and secession and destroy the ramparts of treason 
and treachery. Blessed be the forces of unity and the army of 
legitimacy, which is the shield of great, unified Yemen and the 
hand flying the banner of faith and honor. Having plotted, the 
apostate and secessionist forces have received the reward for 
their plotting. But the plotting of evil will hem in only the 
authors thereof. [Koranic verse] The gangs of apostasy and 
secession have betrayed the homeland, disavowed pledges, and 
violated agreements. Therefore, it was inescapable that they 
receive the wrath of the God and the people and that they 
receive the reward of treachery and treason from the forces of 
the people and the heroic army of unity. 
  The people and the entire world have heard the decisions and 
statements of the Yemeni leadership and the the Defense Ministry 
and General Staff Command official source. Those statements 
have made it clear that the renegade Socialist Party traitors 
are the ones who started the fire and triggered the spark, 
believing that they would be safe from its fire. They thought 
there would be no trial or punishment, so they became blind and 
deaf. [Koranic verse] Therefore, they are now being blazed by 
the fire which they have started. The flames are devouring them 
and removing their corruption and germs from the body of the 
Yemeni homeland, the homeland of wisdom and faith. 
  The people who endured this gang's harmful abscess and 
deadly 
disease for a third-of-a-century, are determined to extract the 
abscess, remove the tumor, and to get rid of the disease. 
Toward this end, the faithful forces of unity and 
constitutional legitimacy are executing the will of the people. 
The good news, clear indications, and ongoing events affirm 
that victory will be for the people, unity, and constitutional 
legitimacy. The national and international stands herald a new 
upcoming dawn and tell the world that the treacherous clique 
must be encircled and that it cannot escape the people's army as 
it resolutely marches toward the dens of the gang, confidently 
digging their rotten holes and teaching them that the gang has 
no escape from the people's wrath, for it has sowed corruption 
on earth, exhausted the country, shed blood, and killed innocent 
souls. It has been doing so throughout its black history and 
bloody rule of which the Yemeni people have been afflicted. The 
tyranny of this parasitic gang, which has nothing to do with the 
Yemeni people's tenets and values, has gone far beyond any 
limits. Therefore, it was inevitable that it be confronted by 
the people, rejected by the homeland, and that it receive its 
retribution from God through His lovers and supporters in the 
army of unity, constitutional legitimacy, and the forces of 
unity and democracy. This is best proved by the fact that many 
of the elements who have been deceived for a long time have 
become aware of the lies of the gangs of apostasy and secession 
and realized the falsehood of their slogans and claims. Those 
national elements have joined the trench of unity and legitimacy 
and voluntarily surrendered to and joined the forces of the 
constitutional legitimacy. They declared their rejection of 
the gangs of apostasy and stressed their rejection of all its 
criminal actions. This mass capitulation and joining of our 
forces is taking place at all positions, axes, and governorates. 
This proves that the gangs of apostasy and secession have lost 
everything. They are exposed and have lost all the rejected, 
deceptive merchandise which they have been promoting among the 
masses throughout the past third of a century. [passage omitted] 

