`Backdoor'   Examined 

<F P=102> PM2704100294 London THE INDEPENDENT in English 27 Apr 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> PM2704100294 </F>
<F P=104>  London THE INDEPENDENT </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Jason Bennetto article: "Customs Seize Drugs Worth Record </F>
250 Million Pounds] 
  [Text] Customs officers seized Britain's most valuable 
haul of narcotics-cocaine worth 250 million pounds -- in an 
operation to block the South American drug barons' backdoor 
route into western Europe, it was revealed yesterday. The 1,300 
kg -- about 1.3 tons of high-purity cocaine was discovered in 
January, hidden in a consignment of 48 drums of bitumen on a 
cargo vessel docked at Birkenhead, Merseyside, en route to 
Poland. The seizure provides further evidence that South 
American drug barons are using eastern Europe as a backdoor to 
the West for huge quantities of narcotics. 
  Information from British Customs officers also helped the 
Polish authorities snatch a second consignment of cocaine in 
January, this time 520 kg, from a similar route, it was revealed 
yesterday. Drugs from the two seizures have a street value of 
about 400 million pounds. 
  In the Birkenhead operation, Customs officers removed the 
cocaine barrels and substituted "dummy" drums on board the ship 
which had sailed from Venezuela. It was then tracked to a 
warehouse on the outskirts of Warsaw in Poland. Customs 
officers, however, could not identify the western European and 
Polish figures behind the deal and there have been no arrests. 
  Drug enforcement officers believe the cocaine was destined 
for western Europe and some would almost certainly have been 
sold on the streets of Britain. 
  Douglas Tweddle, the chief investigations officer, said: 
"This massive seizure confirms intelligence reports that the 
South American `narco barons' are targeting cocaine shipments on 
western Europe and are seeking to use east European countries as 
a back door. We are delighted to have been able to work with 
the Polish authorities to inflict this major blow on these 
traffickers." 
  Forty officers were involved in Operation Ayala, after 
intelligence sources based in South America alerted them to the 
bitumen shipment on board the Polish-American ship, the MV 
gurta. The cocaine was probably grown in Bolivia or Peru and 
then processed in Colombia before being sent to the port of La 
Guaira in northern Venezuela. On its arrival on 24 January in 
Birkenhead, the 48 drums were removed, 47 had inner metal 
containers each packed with up to 30 kilos of cocaine. They had 
been insulated to protect the drugs from the heat of the 
bitumen. Replacement barrels of bitumen were put back onto the 
ship. The vessel made a further stop, in Hamburg, Germany, to 
unload cargo before completing its journey to Gdynia in Poland 
on 3 February. 
  The Polish authorities followed the consignment, but have 
failed to catch any of the drug dealers. One man is being 
interviewed by Polish police. 
  The Birkenhead seizure was the largest haul of hard drugs, 
not only in the United Kingdom, but also in central and eastern 
Europe. There have been bigger hauls of cocaine in Spain, the 
Netherlands and Belgium, but the previous biggest UK find -- 932 
kg -- was discovered two years hidden inside lead ingots. 
  The quantity of cocaine seized in Britain is rapidly rising. 
From 611 kg in 1990, to 1,078 kg in 1991, and 2,248 kg in 1992. 
Cocaine shipments to western Europe from South America, 
particularly involving Colombian drug cartels, have surged over 
the past 12 months. Drugs brought in via Spain and eastern 
Europe have been distributed in co-operation with European 
organised crime syndicates, according to drug intelligence 
officers on the Continent. 
  The Balkan route for heroin, which passes from Turkey to 
Western Europe, is still the major global conduit. 

