Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Political commentary"] </F>
  [Text] In the name of God, the compassionate, the 
merciful. O heroic Sudanese people: 
  When Britain sent Peter Streams as its ambassador to Sudan, 
he felt the greatness of his responsibility in being sent to a 
rebellious country, one that was difficult to shackle since it 
had emerged from the well into which it had been thrown by its 
own abilities. Streams was determined to equip himself with 
[word indistinct] of his predecessors, (Ford), Kitchener, 
Wingate, Gordon and Slatin. 
  He drew from his fertile imagination [word indistinct] entry 
into Khartoum enveloped in the mantle of history and riding 
haughtily in a strong saddle and surrounded by the crowds, 
disbursing before him gifts and presents to the [?poor] [words 
indistinct]. 
  Why not? For he is a descendant of the resident of the first 
palace and a man of action and will, in what they call the Third 
World. Thus, the foundations of the British Embassy were weaker 
than the ambassador's dreams [words indistinct]. 
  His excellency the ambassador began the battle having 
preceded it with a media campaign of defamation. It was 
circulated at gatherings that his blessed advent would put an 
end to the government of the National Salvation Revolution and 
would arrange its end. The honor of the English nobility does 
not permit the erasure of anything they have written with their 
own pens, and no culture or civilization could be (?better) than 
what they had. Politicians should not dismiss those who are 
close to them, and their beloved ones should not be left out of 
ministerial positions. 
  The British ambassador led an active campaign to discourage 
Western ambassadors from attending the country's celebrations, 
marking the fourth anniversary of the revolution, so as not to 
give the government any legitimacy, according to Streams. He 
promised them they would wait and see the death of the 
revolution as a result of his efforts. The British ambassador 
was the most frequent visitor to the camps of the displaced 
persons. He would knock on their doors before dawn prayers, 
when they undress in the afternoon and after the second evening 
prayers [salat al-isha]. He shed tears at the demonstrations of 
misery and wretchedness. He [word indistinct] the haphazard 
housing like the poet in the days of ignorance. He described 
the lake of the Jabal Awliya Dam as the heart of the desert. He 
described the planning of new towns and town quarters as 
deportation of supporters of a party he named which used to have 
cordial relations with his leadership. 
  Ambassador Peter Streams expressed his readiness to amend 
the 
itinerary of the EC delegation to divert it to what he thought 
would be displeasing to them. He wanted to influence the 
delegation's reports, which he believed might otherwise be 
useful to his enemy, Sudan. The British ambassador persevered 
in writing fabricated reports to such an extent that he 
established a particular image in the minds of the recipients of 
his reports, in addition to their media. He was thus afraid 
that the image would change every time a British delegation's 
visit was imminent, out of his fear that the delegation might 
see the truth and discover his lies. We see him using one of 
the important loopholes of British politics, separating religion 
from the state, and the call for secularism in government and 
safeguards against the influence of faith. 
  He wanted to plug a loophole of interest to him, namely the 
lack of clarity in his patched up reports. He went in a rush to 
the speaker of the Transitional Assembly, and told him, making 
it almost an order, that Streams should be the host of the 
archbishop of Canterbury, that is, the Anglican Church. He 
wanted to be host to him in his own house and to be the one to 
draw up the visit's programs and meetings -- otherwise the visit 
would have to be canceled. 
  He seemed to want to put the government in the embarrassing 
position of acceptance or rejection. He obviously reckoned that 
he would win the round. When he saw that the government would 
not concede part of its sovereignty, he rushed off to Britain 
[words indistinct] and that Sudan was imposing restrictions on 
the archbishop's visit, fixing his program, and refusing to 
allow the Sudanese Episcopal Church to be host to him. Moreover 
the British Embassy was more deserving of his [word indistinct] 
in the August presence of Peter Streams. 
  He claimed that Sudan was shutting the door in the face of 
the visit. However, British wisdom pushed the archbishop into 
Sudan through the back door (?to be the guest of) [word 
indistinct] the agent rebels. Thus the visit had to take place 
according to the wishes of Great Britain and not according to 
the wishes of Sudan. In this way the aging empire struck the 
final wedge in Western credibility, which had been filling the 
world with talk of freedoms, human rights, democracy, and the 
separation of religion and state. As for freedom: Look at its 
creation of the Zionist entity in the Arab land. Human rights 
are being practiced in Bosnia, with Britain's support. As for 
democracy, they are opposed to it unless it gives birth to what 
they love, and there is much proof of this. 
  As for the separation of religion and the state, this is 
what 
Peter Streams, the British ambassador to Sudan, has done. If 
the separation is real, then what business does the embassy have 
in the archbishop's visit when the embassy is the state? What 
business does it have with the (?Episcopal) church and its 
parishioners? Why should the visit become political, tarnishing 
the name of Sudan as is being done by that Jewish radio in 
London? Why was the visit directed to the zone of military and 
political conflict where there are no civilian citizens? Is it 
for the defeated rebellion to present its demands for arms from 
the archbishop at a time when so many southerners have taken 
refuge in their homeland in the north? When did the leaders of 
the rebellion abandon the atheistic communist influence and 
forget the era of the manifesto [as heard] and become apostles 
of Jesus Christ? 
  But all this is nothing more than a lack of capability and 
defeat, which destroyed those who were seeking support for a 
crusade, as they suggested to the archbishop, while continuing 
to fight among themselves as a result of the struggle for 
leadership and interests, ethnic interests and the rancor of 
desperate souls. 
  Pope John Paul was right when he came to Khartoum and 
received a great welcome from its people. He met his followers 
and prayed with them safely into the night -- yet in other 
Christian countries he is surrounded by armored glass. He was 
indeed a friend of Sudan. 
  As for Ambassador Streams, he should (?remember) Kordofan. 
How it managed to extinguish the lives of a whole army in one 
hour -- it was led by Kitchener [words indistinct]. Remember 
the iron sword which reached the neck of the sacred General 
Gordon [word indistinct] on that day of liberation in 1885, and 
left so much grief in the heart of the foggy capital. 
  Had Peter looked to history it would have told him the 
truth. 
But he did not, preferring to send fabricated reports about the 
Sudanese people. That is why he is returning to Great Britain 
after having lost his bid. He has not succeeded in what he 
promised his fellow ambassadors concerning changing the Sudanese 
regime. He has revealed a lie which was earlier concealed -- 
the lie of separating religion from the state. This was urged 
so much by Britain, and repeated by its parrots. The people of 
Islam must rule their life. The Sudanese people should thank 
God for the merit of our predecessors. The British Embassy will 
continue to be a symbol of contacts between peoples in equal 
measure, like other embassies, that is, if its people want to 
have contacts without conditions, arrogance and conspiracy. 
Sudan covets nothing from Britain because it is able to assess 
Britain's situation and the notions of the past that it suffers 
from, as well as the problems of its complicated present -- 
being overpowered by America and influenced by the Jews. 
  Long live the revolution, with its bright and dignified 
banners on the brown masts of Sudan. Long live the unoppressed 
people [words indistinct]. God is great and dignity to Sudan. 

