BFN 

<F P=106> [Boris Reznik and Natalya Ostrovskaya reports under the </F>
general heading "Operation Fishing Season": "Protecting Our 
Fish on the Border.... Homegrown Poachers Still Being Caught"] 
  [Text] Far East -- The scale of brazen robbery in our 
territorial waters can be judged from the figures -- more than 
9,000 violations of the state border have been recorded in the 
space of just one year off the Kurils alone. These were mainly 
interminable incursions by Japanese poachers aiming to make 
illegal catches of fish and seafood. 
  Naturally, the Russian side could not tolerate this 
situation. The commander of the country's Border Guard Troops 
carefully planned and has successfully launched the wide-ranging 
"Fishing Season 1994" operation, in which ships and aircraft of 
the Pacific Fleet, staffers from fishery and environmental 
protection organs, customs officers, militiamen, and 
Prosecutor's Office staffers have been taking part. 
  "I would like to note," Colonel General Andrey Nikolayev, 
commander in chief of the Russian Federation Border Guard 
Troops, told me, "that Operation `Fishing Season 1994' will not 
actually be limited to just one year. It will continue until 
such time as we restore order and can ensure the effective 
defense of Russia's interests here, on our Far Eastern borders. 
So this measure should be seen as systematic official military 
cooperation between the Border Guard Troops and the various 
environmental protection and law enforcement organs under a 
single plan aimed at completely safeguarding the state's 
economic interests. 
  "From the very first days of Operation `Fishing Season'," 
the 
commander in chief said, "I have been asked how many poachers' 
fishing smacks have been arrested and how much illegally caught 
fish and seafood has been confiscated. I would like to stress 
that our main task is not to do this but to make poaching itself 
impossible. We can be said to be succeeding. I reported the 
situation on the state border, including the Far Eastern border, 
to President Yeltsin and I received political approval for the 
planned extensive measures to strengthen Russia's borders. And 
the government has provided economic support for these measures. 
So that our subunits are now up to their full complement and 
are being issued with modern equipment to ensure that their 
service goes normally. 
  "This is shown by just one detail -- space-based 
intelligence-gathering has been used in Operation `Fishing 
Season 1994.' Movements of poaching ships are now being 
monitored from space, and their positions show up clear as 
day.... Being in control of the operational situation, we are 
able to take the appropriate measures to respond." 
  The commander in chief also reported that, as well as the 
name change -- to Federal Border Service-Border Guard Troops 
High Command -- there has also been a change in the actual 
substance of the department's activities. Now it will be 
involved not only in serving on the country's borders but also 
in shaping state policy on the border. 
  Vladivostok -- The first week of Operation "Fishing Season 
1994" has shown that it is none other than our own Russian 
fishermen who are now the main violators of Russia's economic 
interests in the expanses of its Far Eastern seas. So says Anas 
Nurutdinov, deputy commander of the Pacific Border District. 
  "Fishing Season" had been widely publicized long before it 
began. But, as we know, there is no way of scaring "our own 
people." Over the past week nine intruder vessels have fallen 
into the "net." On Day One of the operation the Border Guard 
Troops, militiamen, fishery protection officers, and customs 
officers -- taking part in such operations for the first time -- 
detained the Sakhalin-registered seiner Omar-1 with contraband 
on board. Crabs, which had not been recorded anywhere by the 
captain, were destined to "find their way" abroad. 
  People abroad value not only high-quality seafood but also 
fresh-frozen fish. Thus, having stated that his vessel was 
empty and not carrying a cargo, the captain of the Maritime Kray 
trawler 50 Let VLKSM planned to ship 260 tonnes of perch, cod, 
and plaice to the South Korean port of Pusan for his own 
commercial interests. As he had managed to accumulate a 
considerable cargo, an investigation will follow. And Russia's 
"Primorrybprom" Enterprise will pay a fine of several hundred 
million rubles [R]. The Maritime Kray Internal Affairs 
Administration Department for Combating Crimes in the Fishing 
Industry also has a big "catch" to its credit. It was not for 
nothing that its staffers recently met the factory ship Iyeronim 
Uborevich returning to Vladivostok from a fishing trip. On 
board they discovered fresh-frozen and entirely unaccounted-for 
products worth R27 million. 
  There are 15 coastguard vessels, four ships from 
"Primorrybvod" and "Sakhalinrybvod," and two ships from the 
Pacific Fleet involved in Operation "Fishing Season," as well as 
daily patrols by Border Guard Troops' aircraft and helicopters. 
The entire Far Eastern sea area -- from the Bering Straits to 
the Sea of Japan -- is being monitored. As the ice situation 
improves, the number of coastguard vessels will be increased. 
  With the adoption of the government decision on Operation 
"Fishing Season 1994" the Far Eastern Border Guard Troops have 
finally been able to use their fleet and aircraft. Fully. 
Until recently the guards of the country's Far Eastern borders 
were on subsistence rations, without enough money or fuel. They 
have now received both "for the operation." 
  The first phase of "Fishing Season" will end 10 May. Phase 
Two will begin 10 June. It, like Phase One, will last 20 days. 
What then? Subsistence rations again? Will poachers once 
again be fishing off the South Kurils with impunity? Today, 
according to the Border Guard Troops, it is relatively quiet in 
this area. But until quite recently mass incursions into our 
waters by Japanese and other fishing smacks had been a common 
occurrence. 
  Specialists have calculated that the annual losses suffered 
from illegal fishing in Far Eastern waters run to more than $2 
billion. That amount would be even bigger, were it not for the 
Border Guard Troops and militia. 
  Now for the first time, and despite all the difficulties, 
the 
state last year recovered $363,000 from foreign intruders in the 
form of fines. The militia in the shape of the Maritime Kray 
Internal Affairs Administration Department for Combating Crimes 
in the Fishing Industry alone, has recovered R6.7 billion for 
the state. That makes good the losses incurred from last year's 
thefts on ships and at enterprises in the Maritime Kray 
fisheries sector. So the expenditure on Operation "Fishing 
Season 1994" will be more than recouped. 

