Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In a recent interview with our staff reporter Zhang 
Xiaodong, Chinese human rights specialist Fan Guoxiang gave an 
analysis of the current distortion of the human rights issue and 
concluded that international cooperation is the most reasonable 
and practical way to promote human rights. 
  QUESTION [Q]: Respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedom is widely regarded as an important issue by all 
countries in the world. But unfortunately it has been used by 
some countries as an excuse to practice power politics. Can the 
universal significance of human rights be interpreted as a 
common human rights standard? 
  ANSWER [A]: The understanding and appreciation of human 
rights have undergone a historical process. In this century, 
especially during World War II, the armed aggression against and 
military occupation of other countries by the German, Italian 
and Japanese fascists brought about untold sorrow to millions of 
innocent people. There were no human rights in the occupied 
countries and regions, and the people in the fascist countries 
were also stripped of their human rights. 
  Reflecting on the scourges of war, the Charter of the United 
Nations solemnly stipulates, "To develop friendly relations 
among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights 
and self-determination of peoples" and "to achieve international 
cooperation...in promoting and encouraging respect for human 
rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction 
as to race, sex, language or religion." 
  The United Nations has also adopted some other international 
human rights instruments which have given, for the first time, a 
number of specifications to human rights. 
  Respect for and promotion of human rights are significantly 
important to all countries, in the West or East, developed or 
developing. However, during the Cold-War period, human rights 
were used to serve the West-East confrontations. 
  In recent years, human rights have been further distorted by 
some countries which have used the human rights issue as an 
instrument to perform power politics and force other nations to 
accept their human rights formula as the so-called common 
standard, turning the universal value of human rights into a 
uniform and predetermined human rights formula. 
  Historically, certain religions persecuted and proselytized 
others in order to spread their rule to the ends of the globe. 
There were also claims that some nationalities were superior to 
others. Although powerful political and military forces were 
exploited to carry out such policies using all kinds of excuses, 
these blatant violations of human rights were continually cast 
aside by the people. 
  The present world is a multicolored one. Different cultures 
and state systems and government forms co-exist. Insisting that 
some way of life or specific values should be a common standard 
and claiming that some governments through certain methods of 
elections are democratic and others are not have confused the 
universal significance of human rights with the common standard 
of human rights. It is designed to force the developing 
countries to take in the so-called common standard by putting 
pressures and imposing sanctions on these countries. 
  In history, the religious fanatics and those who advocated 
ethnic superiority were proved wrong. At present, any attempt 
to impose a single human rights standard on the world will also 
lead nowhere. 
  Many specialists have pointed out that some people claim to 
support democracy in other countries, but they are far from 
being democratic in the international arena. They vigorously 
support dissidents in other nations, but they are 
internationally intolerant of different views on human rights, 
demonstrating their hegemonist behavior. 
  Human rights is universally significant, but it cannot be 
twisted to claim that there is only one standard. The concept 
of universal values for human rights is quite different from 
that of a common standard of human rights. 
  Q: The specific situation of human rights differs from 
nation 
to nation. Under such circumstances, how can we embody the 
universal value of human rights while respecting the diversity 
of human rights in each country? 
  A: For a long time, the human rights issue has been 
politicized and distorted. It became a political instrument in 
the Cold-War confrontation. This practice should be cast aside. 
The only reasonable and feasible way to promote human rights 
is, as stipulated by the UN Charter, through international 
cooperation. 
  Various countries should discuss, exchange views and consult 
on human rights, rather than resorting to attacks and charges 
against each other. When a consensus is reached in some areas 
and conditions mature, international conventions may be signed 
and the signatories should be legally bound to the stipulations 
of those documents. 
  Concrete cooperation may be achieved through bilateral, 
multilateral, regional and global meeting to exchange the 
experiences of each country. Before the 1993 Human Rights 
Conference was convened in Vienna, there were regional meetings 
in Asia, Africa and Latin America, which have proved to be 
beneficial to reflecting the views on the promotion of human 
rights from different regions. 
  International cooperation in human rights may encompass a 
wide range of activities. Discussions between countries may 
include, inter alia, individual human rights and collective 
human rights; people's rights and obligations in society; 
personal freedom and national security; political rights and 
economic rights; relationships between human rights, development 
and peace; protection of the rights of minority nationalities 
and indigenous populations; and protection of the rights of 
women, children and the handicapped. The discussions may be 
conducted from different points of views, taking into account 
divergent historical backgrounds. But it is improper to 
arbitrarily say someone is 100 percent correct and others 
totally wrong. 
  It needs to be noted that discussions should be held with 
all participants enjoying an equal status. Equality is the 
basis for cooperation. Although history, tradition and the 
present situation differ from state to state, each country has 
made specific contributions to human rights. The developing 
countries should be aware of the practices in developed 
countries. At the same time, they can relate their experiences 
to the developed countries so that both sides can learn from the 
successes and mistakes of the other. But it is inappropriate to 
assert that some countries are advanced in promotion of human 
rights and others backward, and that the former should be the 
educator and investigator and the latter the educated and 
investigated. 
  In the international human rights field there must be a 
strict distinction between humanitarian assistance and 
humanitarian intervention. 
  International armed conflicts, natural disasters and other 
uncontrollable forces have caused great harm to the people of 
the affected areas. The United Nations and some other 
international organizations have provided assistance to the 
victims so as to ease their misery. This is positive, 
beneficial and welcome. 
  But some countries, with their own political motives, have 
deliberately, engaged in humanitarian intervention in the name 
of rendering assistance, going as far as to send troops to 
extend so-called aid that finally results in the escalation of 
war. This runs counter to the original intention and deepens 
the misery of the victims. 
  The negative effect of humanitarian intervention has put the 
United Nations and some other international organizations in a 
dilemma and their prestige has been damaged. Humanitarian 
intervention has invited widespread opposition from the 
international community. More and more people are concerned 
that, far from promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms, 
this type of power politics practiced in the name of 
humanitarianism will bring about more serious international 
tension and instability. Therefore, humanitarian assistance is 
welcome and humanitarian intervention should be opposed. 

