Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Belgrade, Feb 3 (TANJUG) -- The Bosnian Serb 
Republic (S.R.) on Thursday said it accepted the U.N.-proclaimed 
"Olympic truce" during the Winter Olympic Games held in the 
Norwegian town of Lillehammer February 13-19, adding that it 
would simultaneously stage its own "mini winter Olympics." The 
"mini winter Olympics" will be held on Serb-controlled Mount 
Jahorina near Sarajevo, as part of a ceremony marking the tenth 
anniversary of the Winter Olympics in Sarajevo, the capital of 
the former Yugoslav Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, said 
Ljubomir Zukovic, the S.R. minister of education, culture and 
sports and president of the S.R. National Olympic Committee. 
  Zukovic told a press conference in Belgrade that 
International Olympic Committee (IOC) Chairman Juan Antonio 
Samaranch had been asked to attend the games. "We should like 
him to pay us a visit and see for himself that we are not opting 
for war, but for restoring peace and multilateral cooperation," 
he added. To a question about what would happen if the Bosnian 
Muslims turned up with their own team to participate in the 
games, Zukovic answered that "if they did, it would mean they 
recognize us. In that case, we would be pleased to accept their 
presence. We do not want to compete with guns, but to separate 
our territories and try our strength at such contests." 
  "Mini winter Olympics" will comprise four events -- slalom, 
giant slalom, cross country and biathlon. 
  Gruja Bjekovic, the secretary-general of the S.R. National 
Olympic Committee, said the Bosnian Serbs fully accepted the 
U.N. resolution proclaiming the "Olympic truce," although they 
could not vouch for the Moslem side to do the same. He added, 
however, that they had taken all precaution to provide maximum 
safety on Mt. Jahorina. Invitations had been sent to all 
countries which participated in the 1984 Winter Olympics in 
Sarajevo. 
  Bjekovic said that about 80 per cent of Olympic facilities 
was situated in the S.R. territory, and competitions would be 
held on the same pistes used by the world's best skiers ten 
years ago. 
  Djordje Perisic, secretary-general of the Yugoslav Olympic 
Committee (JOK), said his organisation fully supported the games 
on Mt. Jahorina adding that the Yugoslav team would take part in 
the games. The JOK would, by using its international 
connections, do everything in its power to bring to Mt. Jahorina 
as many participants from abroad as possible, Perisic said. 

