BFN 

  [Text] Phrae -- His Excellency Bounkeut Sangsomsak, the 
ambassador of the Lao People's Democratic Republic to Thailand, 
told reporters that it is the policy of the Lao Government to 
give its full support to the quadrangle economic development 
program, adding that the Lao Government is always aware of the 
fact that the complete implementation of this four-nation 
cooperation scheme will greatly benefit Laos in terms of 
tourism, industrial development, and international trade. 
  He noted that the Provinces of Luang Namtha, Bokeo, 
Sayaboury, and Oudomsai will directly reap the fruits of the 
program. 
  The ambassador, however, pointed out that the Lao Government 
has no intention to pin all its hopes on the development scheme, 
because it realizes that a program of such a magnitude will 
require a prior careful feasibility study. As a result of the 
technical meetings, one held in Bangkok and the rest in the 
Philippines, the four countries involved have agreed that the 
private sectors should be allowed to play the leading role, and, 
as everyone knows, he said, the private sectors have their 
limits in carrying out working projects. 
  Since the feasibility study for the quadrangle economic 
development program will be very time consuming, the Lao 
Government has decided to implement its own development plan for 
the northern part of the country. Under this plan, the 
government will first estimate the total expense of the plan and 
seek loans from foreign countries to finance all construction 
projects, which will be carried out by both Thai and Lao 
contractors through bidding. 
  His Excellency Bunkeut said that the Lao Government cannot 
depend solely on the quadrangle economic development program, 
because each participating country has its own objectives to 
pursue. For example, Thailand is interested in trade and 
tourism, while Laos looks forward to industrial development, and 
China sets its target on both tourism and industries. Under the 
quadrangle scheme, laws on import and export control and 
immigration legislations of the four countries must be realigned 
into the same direction to ensure good coordination. It will be 
a long time before they can achieve that. 

