BFN 

  [Text] Yesterday, General Luis Cisneros Vizquerra, retired, 
reaffirmed his criticism of and opposition to senior military 
officials and the government, in stating that the Armed Forces 
are performing the role of a political party for President 
Fujimori, and that they therefore cannot guarantee impartiality 
in the 1995 elections. 
  Cisneros is a retired general who served as interior 
minister 
during the government of General Francisco Morales Bermudez. 
Despite the fact that a military court recently issued a 90-day 
suspended sentence against him, Cisneros yesterday openly 
reaffirmed his disagreement with senior officers of the Armed 
Forces. The Supreme Court of Military Justice sentenced him for 
the military crime of having allegedly "insulted his superiors." 
  In an interview he granted yesterday to television host 
Alfredo Barnechea during his "Live" program, Gen. Cisneros said: 
"The Armed Forces have not only become somewhat like a 
political party for President Fujimori, but commanding officers 
are openly voicing their support for him, thus raising doubts 
about their impartiality in the 1995 elections." 
  Early during the bloody subversive war unleashed by Abimael 
Guzman and his "Shining Path" organization, Gen. Cisneros, 
nicknamed "Gaucho" because he studied in Argentina, stirred up a 
great deal of controversy by upholding draconian ideas about the 
antisubversive strategy. 
  As he did then, Cisneros today still supports an extremely 
tough line in fighting terrorism. His theory is that a "social 
cost" is absolutely inevitable in the war against subversion, in 
thus alluding to civilian casualties and to excesses that may 
occur in the theater of operations. 
  Yesterday, Cisneros blamed senior military officers, namely 
from the Army, for the loss of the spirit of comradeship, 
loyalty, and mutual confidence that should prevail within the 
military institution. He harshly criticized the National 
Intelligence Service [SIN], which he described as a true 
"Gestapo," and regarded SIN members as "the eyes and ears of the 
government who have sowed distrust within the institution." 
Cisneros said: "This means that no trust is being placed in 
commanding officers or that distrust prevails among the rank and 
file." 
  On the political front, he said, "in recent times the Armed 
Forces, and especially the Army, have performed the role of 
political party for President Fujimori." Cisneros said that 
because the president has no political party, he has used senior 
officers to serve his own interests, thus violating 
constitutional provisions. 
  He criticized the senior officers for openly supporting 
Fujimori, and contended that no one could fail to notice that 
this support is designed to obtain Fujimori's reelection. 
Cisneros added that this support has placed the Army in an 
awkward position, to the point that today, the Armed Forces can 
no longer guarantee they will be impartial in the upcoming 
electoral process. 
  Cisneros said: "The Armed Forces should not state their 
position on these issues because they have no reason to do so." 
Nevertheless, he said, senior officers are "flamboyantly" 
conveying their support for the regime. 
  Commenting on the antisubversive offensive launched by the 
Army in the Upper Huallaga and to charges of the murder of 
innocent civilians, Cisneros reaffirmed his ideas about the 
antisubversive war. He said it has been a tremendous error to 
entrust the Armed Forces with the task of engaging in drug 
enforcement operations. Cisneros noted that the Constitution 
has entrusted this task to the police. 
  Commenting on the death of civilians in general terms, he 
said no war is clean; they are all dirty, and that social costs 
are inevitable. 

