BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, April 11 (TANJUG) -- NATO's bombing of 
Serb positions around Gorazde has dispersed the illusion about 
the international community's objecitive stand toward the crisis 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina, President of the Yugoslav Republic of 
Serbia Slobodan Milosevic said after meeting with Russian envoy 
Vitaliy Churkin on Monday [11 April], the presidential cabinet 
said in a statement. 
  Milosevic said that the offensive of the Bosnian Moslem army 
had been going on for weeks before the very eyes of the 
international public but that the United Nations had done 
nothing to stop it, apart from a few mild warnings. 
  On the contrary, the Moslem enclave of Gorazde in eastern 
Bosnia was used as a springboard for the offensive on Bosnian 
Serb positions. By launching air strikes, the U.N. evidently 
became involved in the civil war on the Bosnian Moslem side, 
which is highly reprehensible and discredits the world 
organization as a mediator in the peace process, he said. 
  U.S. NATO warplanes on Sunday and Monday bombed Bosnian Serb 
positions around Gorazde, a Moslem enclave which should have 
been demilitarized last spring as one of the six U.N. "safe 
areas." 
  Late in March, around 10,000 Moslems, who had been massed in 
Gorazde for the offensive, launched a strong offensive on Serb 
territories. 
  After breaking the offensive, the Serb army made a strong 
counter-attack and penetrated to a distance of several 
kilometres close to the town. 
  Milosevic said that, in order to surmount the current 
crisis, 
it would be necessary to reach peace without prejudice 
concerning political solutions, rather than to allow an 
escalation of war. When there are no more armed conflicts, 
political negotiations should be brought to an end, he said. 
  The Serbian president supported the resumed talks between 
Knin and Zagreb and expressed satisfaction over the sucessful 
implementation of the ceasefire agreement between the republic 
of Serb Krajina (RSK) and Croatia. 
  The new phase of talks between the two sides, expected to 
focus on normalization of economic ties, in itself touches the 
problem of the sanctions, which are at this moment the biggest 
obstacle to successful talks. 
  Undoubtedly, all factions who care for peace and an end of 
the crisis hope that the talks between Knin and Zagreb would 
result in restored economic and communication ties. However, it 
is impossible to achieve that while one of the sides (Serb) is 
constantly being exposed to sanctions of the international 
community, which make such ties impossible, Milosevic said. 
  The international community and its public will therefore 
face a choice of either supporting a normalization of relations 
and peace or, through the implementation of the sanctions, 
insisting on confrontation. 
  In that case, the sanctions would be the biggest obstacle to 
the peace process and a normalization of relations, Milosevic 
said and added that he expected the forces of peace and 
cooperation to overwhelm the advocators of war and prolonged 
crisis. 
  The RSK was proclaimed in 1991 in the Serb ethnic and 
historical territories within the administrative borders of the 
former Yugoslav Republic of Croatia in response to Croatia's 
violent secession from the former Yugoslav federation and the 
downgrading of the Serbs' status to that of an ethnic minority. 
  In March 1992, the RSK territory was proclaimed a United 
Nations protected area (UNPA). 
  The talks between Milosevic and Churkin were also attended 
by 
Yugoslav Foreign Minister Vladislav Jovanovic and Russian 
Ambassador in Belgrade Gennadiy Shikin. 

