Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone conversation between unidentified anchorman and </F>
KBS political reporter Kim Chin-su from Beijing on 28 March] 
  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] [Anchorman] In today's 
talks, other than the nuclear issue, it seems that talks were 
exchanged between the leaders on the method for promoting 
economic cooperation between the two countries. What did the 
two leaders discuss? 
  [Reporter Kim Chin-su] Along with the North Korean nuclear 
issue, another important agenda at the ROK-Chinese summit talks 
was the economic cooperation field. Both sides agreed to 
establish a ROK-Chinese industrial cooperative committee. 
Through this industrial cooperative committee, the two 
countries decided to strengthen cooperation in the field of 
automobile, airplanes, electronic exchangers, and HDTV. In 
particular, President Kim Yong-sam proposed that the scope of 
joint venture projects in the Time Division Exchanger (TDX) 
field should be increased, and that technological tie-up and 
joint venture production should begin in the aviation field. He 
also said that he hopes that ROK's finished automobiles can 
advance into China and that the road will be opened for the 
ROK's superior construction technology to actively participate 
in China's eighth Five-Year Plan. In this regard, President 
Jiang Zemin answered by proposing to hold minister-level talks 
and consultations among working-level officers in private 
businesses. [passage omitted] 
  [Anchorman] After the summit talks, the Chinese side 
separately announced the result of the talks to its reporters. 
Did the Chinese side reveal its position by saying that the 
Chinese Government's position is that it opposes the resumption 
of the Team Spirit exercise? 
  [Kim] Yes. When viewing the result of the summit talks as 
given by the Chinese side, China's position regarding the North 
Korean nuclear issue can be viewed more clearly. In a briefing 
after the summit talks, Shen Guofang, spokesman of the Chinese 
Foreign Ministry, said that President Jiang Zemin explained to 
President Kim that China supports pursuing long-term peace and 
security on the Korean peninsula and denuclearization on the 
Korean peninsula, and that all issues must stem from the point 
of maintaining peace and security on the Korean peninsula. 
Spokesman Shen revealed that currently there is no cooperation 
between China and North Korea regarding the nuclear issue, but 
since North Korea is also a sovereign state, there is a limit to 
China's role because another country cannot order another 
country what to do. He said that therefore, the most effective 
method regarding the North Korean nuclear issue is dialogue 
between the parties concerned through patience. He also 
explained that maintaining peace and security on the Korean 
peninsula is defending the Korean people's fundamental interest. 
He firmly said that whether it is military exercise or 
deployment of missiles, China opposes any kind of action and 
measure that is detrimental to security on the Korean peninsula. 
  [Anchorman] In today's summit talks, it was decided that 
concrete discussions regarding the nuclear issue will be dealt 
with at the foreign ministers' talks. The foreign ministers' 
talks were held today, right? 
  [Kim] Yes. In accordance with the agreement made at the 
summit talks, ROK Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu and Chinese 
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen held talks for about one and a half 
hour this afternoon to hold further talks on the North Korean 
nuclear issue. In today's talks, the two foreign ministers 
decided that both countries jointly exert efforts for the 
peaceful resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue, and 
agreed that both countries take joint measures to find the most 
effective way to change North Korea's attitude. Foreign 
Minister Qian Qichen proposed that rather than adopting a 
resolution on North Korea at the UN Security Council [UNSC], 
issuing a statement by the president of the UNSC would be of 
help in resolving the North Korean nuclear issue. Foreign 
Minister Han said that if this is an opportunity to enhance the 
road to persuade North Korea by China, he will not oppose this 
proposal. Foreign Minister Qian also said that there is clearly 
a limit in persuading North Korea, but if there is no change in 
North Korea's attitude even after the president of the UNSC 
issues a statement regarding the North Korean nuclear issue 
through China's efforts, it will further strengthen efforts to 
persuade North Korea. [passage omitted] 

