Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by John Palmer: "Macedonia Clouds New EU </F>
Presidency"] 
  [Text] Athens -- The formal launch yesterday of Greece's 
presidency of the European Union [EU] was overshadowed by fears 
of renewed tension between the government in Athens and 
Macedonia, its Balkan neighbour. Most EU governments have now 
established diplomatic relations with Macedonia, in defiance of 
Greek protests. 
  At a ceremenony in Athens, the Greek prime minister, Andreas 
Papandreou, refused to rule out that his government might close 
the border with Macedonia, even though the former Yugoslav 
republic is entirely dependent on aid and trade crossing from 
Greece. 
  While insisting that he had "no plans whatsoever at present 
to close the border," Mr Papandreou said there could be no 
normalisation of relations with Macedonia unless the government 
in Skopje bowed to a series of Greek demands. These included 
changes in the official flag of Macedonia, an amendment to its 
national constitution and a joint declaration on the 
inviolability of its border with Greece. 
  Mr Papandreou spelled out Greece's terms for easing tension 
with Macedonia at a press conference to mark its assumption of 
the presidency of the EU, given with the president of the 
European Commission, Jacques Delors. 
  "I regret the decision of the other EU governments in 
establishing diplomatic relations with Skopje (Macedonia), but 
we will make the best we can out of it," he declared. 
  Mr Delors attempted to steer clear of Greek sensitivies over 
Macedonia, but left no doubt about his strong disapproval of 
recent outspoken attacks on Germany by Greek ministers. "We in 
the European Union can have frank and honest exchanges with each 
other but they should always be courteous exchanges. That is how 
we make progress in the European family of which Greece is a 
full part," he said. 
  Last month the Greek minister for European affairs, 
Theodhoros Pangalos, described Germany as "having bestial 
strength but the intelligence of a child." Another minister, 
Evangelos Yannopoulos, said Germany was using "the power of the 
D-mark to create a Fourth Reich." 
  Defending his government's stance towards the Macedonian 
state, Mr Papandreou said Skopje's decision to include the "Sun 
of Vergina"--the emblem of the ancient Macedonian monarchy--in 
its national flag was "a clear provocation." He added that the 
choice of the emblem, which was only discovered in the Greek 
northern province of Macedonia in the 1970s, together with 
references in the Macedonian constitution to the "liberation of 
all the Macedonian people," implied a claim on Greek soil. 
  Speaking to journalists later, Mr Pangalos went further when 
asked why Greece found itself isolated in the EU over relations 
with Macedonia. "You want us to love people who hate us. They 
hate us like the IRA hates Britain, and they claim one-third of 
my country," he said. 
  Mr Pangalos said that he could not promise that Greece would 
establish diplomatic relations with Macedonia even if all the 
conditions set by the Greek government were met. 
  Asked why he would not accept repeated declarations by the 
Macedonian prime minister, Kiro Gligorov, that his government 
had no wish to alter its frontier with Greece, Mr Pangalos 
replied: "They have added a codicil to their constitution, 
reassuring the Bulgarians about the frontier issue. They are 
afraid of the Bulgarians and the Serbians and the Albanians 
--all of whom have territorial claims on them--but they are not 
afraid of us." 
  Greece's preoccupation with Macedonia and its perceived 
sympathy with Serbia is a continuing embarrassment to the rest 
of the European Union. Some senior commissioners also fear that 
the Greek presidency will not be able to give a strong lead on 
key problems facing the European Union. 
  The European Commission shares the Greek concern to defend 
social rights but fears that Mr Papandreou's Pasok [Panhellenic 
Socialist Party] government will have no interest in pushing for 
liberalisation of telecommunications and other services--which 
are at the core of the economic recovery agenda backed by the 
other EU states. 

