BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, May 11 (CTK) -- The Slovak Foreign 
Ministry reiterated its willingness to continue talks with 
Budapest on the division of the Danube's waters between the 
Gabcikovo derivation canal on Slovakia's territory and the 
Danube's old course, in a note extended to the Hungarian Embassy 
today, the ministry told CTK. 
  The Ministry proposed that talks take place on May 18-19 in 
Bratislava. "It is already the second date proposed by the 
ministry for talks on the temporary water regime on the river 
and it would therefore welcome it if the Hungarian side said it 
was ready for such talks," the note says. It says that such 
talks should help achieve goals proposed by the European Union 
(EU) experts. "It is necessary, however, to take into account 
the possibilities of technical realization and economic impact 
of individual solutions," the note says. 
  Beside the dispute over the Gabcikovo hydroelectric project 
itself which was taken to the International Court of Justice in 
The Hague last July, Bratislava and Budapest are also in 
disagreement over the temporary water regime on the Danube to 
function until a verdict is passed in The Hague. 
  Hungary demands that Slovakia let more water to flow into 
the 
Danube's old course even at the cost of restricting electricity 
production at Gabcikovo, while Slovak experts say that the 
improvement of the state of the Danube's tributaries on the 
Hungarian side which are drying up does not so much depend on 
the flow of water but rather on the construction of the system 
of weirs which would raise the water level to such an extent as 
it flows also into the tributaries. However, the Hungarian 
Parliament rejected the construction of the weirs and decided to 
supply the tributaries with water with the help of pumps. An 
attempt to reach a compromise undertaken by EU Commission 
experts has so far failed. 
  Nevertheless, Bratislava made it clear it is willing to be 
accommodating when during a meeting of the two countries' 
environment ministers in mid-April in Bratislava Juraj Hrasko 
promised to his Hungarian counterpart to double the amount of 
water flowing through Mosoni-Duna tributary on Hungarian 
territory as of May 15. 

