BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Today President of the Republic of 
Kosova Dr. Ibrahim Rugova arrived in Oslo, Norway, at the 
invitation of the North Atlantic Assembly to attend its summer 
session. From Oslo, our correspondent Antigona Qena reports: 
  [Qena] On arrival at the Norwegian capital, President of the 
Republic of Kosova Dr. Ibrahim Rugova held a series of very 
important meetings at the Norwegian Parliament. He was received 
by Mrs. Tristikoll Drandahl, chairman of the parliament. She 
stressed that this is a rare occasion for her to meet President 
Rugova and receive direct information on the situation in the 
region, which is a preoccupation of the entire European and 
international community. 
  Chairman Rugova briefed the interlocutor on the grave 
situation in Kosova, stressing that it is becoming increasingly 
dangerous and that action by the international community is more 
than necessary. That is why Norway, as a country with experience 
in the diplomacy of prevention and good will, can make a 
contribution in the creation of appropriate circumstances for a 
open dialogue. 
  Mr. Drandahl promised that her country will continue to make 
the situation known and do its utmost in international forums. 
  After this meeting, President Rugova held a long talk in the 
parliament building with representatives of Norwegian political 
parties and nongovernmental organizations, committed to the 
Kosova issue, such as Amnesty International, the Norwegian 
Helsinki Committee, the Foreigners Organization Noah, Redbarna 
Children Association, SOS Racism, the Association of Teachers, 
Presidency of Norwegian Churches, etc. 
  Stressing that he highly assessed the commitment rendered so 
far by the Norwegian Government, political parties, and 
particularly by nongovernmental organizations, Dr. Rugova made a 
general and detailed presentation of the situation in Kosova and 
informed them on the political project on an independent and 
neutral Kosova. 
  President Rugova held a meeting with interest with Mr. 
Hackon 
Glancenburg, chairman of the Foreign Committee of the Norwegian 
Parliament. They stressed the necessity to preserve and develop 
contacts in on official and nongovernmental levels between 
Kosova and Norway. 
  After the meeting at the Norwegian Parliament, President 
Rugova held a news conference, where he answered many questions 
by Norwegian and foreign reporters. The news conference gave 
the impression that since the first day, special attention was 
paid to this visit of the president of the Republic of Kosova. 
  Tomorrow, Rugova will meet Norwegian Foreign Minister Bjorn 
Tore Godal and other Norwegian officials. He will also address 
the Civil Affairs Committee of the North Atlantic Alliance, at 
whose invitation President Rugova is visiting Oslo. 

