BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondent Galina Gridneva] </F>
  [Text] Dushanbe 6 April, TASS -- "The people of Tajikistan 
pin their most sincere hopes on the negotiations process, 
expecting it to bring the country civic peace and national 
unity, to end the confrontation and stabilise the situation on 
the Tajik-Afghan border," ITAR-TASS was told by Vice-Chairman of 
the Tajik Council of Ministers Mahmadsaid Ubaydulloyev, who is 
responsible for the work of security structures in the Tajik 
Government. 
  "From the very first days of the restoration of the 
constitutional system in the country, the Tajik leadership was 
ready to open a dialogue with all the constructive opposition 
forces that share the idea of settling all the existing problems 
by political means and building a democratic, secular, 
law-governed state," the vice-premier added. He noted the 
important political role played by members of the Commonwealth 
of Independent States, primarily Russia, and also the United 
Nations in the organisation of the negotiations. 
  Touching on the terms advanced by some representatives of 
the 
opposition, who want for a coalition government to be formed in 
the Republic, the prime minister said that the present 
government was fully legitimate, because it was elected by the 
country's Supreme Soviet. "As a matter of fact," he added, 
"this question, as well as the republic's future state pattern, 
can be decided only by the Tajik people, and not by individual 
groups of leaders." The vice premier did not rule out the 
possibility of a referendum, which could be held for this 
purpose. 
  Ubaydulloyev cautiously commented on the two tough 
statements 
released by the press centre of the Tajik procurator-general's 
office and published by the local press at the end of March. 
They demanded the trial of several leaders of the armed Tajik 
opposition, who were accused of state crimes last spring. Legal 
proceedings were instituted against them. He only said that 
"every citizen of Tajikistan, whether a rank and file person or 
head of the Republic, should answer for his deeds in accordance 
with the national laws if criminal proceedings are instituted 
against him. This is even more correct if we want to build up a 
law-governed state. However, the last dot in this question 
should be put by the people themselves." 

