Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article ``Chemical weapons or chemical war?'' by V. </F>
Voronov, L. Fedorov under the rubric ``Current Topics''] 
  [Text] Two significant events occurred in the world of 
chemical disarmament in the second decade of January 1993. On 13 
January in Paris, Russia signed the Convention on banning the 
development, production, stockpiling, and use of chemical 
weapons and its destruction and together with her, more than 100 
other countries affixed their signatures. At a joint meeting of 
the Committee on Industry and Power and the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources at the Russian Federation 
Supreme Council in Moscow on 19 January, the committees rejected 
the very concept of the comprehensive program of stage-by-stage 
destruction of chemical weapons in Russia submitted by the 
Convention Committee on Chemical and Biological Weapons. Almost 
no one objects to the fact that chemical weapons must be 
destroyed. Yet such a seemingly noble 
cause--disarmament--engenders numerous problems which are not 
only economic but also environmental, social, and political in 
nature. In itself, parting with chemical weapons does not 
signify an end to chemical war but merely its transition to a 
new--environmental--phase. The experience of our civilization 
reveals that it is not easy to untangle the knot of 
contradictions without a detailed study of history. 
Consequently, we asked two professionals in their respective 
fields, the historian Vladimir Voronov who recently completed 
graduate studies at Russia's Humanities Academy and Doctor of 
Chemical Sciences Lev Fedorov to talk about the development of 
chemical weapons production in our country. The facts which they 
are presenting here are drawn from declassified archives, 
official statements, and private conversations with people in 
the know. This is how the conversation turned out. 
  Chemist. From the chemical viewpoint, the most 
``prolific'' part of our chemical weapons in the last 70 years 
can be divided into four categories--yperites [mustard gases], 
choking chemical warfare (OV) agents (phosgene and diphosgene), 
arsenic-containing chemical warfare agents (lewisite, adamsite, 
and diphenylchlorarsine), and finally, highly toxic 
phosphorus-containing nerve agents (sarin, soman, and V-gas). 
Production of the first three groups falls within the period 
from the 1920s to the late 1950s. The last category is the 
``accomplishment'' of the 1960s-1980s. In particular, mustard 
gases formed the bulk of our chemical arsenal up to the 1950s 
while everything began back in the 1920s. 
  Mustard Gases 
  Historian. The first mustard gas batch was 
produced in Moscow by the Olginskiy plant which was nominally 
listed as experimental production of the Anilintrest. This 
happened between 30 Aug and 3 Sep 24. Eighteen pounds of the 
products were produced. It is interesting to note the way this 
formulation was described in those years: production of one 
pound of the substance "H" called for 2,006 buckets of 95% 
alcohol, 0.9 pounds of technical sulfur chloride, and 10 pounds 
of commercial sulfuric acid. 
  Chemist. Substance ``H'' is the code name of 
technical mustard gas which can be produced by the simplest 
technology through ethylene. It usually contains a lot of 
impurities--from 20 to 50% (distilled mustard gas is 
referred 
to as HD). Cloaked in this manner of clothing, mustard gas can 
be traced through all of our prior documents. Yet in the 
chemical language, this formulation appears rather prosaic: 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UST-002LC-07A>           Figure </FIG>




  Our military was experimenting with special enthusiasm with 
low freezing and viscous formulations. 
  Historian. By the way, our military learned to use 
mustard gas in 1927-1933 under the leadership of German military 
chemists. This enabled the teachers to conceal their work with 
chemical warfare agents banned under the Treaty of Versailles in 
the USSR. The first serious German-Soviet mustard gas tests were 
conducted at the edge of today's central chemical warfare 
testing range in Shikhany (Saratov oblast). The first attempt to 
set up production of mustard gas in the town of Ivashchenkovo 
(subsequently Trotsk which is now called Chapayevsk in Samara 
oblast) in 1923-1926 also involved the Germans. Yet it was 
unsuccessful, so large-scale technical mustard gas production 
began only in the 1930s in Chepayevsk at the Bersol plant (now 
the chemical fertilizer plant). Generally speaking, mustard gas 
was produced at two new chemical construction projects--the 
giants of the first five-year plan. In 1929--at the Berezniki 
Chemical Works (soda plant in Perm oblast), the other giant is 
the chemical works in Bobriki (subsequently Stalinogorsk in 
Moscow oblast and today--Novomoskovsk in Tula oblast). Its 
design mustard gas capacity is 9,000 t/yr. Here we should add 
production of viscous yperite with a capacity of 6,000 t. Other 
yperite producers at the turn of the 1920s and 1930s which can 
be mentioned include the Bogorodskiy and Ugreshskiy plants (both 
in Moscow) as well as others. By 1935, the production capacity 
of our mustard gas facilities reached 35,000 t. This was without 
the Chapayevsk plant and high-volume production of 
ethylene-propylene low-freezing mustard gas according to V.S. 
Zaykov's technology set up just before the war at Kaprolaktam 
(Dzerzhinsk) which, it seems, lasted longer than the rest. 
  Choking Agents 
  Chemist. In closing the ``mustard gas'' page in 
our history, we must add that during the war, attempts to 
produce mustard gas in Russia alone were made at 30 plants, 
including plants in Omsk and Tomsk where mustard gas facilities 
were constructed with U.S. assistance. Yet technical yperite "H" 
is a relatively simple product while some of our plants had a 
rather broad chemical warfare orientation. For example, the 
Chapayevsk and Novomoskovsk plants also produced choking 
agents--phosgene and diphosgene--in addition to mustard gas: 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UST-002LC-08A></FIG>




              Yet only trace amounts of arsenic trichloride and 
_g_-lewisite are contained in the mixture while the 
_b_-lewisite 
concentration may reach 10%. Thus, the combat origin of 
lewisite is formed by _a_-lewisite which develops during the 
synthesis in the form of two isomers: 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UST-002LC-08C></FIG>




              The most toxic trans-isomer is predominant in the mixture. 
  Historian. The history of lewisite in the USSR was 
thornier than that of other chemical warfare agents. In 1935, 
the Army announced an annual need for 1,000 t of lewisite but 
did not receive a single ton from the industry. The need to 
obtain lewisite was repeatedly reflected in government decrees. 
In 1937, the chief of the Chemical Warfare Directorate of the 
workers' and peasants' Red Army complained in a memorandum to I. 
Stalin and V. Molotov that the Berezniki Chemical Works still 
had not set up planned lewisite production. 
  Chemist. The reason isquite simple--there was no 
calcium carbide without which cheap acetylene cannot be produced: 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UST-002LC-09A></FIG>




              In Central Russia, calcium carbide production was set up 
just 
before the war at the Chernaya Rechka plant (Dzerzhinsk). This 
was what gave an impetus to lewisite production at the 
Kaprolaktam (Dzerzhinsk) and in Chapayevsk. By the way, a third 
kiln was added in 1943 to the two operating furnaces. 
Altogether, attempts were made to engage at least 13 plants in 
lewisite production in Russia alone. 
  Now we are left with the task of figuring out how to destroy 
today's lewisite stockpiles without any detriment to our planet 
(6.4 thousand t in the town of Kambarka in Udmurtia and 0.2 
thousand t in the village of Gornyy, Saratov oblast). Moreover, 
a lot of munitions with our lewisite stockpiles were sunk some 
time ago in the Arctic Ocean and buried in the ground at various 
locations in Russia. 
  Historian. The Soviet Army was actively preparing 
to employ three other arsenic-containing substances in the last 
war--adamsite, diphenylchlorarsine, and diphenylcyanarsine. 
Adamsite production was set up at the Kineshma chemical plant 
imeni M.V. Frunze (Ivanovo oblast; it is listed as the adamsite 
plant in the documents). In 1935, the plant capacity reached 
3,000 t/yr, and in 1937, plans to increase it to 10-12,000 t 
with a prospect of raising it further to 17,000 t were reported 
to I. Stalin. Diphenylchlorarsine production was related to the 
operation of the Derbenevsk (Moscow) and Shchelkovo (Moscow 
oblast) plants. From the production viewpoint, production of 
these chemical warfare agents was probably not very complicated. 
  Chemist. What's true is true. The feedstocks for 
producing both items cannot be classified as especially scarce 
(we shall cite one of the synthesis versions): 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UST-002LC-09B></FIG>




              And the approach to producing these substances was also on a 
large scale: in Russia alone, nine plants were producing 
adamsite during the war and at least eight--diphenylchlorarsine 
and diphenylcyanarsine. 
  We should note that the attitude toward arsenic-containing 
chemical warfare agents has undergone a certain evolution. 
Whereas they have been regarded as irritant agents before, today 
these substances are no longer treated as chemical weapons, and 
they are not even mentioned in the Chemical Disarmament 
Convention. Yet arsenic-containing compounds remained an 
environmental weapon or a weapon against ourselves. 
  Historian. This aspect of the problem became 
evident quite a long time ago. Back in 1937, it was reported to 
I. Stalin that there was no satisfactory solution to the problem 
of waste-water treatment in arsenic-containing chemical warfare 
agent production. The issue of discharges was not given high 
priority by the authorities either then or later on. As for the 
fate of chemical munitions, the decision taken by the military 
was surprisingly simple. In one highly classified earlier 
document dated 1989, we read then between 1946 and 1978, 17,543 
aerial bombs with adamsite warheads were sunk by our naval 
forces at two locations in the Baltic Sea. 
  Chemist. I should note, by the way, that today 
much is being said about sinking the captured German munitions. 
This is not so. Most of the munitions were ours. As a matter of 
fact, there were not two but at least ten sinking locations. 
  From the viewpoint of environmental safety, the formulated 
problem is exceptionally urgent. Suffice it to say that the 
Convention signed on 13 January bans such methods of parting 
with chemical weapons as "sinking at any reservoirs, burial in 
the ground, or combustion in the open air." This is why the 
draft program for destroying our chemical weapons was rejected 
on 19 January. It absolutely failed to take into account the 
fact that we had to free ourselves not only from available 
chemical weapons but from much of what had been done many years 
earlier. We are talking about the ecological impact of the 
actions undertaken by our military and related to the 
wide-ranging and thoughtless sinking, burial, and burning of 
hundreds of thousands of tons of old chemical weapons as well as 
the activity of our industry involved in producing these weapons. 
  Phosphorus-Containing Chemical Warfare Agents 
  These 1989 documents provide food for very serious thought. 
For example, one of the documents from the Politburo of the 
Central Committee of the CPSU referring to foreign press reports 
mentions the possible transfer of production technologies of 
some of our chemical warfare agents to Middle Eastern countries. 
Most likely, the agent mentioned is sarin. This is a highly 
toxic phosphorus-containing nerve agent which, as well as soman, 
was produced at the Khimprom Production Association in Volgograd: 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UST-002LC-10A></FIG>




              Today, these phosphorus-containing chemical warfare agents 
are stored, according to official reports, at five arsenals 
scattered throughout Russia--in Kizner (Udmurtia), Leonidovka 
(Penza oblast), Maradykovskoye (Kirovsk oblast), Pochepa 
(Bryansk oblast), and Shchuchye (Kurgan oblast). The issue of 
the methods to destroy chemical warfare agents remains 
absolutely unclear. In any case, it will be a long time before 
these of our "treasures" belong to the domain of history. 
  Historian. The problem of binary chemical weapons, 
primarily phosphorus-containing chemical warfare agents, has 
been actively discussed in foreign press in the last decades. 
Yet even we have not remained on the sidelines. I can recall 
that back in the fall of 1989, our Foreign Minister E. 
Shevardnadze proposed at a session of the UN General Assembly 
that the Americans give up the development of binary chemical 
warfare systems on a parity basis. 
  Chemist. Yes, the development of binary weapons 
and even multicomponent weapons is a complicated technological 
breakthrough and a serious new step in the race toward chemical 
death. The source components (precursors) have a low toxicity 
and are convenient to store, while the synthesis location of the 
highly toxic chemical warfare agent from these components is 
transferred from the reactor at an industrial site directly to 
the munitions. The moment of synthesis occurs during the flight 
toward the probable enemy. Strictly speaking, there can be many 
such binary pairs. For example, the following can be used for 
our V-gas: 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UST-002LC-10C></FIG>



              Yet the issue of binary weapons and phosphorus-containing 
chemical warfare agents in general is a subject for a separate 
conversation; likewise, the issue of environmentally safe 
destruction of chemical warfare agents and environmental cleanup 
of Russia's contaminated territories should be discussed 
separately. 


