BFN 

    [Editorial Report] PWV 
  Johannesburg SAPA in English at 1502 GMT on 21 May reports 
that "a 13-year-old schoolgirl was shot in the head and is in a 
critical condition after the car she was travelling in came 
under fire on the N1 freeway near Ennerdale on Saturday. The 
girl's father, Mr Monty Wilken, who was driving the car, told 
police he heard a shot and when he turned around he noticed that 
his daughter, Sylvia, was bleeding. The right-hand rear window 
of the car had been shattered." 
<H5>  East Rand </H5>
  Johannesburg Radio South Africa Network in English at 1600 
GMT on 21 May reports that "a policeman has been killed in a 
shootout between policemen and suspected robbers in the 
crime-ridden area of Alrode on the East Rand. A suspect and two 
other policemen were wounded and one of the policemen is in 
critical condition in hospital. The incident happened after the 
police received information and erected a road block. A vehicle 
carrying between five and seven armed men crashed into the road 
block and shooting broke out. Most of the suspects escaped. An 
AK-47 rifle and three handguns were seized. In another incident 
in the PWV [Pretoria, Witwatersrand, Vereeniging], a bank in 
Southdale was robbed of more than 200,000 rands this morning." 
<H5>  Vaal Triangle </H5>
  Johannesburg SAPA in English at 1505 GMT on 21 May reports 
that "the body of a Vaal Triangle hostel resident was found by 
police on Saturday near the kwaMaziza hostel where he lived. Mr 
Thamanqa Ngethu, believed to be in his 30s, had been tied up and 
stabbed in the neck. No arrests have been made." 
<H5>  Natal </H5>
  Johannesburg Radio South Africa Network in English at 1600 
GMT on 21 May reports that "at least six people have been shot 
in two separate incidents south of Durban. In Umlazi a man was 
killed and three others were wounded when armed men opened fire 
on a taxi. In another incident a man and a woman were admitted 
to hospital after shots were fired at their house in Malukazi, 
and at Inanda near Durban shots were fired at a patrolling 
Internal Stability Unit vehicle. No one was injured in the 
incident." 

