CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Hoang Duc Dam: "Military Region 9 </F>
Strengthens Military Training To Keep Up With Combat Readiness 
Needs, Task"] 
  [Text] In recent years, the situation on the borders, along 
the coast, at sea, and on the islands of Military Region 9 was 
quite complicated. According to incomplete data, from January to 
September 1993, foreign aircraft violated our air space over the 
borders 31 times; people crossed the borders to flee the country 
1,200 times; and people illegally entered the country more than 
200 times. Twenty armed robberies and 17 cases of property 
stealing took place; and people smuggled goods across the 
borders on average about 1,000 times a day. Considerable 
losses of lives and properties were inflicted on the people 
living along the borders. 
  At sea, since the beginning of this year, aircraft violated 
our air space in pursuit of our fishing boats 8 times; warships 
of the Thai Navy violated our territorial sea 26 times as they 
openly chased after, searched, and seized 6 of our boats; 
confiscated fishing equipment and properties from 9 other boats; 
and captured 54 fishermen. Thai fishing boats violated our 
territorial sea to illegally catch fish in average 30-40 times 
per boat per day. Cambodian fishing patrol boats also violated 
our waters 78 times to round up and fine the boats of our 
fishermen. Piracy frequently took place in the area of the 
"Pirates" islands; 15 cases involving losses of lives and 
properties destroyed the peace of mind of our fishermen. 
  Inside the region, the reactionaries who took advantage of 
ethnic and religious issues and the criminals who had refused to 
be reeducated caused disturbances and disorder. 
  In the face of the above-mentioned situation, the issue that 
the armed forces of the military region had to face was to make 
sure that building and training satisfy the needs of the combat 
readiness task, both immediate and in the long term, and 
contribute to safeguarding national sovereignty and maintaining 
political security, order, and social safety in the military 
region. 
  We carried out the directive on military training and 
political education in 1993 issued by the commander of the 
military region: "In 1993, we must continue to guide training 
toward being basic, realistic, steady, and suitable for the 
needs and task of individual forces and units, and suitable for 
the characteristic terrain of the military region, the 
existing table of organization and equipment of individual 
units, the combat objectives that have been set, and the 
fighting realities and traditional fighting patterns of Vietnam 
and of the military region's armed forces, thus making sure to 
provide our forces with three arms, to properly fulfill the 
assigned tasks, and to defeat the enemy under any circumstances." 
  Right from the beginning of the year, before starting the 
main-session training, in addition to teaching and understanding 
the task, plan for, and principle of training and organizing 
advanced training for cadres according to their ranks, the 
military region had been holding seminars to have in-depth 
discussions about renovating the contents and methods of 
training for larger units (main-force divisions, brigades, and 
regiments, and local battalions). On the basis of the technical 
and tactical documents issued by the General Staff, seminar 
participants discussed applying the training of troops to delta 
and river-waterway terrains for the purpose of compiling 
appropriate and realistic training curricula. 
  In the seminars, the issue that received a high degree of 
unanimity was the need to strengthen open-air training, with the 
amount of the latter accounting for 40 percent or more of the 
total training in each unit and for each individual. Depending 
on the task of a unit, the latter would choose an appropriate 
location for open-air training, normally a border area or a key 
point (central points, ethnic minority zones, religious areas, 
remote areas, and so on), with companies or battalions being 
rotated to take part in open-air operations. Open-air training 
should be aimed at satisfying these needs: to get used to the 
terrain, to train in adaptability and tenacity, to train in the 
concept of organizing regular-army discipline and order, to 
apply training to troops-management regulations, and to train in 
technical and tactical matters under the conditions of being 
stationed in river-waterway terrain and densely-populated areas. 
Mass proselyting should be combined with training to contribute 
to building the political base and to urge the youth to enroll 
in the army and to actively take part in providing the locality 
and people, particularly the families having few members, with 
labor. The time spent for open-air activities was 10 days or 
more, up to 1-2 months in the case of some units (depending on 
the training subjects and the political situation in the 
locality demanding a longer period of such training). 
  Almost all permanent forces in the military region 
(including 
the main force, local troops, armed services, and organs) have 
so far obtained good results from their work: Regiment H/Corps B 
went to the Tan Hiep religious zone (Kien Giang Province); 
Regiment M/Corps B30 to the remote U Minh area (Minh Hai 
Province); Regiment B/Corps B30, Artillery Brigade S, and 
Battalion N12/An Giang to the Hoa Hao Zone (An Giang Province); 
and Regiment C/Corps B29 to the border area of Dong Thap. The 
Phu Loi/Soc Trang Battalion, in 6 training operations, went 
through 24 villages in the region of Khmer population and the 
former resistance base area consisting of 4 of the province's 
districts --Vinh Long, Long My, My Xuyen, and Ke Sach. The 
Truong Dinh/Tien Giang Battalion and Battalion N87/Vinh Long 
went to as far as Dong Thap and An Giang border areas in the 
training operations that were coordinated with the local 
district companies and village militia forces in their 
exercises, in accordance with common defense plans. The 
military region's reconnaissance battalion also launched in the 
An Giang border area a training operation that was aimed at both 
improving its professional capabilities and fulfilling the task 
of ensuring combat readiness through coordination. 
  As for the militia and self-defense forces, in the past 
years, training was mainly based on the infantry training 
materials and curricula compiled by the Department of Militia 
and Self-Defense Forces. Using the terrain and traditional 
fighting methods adhered by the Mekong delta militia and 
self-defense forces, the military region recently gathered 
cadres of the local military schools to assign them the task of 
compiling specific training materials for the use of the militia 
and self-defense forces in the military region. These 
materials have been approved by the military region's 
Science-Industry Council and are being used to train local 
military cadres. These materials consist of three groups of 
lessons: political education (three lessons); self-made weapons, 
techniques, tactics for from individuals to platoons; and work 
to ensure rear-area activities in combat. Through their 
learning and discussions in training courses, most cadres found 
that the materials would respond better to terrain conditions 
and to the tasks and capabilities of the militia and 
self-defense forces and the locality. The militia and 
self-defense forces have so far obtained good results from 
training and from taking part in A2 exercises, which involved 
the troops' actual presence and the various assumed 
circumstances. As of September 1993, 851 villages and 1,125 
subwards already completed their exercises and made 
contributions to realistically improving their capabilities and 
usefulness in maintaining security, social order, and safety. 
The most outstanding event in May 1993 was the fact that Can Tho 
Province organized a combined force having as its backbone the 
militia and self-defense mobile forces of six districts, Can Tho 
City, and suburban villages; being 1,363-member strong (over 800 
members of the militia and self-defense forces; 90 members of 
the forces belonging to the provincial and district committees 
and sectors; 50 public security officers; and more than 400 
members of the provincial permanent force); and being sent in an 
operation to the O Mon-Thot Not region (around the Song Hau 
State Farm) to do combined open-air training and to carry out 
exercises aimed at defending villages and subwards. After that 
training phase, a program of training more recently was 
completed by the militia and self-defense forces in which they 
learned military technical and tactical matters to understand 
the terrain concerned so as to be ready to become mobile if 
necessary and at the same time to do mass proselyting work, to 
build the bases, to deter the bad elements, and to stabilize the 
situation in their area following the disturbances and 
demonstrations in Song Hau State Farm. This was an open-air 
training operation that brought about good results and offered 
the localities realistic usefulness in terms of maintaining 
political security and social order and safety. The local 
military organ was able to do this job because first of all it 
had properly fulfilled the staff's role in favor of the party 
committee echelons and administrations while trying to win the 
agreement and support of the latter and mass organizations; at 
the same time, it had cleverly combined the national defense 
expenditures and local budget, and the people's assistance as 
well, in order to ensure the rear-area activities in favor of 
the forces taking part in the open-air operation. 
  At sea, the military region paid attention to assuming 
leadership and training the sea self-defense forces for the 
purpose of properly combining the tasks of producing, catching, 
and marketing sea products with those of safeguarding the 
sovereignty and security in the waters of the military region. 
As to its forces, the military region has so far established 4 
naval groups, 20 flotillas, and 19 detachments, with a total of 
over 1,200 fishing boats being fully equipped with 
self-defense weapons and the necessary means of 
communications. The sea self-defense forces were trained in 
the Law of the Sea, how to identify foreign boats and ships, 
methods of coordinated communications aimed at chasing after and 
driving away foreign boats and ships during their violating 
Vietnam's waters, tactics used to chase after unidentified 
ships, techniques used to fire at targets at sea, and so on. The 
main units were the individual boats, which fully used the time 
they were anchored in port and the time they traveled back and 
forth for training. The military region also distributed work 
to naval groups and flotillas and regularly kept plans for sea 
activities for them to carry out in close coordination with 
border defense troops and the antiaircraft, air force, and naval 
forces stationed in the military region. As a result, both 
economic and national defense tasks were carried out quite 
successfully, with very obvious results being obtained. In the 
first 9 months of 1993, the sea self-defense forces caught 43 
foreign fishing boats as they illegally operated in our fishing 
grounds and drove away many unidentified boats as they violated 
our southwestern waters. Our catch was also considerably high: 
The Kien Giang naval group alone, in the first 9 months of 
1993, caught 11,000 tons of fish and shrimps, valued at a total 
of 32 billion dong, or 75 percent of the annual goal, with 27 
billion dong being put into the budget. 
  As the result of the above-mentioned activities, the 
military 
region helped to limit and considerably reduce the number of 
foreign boats that violated our waters to catch fish, as well as 
the acts of armed provocation of warships, pirates, smugglers, 
and so on. It also contributed to strengthening the confidence 
of the sea self-defense forces and fishermen, expanding the 
fishing grounds and increasing the catch, and supporting the 
exploration and extraction of gas, oil, and other resources in 
the southwestern sea within the jurisdiction of Military Region 
9. 
  In 1993, Military Region 9 showed an initial change in 
military training and political education along the line of the 
needs of its combat task, along with production, and in 
conformity with the terrain, equipment, and traditional fighting 
methods in favor of both the regular forces and the militia and 
self-defense forces. It is continuing to learn from experience 
in order to assume leadership and to multiply the typical acts, 
all for the purpose of carrying out even better the "Basic, 
realistic, and steady training" motto that the ministry has set 
forth. 

