Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter He Jun: "China and U.S. Join To Fight </F>
Drug Trafficking"] 
  [Text] China and the United States have agreed to 
strengthen their co-operation in the fight against drug 
trafficking and illegal immigration, said officials of the 
Ministry of Public Security. 
  The two sides reached the consensus on Tuesday [25 January] 
during talks between Bai Jingfu, Vice-Director of the National 
Narcotics Control Committee and Robert Gelbard, the U.S. 
Assistant Secretary of State for international narcotics matters. 
  Bai and Gelbard exchanged views on fighting international 
narcotics crimes, especially those originating in Asia's 
notorious "Golden Triangle," the sources said. 
  The two sides agreed on the necessity of strengthening their 
efforts in fighting the drug trade. 
  The Chinese side said it hoped the U.S. would adopt measures 
to remove any barriers impeding the two nations from working 
together to stop the drug trade. 
  Gelbard was quoted by the sources as saying he would "try 
his 
best" to do so. 
  Gelbard also held talks on illegal immigration with Zhang 
Hongxi, Director of the Consular Affairs Department of the 
Foreign Ministry. 
  During their meeting Zhang outlined factors contributing to 
smuggling and illegal immigration, reiterated China's opposition 
to such activities and discussed what steps have been taken to 
combat them. 
  Zhang asked the U.S. to clamp down on the so-called 
"snakeheads"--those involved in smuggling Chinese people to the 
U.S. 
  He said that China opposes the U.S. Government offering 
political asylum to these smugglers. 
  Such people, he said, falsely claim they are fleeing 
political persecution in China. 
  And he added that China's view on granting asylum 
indiscreetly is that it encourages smuggling. 
  The Chinese officials said that normal exchanges between the 
two countries should continue and that they hoped the U.S. 
Government would help Chinese who apply for visas from the 
country. 
  Gelbard said the U.S. is formulating new laws to crack down 
on international crime organizations. 
  He also said the US is willing to strengthen co-operation 
with China to combat crime. 
  And relevant U.S. departments are ready to work with their 
Chinese counterparts, the U.S. official said. 
  At the meeting, the two sides agreed to establish an ad hoc 
consultation system, further strengthen bilateral exchanges and 
co-operation between law-enforcing departments, exchange 
information and take effective measures to punish those who 
smuggle people. 
  Describing his talks with the Chinese officials as "frank, 
friendly and productive," Gelbard told reporters that both sides 
"expect greater cooperation at all levels." 
  Gelbard left Beijing yesterday for Fujian, Guangdong and 
Yunnan provinces en route to Thailand and Hong Kong. 

