BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Yuriy Stroganov: "There Will Be No `Baltic </F>
Bloc.' Not Yet...."] 
  [Text] Vilnius -- The meeting of the presidents of Latvia, 
Lithuania, and Estonia in Palanga has caused journalists to 
start talking about the creation of a "Baltic bloc." However, 
A. Brazauskas has stated that there was no talk of creating any 
kind of "bloc." All that is happening is that multilateral 
treaties will be concluded which take into account the three 
Baltic states' joint actions, he noted. 
  On 1 April, for example, the treaty on free trade among the 
Baltic countries went into force. An agreement on social 
guarantees for citizens of any Baltic state working or studying 
in another Baltic state will be prepared at government level. 
  The strengthening of ties among the Baltic countries as well 
as their contacts with neighboring regions will shorten the path 
toward European integration, the Lithuanian president noted. 
  Considerable attention was paid to cooperation with the 
so-called Visegrad group of states -- Poland, the Czech 
Republic, Slovakia, and Hungary. Lennart Meri, for example, 
proposed that the concept of a "North-South axis" be launched, 
which would mean using the formula "five plus three plus four" 
(the five Nordic countries, the three Baltic states, and the 
four Visegrad states). 
  The conference stressed the importance of Ukraine's decision 
on joining NATO's "Partnership for Peace" program. This is 
because Ukraine, in the opinion of the Baltic presidents, will 
play an increasingly important role in the long-term guarantees 
of security and stability in Europe and in particular near to 
the Baltic Sea region. Clearly this is being done in the hope 
of creating a Baltic-Black Sea alliance, which is supported by 
politicians both in Ukraine and the Baltic countries. In this 
light the recent visit to Lithuania by Romanian President Ion 
Iliescu does not seem surprising. He also confirmed his support 
for the creation of such an alliance. 
  In the view of the presidents of Latvia, Lithuania, and 
Estonia, this will also be helped by the bilateral treaties 
recently signed between Ukraine and Lithuania and between 
Ukraine and Estonia. 
  The Palanga meeting paid special attention to questions of 
the withdrawal of the Russian troops from Latvia and Estonia. 
In a joint statement the presidents confirmed their conviction 
that Russia's entire Armed Forces must be withdrawn before 31 
August 1994. They urged the international community to continue 
monitoring the situation to ensure that this deadline is 
observed. The Lithuanian and Estonian presidents welcomed the 
troop withdrawal agreement reached during talks between Latvia 
and Russia. They also hope that a similar accord will be 
reached between Estonia and Russia. 
  The Skrunda radar station, on which Latvia and Russia have 
apparently already reached agreement, was again in the sphere of 
attention of the heads of state. They stressed the need for the 
participation of international organizations in ensuring the 
strict observance of the use of the Skrunda station to ensure 
that the population of this zone does not suffer any adverse 
consequences and that the equipment is not used as a military 
base and does not present a threat to Latvia's sovereignty. 
  The presidents also expressed the wish that international 
specialists take part in the dismantling of the nuclear 
equipment at Paldiski. They also believe that the process of 
strengthening political and economic relations with the European 
Union [EU] should move toward the conclusion of treaties on free 
trade with the EU. They expressed the hope that a treaty on 
associate membership will be concluded no later than the end of 
1994. 
  The presidents agreed among themselves on the holding of the 
so-called "three presidents' sessions" at least twice a year. 
The aim of their meetings is to develop closer cooperation 
between the Baltic states and to coordinate strategy on 
questions of security and foreign policy. 
  But the idea of creating a Baltic Council did not meet with 
support. The point is that such a council, by analogy with the 
Nordic Council, should embrace broader -- parliamentary and 
government -- structures. The presidents were not prepared for 
that. But everything has its day. 

