Language: <F P=105> Burmese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lieutenant General Myo Nyunt, chairman of the 
committee for holding the 49th Armed Forces Day and the 
management committee for Armed Forces Day and commander of the 
Yangon [Rangoon] Military Command headquarters, met with and 
addressed officers, noncommissioned officers, and rank and file 
who will participate in the military parade at Hlaing Stadium in 
Hlaing Township at 0800 today. 
  Speaking at the meeting, Lt. Gen. Myo Nyunt said the Defense 
Services, which have been fighting various armed organizations 
since 1948, have been modernizing the Army, the Air Force and 
the Navy step by step and have remained consolidated and strong 
to this day. The Defense Services have been organized and 
trained in order to serve the three cardinal causes 
[nondisintegration of the Union; nondisintegration of national 
unity; perpetuation of national sovereignty]. 
  Lt. Gen. Myo Nyunt said our Defense Services must have 
quality and be one with the people, constantly striving to 
maintain their prowess. Today's Defense Services are 
endeavoring to build a peaceful and modern nation and the major 
requirement for this endeavor is peace. 
  At a news conference held on 16 February in Bangkok, U.S. 
Congressman Mr. Bill Richardson said: The Burmese should settle 
the Burmese issue, and not outsiders. He also said: I am not a 
Burma expert. Nonetheless, I have been involved in human rights 
in Burma in connection with an amendment that provided financial 
assistance to some Burmese dissident groups. 
  Lt. Gen. Myo Nyunt said it was therefore necessary to 
constantly expose those organizations opposed to the government. 
Likewise, he said, some organizations who cannot bear to see 
the forthcoming 49th Armed Forces Day ceremony because it 
precedes the golden anniversary of the Defense Services are 
likely to resort to overt and political means to receive 
assistance from armed organizations in the jungles, to instigate 
people from behind, and to infiltrate the economic sector by 
manipulating rice prices and causing high prices of commodities 
to create hardship among consumers. 
  Continuing, Lt. Gen. Myo Nyunt said external radio stations 
and certain organizations and persons who pine for the outsiders 
have plans, as in the past, to collude in creating impatience 
and anger among the members of the Defense Services from various 
military commands and divisions who will be marching in the 49th 
Armed Forces Day parade in order to get what they want according 
to their plan. 
  Those opposing us are using force as well as subtle peaceful 
means and if these methods fail they are likely to resort to 
unrest. Therefore, it is necessary for members of the Defense 
Services to uphold the motto "Plotting to cause the 
disintegration of the Defense Services is unacceptable; those 
striving to cause the disintegration of the Defense Services are 
our enemy" and to remain undaunted despite attempts to frighten 
you. He urged those present to have political, military, 
administrative, and economic awareness and to be vigilant about 
security. In accordance with the belief that the strength of 
the nation lies within, it will be necessary to join forces with 
the strength of members of the Union Solidarity and Development 
Association. 

