BFN 

<F P=106> ["Report on the Implementation of Xinjiang's Budget for 1993 </F>
and its Draft Budget for 1994" delivered by Gong Jinniu, 
director of Regional Finance Department, to the Second Session 
of the Eighth Xinjiang Regional People's Congress on 24 February 
1994"] 
  [Text] Deputies: 
  Being entrusted by the people's government of the autonomous 
region, I now submit the report on the implementation of the 
Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region's budget for 1993 and its draft 
budget for 1994 for your examination and approval. 
<H5>  1. Implementation of the Autonomous Region's Budget for 1993 </H5>
  In 1993, guided by the guidelines of the 14th CPC National 
Congress and the Third Plenary Session of 14th CPC Central 
Committee, the autonomous region earnestly implemented the 
series of important measures of the party central committee and 
the State Council for strengthening macroeconomic regulation and 
control, earnestly carried out the resolutions of the first 
session of the eighth regional people's congress, and deepened 
reform in various areas, and further opened to the outside 
world, thus achieving new progress in developing the economy and 
other undertakings. On this basis, the budget was implemented 
well, and revenue income was considerably more than that 
received in 1992. Basically, expenditures were able to meet the 
needs for economic and social development. 
  The 1993 budget, approved at the first session of the eighth 
regional people's congress, is as follows: revenue 2.772 
billion yuan; expenditure 4.554 billion yuan. In the course of 
implementing the budget, it was partially readjusted with the 
approval of the fourth meeting of the standing committee of the 
eighth regional people's congress last September. After this, 
the central authority readjusted the revenue and expenditure 
figures in the region's budget. The readjusted budget is as 
follows: revenue 2.83 billion yuan and expenditure 6.634 
billion yuan. 
  The autonomous region's 1993 revenues and expenditures are 
expected to be as follows: revenue is expected to reach 3.47 
billion yuan, or 122.61 percent of the fiscal budget (the 
readjusted budget, same below) of 2.83 billion yuan, 
representing 640 million yuan more than the budgeted figure or 
an increase of 863 million yuan or 33.08 percent over 1992; 
expenditure is expected to amount to 6.446 billion yuan 
(including 229 million for workers' pay raises readjusted in the 
fourth quarter of 1993; this amount was listed under other 
categories of expenditures), or 97.17 percent of the fiscal 
budget of 6.634 billion yuan, representing an increase of 837 
million or 14.92 percent over 1992 (an increase of 608 million 
or 10.84 percent after deducting the amount to pay for workers' 
wage increases). 
  The main revenue figures are expected to be as follows: 
Industrial and business tax revenues are expected to total 3.146 
billion yuan, which is 123.37 percent of the budgeted figure, 
surpassing the budgeted figure by 596 million yuan and 
representing an increase of 819 million yuan or 35.19 percent 
over 1992; taxes from agriculture, animal husbandry, special 
agricultural and forestry products, the using of arable land, 
and contracts will be 136 million yuan, up 3.86 percent over the 
previous year; after profits are set against losses, 
enterprises' income will be 54 million yuan from canceled 
stocks, which is 52 million yuan short of the budgeted figure 
and represents 18 million yuan of fewer stocks canceled compared 
with 1992. Actual revenue from grain will be 42 million yuan 
less than the budgeted figure after deducting 59 million of 
losses in 1993 (used as grain price subsidies for workers of 
enterprises and institutions). In 1993, the autonomous region's 
revenues rose by a large margin, surpassing the previous year's 
figure by 863 million yuan. The main reasons are: first, the 
region earnestly implemented the CPC Central Committee's 
Document No. 6 and strengthened overall regulation and control 
over its economy. Production expanded, the market was brisk, 
and revenue sources increased. Business tax increased by 260 
million yuan (not including the income from raised tax rates) 
due to the expansion of commodity circulation and the increase 
in retail sales; second, the region strengthened tax collection 
and management, resolutely put a stop to new tax exemptions and 
reductions, and recovered back taxes; and third, the central 
authorities raised the tax rate for Xinjiang's petroleum 
products, started levying a crude oil tax, changed the rules for 
collecting taxes from processed crude oil products, and raised 
the tax rate for retail businesses. These policies will result 
in a tax income increase of 280 million yuan. 
  The main expenditures are expected to break down as 
follows: Capital construction expenditures, 650 million yuan, 
an increase of 26 million yuan or 4.1 percent over 1992; 
expenditures for tapping the potential of and transforming 
enterprises, 158 million yuan, up 37.01 percent over the 
previous year; expenses for three scientific and technological 
projects, 41 million yuan, up 23.23 percent over 1992; expenses 
for support of rural production, 304 million yuan, up 3.89 
percent over 1992; expenses for agricultural, animal husbandry, 
forestry, water conservation, and weather departments, 370 
million yuan, up 7.07 percent over the previous year; expenses 
for education, culture, and public health, 1.775 billion yuan, 
an increase of 15.92 percent over 1992, of which education 
expenditure, 1.70 billion yuan, up 14.26 percent over 1992; 
expenses for science and technology, 63 million yuan, up 13.62 
percent over 1992; administrative expenses, 1.1 billion yuan, an 
increase of 20.46 percent over the previous year; expenditures 
for public security, procuratorial, and judicial organs, 337 
million yuan, up 25.21 percent over 1992. The above expenses do 
not include the expenditure for pay raises effective since the 
fourth quarter of last year. The expenditure was listed under 
another category. 
  In 1993, expenses for various undertakings, especially 
administrative expenditures, in the autonomous region rose 
considerably, and expenses for production and construction 
projects also rose to varying degrees. The increase in the 
administrative expenses and expenses for other undertakings was 
caused by the increase in pay for personnel. Price rises also 
contributed to the increase in the expenses for various 
undertakings. Last year, despite serious financial 
difficulties, we basically ensured wage payments for workers of 
administrative departments and institutions and also ensured the 
funds for the development of the economy and other undertakings 
as set in the budget. This is the result of the joint efforts 
of various localities and departments and is also the result of 
assistance from the central authorities. Last year, the central 
authorities loaned our region 200 million yuan to help alleviate 
our shortage of funds. 
  Next I would like to report on the execution of the 1993 
budget at the autonomous regional level. Total revenues are 
expected to be [as published] 365 million yuan, 168 million yuan 
more than budgetary target and 135 million yuan or 58.61 percent 
more than 1992 revenues. Of the total revenues, industrial and 
commercial taxes amounted to 347 million yuan, 157 million yuan 
more than the budgetary target and 167 million yuan more than 
the 1992 figure. The net revenues from state-owned enterprises 
of the autonomous regional level amounted to 69 million yuan, 
which included income tax, regulatory tax, and profit delivery 
after deduction of subsidies to those enterprises which suffered 
business losses; and the figure was 30 million yuan less than 
the budgetary target. The total expenditures are expected to be 
1.825 billion yuan (including 45 billion yuan for wage increases 
for regional- level organizations in three months of 1993), 
fulfilling 77.27 percent of the fiscal budget and up 167 million 
yuan or 10.05 percent from 1992 figure (the slow progress of the 
expenditure was because there were more carry-overs of special 
central fundings and they were used in wage payments in various 
localities). 
  The above is the situation of the budget's execution. After 
the final accounts are completed, there will be some changes in 
figures and another report will be delivered then. 
  To fulfill the 1993 budget targets, all localities and 
departments continued to strengthen their leadership over fiscal 
work, made great efforts to increase revenues and reduce 
expenditures, and concentrated on the following aspects of work: 
  (1) Great efforts were made to support the development of 
production and cultivate financial resources. In the second 
half of 1993, finance departments at all levels made rational 
distribution of funds, basically ensured funds for productive 
undertakings, increased investment in agriculture and animal 
husbandry through various channels, and ensured timely 
availability of funds for the purchase of agricultural products. 
They used circulation funds in supporting the technological 
transformation of enterprises and thus helped enterprises to 
promote production. They took a further step to support the 
development of border towns and the county-level economy. They 
serviced the World Bank's loans on time, and all projects 
undertaken with the loans are proceeding smoothly, gradually 
yielding economic and social benefits. 
  (2) Efforts were made to improve the collection and 
management of revenues. All local authorities screened tax 
reductions and exemptions they had previously approved, as well 
as local provisions on the two funds [construction funds for key 
energy and communications projects and budgetary regulatory 
funds]. They abolished some improper policies and stopped 
approving requests for tax reduction or exemption on grounds of 
temporary difficulties. So, the situation of approving 
unwarranted tax reductions and tax exemptions at will were by 
and large brought under control. They also corrected the 
practice of some enterprises paying a fixed amount of turnover 
tax by contract and thus upheld the dignity of the tax law. At 
the same time, they improved the collection and management of 
agricultural and animal husbandry taxes and overfulfilled their 
treasury bond sales task. 
  (3) Funds were distributed in a rational way to ensure 
funding for key expenditures. They adhered to the principle of 
ensuring funding for wages, basic administrative expenses, and 
winter needs, and gave first priority to funding the wages and 
operating expenses of administrative organizations and 
institutions. They also ensured funds for maintaining social 
stability, combating natural disasters and providing relief, and 
preventing and controlling diseases. At the same time, they 
attached importance to saving administrative operating expenses, 
and in the second half of the year stopped approving most 
requests of administrative institutions for buying controlled 
commodities. 
  (4) They did a good preparatory work for the reform of the 
fiscal and taxation systems in support of economic 
restructuring. Following the unified arrangements made by the 
Party Central Committee and the State Council, they seriously 
prepared for the implementation of the revenue-sharing system -- 
an objective of the reform of the fiscal and taxation systems. 
The fiscal departments at various levels earnestly implemented 
"Regulations on Transforming the Operational Mechanisms of 
State-Owned Industrial Enterprises," helped enterprises exercise 
their autonomy, and seriously did a good job in signing the 
third round of contracts with enterprises. They achieved very 
good results in deepening the reform of the commodity 
distribution system and in reforming the grain management 
system, and did a great deal of work in improving the 
reappraisal of the assets of administrative institutions. They 
made positive efforts to appraise assets, define property 
rights, and register property rights. They began, as scheduled, 
the implementation of "general principles of financial affairs 
of enterprises," "rules for enterprise accounting," and the 
accounting systems for various professions and trades on 1 July 
1993. As a result, those major reforms were carried out 
smoothly. 
  (5) Efforts were made to rectify fiscal and taxation order 
and enforce financial and economic discipline. They seriously 
conducted a general inspection of taxation and financial work 
and achieved certain success. They generally screened the 
circulation funds and improved their management. They adopted 
effective measures and basically stopped unwarranted pooling of 
funds, arbitrary imposition of fines and exaction of fees, and 
unauthorized requisition of donations. Those measures have 
played an important role in reducing the unreasonable burdens of 
enterprises and the people. 
  While achievements were the main feature of the autonomous 
region's fiscal work in 1993, it also had many difficulties and 
problems. The major problems were as follows: The problem of 
low growth and low efficiency among enterprises was not 
fundamentally solved. The losses suffered by industrial 
enterprises covered by the budget continued to increase and most 
enterprises lacked the basis for further development, impeding 
revenue increases. The net increase of income of most 
prefectures and counties was far from being sufficient for 
defraying the increase of expenditures, because the revenue base 
was small, the expenditure base was large, and the increase of 
revenues was uneven among various localities. Moreover, it is 
difficult to reduce present expenditures because a large portion 
is wages; and so, the financial situation is becoming worse. 
With increasing debts and financial deficits, the financial 
difficulties are becoming greater and greater at all levels. 
Because of deficits, more special-purpose funds have been 
diverted to other-than-intended purposes, causing difficulties 
in fund distribution and frequent delay in wage payments. While 
these are financial problems, they are also a comprehensive 
reflection of social and economic problems. 
<H5>  2. Draft budget of the autonomous region for 1994 </H5>
  The autonomous region's budget for 1994 is projected in 
accordance with the guidelines of the Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee and the Sixth (enlarged) Plenary 
Session of the Fourth Autonomous Regional CPC Committee, as well 
as the guidelines of the national economic work conference and 
financial work conference. The guiding principles for budget 
projection are to actively and properly promote the 
revenue-sharing system during the reform of the fiscal system 
and other relevant reforms and continue to strengthen and 
improve overall fiscal regulation and control; by promoting 
production and enhancing economic efficiency, to vigorously 
cultivate financial resources, continue to manage taxation 
according to law, step up tax collection, and strive to achieve 
a steady revenue growth; and in accordance with the principle of 
"feeding the people and building the region simultaneously," to 
give first priority to paying wages while making overall 
arrangements for other expenditures, so as to ensure a social 
and political stability, ensure a smooth proceeding of reform 
and opening up, and bring about a rapid and highly effective 
economic development in the autonomous region. 
  Following the central authorities' unified plan and the 
State 
Council's "decision on implementation of the revenue-sharing 
fiscal system," Xinjiang began the revenue-sharing fiscal system 
on 1 January 1994. The revenue-sharing system is implemented on 
the basis of the reform of the taxation system. The reform of 
the taxation system mainly involved the reform of the turnover 
tax. The new turnover tax system is mainly based on the 
value-added tax, supplemented by the consumption tax and the 
business tax. Under the new revenue-sharing system, the central 
government receives all revenues from the consumption tax and 75 
percent of the revenues from the value-added tax; while the 
local government receives 25 percent of the revenues from the 
value-added tax and all the revenues from the business tax. 
Other tax revenues are shared roughly according to old 
proportions. The tax revenues delivered to the central 
government will be based on the 1993 figure. If more revenues 
are delivered than in the previous year, the central government 
will keep a larger share of the increased portion while 
returning the rest to the local government. 
  Our 1994 budget is projected in accordance with the 
aforesaid 
guiding principles, the quotas set for Xinjiang by the national 
financial work conference, the autonomous regional economic and 
social development plan for 1994, and the requirements of the 
revenue-sharing system. Our targets are: revenues, 2.448 
billion yuan, up 9.86 percent or 220 million yuan from the 
comparable, readjusted 1993 revenues of 2.227 billion yuan; 
expenditures, 6.615 billion yuan, an increase of 27.21 percent 
or 1.415 billion yuan over the 1993 base figure (excluding the 
spendings defrayed by special central fundings and the spendings 
on wage increase in the fourth quarter) if calculated in terms 
of comparable items. 
  (1) The autonomous region's major revenue targets in 1994 
are: industrial and commercial taxes, 2.064 billion yuan; five 
agricultural taxes, 212 million yuan; enterprise income tax, 408 
million yuan; subsidies [source not further clarified] for 
state- owned enterprises which suffer losses, 394 million yuan; 
and other incomes, 60 million yuan. 
  In arranging the above revenue targets, we have taken into 
consideration such favorable factors as increased production and 
commodity circulation. At the same time, we have also 
considered some policies which will decrease the revenues. 
According to our estimate, we expect to increase the business 
tax revenue by approximately 100 million yuan this year. We 
also expect to increase the resource tax by approximately 100 
million yuan due to increased crude oil output, and collect some 
30 million yuan more in agricultural tax due to higher prices of 
agricultural products. This shows that the 1994 budget is 
properly projected. 
  (2) Major expenditure targets are: capital construction, 400 
million yuan; enterprise transformation, 93 million yuan; 
support for agricultural production, 217 million yuan; operating 
expenses of agricultural, animal husbandry, forestry, water, and 
gas departments, 442 million yuan; operating expenses for 
cultural, education and public health departments, 2.456 billion 
yuan -- of which the education department will receive 1.534 
billion yuan; operation expenses for science undertakings, 80 
million yuan; administrative expenses, 1.345 billion yuan; and 
expenses for the work of public security, the procuratorate and 
the judiciary, 451 million yuan. 
  The additional expenditures for 1994 include the additional 
budget of 915 million yuan for wage reform (assessed on the 
basis of wage increases for 12 months) -- which has been 
incorporated with allotments for various administrative projects 
-- and 500 million yuan for hiring additional personnel. This 
year's allotments for various administrative projects have grown 
by a fairly large percentage, primarily because of higher wages. 
  (3) Views about arrangements for the regional treasury's 
receipts and payments in 1994: 
  1. The regional treasury's receipts in 1994 will be 1.7 
million yuan in the red. Among the receipts will be 115 million 
yuan from business taxes, 130 million yuan from state 
enterprises' income taxes, and 290 million yuan for subsidizing 
state enterprises' losses, which are permitted by policy. 
  2. The regional treasury's budgetary payments in 1993 will 
be 
1.631 billion yuan (certain budgets will be allotted to local 
authorities). This includes 1.437 billion yuan of basic 
expenditures -- same as those in 1993 -- 154 million yuan for 
wage increase, 20 million yuan for law enforcement, and 20 
million yuan for enterprises' technological upgrading. 
  3. The amount of money available for the region's use in 
1994 
will be 1.524 billion yuan after the subsidies for lower 
authorities have been deducted from the region's revenues, which 
also include the central government's regular subsidies and tax 
refunds; but because of the 1.631 billion yuan of budgetary 
expenses, there will be a deficit of 107 million yuan. 
  It must be pointed out here that the region's expenditures 
for 1994 are based on the basic budgets in early 1993, plus 154 
million yuan for wage increase and an additional 40 million yuan 
for law enforcement and technological upgrading, and not on the 
basis of budgetary expenditures in 1993. Budgets for certain 
essential expenses in 1994 are not arranged. 
<H5>  3. Strive To Accomplish the Autonomous Region's 1994 </H5>
Budgetary Plans by Implementing Measures for Increasing Revenues 
and Conserving Expenditures 
  To accomplish the region's budgetary plans for 1994, 
safeguard the region's social and political stability, and 
expedite the region's economic growth and development of other 
causes, we must follow through with the guidelines laid down by 
the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee and 
the Sixth Plenary (Enlarged) Session of the Fourth Xinjiang 
Regional Party Committee. Surrounding the general requirement -- 
"seizing the opportunity, deepening reform, opening up wider to 
the outside world, expediting development, and maintaining 
stability" -- we must give priority to accomplishing the 
following projects: 
  (1) We must speed up the pace of reform. This is the first 
year for carrying out the reform of establishing separated 
central and local taxation systems, we must positively and 
reliably carry out this and other relevant fiscal and tax reform 
projects according to the central authorities' consolidated 
plan. We must positively and reliably reform state enterprises' 
profit-sharing system, properly distribute their profits, and 
see to it that they change their operating mechanisms. We must 
manage state-owned assets more efficiently, continue to 
reappraise enterprises' stocks and assets, and determine their 
property rights, and make sure that the state's assets and 
interests are not violated. 
  (2) We must broaden the sources of financial incomes through 
supporting the development of production. All localities and 
departments must continue to attach great importance to 
supporting agricultural production and animal husbandry. They 
should do their best to increase investments in agriculture and 
animal husbandry as well as in the development of agricultural 
projects which yield a high output of quality products, and 
actively support the development of secondary and tertiary 
industries in rural areas, especially the development of village 
and town enterprises. We must continue to attach importance to 
enterprises' technological upgrading and assist them to improve 
their production technology, operations, and management so that 
they can become more competitive in the market. We must 
energetically support the development of local trade and border 
trade. All localities should give full scope to their resources 
so that their rich resources can be turned into economic 
strength and financial resources. 
  (3) We must ensure a sustained and steady increase of taxes 
through tightening tax collection and management. All 
localities and departments must earnestly implement the "Tax 
Collection and Management Law," we must do our work strictly in 
accordance with regulations, and collect taxes according to the 
established tax rates. While exercising strict control over tax 
deductions and exemptions, we must make great efforts in 
screening delinquent tax payments. In accordance with the tax 
law, we must strictly handle individuals and units which have 
evaded or contested tax payments, and we must make sure that all 
small tax loopholes are plugged and all taxes are delivered to 
the treasury in full. 
  (4) We must intensify control over our budgets and spend 
money rationally. To uphold the solemnity of budgets, all 
localities and departments must carry out their projects 
according to budget availability, and uphold the principle that 
receipts and payments are uniformly controlled, and that large 
receipts and payments must be collectively decided. Considering 
the current financial difficulties and financial capabilities, 
and in accordance with the principle of making overall plans and 
taking all factors into consideration, all localities and 
departments must rationally spend their funds according to 
urgency and priority. Payment of workers' wages must have 
precedence over various other expenditures, and expenses for 
combating disasters, relief services, and medical services must 
be ensured. We must tighten the management of nonappropriated 
funds, continue to audit the receipt and payment of all units' 
nonappropriated funds, and encourage all units to make up 
insufficient budgets with their nonappropriated funds. 
  (5) We must adopt strict measures for increasing revenues 
and conserving expenditures and count on society to tide over 
financial difficulties with concerted efforts. We must heighten 
our sense of reform, properly solve our needs this year with 
unconventional methods, and firmly stop unwarranted projects 
that increase spending and reduce income. To ensure a sustained 
growth of revenues, all localities and departments must 
energetically develop production, and make positive efforts to 
achieve higher economic returns and explore financial resources. 
Meanwhile, we must strictly control expenditures. We must 
strictly control the size of capital construction projects, stop 
authorizing new construction projects and all types of office 
buildings, auditoriums, guesthouses, and activity centers. We 
must adopt specific measures to curtail expenses for meetings, 
strictly control establishment of additional organs and 
expansion of authorized staff sizes, and correct the impropriety 
of giving out unwarranted cash awards and allowances. We must 
tighten management of budgets for public-funded medical services 
to stop waste while making sure that sick people will receive 
medical attention. Administrative units and institutions 
throughout Xinjiang must have special bank accounts to ensure 
the availability of money for wages. Effective measures must be 
taken to stop certain wasteful practices to which the masses 
have responded strongly. We must firmly stop the improper 
tendency of purchasing luxury cars, and firmly stop the use of 
public funds for housing renovations that exceed established 
standards. 
  We are confronted with a very grim financial situation this 
year. To tide over the difficulties, we must adopt some strict 
measures for increasing revenues and conserving expenditures, 
but this certainly will affect the interests of some departments 
and units. So that the measures for increasing revenues and 
conserving expenditures can be effectively carried out, we need 
the understanding and support of all social quarters. Leading 
cadres at all levels, in particular, must set personal examples 
in this regard. 
  Fellow deputies, Xinjiang's financial problems have become 
even worse this year. To alleviate the problems, society as a 
whole must continue to support financial retrenchment projects; 
have a clear view on the financial situation; understand the 
need to lead a plain life, work diligently and thriftily, 
consider the overall needs, help one another, and tighten our 
belts; and give financial departments the support they need in 
attaining their goals. Under the correct guidance of the 
regional party committee, and with the supervision and support 
of people's congresses in Xinjiang, we must count on people of 
all nationalities in our region, earnestly follow the guidelines 
laid down by the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee and those by the Sixth Plenary (Enlarged) Session of 
the Fourth Xinjiang Regional Party Committee, stop empty talk, 
and work earnestly and practically to accomplish all budgetary 
assignments of our autonomous region this year. 

