BFN 

<F P=106> ["Part three" of the report by Deputy Prime Minister Phan </F>
Van Khai at the opening of the Ninth National Assembly's Fifth 
Session held at the Ba Dinh Conference Hall in Hanoi on 26 May 
-- recorded] 
  [Text] While planning and preparing for the implementation 
of resolutions to be introduced by the upcoming central level 
meeting on the direction of industrialization and modernization 
industrial development through the year 2000, it is necessary to 
strive to satisfactorily execute this year's plans for 
investment development in order to create momentum for 
subsequent years. 
  A. Investment capital for development is a priority issue. 
Together with active efforts to obtain and efficiently use 
foreign capital for investment, the government is issuing 
guidance to supplement policies and measures to mobilize more 
domestic capital and to gradually create a capital market. 
Interests are slowly and reasonably adjusted together with the 
introduction of variable and attractive forms to mobilize 
capital from different resources. Insurance funds and consumer 
credit funds are to be developed. A credit policy to provide 
capital based on economic effectiveness but not on economic 
sectors is to be applied in order to progressively create a 
environment of competition in the credit sector. Financial 
markets from low to high levels will be established with the 
increasing availability of bonds and stocks. The government is 
considering introducing a law on shares and stock market 
operations and preparing the necessary conditions for a healthy 
stock market in our country. 
  B. We will actively provide enough capital for important 
projects in the 1994 planning, especially the projects that have 
suffered shortages of capital. We will ensure the progress of 
electricity- generating projects. This year, we will put into 
partial service the Thac Mo hydroelectric project and the Vinh 
Son hydroelectric project, start construction of the Yali 
hydroelectric power station, and prepare for construction of the 
Phy My thermal power station, the Ham Thuan-Da Mi hydroelectric 
project, and expansion of the Pha Lai thermal power station. In 
transportation, we will rebuild the national highways Nos. 5 and 
1 and the South Thang Long-Ba Dinh highways to connect with the 
North Thang Long-Noi Bai highways. Regarding water conservation, 
we will carry out such major projects as the (Gong) River, Thach 
Nham, Rac, and A Yun Ha projects. It is noteworthy is that we 
have completed the natural gas pipeline project from the Bach Ho 
oil field to Ba Ria. Plans have been formulated to expand the 
Hoang Thach cement factory, build the But Son cement plant, 
expand the Bim Son cement factory, and so forth. Efforts are 
being made to ensure sufficient capital for these projects. All 
projects built with capital provided or loaned by the state or 
by foreign countries must be carried out seriously in accordance 
with the government's new regulations on strengthening 
management, opposing waste, and overcoming negativism in the 
various stages of construction from the drawing of blueprints, 
through the bidding process, contract signing, inspection, and 
final acceptance of the projects. We must strive to complete 
various communications and transport projects in accordance with 
the set policy and schedule. 
  C. We must create favorable conditions for accelerating 
investment by various economic components in society, and strive 
to encourage enterprises and families to invest in developing 
production and business while promoting the capital market. The 
law on encouraging investment at home, to be submitted to the 
National Assembly at this session, has been formulated on the 
basis of providing the most favorable status to domestic 
investment projects, similar to those of foreign investment 
projects. The enforcement of this law requires an amendment to 
some articles of other promulgated laws such and the Law on Land 
and other laws related to taxation. 
  Various documents aimed at providing guidance for law 
enforcement are being written for promulgation. This will help 
to accelerate the application of various laws in daily life, 
thereby meeting requests by various business establishments. 
  D. While implementing the investment policy, we must quickly 
formulate plans to develop economic sectors and branches, 
especially those related to infrastructure projects, 
agricultural branches in localities and cities, goods processing 
centers, and industrial complexes in each region and province. 
We must strive to build more infrastructure projects to meet 
requirements of the construction and completion of these 
industrial complexes. 
  These plans provide the groundwork for the rational 
formulation of important state-funded investment projects. They 
also direct and assist Vietnamese and foreign investors in 
overcoming situations where investment is made spontaneously and 
subsequently leads to overlapping work, conflicts, and poor 
returns on investment. 
  Third, it is necessary to step up diplomatic activities and 
broaden external economic relations. The current situation 
provides us with the opportunity to strengthen foreign relations 
to accelerate national development and enhance the ability to 
safeguard national sovereignty and territorial integrity. At 
the same time, it contains factors of instability and the danger 
of causing us to be left farther behind. Complicated and 
sensitive external relations require us to be more vigilant, 
dynamic, and creative in the implementation of a foreign policy 
of independence and sovereignty to bring into full play the 
strength of the entire nation in combination with international 
strength in order to cope with challenges and take advantage of 
opportunities to develop the national industrialization and 
modernization program a step further. 
  We are actively settling outstanding issues and disputes 
with 
some countries gradually and through peaceful negotiations. We 
are ready to proceed to normalization with the United States, 
join ASEAN at an early date, enter into multi-sided cooperation 
in the Pacific region, and at the same time continue 
consolidating and expanding cooperation with all countries and 
international organizations. 
  Together with the enhancement of state-level relations, it 
is 
necessary to develop cooperative ties in the economic, 
scientific, technical, and cultural fields; expand cooperation 
with non-governmental organizations and business people; step up 
people-to-people contacts; and enhance foreign information and 
propaganda services. 
  The government is preparing an overall project for 
developing 
external economic relations in the new situation. Some key 
tasks that must be done between now and the end of the year are 
as follows: 
  a. Guiding the implementation of new regulations on managing 
and distributing Official Development Assistance (ODA). Many 
countries and international organizations committed to provide 
necessary financial aid provided that this aid is used strictly 
in accordance with stringent quality control requirements. 
Therefore, along with seriously implementing previously funded 
projects, it is necessary to see to it that new projects are 
properly worked out because this constitutes the key conditions 
for using or gaining more aid to meet specified goals. The 
State Planning Committee is responsible for improving cadre 
skills and directing sectors and localities in formulating 
ODA-funded projects in combination with other sources of 
investment capital, bearing in mind the need to build 
socioeconomic infrastructure and zone off targeted areas and 
domains of activities. First priority must be given to the use 
of non-refundable ODA to fund projects that benefit localities 
with many difficulties. 
  b. Continuing to improve the environment to attract direct 
foreign investment. As an immediate objective, urgent efforts 
must be made to improve investment procedures and other foreign 
investment-related regulations, especially procedures on land 
leasing, construction, taxation, and paperwork simplification to 
make them administratively simple but legally solid. 
  Steps must be taken to reduce the time needed for license 
application and removing obtacles that stand in the way of 
implementing approved projects. Particularly, when it comes to 
land leasing, site clearance cost, housing rental, and postage, 
we must take into consideration the average charges set by 
neighboring countries. Generally speaking, as far as our 
country is concerned, land leasing, housing rental, and postage 
are higher than the charges set by neighboring countries. 
  All sectors and localities must implement laws and legal 
documents relating to these matters in a uniform and serious 
manner. It is necessary to conduct educational activities and 
inspections to make sure that cadres overcome the evils of red 
tape. It is important to try by all means to contain the ills 
of bureaucratism and attempts to seek bribes because these moves 
inconvenience and discourage foreign investors. 
  We must focus on the experiences drawn during the past to 
review and improve work on sectors, production establishments, 
and key projects that need foreign capital. It is necessary to 
formulate plans for building foreign investment centers, 
especially in the three key economic areas. We must amend and 
supplement various policies to encourage and attract more 
foreign investment, especially in regions with numerous 
difficulties. Efforts must be made to promulgate regulations on 
the management of enterprises with foreign capital toward 
developing the private sector role and responsibility, while 
ensuring the management function of the state and authorized 
agencies in accordance with the law. We must strive to avoid 
applying management through a single administrative agency. 
  C. The government set a policy on export-import early this 
year. Its implementation, however, has been very slow. As a 
result, we must strive to overcome this shortcoming while 
strengthening the supervision in export-import activities. 
Efforts must be made to regulate domestic demands on essential 
goods while preventing prices from acute fluctuations. 
Regarding the foreign exchange rates, we must strive to 
stabilize the actual rate to protect the interests of exporters 
while stabilizing the macro-economy. The actual foreign 
exchange rate rests with the purchasing power of the Vietnamese 
dong and foreign currencies calculated on the basis of the 
current rate of inflation and demand for foreign currencies in 
the market. The Ministry of Trade must formulate concrete plans 
to coordinate with the Chamber of Commerce and Industry and 
various export-import associations to find more foreign markets 
for our goods, especially agricultural products. It must 
conduct research on the market situation at home and abroad to 
provide producers, businessmen, exporters, and importers with 
accurate information related to their businesses. Our 
export-based industrialization strategy calls for a renovation 
in foreign trade relations so as to quickly increase our export 
value. This must be carried out in close association with the 
efforts to develop the exported goods pattern and fundamentally 
change the business activities and export-import management. 
Efforts must also be made to shift from the rigid administrative 
management system to the application of an active economic 
measure. The Ministry of Trade must strive to perfect 
regulations on renovating foreign trade management to solicit 
ideas from businessmen during the next several months. On this 
basis, we will gradually form a unified management system to 
stabilize export-import activities. 
  D. Regarding our tourism, this sector is in great demand by 
tourists at home and abroad. We have great, favorable 
conditions for developing this sector. As a result, capital 
invested in this domain will be recovered quickly with a high 
rate of interest. Moreover, we have great advantage in having 
good geographic conditions, beautiful scenery, and numerous 
cultural and historical relics. It is necessary to say here, 
however, that although we are attaining high growth in tourism, 
various aspects of this sector are not developing well enough to 
meet current demands and requirements. Efforts must be make to 
quickly overcome the shortage of hotels and accommodations for 
foreign guests in Hanoi. The tourism sector must strive to meet 
all requirements of foreign guests and provide them with better 
service. It must strive to increase its income while expanding 
cooperation relations with foreign countries so as to contribute 
to developing the national economy. In implementing the 
government resolution on developing tourism, we must immediately 
accelerate the building of hotels and tourist centers using 
capital, first of all, from economic sectors at home in various 
forms. The tourism sector must coordinate with the 
transportation and other sectors, especially airline companies, 
the customs department, and other agencies to meet the 
requirements of various service activities. The security and 
consular agencies must formulate regulations to effectively 
coordinate with other organizations to provide the best service 
for foreign guests while ensuring their safety ,as well as 
social order and discipline. 

