Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Excerpts from article by Lu Weide [7120 4850 1795], </F>
researcher in the Solar Energy Institute, Beijing: "The Current 
Situation of Solar Energy Heat Utilization and China's 
Countermeasures"] 
  [Excerpts] Solar energy is an enormous energy resource that 
does not pollute the environment. The modes of solar energy 
conversion and utilization are: photo-electrical conversion, 
photo-thermal conversion, and photo-chemical conversion. Solar 
energy heat utilization technologies can be divided overall 
according to the temperature range of their ultimate use into 
low-temperature, moderate-temperature, and high-temperature. 
Low-temperature (under 100C): hot water for household uses, 
heating, drying, distillation, agricultural greenhouses, etc.; 
Moderate-temperature (100 to 300C): industrial heat, 
cooling and air conditioning, cooking, etc.; High-temperature 
(above 300C): thermal power generation, high-temperature 
materials processing, sterilization processing of toxic 
materials, etc. 
  Among solar energy heat utilization technologies, solar 
energy water heating and structural solar energy heating 
technologies are now mature and have attained the applications 
stage. The energy consumption in these two categories of 
ultimate utilization now account for a significant proportion of 
total energy consumption, about 37 percent in the United States. 
There have also been technical breakthroughs in solar energy 
thermal power generation which is consequently developing very 
quickly. This article focuses on the current situation and 
development strategies for solar energy hot water, heating, 
thermal power generation, and other primary heat utilization 
realms. 
  [passage omitted] 
<H3>  II. The Current Development Situation and an Assessment of 
China's Solar Energy Heat Utilization Technology </H3>
<H5>  A. The Distribution of China's Solar Energy Resources </H5>
  China is located in the eastern part of the Eurasian 
continent in the northern hemisphere, and it has a vast 
territory and abundant solar energy resources. The total annual 
amount of solar irradiation in the various regions of China 
ranges from 3.3 x 10[.sup]6[/] to 8.4 x 10[.sup]6[/] 
kilocalories/square meter, with an average of 5.9 x 
10[.sup]6[/] kilocalories/square meter. See Table 1 for a 
detailed distribution of China's solar energy resources. In the 
table, categories I, II, and III regions are regions with 
relatively abundant solar energy resources and they cover an 
area equal to more than two-thirds of China's total area. 



  Table 1. Regional Demarcation of China's Solar Energy Resources 



Regional       Number of         Total Annual Amount of    Regions Included 
Category       Annual Hours of   Solar Energy 
               Sunshine          Irradiation 
                                 (10[.sup]4[/] 
                                 kilocalories/square 
                                 meter) 

I              2,800-3,300       670-840                   Northern 
                                                           Ningxia, 
                                                           northern Gansu, 
                                                           southeastern 
                                                           Xinjiang, 
                                                           western Qinghai, 
                                                           western Tibet 

II             3,000-3,200       590-670                   Northern Hebei, 
                                                           northern Shanxi, 
                                                           southern Inner 
                                                           Mongolia and 
                                                           Ningxia, central 
                                                           Gansu, eastern 
                                                           Qinghai, 
                                                           southeastern 
                                                           Tibet, southern 
                                                           Xinjiang 

III            2,200-3,000       500-590                   Shandong, Henan, 
                                                           southeastern 
                                                           Hebei, southern 
                                                           Shanxi, northern 
                                                           Xinjiang, Jilin, 
                                                           Liaoning, 
                                                           Yunnan, northern 
                                                           Shaanxi, 
                                                           southeastern 
                                                           Gansu, southern 
                                                           Guangdong and 
                                                           Fujian, Beijing 

IV             1,400-2,200       420-500                   Northern Jiangsu 
                                                           and Anhui, 
                                                           Hubei, Hunan, 
                                                           Jiangxi, 
                                                           Zhejiang, 
                                                           northern Guangxi 
                                                           and Guangdong, 
                                                           southern 
                                                           Shaanxi, 
                                                           Jiangsu, and 
                                                           Anhui, and 
                                                           Heilongjiang 

V              1,000-1,400       340-420                   Sichuan, Guizhou 



<H3>  B. China's Advances in Solar Energy Heat Utilization 
Technology </H3>
  China's research and demonstration of solar energy heat 
utilization in an organized and guided manner began in the 
mid-1970s. Starting in the 1980s, new energy resource and 
renewable energy resource technology was included in the state's 
attack on key S&amp;T problems in the Sixth 5-Year Plan, Seventh 
5-Year Plan, and Eighth 5-Year Plan, and solar energy heat 
utilization technology is a subtopic in new energy resource and 
renewable energy resource projects. 
  Starting from China's national strengths and real needs, the 
focus of attacks on key S&amp;T problems regarding solar energy 
heat 
utilization in the Sixth 5-Year Plan and Seventh 5-Year Plan was 
placed on preferential development of low-temperature heat 
utilization technology. The actual projects were: solar energy 
water heaters, passive solar energy-saving houses, solar energy 
dryers, and solar stoves. Through 10 years of efforts, solar 
energy heat utilization technology in these four realms 
basically moved forward, S&amp;T achievements have shifted into 
small batch production to varying degrees and a substantial 
number have an extension and application coverage area and have 
provided real benefits in alleviating local shortages of 
conventional energy resources, reducing ecological and 
environmental degradation, and other areas. According to 
incomplete statistics for 1991, we have extended 1.8 million 
square meters of solar energy water heaters, 300,000 square 
meters (structural area) of passive solar energy-saving houses, 
330,000 hectares of solar energy agricultural greenhouses, 
120,000 solar stoves, and 1,314 square meters of solar energy 
dryers, and we have consistently maintained a development 
momentum. Chinese-made solar energy water heaters can conserve 
an average of 100 to 150 kg of standard coal per square meter 
each year. Solar stoves can conserve 500 to 700 kg of firewood 
per unit each year. 
<H5>  C. The Main Problems and Impediments That Exist at Present </H5>
  China lags behind foreign countries in two areas in solar 
energy heat utilization. One is S&amp;T investments. The 
government 
in the United States invested $500 million annually in solar 
energy research and development from the late 1970s to early 
1980s. Subsequently, due to a drop in the price of petroleum and 
the energy policies of the Reagan government, there was a 
substantial reduction in expenditures on solar energy research 
and by the early 1990s they were consistently maintained at the 
level of $150 to $200 million annually. Japan's New Energy 
Resource Industrial Technology Comprehensive Development 
Organization (NEDO) and Global Environmental Industrial 
Technology Research Organization (RITE) organized scientific 
research units and large enterprises to establish an R&amp;D 
group 
to help accelerate the course of R&amp;D and commercialization. 
Thus, the development of solar energy heat utilization in the 
developed countries at the present time is characterized by 
high-S&amp;T injections, especially for breakthroughs in new 
materials R&amp;D such as light condensors and vacuum tube heat 
collectors used in solar energy thermal power generation 
stations or tower-type solar energy boilers, which are the 
result of the commercialization of major achievements in modern 
materials science and heat transfer science. The second area is 
policies to encourage the extension and development of solar 
energy. Since the 1990s, the developed countries have 
universally focused on global environmental issues and raised 
the development and utilization of new energy resources to 
reduce CO[.sup]2[/] discharges to an important strategic 
height, and they have concrete measures and policies to provide 
economic subsidies or tax reductions and exemptions to new 
energy resources. Thirty-one of the states in the United States 
have implemented energy conservation Energy Resource Ultimate 
Utilization Management (Demand-Side Management) plans (as part 
of comprehensive resource plans). Their method involves state 
governments encouraging public utility (electric power, natural 
gas, and coal gas) companies to make every possible effort to 
generate less electricity and supply less gas with a 
precondition of satisfying user load demand. In this manner, 
companies transfer their investments in power plant capacity 
expansion to energy conservation upgrading on the user end, 
which has the advantages of smaller investments, short capital 
turnover cycles, and little risk. Now, solar energy hot water 
supplies and solar energy heating are to be included in 
construction end management plans, which has solved problems 
with the impediments of large initial investments for solar 
energy equipment and excessively heavy user burdens. It is 
expected that, spurred by this new plan, solar energy water 
heaters and solar energy-saving houses will become more 
widespread and develop more quickly. 
<H5>  III. Development Strategies and Countermeasures </H5>
<H5>  A. Technology Development Objectives for Different Periods </H5>
  China is a developing country and 800 million of its 
population lives in vast rural regions. The energy consumed 
annually to sustain the minimum normal household energy needs of 
our peasants accounts for 30 percent of China's total energy 
consumption. Within a rather long period to come, China's 
commodity energy resource supplies will be unable to completely 
satisfy the basic energy requirements of production and life in 
rural areas. For this reason, in the near term (the next 20 
years), the development and utilization of solar energy heat 
utilization technology in China should still mainly involve 
low-temperature heat utilization and be oriented toward rural 
areas and medium-sized and small cities to alleviate the 
shortages of energy resources there for living and production 
energy needs (heating, hot water, solar energy greenhouses, 
etc.) and improve the situation of ecological and environmental 
degradation that has arisen there because of energy shortages. 
In the medium and long term (20 to 50 years from now), by 
serving as a program to replace part of the coal we burn, we 
could develop solar energy thermal power generation as 
appropriate and extend energy-saving type structures centered on 
solar energy heat utilization in cities. 
<H5>  B. Strategic Choices for Different Regions </H5>
  1. In regions with category I solar irradiation resources, 
we 
can give consideration in medium and long-term plans to the 
construction of solar energy thermal power stations, especially 
in Tibet, which is very poor in coal, oil, and other 
conventional energy resources and which has abundant direct 
radiation sunlight sources, making it uniquely superior 
economically for the development of solar energy thermal power 
generation. Prior to 2000, we should try to set up trial point 
demonstrations to enable further evaluations after comparison 
with photovoltaic power generation stations. 
  2. In regions with categories I, II, and III solar 
irradiation resources, we should further extend passive solar 
energy-saving houses and solar energy water heaters (as a part 
of structural facilities). 
  3. In certain poor regions (mainly in northwest China), 
there 
are still places where solar stoves can be used, but we must pay 
attention to quality improvements and implement industrialized 
production. 
<H5>  C. Suggested Countermeasures and Measures </H5>
  1. Based on the 10 countermeasures and measures that we 
should adopt in China's environmental and development programs 
proposed by the government, move further in formulating programs 
for the development of new energy resources and renewable energy 
resources, and provide policies focused on providing support in 
raising capital, preferential treatment in tax collection, and 
other areas. 
  2. For major solar energy thermal utilization projects such 
as solar energy power generation stations, which have already 
been commercialized internationally, China should base itself on 
importing advanced technology and equipment from foreign 
countries. In regions with abundant sunlight such as Tibet, use 
feasibility research as a basis for government investment to 
invest in their construction. Avoid the waste caused by small 
investments and repeated low-level scientific research. 
  3. The government should use industrial conferences and 
other 
means to organize and reinforce industrial management for solar 
energy water heater and solar stove products. They should mainly 
do good work on standardization and quality demonstration 
systems to guarantee product quality. 
  4. Solar energy energy-saving structures occupy an important 
status in structural energy conservation and the Ministry of 
Construction should provide unified deployments and programs. 
  5. Focus on absorbing foreign capital to develop the solar 
energy product market and raise the quality of China's solar 
energy water heaters to modern international levels and make 
them competitive in the international market. 

