BFN 

  [Text] Kuala Lumpur, June 22 (OANA-BERNAMA) -- Prime 
Minister Dr Mahathir Mohamed Tuesday witnessed the signing of a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) between a Malaysian and an 
American consortium to undertake a housing and infrastructure 
project in South Africa. 
  The Malaysian companies led by Taliworks (Oversea) Sdn Bhd 
[private limited] will participate in the construction of low- 
to medium-cost houses, complete with infrastructural facilities. 
  It will also help create new townships, apart from expanding 
existing ones. 
  The American consortium, headed by Black &amp; Veatch 
International company, will be responsible for the drawing up of 
a masterplan of the township and housing development besides 
providing financial backing and participating in power 
generation projects. 
  Speaking to reporters after the ceremony, the prime minister 
said he was very happy that American and Malaysian companies had 
come together to work in South Africa. 
  We have always stressed that in our relationship with South 
Africa, we would contribute to solving some of their social, 
economic and even political problems, he said. 
  He said the situation in South Africa was not unlike that in 
Malaysia and there was a need to restructure society and to 
bring in everybody so that each one would have a share in the 
wealth of the country. 
  I think this is an area that Malaysians are conversant with, 
he said adding that Malaysia could help to resolve problems on 
inequitable racial development in South Africa. 
  Dr Mahathir said he was quite sure the Malaysian and the 
American companies involved in the project were aware of the 
problems and would implement their projects with due regard to 
the situation in South Africa. 
  On the opening of a mission in South Africa, he said Wisma 
Putra (Foreign Ministry) had sent a representative there. 
  The MOU was signed by Taliworks Chairman Mohamed Hussaini 
Abdul Jamil and Black &amp; Veatch Asia Pacific Managing Director 
and Regional Executive Howard A. Russel. 
  Works Minister Datuk Leo Moggie, who was present, said 
Taliworks had some experience in civil and construction works, 
particularly in water development. 
  However, their involvement in the MOU now is only at the 
conceptual stage and it is intended that a consortium of various 
Malaysian companies will participate when the whole project 
becomes more concrete later on. 
  The idea now is to have a framework that can work together 
with a group of American companies so that we can work out the 
details and the involvement of other potential companies will be 
determined at a later date, he said. 

