Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] On Wednesday, the Federal Cabinet declared itself 
in favor of building the Transrapid magnetic levitation railway 
from Hamburg to Berlin on the basis of a new financing strategy 
submitted by industry. Speaking at a news conference held 
jointly with Research Minister Krueger (CDU [Christian 
Democratic Union]) in Bonn, Transport Minister Wissmann (CDU) 
stated that the Federal Government had "given a favorable 
reading" to the report, which envisages financing the 
8.9-million German mark [DM] project overwhelmingly by private 
investment. The building go-ahead will be given by the end of 
March, and Federal Chancellor Kohl has made it known that he 
wants all matters of detail settled by the end of February. 
  Krueger and Wissman spoke of a "signal for Germany as a 
leading center of industry" and of a sign of the country's 
future viability. Magnetic levitation was power-saving, quiet, 
and safe; Germany, moreover, still had five to 10 years' lead 
over the United States and Japan in this technology. Building 
work on the line, on which Bonn had agreed back in 1992, is 
scheduled to begin in or around 1996, and trial operation in 
2003 or 2004. It will run over a distance of 284 kilometers 
from Hamburg Central Station and Hamburg- Billwerder Moorfleet 
to Berlin via Schwerin and Spandau. Journey time will be just 
under one hour, with a train leaving in each direction every 10 
minutes. Wissmann said that the ticket price could not yet be 
specified, as it would depend on the amount of custom attracted. 
Krueger said that, at today's fare levels, an "indicative" fare 
of DM90 to 100 was likely. The project will create at least 
10,000 jobs overall, 4,000 of them in the structural steel 
engineering industry alone. 
  Wissmann said that the decisive factor in obtaining the 
Federal Government's agreement had been the industry's new 
financing strategy, which envisaged a substantially higher 
contribution on the part of industry than the initial plan, 
submitted in March. According to the new proposals, track 
ownership and operation would be kept strictly separate, the 
Federal Government taking responsibility for the track and the 
operating company being organized on private lines. In addition 
to the main parties involved, which are Daimler-Benz/AEG, 
Siemens, Thyssen Industries, the Deutsche Bank, and the 
Investment Bank for Reconstruction, the plan is for the 
shareholders to include insurance companies and the Dyckerhoff 
&amp; 
Widmann, Hochtief, and Philipp Holzmann construction firms. 
Industry, banks, and private investors will contribute DM1.2 
billion in venture capital, and the Bundesbahn and Lufthansa 
will each put up DM150 million. The industry proposes a 20 
percent tax preference for private investors along Berlin loan 
lines, as no dividend can be expected for many years. In 
addition to the DM1.5- billion shareholders' equity, loans to 
the tune of DM3.3 billion will be obtained. Third-party funds 
will be refinanced solely out of profits, without state 
guarantees. 
  The Federal Government is to bear the investment costs for 
the track, which will amount to approximately DM5.6 billion, 
although industry is offering to contribute: The operating 
company is offering to pay the track company the interest and 
repayment installments on loans totaling DM2.4 billion out of 
the track rental fee, after which the Federal Government would 
be directly liable for only DM3.2 billion. Winfriend Haastert, 
board chairman of Thyssen Industries AG Henschel, stated that 
building an ICE [intercity express] line between Hamburg and 
Berlin would cost more than the Transrapid line. 
  Coalition deputies such as Kurt Faltlhauser (CSU [Christian 
Social Union]), Christian Lenzer (CDU), and Horst Friedrich (FDP 
[Free Democratic Party of Germany]) spoke in support of the plan 
and called for rapid implementation. SPD [Social Democratic 
Party of Germany] industry spokesman Uwe Jens welcomed the 
project as well. SPD deputies Michael Mueller and Siegrun 
Klemmer, however, were against the "Transrapid adventure," 
suggesting that the billions would be better spent modernizing 
the railways. 

