BFN 

  [Text] Tunis, 6 Jun (MENA)--Egypt has called for convening 
an extraordinary session of the OAU foreign ministers council to 
discuss the deteriorating economic and social situation in 
Africa. This came in a statement Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa made 
at the OAU ministerial council while commenting on a report on 
the general situation in Africa submitted by OAU Secretary 
General Salim Ahmed Salim. 
  Musa said that important events have occurred in Africa this 
year, noting that he agrees with Salim's report on its negative 
and positive aspects. He mentioned the recent positive 
developments in Africa, notably the declaration of a new 
government in South Africa and the establishment of a mechanism 
for resolving disputes within the framework of the OAU. He said 
that progress has been achieved in a number of areas that have 
long worried Africa, such as the improvement in the situation in 
Liberia, the positive developments in Mozambique, the stable 
ties between Libya and Chad, and Namibia's recent restoration of 
the Gulf of Whales. 
  Musa pointed out that Africa encountered a number of basic 
problems such as the tragic situation in Rwanda, the problems in 
Somalia, the stagnant situation in Angola, and the stalemate on 
the Lockerbie issue. He emphasized that the most important 
problems facing Africa are the serious deterioration in the 
economic and social situation, which far outweighs the political 
problems. 
  Musa pointed out that not only the economic situation but 
also all aspects of the social situation are deteriorating, such 
as the refugee problem, drought, and the environment. He stated 
that, although Salim's report notes that progress was achieved 
in certain African countries, the economic situation in general 
is bad and is getting worse in most cases. He said that Salim's 
report notes that the GATT agreement and the establishment of 
the International Trade Organization will increase the volume of 
international trade to approximately $200 billion and that 
Africa must obtain a share of this increase. 
  Discussing the issue of African debts, Musa stressed the 
need 
to find a solution to this problem, noting that this is 
insufficient to confront the African problems because debts, 
trade, development, and funding are integrated elements. He 
expressed support for the establishment of an economic group. 
He said that Egypt calls for convening an extraordinary meeting 
of the OAU ministerial council to discuss and assess the overall 
economic and social situation in Africa in light of 
international developments. He said that such a meeting will 
not be confined to discussing the problem of debts but also 
social problems, the environment, and the refugee problem 
whether resulting from internal conflicts or natural causes. 

