CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Le Quang Thanh] </F>
  [Text] 1. Over the past years, our party and state have 
adopted the policy of combining security and national defense, 
security and economy, and security and culture and ideology, and 
have made a number of important decisions. Worthy of note are 
Directive 15 of the Political Bureau and Decision 114 of the 
government prime minister. In certain aspects, the 
implementation of these directives and decisions has yielded 
some definite results and has contributed to further overcoming 
the socioeconomic crisis, firmly maintaining and consolidating 
political stability, and creating the necessary premises for 
gradually shifting our country to a new period of development. 
  However, these combining efforts have been uneven and have 
not been well-coordinated and actively mutually supportive; in 
some places and at times they have been separated from one 
another and, worse still, have been conflicting, thereby 
limiting economic growth and political stability. This situation 
has many causes, among them those concerning perception and 
thinking and those concerning the management mechanism. In the 
conditions of the new having not yet definitely emerged and the 
old having not been completely abolished, it is difficult to 
avoid the problem that the perception and thinking of many 
people remain unclear and somewhat deviationist, in particular 
the tendency to run after economic gains, thereby loosening 
security and losing vigilance. Within the mechanism itself there 
remain numerous loopholes that are reflected in policies, laws 
and regulations, and organization of implementation--loopholes 
that criminal elements may exploit to sabotage us economically. 
  In the first six months of 1993--if we count of cases that 
have been detected only (the number of which is still far too 
low compared to reality)--there were nearly 1,700 violations of 
socialist property causing the loss of almost 185 billion dong, 
among them more than 530 cases of corruption causing the loss of 
nearly 167 billion dong. These figures represent a fairly marked 
increase over the first six months of 1992 (during which there 
were 341 cases of corruption causing the loss of 53.54 billion 
dong). Not only has the scourge of corruption been 
unstoppable but it has also increased, with the number of 
corruption cases going up with each passing day and the losses 
becoming increasingly greater. Corruption has occurred fairly 
frequently in many sophisticated forms in many key economic 
sectors, with the crime of intentionally committing 
wrongdoings to embezzle public property being the most 
prominent offense. Taking advantage of those areas where there 
are foreign investment, the administrations of a number of 
localities have arbitrarily sold land illegally, have even sold 
standing trees in the forests, have unlawfully exported precious 
timber, and have been "liberal" to the point of voluntarily 
working without pay for foreign countries and allowing them to 
freely exploit their precious, rare assets right in their own 
land. Many agencies and enterprises have asked to be allocated 
land for the purposes of building factories and offices, but in 
fact have traded it for profit. Numerous traders and even a 
number of Vietnamese joint ventures having the legal status of a 
corporate body have used the money of foreign businessmen or 
companies to deal in real state. Sales of land, forests, and sea 
areas have been reported. 
  Smuggling has continued to develop in a complex and serious 
manner in all communications lines: land routes, see routes, and 
air routes, and along the northern and southwestern borders. 
Also in the first six months of 1993 alone, we had detected and 
dealt with more than 11,000 cases of smuggling, trading of 
forbidden goods, illegal business operations, and tax evasion, 
and have confiscated goods worth more than 188 billion dong. 
Compared to the first six months of 1992 (during which more than 
4,000 cases were uncovered and more than 71-billion dong worth 
of goods confiscated), it is obvious that far from 
decreasing, snuggling has in fact increased two-fold. 
  2. Along with the domestic economic achievements, our 
external economic activities have been broadened and 
relations in many forms have been established with numerous 
foreign partners to help the economy overcome severe trials 
after the (former) Soviet Union stopped giving aid and 
unexpectedly reduced its economic and trade relations with us. 
However, its has become increasingly clear that, besides the 
positive aspects, our open-door policy has also resulted in no 
little negativism that has caused difficult and complex problems 
concerning political security and has further polluted the 
cultural and social environment. Besides the numerous cases in 
which we have suffered losses and disadvantages in our economic 
relations with the outside world, corruption and smuggling have 
also occurred frequently in our external economic activities. We 
have uncovered a number of international smuggling channels 
operated by some foreign traders or organizations acting in 
collusion with various local economic organizations and 
management and control organs to bring in contraband or to use 
Vietnamese territory as a transit center for contraband 
including narcotic drugs, as Interpol has notified us. Aside 
from the fraudulent acts of a number of foreign companies and 
businessmen, there have been "mistakes" with regard to the 
prices and quality of a fairly large amount of machinery and 
equipment imported by none other than our state organs. To date 
we are still unable to inventory the cases of external economic 
activities resulting in disclosure of national secrets. 
  3. With the very important achievements it has recorded over 
the past seven years, our country is becoming an investment hot 
point to the capitalist countries. These countries consider 
Vietnam to be a market with the purchasing power of 70 million 
people, with abundant resources, with skilled and cheap labor, 
and with a stable political environment. 
  We are being faced with both new opportunities and new 
challenges. The new opportunities lie in the fact that we have 
new conditions for using--in the position of an independent, and 
unified nation with a stable political system--the considerable 
power sources of our country in terms of labor and people, 
natural resources and geographical position, market potential 
and the advantage of a country marching behind others, thereby 
benefiting from the experiences of the countries ahead of it. If 
we know how to satisfactorily exploit these factors, we will 
certainly be able to attract the outside world in our economic 
relations with it, and at the same time to obtain capital and 
modern science and technology along with experience in market 
economy management. 
  In the immediate future, however, we still have to surmount 
many big challenges. Although our national economy enjoys a 
fairly high growth rate, this growth is not yet steady, and many 
mishaps may still occur. Our capital, meager as it is, has been 
further affected by serious corruption and smuggling, while many 
sectors, echelons, localities, and units and many leading and 
managing cadres have spent more than they could afford to, have 
squandered money, and have allowed serious losses of public 
property to occur. Corruption and smuggling alone already 
constitute a big challenge to the economy, not to mention the 
damage they cause to public order and security, the ideology, 
culture, and society. 
  Our national economy has had to enter the race with the 
world 
and the region in the conditions of a very low starting point; 
moreover, it has not yet extricated itself from its crisis. 
Although we have shifted to the market mechanism only recently, 
we have to struggle for a foothold in the world market in highly 
unfavorable conditions: we lack knowledge and experience in 
competition; price differences are unfavorable; the world 
economy is in the grip of a recession and crisis and fraught 
with uncertainty.... This is not to mention the fact that we 
might make mistakes leading to deviation from the socialist 
orientation. Looking at the objective aspect alone, we can see 
that in the renovation process, owing to the change of the model 
of organization of socioeconomic life--from the old 
model full of errors to a new one that has never 
existed before in history--it is inevitable that micro and macro 
contradictions will crop up. 
  4. Meanwhile, the hostile forces have ceaselessly carried 
out 
the "peaceful evolution" strategy in new forms; if an 
opportunity presents itself, they will not hesitate to use 
violence to intervene from outside with the aim of abolishing 
socialism in our country or steering our country into their 
orbit. 
  To carry out "peaceful evolution" in the conditions of the 
United States lifting its embargo against and normalizing 
relations with our country, the hostile forces will surely 
concentrate on their two familiar trump cards: democracy, 
human rights and the free market. These two 
cards are bound to each other. Under the "democracy, human 
rights" label, they will make the most the forms of overt, legal 
activities to extol bourgeois freedom, to gather and disseminate 
information, to establish contact with their former agents and 
to incite extremist elements among the various ethnic minorities 
and religions to create forces opposed to our party and state. 
But what they pay special attention to is to incite, divide, and 
split our internal ranks, to strive to win over those persons 
who hold erroneous viewpoints, who are degenerate and deviant, 
and who demand political pluralism and multiparty opposition. 
  A primary, direct thrust by the hostile forces against the 
socioeconomic development line and process in our country in 
their "peaceful evolution" strategy is to take advantage of the 
investment and economic cooperation channel to promote the 
capitalist free market. They hope that when the private economic 
sector (including foreign capitalists investing in Vietnam) 
accounts for a significant proportion of our national economy 
and becomes a strong economic force, it may be able to bring 
pressure to bear to have our line altered. The economic change 
that would result in political change is to be reflected in the 
following points: 
  -- Through economic activities, they will seek to create 
sociopolitical bases, specifically to create class bases, social 
strata, a social ideology and psychology, and a social way of 
living in accordance with their intention. 
  -- Through various forms of technological transfer, 
international trade... they will keep our national economy in a 
backward, dependent state. (Of course, not all activities of 
economic cooperation and association of the outside world with 
us lie in the "peaceful evolution" channel, but reality has 
shown that such activities are not rare). 
  -- Through various forms such as study, seminars, exchanges 
of experience, and so forth...they will try to gradually modify 
our ways of organizing economic management and training our 
contingent of business management personnel in accordance with 
their models. Reality has shown that the study of and reference 
to the management experiences of the outside world through 
seminars, "refresher" courses, short-term training classes...are 
very necessary and useful to us, but they also represent golden 
opportunities for hostile forces to exploit our secrets for 
economic purposes--namely to gain high profits--and also for 
political purposes, a possibility that cannot be ruled out. 
  -- Through investment, aid, and loans... they will bring 
political pressure to bear and meddle in our country's internal 
affairs. In fact, a western statesman once said: "We have no 
blank checks. Economic aid depends on the progress of political 
democratization." 
  5. To firmly defend security in the conditions of an open 
economy, given our country's characteristics and specific 
situation at present, several different measures should be 
adopted and uniformly implemented. 
  In the ideological and political domain, we should 
see to it that all citizens, first of all the contingent of 
cadres and party members, in particular the contingent of cadres 
in charge of economic management and foreign relations, clearly 
perceive the new opportunities and advantages and even the new 
challenges and dangers. We should arouse patriotism and national 
pride, blot out the shame of hunger and poverty, rid ourselves 
of complexes and rancor, and show unity of will and 
singlemindedness in striving to achieve the goal of "making the 
people rich, the country strong, and society just and 
civilized." We must strongly promote theoretical research and 
the review of practice, attach special importance to burning 
issues that need to be resolved to put the people's hearts at 
ease and to achieve the unity of thought and action. These are 
very basic issues, such as: concretizing the socialist 
orientation; relations between socialist construction and 
national defense, between the class and the nation, and between 
the state and the international community; resolving the 
relations between economy and politics in in the socialist 
market mechanism; the polarization of the rich and the poor, 
class division, the current ideological trends, and so forth.... 
  It is true that a general model is not available yet, and 
the 
picture still remains an initial rough sketch; but, anyway, 
since we have embarked on renovation for seven years, if we pay 
attention to reviewing our practical activities, we may be able 
to begin resolving a number of issues. 
  We must continue to renovate the party's organization 
and operations. Since the sixth party congress, and 
particularly since the seventh party congress, it has become 
increasingly clear that stability is a condition for renovation, 
and fruitful renovation will in turn consolidate stability. If 
economic achievements create proper conditions for consolidating 
political stability, then political stability is the basis for 
renovation to record economic achievements. In a certain sense, 
economic renovation also means political renovation (renovation 
of line, policy, management mechanism). The party's strength and 
capability manifest themselves first of all in the drawing up of 
its political program and in determining the right direction for 
national development. At present, we should clarify the 
socialist orientation and, at the same time, develop the theory 
of socialism in Vietnam. Although we cannot demand that a full 
picture of the models of socialism be completed at once, we 
should nevertheless gradually explain the theoretical issues of 
socialism in the conditions of renovation. To continue carrying 
out the renovation undertaking, the party and state should show 
high resolve in purifying the contingent of cadres and party 
members, in particular key cadres--both incumbent and 
next-in-line--and should consider this the most important issue 
at present. 
  With regard to the struggle against corruption in 
particular, 
we should make public the assets of cadres, in particular 
high-ranking cadres from the provincial echelon up, especially 
in the economic and law-enforcement sectors (the public 
security, the courts, the organs of control, the customs...). 
The struggle against corruption and smuggling must be waged from 
top to bottom, from the party committee echelons to party 
members. Important court cases should be definitely tried by the 
law and should not be settled as internal matters. Lawbreakers 
must be severely punished; the failure to match words with deeds 
and the practice of making severe threats but meting out light 
penalties..., which have damaged the prestige of the party and 
state, must be ended forthwith. 
  We must increase the effectiveness of state management 
and ensure that economic development goes hand in glove with the 
maintenance of order and security. In the current first 
stage, increasing the effectiveness of state management and 
preventing, overcoming, and limiting the negative effects of the 
mechanism-changeover period and of the market mechanism itself 
is an urgent matter. The state should concentrate on 
satisfactorily performing its macroeconomic management 
functions. Specifically, these functions are: 
  -- Perfecting the legal system and creating all the 
necessary, stable, and consistent legal frameworks for economic 
activities on the basis of the market and the open-door policy 
toward the outside world. The state should clearly define what 
may not be done and what may be done only with permission, 
thereby creating a corridor of free enterprise in accordance 
with the law for businesses and citizens. In the immediate 
future, it should promulgate various laws along the line of 
encouraging investment for development while limiting and 
prevent social injustices, for example: the labor law, the wages 
law, the insurance law, the law on taxation and income 
regulation.... All production and business operations of various 
units of all economic sectors, including foreign-owed businesses 
in our countries, must be conducted in strict accordance with 
the law. At the same time, law-enforcement organs must strictly 
abide by the law; only by observing the law in an exemplary 
manner themselves will they be able to maintain the 
effectiveness of the law vis-a-vis all units and individuals. 
  -- Renovating and strengthening the executive system in all 
the three domains of organization, personnel, and operational 
mechanism. The executive system should be managed in a unified, 
concentrated, uninterrupted, and highly efficient manner. There 
should be a clear-cut division of labor among all the three 
powers--legislative, judiciary, and executive--from the central 
to the local echelons, and their effectiveness should be brought 
into full play. Laws are made for the whole country; the local 
administrations must really fulfill their responsibilities on 
the basis of the unified legal system and the centralized 
management of the government, thereby avoiding the state of each 
sector and each locality acting as a "little king" or a 
"warlord" and disregarding the law of the land. 
  -- A very important force for the state to use in 
strengthening management in this respect is the public security, 
the organs of control, and the courts, which are the ones who 
directly maintain nationals security and ensure socioeconomic 
stability and development on behalf of the state. These 
protective forces should be better equipped in terms of both 
perception and material means in order to bring into full play 
the strength of their individual organizations and to promote 
close cooperation with one another. 
  -- Continuing to renovate, perfect, and uniformly implement 
various social policies such as those aimed at creating jobs, 
wiping our hunger and reducing poverty, providing social 
welfare, suppressing outmoded customs and social evils... These 
are both short-term and long-term policies designed to prevent 
crime and to ensure that economic growth is closely linked with 
social progress and justice. Successfully ensuring social 
justice at a definite level is ensuring order and security. In 
this spirit, the law must severely punish all acts of enriching 
oneself unlawfully and must prevent people from enriching 
themselves by means of excessive and unethical exploitation and 
by impoverishing laborers. This is the most important point in 
the relationship between economic growth and the maintenance of 
order and security. 
  We must develop external economic relations in the 
right direction. At present our advance is gaining 
momentum, at the same time we have also come under pressure from 
many directions. In such conditions, our external relations 
activities should concentrate on serving our legitimate national 
interest, namely making the people prosperous and the country 
strong, peaceful, independent, and marked by social progress. 
Unlike in past times, today the hostile forces have many means 
by which to influence our country with the aim of driving us 
onto the capitalist road or steering us into their orbit, thus 
making us dependent on them. For this reason, external relations 
activities should hold fast to the two aspects of cooperation 
and struggle in order to develop and protect the economy, to 
defend national security, and to preserve and develop the 
national cultural traditions and characteristics. We protect our 
national security (including political security, economic 
security, cultural security, and social security) by renovating 
our mode of operation, effectively meeting the requirements of 
economic development, and creating favorable conditions for 
external economic activities. 

