CSO 

<F P=106> [Article with contributions by Ursula Bernhard, Wolfgang </F>
Gillmann, Siegfried Grass, Josef Hess, Siegfried Nagel, Georg 
Weishaupt: "Even the 100- 
  [TEXT] With the amendment of the 
genetic engineering law, representatives of the chemical 
industry believe that Germany as a business location will once 
again become attractive to researchers in genetic engineering, a 
field that represents one of the most dynamic tools for 
innovation. As a result of the reduced licensing and 
registration periods as well as the simplification of these 
procedures, German scientists will finally be able to 
reestablish contact with world-wide developments in this field. 
Professor Wolfgang Hilger, chairman of the board of Hoechst AG, 
has been a tireless advocate of genetic engineering over the 
past several years. He believes that its importance to 
industrial development is at least as great as that of 
microelectronics. 
  As a key technology, genetic engineering stimulates and 
influences many fields. It is indispensable in the struggle 
against disease, from research into its causes all the way to 
the treatment of patients. Agricultural scientists have great 
expectations of developing new varieties of plants that will not 
only produce higher yields, but will also make it possible to 
use more ecologically benign methods of crop and harvest 
protection. Biotechnical methods could make important 
contributions to resource and energy conservation. Genetic 
engineering could also lead to important advances in 
environmental technology, concerning the removal of wastes or 
contaminants in the soil, for example. 
  Whereas outside of Germany, particularly in the United 
States, research and its industrial application has progressed 
rapidly, Germany has almost inevitably fallen behind. The 
primary reason for this has been the movement of research 
efforts, young researchers, and even many firms out of Germany. 
It is unlikely that the production and research resources now 
located abroad will return, but at least Germany will be once 
again be on the list of potential locations for upcoming 
projects. 
  No other market is currently generating quite as much 
commotion as is the telecommunications market. With the ongoing 
breakup of state monopolies, more and more fields in Germany 
being opened to competition. For example, private businesses 
such as Mannesmann Mobilfunk and E-Plus have established their 
own mobile radio telephone networks. More and more private 
investors are also competing with the state-owned enterprise 
Telekom in the establishment and operation of satellite and, in 
the future, terrestrial data networks. 
  And this is not all. Even the state telephone monopoly is 
being increasingly eroded. Concerns such as Vebe, RWE, or Viag 
are joining with other companies to build extensive 
communications networks. They and other large enterprises use 
these networks for internal telephone traffic as well as for 
remote transmission of images and other data. They are preparing 
for 1 January 1998, when the telephone monopoly will be 
dissolved and they will apply for licensing as private telephone 
networks. 
  The reactions of the German communications firms to the 
opening of the market are mixed. On the one hand, new fields 
such as the mobile telephone market are opening up to them. On 
the other hand, foreign competitors are champing at the bit, 
eager to use their specialized know-how and more advantageous 
price/service ratio to snatch contracts away from German 
manufacturers. However, it is the German companies that profit 
the most from the enormous investments (approximately 60 billion 
German marks [DM]) made by Telekom in the new laender. 
  Information technology (hardware and software) and 
communications technology are drawing closer together. An 
information system should not only streamline operations, but 
also inform, in the original sense of the word. Data is 
exchanged on all levels. Increased cabling as well as the GSM 
(Global System for Mobile Communications) telephone networks 
will make it possible to transmit every piece of information to 
any location. Stimulus will also come from entertainment 
electronics --multimedia is the watchword here. Traffic control, 
metrology, control systems engineering, education, medical 
electronics -- researchers have plenty of ideas. 
  If the computer industry is still struggling with tremendous 
difficulties, it is primarily because it has not yet learned how 
to translate its many good ideas into marketable products. In 
their understandable enthusiasm for what is technically 
feasible, retailers and developers ignore the real needs of the 
users. 
  It is essential that the shift to 32-bit technology and 
significantly more powerful microprocessors result in genuinely 
new uses. The consumer will be happy to see prices continue to 
be driven lower by the entrance of alternatives such as those 
offered by AMD or IBM/Motorola into the PC (personal computer) 
market, which is still dominated by the intel-processors. Then 
it is up to the software developer to put life into this 
fascinating and affordable technology. 
  Even in the most devastating structural crisis, such as that 
in which the relatively young data-processing industry currently 
finds itself, companies that have a clear strategy and focus 
their goods and services on a well-defined market do well. It is 
the large traditional data-processing concerns, which have a 
particularly hard time adapting to new market conditions, that 
are currently struggling with heavy losses. The industry is 
entering a new era of integrated computer and communications 
products. It is predicted that by the year 2000 the number of 
radio data transmitters in use alone will exceed 20 million. 
Radio data transmission makes possible such operations as the 
wireless exchange of data and information via portable palmtop, 
notebook, and laptop computers. 
  The expected rise in the world's population and the rapid 
economic growth in Southeast Asia will bring with it a sharp 
increase in energy consumption over the next 30 years; the World 
Energy Conference predicts an increase of 52 percent. The demand 
for power plants will increase dramatically. The Lesser 
Developed Countries (LDCs) need new power plants, while the 
industrialized countries and eastern Europe primarily need to 
replace outdated facilities. Experts predict an annual new 
building capacity of 95,000 megawatts worldwide over the next 10 
years. This translates to contracts for approximately 300 new 
power plants, for which major power plant construction firms 
such as Siemens, ABB, GEC Alsthom, General Electric, and 
Matsushita will compete. 
  Even should the construction of new atomic power plants 
continue to be blocked, power plant construction will continue 
to be a growth sector. Conventional power plants have improved 
significantly over the past few years in terms of technology. 
The tapping of new gas fields combined with improvements in the 
efficiency of the gas turbines has given this field a tremendous 
boost. The double use of the combustion heat in "Gas and Steam 
Turbine Power Plants" (the GUD technique), also called 
combination power plants, has made it possible to achieve record 
efficiencies of nearly 60 percent. When combined with a heat 
coupling, efficiencies of 90 percent are within reach. This 
increases the earning power of modern power plants dramatically. 
  Nonetheless, it is price and low-cost financing that are the 
primary focus of worldwide competition. In addition, local 
manufacturing is being demanded, causing the major concerns to 
increasingly engage in joint ventures in the LDCs or Eastern 
Europe in order to stay in the market. 
  All the industrialized countries are promoting the key 
technology of material development. This is because improvements 
and innovations in materials can lead to better or more 
competitive products. Many products on the world market have 
become more durable as a result of such improvements, including 
automobiles, computers, communications and entertainment 
electronics, and even artificial organs and dentures. 
  German industry is still a leader in materials research and 
development (R&amp;D). However, experts surveyed for the new 
Federal 
Ministry of Research and Technology (BMFT) Delphi Study rank 
Germany third, behind the United States and Japan -- but still 
by no means out of the race. The consulting firm Arthur D. 
Little, which was contracted by the BMFT to evaluate its 
materials research program, assured the BMFT that the research 
fields into which it has channeled approximately DM2 billion 
since 1985 have been those that will enable Germany to maintain 
its leading position. 
  One of the goals recommended by the study -- in addition to 
higher technological and industrial productivity -- concerns 
materials research. This goal is the more careful consideration 
of long-term ecological consequences. In the past few decades, 
materials researchers have considered their primary job to be 
the development of materials that meet their requirements both 
reliably and as cheaply as possible. 
  Now, however, the effect that a material has on man and his 
environment are being taken into greater consideration, both 
with regard to manufacturing and to processing,. This is due in 
part to legislation such as product liability laws, emission 
standards, waste disposal laws, and other regulations. The 
disposal, whether monolithically or as a compound, of a material 
that can no longer function as a product should, if at all 
possible, generate a new product. This is the ideal championed 
by proponents of a consistent recycling program. 
  Cooperation between the state and parliament will result in 
continued and even more direct intervention where materials are 
concerned. A carbon dioxide or energy consumption surcharge -- 
regardless of its final form -- and a heat utilization 
regulation will not only penalize plants that must be licensed 
for their emissions, but, via the resulting higher prices, will 
also indirectly affect the materials market mechanisms. The 
adoption by the state of product-energy indicators --which are 
not yet being publicly discussed -- would have a tremendous 
influence on which materials are available. 
  Even the automobile, which has been around for over 100 
years, is subject to improvement. Since World War II, there have 
been many innovations that have genuinely benefited the 
consumer. Currently under development are an anti-theft device 
which operates on the redundancy principle, a driver- and 
passenger-side airbag, and an airbag for side impact protection. 
These useful developments are at first available only in 
top-of-the-line models, but are increasingly incorporated in the 
more economical models. In the case of the "active chassis," 
which permits even the rear wheels to be steered within a 
limited radius, engineers and marketing experts are not yet in 
agreement as to whether the cost-benefit ratio is acceptable. 
  For the future, the automobile industry is adjusting to the 
notion that both the government and the public will demand lower 
carbon dioxide emissions. However, this is only possible through 
a corresponding decline in consumption. Consequently, automobile 
manufacturers are presently leaning towards smaller automobiles 
and new, more efficient, engines such as the VW Diesel TDI 
(*turbo direct injection*) with direct injection. The three 
liters per 100 kilometers average consumption rate is within 
reach. 
  At the same time, the industry is adjusting to requirements 
such as those of California, which within a few years will 
require a certain percentage of newly licensed vehicles to 
consist of cars with 0 percent emissions. This is only possible 
with electric automobiles. Despite the new developments in 
batteries, which have made it possible for batteries to hold as 
much as four times the charge held by conventional lead 
batteries, pure electric vehicles are still hampered by their 
limited range. Furthermore, they are dependent upon recharging 
stations. Consequently, at the very best they are suitable for 
those downtown areas that will soon be off limits to gas- or 
diesel-powered vehicles. A possible solution to this problem is 
offered by vehicles with a hybrid drive, which would use an 
electric engine within city limits and a combustion engine 
outside of the city, whereby use of the combustion engine also 
recharges the electric engine. 
  There are also promising developments -- by Mercedes and 
BMW, 
for example -- that make it possible to use hydrogen gas 
produced from water via electrolysis as a fuel. Finally, there 
are devices to aid the driver in finding and reaching his 
destination. This can be accomplished either with the help of a 
city map loaded in an on-board computer or via a satellite link. 

