Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Owing primarily to the damaging influence of U.S. 
visitors and of Mexican emigrants returning to their places of 
origin, during the past five years a considerable rise has been 
observed in drug consumption. It involves mainly the so-called 
hard drugs (cocaine, morphine, heroin, etc.), consumed by the 
young population in the country's northern border zone. This 
disclosure was made by those in charge of programs of preventive 
action against drug addiction in Chihuahua, Baja California, 
Tamaulipas, and Sonora States. 
  In the context of the National Meeting on Strategies To 
Prevent Addiction, organized by the National Sports Commission's 
Social Crime Prevention Board, the speakers agreed in making the 
foregoing assertion. At the same time, they revealed that, in 
the border towns of their respective states, the drug addiction 
problem has worsened for the reasons mentioned, and also because 
of economic and social factors inducing the youth, in 
particular, from all sectors of society, to consume toxic 
substances. 
  Jose Luis Acevedo Lopez, representative of the Health 
Secretariat Agency in Baja California, for his part, stressed 
that, during the past two years, 96,000 persons between ages 14 
and 40 have been arrested on various charges involving 
addiction. He noted that, in the town of Mexicali alone, 50 
percent of that group were addicted to alcohol, a quarter 
consumed marijuana, and the rest were proven to have consumed 
hard substances. 
  The representative of the ``Buddies'' Civil Association of 
Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, and Piedad Huerta Armeros, in turn, 
disclosed that the rate of drug consumption in these northern 
zones of the country has risen. She attributed this to the fact 
that ``we are a transit area'' for large volumes of different 
types of drugs shipped to the United States. Some are left in 
the border towns and, since many people in the local areas are 
involved in drug distribution and sales, the youth, 
particularly, are encouraged to begin consuming those substances. 
  During the work sessions on addiction prevention and 
rehabilitation of addicts, held during the course of the meeting 
to exchange views on the problems in each of the regions, Ramon 
Murillo Ochoa, from the Tamaulipas agency of the Office of the 
Attorney General of the Republic, declared that it was 
discovered that the increase often originates in the consumption 
of socially accepted toxic substances, such as alcohol and 
tobacco. Hence, he emphasized, the high rate of consumption of 
the latter should be considered equally important, because they 
are the vehicle leading to others more harmful to consumers and 
to the society in general. 
  On this topic, the assistant director for institutional 
liaison of the National Council Against Addiction, Luis F. 
Cardenas, reported that the organization to which he belongs, 
through its state and municipal councils, is taking special 
action in the so-called ``high risk zones'' to reduce the menace 
of addiction. 

