Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on "exclusive" interviews with Dr. Fathi al-Shiqaqi, </F>
secretary general of the Islamic Jihad in Palestine, and Nayif 
Hawatimah, secretary general of the Democratic Front for the 
Liberation of Palestine, by an unidentified KEYHAN correspondent 
in Damascus; date not given] 
  [Text] The secretary general of the Islamic Jihad in 
Palestine Dr. Fathi al-Shiqaqi and the secretary general of the 
Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine [DFLP] Nayif 
Hawatimah answered questions put by a KEYHAN correspondent in 
Damascus on the dimensions of the Hebron catastrophe. 
  We now present the exclusive interviews with these 
Palestinian personalities: 
  Dr. Fathi al-Shiqaqi, the secretary general of the Islamic 
Jihad in Palestine, elaborated on the organization's stance on 
the killing of dozens of Palestinian Muslims in the mosque of 
the Prophet Abraham (peace be upon bim) in Hebron in an 
exclusive interview with our correspondent in Damascus. 
  He said: This massacre was not at all unexpected, as the 
criminal Zionists have been perpetrating the most heinous crimes 
in the past 50 years against the Muslim Palestinian nation. 
  He added: The criminal Zionists believe they can achieve 
their unholy objectives by martyring the greatest number of 
Palestinian Muslims and by driving the Palestinian nation out of 
the country. 
  Regarding the joint plot by the Zionist armed forces and the 
Jewish settlers in carrying out the massacre, Dr. al-Shiqaqi 
stated: Naturally, the Zionist armed forces jointly carried out 
this crime, because, in the past, 40 soldiers have been on guard 
at the mosque round the clock. But at the time this crime was 
committed, only two or three soldiers were at the scene of the 
crime. They assisted the attacking settlers and provided them 
with the necessary arms and equipment to kill the greatest 
number of worshippers. 
  He said: After committing the catastrophic crime, the 
criminals easily fled the scene with the help of the Zionist 
armed forces. He blamed the government of Yitzhaq Rabin for the 
crime and said: There is no doubt that the Rabin government had 
all the information on this crime before it was perpetrated and 
even prepared the conditions for killing the Palestinian Muslims. 
  On the condemnation of the crime by Yasir 'Arafat, he said: 
It is absurd that Rabin and Clinton also condemned the crime, 
when they are accomplices to the crime, the natural result of 
the treasonous PLO accord with the Zionist regime plotted by the 
United States. 
  On the future response by the Palestinian organizations to 
this atrocity, Dr. al-Shiqaqi stated: Our nation does not fear 
intimidation or martyrdom and will continue the intifadah. The 
Palestinian guerrillas will, helped by almighty God, very soon 
deliver a shattering blow to the Zionists and those who have 
compromised with them. We will soon avenge the blood of the 
martyrs of the Hebron Mosque. 
  Referring to the stances of international organizations on 
this crime, al-Shiqaqi stated: Our nation pays no attention to 
these organizations' stances, as the United States is 
supervising them and using them. The international 
organizations claim to condemn the crime but have taken no 
important step to condemn the Zionist regime. The United States 
will never exert pressure on Israel for committing this crime. 
  Commenting on the possibility of 'Arafat capitalizing on the 
crime at the mosque, the secretary general of Islamic Jihad in 
Palestine said: Instead of taking a stance against the Zionist 
regime, 'Arafat has agreed to accept the U.S. Government's 
invitation to continue talks with Rabin to rein in the 
intifadah. On principle, 'Arafat has become an agent for the 
policies of the United States and the Zionist regime to pave the 
way for killing more Palestinian Muslims. 
  Concluding, he alluded to the stances of the United States 
and some of the Western and regional countries asking the 
Palestinian organizations not to carry out guerrilla operations 
and to confine themselves to political measures and stated: The 
United States and the countries above wish to draw our nation 
into a compromise and will not give the Palestinian 
organizations permission to take any political action. But the 
Palestinian nation is determined to continue its struggle and 
soon, the flames of our nation's fury will descend upon the 
Zionists and upon those who have compromised and lethal blows 
will be dealt by means of armed struggle against the Zionist 
regime. The PLO accord with the Zionist regime will be thrown 
in the dustbin of history. 
  In his remarks to the KEYHAN correspondent, Nayif Hawatimah 
stated: The Zionist regime is the element behind the crime of 
killing the worshippers in al-Khalil and 'Arafat paved the way 
for its occurrence. According to Hawatimah, 'Arafat has made a 
two-faced statement. First, he claimed that a demented Israeli 
had committed the crime; he did this to prevent clashes from 
erupting and the intifadah from continuing. Second, 'Arafat 
openly held talks with Clinton and Rabin and accepted the 
Rabin-Clinton plan for reining in the Palestinian guerrilla 
operations. Hawatimah added: This atrocity has been committed 
as a result of the accord among the United States, Israel, and 
'Arafat and this compromise has been the catalyst for the 
heinous atrocity in Hebron. 
  Answering a question on whether he will only confine himself 
to political actions at this stage, Hawatimah declared: The DFLP 
has faith in political means and armed operations and will 
utilize every means to inflict a blow on the Israeli regime. He 
called on the Western countries to revoke all negotiations with 
the Zionist regime and asked the Arab countries to continue 
their economic siege of Israel. On the need for coordination 
among the Palestinian groups opposed to the trend of compromise, 
Hawatimah said: This coordination will continue without heeding 
the existing difficulties and the Palestinian organizations will 
continue to prepare the Palestinian nation for the intifadah and 
general strikes. 
  According to Hawatimah, the United States does not 
comprehend 
the real internal problems of Palestine and 'Arafat has no 
standing in the Palestinian nation. He cannot direct or rein in 
the intifadah. He added: The Zionist regime's massacres must be 
halted and the UN forces should be sent to the West Bank and the 
Gaza Strip for this purpose. 
  Hawatimah stated: Extensive demonstrations continue on the 
West Bank, in Gaza, and in the Palestinian camps in Syria, 
Lebanon, and Jordan and general strikes have been announced for 
three days inside the occupied territories. The Zionists have 
given no privileges to 'Arafat and merely prepared themselves 
for committing more crimes against the Palestinian nation. Such 
crimes will continue to be perpetrated under the cover of the 
'Arafat-Rabin accord. 
  He also announced that the DFLP accepts UN Security Council 
Resolutions 242 and 338 and that the United Nations must send 
its troops to supervise the conditions inside the West Bank and 
Gaza Strip and should treat the occupied areas like those in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. He appealed to Russia, the United States, 
and other countries to prevent new crimes against the 
Palestinians. 

