Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Bettina Burger and Markus Lenzer: "Tallinn's </F>
Reform Successes With Social Difficulties"] 
  [Text] Hamburg--The slump in the Estonian economy is likely 
to come to an end by the turn of the year. As early as 1992 the 
drop in the real GDP was 20 to 25 percent lower than originally 
forecast. 
  If it should be confirmed that in the past year the GDP grew 
from a nominal 13.5 billion Estonian kroons (8 Estonian kroons = 
1 German mark) in 1992 to about 20 billion kroons, one would 
even have to anticipate a slight amount of growth in real GDP 
for 1993, with a moderate annual inflation of about 30 percent. 
  The driving force behind the economic development is to an 
increasing extent private companies. These usually involve newly 
founded firms and privatized state-owned enterprises. 
  The government has succeeded in rapidly promoting 
privatization in some sectors. With the creation of a single 
privatization agency in the summer of 1993, privatization 
activities were also organizationally streamlined and the 
potential overlapping of expertise avoided. 
<H5>  Tourism and Marine Transportation With High Growth Rates </H5>
  By the end of December 1993, 45 out of the total of 130 
internationally competing major companies had been wholly or 
partially privatized. In the framework of small-scale 
privatization, over the first nine months of 1993 approximately 
60 percent of the small industrial enterprises had been 
transferred to private hands. In this area the pace of 
privatization will slow down, however, since questions of the 
legality of property created before the independence ("black 
privatization") have not yet been solved. 
  In the trade and service sector, the transfer of property 
should continue to take place quickly. About 80 percent of the 
privatization had been completed by the fall of 1993. 
  While all of industry is recovering only slowly, the service 
industries of tourism and marine transportation are recording 
high growth rates. The income from these services at present 
represents Estonia's most important source of foreign revenue. 
The extensive influx of foreign currency simultaneously 
reinforces confidence in the Estonian kroon. 
<H5>  A Restrictive Monetary and Fiscal Policy </H5>
  One guarantee of the stability of the Estonian kroon is a 
restrictive monetary and fiscal policy, which continues to be 
consistently implemented by the central bank and the government. 
For the current year an inflation rate of about 20 percent is 
anticipated. This figure was also taken as the basis for the 
1994 national budget passed in December 1993 with a total volume 
of 5.7 billion kroons. 
  To make it possible to have the balanced budget mandated by 
law, the spending margins for 1994 have been set just as narrow 
as in the previous year's budget. However, these economy 
measures represent a significant component of the stability 
policy. But those portions of the population which are 
particularly affected by the economic conversion process suffer 
particularly from this, among them unemployed, retirees, and 
families with many children. 
  The small amount of money for unemployment compensation is 
offered through an employment fund, which is exclusively funded 
by the national treasury. At 180 kroons the unemployment 
compensation is clearly below the minimum subsistence level of 
280 kroons. It is therefore so low that many unemployed do not 
even turn to the labor office where they are officially 
registered. 
  The official unemployment figures, which form the basis for 
the state's spending, greatly improve on the actual employment 
development. While the official unemployment rate on 1 September 
1993 was 1.84 percent (16,151 unemployed), the actual rate of 
unemployed is estimated to be three to four times higher. For 
the end of 1994 an official unemployment figure of 40,000 
persons is expected. 
  A faster drop in employment is anticipated above all in the 
heavy industrial enterprises, since they are still at the 
beginning of the restructuring. Many workers have already been 
affected by a cutback in working hours and forced vacations. 
Between January and July 1993 nearly 27,000 workers were thus 
temporarily laid off. 
  The lack of financial means also prevents the necessary 
expansion of the administrative organization. For this reason 
people looking for work can only expect little support from the 
labor offices in helping to find jobs. Training and continuing 
education programs are still largely lacking. 
<H5>  The State Must Subsidize the Social Funds </H5>
  Pensions and child subsidies are financed through the social 
fund, the second leg of the social net. The social fund receives 
most of its funding from employer contributions (social taxes). 
Due to the poor payment ethics of business owners, about 
one-third of the fund must be subsidized by the state. Here as 
well the financial scope permits only minor support payments and 
for those affected it means a daily struggle for survival. The 
amount of the pension, which so far is still independent of 
income, is usually the minimum subsistence level. 
  To guarantee at least a cost-of-living adjustment for all 
subsidies, including unemployment money, employment and social 
funds had to be financially replenished. The amendment to the 
social law, which took effect at the beginning of the year, can 
be regarded as a small step in this direction. It enables better 
control and sanction mechanisms with which to reinforce the 
payment ethics of the employers. The anticipated additional 
income is intended to raise the level of support and make the 
system of social security more efficient. 
  The government finds itself in a dilemma with which all 
transformation nations in Eastern Europe are being confronted. 
This refers to the target conflict between macroeconomic 
stabilization on the one hand, and battling social hardships on 
the other. Only in this way can broad acceptance of the 
market-economic reforms be achieved. Estonia has shown that 
despite the existing structural weaknesses, it has set out on a 
promising path in the direction of market economy. 

