Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Tim Kelsey in London and Martin Himmelheber in </F>
Rottweil: "Documents `Link UK Company to Illegal Arms Deal'"] 
  [Text] Documents which allegedly show that Royal Ordnance 
helped a German arms manufacturer to evade sanctions were 
presented to a German court yesterday. 
  It has been, claimed that Britain's largest arms 
manufacturer 
-- while a state-run concern -- was involved in a plot in the 
1980's to supply banned countries with arms. 
  THE INDPENDENT published news of the court case last week 
and 
also separately reported that guns made by the same German 
manufacturer, Heckler &amp; Koch, had been exported to Serbia 
after 
the imposition of the United Nations embargo on the former 
Yugoslavia in 1991; Heckler &amp; Koch was then wholly owned by 
Royal Ordnance. The company has denied shipping weapons 
directly to Serbia but has conceded that a number of "hunting 
rifles" were exported. Royal Ordnance said it would never 
breach British law but could be held responsible if weapons were 
sold on to third parties. 
  The presence in Serbia of Heckler &amp; Koch weapons is not 
a 
matter under consideration by the court in Rottweil, 
Baden-Wuerttemberg. This case focuses on allegations that a 
managing director of the company, Walter Lamp, breached German 
arms exporting laws for nearly 10 years prior to 1987, with the 
help of Royal Ordnance. In 1987, Royal Ordnance was sold to 
British Aerospace and in 1991 the company bought Heckler &amp; 
Koch. 
  The prosecution in the trial, which reconvened yesterday, 
claims that arms from Heckler &amp; Koch were exported via Royal 
Ordnance, which allegedly provided false papers and some 
components, to a variety of illegal destinations including East 
Germany and Nicaragua. Mr Lamp denies he was responsible for 
licensing exports. 
  The prosecution is concentrating on a shipment of 
machine-guns exported via Britain officially destined for the 
United Arab Emirates. The ship carrying the guns, which set 
sail from Liverpool, was seized en route by Italian police in 
1987 who discovered Iraqi naval officers on board and believed 
that Iraq was its real destination. It was illegal at this time 
for German firms to export weapons to the UAE, but not for UK 
firms. 
  The judge, Siegfried Haage, yesterday allowed around a 
hundred documents on to the court record which are said to show 
that Royal Ordnance was involved as a "smokescreen" for illegal 
Heckler &amp; Koch exports. They include bills, export papers and 
pro forma invoices. 
  The defence then asked Judge Haage to terminate the trial on 
the grounds that following the reports in THE INDEPENDENT, which 
have caused uproar in the German media, Mr Lamp could not be 
assured of a fair trial. 
  "There is no chance for a fair trial unless the accusations 
regarding arms exports to Serbia are cleared," Siegfried Kauder, 
for the defence, said. "The German press does not want to 
poison the climate but they do if they take THE INDEPENDENT 
stories and reprint them." He denied that Heckler &amp; Koch had 
exported weapons to Serbia. 
  Judge Haage is to consider whether to end the trial. The 
case continues next week. 

