BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 11 KYODO -- Malaysian Prime Minister 
Mahathir Mohamad slammed Western-style democracy Wednesday [11 
May] while praising China's brand of authoritarianism. 
  Speaking at an international conference on China's economic 
reforms, Mahathir blamed the West for being "motivated by 
selfish interests" when professing concerns over humanitarian, 
democratic and environmental issues in Asia. 
  Although invited to comment on China's socialist market 
economy, Mahathir embarked on a long tirade on the difficulties 
Malaysia had in developing its own brand of democracy. 
  "The worst part is the assumption that democratic Western 
countries can foist their principles through undemocratic 
means," he said. "Sanctions, arm twisting of various kinds and 
sustained campaigns through their controlled media are weapons 
they never hesitate to use." 
  While calling democracy the "greatest idea ever conceived by 
man," he also said Asian societies, in contrast to the West, 
believed in strong stable governments, instead of weak 
governments which are constantly changing. 
  Greater democracy and individual freedom to go against the 
interests of the majority are luxuries China can ill afford now, 
he said, while adding authoritarianism is better than anarchy. 
  "An anarchic situation is not going to facilitate the growth 
and flowering of a free market," he said. "Business needs 
order." 
  "Already we see the Chinese being badgered and hectored to 
conform to systems and values which have been devised elsewhere 
for the benefit of different people," he said in an obvious 
reference to U.S. pressure on China to improve its human rights 
record. 
  The Malaysian leader discounted China's growing military 
expenditures, saying if China is a threat to East Asia, then 
Japan's military growth is equally threatening. 
  "On the other hand a prosperous China will become the engine 
of growth firstly for East Asia, including Southeast Asia and 
the world," he said. 
  Mahathir, who did not rule out future upheaval and bloodshed 
in China, concluded that the "socialist market economy" is the 
answer to China's political and economic needs and China should 
not attempt to make a radical political change. 
  "The day will come when individual freedom to disrupt and 
undermine the well-being of the great majority will be enshrined 
in the democratic values of China," he predicted. "But for the 
moment the interest of the majority demands an orderly society." 

