BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpts" of Zhejiang Provincial Report on the Execution </F>
of the 1993 Economic and Social Development Plan, and the Draft 
of the 1994 Economic and Social Development Plan -- by Zhang 
Qimei, vice governor of Zhejiang and chairman of the Provincial 
Planning and Economic Committee, at the Second Session of the 
Eighth Zhejiang Provincial People's Congress on 26 February 1994] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies: 
  The provincial people's government asked me to report to you 
on the execution of the 1993 provincial economic and social 
development plan and the draft 1994 economic and social 
development plan. Please examine this report. 
<H5>  1. The Execution of the 1993 Plan </H5>
  In 1993, under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
important talks and the guidelines laid down by the 14th 
National Party Congress, the vast number of cadres and people in 
Zhejiang continued to emancipate their minds, seize the 
opportunity, and speed up their pace of reform, opening up, and 
modernization. On the basis of the fairly high growth in 1992, 
the province continued to pick up speed in its economic 
development and achieved noticeable success in all social causes. 
  The economy continued to develop rapidly. It is 
expected that the gross domestic product [GDP] in 1993 will 
increase 25 percent over 1992, reaching 164.5 billion yuan. 
Agricultural production yielding high output of quality goods 
and high returns developed with gratifying results, village and 
town enterprises were developing faster while making 
improvements, and rural areas' economic vitality was even 
stronger. Industrial production maintained its high growth, and 
the value added by industry increased 40 percent, reaching 87 
billion yuan. Production and marketing were well coordinated, 
and the sales rate of industrial goods produced by enterprises 
operated by townships and larger areas reached 96 percent. The 
province's state-owned industries, the revenues of which were 
part of the budget resources, turned in 4.34 billion yuan of 
profit taxes, and the 28.8 percent increase was higher than the 
increase of their output value. Investments increased rather 
rapidly. Public investments in fixed assets grew 66.2 percent, 
reaching 60 billion yuan. Urban and rural markets thrived, the 
total retails of consumer goods increased 33.2 percent, reaching 
75.87 billion yuan. 
  Macroeconomic regulation and control yielded positive 
results. Implementing the guidelines laid down in the No. 6 
Document issued by the central authorities and proceeding from 
actual needs, the province gave priority to putting financial 
situation and taxation in order and to screening investments in 
fixed assets. In terms of banking operations, the amount of 
savings deposits by people in Zhejiang was 15 billion yuan more 
than that registered early in the year, or 3.78 billion yuan 
higher than that a year before [tong bi duo zeng 0681 3024 1122 
1073]. All banking institutions had a favorable balance. Funds 
needed for purchasing agricultural and sideline products were 
ensured. Financially, revenues increased faster, reaching 
16.656 billion yuan in the year, or 38.6 percent higher than a 
year ago; and expenditures were put under control. In the field 
of investment, the construction of many projects -- which were 
not in line with the state's industrial policy, which were 
unsure of capital and other resources, and for which the future 
was unclear -- were halted. Financial resources were pooled for 
supporting 21 capital construction projects and 169 
technological upgrading projects. Allotments of resources for 
key projects were more readily ensured. 
  Reforms continued to deepen. As required by the 
establishment of a socialist market economic system, efforts 
were made in reforming enterprises, market systems, government 
functions, and social security. With the removal of control 
over grain purchasing and market prices, agricultural production 
made the crucial step toward the market. Enterprises enjoyed 
greater autonomy following the implementation of the 
"Regulations Governing the Change of Operating Mechanisms in 
State-Owned Industrial Enterprises" and the provincial measures 
for implementing these regulations. Positive efforts were made 
in exploring feasibilities of reforming the system governing 
property ownership. The pace of building various types of 
market gathered speed. The construction of futures trade 
markets started, and markets of technology, information, 
personnel, real estate, and other goods and services for 
production continued to develop. The establishment of a social 
security system covering old age pension, insurance against 
unemployment, housing, and free medical services continued to 
proceed step by step. The restructuring of the planned economic 
system continued to deepen. All the provincial mandatory plans 
for industrial production were abolished. In the field of 
investment, investors were required to hold themselves 
responsible for their investment projects and invest according 
to contract; and the mechanisms governing investment became 
noticeably more efficient after measures binding investors to 
responsible for investment capital, construction projects, 
management, and repayment of loans themselves. 
  Important progress was made in infrastructural 
construction. Governments at various levels throughout the 
province attached great importance to the construction of 
projects in transportation, energy, communications, and other 
infrastructural facilities. They sought various ways to raise 
funds to increase their investment and speed up the pace of 
construction. The Xiaoshan Power Plant's 125,000-kw generating 
unit and 12 other key projects, including the Nantaitou 
floodgate in Nanpai along Hangjia Lake, were required to be 
completed and put into operation according to plan. They were 
completed and yielded results or partial results. The 
construction of the Jinhua-Wenzhou Railway was started. The 
Shaoxing section of the province's first highway that was 
self-designed and self-built, and whose funds were self-raised 
was completed and open to traffic. The construction of the 
Hangzhou-Ningbo Expressway was accelerated. The construction of 
the Zhejiang-Jiangxi Double-Track Railway, the ore wharf at 
Beilun Harbor, the first-stage project of the Jiaxing Power 
Plant, the Yongning River-harnessing project, and the Shafan 
reservoir proceeded smoothly. The province built 560 kilometers 
of new highways and rebuilt 1,300 kilometers of first- or 
second-grade highways. Postal and telecommunications service at 
or above the county level was program-controlled, and the volume 
of such service doubled and redoubled. There were cellular 
telephones available in cities and counties. By the first 
quarter of this year, power plants installed an additional 
850,000 kw capacity. 
  New steps were taken in opening to the outside 
world. The State Council approved the establishment of the 
Hangzhou and Xiaoshan economic and technological development 
zones and a comprehensive development project on Daxie Island. 
The provincial government also approved the establishment of a 
number of economic development zones, including the Jinhua 
Economic Development Zone, and the building of Zhapu and three 
other secondary ports. In 1993, $1.033 billion in foreign funds 
was directly used, an increase of 251.3 percent and more than 
the total of the previous 14 years. The total volume of export 
trade amounted to $4.439 billion, up 19.9 percent. 
  Social undertakings continuously developed. There 
were 297 achievements in scientific research which won 
provincial-level awards for scientific and technological 
progress, and noticeable results were achieved in using 
scientific-research achievements in production. The enrollment 
in universities and special or technical secondary schools 
increased more than 30 percent over 1992. The construction of 
the provincial museum, the Hemudu Museum, and other cultural 
projects were completed and put to use. Zhejiang radio and 
television programs were transmitted through satellite. New 
achievements were scored in family planning. By the end of the 
year, the province's population was 43.348 million, and the 
natural population growth rate was 7.03 per thousand. The 
incomes of people in both urban and rural areas increased. The 
annual average amount of per capita income that city dwellers 
used for living expenses was 3,371 yuan, and the net per capita 
income of residents in rural areas was 1,746 yuan, increasing 15 
percent and 10.3 percent respectively after allowing for price 
rises. 
  While fully affirming our achievements, we should also note 
soberly that there exist contradictions and new problems in our 
economic life. They mainly are: (1) Although much has been 
done in readjusting the structure, the structure as a whole is 
not rational enough. We have optimized the variety and 
structure of agricultural production and also increased the 
production of quality, famous-brand, new, and special products, 
but the acreage sown to grain crops has reduced, and so has 
their output. Agriculture as the foundation of the national 
economy is not solid enough, the industrial structure is not 
readjusted quickly enough, and there are still substandard 
construction, and a number of projects without bright market 
prospects. Tangible results have been achieved in the 
construction of transportation and power projects; however, 
supply still falls far short of demand in these regards. The 
development of tertiary industry lags behind economic 
development, and its internal structure has yet to be improved. 
(2) Although the total amounts of profits and taxes have grown 
rather rapidly, the economic returns of industries as a whole 
are not sufficiently ideal. Enterprises that have made profits 
are mainly those producing goods for investment, and the profits 
of general enterprises have fallen. (3) Increased Prices have 
not dropped. The annual retail price index increased 16.7 
percent, affecting in varying degrees the lives of residents in 
both urban and rural areas. The above problems merit our close 
attention, and we should take effective measures to solve them 
step by step in the new year. 
  2. Basic Requirements Set For Economic and Social 
Development in 1994 
  This year is important for following through with the 
guidelines laid down by the Third Plenary Session of the 14th 
CPC Central Committee, and for continuing with the reform for 
establishing a socialist market economic system; a crucial year 
for maintaining the good momentum of Zhejiang's economic growth 
and carrying out the Eighth Five-Year Plan; and a year with 
formidable missions to carry out in alleviating inflation and 
maintaining social stability while speeding up reforms and 
development. Seizing the opportunity, deepening reform, opening 
wider to the outside world, expediting development, and 
maintaining stability are requirements of overall importance 
this year. While proceeding with this year's economic 
projects, we must comprehensively follow through with the 
guidelines laid down by the Third Plenary Session of the 14th 
CPC Central Committee and the ninth provincial conference of 
party representatives, continue to emancipate our minds, seize 
the opportunity, deepen reforms, build a stronger foundation, 
broaden the market, improve quality, and push forward our 
sustained, rapid and healthy economic development so as to bring 
about a coordinated economic and social development and attain 
the targets in the Eighth Five-Year Plan one year ahead of 
time. To achieve this guideline, we should properly handle 
the relationship in the following sectors: 
  First, we should properly handle the relationship 
between reforms and development. While we must follow the 
guideline of seizing the opportunity and speed up development 
when we set targets and make other arrangements for this year's 
economic growth, we must make sure there will be room and the 
means for alleviating pressure from inflation and ensuring the 
implementation of various measures for reform. We must consider 
deepening reform as the fundamental dynamic for pushing economic 
development forward and expediting the reforms for establishing 
a modern enterprise system, market system, and improving major 
systems governing financial affairs, taxation, banking 
operations, investment, foreign trade, foreign exchange, and the 
management of state-owned assets. During the course of reforms, 
we must also properly handle the relationship between various 
sectors. We must, in particular, work meticulously in 
coordinating the new and old systems and various reform 
projects, as well as the relationship between reforms, 
development, and stability. 
  Second, we must properly handle the relationship 
between growth, structure, and returns. During the course 
of economic development, we must guard against the tendency of 
pursuing output value and launching new projects 
unrealistically. We must direct our attention to building a 
stronger foundation, reaching a higher level, achieving higher 
returns, broadening markets at home and abroad, and opening up 
our economic sector even wider. We must continue to build a 
stronger infrastructure, stabilize agricultural development, 
rationally readjust the industrial structure, and speed up the 
development of tertiary industries. 
  Third, we must properly handle the relationship between 
economic development and social progress. We must firmly 
establish the idea that economic and social development must be 
coordinated, and we make sure that efforts for promoting 
economic growth must be more closely integrated with efforts for 
maintaining social stability and promoting social progress. 
While focusing on economic development, we must attach great 
importance to scientific-technological and educational 
development as well as the development of other social causes so 
as to promote social stability. 
  In view of these requirements, the main targets set in the 
draft provincial economic and social development plan for 1994 
are: 
  1. The GDP will be 202.5 billion yuan, an increase of 12 
percent over 1993; and the growth of tertiary industries will be 
higher than 12 percent. 
  2. Budgetary local incomes will increase 10.1 percent, 
reaching 8.02 billion yuan. 
  3. Public investment in fixed assets will increase 20 
percent, reaching 72 billion yuan. 
  4. Total retail value of consumer goods will increase 22 
percent, reaching 82.8 billion yuan. 
  5. Total exports will increase 12 percent, reaching $4.97 
billion. 
  6. The rise of the total retail price level will be 
controlled at about 12 percent. 
  7. The natural population growth rate will be controlled 
to under 8.39 per one thousand. 
<H5>  3. Major Economic Plans and Measures </H5>
  (1) Strengthen the Role of Agriculture as the 
Foundation of the National Economy, and Bring About an Allround 
Rural Economic Development. While promoting economic 
development, we must always give top priority to agriculture, 
bring about economic prosperity in rural areas, and increase 
peasants' income through speeding up the development of 
agriculture that yields high output of quality products which 
can bring in high returns. Our plan requires that the value 
added by agriculture be 2.8 percent higher than that of 1993. 
  To strengthen the fundamental role of agriculture and 
develop the rural economy, the most basic requirement is to 
implement all party policies for rural areas and proceed with 
all reform projects in rural areas so that agriculture and rural 
economy can be gradually brought into the orbit of the socialist 
market economy. Our main economic plans are: First, while 
restructuring agriculture and developing forestry, animal 
husbandry, sideline production, and fishery, we will stabilize 
the size of crop acreage, the multiple crop index, and the 
output of such major crops as grain, cotton, and oil-bearing 
products. According to the requirement of "achieving basic 
self-sufficiency and adjusting surpluses and shortages," the 
size of grain acreage will be maintained at 43 million mu and 
the total grain output should be maintained at about 15 million 
tonnes. Some funds and loans on favorable terms will be 
arranged for supporting principal grain producing areas to 
promote new and quality species and techniques for achieving 
higher yield, and for supporting major grain producers in 
carrying out sizable production. Arable land must be more 
strongly protected and its use must be rational. No more than 
10,000 hectares of arable land can be used for construction 
purposes. Second, the prices for purchasing grain and cotton 
must be increased, additional payments should be added to set 
prices, funds should be established against risks in grain 
production, and a system of reserving grain should also be 
established. Regions designated to reserve grain should be 
rationally distributed. According to plan, part of the 
province's reserved grain should be transferred from production 
areas to marketing areas. Third, industries supporting 
agriculture must make positive efforts to operate efficiently 
and make sure that supply of capital goods for agricultural 
production is ensured. Policies and measures for supporting 
production of chemical fertilizers should continue. Fourth, more 
resources will be invested in agricultural production through 
various channels. Levies for the special fund set up for 
building irrigation facilities will be collected throughout 
Zhejiang in accordance with the provincial government's 
"Procedures for Raising Capital for Renovating Mainstay 
Irrigation Facilities on the Hangzhou-Jiaxing-Huzhou Plain Along 
the Tai Hu Basin." The basic quotas set for small hydroelectric 
power stations to contribute power to the power grid will be 
abolished. A certain percentage of the electricity surcharge 
collected by small hydroelectric power stations built with state 
investment will be withheld for establishing a foundation for 
the development of small hydroelectric power stations. 
Preferential treatment should also be given to agriculture in 
terms of budgets and loans. The masses should be organized to 
build capital irrigation facilities for agriculture. The 
renovation of the Jinqingxin, Yongningjiang, and Dongjin 
watergates and the Shafan and Wanyaohe dams as well as for 
controlling the Qian Tang Jiang, as well as the preparations for 
building the Shanxi water conservancy project and other mainstay 
projects should be expedited. Fifth, programs for supporting 
impoverished areas will be strengthened and improved. Funds 
should be raised from all quarters for building infrastructures, 
launching comprehensive agricultural development projects, and 
upgrading industrial technology in impoverished counties. 
  (2) Deepen enterprise reform and strive for efficient 
and high growth in industrial production. This year's 
industrial production is confronted with two outstanding 
problems concerning market and returns. To achieve a sustained 
industrial growth, reform must be considered as the dynamics for 
integrating these three areas -- production and distribution, 
domestic and foreign trade, and enterprises and markets -- 
focusing on broadening the market and achieving higher returns. 
We must do a good job in broadening the market, restructuring 
industrial production, improving management, and reducing 
enterprises' burdens. It has been planned that value added by 
industry will increase 17 percent, and sales of industrial 
enterprises operated by townships and larger areas will increase 
15 percent. 
  First, enterprises must be more market conscious and they 
must give priority to broadening the market and promoting sales. 
The sales rate of industrial enterprises operated by townships 
and larger areas should be at least 96 percent. Enterprises 
must strive to improve their market survey, forecast, and 
analysis. They must make great efforts to develop marketable 
new products, and strive to increase output of quality, brand 
name products. They must firmly stop or switch the production 
of energy-inefficient and unmarketable goods of poor quality 
that pollute the environment. Three measures should be taken to 
guide departments and enterprises at various levels to direct 
their attention to broadening the market and achieving higher 
returns: 1) Continue to reform industrial plans. While 
provincial authorities will no longer issue mandatory plans for 
industrial production, both the types and the quantities of 
goods produced under state plans should be further reduced. 2) 
Value of industrial sales and value added by industry will be 
used to replace the value of gross industrial output, which will 
no longer be publicized externally from now on. 3) Evaluation 
of industrial sales rates will be intensified. Enterprises with 
sales rates one percentage point below the provincial average 
will be warned. With the exception of some special trades and 
enterprises, the production of which is seasonal, measures 
should be taken to restrict the production of enterprises whose 
sales rate is below 93 percent. 
  Second, we must rely on scientific and technological 
advancement to quicken industrial restructuring. We should 
actively develop and utilize new technologies, new crafts, and 
new materials, as well as strive to produce a group of high 
quality and strongly competitive products. We should reorganize 
Zhejiang's advantages in traditional industries such as 
machinery, electronics, textile, food, chemical, building 
materials, and construction. We should effectively develop the 
electronics information sector centered on communications 
equipment and computers; the machinery industry centered on 
transportation equipment and engineering machinery; as well as 
the chemical industry centered on new-type synthetic materials 
and fine chemical products to gradually establish new advantages 
in our industries. It is necessary to vigorously strengthen 
scientific and technological undertakings of enterprises as well 
as give special support to enterprise groups and large and 
medium enterprises that possess the capability to establish 
technology centers. 
  Third, we must stress quality and efficiency and strengthen 
enterprise management. We will hold activities in "changing 
enterprise operating mechanism, improving enterprises' internal 
management and operations, and increasing efficiency" in the 
entire province. We should improve the enterprise quality 
management system and social quality supervision system. We 
will hold the "1994 Zhejiang Quality Drive" activities and 
continue to support the production of excellent and branded 
goods while cracking down on fake and inferior-quality products. 
We should strengthen cost accounting, quicken fund turnover, 
conserve energy, and minimize wastes. Industries at 
village-level and above should ensure that their circulation 
funds turn over at least two times, increase overall labor 
productivity by 17 percent, and lower comprehensive energy 
consumption for every 10,000 yuan of output value by five 
percent. We should continue to do a good job in reducing losses 
and increasing profits. We must ensure safety in production by 
strengthening safety and fire prevention in transportation, 
mines, foreign enterprises, and enterprise units owned by other 
sectors to prevent major accidents. 
  Fourth, we must adopt practical measures to reduce 
enterprises' burdens. We should allow enterprises 
self-governing rights, and resolutely halt wanton fund raising, 
wanton apportionment of expenses, and wanton fee collection from 
enterprises. We should screen and reduce irrational debt 
burdens of some enterprises. We should supplement enterprises 
with circulation funds through various channels. We should 
transfer some of the social service functions of enterprises to 
reduce their duties in society by vigorously developing tertiary 
industry. 
  To strive for high efficiency and rapid growth in industrial 
production, it is necessary to establish a modern enterprise 
system and quicken enterprise reform. This year, a group of 
state-owned large and medium enterprises with fairly good 
performances will be selected from the province as pilot 
enterprises for experiments in modern enterprise system. The 
main task of these enterprises is to actively deepen reform in 
accordance with modern enterprise system. 
  First, it is necessary to continue to deepen the 
implementation of the "Regulations on Transforming the 
Management Mechanisms of State-owned Enterprises" and the 
"Implementation Methods" for enterprises to truly perform their 
various operations, rights, and responsibilities. 
  Second, it is necessary to further regulate enterprises' 
property rights. In accordance with the "Company Law," large- 
and medium- sized enterprises will be reorganized into limited 
shareholding and limited liability companies. In particular, we 
will establish inter-trade and inter-regional enterprise groups 
with public ownership as the mainstay, and with property rights 
as the major link among them. To change the operating 
mechanisms of medium- and small-sized enterprises, we should 
adopt several flexible and efficient methods such as 
shareholding, having state enterprises run privately, and 
leasing. Mergers, auctions, and bankruptcy proceedings for 
small, poor, and deficit-ridden enterprises should be quickened. 
It is necessary to try establishing state asset operating 
companies and property rights trading markets. In the course of 
reforming the enterprise property rights system, it is necessary 
to strengthen the supervision and management of the property of 
state enterprises. Village and town collectives and enterprises 
should also enthusiastically and steadily promote reform in a 
wider scope based mainly on the shareholding system. It is 
necessary to encourage the development of individual, private, 
and foreign-funded businesses, as well as strengthen the 
guidance and control over these business endeavors. 
  Third, it is necessary to further reform the distribution 
system. On the one hand, we should, in accordance with the new 
financial and taxation system, readjust the distributions of the 
state and enterprises, particularly the effective transition 
from the contract system to the unified income tax system. In 
addition, we should study and formulate methods for supporting 
enterprises' technological modifications and new product 
development under the new situation. On the other, we should 
guide enterprises in further invigorating their internal wage 
distribution system. On the principle of prioritizing 
efficiency while giving similar consideration to fairness, we 
should introduce a competition mechanism that will rationally 
bring about differences in workers' wages. It is necessary to 
attach importance to protecting workers' rights and interests as 
well as arouse the enthusiasm of the vast number of workers to 
participate and support reform. 
  Fourth, it is necessary to quicken the pace in establishing 
and improving a multilevel social security system, emphatically 
improve the enterprise pension and unemployment insurance 
systems, and vigorously advance reform of the housing, medical, 
and other social security systems. 
  Fifth, it is necessary to conscientiously strengthen 
guidance 
for the organization of enterprise reform as well as 
experimental work. We should carry out project "5100" across the 
province and strive to attain the objective of realizing the two 
"thirds" in reform. That is to say, we are to commend and 
recommend to society 100 "double- good enterprises" with good 
showings in transforming operating mechanisms and in operating 
efficiency; to keep track of 100 enterprises operating in the 
red; to embark on experimental transformation of 100 limited 
companies wholly owned, controlled, or invested in by the state; 
to experimentally implement the assets management responsibility 
system in 100 state-owned enterprises; to form 100 provincial 
and city-level business conglomerates; as well as to strive to 
implement, by the end of the Eighth Five-Year Plan period, the 
corporate system in one-third of state-owned enterprises and the 
cooperative share-holding system in one-third of urban 
collective enterprises. 
  (3) Vigorously develop an open economy and promote 
opening up to the outside world to get it to develop in depth 
and toward a higher level and broader sectorial base. We 
should try hard to keep up the momentum of rapid growth in 
foreign capital utilization. It is necessary to, based on the 
state industrial policy and the actual situation in the 
province, further define industrial orientation for foreign 
investment; expand the field of investment; as well as reserve 
and introduce selectively a number of infrastructure and basic 
industrial projects such as power generation and wharf and road 
construction, a number of export-oriented and 
foreign-exchange-earning agricultural development projects, a 
number of old town reconstruction and large-scale land 
development projects, and a number of technological 
transformation projects for traditional industries and projects 
in the heavy, chemical, and high- and new-technology industries. 
We should continue to expand the solicitation of foreign 
investment in various forms at different levels through 
diversified channels. Special efforts should be made in seeking 
direct investment by major companies and enterprises with 
international prestige. It is necessary to heedfully give play 
to the potential for indirectly utilizing foreign capital, 
strive to get a number of major projects included in 
international financial organizations and foreign governments' 
lending plans, and make full and good use of international 
commercial loans we borrow and repay on our own. We should take 
good charge of the tracking and implementation of projects with 
a confirmed contract, strengthen administration of 
foreign-invested enterprises in accordance with the law, and 
work hard to upgrade work quality and efficiency in utilizing 
foreign capital. In building development zones, we should 
insist on having a high starting point, high standards, and high 
efficiency; pay attention to the rationality of planning; 
attentively check the level of projects; and ensure full 
utilization of every development zone to give full play to their 
demonstrative and radiative role. 
  We should further develop trade and economic and 
technological cooperation with other countries. We should do a 
good job in replacing the old structure with a new one in order 
to meet the needs of reform of the systems for foreign trade and 
foreign exchange. While effectively running foreign trade 
enterprises at the provincial level, we should continue to 
encourage foreign trade enterprises at the city and county 
levels, individually owned production enterprises with foreign 
trade licenses, and the three kinds of partially or wholly 
foreign-owned enterprises to earn more foreign exchange by 
exporting more goods. According to the requirements for market 
diversification and with product quality as a top concern, we 
should further open markets in Southeast Asia, Japan, Korea, the 
United States, Russian, and other countries and regions while 
striving to consolidate our existing markets. We should make 
vigorous efforts to increase the sources of goods and do a good 
job in exporting machinery, electronic products, extensively 
processed textile and light-industrial products, high-technology 
products, as well as traditional and special handicraft 
articles. Efforts should be made to improve the quality and 
grades of products. We should continue to develop international 
tourism and contract construction projects and provide 
designing consulting and labor services abroad in order to 
increase non-trade earnings. We should rationally readjust the 
export structure, improve foreign trade management, and give 
priority to exporting major products and importing technologies 
and equipment for key projects. 
  We should further research and implement plans for the 
regional economy, the industrial structure, and the distribution 
of major projects in order to connect the domestic market with 
the international market and develop an open economy. We should 
gradually make an overall plan for developing three economic 
areas along the Shanghai-Hangzhou-Ningbo Expressway, in the 
coastal Wenzhou-Taizhou region, and along the Zhejiang-Jiangxi 
and Jinghua-Wenzhou Railways, in the light of the requirements 
for relying on major cities and main lines of communication for 
economic development. We should link with Pudong, develop major 
cities, strengthen various counties' economies, develop coastal 
and mountainous areas, and improve the pattern for opening to 
the outside world and the distribution of productive forces. 
With the international economy as the background, we should 
profoundly study and improve plans for the development of 
transportation, electric power, communications, machinery, 
electronics, light and textile industries, chemical industry, 
construction materials, medicine, metallurgical industry, and 
other major industries as well as tertiary industry. We should 
research key capital construction projects, technical 
transformation, and joint ventures and set forth a list of 
reserve projects on the basis of feasibility studies. As for 
existing key projects, we should further analyze their market 
prospects and possible economic returns and then take 
appropriate measures in this regard. 
<H5>  4. Reform the Investment Structure and Increase Investment </H5>
in Infrastructure, Basic Industries, and Major 
Technical-Transformation Projects 
  Overall, the amount of this year's investment is large 
enough. It is important to optimize the investment structure and 
concentrate financial and material resources on the construction 
of key projects. 
  The increased investment in capital construction is mainly 
to 
be used for agriculture, water conservancy projects, 
transportation, energy, communications, important raw and 
semifinished materials, science and technology, and education. 
We should increase investment in key projects listed in the 
Eighth Five-Year Plan. In carrying out technical 
transformation, we should ensure quality and the carrying out of 
major projects. We should pay close attention to optimizing the 
structure, improve quality, and lower consumption of raw 
materials. We should improve the levels of equipment and 
technology and quickly carry out a number of key 
technical-transformation projects and the project for 
transforming the silk industry, which was included in the Eighth 
Five-Year Plan. 
  We will seriously implement the State Council's "Circular 
on Continuing To Strengthen Macroeconomic Regulation and Control 
Over Fixed Assets Investment." On the basis of last year's 
screening and examination of construction projects, we should 
properly set the order of precedence and give higher priority to 
completion of key projects, to putting completed projects into 
operation, and to continuing the construction of unfinished key 
projects. Those projects which were canceled or suspended last 
year must not be restored if without proper authorization. 
Infrastructure and basic industry projects should also be built 
according to a unified plan and a rational geographic 
distribution. We should stress economic efficiency, do what we 
are capable of, concentrate efforts on major projects, and avoid 
blind and repetitive construction. We should improve the 
administrative work of examining and approving requests for new 
projects. According to the State Council's regulations, the 
power to examine and approve projects is not to be divided 
laterally, nor delegated to all lower levels. With the 
exception of the projects which the State Council has authorized 
the national-level development zones to examine and approve and 
the projects which enterprises may examine and approve according 
to "Regulations on Transforming the Operational Mechanisms of 
State-Owned Industrial Enterprises," local projects must be 
examined and approved by the local government's planning 
committee (planing and economic committee) and economic 
committee. Investment in real estate development should be 
included in the overall fixed assets investment plan, and the 
land used for the purpose should be placed under a special 
management. The execution of an investment plan must be 
seriously supervised, and projects not covered by the plan shall 
receive no funding from the finance department, nor shall they 
obtain loans from banks. The departments concerned should 
ensure timely funding for major construction projects and 
technological transformation projects according the construction 
plan and engineering progress. It is necessary to build well a 
number of major projects. It is necessary to organize an 
efficient work force and pay attention to fund raising, 
coordination, and construction progress. It is necessary to 
implement the open bidding system, perform a modern management 
of designing and engineering jobs, and ensure good engineering 
quality. Besides agricultural and water resources projects, we 
are building the following capital construction projects: major 
transport projects -- the Jinhua-Wenzhou railroad, 
double-tracking of the Xiaoshan-Ningbo railroad, double-tracking 
of the Zhejiang-Jiangxi railroad, the Shanghai-Hangzhou-Ningbo 
express highway, Zhujiajian airfield, the Taizhou section of the 
Ningbo-Taizhou-Wenzhou express highway, and two bridges on the 
Ou Jiang in Wenzhou; energy source projects -- the first-stage 
construction of the Beilun power plant, the first-stage 
construction of the Jiaxing power plant, the Xiaoshan power 
plant, the Changxing power plant, the fourth-stage construction 
of the Taizhou power plant, the Yuxi power station, the 
Tianhuangping pumped hydroelectric storage power station, the 
Beishaoping transformer station and transmission line; and raw 
and processed materials projects -- the Zhejiang acrylics fiber 
plant, the Zhejiang chemical plant, the Quzhou chemical company, 
the Zhejiang polyester fiber plant. We should continue to 
accelerate the construction of telecommunications projects and 
strive to increase the total number of telephones to 3 million 
and basically complete the C3 local network by the end of the 
year. In addition, we are building a number of other projects, 
including urban water and gas supply projects and infrastructure 
projects on coastal islets and in mountainous regions. We 
should continue to accelerate the preparatory work for the 
construction of Hangzhou's Xiaoshan international airport, the 
Hangzhou-Jinhua-Quzhou highway, the Sanmen nuclear power plant, 
the Yanhai thermoelectric power plant, the Beilun steel plant. 
We should make preparations for starting the construction of 
the 600,000-ton catalytic cracking project, the first stage of 
Wenzhou's Qili harbor, and the second stage of the Wenzhou power 
plant. Our major technological transformation projects include 
the Hangzhou Iron and Steel Plant, the Hangzhou Oxygen Plant, 
the Shaoxing Electronic Tubes Plant, the Minfeng Paper Mill and 
the Huafeng Paper Mill. 
  The fundamental motive force for maximizing investment 
structure and enhancing investment profits lies in accelerating 
the reform of the investment system. Main efforts should be 
made on the following three links: 
  First, a responsibility system for investment risks should 
be 
established and improved. Great efforts should be made to carry 
out the responsibility system of enterprises as a legal entity. 
In the future, the subject responsible for any risks in the 
investment projects should be clearly defined first. A 
share-holding system in which legal persons can hold their 
shares shall be universally promoted so as to establish a 
clear-cut property ownership. Trans-regional large construction 
projects should be built by specialized companies. Such 
companies shall be organized by the government, with part of 
their shares owned and controlled by the government. Funds for 
building regional transportation facilities and other 
infrastructural construction projects should be raised by 
localities which are also responsible for the operation, 
profits, and losses of these projects. But localities should be 
careful in the planning, operation, and management of these 
projects. Zhejiang Province and localities in the province must 
join their venture in building more power stations. Those who 
invest more in building power stations are entitled to get more 
profits. 
  Second, it is necessary to improve the control of total 
investment volume and structure by consolidating the sources of 
construction funds. While introducing some necessary 
fund-raising policies, we should strengthen the overall control 
of various construction funds as well as formulate and improve 
relevant management measures. In this way, we can ensure that 
what is taken from the people is rational, that the operation of 
the projects is standardized, and that the funds for key 
projects are sufficient. Active efforts should be made to expand 
the functions of those banking institutions formed by Zhejiang 
government and various localities in the province. We should 
explore ways to establish a local investment and banking system. 
  Third, it is necessary to establish a system for registering 
fixed asset investment projects. To strengthen the supervision 
and control of total investment volume and structure, any 
investment projects exceeding a certain investment limit should 
file with the departments in charge of investment planning and 
management for the record. 
<H5>  5. Work Hard To Control Commodity Price and Improve </H5>
People's Living Standard 
  While carrying out price reform, it is necessary to work 
hard 
to curb the over-rapid inflation, continue to improve people's 
living standard, and promote social stability. 
  First of all, great efforts should be made to ensure the 
production and supply of people's basic necessities, specially 
that of rice and vegetables. We should uphold the role of grain 
and commercial departments as well as supply and marketing units 
as a main channel and further integrate the effort of improving 
business management with that of implementing the 
policy-oriented tasks. We should ensure that current vegetable 
production bases will not be used for building capital 
construction projects. If there is a real need for this 
purpose, we should find double acreage for the farmland lost. 
In light of agricultural development policy, we should develop 
new secondary and tertiary vegetable bases. In order to 
stabilize hog production, we should adopt necessary assistance 
policies to enlarge mass production. While stabilizing 
vegetable and hog production, we should spend great efforts to 
promote the production of poultry, egg, and aquatic products. 
  Second, the supervision over and control of the market 
should 
be strengthened. We should establish and improve a system for 
reserving and supplying important materials used for production 
and daily life, and intervene in a timely fashion if there are 
abnormal fluctuations in the market. Prices for important 
commodities which have great bearing on people's livelihood and 
service charges should be reported to relevant authorities for 
the record or for authorization. Market management should be 
strengthened and improved. 
  Third, we should make efforts to increase people's incomes. 
Every effort should be made so that their income growth will be 
higher than the increase of commodity prices. We must pay 
particular attention to taking care of the livelihood of 
retirees, workers of enterprises which have production and 
operation problems, and peasants in impoverished areas. We must 
gradually improve the people's living conditions. In 
conjunction with urban areas' housing reform, we should build 
more affordable housing units for people with average incomes 
and units for easing housing congestion, as well as temporary 
housing units. 
<H5>  6. We Must Act on the Guideline That Science and Technology </H5>
Are the Primary Productive Forces, and Closely Integrate Science 
and Technology With Economic Construction 
  We should popularize certain scientific and technological 
achievements which can be widely applied, which have high added 
value, and which have significant guiding functions; and we 
should render our support for the project in terms of investment 
and credit. We must actively restructure the management of 
science and technology, encourage and support the establishment 
of all types of nongovernment research institutions, and 
increase investment in scientific and technological development 
projects in various ways. 
  We must give priority to educational development, which must 
be regarded as a strategic mission, and speed up the training of 
all types of proficient personnel. We must continue to 
strengthen basic education and promote the nine-year compulsory 
education in areas with 90 percent of Zhejiang's total 
population. We must make great efforts to promote vocational, 
adult, and special education; improve the educational structure; 
promote cooperation; and steadily develop higher education. It 
has been planned that ordinary schools of higher education and 
technical secondary schools will enroll respectively 23,500 and 
36,000 students this year. We must restructure the educational 
system and encourage and support social sectors and 
nongovernment organs to raise funds for setting up all types of 
schools. We must give schools greater management autonomy and 
speed up the pace of restructuring the enrollment system and the 
system of placing graduates. We should continue to raise funds 
through all channels so that there will be more money for 
educational investment. 
  We must make overall planning and speed up the development 
of 
all social causes, such as cultural affairs, news reporting, 
publishing, radio and television broadcasting, public health, 
sports, tourism, and protection of the handicapped. We must 
intensify environmental protection and improve the ecology. We 
should build stronger infrastructures essential for speeding up 
scientific-technological, educational, and social development. 
We should speed up the expansion of the provincial association 
of science and technology, and the construction of the 
provincial hospital of Chinese medicine, the provincial radio 
building, and the provincial physical education and sports 
commission's laboratory; and launch the construction of the 
provincial library,the Huanglongdong sports center, the 
ZHEJIANG RIBAO building, the provincial senior citizens' 
activity center, and the provincial women and children activity 
center. 
  We believe that, with the efforts exerted by people in 
Zhejiang, we certainly will be able to accomplish all tasks set 
in the 1994 economic and social development plan. 

