BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Alfonso Malespin Jiron] </F>
  [Text] Foreign Minister Ernesto Leal has confirmed that the 
United States has asked the Nicaraguan Government to allow the 
entry of some of the thousands of Haitians who are fleeing the 
reign of terror in their country. The minister explained that 
the U.S. State Department made the same request of all Central 
American countries. 
  "We have received a note asking us to welcome Haitians. The 
request is being studied," he said, while explaining that 
Nicaragua is a country with too many problems relating to 
poverty and social instability. 
  Ramiro Gurdian, the president of the Higher Council of 
Private Enterprise (COSEP), astonished upon learning of the 
offer, asked: "What are we to do with them?" 
  Gurdian said he believes the Haitians are fleeing their 
country in search of work and in order to escape the insecure 
situation in which they live. 
  Gurdian expressed his assurance that "there are no 
incentives 
in Nicaragua. Perhaps the U.S. Government could finance 
projects in exchange for our accepting them. We do not really 
know what is behind all this." 
  The business leader concluded by saying that "it would be a 
problem for them to come into the country, because we have no 
sources for jobs." Nevertheless, the foreign minister announced 
that the Clinton administration's petition is being studied by 
President Violeta Chamorro. 
  Vilma Nunez, director of the Nicaraguan Human Rights Center 
(Cenidh), said that by accepting the Haitian refugees "from a 
humanitarian standpoint, Nicaragua would regain its status as a 
sanctuary nation." 
  But Nunez added that "from a realistic standpoint, the 
country is in no condition to accept the refugees, unless they 
bring their own bread." 
  "I do not think it would do any good to send refugees to a 
country that lacks the appropriate conditions, where they would 
be cast aside, humiliated, and discriminated against, and where 
they would go hungry," Nunez argued. 
  Attorney Alejandro Bravo contended that "if I were a Haitian 
I would not set sail for Nicaragua. It would be going from bad 
to worse." 
  He added that the U.S. Government looks upon Haitians as 
scum 
because they speak no English, they are black, and they are 
unskilled. Therefore, their logic is that "there is nothing 
better than to send them to another country that they also 
regard as scum." 
  Oscar Tellez, an attorney and former Nicaraguan ambassador 
to 
the Dominican Republic, agreed with accepting Haitian refugees 
in coordination with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees 
(ACNUR). 
<H5>  Criticism in CODEHUCA </H5>
  But he noted that "this would have to be done in conjunction 
with a great effort by all Central America directed at getting 
Bertrand Aristide back into power. Until now, the OAS and the 
United States have had a weak position on the government of 
Raoul Cedras." 
  Abel Santamaria, secretary general of the National 
Federation 
of Associations of Public Employees of Panama, called the U.S. 
request "inhumane" and added that it demonstrates the lack of 
compassion and real democracy on the part of the United States. 
Santamaria is attending the forum organized by the Commission 
for the Defense of Human Rights in Central America [CODEHUCA]. 
  It is the United States and the economic measures it has 
applied through international financial organizations that is 
preventing poor countries, like those in Central America, from 
attaining a balanced development. This now is a compassionless 
measure that violates human rights, he criticized. 
  Meanwhile, Carmen Caney, a member of the Guatemalan 
delegation participating in the human rights forum, added that 
it is inhumane for the United States to discriminate against the 
Haitians fleeing their country. 
  The Guatemalan delegate pointed out that "the majority are 
black, for which they are discriminated against. This is also 
discrimination against the poor countries, which already are 
facing enormous economic problems." She concluded that "besides 
being discriminatory, then, this measure will only worsen our 
own problems." 

