Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, Feb 27 (AFP) -- UN humanitarian convoys 
will move through central Bosnia as of Monday [28 February] 
without detours, without negotiating passage in advance and 
routinely with armored escort, a UN spokesman said here Sunday. 
  UN Bosnian commander General Michael Rose's approach is "to 
give notice and then run convoys," UN High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR) spokesman Kris Janowski said. 
  He said convoys in the past had negotiated their passage 
with 
the warring parties who often blocked humanitarian aid at their 
checkpoints. The convoys did not always have armored escorts. 
But now the convoys would have an armored UN Protection Force 
(UNPROFOR) escort which would give notice of their passage but 
not negotiate in advance about whether they could move through 
certain territory. 
  Janowski said this did not mean the UNPROFOR would force its 
way although UNPROFOR policy is to return fire if fired upon. 
  Convoys have also been blocked, however, by civilian 
demonstrations, often by women. Janowski stressed that the 
armored escort would not be forcing its way through such 
demonstrations. 
  He said that on Monday a Danish convoy would be traveling 
from Metkovic, in Croatia on the Adriatic Coast, to Sarajevo 
directly through Mostar instead of detouring through Gornji 
Vakuf. 
  The 300,000 residents of Sarajevo are cut of by a Serb siege 
and completely dependent on humanitarian aid to survive. The 
same is true for Moslems in Tuzla and other cities. The detour 
has been necessary due to Moslem-Croat fighting over the past 10 
months, in Mostar in the south but also in the approach through 
central Bosnia to Sarajevo. Moslems and Croats began a 
ceasefire Friday that appeared to be holding despite some 
violations. 
  Janowski said a convoy would be leaving Zenica in central 
Bosnia on Wednesday for Maglaj in the north. Maglaj has not 
received a convoy since October as the Moslems there are under 
attack from Serb and Croat forces. People there are said to be 
on the verge of starvation. 
  "This will be a test of the ceasefire to allow the free 
passage of convoys," Janowski said about getting through to 
Maglaj. 

