Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Debbie Kuo] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, Feb. 18 (CNA) -- A mainland soldier, 
identified as Lin Wenqiang, teamed up with his wife and three 
other family members to hijack a Southwest China Airlines Boeing 
737 to Taiwan Friday morning. 
  It was the first hijacking of a mainland passenger plane to 
Taiwan in 1994 and the 11th since last April. 
  Lin, 26, wearing the uniform of a People's Liberation Army 
soldier, forced the Boeing 737 to Taiwan with a knife and a 
glass filled with tissue paper which lin claimed was an 
explosive, airport police reported. 
  The hijacking was reported at around 10:30 a.m. [0130 GMT] 
after a Southwest China Airlines 737 flying from Chengdu in 
Sichuan Province veered off course over Fuzhou and approached 
Taiwan. 
  The flight, with 122 passengers and eight crew members on 
board, landed in Taiwan at 10:43 a.m. and was expected to fly 
back to the mainland via Hong Kong after refueling, the police 
said. 
  Lin, his wife, mother and two children were arrested for 
their involvement in the hijacking and were sent to the office 
of the Taoyuan prosecutor for questioning. 
  The Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) said Friday that 
Taiwan 
will continue to abide by the provisions of the Hague 
Convention, which requires separate treatment for hijacked 
aircraft and hijackers. 
  Despite several rounds of negotiations between SEF and its 
mainland counterpart Association for Relations Across the Taiwan 
Strait (ARATS), the two sides failed to reach any agreement on 
ways to avoid the repeated hijackings. 
  Friday's hijacking underlined air security problems on the 
Chinese Mainland. A Wednesday report by the International 
Airline Passengers Association called air travel in the 
mainland, "an ongoing disaster," and urged visitors to the 
mainland to avoid air travel. 
  Last year, ten mainland passenger airplanes were hijacked to 
Taiwan. The hijackings occurred on a number of different flight 
paths and took place in the months of April, June, August, 
September, October, November and December. 

