Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Deric Henderson, PRESS ASSOCIATION] </F>
  [Text] The IRA tonight demanded new direct talks between 
Republicans and the Government. 
  Just hours after accusing the police of gambling with 
peoples' lives over the Heathrow airport mortar attacks, the 
Provisionals said there had to be discussions if there was any 
chance of an end to the violence. 
  The IRA was prepared to be flexible and positive in 
exploring 
potential for moving the peace process forward. But the lines 
of communication between the two sides would have to reopen. 
  In a statement released in Dublin, the IRA said: "The 
continued opportunity for peace should not be squandered. There 
is an urgent need to re-focus attention and to move the peace 
process forward." 
  Although the Provisionals have yet to make a definitive 
response to the Downing St declaration reached between Mr Major 
and Irish Prime Minister Albert Reynolds three months ago, this 
is as close as they have come to acknowledging that the 
agreement clearly is not enough to persuade them to stop their 
campaign. 
  The bomb attacks at Heathrow effectively confirmed that, but 
the terrorists said they were still interested in trying to 
reach a settlement with Britain. 
  Secret contacts between the IRA and the Government stopped 
last November after disclosures that the two sides were in 
discussions. 
  The Provisionals claimed they had been prepared to call a 
fortnight's ceasefire the previous May to try and help reach 
some sort of settlement. 
  But they alleged the Government walked away from the offer 
of 
a truce because of the need for Ulster Unionist support to 
survive the Maastricht vote. 
  Tonight, the IRA tonight said its attitude to the peace 
initiative between the SDLP [Social Democratic Labour Party] 
leader John Hume and Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams was 
positive and flexible. It was also abiding and enduring. 
  But there was a responsibility on Britain to move from what 
it described as "its current negative stance." The people of 
Britain and Ireland deserved better, they claimed. 
  The statement said: "We, our supporters and activists have a 
vested interest in achieving a just and lasting peace in 
Ireland. We are prepared to be flexible in exploring the 
potential for peace. All concerned should leave no stone 
unturned. Our objectives which include the recognition and the 
exercise of the Irish people's right to national 
self-determination are well known. Our commitment and our unity 
of purpose remain steadfast." 

