BFN 

<F P=106> [By Bill Wang] </F>
  [Text] Washington, March 30 (CNA) -- The ROC [Republic of 
China] Government has reaffirmed its commitment to eradicating 
the trade in endangered species. The ROC representative's 
office in Washington said Wednesday [30 March] that the ROC 
Government shares the U.S. Government's commitment to 
eradicating the illegal wildlife trade, but believes dialogue 
and cooperation, rather than sanctions, are the best means of 
achieving progress toward this goal. 
  The office issued the statement in response to a news 
release 
sent out by Senator Jim Jeffords (R-VT.) in which the senator 
said that 25 senators and 13 representatives have joined him in 
forwarding a letter to President Bill Clinton asking him to 
consider taking limited trade sanctions against Taiwan and 
Mainland China for their continued illegal trade in rhino horn 
and tiger parts. 
  The office pointed out that the ROC Executive Yuan recently 
approved amendments to the Wildlife Conservation Law that would 
make trade in endangered species a crime punishable by prison 
terms up to five years and/or fines up to U.S. $60,000. 
  In addition, it added, prison terms for repeat offenders 
would be lengthened to as much as seven years, and the maximum 
fine would increase to approximately U.S. $100,000 under the 
amendments expected to be passed by the Legislative Yuan soon. 
  It said that the government has also been conducting 
island-wide crackdowns in Taiwan, involving undercover 
investigations on establishments selling traditional medicine. 
  It said that the efforts of the ROC Government were 
acknowledged at the meeting last week of the Standing Committee 
of the United Nations Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species (CITES). During the meeting, CITES decided 
that Taiwan should be given more time to implement wildlife 
conservation measures and postpone any decisions on sanctions to 
November. 
  Senator Jeffords also introduced legislation in the Senate 
calling for the setup of a fund to support conservation programs 
of nations whose activities affect rhino and tiger populations 
as well as automatic sanctions against nations violating 
endangered species laws. 

