BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin promised 
Jordan's King Husayn that the Palestinians will not be given any 
authority in the holy sites in Jerusalem. Concerning the 
resumption of the bilateral negotiations next month, political 
sources here told our political correspondent 'Imanu'el Rosen 
today that Israel is willing to return a significant part of the 
territories in dispute along the joint border to Jordan. 
Following are the details: 
  [Begin recording] [Rosen] Today, again, the prime minister 
chose not to address himself to his meeting with King Husayn. 
  [Rabin, in English] I do not believe that it is advisable to 
say anything about it. 
  [Rosen] Deputy Foreign Minister Yosi Beilin settles for a 
general comment and several hints: 
  [Beilin] Clearly, the relations between Israel and Jordan 
are not those between sworn enemies. I believe that we share 
many interests, and meetings on various levels have taken place. 
  [Rosen] Is it true that the deputy foreign minister also met 
King Husayn in the past? 
  [Beilin] You read too many books. 
  [Rosen] The Rabin-Husayn meeting was held two weeks ago, 
after 'Arafat's jihad speech and Rabin's nonsense speech. The 
prime minister wished to calm the king and assured him that he 
will not give 'Arafat a religious or political foothold in 
Jerusalem. From there, they reached agreements in principle on 
issues under negotiation, which led to the agreements in 
Washington. On the issue of borders, for example, Israel is 
willing to begin marking the border in accordance with 
geographic surveys that will be conducted on site. The 
demarcation will begin in the area of al-'Aqabah and Elat, where 
a joint road is to be built. 
  On the issue of security, the parties discussed cooperation 
against terrorism. Thus far, this was informal; from now on, it 
is written down as an element of normalization before a peace 
accord. Other normalization elements are to be expressed through 
the joint projects: A Riviera stretching around Jordanian, 
Israeli, and Egyptian shores; a joint road to connect the three 
countries; and an Israeli-Jordanian park in the Dead Sea region. 
  [Beilin] Acting from a position of caution and not to be the 
first to do things, typical of King Husayn, and at the same time 
with his wish not to be the last, he made the correct decision 
to move forward while not committing himself to a separate peace 
agreement. 
  [Rosen] Sources in Jerusalem say that Major General Uri 
Sagi, head of the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] Intelligence 
Branch, was a senior partner in the discussions with Jordan. 
According to some sources, he even attended the recent meeting 
with King Husayn. Shim'on Peres, formerly an enthusiastic 
supporter of the Jordanian track, is now out of the picture. 
Recently, he expressed disappointment with King Husayn and his 
willingness to make progress toward normalization with Israel. 
[end recording] 

