Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Newspaper of the Airwaves, Second Edition" </F>
newscast] 
  [Text] The National Counterterrorism Directorate [Dincote] 
has discovered links between drug-trafficker Demetrio Chavez 
Penaherrera and subversive organizations in Alto Huallaga. 
  Chavez, alias El Vaticano, was presented to the local and 
foreign media a few minutes ago wearing the characteristic 
striped attire in which terrorists are presented. Chavez' shirt 
had the number 1891 and he appeared very briefly -- 10 seconds 
-- before the media. 
  Dincote Commander Hugo Sayers Calderon illustrated the links 
between the drug trafficker and the subversive organizations. 
He reported that Chavez had provided weapons to the terrorists 
and had built a rural road at Campanilla. 
  Juan Lazarte Luna, who was Chavez's lawyer until noon today, 
formally announced that he would not defend the drug trafficker 
because, he said, he has too much work. He declared, however, 
that he will continue to defend Demetrio Chavez' sister, Berta 
Chavez, who is scheduled to be released tomorrow. Lazarte also 
reported that Fausto Parra will continue the drug terrorist's 
defense for all pending charges against him. 
  Television host Susan Leon, who is being held at the police 
station women's section for her alleged involvement in the El 
Vaticano case, will be released in the coming hours. Her 
lawyer, Mario Rodriguez Hurtado, presented a habeas corpus 
appeal, which the 5th Arraignment Court has to respond to within 
24 hours. Upon receiving the habeas corpus, 5th Arraignment 
Court Judge Carmen Rojari visited Susan Leon in jail where she 
has been held for the last four days. 
  Also, hair stylist Segundo Gonzales, alias Chocco, who has 
been held at the Dirandro [General Narcotics Directorate] 
headquarters for the last five days, will be released today or 
tomorrow. His lawyer, Rosa del Corral, reported that El 
Vaticano himself had testified that his friendship with the hair 
stylist was only based on the latter's profession. 
  Former Miss World Lucila Boggiano de Zoeger's situation, 
however, is still unknown. She is currently at the Estela Maris 
Clinic where she had to be admitted last Monday. Comedian 
Andres Hurtado, alias Chibolin, and his wife, Marilu Montiel, 
are also under arrest on charges of alleged links to the El 
Vaticano case. 

