SUMMARY 

                                  The Jordanian government has withdrawn from its prior role of 
mediator in the Yemeni conflict following the outbreak of civil 
war in Yemen in early May, and has openly indicated its backing 
for a united Yemen under President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih.  Amman 
media initially reported a few token gestures by the government 
that suggested a policy of evenhandedness toward the warring 
factions, but recent references in Jordanian media confirm the 
government's opposition to Vice President 'Ali Salim al-Bid's 
recent declaration of a secession from northern Yemen. 

                            END SUMMARY 

   Jordan's official broadcast media have recently signaled the 
government's alignment with northern Yemen in the inter-Yemeni 
conflict by replacing merely geographic references to the warring 
sides with value-laden terms (Amman radio, 9 May). Since 18 May, 
three days before al-Bid's announcement of secession from the 
Sanaa government, state-controlled Amman radio and television 
have been observed to refer to the northern forces under Yemeni 
President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih as the "forces of unity and 
legitimacy," and to the southern army backing Vice President 'Ali 
Salim al-Bid  as the "secessionist forces," phrases identical to 
those used by northern Yemen-controlled Sanaa radio in its 
references to the fighting (Amman radio, 23 May; Amman TV, 25 
May; Sanaa radio, 1 May). 

   Prior to 18 May, official media not only used neutral references 
to the rival armies, but also carried reports that projected a 
balanced stance toward the conflict, conveying Jordan's efforts 
to reconcile both sides. For example: 

   --Amman TV on 10 May took pains to note that "a number of wounded 
from the two opposing sides" were being treated at the al-Husayn 
Medical Center in Amman. 

   --The English-language Jordan Times cited Prime Minister 'Abd al- 
Salam al-Majali as stating that the Jordanian government would 
not "interfere in support of either party to the crisis."  The 
paper also noted that King Husayn had "telephoned both Mr. al-Bid 
and Mr. Salih in a bid to end the fighting" (14 May). 

   Discrimination Against Southern Yemenis Alleged 

   In a report that suggests Jordan's open sympathy for Sanaa may 
have extended to a bias against southern Yemenis, the Saudi-owned 
daily Al-Sharq al-Awsat said that Jordanian authorities had 
turned back "a large number of Yemeni passengers, including many 
women and children," who had arrived in Amman from Yemen, and 
cited Jordanian officials as stating that the decision to deny 
entry to the southern Yemenis was at "the instructions of higher 
authorities."  The paper also cited a "responsible south Yemeni 
source" as charging that Jordanian officials had denied admission 
to a southern Yemeni official seeking medical treatment.  The 
official said that Jordan had recently sent "six planeloads of 
medical aid to Sanaa, thereby indicating alignment with the 
northern leadership in the current conflict in Yemen" (20 May). 

   Implications 

   The Jordanian government, which has always favored a united 
Yemen, has revealed its deep disappointment with the war's 
escalation and subsequently with al-Bid's decision to secede. 
The official media's earlier evenhanded stance probably reflected 
hopes for an early end to the civil strife, and a desire to 
retain at least the appearance of neutrality.  The secession 
development, however, was a particular blow to King Husayn's 
reputation as a pan-Arab peacemaker, especially following the 
extensive and well publicized mediation efforts that culminated 
in the signing of a reconciliation accord in Amman last February. 
Following its failed attempts to reconcile the two leaders, 
Jordan will likely continue to back efforts to reunite Yemen, 
although its evident sympathy toward Salih rules out Amman's 
future role as a neutral player. 
   (AUTHOR:  MURRAY.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703) 733-6094.) 
ENEAG/PINKASOVIC/CL 28/0027Z MAY 

