Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentator's article: "Give Consideration to the </F>
Well-Being of Future Generations--Further Talk on Doing a Good 
Job of Promoting Family Planning"] 
  [Text] In recent years, under the correct leadership of 
the party Central Committee and the State Council, marked 
results have been achieved in the field of promoting family 
planning in our country. The excessively rapid growth of the 
population has been effectively brought under control. This is 
a major step for creating a favorable population environment for 
accelerating reforms and developing the economy. However, work 
to promote family planning still faces many difficulties and 
problems. On the whole, the work remains in the uphill stage, 
and we must not, even to the slightest degree, relax our 
efforts. A noteworthy fact is that some comrades do not clearly 
understand the current situation and have not made a cool-headed 
analysis, and they overestimate our achievements in the family 
planning field over the past years and are excessively and 
unrealistically optimistic as they think that work to promote 
family planning will not require too much effort. Thus, they do 
not pay much attention to this work. This is a problem to which 
we must pay serious attention. 
  General Secretary Jiang Zemin recently pointed out: In our 
country, which was a feudal society for over several thousand 
years, it is not easy to break with the worn-out concept of 
continuing the family line by producing a male heir and 
regarding men as superior to women. In addition, peasant 
households need a male labor force and peasant couples need sons 
to support them when they get old. We must be fully aware of 
the arduousness and prolonged nature of family planning 
promotion work. Leading cadres at all levels should seriously 
understand this important instruction and should persistently 
conduct propaganda and education so that people may better 
understand that the population issue may seriously affect the 
level of economic development in per capita terms. We should 
give consideration to the well-being of future generations. 
Family planning should be carried out in every family and be 
effected by every couple of child-bearing age. This certainly 
requires painstaking and unswerving efforts. The present low 
birth rate is not stable. Because the masses have not 
thoroughly changed their attitude toward childbearing and some 
actual difficulties in their livelihood have not been thoroughly 
settled, if our efforts are slightly relaxed, the birth rate 
will rebound immediately. Localities where work to promote 
family planning has achieved good results are no exception. The 
base population of our country is large, and a third population 
growth peak exists in the 1990's, which means that the net 
population increase each year will reach some 14 million people. 
According to the population plan for the Eighth Five-Year Plan 
period and the 10-year population plan, by the end of this 
century, even if our work in promoting family planning is done 
very effectively, the population of the Chinese mainland will 
still be close to 1.3 billion people. According to 
calculations, the national population will not stop increasing 
until it reaches 1.6 billion people in the middle of the next 
century. Therefore, no one can brag that the population can be 
completely brought under control in the next few years or even 
in the next few decades. We must keep ourselves sober-headed on 
this issue and adopt a realistic attitude. While fully 
affirming the achievements in our work, we should also dare to 
face problems squarely and notice the deficiencies, and we 
should continue to analyze new conditions and solve new problems. 
  This year is an important year for the implementation of the 
Eighth Five-Year Plan in our country. We should conscientiously 
carry out a target management responsibility system for 
population control and family planning, persistently carry out 
existing birth control policies and population plans, intensify 
inspection and supervision, strictly assess work results, and 
actually give awards and penalties to those who deserve them. 
At present, population statistics remain inaccurate and 
unreliable so it is necessary to find out the actual situation, 
and we must carry forward our party's fine tradition and work 
style of seeking truth from facts. We advocate that all of us 
should behave honestly and must not practice fraud or try to 
deceive ourselves as well as others. Cadres at all levels 
should hold a realistic and responsible attitude for the benefit 
of the people, actually improve their style of work, go deep 
into the realities of life and grass-roots units, carry out 
effective investigations and studies, and actively spread 
scientific methods. 
  At present, the work of promoting family planning should 
still be focused on the vast rural areas. It is necessary to 
continue to make great efforts to promote family planning in all 
rural villages and grass-roots units. Cadres in village party 
branches and villagers' committees should be mobilized to do 
painstaking, careful, and effective work. We should constantly 
follow the mass line in our work, serve the people 
wholeheartedly, and correctly handle the relationship between 
work effectiveness and work intensity. Rural work in other 
fields should be properly linked with the work of promoting 
family planning, and they should promote each other so that we 
open up a road of effectively coordinating population growth 
with socioeconomic development. 

