BFN 

  [Text] During the second day of his official visit to 
Canada, President Carlos Menem said that while he is president 
the peso will maintain its current exchange parity with the 
dollar. He reiterated that there is no possibility of 
devaluating the peso and confirmed that he will meet with his 
American colleague, Bill Clinton on 24 June in Washington. 
  Contradicting all predictions, the president announced he 
will be in Washington when the Argentine team plays Nigeria. He 
will watch the game on television. Moreover, his advisers 
assure that Menem will return to Buenos Aires on the night of 24 
June. 
  The chief of state granted an interview to the Canadian 
media, breakfasted with leading businessmen and some government 
officials, and signed cooperation agreements with official 
organizations of the Canadian Government. 
  "There is no chance that the peso will be devaluated because 
that would return us to a tragic experience that Argentines have 
already suffered. To return to what we had before would be 
fatal for Argentina," he stressed during a meeting with 
executives. 
  He said Argentina has buried "the culture of speculation as 
the rule, we are now entering an era of work and production." 
  He acknowledged that there is pressure "especially from the 
export sector," adding that to change the parity that has been 
established by the convertibility plan would be "bad for the 
rest of the Argentine community." 
  The president told Canadian officials and businessmen that 
Argentina is ready to join NAFTA -- the free trade zone among 
the United States, Canada, and Mexico. He admitted, however, 
that an invitation has not been received to participate in the 
agreement. Canadian International Trade Minister Roy McLaren 
immediately answered: "If that decision were ours alone to make, 
we would extend it today." The minister added that Argentina 
can rely on "all possible support" from the Canadian Government, 
which is "willing to do so." During a personal meeting with 
Menem on the first day of the visit, Prime Minister Jean 
Chretien expressed this sentiment to the Argentine president. 
  The president and 20 Argentine executives, who are in Canada 
seeking investment and buyers for national products, met with a 
dozen Canadian businessmen, including representatives of 
companies that participated in Argentine privatizations and 
high-ranking Ottawa government officials. 
  Menem confirmed he will meet with President Clinton at the 
White House on 24 June and denied that he would watch the 
Argentina-Nigeria match on 25 June in Boston. 
  It was officially reported that the chief of state will meet 
and play golf with former U.S. President George Bush at his 
residence the state of Maine. The delegation will travel to 
Washington in the official Argentine plane. 
  Menem will arrive in the U.S. capital early on the morning 
of 
24 June for his meeting at the White House with the U.S. 
President, and remain in the city until after the 
Argentina-Nigeria game. He will return that same day to Buenos 
Aires. 
  During his meeting with the media, Menem said he asked the 
Canadian authorities to "stop the dumping" [preceding word in 
English] of 1,400 tons of Canadian wheat in Brazil at prices 
below the international market. This move provoked losses of 
$180 million for Argentina. 
  "We were a closed and statist country but we are now opening 
up. Out of loyalty, we ask the nations that have always had a 
market economy to now act with equality," Menem maintained. He 
insisted that Argentina's regional integration priorities lie 
with the Common Market of the South because "there are good 
prospects for doing excellent business deals." He indicated 
that poverty, which afflicts "40 percent of Latin Americans," 
and unemployment, which "has reached alarming levels despite the 
growing economies," are the two most serious and urgent problems 
afflicting humanity. 
  The president took the opportunity to express his viewpoint 
on the international political map. He said he approves of 
military intervention in Haiti, adding that he has "good" 
personal "relations" with Cuban President Fidel Castro. 

