BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel by Hugo </F>
Mueller-Vogg and Cornelia von Wrangel; place and date not given: 
"If Herzog Fails, It Would Not Be a Defeat for Kohl"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE 
SONNTAGSZEITUNG] Your party is dangerously close to 5 percent. 
  [Kinkel] We have clearly improved In the latest polls. The 
Christian Democratic Union [CDU] is improving and we will also 
continue to improve. When we have our next interview together, 
we will be considerably higher in the polls. I promise you 
that. We will conduct a massive second-vote campaign until the 
Bundestag elections and we will specifically address those who 
perform most in our society. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] But in the election 
program you are shying away from using the term party of 
high-wage earners. 
  [Kinkel] Yes, the term high-wage earner is not an invention 
of the Free Democratic Party [FDP], but a class-struggle term of 
the Social Democratic Party of Germany [SPD]. The term 
high-wage earner was easy to misinterpret, but the basic 
approach remains correct: Equal starting opportunities for 
everyone, then let those who are better, more dedicated, more 
intelligent, more inclined toward risks, more willing to 
perform, and more capable of performance take the lead. They 
must fill the baskets from which things can then be distributed 
to the socially weaker people. We will clearly say that those 
who do more should be and may also be better off. No social 
envy, please! Without performance, without performance elites 
in all fields, Germany will not remain competitive. Therefore, 
the FDP will embrace this. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] Can the high-wage 
earners rely on you to struggle for a limitation of the 
solidarity surcharge in terms of time? 
  [Kinkel] Certainly. It remains true: After three years, 
the solidarity surcharge must be reexamined with the goal of 
abolishing it as soon as possible, in steps if necessary. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] Two years ago, you 
were categorically against any amendment to the asylum law. In 
the meantime, the asylum law has been amended. 
  [Kinkel] This was very difficult formerly. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] After the event, 
would you still say that this amendment was a mistake? 
  [Kinkel] The dimension of immigration has steamrolled us. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] And if you look at 
the result now? 
  [Kinkel] In any case, the result is such that one can say 
that the amendment was probably correct. I am not someone who 
shies away from saying that he can be convinced by better 
reasons or results. However, my approach was different: Not too 
long ago, millions of people had to leave Germany to save their 
lives and ask for asylum in other countries. I was and am proud 
of our liberal aliens' law. I was and am proud of our Article 
16. However, what I wanted to hold high was undermined by the 
dimension of the requests for asylum. This was the reason for me 
to politically support the amendment to Article 16. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] The laender ruled 
by the SPD are in favor of temporarily stopping the deportations 
of Kurds. With this, they suggest that Kurds are persecuted 
everywhere in Turkey. Our question to the foreign minister: 
Does this strain German-Turkish relations? 
  [Kinkel] We have had friendly relations with Turkey, an 
important NATO partner, for decades. After overcoming the 
East-West conflict, this country has become even more important 
as a bridge to the Islamic world and to Asia. For Turkey, the 
Kurdish issue is a gigantic problem. I always tell my Turkish 
interlocutors that naturally they must fight the PKK [Workers 
Party of Kurdistan], but exclusively with the means of a 
rule-of-law state. I always say that human rights violations 
cannot be accepted. I cannot and do not want to comment on the 
decisions of the interior ministers. However, as foreign 
minister, I have to keep an eye on the overall situation. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] Hesse 
Minister-President Eichel has criticized you, saying that the 
Foreign Ministry's reports about the observation of human rights 
in Turkey are unreliable. 
  [Kinkel] I do not know whether Mr. Eichel is, first, 
properly informed and, second, the expert for these questions. 
I would slightly doubt that. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] He will not like to 
hear that.... 
  [Kinkel] ...but I maintain that. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] How can the 
government of our NATO partner, Turkey, prove that the 
persecution of the Kurds is not ordered and condoned by the 
state? 
  [Kinkel] I advise Turkey to ask for CSCE observers itself to 
refute everything that is claimed. This is not very easy for 
Turkey. Nor is it easy that I keep broaching the issue of human 
rights. But the Turks know that I am doing all this out of a 
friendly feeling for Turkey and that I want to help the country. 
Ankara knows my attitude toward Turkey, which has remained the 
same in the good days and in the bad days. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] Let us stay with 
foreign policy. The West fought the Gulf war to bring the 
"legitimate regime" in Kuwait back to power. In Bosnia the West 
is hardly fighting, and Rwanda is of no interest at all. 
  [Kinkel] This is not correct, in this way. In the former 
Yugoslavia we have achieved some progress: Sarajevo, Gorazde, 
in the safe havens, in Krajina, in Mostar. A definite solution 
is not yet in sight, despite all the effort. And in Rwanda, 
too, help is provided. A total of 5,000 blue-helmet soldiers 
are to go there; humanitarian aid is under way. The Bundeswehr 
will fly relief goods to Kigali as soon as the security 
situation permits and the conflict parties agree. However, it 
is correct that the media, for instance, with their 
supercritical reports about the terrible conflicts in the former 
Yugoslavia, about the UN mission in Somalia, and about some 
other missions, are contributing to making all governments very 
restrained regarding the issue of involvement, now in Rwanda for 
instance. In Somalia there were some failures. Yes, the UN 
Somalia mission did not go as we all wanted it to go. However, 
thanks to the UN mission, we at least defeated hunger there. 
Nevertheless, everything was presented as a failure in the 
media. Is it surprising that the governments are restrained 
about Rwanda, even though a terrible genocide is happening 
there? In addition, it is extremely difficult to help from the 
outside in such a conflict. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] Should we not at 
least provide humanitarian aid there? 
  [Kinkel] We are going to do that. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] In three weeks, we 
will have European elections. How credible is the European idea 
if one thinks of the Europeans' failure in the former Yugoslavia 
and of the Germans' narrow-minded reservations against the 
Maastricht Treaty? 
  First of all, Europe was an economic community of six. Now 
there are 12. Soon there will be 16 sitting at the table. 
Unfortunately, the development of a common foreign and security 
policy did not keep pace with economic integration. There is no 
doubt: So far, we have not found any solution for the conflict 
in the former Yugoslavia. However, one must also see that we are 
certainly making progress. But it would be wrong to throw the 
baby out with the bathwater and to say that there is no point in 
striving for a common foreign and security policy. On the 
contrary: This is urgently necessary, because without the 
European Union not even what we have achieved would have been 
possible. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] And what about 
Maastricht and the common currency? 
  [Kinkel] For me the observation of the criteria for 
convergence is of absolute priority. Compared with that, the 
envisaged schedule is secondary. 
  [FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE SONNTAGSZEITUNG] How dangerous, do 
you think, is the former Bavarian FDP chairman and his 
anti-Europe party? 
  [Kinkel] Like a may-fly. 

