BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Laszlo Bekesi, former finance minister and </F>
economic expert of the Hungarian Socialist Party, by Katalin 
Bossanyi; place and date not given: "We Cannot Allow Ourselves 
To Make Baseless Promises -- Laszlo Bekesi on Crisis Management, 
Reform of State Finances, and Wage Compensation"] 
  [Text] According to Bekesi, the Socialists are in a unique 
position in the election campaign because they cannot allow 
themselves to gain votes through unfounded promises. The 
Hungarian Socialist Party's [MSZP] program is basically 
pragmatic and concentrates on handling the crisis. Bekesi 
thinks that he will not participate in implementing his program 
if he does not get support for it within his party and from the 
potential coalition partners, because for him, stabilizing the 
economy is the important issue, rather than personal and 
prestige consideration. I interviewed him on the details of the 
oft-mentioned reform of state finances, among other things. 
  [Bossanyi] We can witness a peculiar war of numbers: The 
opposition parties -- including the MSZP -- are claiming, 
supported by figures, that the country is in a worse economic 
situation than in 1990. However, the government parties claim 
that two different periods cannot be compared. What are your 
views on this? 
  [Bekesi] In my view, the two periods cannot indeed very well 
be compared to each other due to the character of the changeover 
to a market economy. However, it can be assessed what kind of 
room for maneuver the government is leaving its successor in the 
area of economic policy, at that time and now, and to what 
extent it is trying to depict the state of the economy as being 
better than it is. The three main arguments of the government's 
propaganda of success that can be observed are the following: 
"We are past the worst because industrial production is 
increasing, unemployment is decreasing, and we have high foreign 
currency reserves." 
  [Bossanyi] Are these statistical facts? 
  [Bekesi] These are facts that cannot be interpreted removed 
from the economic environment, and they are only really suitable 
for manipulating the public. Together with the increase in 
industrial output, it has to be known that this is mainly a 
delayed effect of the forced exports of 1992. On the other 
hand, the state is heavily overspending, which indeed creates 
more domestic demand, but also leads to an even more upset 
balance. As for unemployment, the proportion of people without 
work is much higher than the registered level, and an increasing 
number of people are leaving the unemployment benefit system, 
which lays an extra burden on welfare policy. The fact that, 
along with this high level of unemployment, productivity has 
actually decreased in industry and agriculture in the past four 
years is one of the biggest traps. In the case of the 7 billion 
[currency not specified] foreign currency reserve, it has to be 
remembered that this is the central bank's, rather than the 
government's, reserve. It is more than a political misstatement 
to mention this as a reserve that can be used freely. I am not 
disputing that the relatively high level of the reserves has 
some advantages. The central bank has for some time been 
managing the Hungarian debt financing quite well. However, it 
is also part of this that they were perfectly aware that the bad 
balance figures -- which are still bad -- will shake the trust 
of foreign capital, therefore, it will be more difficult to get 
new money. No more agreements should be made with the IMF for 
this year. The new government will have to strive for at least 
two- to three-year financing agreements for its stabilization 
and modernization program. Therefore, the "success indicators" 
do not mean that "we are past the worst." 
  [Bossanyi] To what extent do all these factors determine the 
next government's room for maneuver, whichever government it 
will be? 
  [Bekesi] The fact that the structural change has not been 
implemented increases the social costs of the changes, and 
modernization decisions will have to be made while much fewer 
resources will be at the government's disposal. While society 
is waiting for the distribution of higher amounts and for the 
improvement of living standards, we have to introduce an 
economic policy based on accumulation and savings. If the 
conditions for modernization are not established then we will 
not have growth, either. That is why I am stating that the 
starting position is worse in 1994 than it was in 1990. 
According to my calculations, the 1993 trend will be continued 
and as much as 40 percent of the budget deficit will have to be 
financed from foreign resources. It is a further burden that 
while in 1990, the cost of debt servicing did not reach 8 
percent in the budget, it will be 21 percent in 1994 and 25 
percent in 1995. The value of the annual interest rate increase 
is 80 billion [currency not specified], which can destroy the 
budget. 
  [Bossanyi] The government has been continuously easing its 
monetary policy since 1992 while the range and level of state 
obligations has been increasing. How big is this legacy and 
what can the next government do with it? 
  [Bekesi] These are obligations that can be measured in 
assets, forints, and foreign currency. The first is the 
unfinished compensation, which is an almost 300 billion 
[currency not specified] state obligation that is to come out of 
the state assets. Although the Socialists have not agreed with 
the compensation laws from the beginning, guaranteeing legal 
security and strengthening the citizens' trust are decisive 
factors for us in this issue. Therefore, if we come into a 
decision-making position, we will continue to meet the 
obligations affecting the assets. This is in spite of the fact 
that we know that this damages the conditions of market 
privatizations, lowers the [share] prices, and has an 
inflationary effect that cannot be neglected. However, we will 
not start new compensation. 
  [Bossanyi] Providing the large self-governing bodies with 
assets is also a pending issue. 
  [Bekesi] The social security obviously will not be able to 
receive majority shares -- these have to be left to the 
professional investors -- only minority ones that also have 
dividends. However, it will be difficult to find the financing 
for this from the current state assets. At the same time, the 
reform of health care and pensions cannot be implemented without 
this, and even the reform of state finances cannot be started. 
All these indicate what kind of restraints the asset management 
practice of the predecessors can create. 
  [Bossanyi] Do you also see debtor consolidation as an 
obligation that is forced to be continued? 
  [Bekesi] The new government will have to make a snapshot 
inventory because it will not otherwise be able to make 
decisions. The costs of consolidation can range from 300 to 600 
billion [currency not specified]. According to unconfirmed 
figures, more than 120 billion in state guarantees also have to 
be added to this. And we have not even mentioned the state's 
obligations to the local governments. The state obligations 
calculated in foreign currency -- for example through issuing 
bonds -- also increase the burdens. All these form a 
determination chain that will really appear in the 1995 and 1996 
budgets. I believe that these facts show tangibly that the 
government's scope for maneuver is smaller than it was in 1990. 
  [Bossanyi] According to this, whichever government comes to 
power, it will first have to perform crisis management, whether 
it admits to this during its campaign or not. 
  [Bekesi] Crisis management will have to be the first: The 
negative processes have to be dampened and stopped. However, 
the immediate restoration of the balance is an economic fiction. 
The second step will be strengthening the market institutions 
and deregulation, and the third -- in close relationship with 
the previous factors -- is establishing the conditions for 
lasting economic growth. 
  [Bossanyi] What would be the desirable process of crisis 
management? 
  [Bekesi] Restructuring the state finances -- namely the oft 
mentioned but always postponed reform of the state finances -- 
then completing the process of putting the banking system back 
on its feet, stopping the destruction in the agrarian economy, 
and recapturing some of the lost eastern markets. 
  [Bossanyi] What will be the measures to follow these, which 
will help growth? 
  [Bekesi] For example, these will be the improvement of the 
investment climate, a faster development of infrastructure, and 
the drawing up of a new privatization strategy. 
  [Bossanyi] Let us expand on one element of crisis 
management, the reform of state finances. Everyone keeps 
talking about this but the details are still not clear. 
  [Bekesi] Examining the state expenditure is the first task. 
This is not a slogan. Today, these expenses are many times 
greater than what can be tolerated by the economy, and they 
lastingly lead to the centralization and then redistribution of 
60 percent of the gross domestic product. In the case of the 
undivided expenditure items -- for example, administration, 
defense, and political or prestige spending -- we have to expect 
an absolute cut. It is possible to make savings in a similar 
way in the case of the decentralized funds. The new program to 
be drawn up for managing the debts can also release resources. 
However, among the state expenditure, there is an area whose 
size cannot be touched, namely basic and middle level education, 
healthcare, and welfare policy. Another area -- which is very 
broad, therefore I will only indicate it -- is the one where the 
state and the user of the service have to share the burden of 
financing. These areas can be culture, higher education, 
sciences, sports, town development, and sewage and similar 
services in towns. The division of these costs will depend on 
economic development and on interest coordination in society. 
The third area is the one from where the state has to withdraw 
and the market demand has to decide whether these services are 
needed. I would include many functions of authorities here. 
  [Bossanyi] Would this mean that there will be less money for 
health care or welfare benefits? 
  [Bekesi] In the welfare sphere, the examination of the 
expenditure does not in itself mean the reduction of expenses, 
but it means a system of financing that is different from the 
current one. This can be achieved partly through expanding the 
insurance methods, and through basing the benefits on needs, 
rather than on fairness. It is very important to reconsider the 
role of the state and, on the other hand, the civic 
organizations, charitable organizations, and churches in 
financing these areas. They participate in education, health 
care, and welfare care; the question is what, out of these, can 
be placed on an entrepreneurial basis, and what can be financed 
by public funds. To achieve this, we will also need a good law 
on nonprofit organizations. 
  [Bossanyi] All this means that the reform measures can -- 
temporarily -- reduce living standards. According to your 
calculations, to what extent? 
  [Bekesi] We are calculating with a three-year reform 
concept. This can mean a 4 to 5 percent reduction in public 
consumption and in net incomes, out of which 50 percent has to 
be compensated for. My view is that, in basic provisions, all of 
the lost amounts have to be returned to the affected areas, for 
example in the form of pension increase, a welfare benefit 
increase, or family supplement increase. In the case of active 
workers, this will be up to a certain level of income. 
  [Bossanyi] From what will you finance all this? 
  [Bekesi] From reducing the other state expenditure. 
Therefore, only 40 to 50 percent can be saved from the program 
to reduce the expenditure. 
  [Bossanyi] Is the social pact enough for this? 
  [Bekesi] Not in itself. We need a coalition government with 
a large majority that will support this program at the outset 
and will carry it through consistently to the end. 
  [Bossanyi] What will guarantee to the social partners that 
the government will adhere to the agreement? 
  [Bekesi] Partly, the new system of interest coordination. 
In my view, the various reform measures must not be taken to 
parliament until the agreement on the social pact is achieved. 
  [Bossanyi] When your concept is criticized -- even within 
your party -- the usual argument is that it is too restrictive, 
it only concentrates on the balance and does not sufficiently 
take society's ability to accept this into consideration. In 
fact, it is also said that this economic policy program is not 
typical of a socialist-social democratic party. 
  [Bekesi] I believe that the Socialists are in a unique 
position among the parties running in the elections: We cannot 
allow ourselves to gain votes with unfounded promises. As for 
the program that I drew up, indeed it is usually called 
social-liberal. In my view, in these days, there is no point in 
putting ideological labels on crisis management. We need 
pragmatic programs that can be implemented. It is true that a 
softer program could also be drawn up, but the sad truth is that 
it would not achieve the goal. Without restoring the balance and 
without stabilization we will not have growth. Anyone who is 
trying to tackle the problems in the opposite order -- whether 
through a complete or a half turn -- is deceiving himself and 
society. If we cannot stop the deterioration of the balance 
then we will face payment problems at the end of 1995 that would 
lead to a dramatic decline. If the deficit continues to 
increase in proportion to the GDP then a galloping inflation 
will be the result. Let us be clear: Both negative processes 
can be stopped. However, not through growth promises as it is 
being done by the Hungarian Democratic Forum and the Federation 
of Young Democrats. 
  [Bossanyi] Does this also mean that you will not sign your 
name to the program if the crisis management is not started in 
the order you consider professionally justified? 
  [Bekesi] For me, the possibility to implement this program 
is not a personal or prestige issue. I am convinced that I have 
suggested the economically most rational solution and precisely 
because of the narrow roads, I cannot see any other feasible 
way. Therefore, if I do not receive support for this within the 
party or, in a given situation, from the coalition partners, 
then I will not attempt to implement it. Not because of the 
possible professional failure, but because I do not wish to 
participate in forming an economic policy -- neither actively, 
nor as an accomplice, watching from the sidelines -- that might 
ring nicer in the ears of the electors but causes the 
deterioration of the economy and of the situation of the whole 
society in the long run. 

