BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 21 (AFP) -- A Sino-Vietnamese 
territorial row over the Spratly islands intensified Thursday, 
with China defending as "totally legal" its deal with a U.S. 
company to explore for oil in the disputed island chain. 
  "China has irrefutable sovereignty over the Spratly islands 
and adjacent waters and this fact enjoys full international 
legal basis," Foreign Ministry spokesman Wu Jianmin told a 
weekly press briefing. 
  "Oil contracts between Chinese companies and foreign 
countries concerning these waters is action totally within 
China's sovereignty and is therefore totally legal," Wu said. 
  Hanoi reacted strongly Wednesday to what it described as the 
"illegal" contract signed by China and Colorado-based Crestone 
Energy, warning that the deal marked a "serious escalation of 
the situation in the South China Sea." The Spratly islands are 
claimed wholly or in part by China, Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia, 
the Philippines and Taiwan. The crux of the dispute revolves 
around what are believed to be vast oil deposits in the area. 
  Crestone had announced Tuesday that it would sink 
exploratory 
wells under the protection of the Chinese Navy, which has 
recently stepped up its operations around the disputed island 
chain. The contract provides Crestone with access to a 25,155 
square kilometer (10,062 square miles) area -- the largest ever 
included in a prospecting contract in Southeast Asia. 
  Wu also returned Hanoi's accusations that mineral 
exploration 
around the Spratlys constituted a violation of Vietnamese 
sovereignty. "In recent years, Vietnam has carried out a lot of 
oil and gas exploration in Chinese waters. These activities are 
illegal and encroach upon China's sovereignty," Wu said. 
  Historical enemies China and Vietnam normalised diplomatic 
relations in November 1991 after a 12-year freeze, agreeing at 
the time to peacefully settle border disputes through 
negotiations. But mutual suspicion and allegations of violating 
bilateral understandings have continued to strain relations, 
with rival claims to the Spratly and Paracel islands the main 
point of contention. 

