Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Igor Andreyev, IZVESTIYA: "Tell Me What You Are </F>
Smuggling and I Will Tell You What Country You Are From"] 
  [Excerpts] According to Valeriy Draganov, deputy 
chairman of the State Customs Committee, the standard procedure 
for importing consumer goods and exporting valuable strategic 
resources in our country is as follows: Using all means 
possible, criminals obtain documents that describe a certain 
commodity as something entirely different. The licensed product, 
for instance, fuel or some metals--primarily nonferrous or rare 
earth--are usually documented as other items that may be 
exported without any restrictions. The documents, 
understandably, appear quite flawless, thanks to the corrupt 
officials of many agencies, including some customs and law 
enforcement offices. Fakes may be discovered either at an early 
stage when the goods start their long journey to the border, or 
at the border itself, through a complete examination of all 
cargo. 
  The trick with liquor, huge quantities of which are being 
brought here from Western Europe, is quite typical. In order to 
avoid paying a considerable excise tax, owners of the Royal 
exotic fruit liqueurs and various vodkas bottle them in 
innocent-looking lemonade containers. Aware of the fact that 
convoys from, say, Germany are being kept under observation by 
Russian customs and their foreign colleagues, they indicate a 
false final destination in Russia in the documents; in most 
cases it is a private residence. Customs operations officers 
check the address and find some drunken apartment owner who has 
no idea of the cargo he is supposed to receive. According to 
Draganov, it has been known to happen that such an addressee 
would call the Customs Committee after such a visit and beg them 
tearfully to put him in jail or, he assured them, he will simply 
be killed. One way or another the commodity, without reaching 
the declared addressee, is bottled once again, this time in its 
"own" container, and then dispensed to trade facilities. 
[passage omitted] 
  In Draganov's estimation, the worst situation can be found 
at 
the Russia-Kazakhstan border. It is occurring more and more 
often in this area that smugglers are resorting to arms when 
breaking through the border from Russia to adjacent territory. 
Here is the maneuver they normally use: A truck rushes by at top 
speed while somebody in it sprays customs officers with machine 
gun and submachine gun fire; it breaks through the barriers and 
disappears into Kazakhstan. Goods carried there include 
automotive parts, metals, petroleum products, jewelry, gold 
items, furs, ordinary consumer goods. The first 10 armored cars 
being manufactured by the GAZ [Gorky Motor Vehicle Works] for 
the State Customs Committee will be assigned to this particular 
section of the Russian border. 
  Committee reports cite more and more violent actions 
directed 
against customs offices and officers. One hundred and twenty 
such cases were recorded last year, from the murder of a customs 
officer's wife and children near Novorossiysk to terrorizing and 
coercion to suicide. Quite recently, in early February, a 
Dagestani official of the Russian customs was shot dead in his 
home. 
  The State Customs Committee has fully utilized the new 
provisions of the Russian Customs Code which allow it, among 
other things, to conduct independent investigative activity. 
Valeriy Draganov, who is in charge of the antismuggling work, 
told us that in one year they formed customs security subunits 
and rapid deployment groups based in Moscow and Rostov, the 
Urals and the Far East. They have their own aircraft, superior, 
state-of-the-art weapons, bullet-proof vests, and communications 
equipment. They conduct their operations either independently or 
in conjunction with the Federal Counterintelligence Service 
[FSK] and Ministry of Internal Affairs [MVD]; in their combat 
and other qualifications they are on the par with Alfa or Vityaz. 
  The old headache of Russian customs, drug smuggling made a 
threatening reappearance last year. Illegal drug trafficking did 
not just grow but exploded. The number of arrests in 1993 was 
3.5 times that of 1992, and the weight of confiscated drugs 
increased 5.5 times. This was the first time that a diplomatic 
cover was used for this kind of contraband. This was also the 
first time that Russian customs officers seized several large 
shipments of an especially strong drug KAT. 
  Another noticeable change has occurred in what can be termed 
the nomenclature of smuggled drugs. If hashish accounted for 
most confiscated substances before 1990, since 1991 first place 
has taken by poppy straw. Of 2,408 kilos of narcotics 
confiscated last year, poppy straw and marijuana made up 1,070.8 
and 153.5 kilos respectively. I would like to mention that these 
goods came to Russia from the Baltics, especially Lithuania, in 
the first half of the year, and from Ukraine during the second 
half. Moreover, of the entire 1,070.8 kilos seized last year, 
558 kilos of poppy straw were seized in December alone. 
  State Customs Committee analysts have also noticed a jump in 
the number of cases of confiscation of heroin and cocaine coming 
from the far abroad. In February of this year alone, 1,090 kilos 
of cocaine were seized, almost half the entire drug catch in 
1993. Here is one more curious circumstance: Women are becoming 
carriers of narcotics more and more often. The number of women 
carriers in the past year was more than five times that of the 
previous years... 
  Valeriy Draganov assured us that the customs service has 
considerably matured during the last 12-18 months; it has been 
given new rights, equipment, and infrastructure. However, we 
should not expect a sharp change in our fight against drug 
traffickers, who are acting more and more brazenly. The causes 
that breed all types of crime and corruption, which can also be 
found among customs officials, remain with us. 

