Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, February 9 (KCNA) -- The praise of the 
dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il by all people is growing higher 
with each passing day. 
  It is an irresistible trend of the present times for the 
world people to deeply trust and revere Comrade Kim Chong-il who 
is guiding the cause of independence to victory with his 
tested and veteran leadership. 
  A typical instance is that gifts of best wishes are 
presented to him from many countries every year. 
  Last year, he received precious gifts from party and state 
leaders of more than 100 countries including Chairman of the 
C.C. [Central Committee], the Lao People's Revolutionary Party 
and Premier of the Lao Government Khamtai Siphandon, Syrian 
President Hafiz al-Asad and Afghan President Borhanoddin 
Rabbani and prominent figures of governments, political parties 
and organisations, and international organisations. 
  Among them are various books, silk banners and 
congratulatory 
messages praising the greatness and feats of Comrade Kim 
Chong-il, treasured swords and gold and silver knives showing 
their ardent desire for his longevity in good health and hunting 
equipment and rare medicines. 
  Among the gifts there are many ornaments of thick national 
coloring, special clocks, high-grade musical instruments and 
valuable relics. 
  The praise and reverence for Comrade Kim Chong-il are found 
in the fact that books praising his great ideology and theory 
and feats and noble virtues have been written and published in 
many copies in a host of countries. 
  "Kim Chong-il and Shining Korea" (Pakistan), "The Lodestar 
Which Has Risen Over Korea" (Nepal), "The Genius of the East" 
(Syria), "Kim Chong-il, Brilliant Great Man" (Mali), "Collection 
of Papers Marking the 50th Birthday of the Dear Leader Comrade 
Kim Chong-il" (Japan), "Art of Diamond" (Peru) and many other 
books have been written and published in recent years to be 
widely read. 
  Praise of the revolutionary exploits performed by Comrade 
Kim 
Chong-il finds manifestation in orders, medals, honorary titles 
of various countries awarded to him. 
  Comrade Kim Chong-il has received supreme orders of many 
countries including the Kiettikhoun Order (Laos), the Grand 
Cordon of the National Order of Leopard (Zaire), the Grand Order 
of Independence (Equatorial Guinea) and the Grand Cross (Mali) 
and last year he was awarded the Star Order of Sacred Kuds of 
Palestine and medals of Bagneux City, France; and Marinha 
Grande City in Leiria Province, Portugal; and titles of honorary 
professor of the Iquitos and Los Andes de Huancayo Universities 
of Peru. 

