BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Analysis" by Anwer Khalil: "US Initiative for S Asia </F>
Regional Security"] 
  [Text] A new US diplomatic offensive seems to be in the 
offing to bring Pakistan under a regional security arrangement 
in South Asia supervised by India on behalf of the sole 
surviving superpower. Unconfirmed reports say that the latest 
non-papers or informal proposals received from the US underline 
the importance of a regional security system in South Asia. The 
presence here earlier this month of Mr Robert Oakley as also of 
some other experts who work for the State Department confirms 
that the "quiet diplomacy" to promote understanding between the 
United States and Pakistan is continuing. That in itself would 
be welcomed by many observes but there are others who think that 
any major initiatives need to be shared with the people and 
discussed publicity. 
  In the absence of any authoritative information on the 
subject, one has to rely on whatever unconfirmed reports are 
available. It is said that the US now wants Pakistan to adopt a 
regionalist approach and support a collective security system in 
South Asia. So far as Pakistan's disputes with India are 
concerned these should be tackled bilaterally with India. 
Translated in simple terms, it means that. 
  1 -- Pakistan shall not raise Kashmir in bilateral talks 
with 
the US. The issue shall be be raised with India bilaterally. 
  2 -- Pakistan's nuclear programme should be discussed 
without 
linking it to the Indian nuclear programme. 
  3 -- The US concerns about security and stability in South 
Asia can best be addressed through a collective security 
arrangement jointed by all states in South Asia. 
  The concept of regional security is not new. And it has been 
frequently raised. From mid-level US officials to President 
Clinton. 
  All have mentioned security in South Asia a workable 
concept. 
[sentence as published] Perhaps it also came under discussion in 
Pak-US talks previously but this time, the theme seems to be 
central. One reason might be Indian Prime Minister Narasimha 
Rao's Washington visit in May last. This is particularly 
relevant because the United States, over the last three years at 
least, has held a series of discussions with India on the 
subject. In 1992, the US held two rounds of bilateral talks 
with India on South Asian regional security and sought to obtain 
India's thoughts on how appropriately structured regional talks 
might deal with the underlying security concerns. 
  This was followed up with more talks on South Asian security 
-- in April this year. Mr Talbott, on his first visit abroad as 
US deputy secretary of state, arrived in New Delhi on what be 
described as "a mission of consultation between friends". 
During his talks in New Delhi, Mr Talbott "underscored the US 
commitment to promote greater peace and security in South Asia 
through both multilateral and bilateral initiatives". Two days 
later, addressing a press conference in Islamabad, he talked of 
a "multilateral forum" which he felt "would very much serve the 
interests of non-proliferation, of disarmament, of arms control 
and of security issues in general". 
  Apparently in the continuing discussions which followed Mr 
Talbott's visit in April this year, the important points 
elaborated include the high desirability of a multilateral forum 
to ensure security in South Asia. 
  In fact Mr Talbott had also hinted at the US exasperation 
at Pakistan's habit of linking Kashmir issue with all questions 
of security and non-proliferation. Mr Talbott advised us not to 
look backward saying that history is a complicating factor. He 
made it very clear that "the issue of non-proliferation is so 
important and so complex in itself, that it needs to be 
addressed very much in its own terms". Mr Talbott was also very 
categorical about delinking India from Pakistan-US bilateral 
relations. He minced no words when he said in Islamabad that 
Pakistan and India in "much of the last half century have been 
caught up in a zero-sum game, and that has influenced the United 
States in a way that we want very much to break out of." He 
plainly informed that "when American officials come here in 
future, they would not like to hear about Pakistan's problems 
with India." Talbott said this in April, 1994 and since then 
more than one team of Americans have come and gone. Mr Oakley 
was one such American and he seems to have used a more plain 
language than others. 
  Regional security and conflict resolution: The US 
policymakers perceive South-Asia as a potential flashpoint of a 
nuclear flare-up. Their logic is simple: The Kashmir problem, 
has already led the two major countries of the region, India and 
Pakistan, to fight three wars. The freedom movement in the 
Indian held Kashmir is creating its own heat and the cost of 
keeping the territory and the people of Kashmir under its hold 
is increasingly becoming unbearable for India. Pakistan is 
providing moral (and supposedly also material) support to the 
Kashmiri freedom-fighters. Since India is not likely to accede 
to the demands of the right of self-determination of the 
Kashmiris, there is bound to be a flare-up between the two 
rivals at some point. And since both are presumed to be nuclear 
threshold powers, the next round of war between India and 
Pakistan according to the Americans, has to be fought with 
nuclear weapons. 
  The truth is that the whole sequence cannot be dismissed as 
mere nonsense. The issue of Kashmir is very real and, despite 
the passage of more than four decades, has refused to be buried 
under the debris of broken promises both at the global level by 
the UN and regionally by the Indian leaders. There are, 
however, too many gaps and too many suppositions in the 
sequence. The thinking based on so faulty a reasoning can only 
lead to the kind of confusion manifest in the US initiatives 
taken one after the other. Each initiative was abandoned in 
quick succession and without making any real political effort to 
achieve the objectives. 
Alternate Options: Ever since it took the decision 
to stop all economic and military assistance to Pakistan, no US 
Administration had been able to come up with any meaningful 
basis for an enduring bilateral relationship between the two 
countries. If a bunch of US legislators in their anxiety to 
punish Pakistan exerted more pressure than what would have been 
civilised and if some of the more influential managers sitting 
next to the Foggy Bottom in Washington thought that the stoppage 
of all economic and military assistance will bring Pakistan to 
its knees and make it accept dictation, that can be condoned as 
one of the chronic bouts of arrogance that the mid-level 
representatives of a superpower are prone to suffer from. In 
any case, they stand disappointed. There were and there are 
many on the Capital Hill and at the State Department who did not 
agree with what was done to a close ally. What is unbelievable, 
however, is that no one had thought about policy options before 
demolishing the existing one. The result is that US policy for 
this region has continued to drift from one set of options to 
another without achieving anything tangible. First, it was the 
five-nation moot. Much time and effort was wasted in pursuit of 
this proposal. Then there was a new cry: "Preventive 
diplomacy". South Asia was declared to be the best place to 
demonstrate the efficacy of this new concept in managing affairs 
of the world. The tone and substance of this new slogan was 
undoubtedly in harmony with the new US role as the sole 
surviving superpower, particularly when the US took upon itself 
to rid the mankind of all evils, big and small. Well, the 
concept was too universal to fire the imagination of the people 
in a small region of the globe. 
  And now this new initiative of a regional security system 
for 
South Asia. There are two reasons why Pakistan shall reject 
this proposal outright. One: Because this will put an 
immediate freeze on the Kashmir issue which Pakistan simply 
cannot afford. And two because the proposal is calculated to 
completely exclude a role for China in South Asia. 
  This does not mean that the situation in South Asia is 
permanently disqualified from coming under a joint security 
system sustained and administered basically by the states in the 
region. Perhaps it would need a bold initiative in establishing 
a regional conflict resolution mechanism under the over-all 
supervision of the United Nations and supported by the five 
permanent members of the Security Council. 

