Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Articles by Nikolay Usov and Yuriy Shatalov: "`Wild Geese' </F>
Return: Russian Military Commissariats Helped Azerbaijan Recruit 
Mercenaries for War in Karabakh"] 
  [Text] Ivanovo--The widely publicized incident involving 
the organized dispatch of volunteers from Ivanovo Oblast to the 
front lines of that ethnic conflict has for the most part ended 
successfully for them. ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA wrote about this in 
December of last year. Let us briefly recount what happened. 
  The police were the first to suspect that something was 
awry. 
Everywhere where you looked at the quiet provincial airport, 
which handles only a few outbound flights, dozens of young men 
-- residents of a number of oblasts in central Russia -- had 
suddenly started gathering. They behaved themselves so brazenly 
that the police officer on duty had to call the city for help. 
  The intoxicated youths made no secret of the fact that they 
were waiting for a plane that would take them to Baku, and from 
there to the combat zone in Karabakh. None of them really knew 
what force they would be fighting in -- the regular army or some 
band. 
  After that there was no word from the "soldiers of fortune" 
for almost two months. Learning the mercenaries' names posed no 
difficulty. It turned out that the 17 Ivanovo youths between the 
ages of 24 and 29 had army experience, and several more than one 
criminal offense. 
  And so the "buyers" from Azerbaijan got what they were 
looking for: A ragtag detachment of cannonfodder ready for 
action. For money these youths were truly prepared to do 
anything. And it is hard to believe that the deal was 
consummated without the tacit consent of military commissariat 
officials. 
  Now the Ivanovo mercenaries have returned home; without 
contracts signed by the Azerbaijan Defense Ministry. Immediately 
upon payment of the agreed-upon sums, the documents were 
circumspectly collected from them. 
  However, the Ivanovo youths were lucky: Only two of them 
remain in hospitals somewhere. But their "colleagues" from 
Tambov, Kaluga, and Vladimir suffered both fatalities and 
missing in action. 
  And that is essentially the whole story of their voyage of 
death. The Federal Counterintelligence Service was able to 
obtain documentary proof that officials of military 
commissariats in a number of Russian cities were involved in the 
illegal recruitment. -- Nikolay Usov, correspondent for the 
oblast newspaper RABOCHIY KRAY. 
<H6>  * * * </H6>
  Vladimir--According to the Federal Counterintelligence 
Service's Vladimir Oblast Administration, 13 mercenaries 
returned home to Vladimir, three in zinc coffins. 
  Who are these young men? How and why did they wind up in 
warring Azerbaijan? Officers of the Federal Counterintelligence 
Service Administration who conducted an investigation were able 
to interview many of the "wild geese" who came back and to speak 
with their relatives. They learned some things that are much 
food for thought. 
  For example, the Vladimir mercenaries' average age was 30 to 
35. They were all soldiers and sergeants in the reserve of the 
former Soviet Army. Almost all of them had families and 
children. It was also learned that many of them did not have 
jobs worthy of their ages and health, and so they were unable to 
properly provide for their families and elderly parents. 
Necessity forced them to look for good pay in the army. And 
until a certain point, none of them had entertained the idea of 
serving in the army of another state. Officials of the Vladimir 
Oblast military commissariat, to which they had applied, talked 
about contractual service in Russia's 201st Motorized Infantry 
Division, stationed in Tajikistan. 
  But once the final formalities were completed, some of the 
military commissariat's officers began suggesting that the 
fellows go to Azerbaijan for three months. They set up a meeting 
with representatives of that Caucasus republic's armed forces. 
Many promises were made, far more than a Russian Army recruiter 
could have made: 250,000 rubles and $250 for each month of 
service. In the event of the mercenary's death, his family would 
receive a guaranteed benefit of 5 million rubles. There was 
another, no less important detail that was all but decisive in 
the young men's quickly deciding to go to that "trouble spot." 
  The fact is that the group was made up largely of mechanics 
and drivers of tanks, armored personnel carriers, infantry 
fighting vehicles, and other combat vehicles, whom the 
recruiters needed. The "buyer" from the Transcaucasus assured 
the young men that they would not see combat but work primarily 
in the rear as instructors. 
  It is also curious that the future mercenaries in Vladimir 
signed no contracts. They took the "buyer" at his word and, at 
his request, promised to keep secret everything having to do 
with their departure for Azerbaijan and service in its army. But 
on arriving at the front, the "wild geese" found out very 
quickly that they would not be allowed to sit things out in the 
rear. One fine day the mercenaries were handed automatic rifles 
and ordered into battle. They also later learned that they would 
not be getting the promised $250. And that is when they began to 
sober up. 
  As for the officers of the Vladimir Oblast military 
commissariat who were directly or indirectly involved in the 
recruitment of young Russian men for the Azerbaijan Army, the 
counterintelligence officers know their identities too. To all 
indications, they will not be able to avoid some unpleasantries, 
as the Federal Counterintelligence Service's Vladimir Province 
Administration has forwarded the findings of its investigation 
into the mercenaries' recruitment to the military prosecutor. -- 
Yuriy Shatalov, correspondent. 
<H6>  * * * </H6>
  From the Editors: We intend to continue to inform 
readers of new instances and circumstances involving the 
recruitment of mercenaries on Russian Federation territory. 

