Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA staff correspondent Eduard </F>
Mokhorov under the rubric "A Banal Economic Story": "A Blow 
Below the Belt. From Their Own..."] 
  [Text] 
  How a Successful Bryansk Plant That Made It to the 
World Market With Its Unique Product Sustained Crushing Losses 
Caused by Ideas of Homegrown Radical Reformers 
  There is little to cheer about in factory life these 
days. Nevertheless, until recently the Bryansk Machine Building 
Plant [BMZ] seemed to be a happy exception to the rule. The BMZ 
Association had integrated into the world division of labor 
earlier than many Russian enterprises. Thanks to many years of 
close cooperation with the well-known European firm 
Man-Burmeister and Wein Diesel AO [name as transliterated], 
Bryansk ship diesels sell well among ship owners of many Western 
countries. This brought our producer the desired foreign 
currency and some economic independence. I am convinced that the 
BMZ can serve as a model for Russian industry's entry into the 
world market. 
  Actually, the famous formula "do as I do and you will 
succeed" requires some clarification in this case. This 
industrial giant's road to the market is far from being the 
result of the current economic reform. The foundation for 
integration was laid at the time Aleksey Kosygin headed the 
government. The advance technical base developed in the 1960's 
and subsequent years. But on top of that it took several decades 
to adapt to the world of Western business. Our mentor and 
companion all these years was one of the oldest engineering 
firms in West Europe with an impeccable reputation. 
  This latter circumstance to a large extent predetermined our 
success. And this is what we need to remember: The circles where 
the company, whose name begins with "Man," rules, do not accept 
novices and strangers. There is apparently no other road to 
success in the West. Most Russian goods producers today do not 
have such a unique experience in working with Western partners. 
Nevertheless, all want access to the world market, the road to 
which is simply closed to many. We, on the other hand, 
habitually explain first failures as intrigues of capitalist 
monopolies, who do not want to see Russia as a worthy partner. 
  The situation is somewhat more complex. We have lived in a 
closed economic space at the time when the world was going 
through integration. Integration of financial power; 
concentration of scientific and technical intellect; settling 
spheres of influence. The militarized, secret Soviet industry, 
with all its technical achievements, remained on the wayside of 
the world integration process, and no laments, obligations to 
put one's life on the line, or shock therapy experiments will 
reduce this lag, will relieve Russian producers of the necessity 
to go through a natural, rather lengthy process of adaptation in 
the world community. By the way, our air and space industry is 
embarking on the beginnings of this road--they have signed 
agreements on joint projects with U.S. companies. 
  At different times over a number of years I was present at 
key negotiations between the Bryansk Machine Building Plant and 
Western partners. There were moments when the fate of subsequent 
relations with companies hung in the balance depending on the 
last word of our general director. The negotiations scenario is 
routine: We are offered cooperation on terms by which we have to 
give up a considerable part of our own profit; if this is not 
acceptable, negotiations inevitably fail. 
  After one such climactic moment, which resulted in signing a 
long-term agreement, I had a frank conversation with BMZ General 
Director Artur Chebrikov. 
  "If you did not accept the terms, what would be the 
consequences?" was my question. 
  "Lamentable," summed up Chebrikov. "Our country would have 
to 
cease production of ship diesels within the next few years. We 
would begin buying the same kind of diesels in other countries 
and equip our sea vessels with them." 
  "But our diesels are as good as foreign, are they not?" 
  "They are just as good," agreed Chebrikov. "But the Man-B. 
&amp; 
W. Diesel AO controls the world network of company service and 
maintenance of sea transport, and in the event we break our 
relations no service will be available in any port for vessels 
equipped with Bryansk diesels. Then no ship owner will want to 
buy BMZ products." 
  This is how small the world is. 
  Chebrikov accepted all the terms of the firm, and in the 
final count the contract turned out profitable for both sides. 
Actually, even more profitable than all previous contracts: In 
the past, Bryansk diesel-builders themselves searched for buyers 
for their products; after signing this deal, the Germans and 
Danes took this responsibility, and they know the Western market 
far better than we do. 
  Orders from leading ship-building companies started pouring 
as if from the horn of plenty. At the same time, the firm was 
extremely conscientious in fulfilling obligations with respect 
to technical cooperation. The West's good will also showed 
during those difficult times for BMZ when the Union Government 
confiscated the foreign currency holding in the plant's 
accounts. Chebrikov ran up a considerable debt to his partners. 
But the Germans were patient, did not break relations. Debt 
deferment helped our side to resolve the problems of financing, 
pay off old debts, and get on its feet. 
  The Western business world needs the peaceful Russian might. 
Farsighted people in Europe do not live day by day. It all 
depends on how things will proceed with respect to our own 
reforms. But even with respect to such "market" enterprise as 
BMZ's one cannot say with certainty that the crisis is over. 
  A year ago it looked like the Bryansk Machine Building 
Plant, 
with numerous orders from the West, had all the chances of 
avoiding the problems that are rocking Russia today. The 
powerful Man-Burmeister and Wein teamed up Bryansk 
diesel-builders with its subsidiary Holeby [as transliterated], 
a world-recognized authority in the area of design and marketing 
of auxiliary ship diesels. New profitable orders came. In the 
current year of 1994, BMZ will build 30 ship diesels. Last year 
they built 26; a year before, 22. Our industry has not seen such 
dynamic growth for a long time. 
  It is even more regrettable that success in the world market 
does not make the life of this labor collective easier. The 
enterprise's situation today differs little from the lot of 
troubled Russian plants that have found themselves on the verge 
of bankruptcy. Alas, one cannot build a market economy on the 
territory of one separate oblast or factory. 
  The BMZ combines several major production facilities. The 
state of the world market for ship diesels was favorable, but 
the rest of the output has always been oriented towards domestic 
needs. And that single country no longer exists. 
  As a result of the Belovezha impromptu, BMZ lost its 
traditional market in Ukraine and Central Asia. The Ministry of 
Railroads found itself insolvent. There are no buyers today for 
freight railcars, refrigerator sections, diesel locomotives and 
engines for them, as well as consumer goods. 
  Forced lengthy stoppages of these productions followed. 
About 
1,000 workers were sent on an indefinite leave. But these people 
need to be paid at least a minimal allowance. It amounts to 
R15,000 rubles a month. In 1993, BMZ began to irretrievably lose 
highly skilled cadres. Low-skilled workers, whose services these 
days could be dispensed with, on the contrary, hold on tight to 
their jobs. Labor veterans also are seen as an additional burden 
today. There are about 3,000 of them still working today. They 
are the first candidates for layoffs, but the process probably 
will not be limited to just pensioners. 
  Without producing material goods, unneeded people live today 
at the expense of those who have jobs. One salary is sometimes 
shared by two, three, or four. There is a rumor that CIS 
railroads are on the verge of collapse. Unless mass replacement 
of the rolling stock is undertaken within the next two years, we 
will have a situation similar to the times of the civil war. 
This brings a weak hope for revival. The hope is based not on 
real credits or investment, but on the anticipation of 
irreversible ruin. 
  The BMZ Association today resembles an air balloon that is 
rapidly losing altitude. The travelers, in order to save 
themselves, hurriedly dispose of extra weight on board. What 
gets sacrificed are child care facilities, recreation bases, a 
sports school, housing construction, municipal services, and 
jobs. True, the association earned a R12-billion profit over the 
past year, but it is also owed the same amount by insolvent 
customers. 
  The insolvency crisis is exacerbated by the thoroughly 
corrupt financial and banking systems. As is known, a market is 
based on the reciprocal movement of goods and money supply. 
Success comes to those who can ensure for themselves a high 
velocity of capital turnover. The higher the velocity, the 
greater the profit, and the greater the working capital savings. 
  In the world of civilized market economics the 
procedure of completing a payment is measured in minutes. Under 
Gaydar, a new procedure was put in place whereby payments take 
two to three weeks to reach their destination, or sometimes 
"wander around" for months. Other people's money that is not 
transferred to its proper owner in a timely manner, is put into 
turnover, bringing considerable profits to speculators and 
dishonest bureaucrats. This is how initial capital is 
accumulated. 
  It appears that things have been straightened out under 
Chernomyrdin. Now payments sent by telegraph take three days. 
Regular payments--one week. At the same time, the problem of 
clearing with Ukraine and the other CIS countries has not been 
resolved. Gaydar proclaimed presumptuously that he had put in 
place the foundations of market structures in Russia. But if 
this is a market, then it would be appropriate to remind that 
during the notorious times of stagnation the planned system, 
with all its vices, ensured that payments reached addresses in 
any point of the Soviet Union within hours. 
  What meaning then does Yegor Timurovich put in the 
notion of "market?" 
  The Bryansk Machine Building Plant is not isolated from 
Russian reality. Income earned from ship diesel production keeps 
the association's entire infrastructure afloat. There are simply 
no other sources today for propping up the shaky financial 
situation. There is an earring for each sister, and in the final 
count the general financial collapse is avoided only thanks to 
foreign currency earnings. 
  The forecast for 1994 also is bleak. Further sharp decline 
is 
expected in orders for freight railcars, diesel locomotives, 
engines for them, and refrigerator sections. Entire plants will 
be idled for long periods of time, as happened quite recently in 
automobile building. 
  The enterprise leadership no longer speaks of the 
possibility 
of averting mass unemployment, but hope to at least preserve the 
skeleton cadres. The list of insolvent debtors is growing 
menacingly fast. Ukrainian ship builders owe BMZ R7 billion. To 
refuse to ship more products means to lose the plant's 
traditional distribution market for a long time. But working for 
free for an Ukrainian uncle also means neglecting one's own 
needs. 
  This was the situation at the time the plant approached the 
new phase of the reform, widely promoted by the well-supervised 
press. What a tempting word: privatization. It means transfer of 
the state-owned depersonalized property into the hands of real, 
judicious owners. The BMZ has just been proclaimed a joint-stock 
society. Today this major industrial enterprise is owned by 
27,000 people. 
  But the social portrait of the new owner comes out one-sided 
and faceless. It is workers and office workers who have been 
practically reduced to the status of lumpens, temporarily 
unemployed, and pensioners. In short, the same hired labor, 
which now has also lost the right to social protection, unsure 
even of tomorrow. Are these the owners, free proprietors, 
independent from the state and the rulers? According to Mr. 
Chubays, it appears to be so... 
  The status of owner does not elicit any enthusiasm 
among the newly-baked stockholders-capitalists. The enterprise 
cannot give anything today to its nominal owners. Forget 
dividends! The "owners," stockholders cannot even get an 
elementary guarantee of the right to keep their jobs. 
  And the "owners" themselves cannot offer the plant, 
which theoretically belongs to them personally, anything but 
their own pair of working hands. The Bryansk Machine Building 
Plant Joint-Stock Society, however, at this point has no need 
for this valuable--or at least this is what we have been taught 
under socialism--capital. 
  One has to admit that the new interpretation of the 
famous slogan "he who had been nothing will become everything," 
for the sake of which, actually, the people rose in defense of 
the White House and President Yeltsin in August 1991, clearly 
has suffered an utter defeat. More than anything, the BMZ 
Joint-Stock Society needs credits, investment, orders, 
distribution markets. There are no rich owners, however, among 
the stockholders. 
  And where are our Russian banks and investment funds? 
Created, in theory, for the purpose of supporting domestic 
industry by financial resources, all they have been able to 
accomplish so far is loud, to the point of vulgarity, 
self-advertising on television. They also have enough drive to 
engage in speculative operations in playing the dollar exchange 
rate, Royal spirits, and Snickers. Russian foreign currency 
accumulates in foreign banks. 
  BMZ General Director Artur Chebrikov and other enterprise 
managers had entertained some hope that Western partners would 
show some interest in the stock of the Bryansk joint-stock 
society. The Man-B. and W. Diesel AO does not display any such 
interest in Russian affairs, however. What capitalist would 
assume somebody else's headache? And with it, the burden of 
crashing state taxes, the responsibility for others' debts and 
others' unemployed? 
  The ideal of the proclaimed Russian reform was the revival 
of 
the owner, a proprietor free from the state. The outcome of the 
two-year-long exhausting shock therapy epic shows that Russia 
today is farther away from the conceived goal than it was at the 
beginning of this road. 
  The result of privatization according to Gaydar and Chubays 
is property that is still ownerless, but on top of this, is now 
lumpenized. This is a terrible result for a great country at the 
finish of the century. We were promised the rebirth of a class 
of proprietors. But today all that looms over nationalized 
factories and plants is the specter of common proletarian 
poverty. 

