Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafael Medina Cruz] </F>
  [Excerpt] Through detection, reconnaissance, and inspection 
flights, Federal Judicial Police [PJF] agents, campaign 
personnel, and the air team from the Office of the Attorney 
General of the Republic [PGR] discovered 25 marijuana and poppy 
plantations in Sinaloa State yesterday, on an area of 
approximately 200,000 square meters. There, over 900,000 of 
those drug plants were destroyed manually and through 
incineration and fumigation. It was noted that no incidents nor 
confrontations occurred between the criminals and 
representatives of the law during the operations. 
  According to reports provided by the PGR, the destruction of 
22 cannabis indica plantations, and three poppy plantations 
(from which opium gum is obtained) took place in the 
municipalities of Culiacan, Mocorito, Ocoroni, San Ignacio, and 
El Fuerte. The forces also confiscated fertilizers and several 
plastic bags containing large amounts of marijuana seed, also 
presumed to be for marketing. 
  The discovery and eradication of those crops, on an area of 
178,887 square meters, caused the criminals large financial 
losses, since all of them, including the poppy plants, were 
ready for harvesting. If that had occurred, the public poisoners 
would have accrued about 30 tons of drugs, as the investigating 
agents explained. 
  Based on the reports reaching the headquarters of the Office 
of the Attorney General of the Republic, it was learned that, on 
the banks of the Evora River in the municipality of Mocorito, 10 
drug crops (three consisting of poppies) were discovered on an 
area of 116,212 square meters. The authorities revealed: "There, 
the drug dealers had planted approximately 500,000 cannabis 
bushes and over 165,000 poppy plants. No incidents occurred 
during their destruction." 
  The report added that, through reconnaissance flights in the 
settlements of Salsipuedes and La Noria, in the municipality of 
Ocoroni, the forces managed to locate and destroy six more 
cannabis indica plantations, on an area of 2,773 square meters. 
On that site, over 11,000 bushes were incinerated. It indicated 
that, in the same locality, the federal agents deactivated a 
drug dryer, seizing fertilizer and seed of the same drug. 
[passage omitted]. 

