Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Pieter Kooijmans by Pierre </F>
Petit and Jan Warners in The Hague; date not given: "The Hard 
Approach Has Worked"] 
  [Text] The Hague -- Around Sarajevo the heavy weapons of 
the Bosnian Serbs have now been placed under UN supervision. 
The NATO ultimatum worked. Minister Pieter Kooijmans, aged 60, 
who has always called for a hard approach, should be satisfied. 
  [Kooijmans] Yes, but a victory must be followed up, 
otherwise 
it becomes a Pyrrhic victory. I am happy that a decision was 
taken -- albeit too late -- to make the show of strength that 
was required to bring an end to a situation that had become 
untenable. 
  [ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD] The NATO ultimatum proved effective for 
Sarajevo. Does it not now follow that all resolutions adopted 
by the UN Security Council can be enforced by applying pressure? 
  [Kooijmans] That pressure has already been vented. It has 
been asked why, in the NATO declaration imposing the ultimatum, 
Tuzla and the change in Srebrenica and Zepa were not mentioned. 
  My answer to that is simple. It had already been done: At 
the NATO summit held in Brussels on 10 January. We would have 
lost our credibility if we had repeated it again. Because the 
outside world would then wonder why we were doing the same thing 
again. That is why there is a willingness to use air support, 
if necessary, to achieve two objectives -- opening up the 
airfield at Tuzla, and changing the guard in Srebrenica and Zepa. 
  Furthermore, the UN secretary general has empowered his 
representative in Yugoslavia to request NATO support if 
necessary. So therein, too, lies a forceful argument. 
  The second question is whether an ultimatum has to be 
imposed 
each time. That argument is used to achieve specific political 
objectives. If they can be achieved through consultation, then 
it has worked. 
  When I read now that the opening of the airfield at Tuzla is 
up for discussion with the Serbs -- a prospect that appeared to 
be totally out of the question in the talks we had on 22 
December -- then I think that the statement made by the summit 
on 10 January was not without some effect. 
  As long as we can still reach our objective through 
negotiations, that path must be followed in the hope that 
following the ultimatum for Sarajewo, the other parties will 
definitely feel the same determination and resolve regarding 
Tuzla. 
  Many barriers that were definitely there before -- who will 
ultimately request air support, must there be a separate 
deicisionmaking procedure within NATO? -- have now been 
eliminated. So the path has become a lot shorter. Naturally, 
that has a far more convincing effect. 
  [ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD] But if the UN objective cannot be 
achieved 
at the negotiating table, you can then say: Do we not need to 
impose any more ultimatums? 
  [Kooijmans] You will not hear me saying that. Rather, on 
each occasion you have to consider whether or not to impose an 
ultimatum, depending on the actual situation. If you resort to 
that option too quickly, then the weapon becomes blunt. 
  So inventiveness is required. No two situations are 
comparable. Take Mostar. I am in favor of declaring that city a 
safe area, but first there must exist a legal basis on which 
that can be done. 
  [ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD] Is the Security Council working on that? 
  [Kooijmans] Tonight there will be a meeting of the UN 
Security Council at which the subject of Mostar will feature on 
the agenda at the request of France. Theoretically, an annex on 
Mostar could be appended to Resolution 836 which lists the safe 
areas. 
  However, the situation in Mostar is different. The artillery 
positions do not encircle the city. The mortars are located in 
the city. So we have to develop a different campaign there. 
That is something we are currently looking into. 
  [ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD] For several weeks now, the United States 
has been a player in the diplomatic game, as have the Russians 
since one week ago. The divided Europe that let Lord Owen carry 
on messing around at the negotiating table for months on end has 
now gathered around itself some players with more decisiveness. 
Must Owen now be replaced? 
  [Kooijmans] The whole context has changed, which is 
something 
I do not regret. I, myself, wrote to my U.S. colleague, Warren 
Christopher, asking whether he wanted to become more closely 
involved in the peace process -- even the French have pressed 
for the same thing. 
  In the new context, no UN or European Union representative 
is 
needed any longer as a negotiator. The United States is also 
actively involved, as is -- surprisingly enough -- Russia. I do 
not know how things should be worked out further. 
  My impression is that the United States is busy implementing 
its own exploratory trip in an endeavour to find out what it 
feels constitutes the best approach. In the first instance, 
that approach would seem to concentrate on reconciling the 
Croats and the Muslims. 
  [ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD] What do you expect to emerge from 
Russian involvement in the peace process? 
  [Kooijmans] So far, Russia has not been in any position to 
participate actively in the peace process. On the other hand, 
it is not in the Russian interest for the ulcer currently 
threatening stability throughout the whole of Europe to be 
allowed to merely continue festering away. After the imposition 
of the ultimatum, Russia felt obliged to play a more active 
role. They had the choice between a confrontation with the West 
-- according to them the ultimatum should never have been 
allowed to be imposed because it supposedly contravenes the UN 
Charter -- and taking a leap into the deep end by trying to make 
the best of things by fully exploiting their contacts with the 
Serbs. Fortunately for the people of Sarajevo this resulted in 
the heavy weapons being withdrawn, placed under UN supervision, 
or neutralized. 
  The thorniest problem remaining is to find an international 
solution for Sarajevo. The city can be placed under UN 
administration. That would require a UN Security Council 
resolution to that effect. However, the main thing is that it 
remains the capital of Bosnia. 
  [ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD] But should Owen now be replaced? 
  [Kooijmans] Let me put it like this: It is quite easy to 
send the messenger away, but that changes nothing regarding the 
contents of his message. Of course, the criticism focuses on 
the messenger. What one has to do is consider whether one can 
still work functionally now that the context has changed -- 
Geneva in another guise. The person best placed to judge this 
is Lord Owen himself. 
  [ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD] Has Europe frittered away a great deal of 
credibility over the last two years? 
  [Kooijmans] For a very long time now, Europe has called for 
greater involvement on the part of the United States. Perhaps 
we misjudged the situation when the United States said that 
Yugoslavia is a European problem that Europe must resolve itself. 
  When Prime Minister Lubbers and I were in Washington, we 
said 
we thought that view was wrong. Stability in Europe is just as 
much of a U.S. as a European interest. The United States has 
100,000 troops stationed on European territory. Now I do not 
mean to intimate that President Clinton directly replied "Oh 
yes, well, I was wrong to see things that way." However, it is 
pleasing to see such a message getting across. 
  [ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD] And yet, is the commitment shown by the 
United States and Russia now complicating matters or rather 
clearing them up? Because Owen is, or was, the very 
personification of European discord? 
  [Kooijmans] You must not forget that a Russian 
representative 
was there at the request of the European Union. Because the 
Russians may be expected to actively influence the Serbs. The 
Serbs do not have that many friends in the Western camp who can 
exert credible pressure on them. 
  If the Russians feel forced to play a more active role by 
the 
run of events, so much the better. Because if they commit 
themselves to the peace process they are the ones who can 
exercise the necessary influence on Belgrade, and via Belgrade 
on Pale (the site of the headquarters of the bosnian Serbs -- 
ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD editor's note). 
  [ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD] Do you believe that if hostilities cease 
the West may in the end acquiesce to an ethnic division of 
Bosnia? 
  [Kooijmans] I find that question so frightfully difficult to 
answer here behind my desk in The Hague. I have also asked the 
Bosnians, and President Izetbegovic, who must really abhor such 
a prospect, the same question. 
  And they replied that they do not want to regard whatever 
remains of Bosnia, ultimately as a Muslim state. Bosnia is a 
multicultural state, they say, just look at our army and our 
administration. On the other hand, they also say that it will 
be extremely difficult in the near future to build up a society 
in which people who have subjected each other to all manner of 
things that we would until recently have viewed as impossible 
can be considered members of a single integrated association of 
states building up something together. 
  [ALGEMEEN DAGBLAD] You sometimes get the feeling that 
certain 
Western governments, including the British and Greek 
Governments, think: Let the war in the Balkans just blaze away, 
because in the years to come it will be even worse if an Islamic 
entity starts acting up in the Balkans. 
  [Kooijmans] That is why I find it so important to stick by 
Izetbegovic's claim that Bosnia is not an Islamic state, but 
rather a multicultural society where everyone is welcome. 
  However, I do believe that the Western countries are less 
fearful of an Islamic state than of being drawn into the 
conflict, falling victim to the so-called Vietnam syndrome in 
the United States and the Northern Ireland syndrome in the 
United Kingdom. 

