Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with former Vice-Premier Irina Sarishvili, </F>
leading member of the National-Democratic Party (NDP), 
Parliament Deputy Speaker Vakhtang Rcheulishvili by Tinatin 
Gviniashvili; place and date not given: "Will International 
Experts Be Summoned?"] 
  [Text]At one of the recent sessions of the Georgian 
Parliament, Irina Sarishvili, a deputy from the NDP, stated that 
the ratification of the agreement on Georgia joining the CIS was 
illegal. The view was also expressed that it was necessary to 
summon international experts in order to establish the legality 
of this act. 
  We met with Irina Sarishvili and Parliament Deputy Speaker 
Vakhtang Rcheulishvili and asked them to comment on the 
situation that has taken shape. 
  [Sarishvili] Yes, we delivered our statement on the 
illegality of the ratification of the agreement on Georgia 
joining the CIS. 
  As for inviting international experts, this has been 
insisted 
upon by the representatives of both the majority and the 
minority in Parliament. However, I know that, even if the 
conclusions of the experts are in our favor, this will 
essentially not change anything. I hope that our statement will 
serve the future when Georgia will once more be given the chance 
to acquire independence. In its time, in 1921, the Georgian 
Government, which we often curse, did not sign the treaty on 
Georgia joining Russia, which is now identical to joining the 
CIS. Therefore, for a long time, Georgia was not a legal part 
of the USSR. If there had been no ratification on 1 March, this 
fact would have given us the chance to acquire a status similar 
to that held by the Baltic republics. 
  What is most surprising is not so much that the agreement on 
Georgia joining the CIS was ratified but that this step was 
proclaimed as the only means by which Georgia can emerge from 
the serious situation in which it finds itself today, the sole 
reason for which, so it is claimed, is the complication of 
relations with Russia. However, we are inclined to believe that 
80 percent of all the misfortunes have been conditioned by 
internal state policy. 
  [Rcheulishvili] I consider it wholly legitimate to call upon 
international experts to act as arbitrators. The arrival of 
international experts will benefit both the opposition and those 
not in opposition. The more frequently we have contacts with 
professionals, the better this will be for our Parliament in 
general.... 
  As regards the possible results of their work, they will not 
be able to change the decision that has been adopted. 
  It is a great pity that Parliament lacks the institution of 
the constitutional court to whom parliamentarians who are 
dissatisfied with something could appeal. I hope that this 
fact, which is necessary for the normal work of Parliament, will 
be taken into account in the new constitution. 

