BFN 

  [Text] Phnom Penh AKP June 23 -- National Assembly Chairman 
Chea Sim said he hoped that the members of the National Assembly 
will agree to outlaw the Khmer Rouge [KR] during the coming N.A. 
session. A draft law to outlaw the Khmer Rouge was made after 
the failure of round-table talks held in Phnom Penh on June 15 
and 16 in which the Maoist faction did not clearly response to 
King Sihanouk's proposal for a permanent, unconditional, 
immediate cease-fire. The draft will be submitted to the 
National Assembly for promulgation during its coming session. 
The bill could be passed unless it gains a majority of 
two-thirds from the members of parliament. 
  Also after the failure of peace-talks, the Royal Government 
decided to close the Khmer Rouge's office in Phnom Penh and the 
Ministry [words indistinct] all Khmer Rouge representatives to 
leave the city before June 19. 
  Chea Sim who visited the seaport of Sihanoukville on June 20 
repeated King Sihanouk's clarification saying: "If the 
peace-talks held in Phnom Penh fails to obtain success, there 
will not be a third round-table talks to be organised." 
  Second Prime Minister Hun Sen told a press conference while 
he was in Jakarta between June 20 and 22 that: "We won't have 
any more round-table talks with the Khmer Rouge." 
  Prince Norodom Ranariddh, first prime minister, and Mr. Hun 
Sen, second prime minister, led the delegation of the Royal 
Government to visit Indonesia on June 20-22. 
  The Cambodian leader highly appreciated the role played by 
Indonesia in the non-aligned movement, "I'm very impressed," 
said the prince "by the socio-economic development and political 
stability of Indonesian government under the leadership of 
President Suharto." 
  He spoke of the urgent need of Cambodia in the 
reconstruction 
of socio-economic infrastructure after two decades of war, 
adding that the Cambodian efforts needed the contribution and 
the support from the countries in the region, Indonesia included. 
  "The process of the national reconstruction and development 
is threatened by the sporadic fighting between the Royal 
Government and the Khmer Rouge guerrillas," he said. 
  He affirmed that the Royal Government strongly supports 
[words indistinct] national reconciliation raised by his majesty 
the king and cease-fire [words indistinct] the king's initiative 
[words indistinct], he said. 
  The government must be responsible for ensuring the national 
[words indistinct] the country. The Cambodian co-prime 
ministers requested Indonesia to provide its aid to the Royal 
Government born from the general elections organized and 
supervised by the United Nations under the Paris agreement. 
  "The Royal Government are ready and eager to negotiate with 
Khmer Rouge to find a compromise acceptable to all parties for 
the national unity, peace and freedom," he said. 
  "We also ask the Paris accords signatories to strictly 
implement the accords so as to give international guarantee to 
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, 
inviolability, neutrality and national unity in Cambodia," said 
Prince Ranariddh. 

