BFN 

<F P=106> [From 26 May EESTI SENUMID, RAHVA HAAL, PAEVALEHT, </F>
HOMMIKULEHT, p 1,3; "News Bulletin" No. 101/94] 
  [Text] Thursday, May 26 -- The foreign ministers' meeting 
of the Baltic Sea Countries ended yesterday with the passing of 
a joint communique stating considerable development of the 
political contacts and economic cooperation of the member 
states. The communique calls for turning the Baltic Sea area 
into a region of special economic growth. 
  The ministers expressed support to the EU-Baltic free trade 
negotiations and hoped that a friendship and cooperation 
agreement between the EU and Russia could be concluded soon. 
  More attention was paid to improved cooperation in transport 
and energetics, especially in the use of seaports. The need for 
simplified border crossing procedures was also stressed. 
  The communique welcomed democratic reforms in the Baltic 
states, Poland and Russia, stressed the importance of the troops 
withdrawal from Lithuania and Latvia and reiterated the "speedy, 
complete and orderly withdrawal" demand. The dismantling of the 
Russian nuclear reactors in Paldiski and technical and legal aid 
to the process was mentioned. 
  The statute of the Euro-faculties was approved and it was 
decided to open another faculty in the Kaliningrad region. 
  The Baltic Sea Countries Council senior officials committee 
is to consider the forming of a permanent secretariat. The 
meeting will also consider Iceland's appeal to join the council. 
  Poland was elected next chairman country of the Council. 
The foreign ministers' meeting established the post of another 
human rights commissioner. Danish lawyer Ole Espersen was 
appointed Special Commissioner for Democratic Institutions and 
Human Rights. 
  Espersen commented that his tasks include the protection of 
human rights and ethnic minorities and added that private 
individual, groups of persons and organisations are free to 
appeal to the commissioner. But he pointed out that he cannot 
deal with all council member countries at once, due to the 
limited resources and manpower. He met the representatives of 
the Estonian Institute for Human Rights yesterday. 
  Representative of the EU sir Leon Brittan offered a 
possibility to form a free trade area between the EU and the 
Baltic Sea countries outside the union. Free trade has a 
central position in the relations between these states and the 
EU and it would not be too early to think of a common trade 
region, he stressed. 
  The border issues between Russia and Estonia were not 
mentioned at the meeting, contrary to the earlier promises of 
the Russian foreign minister. Kozyrev unexpectedly announced at 
the news conference that Russia has no border disputes with 
neighbouring countries and that the issue will not be raised at 
the Paris conference either. Estonian Foreign Minister Juri 
Luik, however, stressed that Estonia will bring up the border 
subject, as the Balladur Pact conference is the best opportunity 
for discussing it. 

