Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Cornelia Block report: ``Three Poppy Harvests Per Year Are </F>
Possible''] 
  [Text] Wiesbaden, December -- ``At some time or other they 
will remember the field. This is a sleeping reserve,'' says 
Volker Brandt, senior official in the ``Drugs'' Department of 
the Federal Office of Criminal Investigations [BKA] in 
Wiesbaden. He is referring to a plain in the Chu Valley near 
Dzhambul in southeastern Kazakhstan. ``Cannabis is growing 
there on an area of about 150 by 30 km, sometimes interrupted by 
other plants and trees,'' Brandt reports, who got to know the 
region when he visited the country. It is not farmers or 
smugglers who have established a drug plantation there, the 
cannabis is just part of the natural vegetation. The plants 
protect the soil from erosion. Therefore, one cannot simply 
destroy them. By genetically engineering the seeds, it would be 
possible to reduce the plants' active contents to 1 to 2 
percent, he explains. Then they would be uninteresting for drug 
dealers. However, this can hardly be implemented. 
  According to Brandt, poppy, on the other hand, usually does 
not grow in this region. Wherever there are fields, they must 
be established, cultivated, and harvested by farmers. Poppy 
needs regular watering, and water is rare in this region. 
Nevertheless, if someone organized irrigation, it might become 
important that ``the Central Asian republics are predestined for 
the cultivation of poppy. Three harvests per year would then be 
possible,'' he adds. 
  The still harmless cannabis fields are of symbolic value for 
the development in the smuggling, trade, and production of drugs 
in Eastern Europe and in the states of the former Soviet Union 
because of the advantage that drug criminals might soon take of 
the plants. All dealers and smugglers of addictive substances 
consider Europe--just like the United States--as a ``closed 
consumer region.'' The rising number of drug finds during 
checks at the borders of Eastern Europe and at east German 
checkpoints are like a bad omen in the statistics. 
  In contrast to the time before 1989, when the eastern 
borders 
were hermetically sealed, ``new supply lines are developing 
now,'' Leopold Schuster, president of the BKA ``Antidrug'' 
Department, reports. ``The South Americans have recognized the 
new situation, and they exploit it,'' Schuster says. This is 
true, for instance, regarding smugglers' routes via East 
European ports. According to findings so far, the Russian Mafia 
is not yet as active in the drug trade as previously feared, 
Brandt reports. It is rather concentrated on night life--e.g. 
on gambling and prostitution. In the heroin trade it cannot yet 
be seen as a competition for the dominating Turkish drug 
dealers. ``However, as soon as they cannot get anything out of 
the night life anymore...,'' he adds with premonition. The 
profit margin per kilogram of heroin is 50,000 to 60,000 German 
marks. He is worried because the methods of action of the 
Russian Mafia are ``incomparably more frightening'' than those 
of the Turkish drug dealers. The latter use brutality primarily 
in case of disloyal behavior within the groups of criminals. 
  An example of more recent activities by the South Americans 
is the smuggling of drugs via East European harbors at the 
Baltic Sea, Schuster reports. Some of these harbors are less 
risky than Bremen or Hamburg because of the lower ``density of 
checks.'' ``They accept rather complicated roundabout routes,'' 
he says. Rostock has felt that just like St. Petersburg. 
Several times, major amounts of drugs were discovered in the 
east German port. In the meantime, this ``smugglers' gate'' has 
been secured better. Concerning airports, there are also side 
routes, which deviate from the traditional routes. ``Courier 
deliveries suddenly come in transit via Moscow and Prague 
instead of by air via Black Africa,'' Schuster says. In 
addition, there are the drugs that are transported in trucks via 
the ``Balkan route'' and come from the ``Golden Crescent'' and 
Turkey and drugs that are produced in the East European 
countries or states of the former Soviet Union. The so-called 
Balkan route has shifted to the north because of the war in the 
former Yugoslavia. Nowadays, drugs reach Western Europe via 
Istanbul, Odessa, Ukraine, Belarus, Poland, and the Czech 
Republic. 
  However, the drug investigators react to these developments. 
German liaison officials, who also deal with organized crime, 
have already been detached to Warsaw, Prague, and Budapest. 
These experts are also to be sent to Bratislava, Kiev, Riga, 
Moscow, Sofia, and Bucharest. However, according to Schuster, 
cooperation is not always simple. Even though Germany has 
concluded bilateral agreements--which legitimize and improve the 
exchange of information--with Hungary, the Czech Republic, and 
Poland, and such agreements are being prepared with the Slovak 
Republic, Ukraine, and the Baltic States, this alone is not 
sufficient. 
  Referring generally to the states to the east of Germany, 
Schuster speaks of partly ``not functioning structures.'' In 
addition, in some countries the interlocutors are changing 
constantly. Sometimes there is ``a field of tension,'' which 
results from the competition between the police and the 
intelligence services, which are responsible for organized drug 
crime. Other difficulties are the result of legal 
uncertainties. Schuster describes it as follows: ``They do not 
know what they are permitted to do.'' In Poland, for instance, 
there is a ``large market of amphetamines,'' but there is no 
drug law. Basic substances that come from Western Europe are 
turned into amphetamines in the country, which are not 
prohibited there. Later, the drugs reach the European black 
market as ``XTC,'' for instance. However, he adds: ``But the 
Poles are cooperating with us.'' This summer Polish police 
received several hundred drug test sets from Germany for quick 
checks. 
  How dangerous the production of amphetamines is in general 
and which black markets exist for amphetamines from Eastern 
Europe can be seen in findings by the British ``National 
Criminal Intelligence Service'' (NCIS), which were recently 
published in a report by THE TIMES. The report says that the 
amount of amphetamines seized in Great Britain has risen by 55 
percent compared with 1991. Compared with 1989, it has even 
tripled. Addicts in Great Britain, Belgium, the Netherlands, and 
in Scandinavia are considered to be the ``main consumers'' of 
these drugs in Europe. 
  Police and customs officials are trying to counter the drug 
wave through increasing international cooperation. Thus, the 
countries that are located to the east of Germany have meanwhile 
become members of Interpol. Exceptions are only some Asian 
states of the former Soviet Union. The rising exchange of 
technical and specific information benefits all participants. 
In Schuster's view, international legal aid is too cumbersome. 
There may be months of delays. Police are closer to the goal 
of cooperation in Europe than the judiciary. 
  Other clues indicate that training and equipment aid, 
cooperation, and exchange of information are beginning to have 
an effect. This includes teaching scholarship holders in the 
BKA or offering drug courses on site, which take three to four 
weeks. The Germans' foreign colleagues learn, for instance, how 
heroin can be recognized and how they can check suspicious 
substances with a quick test. About 25 persons participate in 
each course. They return to their offices and have a 
multiplying effect, Schuster says. He sees the main problems 
for this kind of police organization in communication and 
mobility. Vehicles, criminal technology, radios, equipment for 
laboratories, and forensic equipment are, therefore, also part 
of the ``help for self-help,'' according to him. This support 
is part of the ``advance shifting strategy'' 
[Vorverlagerungsstrategie] of the Federal Government and the BKA. 
  Courses have already been held, for example in the Czech 
Republic, Hungary, and Bulgaria. This summer a press agency 
report about Bulgarian customs noted that by the end of June 
almost 70 percent more heroin was seized than all through 1992. 
Customs says that this is due to improved training of its 
officials, the report stated. In evaluating such reports of 
success, one must take into consideration, however, that large 
finds are mostly also an indication of rising amounts that are 
smuggled. According to Schuster, the United Nations estimates 
that the seized drugs constitute only 10 to 15 percent of the 
entire production. These figures can be calculated because one 
can estimate the harvest yields with relative certainty, he says. 
  In Kazakhstan the combating of drug smuggling--at the moment 
the Republic is primarily a transit country--is still in its 
infancy. Senior BKA official Brandt and other Western guests 
were introduced to an antidrug brigade there. Police depend on 
being given vehicles by the military, for instance; otherwise 
there is little to be had. When they then fly around in old 
military helicopters, everyone knows immediately: ``Ah, the 
antidrug brigade.'' Only when the Kazakh colleagues are lucky 
can they ``catch someone now and then,'' Brandt reports. In 
addition, there is the fact that the country is very large. It 
can ``hardly be controlled with the police forces.'' 
Furthermore, there are no technical possibilities, such as 
satellite monitoring to discover cultivation areas. 
  The BKA drug experts are worried about new cultivation 
areas, 
for example in Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan. 
Perpetrators from there are pushing on the market--in a 
``relatively uncontrolled'' manner, as it is said. In their 
report about a reconnaissance trip for the UN International Drug 
Control Program through seven CIS republics in the spring of 
1992, the members of the mission came to the following forecast 
for Uzbekistan, for instance: ``Smugglers come from Turkey, 
Georgia, the Caucasus, and Turkmenistan and buy opium from the 
farmers. In smuggling the drugs from Afghanistan to Western 
Europe, Tashkent is used for transit, and smuggling will 
increase as a result of the establishment of new international 
flights to Uzbekistan.'' These factors establish preconditions 
that might lead to a considerable increase in smuggling in the 
near future. 
  From another country of the former Soviet Union the 
``scouts'' of the United Nations report on difficulties in 
training customs officials. They were told that future 
inspectors can no longer use the Moscow customs college, the 
report says. According to this report, in Russia the seized 
amounts of opium (69 kg in 1991; 35 kg in 1990) and cannabis 
(13.4 tonnes in 1991; 8.6 tonnes in 1990) have almost 
doubled--customs has asked for support in acquiring 
drug-sniffing dogs. 

