BFN 

  [Text] Now that the DPRK (North Korea), the country 
suspected of developing nuclear arms, has unilaterally announced 
its withdrawal from the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA), the Hata government is being compelled to make difficult 
choices in its actions. The government on 14 June was busy 
collecting information and studying actions to take, but with 
the North Korean announcement having come just at the time when 
the UN Security Council was getting ready to discuss the North 
Korean issue, (according to a source in the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs) the government is having hard time trying to figure out 
what this "challenging act defying and going against the demand 
of the international community" means. 
  Speaking at the House of Councillors' Budget Committee on 
the 
same day, Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata strongly urged North Korea 
to reconsider its decision. Meanwhile, there is a growing mood 
that sanctions would be unavoidable. For instance, Secretary of 
State Warren Christopher in a telephone conversation with 
Foreign Minister Koji Kakizawa indicated a thinking of taking 
further positive actions against North Korea. 
<H5>  What Is the Real Intention? </H5>
  "The problem is that we do not know their real intention." 
Prime Minister Hata remarked to the press corps in the Diet on 
14 June. The [North Korean] announcement on the withdrawal [from 
the IAEA] made him wonder as it showed that the country was 
withdrawing from the IAEA while remaining a member of the 
Non-Nuclear Proliferation Treaty (NPT). It was a puzzle because 
under that condition, North Korea would have continued 
obligations to accept nuclear inspections. Chief Cabinet 
Secretary Hiroshi Kumagai gave this interpretation, "It showed 
half the body but the other half remains hidden." 
  Interpretations of the government offices [on North Korea's 
action] can be summarized as it representing: 1) retaliation 
against the IAEA for its punitive action to suspend 
technological assistance; and 2) an act of declaring that the 
party with which it will negotiate is the United States before 
UN Security Council starts its debate [on the North Korean 
question] and warning the United States that its next action 
will be withdrawal from the NPT. 
  But still the truth is that the government is unable to 
understand this tough stand of North Korea. Government 
officials emphasize the need for cool response, saying, "We can 
never tell what that country will do. The best thing to do is 
to not make too much fuss over this. North Korea must be happy 
to see its one word has caused uproar in whole of Japan. 
<H5>  Sanctions Unavoidable </H5>
  Whatever the true intention of North Korea may be, the 
dominant view of the government officials is that the impact of 
the North Korean action on the UN Security Council in its debate 
would be unavoidable. Depending on what China, the country 
which is cautious on the issue of sanctions, chooses to do, it 
is possible that the United Nations may not get to pass a 
resolution and, instead, a number of nations will come to agree 
on actions of sanctions without a UN resolution." But the 
Foreign Ministry's view is that of wanting to expedite 
preparations for sanctions in cooperation with other offices 
concerned. A middle-level official of the ministry said, 
"Sanctions will be unavoidable. Things having come this far, it 
is possible that a tough action (a resolution) will be agreed 
to. The resolution may come as early as this week." 
  The Japanese Government in the past has insisted on phased 
actions that would begin with "moderate actions," but according 
to a government source, it "can no longer say such a thing." 
  Prime Minister Hata told the press corps in the Diet on the 
evening of 14 June, "That country has a man called Mr. 
(President) Kim Il-song. Some things cannot be resolved without 
his decision. This matter increasingly is becoming a matter that 
also cannot be resolved without a resolute decision by him." 
Hata appeared to be acutely feeling that the situation is 
getting more serious than before. 

