SUMMARY 
                                        Reflecting concern within the European Union (EU) that the U.S. 
revival of the Super 301 trade law provision could eventually 
have a negative effect on Europe and that U.S. bilateral deals 
with Japan could hurt European business, EU leaders reacted 
sharply to the U.S. move and its threat of sanctions against 
Japan.  Apparently anxious not to be left out of any deals, 
however, EU leaders, as well as French and German officials, have 
tempered their criticism and urged a "trilateral" U.S.-EU- 
Japanese approach to efforts to remove barriers in Japan.  French 
and German media likewise criticized U.S. trade policy measures 
but have revealed a strong current of sympathy for U.S. efforts 
to open Japan's markets. 
                                     END SUMMARY 
   EU Commissioner Leon Brittan, along with French and German 
leaders, have criticized the U.S. reinstatement of its Super 301 
trade law and the U.S. threat of sanctions against Japan, 
charging that the measures run counter to multilateral agreements 
and that they border on "managed trade" because they aim at 
setting numerical market share targets: 
   --EU Trade Commissioner Leon Brittan charged that the U.S. 
strategy of negotiating market shares with Japan posed a risk for 
Europe, suggesting that if the Japanese complied it would be at 
Europe's expense (AFP, Reuter, 17 February).  Saying that the 
U.S. threat to impose sanctions amounted to "managed trade," he 
called the U.S. decision to  reinstate Super 301 "disappointing" 
and said the EU would be studying the move carefully to see if it 
violated U.S. trade commitments (AFP, 4 March).  On 10 March, 
Brittan charged that the United States was pursuing 
"counterproductive and discriminatory tactics" in the trade 
policy dispute with Japan (Reuter, 10 March). 
   --EU foreign ministers meeting on 7 March issued a statement 
saying Super 301 was "contrary to the spirit" of the GATT and 
calling on the EU Commission to "thoroughly investigate" whether 
the U.S. trade sanctions against Japan are a violation of GATT 
(AFP, 7 March). 
   French and German Reactions 
   As has charactistically occurred in recent trade differences 
between the United States and its European allies, the official 
French reaction to the reinstatement of Super 301 was more blunt 
and direct than the German response: 
   --French Prime Minister Balladur, tying Super 301 to U.S. threats 
to impose sanctions on French goods in retaliation for France's 
blocking of U.S. fish exports, accused the United States of "not 
playing by the rules" of international trade, but he also hoped a 
"reasonable" solution could be found (AFP, 5 March). 
   --In an interview with Le Figaro following his 9-12 March trip to 
Japan, French Trade and Industry Minister Gerard Longuet said 
France "condemns any kind of unilateralism" such as the U.S. 
reinstatement of the "Super 301," calling instead for "dialogue." 
He also said Europe would take care to ensure that settlement of 
the U.S.-Japan trade dispute did not have "adverse effects" on 
European exports (15 March). 
   --In contrast, German Economics Minister Guenter Rexrodt's 
opposition to U.S. trade measures has been very muted.  He told 
an interviewer on 15 February that he "opposed numerical targets" 
because they were "clearly against GATT" and free trade (Reuter, 
15 February).  Similarly, on 4 March, he said Germany wanted 
"better access" to Asian markets but rejected "unilateral action" 
such as introducing sanctions because they "cannot be reconciled" 
with the Uruguay Round (DPA, Reuter 4 March). 
   Seeking Cooperation 
   In spite of their critical remarks, EU leaders have also 
indicated a desire to defuse the trade conflicts and to join with 
the United States in opening up Japan's markets, stressing that 
they prefer a nonconfrontational approach that focuses on ways to 
make European products attractive to the Japanese market rather 
than merely on gaining market shares: 
   --On 4 March, Brittan repeated an EU proposal he had made on 17 
February for a "trilateral" EU-U.S.-Japan approach to opening 
Japan's markets that would identify and remove specific Japanese 
barriers and would accept global targets, but not quotas or 
targets for individual sectors.  Such an approach would be in 
line with the EU's approach exemplified by its "Gateway to Japan" 
initiative, aimed at making European goods more attractive to the 
Japanese and using diplomatic pressure to overcome market access 
difficulties (AFP, 4 March, 17 February). 
   --Longuet seemed to adopt a more conciliatory posture toward the 
U.S. in an interview with La Tribune Desfosses on 9 March. 
Justifying the EU foreign ministers' "rather sof t condemnation" 
of the Super 301 action at their 7 March meeting, he also 
remarked that Kantor had "let us know" that the U.S. decision on 
Super 301 had been made to avoid more radical measures, given the 
views of the U.S. Congress.  Longuet reportedly also had 
expressed some sympathy for the U.S. threat of sanctions against 
Japan, telling Reuter on 3 March that the United States was 
"right to remind the Japanese that trade is not a one-way 
business" (Reuter, 4 March). 
   --Rexrodt also said that Germany was "alongside" the United 
States in pressing Japan to open its markets and was doing its 
best to convince the Japanese that they need "to restructure 
their society and their business structures."  Germany would 
discuss "every measure and every pressure" on the Japanese, 
insisting that they must not just "bow and promise" but must also 
make "commitments," he said.  Nevertheless, he added, "numerical 
targets" were "clearly against GATT" and free trade (Reuter, 15 
February). 
   French Media Reaction 
   French media reaction reflected concern that U.S. trade measures 
could also be aimed at Europe but media commentary also indicated 
some sympathy for, and even approval of, U.S. pressure on Japan. 
   --The influential Liberation of 4 March said President Clinton 
had pulled out the "heaviest weapon" from his "arsenal," Super 
301, following pressure from industrial lobbies and Congress to 
force the Japanese to reduce their trade surplus.  It also noted 
that while EU countries are publicly criticizing the unilateral 
U.S. approach, some leaders "in private understand the American 
anger." 
   --The business daily Les Echos of 7 March voiced concern that 
U.S. Super 301 could be "aimed at Europe or any other country" 
and said it was "unlikely" the United States would give up any of 
its "bilateral defense weapons in international trade.  A 
commentary in the 16 February issue, on the other hand, viewed 
the U.S. threat of sanctions against Japan as a "sign of 
moderation" because it provided time "to find a compromise" and 
expressed the hope that it would serve as a "warning shot" to 
Japan without opening "excessive hostilities." 
   German Media Reaction 
   Although the leading German press criticized U.S. reinstatement 
of Super 301 as being contrary to the spirit of GATT and as a 
possible threat to European trade with Japan, some papers also 
expressed sympathy for the U.S. moves to break down Japanese 
trade barriers: 
   --The influential German daily Frankfurter Allgemeine called U.S. 
concern about the "horrendous" Japanese trade surpluses 
"understandable" but said that minimum import quotas are a "bad 
relapse" into "state-regulated foreign trade" (7 March).  It is 
"clear and natural," the daily said,  that Washington is urging 
the Japanese to remove their barriers to import competition, but 
the United States is trying to "forcibly" clear a path for U.S. 
firms and "manipulate trade," taking measures that "ignore" GATT 
principles (14 March). 
   --The business daily Handelsblatt noted that U.S. patience was 
"apparently exhausted" because of the lack of progress in 
reducing Japanese trade surpluses.  Nevertheless, it called such 
"unilateral measures," incompatible with the "complexities" of 
world trade, saying that the "dangerous aspect" is that Super 301 
can be used not only against Japan but also against other trading 
partners (7 March). 
   --The left-of-center Frankfurter Rundschau of 19 February said 
Europe "should not be fooled."  The U.S. "first and foremost" 
wants access to the Japanese consumers for itself and not for 
everybody, it charged, saying that President Clinton "spoke for 
the United States and not for GATT." 
(AUTHOR:  SHAVER.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF 
ANALYST, ELAG, (703) 733-6120). 
ELAG/GILISON  cka 17/0136z  mar 

