BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Borhanoddin Rabbani at a meeting of </F>
social organizations in Kabul on 21 June -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] In the name of God, the merciful, the 
compassionate. [passage omitted] Brothers and sisters, the 
peace and blessing of God be upon you. First of all I express 
thanks to you all, participants in this glorious meeting held on 
the initiative of all social organizations. Undoubtedly our 
persecuted and heroic nation more urgently needs peace now than 
at any other time. We must try and join hands so that peace 
may be restored throughout our beloved country. Our nation 
should no longer suffer from difficulties and from the fighting 
with which it is confronted now. Of course, we all know who 
started this fighting and whose hands are involved in causing 
the fighting to flare up in our country. We all know what sorts 
of conspiracy are under way on the other side of our borders, 
and we all know the evil intention behind them. Despite all 
these conspiracies guided from outside, it is our religious and 
national duty and mission to work hard, day and night, to end 
the fighting and to resort to all possible means at our 
disposal. 
  As far as the Islamic State of Afghanistan is concerned, the 
state has declared its righteous strategy for the restoration of 
peace. The Islamic State, in most difficult situations, has 
given a positive reply to the message of peace from wherever it 
comes. We have been saying this all along, and we emphasize it 
again -- fighting is not the way to solve the issues. We are 
now witness to the fact that our people in the capital and 
provinces have embarked on a broad-scale endeavor to prevent the 
fighting. We have seen that a large number of governors, 
commanders, and esteemed figures have come to the capital from 
various regions of our country and have expressed readiness for 
the solution of issues. Once again our people and the people of 
the world are waiting to see what actual steps we will take for 
the solution of the present difficulties and how we will resolve 
the problems we are facing. The Islamic State recognizes that 
all issues pertaining to the selection of leaders and political 
decisionmaking on behalf of the country are the right of the 
people of Afghanistan. The people themselves must make the 
decisions. 
  The people should themselves decide. In our meetings with 
governors we emphasized the point that Afghanistan does not want 
the continuation of its leadership and political domination, and 
despite the will of the people, it has never been and will never 
be [words indistinct]. The only thing we want is the presence 
of people's representatives on the scene so that we can transfer 
political power to them, and the people can decide about their 
leadership. Further anarchism, clashes, and misery do not 
engulf our nation. 
  We asked esteemed commanders and governors to convene, as 
soon as possible, a large gathering anywhere it is feasible, and 
to invite all jehadi leaders and our tribal elders, 
personalities from inside the country and abroad, to make a 
decision in a large gathering on the future of their country. 
The opponents and those who have chosen war as the only way of 
achieving their goals should be asked not to add to the pains of 
their oppressed people. They should participate in a people's 
gathering anywhere it is to be convened. And now, at the 
invitation of the southwest zone's commanders and the initiation 
of our mojahed brother Esmail Khan, governors and a number of 
commanders of the country, and political party leaders or their 
representatives will come together in ancient Herat. 
  The Islamic State's view is that all sides to the problem 
should participate in the gathering in ancient Herat. They 
should clearly express their views and proposals at this 
gathering and then let the people themselves decide. The 
decision of our people is surely a righteous decision. We 
should welcome the resolve and decision of our people. Any 
decision which is made by representatives of our nation, who 
come from different provinces of the country or from countries 
where they live as refugees and uprooted people, all those who 
participate in this gathering should respect the collective 
opinion of our people. We will let the people decide and 
resolve the future of their country, their political leadership, 
and their resolution will be respected by everyone. 
  We asked the UN and the conference of Islamic foreign 
ministers to actively participate in solving the Afghan 
problems. After the victory of the Islamic revolution, 
Afghanistan has been [word indistinct] by world institutions. 
[Words indistinct] and strategic importance of Afghanstan 
cannot be restricted only to the pre-war period. Afghanistan 
was not an important and hot point just during the presence of 
the former Soviet Union. However, after recent changes in the 
region, Afghanistan has emerged as an important and major and 
strategic country. Surely security in Afghanistan guarantees 
security in the region and security in the world. If war and 
chaos continue in Afghanistan, the region's countries cannot 
live in tranquillity and security. There are some sides who 
want Afghanistan to live in tension. Albeit, the international 
mafia, international terrorism, and various other sides seek 
their interests in Afghanistan's chaos, conflict, and 
insecurity. They want insecurity in Afghanistan in order that 
the cells of international terrorism and the international mafia 
-- those who are engaged in activities for the expansion, 
trafficking, and production of drugs in the region and in the 
world -- may benefit from this chaos and they want to keep 
Afghanistan permanently in a state of war and chaos. The main 
problems of the great powers -- America, the European countries, 
and others -- are the prevention of drug distribution, 
production and trafficking, and the campaign against terrorism. 
God forbid, if war and chaos continue in Afghanistan, 
terrorists will use Afghanistan and the areas under their 
control for terrorist activities in the region. Therefore, 
those countries that have completely closed the Afghan file, the 
countries that think Afghanistan is no longer of importance 
following the fall of the Soviet Union and Communism, will pay a 
heavy price. God forbid that insecurity should spread to other 
countries from the Afghan borders. If that were the case, not 
only would conflicts emerge in the region, but also many 
countries would face many problems. Thus, once again we want 
great powers, international institutions, and the sides that are 
interested -- interested in peace, interested in humane values 
-- we ask them not to leave the Afghan nation alone in the 
current crisis, much of which has entered our country as 
illegitimate imported gifts from abroad. 
  Unfortunately even the humanitarian assistance to our people 
has been cut off for various incorrect reasons. We have been 
saying that there are conflicts in Afghanistan; however, there 
are not conflicts or clashes in all provinces. In over 25 
provinces of the country reconstruction work is broadly under 
way. If reconstruction started all over the country at once; if 
our youths had the opportunity to be trained and educated 
properly; and if unemployment and lack of entertainment did not 
exist in our country, surely the seditious elements, consisting 
of selfish and adventurist people, could not manage to make use 
of the situation. Obviously, unemployment is one of the major 
factor for crime and conflict in human society. Our nation 
after the war lost almost all opportunities for social work and 
economic activities. Fighting and conflicts added to these 
difficulties. 
  Those who believe in human values and human dignity should 
not forget the heroic struggle of our nation and the debt they 
owe to the people of Afghanistan. The world should not forget 
that countries are now safe from the fear of communism which 
until yesterday could not sleep at night. Before the uprising 
of our heroic and Muslim nation most of the other nations were 
spending much of their colossal budgets on repulsing the 
communism danger and repulsing the danger posed by the Soviet 
Union; they did not feel safe. The sound of alarm, even in 
major cities, used to be heard every day warning against the 
danger of the possible launching of Soviet nuclear weapons and 
cruise missiles against major capitals of the world. Those days 
have gone. This confidence, this peace, and the new chapter 
that came into being in the world are the result of the 
unreserved self-sacrifice of our nation. The world should not 
forget the self-sacrifice of our nation and the enormous 
devotion shown by our nation, which brought about the gigantic 
change. We are witness to the fact that all the ingredients of 
the dangers that once threatened the world have not yet been 
eliminated. The seeds of danger are still seeking to spring to 
life in various regions, in particular in countries that want to 
revive once again the past ideologies that formerly put the 
world in danger. Afghanistan has surely preserved its strategic 
importance and once again we call on all countries and 
international institutions to extend their assistance for the 
solution of our people's difficulties. 
  We are hoping that our persecuted nation will emerge intact 
from this problem and from this crisis. We are hoping that our 
nation by its decisive resolutions will end the existing 
conflicts and difficulties in the near future, by sending its 
representatives to the national and Islamic shuras. We do not 
want to increase the life of the government (?even by one day). 
We are trying to take part in every meeting for political talks 
and solution of the issues by understanding, and to take part in 
every session for the resolution of problems. However, this 
subject must be once again cleared up. Our decisions today 
should not be rendered in the same way, or manner, as they were 
at the time when we were homeless or soon after [words 
indistinct] when decisions and resolutions were rendered within 
a limited framework, under the name of leadership council or 
guidance council. The decision-making platform must be 
withdrawn from the leadership council and revert to a large area 
and a large gathering. The jihadi leaders must not remain for 
ever as guardians or the nation's supervisors and be the only 
ones to resolve all issues. Their jihad and their struggles are 
respected by all. The leaders however must take part in 
people's gatherings and in national shuras as individuals, as 
representatives of the people. I believe that henceforth the 
jihadi leaders should not attend every gathering as eternal 
heirs of the revolutionary uprising. They must nominate 
themselves as candidates from provinces or districts; they must 
submit themselves to the people and come to a shura from a 
district or province, not on the grounds that he was a leader of 
a formation or group. Their jihad and their leadership of 
jihadi groups is deserving of respect and acknowledgement. 
However, they must submit themselves to their people and take 
part in the political campaign and in decision- making through 
the people. Therefore, the leaders of the parties should not 
henceforth insist on resolution of issues and problems to such 
an extent as to put themselves on the opposite side of the 
people. 
  These leaders should not set themselves against the aims, 
decisions, and will of the people. We are hoping that 
henceforth the sound of machine guns and rockets will not 
trouble our elders, children, and persecuted people. We are 
hoping that our country will not be further destroyed and our 
people dragged to slaughter by the hand of Afghans. Concerning 
the state, once again I declare we are hoping that a shura, 
which will be the center of decision- making, and the highest 
forum for the people to express their will, will be convened as 
soon as possible. The state will extend every cooperation in 
this respect. We do not want to take part in the convocation of 
shura although normally the state takes a direct part in the 
convocation of shura; we will leave this task to the people; we 
will leave it to neutral sides; we leave it to the provinces; we 
leave it to the peace delegations. Whatever plan and program 
they design and implement we will support. We have asked the 
peace delegations -- and once again we call on them -- to 
accelerate the process for the restoration of peace and take 
serious action for the convocation of the shura. The state will 
only extend its cooperation and prepare the ground to facilitate 
their activities, but will not interfere in their activities. 
They can freely accomplish their work. I am hoping that the 
various parties will not continue fighting under any pretext; 
they must all join hands so that peace may be restored in our 
country. Once again I sincerely express thanks to all who are 
here at this session. [passage omitted] 

