Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Conservative Party presidential candidate </F>
Andres Pastrana, 11 February, in Bogota, by Maria Teresa 
Ronderos and Jorge Gonzalez] 
  [Excerpts] Twelve hours after presenting his platform at a 
hectic and colorful session in the Convention Center, Andres 
Pastrana still seemed very animated. 
  Since 0600 on Friday he had been taking calls from radio 
stations and at the request of one of them, he exchanged 
greetings with Samper, responding with a "very good, my dear 
Ernesto," to a somewhat cool "well, how did it go?" 
  Then he met with journalists from EL TIEMPO in his apartment 
where, accompanied by Luis Alberto Moreno, his campaign 
coordinator, and Jaime Ruiz, his issues adviser, he was getting 
ready to begin his first campaign trip through Antioquia. 
  [EL TIEMPO] You have urged Ernesto Samper to challenge your 
ideas. You told him that neither your father nor your moustache 
are issues for debate. What might be the major conceptual 
differences between the proposals you made on Thursday and 
Samper's? 
  [Pastrana] I presented a platform in which I say not only 
what I am going to do but how I am going to do it, where we will 
get the resources, and on what areas our seven priorities are 
going to focus. The program is backed by solid work and 
supported by a reliable team. Our proposals are specific and 
they in no way are the result of improvization. 
  I find contradictions in Dr. Samper's ideas. I agree with 
Dr. 
De la Calle that Samper changes his mind a lot. For example, I 
have always believed in the "apertura" [trade liberalization] 
and I have always opposed legalizing drugs. I do not know if 
Samper agrees or does not agree with me this week. [passage 
omitted] 
  [EL TIEMPO] You say that there are strong similarities 
between you and President Gaviria. How does your platform differ 
from what he has done? 
  [Pastrana] I agree with his economic approach. He laid the 
foundation and now we have to build the structure. The 
difference is that I am calling for a strong social investment. 
I will base this on an education policy that ensures that not a 
single child will not go to school. Education will give us what 
we need so that we, the Colombian people, can begin to compete 
in international markets. We are going to generate the 
infrastructure required for modern development. We will have 
roads, efficient communications, and ports. We plan to create a 
revolution in water, not only to ensure 90 percent coverage in 
providing service, but also to promote its appropriate use in 
agrarian development. We have already calculated the resources 
needed. [passage omitted] 
  [EL TIEMPO] People recognize the effort you have made to be 
independent of your father. But there are some issues, like 
international policy, on which when you speak it seems as if 
Misael and not Andres were speaking.... 
  [Pastrana] One thing needs to be understood: few times in 
political history has a former president seen that his son might 
reach the presidency. I imagine that would not be easy to deal 
with. At least not for a man with the character and temperament 
of Misael Pastrana, a person who likes to express his opinions, 
who fights openly for his party and for his ideas. 
  On international policy, we have a very important group of 
people who are truly knowledgeable about these issues. If there 
is one thing on which I agree with my father, it is that 
international policy should not be handled in isolation by one 
party. 
  [EL TIEMPO] But in this area some of your father's proposals 
belong more to a nationalism of a bygone era. 
  [Pastrana] Are we perhaps talking about the 
marines? Fine, we can do that. If there really are 
troop movements, the president has to make the issues clear. The 
government has said that it failed to provide information. It is 
still possible to convene the Advisory Commission on Relations 
to help clear up unknown factors. 
  Since I am on this issue, here is another difference between 
myself and Samper. During my government I will bring in foreign 
advisers to help coordinate the campaign against narcoterrorism. 
He said he would not do that; he does not know that we need 
strong methods to fight this scourge. 
  In this field, I have developed my own policy, my own 
contacts. I chaired an organization of 16 Latin American 
parties. I have ties of friendship with President Caldera and 
his family, and also with President Frei of Chile. I am a friend 
and I went to school with President Figueres of Costa Rica. We 
have excellent relations with President Cristiani. I also have 
excellent contacts in Europe. That will allow us to consolidate 
the integration process, going beyond international treaties. We 
have already promoted our own course of action, which is very 
much my own. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Your family has a high political profile. Your 
father is a former president. Your brother is the editor of a 
militant opposition newspaper. Do you share the view that your 
family may become your Achilles heel? 
  [Pastrana] The Pastranas, as my brother Juan Carlos said, 
are 
a family and not a herd, so everyone will continue to pursue the 
activities to which he has devoted himself so far, with mutual 
respect and independence. I have never considered my family my 
Achilles heel, but I must say that I now fear LA PRENSA's 
headlines. [passage omitted] 
  [EL TIEMPO] Now that Escobar and the myth of the Medellin 
Cartel are dead, what would you do about the Cali Cartel? 
  [Pastrana] I have been quite clear about the need to curb 
the 
drug traffic and not to legalize the production, sale, and 
consumption of drugs. We are going to revise our antidrug 
strategies to make them more effective. I have not been informed 
about the negotiations with the Cali Cartel. I support them as 
long as they are in compliance with the law and the policy of 
bringing criminals to justice. I do not accept and will not 
accept the policy of house arrest. That is ridiculous; it would 
be shameful. What is needed is severe punishment, not a reward. 
  [EL TIEMPO] The possibility that drug traffickers may end up 
with ridiculously small penalties is of great concern to the 
United States. They demand that the punishment be proportional 
to the crime. Do you think that fear is reasonable? 
  [Pastrana] Why do they not apply that approach in their 
country? Carlos Lehder was sentenced to life in prison plus 100 
years. Now, according to what we have heard, he was transferred 
to a German jail and given special privileges after 
negotiations. When I was in Washington in 1990 I proposed that 
we pursue a policy similar to plea bargaining; the 
press jumped all over me and asked me why I was suggesting such 
an idea. "Why are you so upset? That is your system, we are 
going to copy it," I answered. And we have copied it, to such an 
extent that the first legislation was issued by decree. What was 
wrong with that? That we might negotiate in search of peace? But 
when the drug lords sought through extradition went [to the 
United States] and got the "perks" of plea bargaining 
by turning in other people, that was not criticized. 
  I agree that we need to seek a fair sentence from the legal 
point of view. I insist that penalties must be served in prison. 
The policy of bringing criminals to justice must be consistent. 
  [EL TIEMPO] You have announced that you will not accept 
campaign contributions from the Santo Domingo Group. Does this 
mean your government would pursue an energetic policy of 
controlling concentrations of wealth? 
  [Pastrana] As they should be, my campaign books are open to 
anyone who wants to see them in the Treasury Inspector's Office. 
A policy needs to be developed to protect citizens from abuses 
by private and public enterprises that take advantage of their 
dominant position. Another very important issue is regulating 
lobbying and political campaign financing. 
  The regulation of the monopoly system concerns me, 
especially 
as it relates to the Television Law. I believe we have been lax 
because the government has run the television system. If we want 
to protect the citizens' right to be well informed, we can not 
continue to be so lax. Furthermore, regional autonomy will not 
become a reality without excellent territorial legislation. We 
need to strengthen and pay attention to the commission created 
by the 1991 Charter. The truth is that the bill now pending in 
Congress is very weak. 

