Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Wilhelm Theuretsbacher: "Missile Terrorism With </F>
Chemicals From Salzburg?"] 
  [Text] Dictators in the Third World were highly interested. 
A special propellant is required for firing missiles on Europe, 
which could be purchased in Salzburg -- until last week. 
  In a concerted action by the Economics, Finance, and 
Interior 
Ministries, the filing cabinets of a Salzburg firm were opened 
during a search of the office. The subsidiary of a foreign 
company produced special aluminum and magnesium compounds, which 
reached Latin America and the Middle and Far East in a 
roundabout way. 
  The buyers are mainly states that are trying to convert 
obsolete missile systems. The most widespread missiles -- like 
the "Scud" missiles that became know as a result of the Gulf war 
-- are being propelled by liquid fuels and have a range of 600 
km in the original version. Only a few states have systems with 
wider ranges. Numerous countries, including Libya, Syria, and 
Iran, want to increase the range to 2,000 km with the aid of 
solid propellants. Thus, "targets" like Vienna, Paris, or Rome 
are becoming realistic. 
  The basis for the conversion is the metallic powder that was 
offered illegally in Salzburg. The investigating authorities 
have examined dozens of deliveries. Like nearly everything else 
in this case, the exact extent of the damage is a top secret. 
  The Salzburg company has violated the amended foreign trade 
law. The responsible officials are facing 10-year prison terms. 
Moreover, the deliveries also infringed the MTCR Agreement 
[Missile Technology Control Regime], designed to prevent the 
proliferation of missile technology. The suspects deny any 
criminal intent. The fuel components can also be used for 
civilian purposes -- such as fireworks. 
  For the Austrian police, the operation was a first in a new 
criminal sphere, called "proliferation." It refers to the 
illegal procurement of nuclear, chemical, and biological warfare 
agents, including the relevant carrier technology. These 
economic crimes with an intensive intelligence background are 
new ground for the police. The usual methods do not yield the 
desired results in this area. The police need highly qualified 
experts like physical and chemical engineers and economic 
experts. 
  The counterstrategy is police reform. As a result of the 
reform of the antiterrorism task force (EBT), the Interior 
Ministry has scored several international successes in the 
sphere of terrorism, the smuggling of refugees, and nuclear 
crime. This is one of the reasons why EBT leader Josef Dick was 
appointed as provisional head of Group D (criminal police). His 
task is to initiate the overdue reform among the criminal police. 

