CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jayme Brener and Luiz Antonio Novaes] </F>
  [Text] The Brazilian Government is ready to undertake a 
prickly mission: convincing the White House that Brazil's space 
program is completely peaceful. In other words, that our 
satellite launch rockets will neither don military uniforms nor 
transform themselves into missiles capable of landing in our 
neighbors' territories. In February, the government announced it 
would adhere to the terms of the MTCR [Missile Technology 
Control Regime] an international treaty that restricts missile 
production. And the new Brazilian Space Agency (a sort of 
green-and-yellow NASA), which acquired its first directors in 
early March, is likely to permanently disconnect the program 
from any military content, in the eyes of the Americans. Until 
February, when the agency was created, the Brazilian Commission 
for Space Activities (COBAE), linked to the Armed Forces General 
Staff, was responsible for this project. The oaths taken as to 
the peaceful nature of our space program will probably also 
appear on the menu at the meetings that U.S. Vice President Al 
Gore will hold in Brasilia this week. Major General Ajax Barros 
de Melo, 59, the new director general of the space agency, 
confirmed the overtures to the United States, saying: "We want 
to make it plain that we really never had military objectives." 
The United States acknowledges the blandishments: "The creation 
of the civilian agency puts relations between the two countries 
back on track," commented an American diplomat. 
  There is a clear motive behind these Brazilian signs of good 
will: a relaxation of the veritable blockade the White House has 
been imposing on Brazil's space mission. Since the United States 
suspects that a parallel missile program exists, it has always 
done everything possible to keep Brazil from accessing the most 
sensitive technology. One American diplomat told ISTOE that his 
government went so far as to prohibit the presentation of 
certain books to Brazilian scientists. A study that the White 
House commissioned in 1993 from the Rand Corporation, an 
ultraconservative research institution, concluded that the 
Brazilian space program is "not economically viable." Unless its 
true objective were the production of missiles. The skirmishes 
between the two countries peaked at the end of last year, when 
Brazil accelerated its participation in a joint program with 
China for the launching of two observation satellites. At the 
time, the military command signalled that Brazil might attempt 
to obtain, from the Chinese and Russians, the special technology 
denied it by the United States and its allies. 
  The Brazilian space program calls for the launching of four 
communications satellites. The first two in the Brasilsat series 
are already in orbit. It is expected that another will take off 
in 1995, mounted on the nose of a Brazilian satellite launch 
vehicle (SLV). The Sino-Brazilian project, in turn, includes the 
launching of two observation satellites, the first in 1996. "Our 
space mission has not only created about 5,000 highly 
specialized jobs, it transferred First World technology to 
different sectors of civilian industry," said Marcio Barbosa, 
director of the National Institute of Space Research (INPE) in 
Sao Jose dos Campos (SP). One of the examples of this 
technological transfer occurred at the Esca company, of Barueri 
(SP), which is involved in the Sino-Brazilian satellites 
project. Esca used the aerospace know-how to develop cheaper 
plastic bottles for soft drinks. 
  Even with all the guarantees offered the United States as to 
the civilian objective of the space mission, there is little 
possibility that the Brazilian project will get a powerful 
injection of the latest technology in the near future. "I do not 
think our potential partners will help us build the SLV," Ajax 
de Melo said. "We will have to do it right here." And even if it 
has "adhered to the conditions" of the missiles limitation 
agreement, there are still doubts that Brazil will actually sign 
the document, an action that would make the White House more 
tractable. "There will be no formal signature. We are adults and 
we will do what Russia and China did, which is simply to declare 
that we will adhere to the terms of the agreement," the general 
explained. After enduring spartan budgets when Fernando Collor 
was president, the SLV is supposed to get US$40 million from the 
government between now and 1995. And its development may yet 
provoke new frictions with the Americans. After all, as Ajax de 
Melo noted,"if you build a rocket and put it into orbit, you can 
aim it anywhere you want. We have that capability and the 
Americans know it. That is what sovereignty is," the officer 
concluded. 

