BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Key to Pyongyang"] </F>
  [Text] Hans Blix, head of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA), has a North Korean task no other would envy. 
When he informed the Security Council that Pyongyang had denied 
his inspectors access to two nuclear waste sites earmarked for 
investigation, he raised a vexing question: what should be the 
response of the international community in this dangerous case? 
  The North Korean regime is in violation of the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Failure to punish it for doing 
so would leave in tatters the credibility of both the NPT and 
the IAEA. It would send a comforting message to every 
panjandrum in every "rogue" state: violate international law 
with impunity, for the Security Council may not care what you 
do. Were it not for local injunctions against champagne, the 
corks would be popping from Baghdad to Tripoli. 
  Sharp United Nations sanctions against North Korea, provided 
under the NPT and imposed in the interests of global public 
order, would appear to be a possible next step. Yet the 
apparent logic of sanctions is here hostage to reality. It is 
unlikely that China would favour such a move. If the matter 
were put to a vote now--and to do so would be impolitic- -a 
Chinese veto would give North Korea s "Great Leader" Kim Il Sung 
an undeserved propaganda gift. 
  If the matter were addressed outside the aegis of the 
Security Council, in order to circumnavigate the dragon of 
China's veto, there would be an equally unsatisfactory outcome. 
North Korea lives off Beijing's supplies of oil and food; and 
barter across the porous border with China, between ethnic 
Koreans on either side, is economic scaffolding for the regime 
in Pyongyang. 
  Even if sanctions bite, they will not "draw blood' if 
relations with China are unaffected. This will be so, even with 
Japan's presence in any critical coalition. Tokyo can choke at 
source the remittances sent by its own ethnic Koreans to 
relatives in North Korea, believed to amount to $600 million 
annually. This infusion is crucial to Pyongyang's sickly 
economy, and some estimates put the figure at nearly $2 billion. 
But important sections of the Japanese political establishment 
continue to balk at the prospect, perceiving it to be 
"counter-productive". 
  Moreover, the key to the resolution of the crisis lies not 
in 
New York, nor Washington, nor Tokyo, but in Beijing. If the 
impasse is to be ended, President Clinton must direct his 
diplomatic energy at China. He must proceed subtly: while 
impressing on Beijing the significance of Americas recent 
renewal of China's most favoured nation status, he must not 
approach the matter as a debt-collector would. American 
diplomacy must, instead, stress the obvious: that an end to the 
nuclear crisis is as much in China's interest as it is in 
America's. 
  Beijing has nothing to gain, and much to lose, from a Korean 
peninsula in a state of nuclear instability. Will the economic 
climate in the region be improved by crisis? Is it in Beijing's 
interest to provoke a renewed arms race in the region, centred 
mainly in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan -- all major investors 
in the Chinese economy? Can Beijing afford to continue its 
munificence, with cheap oil and free food, to a regime which 
earns for its benefactor no international good will? Mr Clinton 
must demonstrate to China that the answer to all these questions 
is "no". Only then can the Security Council, in wisdom and in 
logic, proceed to sanctions against North Korea. 

