BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by correspondent Netan'el Semrik on news conference </F>
by Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin at the Defense Ministry in Tel 
Aviv on 31 March -- recorded] 
  [Text] Yitzhaq Rabin, prime minister and defense minister, 
held a news conference a short while ago in which he sharply 
criticized right-wing figures and the rabbis who called on 
soldiers to disobey orders. Rabin said that this was moral 
lawlessness, irresponsibility, hypocrisy, and lies. Our 
correspondent Netan'el Semrik reports. 
  [Semrik] Good evening from the our broadcasting van at the 
Defense Ministry in Tel Aviv. In a news conference for 
electronic media correspondents which ended exactly two minutes 
ago, Yitzhaq Rabin, prime minister and defense minister, 
vehemently attacked right-wing figures and the rabbis, accusing 
them of setting the precedent for a transfer of Jewish 
population. This in reaction to the charges leveled against him 
about the possibility of evacuating the Jewish settlers from 
Hebron. Let us hear some of Rabin's remarks: 
  [Rabin] The Palestinians have given up their demand for a 
police force. We agreed to a certain increase in the size of 
the international presence to 160 people, of which 90 will be 
Norwegians, 35 Danes, and 35 Italians. Those personnel who will 
serve as observers will report to a joint team composed by the 
mayor of Hebron and the military governor. They will also 
report to the liaison committee we agreed upon in the 
Declaration of Principles signed in Washington, which will be 
headed on the Israeli side by the foreign minister and on the 
Palestinian side by Abu-Mazin [Mahmud 'Abbas]. We very much 
hope that this new situation will help restore calm to Hebron 
and of course permit the resumption of the negotiations over 
reaching an agreement on the implementation of the first stage 
of the Declaration of Principles: Gaza-Jericho First. Indeed, 
the formal opening of the negotiations on Gaza-Jericho First 
began today in Cairo and will resume on Sunday [3 April] when 
our delegation arrives there to continue the negotiations as 
rapidly as possible in order to finalize, sign, and subsequently 
implement the agreement. At the same time, we agreed to permit 
the first Palestinian policemen to enter the Gaza Strip and 
Jericho to begin organizing themselves -- in Gaza city as well 
as in other locations in the strip and in Jericho -- without 
them assuming any police duties at this stage. Only one party 
must retain overall responsibility for security. Israel will 
retain sole responsibility for security in Hebron. This also 
remains the case, at this stage, throughout the Gaza Strip as 
well as in that area of Jericho where the Palestinian 
self-administration body will be established within the 
framework of Gaza-Jericho First. 
  I am pleased with the fact that we have managed to overcome 
the obstacles created by the despicable massacre at the Cave of 
the Patriarchs and the subsequent incidents, and that we have 
managed to get the negotiations back on track. Hopefully, they 
will now be accelerated. I believe that the appropriate reply 
to the enemies of peace and to those people from both sides who 
are trying to murder the process should be to speed up the 
negotiations and implement Gaza-Jericho First in order to prove 
to all the enemies of peace on all sides that they will not be 
able to prevent the process from moving ahead. 
  [Semrik] Mr. Prime Minister, is 13 April Israel's 
preferred target date for starting its withdrawal from the Gaza 
Strip, even under the assumption that the agreement with the PLO 
will not be fully completed by that time? 
  [Rabin] At this stage we must first complete a clear, 
detailed, and comprehensive agreement on security and control 
arrangements, as well as major economic issues before fully 
implementing the agreement and carrying out the IDF's [Israel 
Defense Forces] withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and the Jericho 
area. Nevertheless, as I mentioned earlier, we are permitting 
the initial planning and organization of the police force -- at 
this stage we are talking about something between 100 to 150 
Palestinian policemen who will be stationed in the Gaza Strip 
and Jericho -- in order to make the appropriate preparations. 
We want the transfer of authority to be carried out as rapidly 
as possible but in an orderly manner. We do not want any 
vacuums or ambiguities regarding responsibility. The transfer 
of authority will take place when the Palestinians are 
thoroughly ready to shoulder their responsibility to uphold law 
and public order, as well as for preventing serious incidents in 
the areas under their control. 
  [Israel Television Channel 1 correspondent Gadi Sukenik] Mr. 
Rabin, as this news conference is being recorded, right-wing 
leaders are holding a meeting in Qiryat Arba'. They have issued 
a firm demand not to evacuate Jewish settlers from the 
territories, especially not from Hebron. Do you accept their 
demand? 
  [Rabin] I would like to tell the right wing that they were 
the first to carry out a transfer of Jews during the Israeli 
withdrawal from the Sinai Peninsula. All the settlements were 
evacuated, Yamit was torn down, and Ofira was abandoned. I 
advise them to remember who established the precedent that when 
signing a peace treaty with an Arab country, Israel is expected 
to return all the territories seized from that country by the 
IDF in the 1967 war. Who was the first to set the precedent of 
what they call a Jewish transfer from all of the Sinai Peninsula 
while uprooting all signs of an Israeli presence there? It is 
time for them to stop making these statements which are full of 
hypocrisy and lies. For the time being, nobody is talking about 
evacuating the Jewish settlers from Hebron. 
  [Israel Television Channel 2 correspondent 'Imanu'el Rosen] 
Sir, former prime minister Yitzhaq Shamir today joined the 
rabbis in calling on IDF soldiers to refuse to obey orders to 
implement such a withdrawal. Now that it is not just one or two 
lunatics issuing such a call, do you not fear the possibility of 
a civil war or problems within the Army? 
  [Rabin] I am convinced that calling on soldiers to refuse to 
obey legal orders issued by a legally elected government is an 
act of total lawlessness and irresponsibility. I would like to 
remind everyone that many soldiers and large segments of the 
public questioned the way the Lebanon war was handled. There 
were even officers and public figures who called on soldiers not 
to serve in Lebanon. I said then and I reiterate today that 
nothing poses a greater threat to the continued existence of 
Israel as a democratic country and to the future of the IDF as 
the people's army than such calls to reject legal orders. Many 
soldiers refused to serve in the territories. There were also 
public organizations which called on soldiers to refuse to carry 
out such missions. I stated at the time, regardless of whether 
or not I was in the government or of what position I held, that 
it was inconceivable to call on an IDF soldier to refuse to 
carry out legal orders. I think that what is happening now -- 
whether these are calls by rabbis or statements by various 
public figures -- constitutes lawlessness and irresponsibility 
on a level unprecedented in the State of Israel's history. 
  [Qol Yisra'el correspondent Shlomo Raz] Mr. Prime 
Minister, you mentioned that the observers will carry out 
additional tasks and help the Hebron Municipality do its job. 
Could you give us some more details on this matter? 
  [Rabin] We made such a proposal. The issue has yet to be 
formulated but some of the international personnel will not 
function as observers but rather carry out administrative duties 
and assist the Hebron Municipality wherever such aid is required. 
  [Raz] For example? 
  [Rabin] On economic issues, engineering, education and in 
other fields depending on the municipality's needs. This of 
course, depends on the relationship that develops between the 
municipality and the members of the temporary international 
force. 
  [Rosen] Mr. Rabin, you said that Palestinian policemen would 
begin entering the Gaza Strip and Jericho next week. Is the 
start of a withdrawal by the IDF also included in the attempt to 
accelerate the implementation of the agreement, even before the 
latter is completely finalized and signed? 
  [Rabin] In the area of the Gaza Strip, the IDF is in the 
midst of redeploying for the new situation which take effect 
following the signing of the agreement. This redeployment does 
not cover all fields. The IDF retains responsibility for 
overall security throughout the entire Gaza Strip. Therefore, 
while there is redeployment on the one hand, we continue to bear 
overall responsibility for whatever happens in the Gaza Strip. 
  [Sukenik] What is your reaction to the killing of the six 
Fatah Hawks in Jabalyah on 29 March? 
  [Rabin] That was a regrettable mishap. However, in my 
opinion and to the best of my knowledge from the reports so far, 
the IDF soldiers acted correctly. This was a regrettable mishap 
which resulted from a lack of coordination. I hope that the 
entry of the first police contingent will permit a higher degree 
of coordination and preclude unnecessary confrontations. 
  [Semrik] Mr. Prime Minister, is the scenario of either 
evacuating the Jewish settlers from Hebron or concentrating them 
in one site closer today than it was several days ago? 
  [Rabin] I am dealing with this issue now and I will not 
comment on it. I made it clear that we have no intention of 
uprooting the Israeli presence in Hebron, certainly not at this 
stage of the negotiations. 
  [Raz] Mr. Rabin, do you not fear that a precedent has been 
set for the stationing of international forces at various 
locations beyond the Green Line whenever there are problems? 
  [Rabin] I consider this an exception. The horrendous 
massacre at the Cave of the Patriarchs was perpetrated by an 
Israeli with a weapon issued to him by the IDF for self-defense 
purposes. This man also donned an IDF uniform, although he was 
not on military duty. Statements were also made by various 
elements which almost justified this man's deed. The State of 
Israel is paying for all this just as it might pay with the 
lives of Jews both in Israel and abroad as a result of the fury 
and anger caused by this despicable murder. 

