Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Sermon by leader Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi in Tripoli on 13 </F>
March on the occasion of 'Id al-Fitr -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] Thanks be to God, prayers and peace be upon the 
messenger of God, the seal of prophets who has exchanged these 
two days of 'Id al-Fitr for two days of the Jahiliyah [the 
pre-Islam era of Ignorance]. This 'Id and the one that follows 
it were days of indulgence, leisure, and pleasure during the era 
of the Jahiliyah. [passage omitted 
  The qiblah means having the same direction. By direction I 
do not mean that Muslims face from west to east, or from east to 
west, or from north to south, or from south to north, but that 
they move towards a single aim. Proof of that is that Muslims 
used to face another direction from the south to the north; 
[words indistinct] that they used to achieve their aim [word 
indistinct] from the qiblah, which is the single aim. Muslims 
in the eastern and western parts of the land are nowadays in 
dire need of a united aim and united direction. However, 
nowadays they give the appearance and look as if they are moving 
towards one qiblah, whereas in fact they have different qiblahs. 
What we see now is a kind of hypocrisy and false appearances. 
Yesterday more than a million people were praying in the Holy 
House [Kaaba in Mecca] while tens were at the same time being 
slaughtered in the al-Ibrahimi mosque in usurped Palestine. All 
that they offered were urgent calls and prayers, which neither 
helps nor hurts those who are being massacred in the al-Ibrahimi 
mosque. 
  Muslims ought to have marched from Mecca to Jerusalem, to 
liberate it, and to al-Ibrahimi mosque to rescue the hundreds of 
praying men who were laid open to slaughter at dawn. [passage 
omitted] 
  He who wanted paradise during these moments ought to have 
gone to Palestine to take revenge on the Zionists who shun 
nothing to eliminate Muslims. Even a doctor was armed with a 
machine gun. The Christian world, which failed to protest, 
laments if a Jew of a Christian is killed by Muslims or others. 
The Christian, Catholic world did not lift a finger. More 
still, the so-called UN Security Council has so far obstructed 
the adopting of a resolution even to just condemn this hideous 
slaughter. America told them that condemning Israel is 
forbidden, that the carrying out of chapter 7 against the 
Israelis is forbidden, the Israelis are above the UN charter. 
[passage omitted] 
  From now on the Americans have no right to speak about human 
rights, or about Christ, or ethics, or humanity. They have 
backed with all strength the slaughter of the al-Ibrahimi 
mosque. Jews have also dropped the fig leaf, now that it has 
become clear that they arm doctors. [passage omitted] 
  Suddenly we find a surgeon carrying a machine gun and 
attacks 
worshippers inside the sacred al-Ibrahimi mosque at dawn. The 
United States stated that if you want to denounce anybody, you 
should restrict your condemnation against this surgeon. The 
president of the Jews addressed the world and said that we are 
sorry for this massacre committed by a deranged person. Then 
this statement was reported by the mass media, the coward 
no-Arab mass media; they showed photographs of this doctor who 
was filmed on several occasions carrying a machine gun, 
addressing groups of Jews, and inciting them to take revenge on 
Muslims and avenge a Jewish woman who was killed in one of the 
streets. 
  Unfortunately, neither the Arab nor the Muslim delegates nor 
the coward Arab governmental mass media dared to expose this 
reality. Nobody, apart from the Libyan delegate, told the 
Security Council that this doctor was not insane; that in the 
past he was shown to the whole world on television screens 
carrying a machine gun and addressing masses from Jewish 
occupying settlers. What other justification is left to the 
United States now; it is being accused by the world. I am not 
talking here about the coward governmental official world, the 
traitor and the world that has been bought up. No, I am 
referring to the free world, to the masses, the peoples, the 
free mass organizations; the international conscience and the 
conscience of humanity; the genuine religion, the true 
Christianity; the true Judaism and the genuine Islam. What can 
the United States say when it is being told that you officially 
sponsor terrorism and protect terrorists? 
  From this very day, the United States has no right to talk 
about those who protect terrorism, human rights, the states 
which sponsor terrorism. No other country can match the United 
States when it comes to sponsoring terrorism; it is followed by 
Western states and Christianity in this matter. 
  We would like to remind the Islamic nation of what we told 
it 
a short whole ago. This is a Jewish-Christian alliance, there 
is no doubt about it. It is banging the drums of a crusade war. 
In parallel, we are forced, out of self-defense, to sound bells 
of confrontation and defense of ourselves and homes. This is 
because we are facing barbaric and savage nations that worship 
idols, crucify Christ, arm surgeons, and block attempts of the 
international organization [UN] to condemn the aggression and 
denounce barbarism, savagery, and mass annihilation of a 
defenseless people, whose sole crime lies in the fact that it is 
defending its land and its right to live on earth. [passage 
omitted] 
  The new world order means that Jews and Christians control 
Muslims and if they can, they will after that dominate 
Confucianism and other religions in India, China, and Japan. 
[passage omitted] 
  What the Christians and Jews are now saying: We were 
determined to crush Communism and we must now crush Islam and 
Confucianists. 
  Now, we hope to see a confrontation between China that heads 
the Confucianist camp and America that heads the Christian 
crusader camp. We have no justifications but to be biased 
against the crusaders. We are standing with Confucianism, and 
by allying ourselves with it and fighting alongside it in one 
international front, we will eliminate our mutual opponent. 
  So, we, as Muslims, will support China in its struggle 
against our mutual enemy. [passage omitted] 
  We wish it China victory, we support it and call on all 
small, enslaved, and intimidated peoples to unite with the 
anti-crusaders' camp because the crusade beats the drums of war. 
We are beating the drums of confrontation in preparation for 
the defense of the honor of Islam and sanctity of Muslims. 
[passage omitted] 
  We are amazed, in fact, to see those who claim to embrace 
Islam and claim to serve and defend it taking the Jews and the 
Christians as guardians in an open violation of the very Koran 
that they claim to have faith in. 
  The Koran says: Ye who believe take not the Jews and the 
Christians for your friends and protectors. They are friends 
and protectors to each other. 
  This has happened. America is the protector of Israel, 
Israel is the protector of America. They are friends and 
protectors to each other, this is true. 
  How can you, the Muslim, take those as [Awliya'] responsible 
for your affairs, befriend and ally with them, and still claim 
to be a Muslim? This is blasphemy, hypocrisy, and deception of 
the Muslims. [passage omitted] 
  How can a Muslim, an Arab state be an ally of America? What 
Islam are they left with? Such a state is a hypocrite and 
immoral, ruled by a despot, outside Islam, charlatan, liar, 
Musaylimah the Liar [Islamic figure who pretended to be a 
prophet]. [passage omitted] 
  We can say that a Muslim ruler who is a friend, an ally to 
America, whose guardian is America, we can say to him: You are 
an unbeliever, a Christian, and a Jew. [passage omitted] 
  There are Muslims who send forces to Somalia to cover the 
slaughtering of the Arab Muslim Somali people by the American 
forces. This is blasphemy. Any one alongside the Christian 
forces in Somalia is an unbeliever. This is what God says, not 
us. 
  Some believers said: America is with us, Israel is not with 
us, France is with us and so is Britain; you want us not to have 
these as guardians, what will we do then. Well, God said: Your 
guardian is God, his messenger, and the believers. What more do 
you want than God. 
  God said: I am your guardian; he is stronger than America. 
[passage omitted] 
  Their guardian is God, his messenger, and the believers. 
[passage omitted] 
  From this sacred place and on this great day, I address 
myself to our brothers who have put themselves in the service of 
the Jews and the Christians to return to the fold soon, and we 
say to the Islamic Conference Organization and the Islamic 
nation that an Islamic people, the Libyan people, on orders from 
America, Britain, and France, is prohibited from performing the 
rites of pilgrimage, the pilgrimage that takes place in an Arab 
land. 
  We tell our brothers of the Islamic nation, we draw their 
attention to the difficult situation of the sacred House of God 
[The Kaaba, in Mecca], concerning which the falsified Security 
Council resolutions were implemented with American threat. They 
had been implemented on Holy Mecca and the tomb of the Prophet. 
When an airplane takes off from Libya, it is not allowed to 
cross Saudi air space or to land while carrying pilgrims to 
Mecca and Medina. 
  Our brothers who are standing in the pilgrims way and who 
are 
preventing us from arriving for pilgrimage are in an unenviable 
situation. The poor, they are in such a situation that we do 
not want to put more pressure on them, nor do we want to further 
expose them. Perhaps it is their economic conditions, spiritual 
and material weakness, their helplessness, and their limited 
perception that have made them seek protection with the American 
White House, and obliged them to carry out the decisions of the 
Christian states against the pilgrimage and pilgrims. But at 
the same time, we say that America ought to be grateful to the 
Arabs, to the white hand [symbol of assistance] that was 
extended to it in time of need. [passage omitted] 
  America is in a situation of difficulty and distress. The 
Arab helping hand was extended to it. It should have kissed 
this hand, and the American President should have bowed to the 
Saudi king who handed out 6 billion [currency not specified] to 
America in an historic transaction that saved America from a 
crushing economic crisis. 
  Yesterday, Saudi Arabia concluded a transaction to the 
value of 6 billion dollars for the purchase of civil aircraft 
that Saudi Arabia does not need. However, the Arab legendary 
generosity made Saudi Arabia extend a helping hand to America at 
a difficult time. 
  The Americans should recognize the Saudi good deed, because 
it saved 100,000 American employees who were going to be made 
redundant and become beggars on the pavements of American 
streets. The 6 billion dollars confirmed 100,000 people in 
their jobs. These people were on the brink of becoming beggars. 
America should respond positively to the rank of the Saudi king 
whenever he requests anything from it. When he exerted every 
effort to mediate in the confrontation between Libya, America, 
Britain, and France, they rejected his mediation and did not 
meet his request, while he had done them favors and he has got 
influence. [passage omitted] It seems that our brothers in 
Saudi Arabia are implementing this noble saying of the prophet 
and consider that the American hand stretched out to them to beg 
for money needs to be helped. 
  We can only address the Islamic Conference Organization, 
that 
includes more than 40 Islamic countries, and tell them that 
Mecca is in a difficult situation because the Security Council 
resolutions were imposed on it. Muslims must be informed by the 
Libyans who were banned from pilgrimage for two or three years. 
Despite all this, we are showing patience and forgiveness. We 
are implementing Almighty God's saying: Let not detestation for 
a people who barred you from the holy mosque move you to commit 
aggression. Help one another to piety and Godfearing, do not 
help each other to sin and enmity. 
  This has become a fact: People have barred us from the holy 
mosque. These are Arabs: Those on the way and those who have 
the holy mosque on their land. This, like God said, should not 
push us to enmity and rupture with them. 
  We do take note of their difficult circumstances and their 
weakness in front of the U.S. monster. They acknowledge the 
dominance of Christianity and Judaism, and the alliance of the 
Zionist and the crusade. They are afraid that they might be the 
target of God's punishment, consequently, they put pressure on 
their Libyan brothers; they prevent them from visiting the holy 
places as a favor to satisfy the Christian states. [passage 
omitted] 
  I hope that such acts would not provoke you into attacking 
your brothers in Saudi Arabia, Sudan, or Egypt because these 
people have been targeted, and their turn will come to side with 
the West and the U.S. against Libya, they are forced to bow 
because of their circumtances. Regarding Egypt, its economic 
situation is a dire one, so one should not blame it; it needs a 
helping hand and support. It is being targeted, and there is a 
Zionist-Jewish-Christian plot to balkanize Egypt and divide it 
into several states; war has been declared against Egypt now, 
Egypt is being fought from within, in its streets. Orders are 
given from Tel Aviv, Washington, Paris, London, Bonn, and 
Berlin. Orders are given from Christian and Jewish capitals to 
destroy Egypt and Algeria. 
  Egypt's economic conditions do not allow it to oppose the 
United States during the current phase, therefore, we should 
unite with Egypt, support Egypt's economy, and take advantage 
from Egypt's backing for our economy; we should be strong to 
emerge from the phase of weakness to the phase of strength. Then 
and then only, Egypt can stand up to the United States and stand 
up to other countries. 
  As for Sudan, likewise its economic circumstances are very 
bad; war was declared against it from the south; they created 
poisonous insects for it, which they refer to in their language 
as (?Niania). They stressed that they should sow the poisonous 
insect in southern Sudan. You must have heard of Niania 1, 
Niania 2, and Niania 3. Every now and then a movement emerges in 
the south to destroy Sudan. This plot is being hatched by the 
Jews and the Christians to target Sudan, prevent unity between 
Egypt and Sudan, and weaken Sudan. Even Sudan is in a very 
difficult situation. 
  However, the country that is going through a completely 
different situation is your sisterly Saudi Arabia. Economically 
speaking, Saudi Arabia does not need the United States; the 
latter does not provide Saudi Arabia with any economic support. 
On the contrary, it is Saudi Arabia that is providing economic 
backing to the United States, as we all know. As you have 
witnessed, it has just supplied it with 6 billion dollars in 
return for planes that Saudi Arabia does not need. 
  If Saudi Arabia needed to rely on the United States to 
defend 
it, we would like to ask the following question: To defend it 
against whom? Now, Saudi Arabia claims that Iraq represents a 
danger against Saudi Arabia. If Saudi independence depends on 
U.S. forces, this kind of independence is a hollow one, because 
the United States can withdraw its forces at any time; and 
because there may be a U.S. Administration that does not agree 
with the principle of defending Saudi Arabia. Hence, Saudi 
Arabia should unite with Iraq. 
  If Kuwait independence depends on the presence of U.S. 
troops 
in the country, it should unite with Iraq, or with Saudi Arabia, 
or Jordan, or Libya. 
  Libya tells the truth, it says that the Libyan Army, with 
its artillery, tanks, or radar equipment, cannot fight NATO. 
Therefore, Libya stresses that the Arabs' strength lies in their 
unity. Libya's independence remains a fragile one as long as 
there is no Arab unity from the Atlantic to the Gulf. This 
unity will become a deterrent force against the greedy Western 
colonizers; we are used to their greed, aggression and lack of 
mercy. 
  We are saying...[pause] We are calling for immediate unity. 
We cannot rely on other forces. When the Soviet Union still 
existed, it made a request to set up military bases in Libya to 
protect Libya from the United States. We rejected that. We 
said that that was not acceptable: If our independence is 
dependent on your presence in our territory, that will not be 
independence. It would mean that we have sold independence. 
The other side will take us when you withdraw your forces. 
Therefore, this is not a solution. The solution lies in the 
unity of the Arab people. 
  We know that Saudi Arabia needs the United States in the 
military, political, and security spheres. However, the United 
States needs Saudi Arabia even more economically. What is 
preventing our brothers in Saudi Arabia from being bold with the 
United States. The United States should at least accept their 
views. We cannot accept this situation for our brothers in 
Saudi Arabia. We want our brothers in Saudi Arabia to have a 
voice in the West, to be heard, to have a standing, and able to 
threaten with gasoline and their deposits in the United States, 
Western countries and the companies that work there, and make 
thousands of billions in profit. [passage omitted] 
  In this time of revolutionary Islamic awakening -- this 
revival in Libya, this renaissance, this return of awareness, 
the setting up of the Shura, the community system in the 
religious sense -- this humbug and this nonsense by the 
Islamists has no place here. 
  Amazingly, after Zionism carried out these massacres [Hebron 
massacre] they want to reward it by lifting the economic boycott 
against it; and yesterday France goes to reach a military 
agreement with it Israel to supply it with weapons; and they 
besiege Iraq, and besiege Sudan, and besiege Syria, and besiege 
Libya, and forbid it to hold weapons. They want us to turn to 
stones and the Jews turn to weapons of mass destruction. Look! 
The Arabs are forbidden to buy weapons, technology is forbidden 
to them; while with the Jews, the Christian countries are 
competing to supply them with the most modern weapons. 
Yesterday, France signed an agreement with the Israelis in 
return for the al-Ibrahimi Mosque massacre. Look at this French 
agreement! Look at this blatant alliance in front of humanity 
between Christianity and Judaism against Muslims! If there was 
any nation with a conscience, it would break off relations with 
France, and punish and destroy France. In return for that, I 
heard that the people of Tobruk had decided that they would 
rather get their water on donkeys or on their backs, than accept 
a desalination plant that a French company was to build for 28 
million [currency not specified]. It is impossible -- a French 
company -- God is Great, Oh yes! Salutations to the inhabitants 
of Derna [corrects himself] to the inhabitants of Tobruk. 
[passage omitted] 
  France also even refused to solve its problem with Libya 
over 
its aircraft in solidarity with America and Britain. It said 
that we [words indistinct] solve our problem with Libya in 
solidarity with our brothers, the Americans and the English. 
Yesterday, they reached a military agreement with the Israelis, 
to support them militarily. And the Arabs continue to deal with 
France, except for the inhabitants of Tobruk. [passage omitted] 
  We celebrate this 'Id and we -- many happy returns -- and we 
have declared and legislated for the implementation of the 
Islamic Shari'ah in all the matters covered by the rules of the 
Koran. Every single matter for which the Koran says the rule is 
thus, a law was issued and implemented in this country. Libya 
is thus implementing the Book of God and takes the path of the 
Prophet's practical traditions [sunna]. 
  We who reject -- and call on our brother to reject -- the 
wrong and dangerous slogan of land for peace, address ourselves 
not to the governments -- the governments are helpless -- we 
address ourselves today to worshipers like you in any part of 
the Arab homeland to reject this dangerous slogan -- land for 
peace -- that gives the Israelis the right to occupy any Arab 
land and not withdraw from it unless they get what they want. 
This is a precedent: We occupy your land, we know its your 
land, we occupy it and will not leave until you recognize us. 
This is what happened. 
  Now they are telling Syria the Golan Heights is our land 
that 
we have occupied in 1967 and will not leave it unless you 
recognize us. America on her part said Israel has the right, 
imagine. 
  America demands from Lebanon, whose territory is occupied, 
to stop the fighting in the south of Lebanon. Syria, they have 
been saying, is a terrorist state because it did not act as a 
policeman to protect Israeli's northern borders. Imagine. 
[passage omitted] 
  Look at this injustice; the land for peace. 
  I am talking today at this place as an imam to the Muslims 
just like any other Muslim who led the Muslims at this day at 
any place be it in Mecca, in Madina, in al-Azhar, or at Hassan 
II Mosque, or anywhere in the Arab and Islamic homeland. Hence, 
we are not directing our words to the rulers because I am 
neither a ruler nor a president. I am at this hour an imam to 
those praying at this sacred place. We address our words to our 
Muslim brothers everywhere of the Arab and Islamic homeland with 
the Islamic spirit, the spirit of challenge and with this 
awareness and exposition of truths. 
  Everyone of us has become capable to firmly carry his arms 
and stand in defiance because he has become aware. He has 
learned the triviality of the Christians and the Jews and their 
exposed alliance, and has learned the lie of human rights and 
learned the meaning of terrorism. Namely, he who defends his 
occupied land is a terrorist, and he who defends his honor is a 
terrorist, and he who defend his home is a terrorist. If this 
is terrorism then we are terrorists. If they were threatening 
us by cutting off the oil, we sincerely wish that the Western 
countries and America would force the Security Council to cut 
off oil exports from Libya and no one would buy Libyan oil. 
Then we would be without oil, without electricity, and without 
factories. What would we then be? We would be real fighters 
and underground terrorists like the Irish Republican Army, the 
Red Army, the Kurds, and the Vietnamese. We will appear from 
underground. He who has no factory is the brave one. He who 
has no electricity is the brave one. Look at the Irish 
Republican Army that has no factories and has nothing to worry 
about and has turned London international airport into flames. 
The main airport of Great Britain is in flames and for 48 hours 
was under bombardment from the Irish Republican Army. They 
could not fight it. 
  Neither the American missiles, nor the American aircraft 
carrier, nor Britain's fleets or air force could stop the 
bombardment on its main airport in London, like France's 
international airport. Britain is unable to find out the source 
of the bombardment, people from underground. 
  They want to turn us into real terrorists, we welcome this. 
The day we no longer have oil, we will abandon their false 
civilization and live under trees and in caves, then we will 
fight them (?for sure). They are turning us into real fighters, 
fair enough, we will be patient for so many years in order to 
fight them. Once we defeat them, we go back to building 
factories, roads, and anything else. 
  If they want to deprive us of oil, we welcome this because 
this will make us seek revenge and turn us into fighters. We 
will not have anything to fear anymore. We will be living in 
the bush. We will turn into tigers and lions. 
  This is true. We have talked about them, what Malik [leader 
of one of the four Sunni confessions] had said about wine; he 
rejected and outlawed it. The solution is to address praying 
people, Muslims, and citizens like us. May God...[interrupted 
by cheering masses] God is great. May God give us a firm 
foothold and make us victorious against the unfaithful. 
[passage omitted] 

