BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 10 KYODO -- The Social Democratic Party 
(SDP) will not help the largest opposition Liberal Democratic 
Party (LDP) fell the current administration with a no-confidence 
motion unless the LDP closes policy gaps with the socialists, a 
top SDP strategist said Friday [10 June]. 
  "We will not go along with the LDP's no-confidence motion 
unless we can reach a policy agreement," said SDP Secretary 
General Wataru Kubo in an interview with KYODO NEWS SERVICE. 
  Kubo said the No. 2 opposition SDP will clarify and announce 
its positions on the appropriate Japanese response to counteract 
North Korea's suspected nuclear arms development program as well 
as on proposed tax system reform. 
  The SDP is noted as a staunch critic of proposed sanctions 
on 
North Korea and the proposed hiking of the 3 percent consumption 
tax. 
  The party will make clear its tenets over these critical 
issues in a policy platform document it is presently drawing up, 
he said. 
  "What is crucial for us is what policies would be 
implemented 
(by a new coalition government) and its decision-making 
process," said Kubo, the righthand man of SDP Chairman Tomiichi 
Murayama. 
  The SDP will demand, as a prerequisite to joining any new 
coalition, that the next coalition government set up a supreme 
policy-making panel in which the number of panelists from each 
party would be allocated in proportion to the number of each 
party's legislators in the coalition, he said. 
  If the next coalition to emerge, after an anticipated 
parliamentary power struggle following passage of the fiscal 
1994 budget, were a non-LDP coalition, the SDP would garner the 
greatest representation in the panel under the Kubo-proposed 
allocation scheme. 
  In the previous non-LDP coalition led by former Prime 
Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, the SDP was the biggest party with 
74 seats in the powerful House of Representatives, followed by 
Shinseito with 62 and Komeito with 52 seats. 
  Kubo also hinted the SDP will demand that policy-making 
authority be granted to a regular meeting of coalition party 
leaders, rather than conferring power on meetings of deputy 
chiefs of the parties as in the Hosokawa coalition. 
  In a separate interview, Komeito Secretary General Yuichi 
Ichikawa said his party is ready to compromise its longtime 
differences with the SDP concerning policies on the North Korean 
nuclear arms program as well as the decision-making issue. 
  Ichikawa said Komeito "can conform" its policies on the two 
main issues of concern to the SDP. 
  However, he predicted the current coalition parties would 
have to undergo hard bargaining in a bid to reconcile the gulf 
with the SDP over proposed consumption tax increases. 
  Closing the gaps on tax system reform "would take a lot of 
time in the process of talks," he said. 
  In the previous coalition, the SDP repeatedly expressed its 
dissatisfaction saying it had been distanced from important 
decision-making such as a proposed hike in the consumption tax 
rate and the opening of the rice market to foreign countries. 

