BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "ARF Must Address Trouble on the South China </F>
Sea"] 
  [Text] Much to the horror of the organizers of July's 
inaugural regional defence summit in Bangkok, a real security 
issue is fast developing in the South China Sea. 
  The officials laying the groundwork for the Asean Regional 
Forum (ARF) in Bangkok had hoped to keep any potentially 
explosive topics out of the unprecedented meeting, but with 
tensions rising dangerously around the disputed Spratly Islands, 
the issue will have to be addressed if the ARF is not to become 
a farce. 
  Last week's announcement by US prospecting firm Crestone 
that 
it has begun surveying for oil off Vietnam's continental shelf 
with the "full support and protection of China" has alarmed 
regional analysts and government officials who fear that Beijing 
is bent on bringing the long-simmering dispute to a head. 
<H5>  High-risk prospecting </H5>
  Under its contract, Crestone will have access to a 
prospection area of 25,155 square kilometers, the largest area 
ever turned over to an oil company in Southeast Asia. Not only 
does the move violate a regional agreement to avoid complicating 
negotiations on the disputed archipelago, but the location of 
the concession is being seen by some as outright provocation. 
  The Crestone block is 280 kilometers southeast of the 
Vietnamese coastal city of Vung Tau and 1,100 kilometers from 
Hainan Island, the closest piece of uncontested Chinese 
territory. China also claims control of the neighbouring 
Paracel Islands where it built an air base after forcibly 
evicting the Vietnamese in 1974. But even this outcrop of rock 
is still more than 700 kilometers from the Crestone zone. 
  The Chinese claim is based on its "historic" control of 
nearly the entire South China Sea, which is bordered by 
Malaysia, the Philippines, Brunei, and Taiwan, all of which are 
claimants to the Spratly Islands. While Beijing has repeatedly 
dismissed concerns about the so-called `China threat' and vowed 
"never to seek hegemony," it appears precisely set to do that in 
the oil-rich waterway. 
  The Crestone concession is dangerously close to Vietnam's 
Blue Dragon oil fields -- also claimed by Beijing -- and the 
onset of activity there belies Beijing's earlier promises to set 
aside competing claims and consider joint development of the 
Spratlys. 
<H5>  Issue is central to Asean </H5>
  For Asean, the Chinese action is alarming because the 
organization has long made it known that it considers the South 
China Sea a test case of China's intentions in the region. In 
particular, it revives fears of a recurrance of the bloody 
military clash between China and Vietnam in 1988. 
  The economic success of the Southeast Asian states over the 
last 15 years owes as much to the return of peace and stability 
in the region as to any other single factor. The last thing 
Southeast Asia needs is a return to the years of conflict, 
closed-door foreign policy and expensive arms purchases that 
marked the seventies. In an ominous sign, only three days after 
the Crestone announcement, Taiwan started patrolling waters 
surrounding the atolls in a bid to emphasize its claims to 
sovereignty. 
  The ARF is scheduled to hold its first session on July 25, 
after the annual meeting of foreign ministers from Asean member 
countries. China and Vietnam will attend as guests along with a 
host of other powers with security interests in the region, 
including Russia and the United States. The tentative agenda 
for the meeting is stacked with events intended to foster a 
spirit of conviviality and confidence among the 18 members 
before any serious topics are touched upon in later years. 
  But the Spratly issue needs serious multilateral attention 
before it possibly spirals out of control. Early attempts to 
defuse the row, including a joint scientific project have failed 
to yield any agreement. 
  Calling a meeting of the region's top security officials in 
a 
bid to find ways to avoid conflict is commendable. But to set 
an agenda that ignores the most pressing threat to peace in the 
region for the sake of conviviality is pointless. The South 
China Sea disputes should be settled now before they escalate. 
Avoiding them will not make them go away. 

