BFN 

<F P=106> [Yuriy Rytov report under the "Social View" rubric: </F>
"Emergency Measures Being Taken To Localize Unemployment"] 
  [Text] The destinies of ordinary people once again occupy 
a priority place on the scale of the government's moral values. 
So, how do things stand now with unemployment? 
  According to Russian Federation State Committee for 
Statistics figures, 1,363,600 citizens are registered in Russia 
as not employed in labor activity. This includes 1,083,000 
unemployed. But that is still not the whole story. There is 
so-called hidden unemployment, on a scale estimated by experts 
at 5 million people. It involves, inter alia, working people on 
unpaid leave or on a reduced work regime. 
  As we can see, the figures are striking. Yet they give rise 
to serious doubts. 
  First question. Does the employment sphere take account of 
the number of persons "shuttling" among the regions of Russia 
and to neighboring countries and countries further afield? 
Experts estimate that these people account for one-third of the 
country's trade turnover. So, do they work or do they not? 
They work, and how! But they most likely feature in 
statistical data as being temporarily out of work. 
  Second question. How are we to categorize persons engaged in 
so-called street trading? For example, in addition to 
grandmothers drawing their pensions we meet a lot of prosperous 
young people trading in vodka and cigarettes at every subway 
station in the capital. 
  Third question. According to State Employment Service 
information there are vacancies across the country for 289,400 
people. Why are they not being filled? 
  In short, the problem of unemployment in our country is not 
yet acute. It could become so, however, if mass bankruptcies 
should begin among enterprises. Here tribute must be paid to 
the Cabinet of Ministers, which has finally learned to act 
promptly. 
  On 3 May 1994 the Russian Federation Government adopted the 
decree "On Measures To Ensure the Population's Employment in the 
Event of Critical Situations Arising in the Labor Market in 
Particular Areas of the Russian Federation." 
  What provision does this document make? Above all it 
provides for expert appraisal of the financial state of 
enterprises which dismiss workers en masse. If there is no 
special need for this to happen, the personnel cutback is 
suspended or else carried out in stages. 
  The planned measures conflict with the tough law "On the 
Insolvency (Bankruptcy) of Enterprises." The government has 
therefore suggested that all interested ministries and 
departments submit proposals for amending and supplementing this 
law. 
  I expect such amendments to be received in good time and to 
be approved in the legislature. 

