Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["`Particulars on the Notarization of Preserved Evidence on </F>
Demolished Houses' Issued by the Ministry of Justice on 1 
December 1993"] 
  [Text] Article 1. These particulars were drafted in 
accordance with the "Interim Regulations on Notarization in the 
PRC," "Regulations Governing the Demolition of Urban Houses" and 
"Rules on the Notarization Procedure (tentative)" for the 
purpose of standardizing evidence preservation on demolished 
houses. 
  Article 2. The preservation of evidence on demolished houses 
refers to such lawful preservative measures as the surveying, 
photographing, or videotaping by a notary public of the status 
of a house and its appendages before it is pulled down or 
removed, for the purposes of determining the authenticity and 
certifiability of evidence on the house. 
  Article 3. This body of particulars apply to the 
notarization of evidence on houses which according to the 
"Regulations Governing the Demolition of Urban Houses" are 
liable to be demolished: Those entrusted to house departments; 
those over which property disputes remain unresolved after the 
deadline announced by a house demolition department; and those 
over which property rights have been transferred, but on which 
the mortgagee and mortgager cannot arrive at a mortgage 
agreement within the time specified by a house demolition 
department; and any other houses to be demolished. 
  Article 4. Notarized evidence on demolished houses shall be 
placed in the custody of the notary office of the district in 
which the demolished house is located. 
  Article 5. Demolishers or people whose house will be 
demolished can apply for such notarized evidence. House 
demolition departments can also apply. These applicants may 
apply through their own representatives. 
  Article 6. Applicants must fill out a notarization 
application form and submit it with the following documents: 
  1. Document of identity: Legal entity applicants should 
supply documents proving their legal entity or legal 
representative identity. Citizen applicants whose house will be 
demolished should supply identity proof. 
  2. Proof of qualification: Demolishers should produce 
permits issued by a housing demolition department certifying 
approval of demolition; agents entrusted with demolition work 
should produce documents proving their qualification in house 
demolition; people whose house is demolished should produce 
proof that they are the owners and users (including trustees, 
stewards entrusted by the state with state-owned houses and 
their appendages) of the demolished house and its appendages. 
  3. Documents showing approved compensation and settlement 
packages by a house demolition department of a people's 
government at or above the county level if the house to be 
demolished is in property dispute. 
  4. A notice stating a deadline after which demolition may 
proceed by a people's government at or above the country level, 
or an edict stating a deadline after which demolition may 
proceed signed by a people's court chief judge if the house is 
marked for mandatory demolition. 
  5. Any other documents deemed necessary by a notary public. 
  Article 7. Applications meeting the following requirements 
should be accepted by notary offices, which should notify 
applicants in writing: 
  1. Applications which meet the requirements of Article 4; 
  2. Matters applying to be notarized fall which under the 
mandate of notary offices; 
  3. Applicants who have supplied documents required by 
Article 
6. 
  Notary offices will reject applications which fail to meet 
the above requirements. Applicants will be notified of the 
rejection and informed of review procedure for appeals against 
rejections. 
  Acceptances or rejections should be made within seven days 
after formal applications have been filed in accordance with 
these particulars. 
  Article 8. Notary publics should treat applicants in earnest 
and record conversations as required by Section 24 of the 
"Regulations (tentative) for Notary Procedures," with special 
emphasis on the following information: 
  1. Purposes and reasons for applying to preserve the 
evidence; 
  2. Kinds, names, location, and current status of evidence to 
be preserved; 
  3. Ways of preserving the evidence; 
  4. Any other content the notary public thinks should be 
taken 
down. 
  The information above can also be included in documents 
supplied by applicants. 
  Article 9. When the requirements for notarizing evidence are 
met, the notary office should send two or more notary officers 
(at least one of them a notary public) to participate in the 
entire evidence preservation activity. 
  Article 10. A notary public assigned to notarize evidence on 
a to-be-demolished house should record objectively and 
comprehensively the on-site situation of the house, collect and 
retrieve relevant evidence, and, depending on the 
characteristics of objects to be preserved as evidence, survey, 
photograph, or videotape the objects. 
  Article 11. A record should be kept of a survey on a 
house, noting the time and place of the survey, the house's 
location, its boundary on four sides, the type of use, its 
structure, levels, area, extent of depreciation, composition of 
the house front and the ground, and appended facilities; 
identifying the surveyor, recorder, and the property holder of 
the house, and any other information deemed necessary. Things 
best stated in charts or drawings, such as the length and width 
of the house, should be thus done. The record should be signed 
or stamped by the notary public and the surveyor. Parties 
involved in the demolition, if present, should also sign or 
stamp the record. Should parties involved in the demolition 
refuse to do so, the notary public should state so in his record. 
  Article 12. Photographing and videotaping of the house 
should reflect and record the whole look of the house. House 
structure, doors, windows, kitchens, and appended facilities 
should be recorded in separate pictures. 
  Article 13. When a survey is deemed necessary on the 
evidence to be preserved, the notary office should hire expert 
help from departments with the necessary specialty or other 
departments to conduct the survey. 
  Hired departments and their surveyors should present a 
signed 
or stamped written survey report. Surveyors from other 
departments should have their units stamped on the report to 
certify them. 
  Article 14. In the case of a forceful demolition of a house, 
concerned notary office should notify the people whose house is 
going to be demolished to be present on the scene. If these 
people refuse to show up, the notary public should note this in 
his record. 
  In the case of a forceful demolition of a house, the notary 
public should verify, count, register, and itemize articles 
within the house, put down the time and place of the above 
activity, have two fully functioning people present on the scene 
to check the entries, get their signatures on the record, and 
then sign it. If the people whose house is being demolished 
refuse to cosign the record, the notary public should note this 
in his record. 
  After checking and registering the articles, those that 
cannot be turned over at once to the people whose house is being 
demolished, must be taken by demolishers, under the supervision 
of the notary public, to a designated warehouse, and tagged and 
numbered. The keeper of the warehouse is responsible for 
compensating the owners for any damaged or lost articles. 
  Demolishers should draw up a notice informing owners of the 
articles of the deadline for reclaiming the articles. The 
notary office has the power to accept a demolisher's application 
to withdraw articles left unclaimed after the deadline. 
  Article 15. The notary public should conclude the 
preservation of evidence of a demolished house with a notary 
statement, which should be drawn up according to the 
specifications of the "Rules on the Notarization Procedure 
(tentative)," section 38, and in a format set out in format 48, 
the statement on the preservation of evidence format (part two). 
The notary statement should state the reason and time for the 
applicable preservation; how the notary public scrutinized and 
verified the qualifications of the applicant and his 
documentation; the time, place, and method of preservation; the 
titles and quantity of the written memos, photographs, and 
videotaped programs taken in preserving the evidence; and the 
location of preservation. 
  Article 16 These particulars go into effect as of 1 February 
1994. 

