BFN 

  [Text] The report of the committee of inquiry, appointed by 
the government to investigate the Gonja, Nawuri, and Nangjuri 
dispute and the circumstances that led to the communal violence 
at Kpandai in the Northern Region involving the Gonjas and 
Nawuris in April and June 1991, has been published. The 
committee noted that the Gonja hold on the Nawuris and the 
Nchumurus stems from the Gonja claim to conquest and the 
accepted overlordship by the two ethnic groups. It said despite 
the Nawuris' and the Nchumurus' resistance to this claim, the 
colonial government maintained it in pursuit of the policy of 
indirect rule. Successive governments continued this policy of 
domination by the Gonjas without realistically coming to terms 
with the situation. 
  The committee was of the view that this hegemony by the 
Gonjas has been the major cause of disharmony and unrest in that 
part of the country and the cause of the recent disturbances in 
the area. The committee said it found out that both Nawuris and 
Nchumurus own the land on which they live. They have their own 
chiefs and, according to evidence, the payment of tribute has 
ceased long ago. The Nawuris and the Nchumurus also have 
different languages, customs, practices, and religions from the 
Gonjas. 
  In addition, the practice whereby Gonjas have to protect the 
minor ethnic groups in return for services and tributes has 
ceased to have any meaning to the people. It pointed out that 
the system of overlordship can no longer be tolerated in this 
era of civilization, because it is inimical to the aspirations 
of the people and must be considered obsolete and unworkable at 
the present time. The committee, therefore, made the following 
recommendations: 
  The nangjuri wura, head chief of the Nchumurus, and the 
nawuri wura, head chief of the Nawuris, be accorded recognition 
as the paramount chiefs of their respective people; the 
subchiefs of the Nawuris and Nchumurus be also recognized as 
chiefs in their respective areas; the Nawuri and Nchumuru chiefs 
be registered in the national register of chiefs and gazetted 
accordingly. 
  In addition, separate traditional councils should be created 
for the Nawuris and the Nchumurus. The committee also 
recommended that separate traditional areas should be created 
for the Nawuris and Nchumurus. Membership of the Nawuri 
traditional council to be created should be extended to include 
representatives of all heads of or chiefs of other ethnic 
groups, including the kangokiku wura, chief of the Gonjas at 
Kpandai, if he so wished to attend. The nawuri wura should be 
the president of such a traditional council. 
  Similarly, the membership of the Nchumuru traditional 
council 
should include the representative of all heads or chiefs of 
other ethnic groups, the president of which should be the 
nangjuri wura. They should take their seats in the Northern 
Region House of Chiefs, and in accordance with the practice 
obtaining at the house, they should be given the opportunity to 
represent the house at the National House of Chiefs without any 
discrimination. 
  The Gonjas should however retain whatever land they have 
effectively reduced into their possession [as heard]. In view 
of the strained relations between the Gonjas and the Nawuris in 
particular, and the desire of all people in Nawuriland and 
Nchumuruland for administrative autonomy, the committee 
suggested that serious consideration should be given to the 
possibility of creating a separate district assembly for them. 
  The committee said it is aware that its recommendations may 
not be completely acceptable to the parties. They must, 
however, be made to accept a break with the past. The past has 
not provided a favorable climate for peaceful and progressive 
coexistence and has been a long period of cold war between the 
Gonjas and Nawuris and the Nchumurus. The pressure emanating 
from the cold war has been the major cause of recent 
disturbances. 
  It is clear that the Gonjas can no longer subdue the 
determined Nawuris and Nchumurus. These troubles will cease 
only after the lands, native sovereignty, and dignity are 
restored to the Nawuris and the Nchumurus. 

