Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Yindee Lertcharoenchok in Rangoon] </F>
  [Text] The Burmese border minister has accused Thailand of 
being unwilling to co-operate to crush drug warlord Khun Sa and 
his Mong Tai Army, who can "dodge into Thailand whenever they 
want." 
  Lt Gen Maung Thint said Khun Sa and his followers survive 
only because they get food, arms and ammunition from sources in 
Thailand. 
  He said Burmese government forces need Thai assistance if 
they are to crush them, but he has not yet raised the issue with 
Thai officials. 
  There was no immediate urgency. Rangoon was preoccupied 
negotiating truces with other armed ethnic groups and holding 
the national convention to draft a new constitution. 
  In the meantime, the ruling State Law and Order Restoration 
Council (Slorc) would accept Khun Sa's surrender if he also 
disarmed his Mong Tai Army. However Col Kyaw Win, deputy 
director of the Directorate of Defence Services Intelligence 
(DDSI), said that even if he surrenders Khun Sa will still have 
to answer for his crimes and his narcotics activities. 
  Khun Sa, or Chang Si-fu, controls a narrow strip of 
territory 
east of the Salween River in southern Shan State, alongside the 
Thai border province of Mae Hong Son. 
  "The Thai government is not willing to co-operate with us," 
Maung Thint told The Nation. "They [Khun Sa's forces] get food, 
supplies, arms and ammunition from Thailand. That is why he 
still survives. His survival depends on Thailand." 
  "They [Thailand] never consider wiping out Khun Sa. 
Moreover, he is able to dodge into Thailand whenever he wants." 
  Maung Thint, minister for development of border areas and 
national races, said the MTA was unlike other ethnic forces, 
which are holding talks with Rangoon. Slorc considered Khun Sa 
both an insurgent and a drug baron. However the minister 
minimized the MTA's military strength, saying it has no fighting 
capability and relies on arms purchased with drug money. 
  "We are determined to fight him and wipe them [the MTA] out 
by force," he said. 
  However, "if he surrenders and disarms, the govemment will 
accept him and will let him participate in [border] development 
projects." He said it would take time to "wipe Khun Sa out 
totally." "In the meantime, we are holding the national 
convention and are inviting other insurgent groups to return to 
the legal fold. In the present circumstances it is not the time 
to get rid of him." Khun Kyaw Win was outspokenly critical of 
Thai authorities for allowing Khun Sa to "jump the fence" into 
Thailand. He said the Burmese military had no immediate plan to 
move against the MTA and was currently pursuing a "containment 
policy," trying to restrict its movement and territory. 
  The colonel said up to 50,000 troops and porters would be 
needed to bring down Khun Sa and that high government casualties 
would be unavoidable. The MTA could field an estimated 
8,000-15,000 fighters. 
  The rugged terrain posed no difficulties, he claimed, 
although air strikes were not likely due to the danger of 
accidental encroachment into Tnailand and a shortage of 
helicopters. 
  He also pointed to the likelihood a new drug kingpin 
emerging 
once Khun Sa was eliminated. 

