CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by unidentified author: "Fighting Crimes by </F>
Commiting Other Crimes"; first two paragraphs are HOY editorial 
introduction] 
  [Text] The APDHB [Bolivian Permanent Human Rights Assembly] 
states that almost all of the human rights guaranteed by the 
constitution are violated with the support of the governments in 
power. 
  "The APDHB does not defend criminals. We are not saying that 
we do not oppose terrorism or narcotics trafficking. What we say 
is that crimes cannot be fought by committing other crimes. 
Democracy has its own means of self defense, and that is what 
should be given priority." 
  On 2 May the Bolivian Permanent Human Rights Assembly 
(APDHB) 
officially stated: "Almost all of the human rights guaranteed by 
the constitution are violated in Bolivia with the help of 
government protection for excesses and abuses committed by 
police and other intelligence and repressive organizations and 
through the impunity which surrounds them." 
  The picture of the human rights situation is a devastating 
one because intelligence organizations and police forces have 
been accused by the APDHB of robberies, beatings, torture, 
improper arrests, kidnappings by persons wearing disguises and 
hoods, holding people incommunicado, raiding private homes and 
trade union offices, and other crimes. 
  However, the judges also stand accused because not only do 
they fail to investigate abuses and outrages reported by victims 
but they provide legitimacy to all of these proceedings. 
  In presenting an analysis of the human rights situation in 
Bolivia Waldo Albarracin, the president of the APDHB, has said 
that individual rights guaranteed by the national constitution 
are violated on a systematic and daily basis, condemning the 
people to growing anxiety and insecurity. 
  He added: "Fundamental rights are being violated. 
Unfortunately, the necessary political will is not being shown 
by successive governments, by the courts, and by Congress in 
setting up the machinery which would tend to ensure their full 
application." 
<H5>  Institutional Crime </H5>
  The violations of the law committed by the Mobile Police 
Unit 
for Rural Areas (UMOPAR), which is charged with carrying on the 
fight against the narcotics traffic, and the United States Drug 
Enforcement Administration (DEA) are at the top of the APDHB 
list. 
  The president of the APDHB said: "UMOPAR raids homes, steals 
money and possessions under the excuse of confiscation, and 
improperly arrests people. There are more places of detention 
than are authorized by law. UMOPAR uses safe houses where 
citizens accused of drug trafficking crimes are tortured." 
  In the same study the president of the APDHB said: "We have 
learned that telephones are being tapped, the right of privacy 
is being violated, and investigatory bodies have a free hand in 
committing a series of oppressive acts." 
  He added: "We believe that the struggle against the 
narcotics 
traffic is necessary and just. However, in the name of this 
struggle crimes are being committed by those in power." 
<H5>  State Terrorism </H5>
  The APDHB said that the same thing is happening in 
connection 
with the investigation of cases and problems involving 
subversion. Using the argument of fighting against terrorism the 
national constitution is being violated. 
  The president of the APDHB said: "Unfortunately, the Special 
Center for Police Intelligence (CEIP) raids homes without a 
warrant. A large number of agents with their faces painted or 
covered up take people out of their homes and kidnap them 
because they have no warrant for their arrest." 
  He continued: "Furthermore, when family members complain, 
the 
police deny that their relatives have been arrested and only 
admit it publicly when they have obtained the information which 
they seek. They have even made prisoners confess things which 
they have not done, by subjecting them to degrading and 
humiliating treatment and torture." 
  He added: "It is difficult to identify the torturers, 
because 
the person arrested only sees another person wearing a mask." 
  Furthermore, the president of the human rights organization 
said that this kind of violation is accentuated when the case is 
turned over to the public prosecutor and, later on, to the 
ordinary courts. 
  The president of the APDHB said: "When a case reaches the 
courts, the judges, instead of ordering a detailed investigation 
of these violations or rejecting reports from the judicial 
police based on this kind of improper procedure, approve what 
has been done and order criminal trials." 
<H5>  Demonstrations and Repressive Acts </H5>
  The APDHB stated that other, specific evidence of how human 
rights are being violated in Bolivia is found in improper and 
arbitrary arrests during demonstrations held to obtain salary 
increases and satisfy other types of economic and social claims. 
  The APDHB stated that: "The police go out to stop marches 
and 
arrest people they meet indiscriminately and without lawful 
authority, keep them under detention in police cells, and later 
on and without any evidence turn these people over to the 
courts. No one has put an end to this kind of violation." 
  Albarracin mentioned the case of Judith Munoz, a journalist, 
arrested on a charge of terrorism. An attempt was made to 
incriminate her "in one way or another," in her own words. 
  Despite the fact that on 2 May a favorable decision was made 
on a writ of habeas corpus in her case and the Committee on 
Human Rights in the Chamber of Deputies ordered her release and 
an investigation of the case, she still faces a campaign of 
terror. 
  Albarracin stated: "It would not be surprising if, over the 
next few days, new criminal allegations are made against her, 
out of vengeance or in an attempt to justify the violations 
which the police committed previously." 
<H5>  What the Police Do Not Know </H5>
  The constitution clearly states that no one can be 
imprisoned 
except in cases provided for in the law. A detention order must 
be approved by a competent authority and must be issued in 
writing. 
  Albarracin said: "No order of arrest has ever been shown. On 
the contrary, the police arrest people with their faces covered 
up, thereby terrorizing those who are arrested." 
  The constitution states that holding a person in prison 
incommunicado cannot be ordered, except in cases of notorious 
seriousness and in no case for more than 24 hours. Albarracin 
said: "However, in Bolivia there have been cases of persons held 
incommunicado for more than 15 days." 
  The constitution also prohibits any kind of torture, 
extortion, or any kind of physical or moral violence, under pain 
of immediate dismissal. However, above all it provides that a 
person shall be presumed to be innocent unless his or her guilt 
is proved. All of these provisions are simply ignored. 
  Albarracin said that, as in the case of the above mentioned 
situations, there is a series of constitutional provisions which 
"amounts to nothing." He also pointed out that Law 1008 violates 
the whole constitutional structure, despite the fact that the 
constitution, the supreme law of the national, juridical 
structure, must be given precedence over ordinary laws and other 
legal provisions. 
  Albarracin said: "However, the police, under the protection 
of succeeding governments, violate the constitution with 
impunity, because these arbitrary actions are protected by the 
governments themselves." 

