CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rub'i al-Madhun: "Limited Options in </F>
Inter-Palestinian Relations"] 
  [Text] Are the Palestinians heading toward a civil war in 
their mounting political disputes as they approach 
implementation of the autonomy formula in Gaza and Jericho 
first? Or towards a coexistence that is uneasy yet capable of 
securing basic elements of control to prevent the outbreak of 
any local wars, and to avert the spread of their destructive 
outcomes? 
  It would be naive not to expect the Palestinians' to quickly 
return to the local "cold" war pattern that has accompanied the 
peace process in the Middle East ever since the Madrid 
conference. It would also be a mistake not to show profound 
feelings of fear and unease that reflect the extent of anxiety 
over the future of domestic Palestinian relations as the 
authority exerts its powers in the autonomous areas. And yet it 
would be dangerous to depend on these two expressions of general 
positions on larger, transitional events, such as we see leading 
the Palestinians into a tunnel that would limit their options 
either to retreating from larger events in their political 
life--with the aim of obtaining "joint satisfaction" and 
enabling them to "put their house in order"--or to facing civil 
war to decide the course of the struggle. 
  It is important at the outset to avoid the trap of drawing 
instant deductions, relying on the phenomenon of developments. 
It is necessary to explore the background of the phenomenon, to 
go directly into a quick but quiet process, to dismantle it, in 
order to find the elements that may be within the realm of 
possibility, and to exclude exaggeration. Anxieties generate 
possibilities. 
<H5>  "Palestinian Militias" </H5>
  The Palestinians' fears spring from three principal sources 
that have solidified into a fourth, after reports of the spread 
of more arms in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and the fact 
that the Israeli occupation authorities have facilitated the 
acquisition of arms for a large number of citizens through 
purchase, smuggling, or condoning the theft of arms. They have 
encouraged the formation of local militias to push the Authority 
in the autonomous areas into a civil war, imposing an impediment 
to the first Palestinian autonomy experiment at its very 
beginnings. These sources are: 
  First: the mounting attitude of "political anger" on the 
part 
of Palestinian factions who oppose the policy of the PLO 
leadership and Chairman Yasir 'Arafat, and the PLO's abandonment 
of these factions along the way, which leads to their 
estrangement and extinction, rather than to their participation 
in the political arena, where they may have positive effects on 
the political process. This has limited the dissidents' options 
to calling for the death of 'Arafat and his comrades, or 
proclaiming public despair and frustration with the public 
manifestations of the Palestinian condition. Both options are 
extreme movements in conflicting directions, and neither one has 
the power to influence official policy, as each includes 
open--and possibly final--acknowledgement of early bankruptcy. 
  Second: the isolation of a limited number of Palestinian 
leaders who are managing Palestinian affairs in every category, 
and the growing tendency toward secrecy and immersion in 
administrative detail. These elements give profound indications 
of the likelihood of mounting doubts in Palestinian circles over 
the future of the national movement, and the level of public 
participation in the making of policy and the nature of laws 
governing this participation. This comes at a time when other 
indications give more ominous confirmation of trends inside the 
leadership and in the major centers of action that could push in 
the direction of more hardened norms in relations between the 
coming Authority and its opponents, with the claim of avoiding 
public abandonment and likely oversight accompanying the process 
of transferring authority. 
  Third: these negative points of the Palestinian opposition 
support some early inferences regarding the nature of the future 
authority in the Gaza and Jericho areas. The first picture of 
the autonomy shows a vague image of the future of the 
opposition, some of whom expect a confrontation with the 
Palestinian police "even harsher than that with the Israeli 
forces." So how can these fears be tested in their probable 
interactions? 
  First, the past negative motives that represented the major 
causes of public tension must be eliminated, temporarily at 
least. The events that would most likely inflame or support 
expectations of war should be banished. The background of the 
incident should be studied, as the force that represents the 
main dominating instrument of action in the course of domestic 
relations, and the best able to define its final direction. 
<H5>  Curbing Ingredients of Tension </H5>
  Let us begin with Hamas. This beginning provides a complete 
tour within the ranks of the opposition, as this fundamentalist 
organization plays the major dominating role in controlling the 
elements of general tension, not because it is the most ominous 
"partner" of the PLO, but because it is without peer in 
political opposition to 'Arafat. It holds many of the keys to 
domination--from afar--with numerous elements of Palestinian 
peace and war. It is the most widespread and the most 
influential, and the least subordinate, and this distinction 
made it less interested in the practical aspect of the 
development of relations in the existing 10-member opposition 
alliance in Damascus today, which it describes as a media arena 
more than a forum for achieving specific gains on the ground. 
Thus Hamas, which talks a great deal here, does not ignore what 
is happening there (however little), as the Palestinian 
Authority begins the first phase of formation. Is it enough to 
confirm the belief that Hamas is no longer busy escalating a 
cold war of words with 'Arafat and the PLO leadership, while the 
elements deciding the battle will not be on the scene of this 
war seeking to gain greater influence, in order to be granted 
legitimate and official status? 
  A reading of the results of the recent agreements and 
charters signed by the powers of war and peace on the 
Palestinian scene shows a marked inclination to explain the 
motives of their political decisions, which form the general 
trend of PLO policy more than their interest in obstructing 
their enemies or threatening them directly, and pushing them 
into decisions they do not consider right. But Hamas 
politicians, who have been characterized over the past two years 
by humble political experience and division in political 
pronouncements based on reactions of the supports of difference, 
and reaffirming political participation, have begun to gain 
political field experience, especially after numerous setbacks. 
If one sets aside the difference of their armed activities--and 
this development is reflected in the attempts of some Hamas 
members to push the movement toward greater pragmatism and a 
reduction in the intensity of its fundamentalist violence--if 
one takes the conventional meaning of this violence, can this 
development be placed in the category of tactical politics, or a 
cautious step on the part of Hamas to prepare the way for an 
announcement of its participation in the future Palestinian 
Authority, or at least in its civil admnistrative institutions? 
<H5>  Hamas Camp </H5>
  A little consideration of the power of Hamas is helpful to 
the process of exploring the rest of the elements of Palestinian 
war and peace. Despite the growth of Hamas's influence and its 
strength on the ground in the occupied areas, it has still not 
created a sufficient threat to the PLO's influence allowing it 
to remove it from the arena, but it has produced a certain 
"power balance" which has begun to strengthen in the Hamas camp 
with a rise in gun ownership and the development of technical 
field abilities in terms of violent armed action, especially in 
operations targeted against Israeli intelligence and its 
officers. Fatah, on the other hand, the biggest organization, 
some of whose armed persons turned in their war materiel to the 
occupation authorities in response to political developments, 
while some others held on to a small amount of equipment--it has 
begun to exchange its former elements of power for the 
possession of the official security power, represented by at 
least 6,000 policemen who will be at the disposal of the future 
Authority, of which Fatah will be the backbone. It will be the 
Authority's direct instrument for safeguarding the general 
regime and protecting the political agreements between the PLO 
and Israel, within the confines of the force's deployment area, 
and their major operation areas. If these two power elements 
represent the measure of the "balance of deterrence" of the two 
sides and prevent the firing of the first missile at the 
crossing point, then the question would be about the factors of 
controlling this balance, which does not make civil war a 
mandatory transition. And if that is possible, what are the 
transitions they will pass through? 
<H5>  Expanding the Borders of Coexistence </H5>
  Now, we are able to identify the ablities of both Fatah and 
Hamas as the two primary, major, dominating powers in equalizing 
the "balance of power," which in turn sets out the divisions 
between internal peace and war, and which also impose the the 
form of possible coexistence. How is this balance employed, not 
in its more perilous uses to destroy an enemy, but in the 
framework of joint cooperation? 
  The PLO will be facing, in the very near future, the dilemma 
of controlling numerous secondary and marginal balances that 
have the potential to cause the internal collapse of national 
relations. This requires Fatah, first and foremost, to review 
the worst conditions at the general and specific levels inside 
the PLO's institutions, as Fatah constitutes the greatest weight 
inside the PLO. For there is something that goes beyond the 
perils of this dilemma to more dangerous channels of action 
proposed to the PLO leadership, to allow the approach to a 
palpable degree more like the practices of statesmen. They must 
change existing institutions' management methods that emphasize 
skills that do not value work with the mentality of the 
"political marketplace." They must also create a delicate 
balance on more than one level between this authority's respect 
for the agreements it has signed and the PLO's announced 
commitments within the current political settlement context, 
which enables them to protect the PLO's agreement without being 
forced into a clash with the opposing forces, especially 
concerning autonomous control. A balance such as this may not be 
struck without an increased grasp of the opposition's problems, 
and working to relinquish its extremist ideas by pushing it 
towards practical tests that would convince it to reformulate 
its positions, and everything that would lead to direct 
confrontations with it. The slide towards confrontation would 
not serve the interests of the opposition, but harm them, also, 
and directly, the broad popular sectors and factions that appear 
hurt already by the outcome of the political agreements with 
Israel. They feel that these agreements have not so far served 
their short-term or long-term interests. In another sense, 
'Arafat's command, which will undertake its duties in the 
autonomous areas by stabilizing and maintaining security, will 
face political opposition seeking the widest possible forums for 
expression and freedom of opinion, at a time when the 
Palestinian leadership finds itself compelled to ignore the 
sounds of explosions in areas outside its control. This aspect, 
which includes armed Palestinian actions, must be turned into an 
Israeli problem, to prevent any Palestinian side from playing 
the role of guardian of Israel's security interests in areas 
from which Israel refuses to withdraw, and in which it is still 
raising thousands of flags of occupation. 
  On the other hand, the opposition forces, principally Hamas, 
face in turn the same balance, but in a way that imposes on them 
the creation of a precise and accurate balance between general 
Palestinian national aspirations for peaceful coexistence among 
all political sides, and their militant demands, including armed 
action, which might continue all along the occupation border 
surrounding the autonomous area. 
  Despite the seeming equivalence of the dilemmas of the two 
sides (the PLO and the opposition) and the sharing of 
responsibility for the perils of any slide into civil war, the 
control factors are the PLO's, when we consider its official 
status and its way of dealing with the opposition as a measure 
upon which much light will be shed. 
  Thus we may move on to the test of another sort of balance, 
of the type that defines Hamas's and the other oppositiion 
forces' options after the end of the interactions that will come 
with the first intensive and public appearance of the 
Palestinian police in the autonomous areas. 
  At the outset, there is no need to overemphasize the 
negative 
effects of the appearance of the police force. Despite its 
inevitable show of force, destined for sabotage and field 
experience, the appearance of the Palestinian police, 
unprecedented since the Israeli occupation in 1967, will take 
place after the disappearance of the Israeli army, the security 
forces, the "border guard," and their Palestinian helpers. This 
will transform the show of force into the police's first 
positive task, to safeguard the citizens' security and the 
protection of production facilities and maintaining the process 
of building the first Palestinian Authority on our national 
soil. This gives this transformation a celebratory value that 
hides, for the present, any tendency toward repression. 
  Thus we approach the imagined picture of the likely reality 
in the autonomous areas, and with it we come to the 
possibilities generated by this first step: 
  The first hypothesis is that Hamas and other opposition 
forces intend to launch sporadic attacks on the Palestinian 
police forces, exploiting the unstable transitional state, with 
the aim of confusing the new Authority and hampering its 
exercise of power and the complete extension of its influence in 
the autonomous areas. However, this hypothesis is forcefully 
contradicted by Hamas's past assurances that it would not be the 
first to initiate a clash, and that it does not intend to fight 
the Palestinian police as long as the latter does not obstruct 
Hamas's armed cells, give chase to its fighters, or hamper its 
resistance to the occupation. It is also incompatible with the 
recent statements and positions issued by Hamas spokesmen in the 
wake of the Cairo agreement between the PLO and Israel, which 
merely set out Hamas's position on the agreement and its 
expectations with regard to it. It contained no provocative or 
even outspoken charges; nor did it contain, as was usual in 
past, any challenges to the autonomous Authority going any 
farther than betting on its failure. 
  The second hypothesis is that Hamas will accept in principle 
a sort of coexistence with the future Authority, being content 
to rely on the shortcomings of the Cairo agreement and the 
negative points of the Oslo accord in its bet on the failure of 
the peace process, and on the basis of the accord's new burdens 
on the Palestinian people. In this case, we would be facing two 
scenarios. 
  1. Expanding the "mutual coexistence" between Hamas and the 
opposition under the umbrella of the new Authority, and Hamas's 
willingness to participate indirectly in the agencies of the 
Authority through its members and supporters inside the 
Palestinian institutions and the spread of this participation to 
other security-related institutions against the occupation 
forces all along the belt surrounding the autonomous area. This 
possibility is the most likely, especially in the time between 
the start of the handover of power and the elections expected in 
July. This time period appears likely, because the rest of the 
opposition sides, perhaps includes this distinction, going 
outside the opposition's traditional positions, and taking 
advantage of the time period available to prepare for elections. 
We do not, however, expect Hamas to announce intentions like 
these, or for them to crop up in its spokesmen's statements any 
time soon. Hamas's purpose is not to announce its intentions 
fully, and it is precisely this that has begun to stir up the 
fears of the other opposition forces, which have begun to 
whisper that the PLO is putting "one foot here--inside the ranks 
of the opposition alliance--and another foot there, with 
'Arafat." 
  2. The development of a partial "upset" in Hamas's 
positions, 
especially with the likelihood of participating with the 
Authority in elections. This was clearly the view in Shaykh 
Ahmad Yasin's papers, published weekly in AL-WASAT a few months 
ago. If things move in this direction, the features of this 
upset would begin with Hamas's decision to make a broad and 
organized entry into the autonomous institutions. This would 
translate its public influence into a power taking part in 
seizing the centers of power in the Authority's administrative 
institutions. 
  Thus we may summarize the probabilities of the interaction 
of 
the elements of internal conflict in the coming phase as 
follows: the emergence of a sort of balance of unease between 
the future Palestinian Authority in the autonomous areas, and 
the Palestinian opposition, based on the two sides' balance of 
interests, which could hold the keys to power in the future of 
war and peace, a mounting tendency toward stability. This means 
continued apprehensions over the course of the changes, but to 
an extent that would still leave the door to salvation open. 

