Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Noburo Owada, Device Development Center, </F>
Hitachi, Ltd.] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Introduction </H5>
  The higher integration and increased capacity of DRAMs 
recently progressed at the astonishing rate of four times every 
three years, but the trend has gradually changed in the past two 
to three years. This is because of the diversification of market 
needs and because extensions of current technologies are 
incapable of dealing with new technological developments in 
terms of both technology and cost. In particular, while 
multi-layer wiring technology is needed for the development of 
memory and logic devices by making the basic processes common, 
insufficient progress has been made in new technology 
integrating the micro-wiring/micro-connection holes of memory 
devices and the increased number of wiring layers/increased chip 
area of logic devices. 
  In this report the author would like to introduce his ideas 
on inter-layer insulation film fabrication technology in the 
256M generation and user needs for such equipment from the 
viewpoint of a process engineer. 
<H5>  Themes for Inter-Layer Insulation Film Fabrication Technology </H5>
  Flatness requirements of insulation film between wiring 
layers can be classified into the filling of high-aspect ratio 
wiring spaces and overcoming wiring height differences as shown 
in Figure 1. The former requires the plugging of microfine 
spaces with an aspect ratio of more than 1.0 and the latter 
requires a global flatness which does not cause any 
interdependence between wiring width and wiring pattern density. 
In fact, these issues have been dealt with by realistic 
solutions at a practical level. Nevertheless, as the level of 
requirements for these technical solutions has been increasing 
in importance since the generation of 64M DRAMs, these 
technological requirements cannot be dealt with by present 
technology, otherwise the number of process steps would greatly 
increase along with factors causing the yield to drop. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-007-17A>           Figure 1. Themes for Inter-Layer Film Flattening </FIG>




  Table 1 shows the items posing problems if presently used 
technology for flattening inter-layer films is to be applied in 
the 256M DRAM generation. 



  Table 1. Problems in Current Inter-Layer Film Flattening Technology 

Flattening technology                 Fundamental problems 

SOG coating application technology    (1) SOG material which does not need 
                                      etch-back and which can coat thick film 
                                      has not been developed 

                                      Organic SOG + etch-back process 

                                      Complication of process, increase in 
                                      dust generation potential 

                                      (2) Reduction of wiring space has made 
                                      it difficult to assure inflow domain in 
                                      SOG coating 

                                      Insufficient resolution of wiring height 
                                      differences due to denseness/coarseness 
                                      of wiring patterns (Figure 2) 

O[.sup]3[/]-TEOS                       (1) Flattening by plugging is possible 
                                      only for specific wiring spaces 

                                      Wiring height differences cannot be 
                                      overcome (Restrictions in design rule 
                                      such as space width increases) 

                                      Combination with other processes is 
                                      required, causing complication of 
                                      processes 

Sputter-etching combined technology   (1) Plugging characteristics deteriorate 
                                      following the reduction of wiring space 
                                      (Figure 3 [not reproduced]) 

                                      The repetition count of SiO film 
                                      fabrication and sputter-etching should 
                                      be increased 

                                      Process is complicated and the 
                                      productivity drops greatly 

                                      (2) Only the inclination angle of height 
                                      difference can be reduced (45) but the 
                                      altitude difference cannot be overcome 

                                      Combination with other processes is 
                                      required, causing complication of 
                                      processes 


  The flattening technology used most widely at present is the 
technology combining SOG-coated film with etch-back, which 
provides a flatness with a practically permissible level. The 
biggest problem in this technology or its combination with other 
existing technologies with regard to microminiaturization is, as 
shown in Figure 2, overcoming wiring height difference due to 
the density and coarseness of wiring patterns. This technology 
basically consists of the fabrication of SiO(1) film used as the 
base of the SOG coating, coating of SOG, etch-back, and the 
fabrication of SiO(2) film. However, as microminiaturization 
decreases the wiring space, the SiO(1) film plugs the wiring 
spaces. Consequently SOG inflow domains cannot be secured and, 
in positions where patterns are laid out with high density, the 
SOG film is deposited thickly above the wiring pattern. This 
causes insufficient resolution of the wiring height difference 
due to the density and coarseness of the pattern. To allow this 
technology to be extended to the 256M generation, new 
technologies should be developed for the fabrication of SiO(1) 
film and other SOG-related matters. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-007-18A>           Figure 2. Fundamental Problems in Overcoming Altitude </FIG>




  In addition to the use of SOG, flattening technology using 
ozone-TEOS and that combining sputter-etching are also widely in 
practice. With the former technology, the film cannot be thick 
due to its insufficient reliability so the method for 
fabrication on a plasma-TEOS film with excellent film quality is 
generally used. As a result, while wiring spaces with specific 
widths can be flattened by plugging when the film fabrication 
amount is optimum, the flattening capability is lost with wider 
wiring spaces. To compensate for this inherent problem of 
flattening using ozone-TEOS, attempts are being made to use 
multi-step combinations with other processes or to impose a 
major restriction on the wiring space in pattern design. With 
the flattening technology combining sputter-etching, when SiO 
film fabrication and sputter-etching are repeated alternately, 
space plugging will be incomplete as shown in Figure 3 [photo 
not reproduced] and the effective film thickness will vary 
depending on the wiring space. Figure 3 shows a case using three 
alternate repetitions. Increasing the repetition count allows 
widening the process margin, but the result would be impossible 
to use in mass production. In addition, sputter-etching causes 
dust generation problems and tends to degrade the components 
inside the chamber, so it is difficult to improve its stability 
as production technology. Furthermore, this technology is only 
capable of reducing the inclination angle between sections with 
different heights and cannot solve the altitude difference 
itself, so that multi-step combination with other processes is 
indispensable to solve the wiring height difference. 
<H5>  Flattening Technology in the Age of 256M DRAMs </H5>
  Technological developments aiming at plugging of microfine 
wiring spaces and overcoming the wiring height difference that 
are required for the 256M generation can be classified into two 
subjects as shown in Table 2. 



  Table 2. Topics for Inter-Layer Film Flattening Technology for 256M DRAM 
Generation 

Subject                  Item                 Development subjects 

SOG coating-related      Development of       --Improvement of coating 
technology               coating materials    characteristics of patterns 
                                              with large height differences 

                                              --Improvement of surface 
                                              mobility during coating baking 


                                              Reduction of denseness 
                                              dependence of wiring pattern 

                                              --SOG material which does not 
                                              need etch-back and which can 
                                              be coated in a thick layer 

                                              Inorganic SOG, or quality 
                                              alteration of organic SOG 

                         Development of       --Control of solvent 
                         coating baking       volatilization rate during 
                         technology           rotary coating 

                                              --Film quality improvement by 
                                              controlling the SOG curing 
                                              reaction process 

                                              --Measures for prevention of 
                                              dust from wafer edges/back 
                                              side 

                         Development of       --Reduction of film deposition 
                         SiO(1) film          in wiring spaces 
                         fabrication 
                         technology 

                                              Securing SOG inflow domain 
                                              (Figure 4) 

                                              --Improvement of film quality 
                                              on wiring space sidewalls 

                                              Securing resistance to cracks 
                                              and moisture with thin wiring 
                                              sidewall film thickness 

Development of new       Development of       --Basic film fabrication 
technologies             ECR-CVD technology   technology (uniformity, film 
                                              quality, plasma damage, etc.) 

                                              --Control of actual wafer 
                                              temperature during film 
                                              fabrication 

                                              Heating in initial stage, 
                                              cooling during deposition 

                                              --Measures for prevention of 
                                              production of foreign matter 
                                              derived from objects attached 
                                              inside the chamber during 
                                              sputter-etching 

                         CMP technology       --Achievement of basic 
                                              performance (polishing rate, 
                                              reproducibility, throughput) 

                                              --Uniformity and polishing 
                                              property stability with actual 
                                              wafers 

                                              --Polishing end-point judgment 
                                              technology 

                                              --Contamination/foreign matter 
                                              removal technology, equipment 
                                              installation environment 

                         Other new            --Establishment of basic 
                         technology           technologies Development in 
                                              production technology 

                                              Selective TEOS/O[.sup]3[/] 
                                              CVD-SiO[.sup]2[/] growth 
                                              technology 

                                              TEOS-H[.sup]2[/]O plasma CVD 
                                              technology, etc. 


  The first is technological developments based on flattening 
technology using SOG coating. As described above, application 
limit of this technology is largely dependent on the SiO(1) 
film-fabrication technology and SOG-related technology. As shown 
in Figure 4, by developing: SiO(1) film-fabrication technology 
which can deposit on peaks to ensure the SOG inflow domains in 
the microfine wiring spaces while maintaining the film quality 
(such as resistance to moisture and cracks even on the side 
walls of wiring patterns); and developing an SOG material which 
does not need etch-back and which can be coated thickly; and 
developing an SOG coating technology with improved surface 
mobility to allow migration from dense pattern areas to coarse 
pattern areas and so on; the process margin of SOG flattening 
technology can be improved sufficiently and this technology can 
be applied continuously in the 256M generation. The second 
subject is the practical implementation of new technology such 
as ECR-CVD and CMP (chemical mechanical polishing). ECR-CVD is 
film-fabrication technology in which SiO film deposition and 
sputter-etching based on ion impact take place simultaneously. 
Since the phenomenon as shown in Figure 3 hardly occurs in 
practice, much is expected of this technology in its capability 
of plugging high-aspect ratio spaces by itself. Figure 5 [photos 
not reproduced] shows cross-sectional SEM micrographs of an 
example of the application of ECR-CVD. As ECR-CVD leaves 
projections on the wiring patterns, additional processing to 
remove them is required. The technical problems with ECR-CVD 
technology include damage, wafer temperature control, foreign 
matter countermeasures and productivity, as well as the basic 
properties of the film. CMP technology is attracting strong 
attention as a new flattening technology but its practical 
implementation presupposes inter-layer insulation-film 
fabrication technology which can plug microfine wiring spaces. 
The development issues of CMP include uniformity, polishing, 
control, influence of density differences on the pattern, 
removal of contamination and foreign matter and the equipment 
installation environment. Its potential as production technology 
with high process accuracy is being studied also, taking the 
thickness variations of the silicon wafer itself (around 20 
m) and warp with actual wafers (around 100 m) into 
consideration. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-007-20A>           Figure 4. Suitable SiO(1) Film Deposition Shape for SOG </FIG>




  As described above, two promising flattening technologies 
for 
the 256M generation are technologies based on SOG, and ECR-CVD 
and CMP. However, these two technologies may be used by 
selecting one according to the level of the individual 
flattening requirement. On the other hand, new technologies are 
being developed which can plug microfine spaces and overcome 
wiring height differences simultaneously in a single 
process.[.sup]1,2[/] What the process engineers are really 
seeking is such a single-process breakthrough, and it will take 
such to achieve an effective simplification. 
<H3>  Perspective of Inter-Layer Insulation Film Fabrication 
Equipment </H3>
  As described in the above, flattening technology in the 256M 
generation is following the sequence of searching for a 
breakthrough technology while maintaining a development strategy 
based on existing technology, and covers a wide range of 
technologies including plasma CVD, coating, ECR-CVD, polishing 
and others. Therefore, depending on what kind of process is 
selected, the equipment used will vary and hardware requirements 
will also differ. Basically, equipment which can assure 
reproducibility and stability for the resolution of the 
processes described above is urgently required. 
  From the aspect of production technology, the processing 
capability, including the operating ratio and dust prevention 
measures, will be more important than ever. The operating ratio 
should be considered as a reduction of the time during which 
wafer processing is impossible, rather than a reduction of 
failure time. That is, maintenance and inspection time, 
including the exhaust/harm removal systems, should be counted in 
the time wafer processing is impossible. 
  Dust prevention measures will be based on previously 
acquired 
technology such as dust-free robot arms and frictionless valves, 
and foreign matter reduction measures should not be dependent on 
existing knowledge or process, but be dealt with from an aspect 
of hardware such as the component materials or equipment 
concept. In this context, self-cleaning of the process chamber, 
which has recently been put to general use should be treated as 
an important process technology. Self-cleaning itself is an 
important plasma process and a design cognizant of in-plane 
uniformity, end-point judgment technology, and matching with 
other components inside the chamber will be required more than 
ever in the age of 256M DRAMs. 
  As for recent trends in general production facilities, while 
advances in equipment are being promoted through the development 
of automated equipment, wafer-level handling, cluster tools and 
intelligent equipment incorporating process monitoring and data 
communications functions, the requirements for cost reduction 
and energy saving are also growing rapidly. Certainly, 
inter-layer film flattening technology presupposing a multi-step 
process combining plasma-TEOS film, ozone-TEOS film, 
sputter-etching etc., automation, wafer-level processing, 
clustering and the use of artificial intelligence for achieving 
process accuracy, will be necessary. But these will result in a 
drastic increase in equipment cost and virtually ignore process 
simplification. What is required in the age of 256M DRAMs is not 
an apparent simplification such as the clustering of complicated 
processes, but completely new technology to simplify the 
processes. 
<H5>  Conclusion </H5>
  In recent years, the development of LSIs and reduction of 
production costs have become critical requirements determining 
the survival of the semiconductor industry, and the 
technological requirements for flattening of multi-layer wiring 
are also getting more and more severe. In this situation, both 
equipment manufacturers and device manufacturers fully recognize 
that processes based on a combination of existing technologies 
cannot address the industry of the future. 
  Therefore, improvements of present technologies can deal 
with 
problems from the 16M generation to the beginning of the 64M 
generation but, when the 256M generation is considered, both 
equipment and device manufacturers will have to stress the 
simplification of technologies themselves or the implementation 
of new technologies that allow simplification, rather than the 
pursuit of apparent simplifications by clustering or automation 
of multi-step processes. Conceiving new approaches to 256M 
production is expected to give a new vitality to inter-layer 
insulation fabrication technology in the age of 256M DRAMs. 
References 
  1. M. Suzuki et al., Tech. Digest, IEDM (1992) p 293. 
  2. M. Hatanaka et al., Proc. VLSI Multilevel Interconnection 
Conference (1991) p 435. 

