BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 9 KYODO -- The head of Japan's No. 2 
opposition party pledged Monday [9 May] to cooperate with the 
largest opposition party, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), 
against what he called the coalition's high-handed management of 
state affairs. Tomiichi Murayama, chairman of the Social 
Democratic Party [of Japan, SDPJ] (SDP), said at a meeting of 
delegates from the SDP's prrefectural chapters that the party 
will flexibly join forces with the LDP to combat "power-oriented 
politics." 
  The SDP chairman also vowed to put the party on alert for a 
"battle" that could come at any time since Prime Minister 
Tsutomu Hata faces a heap of issues that demand a clear mandate 
of the people. His remarks were viewed by some political 
pundits as a signal that the SDP is looking for an early general 
election for the House of Representatives because Hata's 
minority government is in a very precarious position. 
  The SDP broke ranks with the ruling coalition immediately 
after the party helped put Hata in office. The split came in a 
feud when the coalition's majority forces led the core party 
Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] due to their move to create a 
large parliamentary bloc excluding the SDP. 
  The SDP, which had constituted the largest component of the 
coalition, criticized Hata's Shinseito and its closest ally 
Komeito for their "forceful" handling of Diet business. The 
SDP's walkout left Hata's coalition with a minority in the lower 
house. 
  If the SDP and its former archrival LDP enter into alliance, 
they could easily put the Hata administration in a corner by, 
for instance, passing a no-confidence motion. In that case, 
Hata will have to call a snap election or resign with his 
ministers. 
  Murayama's remarks also appear to reflect the widening rift 
between his party and the coalition over key political issues, 
in particular over North Korea's suspected nuclear weapons 
program and Japan's tax reform plans. 
  The SDP is leery of growing signs that the coalition might 
take a hard-line stance against Pyongyang, with even a 
possibility of sending Self-Defense Forces members overseas to 
join an international blockade. 
  On the tax issue, Hata and his powerful behind-the-scenes 
partner Ichiro Ozawa want to raise the 3-percent consumption tax 
to fund proposed income tax cuts and set aside funds to support 
an aging society. But for many SDP policy makers, raising the 
consumption tax is still an anathema because they fiercely 
opposed the introduction of the value-added tax. 
  Murayama recently said the consumption tax should be 
abolished as part of sweeping tax reform to realize a better 
balance in taxation on income, consumption and assets. 

