BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Conditionality of Aid"] </F>
  [Text] The worldwide tendency to link foreign aid with 
human rights protection has been escalating in spite of the 
strong opposition to such strings from the governments of the 
developing countries which make up the majority of aid 
beneficiaries. 
  The latest stage in the human rights campaign was initiated 
by the donor members of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) at its 
annual meeting in Nice, France last week. The creditor members 
led by the United States government, stipulated what they term 
"good governance" as one of the 11 conditions for the approval 
of the 1OO percent increase in ADB's capital to US$48 billion. 
  Similar debates between thc governments of developing 
countries and industrialized countries occurred between March 
and April, when the U.S. government, with the support of several 
other advanced countries, strongly demanded that international 
trade be linked with the protection of labor rights. The 
demand, which threatened to foil the signing of the new global 
trade pact in Morocco in the middle of lasl month, was rejected 
and the agreements resulting from the 7.5-year-long Uruguay 
Round of trade negotiations were finally signed by almost all 
members of GATT. 
  That human rights have not yet been explicitly stipulated as 
a condition to international aid does not mean that the 
international campaign for such linkage will die down. Instead, 
developing country governments should gear up for a time when 
such a condition will be imposed officially. 
  We have observed that the international campaign for human 
rights protection has been going on for many years under various 
guises such as workers rights, aid for social welfare and 
democratization. In fact, good governance could also be seen as 
part of the overall program to respect human rights. That can 
be inferred, for example, from the prerequisites which the 
international community has set for what is termed as good 
governance: Respect for human rights, democratic rule, fair, 
efficient and transparent public management, public 
accountability and clean government. 
  There are at least two main reasons for the campaign. One is 
the perception among the international community, notable among 
the advanced country governments, that the violation of human 
rights is one of the major threats to international stability 
and peace in the current post-Cold War era. As recent 
experiences have shown, human rights violations have caused 
people to flee their homelands in huge numbers and the poor 
situation of workers has led to the problem of illegal 
immigrants with all the negative implications. 
  The second reason is the fact that economic globalization 
and 
communications technology are turning the world into a globa] 
village. Hence, the government of a country, whether it is a 
developing or developed one, tends to be assessed by an 
internationally accepted set of yardsticks. Since aid to the 
developing countries is funded mostly by the taxpayers in the 
advanced nations, the developed country governments are under 
increasing pressures from their legislatures, the 
representatives of the taxpayers, to attach human rights 
protection as a condition to their overseas aid. 
  Whether we like or not, we will have to live with the 
reality 
that human rights protection in its broadest terms will 
eventually be stipulated as a condition not only to official aid 
but also to loans from such multilateral aid or lending agencies 
as ADB, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, 
because their lending resources are also financed mostly by the 
taxpayers in the advanced countries. 
  Although developing country governments may have legitimate 
points in their arguments against such a condition, the essence 
of the campaign for human rights is actually for the good of all 
mankind in both developing and developed nations. And human 
rights are also imperative for a sustainable development 
process. What is relative with regard to the implementation of 
the condition is perhaps the stages of the fulfillment of human 
rights protection in its broadest sense. The implementation may 
have to be adjusted to the stages of economic development in the 
various countries. 

