BFN 

<F P=106> [Anders Hellberg report: "Tarschys in European Elite"] </F>
  [Text] Yesterday evening Swedish Riksdag deputy Daniel 
Tarschys was elected the new secretary general of the Council of 
Europe. As a result, he becomes the organization's highest 
official and boss of the 1,200 employees in Strasbourg in France. 
  Tarschys won four votes more than his rival candidate, 
France's Catherine Lalumiere, who has been secretary general for 
the last five years. 
  "The practice is that a secretary general is not reelected; 
there must be rotation in the post," Daniel Tarschys told DAGENS 
NYHETER a few hours after members of parliament from the whole 
of Europe had elected the Riksdag deputy from Sweden's Liberal 
Party. 
  There were only two candidates because the Italian 
Government's man withdrew at the last minute. 
  Tarschys speaks several languages and has a knowledge of 
East 
Europe -- a region which will totally dominate the Council of 
Europe over the next five years. 
  "I have said that the main priority in the next few years 
will be to support the democratization in Central and East 
Europe." 
  Russia has sought membership of the Council of the Europe 
which is known above all for its convention of support for human 
rights. Is Russia really ready to fight for democracy and human 
rights alongside other countries in the Council of Europe? 
  "It would be a good thing if a stable and democratic Russia 
were able to join. The election in December was one of the 
necessary preconditions, as is looking at how democracy is 
working and at how Russia respects human rights," Tarschys said. 
  The human rights situation in Europe has probably been 
better 
in the past than it is today, bearing in mind the conflict in 
the Balkans where human rights are being trampled on every day. 
Has the Council of Europe not failed? 
  "Yes, indeed there are major shortcomings in several places. 
At the same time we cannot ask for perfectionism before 
countries are allowed to join the organization. We count on it 
that the Council of Europe can also make a contribution to 
democracy and human rights when countries have become members." 
  Given the way things look in East Europe, is it likely that 
Europe will soon become the democratic and human rights paradise 
which the Council of Europe is seeking to achieve? 
  "No, it is not likely, but necessary. Sweden too has already 
been found guilty several times by the European Court, which is 
part of the Council of Europe." 
  But Sweden has been found guilty on questions of procedure. 
Does not Sweden have a different view of children's rights than 
the majority in the European Court? 
  "Yes, I agree that there are differences in our views of 
looking after children," Tarschys said. 
  So your election could influence the European Court and the 
Council of Europe in a Swedish direction? 
  "No, I don't think so. I will not be influencing the 
assembly but coordinating the whole organization in its work on 
the 150 different conventions and on interstate cooperation." 
  The Council of Europe consists of members of parliament from 
the member nations throughout Europe, including Sweden. Daniel 
Tarschys will now move from being a MP to working as a 
high-ranking official. 
  The organization does not concern itself with security 
policy 
like the CSCE or with trade and credits like the EU [European 
Union]. Instead it is the various conventions which guide the 
members' work on various issues -- everything from drugs policy 
to football hooliganism. 
  On 1 June Tarschys will move to Strasbourg with his family 
for his five-year term. He will also resign as a Swedish 
Riksdag deputy and as chairman of the Riksdag Foreign Affairs 
Committee. 

