BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Daniel Brenes] </F>
  [Text] A group which utilized "mules" shipped at least 720 
kg of cocaine from Costa Rica to Europe over the last 36 months. 
The Drug Control Police arrested three of the group's leaders, 
a Costa Rican and two Colombians, on 18 March. 
  The group had a workshop to manufacture suitcases and 
backpacks with double bottoms. The workshop operated from the 
Invu [National Institute of Housing and City Planning] project 
in Las Canas, Alajuela Province. The mafiosi covered the drug 
packages with sulfur, to avoid detection by trained dogs, and 
then hid the the drugs in the double bottoms. 
  During the last three years they were able to send, via the 
"mules," about two 10-kilo shipments per week to different 
European countries. 
  The individuals who participated in the group's activities 
include at least eight of the 10 Costa Ricans arrested within 
the last 18 months in Spain when they tried to smuggle cocaine 
into the country. 
  During the operation, carried out on Friday, police arrested 
Carlos Alvarado Alvarado, a Costa Rican, and Moises Nader Vargas 
and Luis Carlos Diez Diez, Colombians. Diez has been identified 
as the group's leader, an emissary of the Pereira Cartel who was 
responsible for organizing the group's different connections. 
  Reports on the presence of Diez, who had ties with the 
Pereira Cartel, in Costa Rica led the narcotics police to a 
large-scale operation. At least 10 narcotics agents settled for 
almost a week next door to the Colombian mafioso's room at a 
local hotel in San Jose. 
  They tailed Diez, and this allowed them to locate Alvarado's 
house at the Invu Las Canas housing project, where they noticed 
a series of suspicious activities; on Friday they proceeded to 
raid the house. 
  The authorities seized 10 kg of cocaine stashed in a double 
bottom suitcase, as well as a considerable amount of implements 
to prepare the illegal merchandise for transportation--glue, 
foam, sewing machines, sulfur, thread, backpacks, and suitcases. 

