Khun   Sa's Army 

<F P=102> BK2305084194 Bangkok MATICHON in Thai 21 May 94 pp 1, 13 </F>
<F P=103> BK2305084194 </F>
<F P=104>  Bangkok MATICHON </F>
<F P=105>  Thai </F>
BFN 

  [Text] Sengchun Salween, spokesman of the Shan State SLORC 
[State Law and Order Restoration Council], revealed that the Tai 
Yai's national liberation army under the leadership of Khun Sa 
earlier launched attacks on the strongholds of Burmese 
Government troops in all parts of the Shan State and seized from 
the government side several towns such as Mong Hsat, Kengtung, 
Mong Hsai, Doi Laem, Doi Namchang, and Mong Chot. The fighting 
between three battalions and seven companies of government 
troops and Khun Sa's army and a combined force comprising Tai 
Yai, Red Wa, Haw, and Karen ethnic groups resulted in the deaths 
of 300 of Khun Sa's soldiers and injuries to 600 others. 
Casualties on the government side were 500 killed and over 
1,000 wounded. The government sent six jet fighters to bomb 
Mong Pan, now under Khun Sa's control, but the bombing mission 
had to be canceled due to poor visibility. Moreover, Khun Sa 
has reportedly installed 10 SAM-7 missiles around Muang Jod to 
deter any attempted offensives by the government side. 
  According to the latest battle report, several government 
battalions attacked Khun Sa's strongholds and recaptured all the 
towns except the major strategic township of Mong Chot. Some 
7,000 government troops together with 1,200 porters are now 
rallying in an area north of Mong Chot on the western bank of 
the Salween River. 
  Phairot Thomat, a senior district clerk of Wiang Haeng 
District in Chiang Mai Province, disclosed that the battle 
between the Burmese Government troops and Khun Sa's army took 
place some 18 kilometers from the Thai border and the sound of 
gunfire could be heard in the district for the whole day 
yesterday. The report received by the district office confirmed 
the recapture of several towns from Khun Sa's army by the 
government side. Meanwhile, Narong Kon-athit, chief of Wiang 
Haeng District, is now inspecting and closely monitoring the 
situation along the Thai-Burmese border. 
  According to a correspondent dispatch, trade activities at 
Piang Luang market comprising 150 shops and the black market at 
Lak Taeng village in Wiang Haeng District were rather sluggish. 
Some shops reported that their daily sales were less than 300 
baht. Earlier, the amount of money circulating at the markets 
each month was formerly recorded at 30 to 40 million baht. 
  Tat Thon, chief of the Information Office of the Shan State 
SLORC, said during an interview that he had not received any 
reports on the United States planning to join the suppression 
operation against Khun Sa's army. However, he reaffirmed that 
Khun Sa's army is still capable of putting up resistance to the 
government's offensives. 
  According to a report from Government House, the issue of 
drug kingpin Khun Sa or Chang Sifu, was raised up for discussion 
during the 20 May meeting of the National Security Council, as 
it has been reported that the United States will join hands with 
the Burmese Government to launch a massive suppression operation 
against Khun Sa in the near future. The United States believes 
that the success of operation will greatly reduce the amount of 
narcotics smuggled to that country while the operation itself 
helps the Burmese Government eliminate its ethnic enemy. 
Burmese soldiers will be used during the operation while the 
U.S. side provides logistics support. 
  The meeting reportedly agreed that Thai authorities must be 
alert and impose stricter security measures along the border 
with Burma to prevent any intrusion and ensure security for Thai 
villagers in the border areas. 

