BFN 

<F P=106> [Address delivered by Hong Chae-hyong, ROK minister of </F>
finance and governor for the ROK, at the 27th annual meeting of 
the ADB Board of Governors in Nice, France on 4 May] 
  [Text] Mr. Chairman, fellow governors, ladies and gentlemen: 
  I am very honored, on behalf of the Korean government, to 
address the 27th Annual Meeting of the ADB [Asian Development 
Bank] in this beautiful coastal city of Nice. On this occasion, 
I would like to join the other governors in expressing our 
appreciation to the people of Nice for their warm welcome and 
hospitality. Also, I would like to welcome the Republics of 
Kazakhstan and Kyrgyz to the Bank, and wish their successful 
integration into the Asian Pacific economy. Moreover, 
congratulations are due to President Sato who has been appointed 
to take on the important task of leading the Bank through this 
critical period facing the region. 
  Recently, however, some symptoms have surfaced which may 
cloud this optimistic outlook. First, contrary to our 
expectations, recent positive developments in the world trade 
system are being overshadowed by the unfortunate revival of 
bilateralism and unilateralism. Meanwhile, the continued strong 
growth of the DMC [Developing Member Country] economics and the 
relatively slack growth of the industrialized countries have 
recently altered the world trade structure. 
  While the proportion of trade between industrialized 
countries has declined, the opposite is true for trade between 
the DMCs and the industrialized countries, it is also true that 
such developments can occasionally engender economic conflicts 
and frictions that may in turn lead to unilateralism and 
bilateralism. Another problem that requires our attention is 
that of infrastructure shortages and transborder pollution. 
Present economic growth of the region cannot be maintained 
unless bottlenecks arising from insufficient infrastructures are 
effectively addressed to meet the growing demand. 
  According to the ADB's annual report, we will need to invest 
up to $1 trillion on physical infrastructure by the year 2000, 
if our economic development is to remain on course. In addition, 
rapid industrialization has brought on environmental problems 
that are now spilling pollution over to the neighboring 
countries. If not addressed in the early stage, this 
environmental problem will engender an enormous burden to the 
countries and the region concerned. It will be wiser to tackle 
the problem early on when costs are relatively low, than to 
defer it later only to discover spiral of costs. 
<H5>  ADB Policy Direction </H5>
  Mr. President: 
  I would like to applaud the Bank's efforts last year to 
reduce poverty, increase infrastructure investment, and protect 
the environment, and would also like to praise its efforts to 
improve the quality of projects. On this occasion, let me also 
suggest some further policy directions for the Bank. 
  First, I suggest the Bank strengthen its research activities 
to promote DMCs to transform their economies to more open ones, 
with proper emphasis given to the unique economic situations of 
the region. I also suggest that the Bank provide many more 
forums for the industrialized countries and DMCs to deepen their 
mutual understanding of the regional economy. The Bank can 
achieve these by actively assisting the APEC [Asia Pacific 
Economic Cooperation] Finance Ministers' Meeting that was 
arranged to exchange experiences and lessons on economic policy 
of the finance ministers from the region. 
  Second, to address the problem of infrastructure shortage 
and 
its accompanying financing problem, I urge the Bank to undergo a 
comprehensive study relevant to the regional situation. While 
engaging in such research, the Bank should fully consider ways 
to effectively manage demand-side and meet the financial 
requirements. 
  Third, as for the regional environmental problem, I urge the 
Bank to pay special attention to the discussions within ESCAP 
[Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific] and 
UNEP [United Nations Environment Program] that have become 
active since the Rio meeting in 1992. In line with this, the 
Bank should extend technical and financial assistance to address 
the problem of transborder air pollution and radioactive waste 
disposal. On this occasion, I am pleased to announce that Korea 
will be contributing from next year 4 mil. SDRs [special drawing 
rights] to the Global Environment Facility. 
<H5>  Korea and economic development </H5>
  Fellow governors: 
  Recently, Korea has been faced with two major challenges in 
the area of economic development. These are the challenge of 
liberalizing and opening the financial market, and the challenge 
of expanding our inadequate infrastructure investment. 
  First, we announced last June our comprehensive blueprint 
for 
financial liberalization and market opening. In connection with 
this, I should mention that we have not only faithfully 
implemented the liberalization measures as scheduled, but, in 
numerous cases, have also advanced them. And it is our firm 
determination to strengthen these efforts of financial 
liberalization in the future. Interest rate deregulation, 
relaxation of foreign exchange restrictions, and liberalization 
of overseas portfolio investment were the major areas of 
progress. 
  To further accelerate our foreign exchange and capital 
account liberalization, a medium-term reform plan will be 
announced by the end of this year that should significantly 
revamp our current foreign exchange system. Also, to make Korea 
a more favorable place for foreign direct investments, 
comprehensive policy measures will be announced next month to 
improve the financial and tax environment and to introduce 
convenient one-stop service for foreign investors. Moreover, 
starting early next year, ADB will be able to issue 
won-denominated bonds in the Korean market. This will contribute 
not only to the internationalization of our financial system, 
but also to the diversification of ADB's financing channels. 
  Now a word on infrastructure investment. In recent years, 
the 
supply of physical infrastructure became clearly inadequate to 
meet the demand arising in the course of our rapid economic 
growth. To solve this bottleneck of our economy, we are now 
again putting strong emphasis on infrastructure investment. As 
such, we have established an investment program amounting to $69 
billion between 1993 and 1997. And to secure the necessary 
funds, a transportation tax has been newly introduced and 
capital from the private sector will be actively invited. 
  Speaking of our economic cooperation we have significantly 
expanded our cooperation with the 3 DMCs. While our total trade 
increased 35 percent during the past five years, our trade with 
the DMCs increased 90 percent. And during the same period, 
whereas our overseas direct investment increased almost six 
times. In addition, almost 40 percent of the funds from our 
Economic Development Cooperation Fund, the main source of 
bilateral assistance, were extended to the Asian region. With a 
significant expansion of the Fund, the size of our financial 
assistance will quadruple this year. 
  Furthermore, we are now under the process of cofinancing 
with 
the ADB the power transmission project in the Philippines. This 
project, the first since the cofinancing agreement settled last 
June, is sure to be a stepping stone for further cofinancing in 
the region. 
<H5>  Concluding statement </H5>
  Mr. President, and fellow governors: 
  As a significant engine of the world economy, Asia has now 
emerged onto the global scene, attracting more interest than 
ever before from the nonregional countries. 
  Before long, time may come when the economic success of Asia 
will largely determine the progress of the world economy. Thus, 
the Bank has to develop a new growth strategy for the region 
tailored to the circumstances of the Asian countries which are 
now facing the wave of market opening pressures. And the 
regional member countries must double their efforts to maintain 
their role as the catalyst fueling the world economy. 
  With these efforts, I envision a future when the Bank's role 
will be defined not merely as a development bank, but as an 
organization with a broader obligation of forging closer the 
regional cooperation among the Asian countries. 
  Thank you very much. 

