Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Slovak Deputy Prime Minister Roman Kovac by </F>
an unidentified announcer in Bratislava--live] 
  [Excerpts] [Announcer] The Slovak Government was in session 
in Bratislava today. Deputy Prime Minister Roman Kovac and 
Foreign Minister Jozef Moravcik left the session very early, 
about half an hour after the beginning. I have Roman Kovac in 
the studio. Can you tell us, how did the prime minister ask you 
to leave the government session? 
  [Kovac] The prime minister accused us both at the beginning 
of this session of various deeds. He wanted to split the 
session into two parts. In the first part, various 
privatization projects were to be approved, and we were to take 
part in it. In the second part, he wanted to discuss, without 
us, the internal political situation. 
  Moravcik's attempt to deny the accusations was not 
successful. It is true this was in keeping with the agenda of 
the government session. I, however, still think that his words 
could be given a hearing. We have asked for permission to 
depart from the session because the prime minister was directly 
asking us to go--so we actually complied with his wishes. 
  [Announcer] You are still members of the government. 
Therefore, this is anticonstitutional. 
  [Kovac] The government can be in session if more than half 
of 
its members are present. On the other hand, members of the 
government have the right to take part in its whole session. 
Therefore, his comment that they will hold a session without our 
presence really contradicts the way the government should act. 
I think that this was also one of the reasons we left the 
session. It was obviously a session about us but without us. 
  [Announcer] In the press club today, the prime minister 
accused you of forming a conspiratorial group and of working 
against the government, against the Movement [for a Democratic 
Slovakia (HZDS)]. Could you tell us something about this? 
  [Kovac] The expression "conspiratorial group" is very 
strong. 
I am happy to explain how the idea has come into being. It 
seemed absurd at first. It was mentioned on a number of 
occasions--the prime minister also mentioned it--that the 
opposition wants a government without him, and asked why then 
not without the top representatives of the other political 
parties, too. Parliament is not able to pass decisions due to 
controversies within it. Therefore, the idea has arisen to 
create a government that would represent the broad spectrum of 
the political forces in parliament, which would make parliament 
functional, and whether this government could not be formed 
without the top representatives of the parliamentary parties. 
What is now called a conspiratorial group or conspiratorial 
talks were, in fact, consultations because this idea was not 
easily acceptable to the other parties, and we would have no 
chance to present this idea without knowing whether they were 
willing to consider it. This is why we conducted these 
consultations. After some time, the parliamentary parties said 
that the idea was viable, in the interests of enabling the 
government and the state to function--as parliament was not able 
not operate. 
  It is certain that early parliamentary elections is the most 
democratic solution. I am fully for the elections because the 
citizens should decide in what way the country is to be ruled. 
There is, however, the period before early elections when there 
is a threat that fighting in parliament will continue. The 
state cannot come to a halt. [passage omitted] 
  [Announcer] The prime minister is to submit to the president 
the proposal for your dismissal tomorrow. It might happen that 
the president will sign it. You are deputy not to the Slovak 
parliament but to the former federal parliament. Have you 
thought of your political future? 
  [Kovac] [passage omitted] I have envisioned that the 
reaction 
to our proposal might be strong, as our proposal is rather 
unusual. I, however, did not think that it would be that strong. 
We have submitted our view, and it was immediately followed by 
the expulsion, the condemnation, and now by the proposal to 
resign from the government. 
  I have said more than once that I will not resign because 
that would mean admitting guilt. I do not see expressing an 
alternative view on the system of government or on solving a 
political crisis as being guilty of something. It is a view 
that can be right or wrong, but this does not mean working 
against the government. In a parliamentary system, the 
government must be seeking the confidence of parliament. If it 
is unable to get the majority in parliament, something needs to 
be done. 
  I am not aware of any shortcomings in my work as deputy 
prime 
minister; I was not criticized for any errors that would force 
me to admit that I did my work badly. If, however, the prime 
minister lost confidence in me and is unable to cooperate with 
me, is it his right to propose my future political destiny? I 
presume I will remain in political life. I remain a member of 
the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia. My expulsion 
contravenes the statutes of this Movement. The Movement has a 
rectifying mechanism, and I will do everything to use it because 
I think that the Movement is based on democracy. In democracy, 
people can express their views freely, and they cannot be 
punished for it. I am convinced that we will be able to defend 
and justify our views and that the expulsion will be nullified. 

