Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article ay "hig.": "Will Gasoline Become Even More </F>
Expensive? Bonn Is Looking for `Income Improvements'"] 
  [Text] Bonn, 13 Mar -- FRG Finance Minister Waigel 
(Christian Social Union) is considering a further increase in 
the gasoline tax in 1996, to finance the old debts of the 
railroad. On Sunday [13 March] in Bonn, a Finance Ministry 
spokeswoman confirmed relevant statements by Waigel that had 
resulted in fierce discussions over the weekend. However, she 
said that an increase in the gasoline tax "comes last" in 
considerations about servicing old debts of the railroad. Tax 
increases are not being contemplated in the first place. The 
private financing of the superhighway or superhighway tolls with 
a sticker is also being considered. To finance the second stage 
of the railroad reform, further "income improvements" in the 
traffic sector are necessary in 1996. The coalition decision on 
the railroad reform provides for this. Transportation Minister 
Wissmann (Christian Democratic Union) will be presenting the 
relevant proposals. 
  The spokeswoman rejected statements on the extent of the tax 
increase -- DER SPIEGEL reported an increase of eight pfennigs 
-- as "speculations." At the beginning of this year, the 
gasoline tax was already increased by 16 pfennigs per liter of 
gasoline and seven pfennigs for diesel to finance the debts of 
the railroad. 
  However, Transportation Minister Wissmann warned against a 
further increase of the mineral oil tax. People on lower 
incomes cannot cope with such a burden, he said in an interview. 
In order to relieve the traffic budget, even more private 
financing of traffic projects than has been planned so far is 
required. "The gasoline tax screw" must not be turned. 
Koppelin, chairman of the Schleswig-Holstein Free Democratic 
Party of Germany, sharply criticized Waigel's plans. Even now, 
Germany has the highest gasoline prices. Those like Waigel who 
call for tax increases obstruct the economic recovery and 
endanger additional jobs. Car drivers are not a "financial milk 
cow" for Waigel. 
  The railroad reform, which was resolved after long 
controversies between the government and the laender over the 
distribution of burdens in December, made it possible that the 
West German and East German railroads were transformed into a 
stock corporation on 1 January. It is to increase the 
railroad's competitiveness in the long run. However, the 
government continues to bear a large part of the burdens and to 
take some future risks. It has not only assumed the 
responsibility for old debts of about 70 billion German marks 
[DM] from 40 years of the West German railroad, but it also 
continues to participate in financing the development of the 
railroad lines. In addition, the government has to bear the 
costs of the East German railroad's adaptation to west German 
standards. The investment in the East German railroad is 
estimated at DM33 billion over the next nine years. As it has 
been resolved, the Federal Government also wants to participate 
with about DM6 billion in the costs of the Transrapid magnetic 
levitation train. 

