CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Xi Ling (3588 7227): "Multi-Dimensional </F>
Perspective on Private Schools"] 
  [Excerpt] Even though private schools appeared in China 
back in 1982, it has only been during the past two years that 
they have grown and flourished on a large scale. 
  In August 1992, a private school that claimed to be the 
largest since founding of the People's Republic, Guangya primary 
school, opened in Chengdu. It aroused widespread public 
attention, thereby opening a new page in the history of China's 
private schools. It was not Guangya primary school's size but 
its high fees that caused a sensation: Each student made a 
one-time payment of 18,000 yuan for school construction, and 
each student paid an additional 4,200 yuan each semester for 
tuition, room and board. Fees at the private Jinghua primary 
school, which opened at about the same time as Guangya primary 
school, were even higher. This school required each student to 
pay 13,500 yuan each year for tuition and room and board, and 
each student had to make a one-time payment of 30,000 yuan to 
the school construction fund. 
  Nevertheless, this sum of money was nothing at all compared 
with what Yinghao Middle School in Guangzhou charged. Each 
student entering that school had to make a one-time payment of 
150,000 yuan into an education fund. A fee of no less than 12 
percent of 150,000 was collected each year for normal teaching 
expenses. At graduation time, 150,000 yuan was returned to the 
student. 
  However, this was still far from being the most expensive 
school. At the private Chaoneng International School in Huizhou, 
Guangdong, the payment into the education fund ran to 200,000 
yuan. For people making an income of about 3,000 yuan per year, 
such expensive fees were simply astronomical; thus, those able 
to attend these schools were certainly not the common people. In 
Guangdong, the millionaire owner of a private concern had one 
son; and even though he himself could not read a word, he wanted 
his son to obtain the highest possible diploma. From the time 
that the child began to talk, he had a teacher come to his house 
to teach him. Despite the greatest effort, for various reasons, 
matters did not turn out as hoped. When he heard that a private 
school could relieve him of his worries and make his 
long-cherished wish come true, he forked over 60,000 yuan for 
his son to enter a private school. The co-pilot of a southern 
airline, whose monthly salary was several thousand yuan and who 
was flying all year round and unable to look after his children, 
had to pin his hopes for his children's education on a private 
school. He felt that investing money in his children's education 
was most worthwhile. 
  Miss Cao is the Beijing representative of a certain 
corporation in Papua New Guinea. Her child is in the second 
grade of a boarding school in Beijing. She felt that more than 
40 pupils in each class at that school were too many. The 
teacher could not attend to all of them. However, a private 
school had a "small class system," of 25 pupils in each class, 
and it taught English too. This made her give up the idea of 
having the child go to school in Hong Kong during the second 
half of the year. According to her, many of her friends were 
planning to bring their children back from Hong Kong, because 
mainland school fees were much cheaper than those for private 
schools in Hong Kong. 
  In Beijing, two men from a firm came to register their 
children at the same time. Originally, they figured that the 
30,000 yuan sponsorship fee would be paid by their firm, but no 
agreement was reached on this, so they simply put up the money 
themselves. "After all, when an organization puts up money, that 
is no indication of a person's worth; a greater indication of 
personal worth is whether one looks after one's own children," 
they said. 
  However, not every head of household who registers has a lot 
of money. After hearing a briefing at a school, a state-owned 
enterprise worker named Li felt the fees were more than he had 
imagined, but he gritted his teeth and registered anyway. He 
said that he would need help from his close friends to pay the 
expensive tuition. 
  Statistics from a private school in Yunnan show that 10 
percent of the student's parents are owners of small businesses, 
50 percent are owners of medium size businesses, and the 
remainder are from various strata of society such as the legal, 
medical, or cultural and teaching professions. Statistics for a 
private school in Beijing are as follows: 39.2 percent are 
children of the heads of companies or enterprises and of persons 
in charge of high technology enterprises; 17.9 percent are 
children of personnel from elsewhere who are stationed in 
Beijing, 14.7 percent are children of personnel sent abroad, 8.2 
percent are the children of agents of foreign concerns in China, 
5.5 percent are children of private business owners, and 14.5 
percent are other. Figures may be dry, but they are best able to 
illuminate issues. 
  It would be dead wrong to conclude that the doors of private 
schools are open only to "aristocrats." In fact, of the 
thousands of private schools in the country, those that have 
high fees and cater to the children of wealthy families number 
no more than 40-odd. Although most private schools do charge 
higher fees that public schools, their fees are within the means 
of those who work for wages and salaries. 
  The several civilian-operated middle schools that set up 
student enrollment sites on Haidian Road in Beijing during the 
summer of 1993 charged no more than 1,200 per semester. At Junyi 
Middle School, which practiced closed management, and in which 
all students were boarded, students paid only 1,500 yuan for 
tuition and miscellaneous fees and 1,200 for food and lodging 
each semester. 
  Approximately 60 percent of the students attending the 
nearly 
100 private schools in Zhejiang Province come from wage and 
salary earning families. Most of the students in the more than 
10 private schools in Yongxian in Guangxi are the children of 
peasant families who "toil on the land." An overwhelming 
majority of kindergartens are playgrounds for the children of 
"ordinary folk!" 
  Although the fees that private schools charge are generally 
higher than for public schools, and the schools do not even give 
diplomas (very many civilian-run middle schools may not issue 
diplomas), pupils flock to them. Before the school term began, 
many parents from outside Beijing who heard about it came to the 
Bowen Primary School in Beijing. Finally, the school accepted 10 
students from places such as Shandong, Hebei, Henan, and 
Shenzhen. The Jinghua private school planned an enrollment of 50 
first form to fourth form students, but in less than a month 
more than 100 had registered. The number of registrants for the 
first and fourth forms was oversubscribed. On the very first day 
that students were enrolled at the Nanjing Xiaozhuang 
Experimental School, the school ran out of briefing materials 
and had to rush print an additional 500. The school received 
more than 70 registration forms on the first day of a total 
enrollment of 256. 
  People cannot help but ask what attracts so many students 
and 
parents? 
  It cannot be denied that high educational goals are the 
first 
thing that attracts people. Virtually all types of private 
schools today emphasize preparation of students for the 
twenty-first century. The schools are run for all-around 
development of ethics, intelligence, the body, aesthetics, and 
work. The idea in running the schools is to produce people who 
have expertise. In Shanghai, the New Century Private Primary 
School and the New Age Middle School begin teaching foreign 
languages in first grade. By the time the pupils are in senior 
middle school, they have pretty well mastered one foreign 
language, so they begin a second foreign language. The primary 
school also has a computer course. In middle school, the 
students gain a basic knowledge of computer hardware and 
software. 
  Very many schools have a plentiful teachers to make sure 
they 
attain their goals. Jinghua private primary school hired 46 
highly experienced teachers who were graduates of renowned 
universities such as Beijing University and Beijing Normal 
College, and it also hired an American to teach English. Many 
highly experienced teachers who have retired or who are still 
employed as teachers have been hired at high salaries to teach 
in private schools. The teacher-student ratio has risen from the 
1:10 in public schools to 1:5. An overwhelming majority of the 
23 teachers that the Beijing Zhengze private middle school has 
hired are leaders from the teaching and research sector in all 
districts, and high-level teachers in important city and 
district middle schools. One school in Shanghai offers special 
music, dance, and art teachers as the pupils' talents require. 
  Very many people appreciate the flexible curriculum and the 
open style teaching methods. Responding to market demand, the 
Huanan private girls academy set up a curriculum that changed as 
the market changed. In 1985, foreign language classes emphasized 
English for tourism; in 1986, it emphasized English for foreign 
trade; in 1987, it emphasized English for secretaries; and in 
1989, it changed back to an emphasis on English for 
international finance and banking. Thus, it was able to say that 
"we have what others do not have; what others do, we do better; 
and what others are doing very well, we are doing innovatively." 
The New Century School in Yunnan devotes one day each week to 
social activities day during which students may go outside of 
school to experience life. The Guangya primary school in Sichuan 
gives pupils military training, holds flag raising ceremonies, 
and uses both Chinese and English to recite the pledge of 
allegiance: "I am Chinese; I love China. I want to make my 
motherland more beautiful, more prosperous and stronger." The 
school also regularly organizes pupils to conduct social surveys 
in village fields and peasants homes. It permits these fortunate 
pupils who have been brought up in a cloistered environment to 
experience personal privations and hardships such as they cannot 
imagine. 
  It does without saying that the comfortable and luxurious 
living conditions and first-rate teaching facilities make many 
parents hearts thump with excitement. Both Guangya and Jinghua 
primary schools have computer rooms, piano salons, language 
laboratories, body-building rooms, close circuit television, and 
central air-conditioning. Some school dormitories are also 
equipped with ultra-violet disinfecting lights, and nurses and 
nutritionists are provided for the students. At the Jinghua 
Primary School, each class has a "life class manager," who is 
responsible for student's extracurricular life. In addition to 
three square meals a day, snacks and fruit are provided. This 
produces a "one-day, five-meals system" that combines both 
Chinese and Western elements. At Bowen primary school, managers 
and nurses are responsible for student's food, beverages, daily 
life, and extracurricular activities. The school also provides 
all-day scheduled vehicle runs on week-ends to pick up and 
deliver students at their homes. [passage omitted] 

