Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with FRY Foreign Minister Vladislav Jovanovic by </F>
Milorad Komrakov in Paris; date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Komrakov] It is important to say that France is 
the first West European country, a member of the European Union, 
that has invited a top-level FRY [Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia] official for a visit. This is all the more 
significant if one knows that the French foreign minister 
insisted on the usefulness of such contacts. Mr. Jovanovic, I 
would like to ask you to assess your visit to France and your 
talks with the French officials briefly for Radio Television of 
Serbia. 
  [Jovanovic] Let me say right away that we are satisfied with 
this visit and talks with all the French officials both as far 
as the protocol and the contents are concerned. We have seen 
everywhere the same regret that the friendship resulting from 
history and the common faith of our countries in the two World 
Wars has been seriously disrupted because of the negative policy 
that France has conducted toward our country, particularly 
recently. We have also agreed that there is a common interest 
in repairing the damage as soon as possible, and that the policy 
should be renewed which -- both sides have agreed -- is in the 
interests of both sides and the stability and cooperation in 
Europe. 
  On the other hand, we could see that the time was over when 
our country and its policy were criticized, not to mention other 
kinds of insinuations, and that we have not heard in these talks 
any such criticism. On the contrary, there was a lot of 
emphasis on our views and attitudes concerning the situation and 
the development of the crisis on the Yugoslav territory, and 
particularly in connection with Bosnia-Herzegovina. In that 
sense, it has been made more than implicitly clear to us that 
our country is seen as an unavoidable factor and respected 
partner in the joint effort in the search for peace, and not as 
a country that [word indistinct] or a country that still has to 
sit on the bench for the accused. 
  [Komrakov] As we have learned, you insisted with the French 
foreign minister -- as far as Bosnia-Herzegovina is concerned -- 
on an equal status and treatment of all the sides, all three 
warring sides, and of course you again insisted on the lifting 
of the sanctions against Yugoslavia. 
  [Jovanovic] During all these talks, particularly with Mr. 
Juppe, we pointed out that the European Union owes our country 
and the Serb side in Bosnia, because of the plan of the European 
Union itself, the plan that we have accepted, which is very 
important for the preservation of the credibility of the 
European Union in our eyes, and the perspective of our 
continuous partnership cooperation in the search for peace and 
an overall settlement of the Yugoslav crisis. 
  [Komrakov] Were your French collocutors aware of the fact 
that it was the French official policy -- with some steps and 
moves -- that has contributed to the disruption of the 
traditionally good relations between France and Serbia? 
  [Jovanovic] The French side has found it necessary to 
mention itself some negative acts toward us in the solution of 
the Bosnian crisis recently. However, at the same time it wants 
to convince us that it has done so out of good, not bad, 
intentions toward us, and that their acts have been forced by 
tactical reasons to avoid an even less favorable development, 
and to gain ground to exert pressure on the other side, which -- 
by the way -- used to be insensitive to outside pressure. 
  [Komrakov] Thank you for the interview, Mr. Jovanovic. 

