Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Elsy Fors] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 25 Jan (PL) -- Under the banner of 
indispensable unity and continental integration, the fourth 
Latin American and Caribbean meeting got under way with the 
presence of President Fidel Castro and 1,000 delegates from all 
the countries of the region. 
  Indian leaders, politicians, intellectuals, professionals, 
and believers of the most varied religions of all the countries 
of the hemisphere, including the United States and Canada, have 
heeded the summons to this meeting for the solidarity, 
sovereignty, self- determination, and lives of our peoples. 
  The Cuban president, who heads the host delegation, received 
the acclamation of the participants at the meeting, which will 
conclude on Friday, 28 January. 
  Representatives from previous host countries of the forum -- 
Ecuador, Colombia, and Brazil -- spoke during the inaugural 
session and concurred in calling for the unity of regional 
progressive forces, the integration of their countries, and 
solidarity with Cuba. 
  Camilo Restrepo of Ecuador referred to the extremely grave 
economic situation of the majority of the Latin American 
population, where poverty is on the increase due to the effects 
of neoliberal economic policies. 
  In turn, Colombian Ivan Foredo said those attending this 
meeting were the genuine heirs of Latin America's struggle for 
liberty, and he called on them to speak out against the inhuman 
U.S. blockade against Cuba, who maintains, he added, the 
socialist program more than ever. 
  Amir Lando, senator for the Brazilian Democratic Movement 
Party, stated solidarity stresses the need to be organized. We 
have the capacity and the duty, he stated, to make our 
convictions reach our peoples. 
  The Brazilian legislator compared Cuban health indicators to 
Brazil's, where the life expectancy is 58 years in comparison to 
75 years in Cuba, and where the infant mortality rate is 69 for 
very 1,000 live births as opposed to 9.5 in Cuba. 
  Regarding the Brazilian experience in the implementation of 
neoliberal adjustments, Lando said the privatization process, 
far from replacing state enterprises with a policy of 
development, had exchanged state monopolies for private business 
monopolies that take away the country's wealth. 
  Jose Ramon Balaguer, Politburo member of the Communist Party 
of Cuba and head of the Ideological Department, spoke on behalf 
of Cuba, stressing the complex international panorama in which 
the meeting is being held. 
  He indicated a decade of changes born under an adverse sign 
of unipolar power began not long ago. He noted that within this 
context, Cuba feels capable of making its own alternatives. 
  Referring to the difficult economic situation in the 
country, 
Balaguer said the road to recovery has begun, albeit slowly, 
mostly because of the impact of the U.S. embargo, which has 
lasted more than three decades. 
  The Cuban leader called on the participants to strive for 
unity because there will be no future without unity and 
integration. This afternoon, the forum is expected to begin 
debating in four commissions, namely, political, economic, 
cultural, and organizational commissions. On 27 January, groups 
will contact unions, Indians, women, religious groups, community 
organizations, friendship and solidarity with Cuba associations, 
intellectuals, artists, and legislators. On Friday, the 
participants will return to the plenum where they will report on 
the work done by the committees and close the meeting with a 
party at the Panamerican Villa, east of Havana. 

