BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Gennadiy Miranovich of KRASNAYA ZVEZDA </F>
under the rubric "View of Problem": "In the Snare of Populist 
Decisions, Or Returning Once More to the Topic of What Kind of 
Army Russia Needs"] 
  [Text] Don't you think, esteemed reader, that the two 
years of the existence of the Russian Army have witnessed 
changes not only in the appearance and content of the state's 
military machine proper but also in our attitudes toward this 
machine, in society's "defense consciousness," so to speak? 
Here are just a few indications. 
  The Armed Forces, which a little while ago were diligently 
defamed by speakers at microphones, on television, and in 
newspaper pages, can today be said to be being advertised at 
state level. It looks as though the lofty concept of 
"patriotism," which had almost been reduced to an expletive, is 
again beginning to acquire its proper sound at that level, and a 
new section entitled "Moral and Psychological Support" has 
actually appeared in the Ground Forces Field Manual. Amendments 
are being made to earlier decisions connected with drafting 
Russian citizens for military service. The question of the 
strength of the Armed Forces, which had seemed a dead issue, is 
again the subject of debate.... 
  What do these and other "amendments" concerning spheres of 
vital importance to the state show? Primarily that it is 
obvious that some of the decisions made in the past on the crest 
of a wave of populism are not in line with today's realities. 
It is not easy to admit this. But there is nothing to be done, 
we will have to find the strength and courage, if not to repent, 
then at least to attempt as far as possible to eliminate 
excesses where they have been allowed to occur. After all, 
there is a great deal at stake -- the security of the state. 
  In the opinion of a number of experts, the rule introduced 
into effect by Russian Federation Supreme Soviet Decree No 
3532-1 of 24 September 1992 whereby the strength of the Russian 
Armed Forces must not exceed 1 percent of the country's 
population can be included among decisions of this kind. What 
prompted this rule? Was it taken into account that the specifics 
of the organizational development of the Russian Army are 
determined not only by the fact that it is being created on the 
basis of the USSR Armed Forces but also by the fact that it must 
accord with the level of real military danger and the new 
geopolitical and other realities? 
  First, as has already been said, a great deal was done back 
then in an ecstasy of populism: The Army is "eating the country 
out of house and home," it has "more generals than all the 
world's armies added together," "no one is threatening us," and 
so on, and so forth. Second, the real challenges of the time 
were not sufficiently clear to make it possible to calculate 
everything accurately. We have now "wised up," because we have 
a military doctrine providing a sufficiently clear idea of the 
state's views of defense tasks. But back then? It is no secret 
that some people in parliament saw the future Russian Army as 
something like a small national guard designed to combat natural 
disasters and calamities. 
  Of course, there could be no question of keeping 2.8 million 
men under arms (that is how many there were in Russia at the 
time of the president's edict on creating its Armed Forces). 
Intensive cuts began within the framework of the reform of the 
Army and Navy. In particular, during the second stage of the 
reforms (1993-1995) it was proposed to have 2.1 million men and 
during the third (after 1995) it was proposed to have 1.5 
million. Is this a lot or a little so far as Russia is 
concerned? We will clearly have a final answer upon completion 
of the studies to substantiate the structure, composition, and 
strength of the Armed Forces for the period after 1995 that are 
currently under way in parallel with the elaboration of a 
blueprint for their organizational development in the long term. 
As for the opinions of various experts, academics, and 
specialists, they still cover quite a broad spectrum. 
  Probably the most popular idea, now commonplace, is that 
almost one of the main ways of stabilizing Russia's budget is 
the continuous and intensive reduction of military spending by 
cutting the strength of the Armed Forces. The reasoning is that 
their strength, even in their reduced form, will substantially 
exceed the strength of the armies of the most developed European 
states -- Germany, France, Britain. 
  I will not venture to judge the validity of such arguments 
from the scientific viewpoint. I will leave that to academics. 
But I cannot remain silent about something that seems to me to 
be obvious. What is obvious is our vast country which is unique 
in its geopolitical situation. 
  Yes, Russia's position in the post-Soviet space is such that 
it is now separated from the West European countries not only by 
the Central and East European countries but also by a second 
"belt" -- the Baltic countries, Belorussia [Belarus], Ukraine, 
Moldavia [Moldova]. The length of coastline in the west and 
south has been sharply reduced. But at the same time from the 
geopolitical viewpoint Russia retains many elements of the 
USSR's position. Its territory is at the intersection between 
Europe and Asia and it has common borders with Christian (in the 
west) and Muslim (in the south) states and with countries with a 
Confucian ideology (in the east). The shores of Russia are 
washed by the waters of 12 seas and three oceans, and it retains 
long maritime borders in the north and east. On top of that you 
have abundant natural wealth and direct encirclement by more 
than 10 states, most of which have either acute claims on Russia 
or a serious interest in it. All this objectively compels us to 
seek our own ways of ensuring the homeland's security, including 
via determining the optimum strength of the Armed Forces. 
  For instance, take the southern section of Russia's flank 
region. In the USSR, as is well known, the North Caucasus 
Military District was in the rear. This accordingly influenced 
its tasks, structure, and manning level, and the orientation of 
troop training. Now it is a border district. Moreover, the 
situation there requires an adequate military presence on 
Russia's part, so to speak. All this must be taken into account 
somehow. 
  Now let us turn to the range of tasks which, according to 
the 
provisions of the military doctrine, Russia's Army and Navy must 
be ready to resolve. The main danger to stability and peace, 
the doctrine asserts, is now local wars and armed conflicts. 
But at the same time it is not ruled out that in specific 
conditions these may develop into a large-scale war. 
Consequently we must be concerned in advance to ensure that the 
combat potential of general-purpose forces is at a level 
guaranteeing the repulse of aggression and that it can be 
rapidly increased in the event of an increase in the scale of 
military operations. 
  Moreover, the doctrine envisages the possibility of using 
individual Armed Forces formations to assist internal affairs 
organs and MVD [Ministry of Internal Affairs] internal troops in 
localizing and blockading conflict zones, stopping armed clashes 
and separating the warring sides, and also protecting 
strategically important facilities. The Armed Forces may be 
entrusted with tasks of assisting the Border Troops in guarding 
the state border and assisting other forces in guarding maritime 
communications, important state facilities, and economic zones 
and combating terrorism, illegal drug trafficking and piracy. 
It is not impossible that the Armed Forces could be used to 
assist the population in eliminating the consequences of 
industrial and environmental calamities and natural disasters. 
  Let us also not forget a task that is fundamentally new to 
us 
-- participation by the Armed Forces in UN peacemaking 
operations, and also in collective peacekeeping forces inside 
the CIS. Suffice it to say that last year the general troop 
grouping performing these tasks had one army, one army corps, 
two divisions, four brigades, and 10 regiments. All this must 
also be taken into account in determining the strength of the 
Armed Forces. 
  Yes, we are now oriented toward mobile defense. And it would 
naturally be excellent to have small but quite powerful mobile 
forces ready for operational use wherever a real threat to 
Russia's security arises -- this could compensate to the maximum 
extent for the sharp reduction in the strength of peacetime 
troop (forces) groupings. But mobile forces, as a new 
interbranch strategic-operational formation, are at present only 
just being set up. Today the foundation of the Russian Armed 
Forces consists of their five branches: Strategic Missile 
Forces, Ground Forces, Air Defense Forces, Air Forces, Naval 
Forces. And this will remain for the transitional period, 
because to change within a short time the historical 
table-of-organization structure and systems of control, 
training, armament, logistical support, and so forth 
characteristic of each branch of the Armed Forces would require 
material expenditure that is beyond our capacity today. 
  Furthermore, in the opinion of knowledgeable people with 
whom I have discussed this topic, even once the principle of 
mobile defense has been implemented, at least 2 million men will 
be required in order to create troop groupings capable of 
responding appropriately to an increase in the military threat 
in a specific region by moving mobile Armed Forces components to 
the scene. Thus here too we must calculate and calculate.... 
  Probably in time the strengthening of Russia's links with 
the 
world community and the creation of a new collective military 
security system in Europe and the world will enable us to 
substantially change the structure of the Armed Forces, the 
correlation between their branches, and the principles for the 
creation and structure of troop groupings and forces in 
peacetime and wartime. But that is in the future. Like, 
incidentally, the equipping of the Army and Navy with the most 
modern means of armed struggle, which will also help to reduce 
the number of personnel. At the moment we are stuck with what we 
have got. We should clearly proceed from this fact in seeking a 
way out of the snare of populist decisions in which we find 
ourselves. 

