CSO 

    NTT Data Communications will establish June 1 a Multimedia 
Business Promotion Headquarters, a new company-wide strategy 
organization which will draft the basic concepts needed to drive 
the company's multimedia business forward. The new organization 
will handle multimedia related business planning, development, 
and implementation as well as information source management and 
allocation activities. Through these efforts NTT DATA hopes to 
offer a variety of new services which exploit multimedia 
technologies. (Tokyo DEMPA SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 2, Tokyo NIKKAN 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 9, Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 
10, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 6) 
  NEC has developed a 0.25-micron aluminum wiring technique, 
which it intends to use for 256Mbit DRAM production. The company 
has replaced photo resist used as a mask material with silicon 
oxide, which makes it possible to lay wires in circuits with 
slightly irregular surface. Photo resist needs to be 2 microns 
thick, but silicon oxide needs to be only 0.2 micron thick. 
Since silicon oxide is etched slower than conventional photo 
resist, it is more suited for use in designing finer circuit 
patterns. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 5) 
  Oki Electric will enter the thin-film transistor LCD driver 
IC market. The company, which manufactures 6 million units of 
super-twisted nematic and other LCD driver ICs per month, plans 
to start producing TFT LCD driver ICs at its Miyazaki plant in 
August, but does not intend to invest in new production 
equipment. The TFT LCD market is said to exceed 500 billion yen 
($4.81 bil) in 1996 or 1997, and targeting PC LCD makers Oki is 
aiming to boost TFT LCD driver IC output to over 1 million units 
per month within two to three years. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 8) 
  The MPT Telecommunications Council has reported that the 
development of a nationwide optical communications network will 
cost 75-95 trillion yen ($721.15-913.46 bil), including 42 
trillion yen ($403.85 bil) estimated to cost to lay optical 
fiber cables underground. The council has submitted 
recommendations concerning network development to the Minister 
of Posts and Telecommunications. The report recommends that the 
network be built in three stages until 2010. The first-phase, 
which should be completed by 2000, will connect cities with 
prefectural government seats covering 20% of population; 
the 
second-phase, which should be finished by 2005, will expand the 
network to include cities with a population of over 100,000 
covering 60% of population; and the third-phase should be 
completed by 2010. The council estimates that the development of 
the network will result in the creation of a 123 trillion yen 
($1.18 tril) market and the generation of 2.43 million jobs in 
2010. (Tokyo DEMPA SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 1, Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO 
SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 1, Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 10, 
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 1, Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI 
SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 1, Tokyo ASAHI SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 11, Tokyo 
YOMIURI SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 9, Tokyo SANKEI SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 1, 
11) 
  Tokyo Electron (TEL) will introduce in June an NTT-developed 
circuit design logic synthesis tool. The Parthenon Basic uses a 
high-level language developed by NTT and allows designers to 
develop electronic circuits like C programming. The workstation 
version of the basic package including a simulator and logic 
synthesis tool is priced at 720,000 yen ($6,923), with TEL 
aiming to sell 300 sets the first year. TEL will not just sell 
the package but also assist customers in developing ASICs based 
on the circuit designs created using the tool. (Tokyo NIKKAN 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 9, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 
p 8) 
  Hitachi intends to nearly triple production of color 
super-twisted nematic LCDs this year. While thin-film transistor 
LCDs are attracting a great deal of attention in the LCD market, 
HITACHI has concluded that demand for STN LCDs will be growing 
stronger for use in low-cost PCs and portable data terminals. 
The company's Taiwanese subsidiary is scheduled to begin 
producing color STN LCDs this fiscal year. Together with a new 
TFT LCD line that will begin full-scale production in the second 
half of this year, Hitachi's annual LCD business in fiscal 1994 
is expected to reach 50 billion yen ($480.8 mil). (Tokyo NIHON 
KEIZAI SHIMBUN 1 Jun 94 p 13) 
  Shibaura Seisakusho has developed and started marketing LCD 
glass substrate wet processing system. The HC Series is a 
single-substrate process system that can stably carry out 
cleaning and chemical processes. The system consists of process 
tools such as a scroll brush, high-flow-velocity flat nozzle, 
cavitation jet, and mechanical sonic shower. System prices start 
at 50 million yen ($480,769). The company projects fiscal 1994 
sales of 50 systems. (Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO 1 Jun 94 p 9) 
  Mitsubishi Kasei has developed a technique for completely 
automating the entire optical disk production process. The 
company will construct an automated production system at its 
Mizushima plant in Okayama Prefecture and will install a 
fully-integrated automated line at the main North Carolina plant 
of Verbatim, which was acquired by Mitsubishi Kasei. The line 
will have the capacity to produce 200,000 disks per month and 
will begin full-scale operations next year. There are plans for 
a further fully-automated line in Europe. (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO 
SHIMBUN 2 Jun 94 p 15) 
  NEC has developed an optical communications semiconductor 
laser using a material with low toxicity. Developed through 
metal organic chemical vapor deposition, the semiconductor laser 
uses liquid tertiary butyl amine (TBA) and tertiary butyl 
phosphine (TBP) as its materials. Since TBA and TBP are 
considerably less toxic than current gas materials, costs of 
assuring safety can be reduced considerably. The semiconductor 
achieves a threshold current of 9mA at 20 degrees C, an 
oscillation efficiency of 0.4W/A, and an output of 15mW at 100 
degrees C. The company plans to switch to new materials for 
manufacturing optical communications semiconductor lasers at its 
labs within the year. (Tokyo DEMPA SHIMBUN 2 Jun 94 p 1, Tokyo 
NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 2 Jun 94 p 7, Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 2 
Jun 94 p 7, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 2 Jun 94 p 5) 
  Toshiba has developed a 2.7V amp IC for use in personal 
handy 
phone systems (PHSs). The IC, which consists of two MES FETs, 
has ions implanted in circuits where current runs in order to 
lower resistance and increase current. It requires 2.7V to 
operate; conventional ICs require 4V. It amplifies sound signal 
output to 180mW, enough to power the PHS. The company explains 
that since the IC's transistor electrodes use heat-resistant 
tungsten the IC is suited to be mass-produced. (Tokyo NIKKEI 
SANGYO SHIMBUN 2 Jun 94 p 5) 
  NEC has developed a technique for making 0.2-micron-wide 
electrodes using titanium silicide. Called the DIET method, the 
technique implants ions into a silicon monocrystal substrate to 
turn the surface into an amorphous surface and sputters with 
titanium. Then, the substrate goes through a thermal process at 
800-900 C to convert the amorphous state into crystal, and 
titanium not reacted on is removed. Since the new technique 
requires only one thermal process, resistance can be maintained 
at a low level. (Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 2 Jun 94 p 7) 
  MPT will set up an Internet Service Committee, a group 
devoted to promoting the commercialization of the Internet, the 
world's largest computer network. In addition to carriers such 
as NTT and KDD, committee members will include AT&amp;T Jens, 
Internet Initiative (IIJ), Fujitsu, and NEC. The new committee 
is the first organization of corporations committed to dealing 
with commercial Internet issues. (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 2 
Jun 94 p 11) 
  Eleven major electronics and data communications equipment 
manufacturers Including Hitachi, Fujitsu, and NEC will in July 
launch a Multimedia Promotion Council aimed at establishing 
industry-wide multimedia standards and lobbying for deregulation 
required to expand the multimedia market. The new group wants to 
prevent chaos in a market now characterized by multiple 
standards, and plans to call on users to participate in the 
organization as well. Other members include Toshiba, Mitsubishi 
Electric, Oki Electric, Matsushita Electric, Sony, Sharp, Sanyo 
Electric, and Matsushita Communication Industrial. (Tokyo NIKKEI 
SANGYO SHIMBUN 2 Jun 94 p 7) 
  Fujitsu Laboratories has developed a flash memory cell 
featuring a low threshold voltage error. The new cell is 
implemented using the thin-film transistor method instead of 
single-crystalline silicon. With conventional flash memory 
cells, 1,000 C dry oxidation is used to form tunnel oxide. 
Fujitsu instead used chemical vapor deposition to form 
10nm-thick tunnel oxide at 800 C. The use of CVD film has 
reduced the erase voltage error to 0.59V, down from 1.16V of 
conventional dry oxide films, meaning that this approach may 
help enhance the reliability of memory operation. The test 
device has a gate length of 2 microns, which the company claims 
can be reduced to 0.5 micron. (Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 2 Jun 
94 p 7) 
  Milliwave, a government/industry-funded R&amp;D company, and 
Fujitsu have jointly developed a milliwave receiver IC. The new 
IC down-converts milliwave (60GHz) signals to a frequency level 
that can be processed by existing devices, and also has an 
amplification capability. HEMTs (high electron mobility 
transistors) are created on a GaAs (gallium arsenide) substrate 
to implement all the necessary functions on chip. It consumes 
5mW and achieves a noise factor of 6.8dB. Milliwave was 
established by the Japan Key Technology Center, NEC, Fujitsu, 
and Obayashi Corp. (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 2 Jun 94 p 7) 
  Mitsubishi Electric has developed a GaAs (gallium arsenide) 
FET for use in radio communications devices. Designed using a 
0.35-micron process, the GaAs FET achieves an output of 500mW at 
18GHz and a gain of 9.5dB. In order to lower the resistance of 
and improve the reliability of the FET's gate electrode, the 
electrode has two layers, tungsten silicide and gold layers. On 
a GaAs substrate, GaAs and silicon oxide layers are deposited. 
After 0.5-micron-wide circuit pattern is burned on the silicon 
oxide layer, etching is applied until the width of a recess, a 
trench, becomes 0.35 micron. Then, tungsten and gold is 
deposited to form a gate. Finally, unnecessary electrode 
residuals and silicon oxide are removed to form the T-shaped 
electrode whose large section is conducive to lowering 
resistance. Mitsubishi plans to begin sampling in August and 
volume production at its Kita-Itami plant within the year. The 
sample price will be set at 10,000 yen ($95.24). (Tokyo DEMPA 
SHIMBUN 3 Jun 94 p 5, Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 3 Jun 94 p 5, 
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 3 Jun 94 p 6, Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO 
3 Jun 94 p 9, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 3 Jun 94 p 5) 
  NEC has developed a technique for forming 0.25-micron low- 
resistance aluminum interconnection, a technique deemed 
necessary for the manufacture of 1Gbit DRAMs. The wafer is 
exposed to organic titan gas (TDMAT) before going through an 
aluminum chemical vapor deposition process, which eliminates the 
need for an underlying film and reduce interconnection 
resistance. The technique can be used to create trenched 
aluminum wiring with an aspect ratio of over 5. (Tokyo DEMPA 
SHIMBUN 3 Jun 94 p 5) 
  NEC has developed a silicon-on-silicon (SOS) multi-chip 
module (MCM) technique which mounts multiple LSIs placed on a 
silicon substrate as a chip set. The technique reduces the 
circuit pitch of MCM substrates to 20 microns, 1/5 the length 
conventionally required of 100MHz or faster signal transmission. 
Therefore, compared to printed circuit boards and ceramic 
substrates, the SOS MCM requires 1/8 and 1/3, respectively, the 
surface mount area. Most SOS MCMs will be smaller than 20mm 
square, so they can be mounted on existing packages such as quad 
flat packs (QFPs). The company also claims that manufacturing 
costs will be kept about the same as PCBs. NEC is aiming to 
commercialize SOS MCMs two to three years from now. (Tokyo NIHON 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 3 Jun 94 p 7) 
  NTT has developed a friction force microscope (FFM) capable 
of observing the distribution of friction force on the surface 
of an object in the order of atoms. The FFM uses an atomic force 
microscope (AFM) to measure the precise distribution of friction 
force applied to a sample by scanning it with a probe, 
functioning as a sensor, contacting it on the surface of the 
sample. The FFM uses its photo diode to measure how the probe 
moves vertically and how it becomes twisted, and displays the 
measurements on a computer monitor. In an experiment, the 
company succeeded in observing a sample by pressuring its 
surface with a force of 30 nanonewtons, not strong enough to 
destroy atoms. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 6 Jun 94 p 5) 
  NEC has developed a silicon bipolar transistor prototype 
that 
operates at very low temperature at double the speed of the 
transistor operating at room temperature. The new technique is 
expected to pave the way for implementation of ultra-high-speed 
BiCMOS LSIs for use in supercomputers. The company has optimized 
concentration and distribution of impurities in the bipolar 
transistor's collector and base regions to improve its current 
amplification and cut-off frequency at low temperature. 
Conventional bipolar transistors suffer performance 
deterioration when operating at low temperature, a bottleneck 
for developing a viable BiCMOS LSI that can operate at low 
temperature. (Tokyo DEMPA SHIMBUN 6 Jun 94 p 9) 
  Japan's government will in fiscal 1994 draft its first-ever 
five- year plan aimed at computerizing the nation's bureaucracy. 
The government will draft a basic plan covering overall 
methodology and plans for cooperation and coordination among 
different ministries, while each ministry will create its own 
action plan. A project committee spanning four ministries has 
been formed and is now at work. Among other things, the plan 
calls for the installation of one PC per ministry employee and 
conversion to an electronic paperless system for official 
documents by 1999. (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 6 Jun 94 p 1) 
  Fujitsu will stop developing a GaAs (gallium arsenide) CPU 
for its VPP500 parallel supercomputer and instead use the 
next-generation 0.35-micron CMOS LSI for a new model due out in 
the second half of 1995. The VPP500 is the first parallel 
supercomputer powered by GaAs LSIs and has 355gigaFLOPS 
(floating point operations per second) capability. Fujitsu 
thinks that the use of less expensive CMOS LSIs will help lower 
the parallel supercomputer price to less than 1 billion yen 
($9.5 mil) while maintaining the current performance level. With 
the company's decision, its GaAs LSI production subsidiary 
Fujitsu Quantum Device will specialize in the manufacture of 
GaAs chips for communication equipment. (Tokyo NIHON KOGYO 
SHIMBUN 6 Jun 94 p 1) 
  NEC has developed an inter-layer insulator formation 
technique for 256Mbit DRAM production. The new technique uses 
biased ECR (electron cyclotron resonance) CVD (chemical vapor 
deposition) to form silicon nitride oxide and helps reduce the 
number of process steps to 1/10 the current level. Insulators 
made using the newly-developed technique are not absorbent and 
are expected to contribute to higher device reliability. (Tokyo 
NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 7 Jun 94 p 6) 
  NEC has developed a technique for forming a 0.04-micron-deep 
PN junction, which has been deemed necessary for implementing 
0.1-micron-class CMOS LSIs. After forming oxide and polysilicon 
layers on a silicon substrate, boron ions are implanted into the 
substrate. The substrate then goes through a 1,000 C RTA (rapid 
thermal anneal) process to shallowly diffuse the boron ions in 
the substrate. The company has test-fabricated a 0.18-micron 
PMOS element using the so-called BDSOX technique and confirmed 
that the element is almost free from fluctuations in threshold 
voltage. (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 7 Jun 94 p 4) 
  Hitachi has developed a CMOS gate array capable of 
integrating high-speed RAM. Models of the HG72E series can 
integrate up to 288Kbits of embedded RAM: 4Kbit and 64Kbit RAMs 
have cycle times of 4.5ns and 6.2ns, respectively. The new 3.3V 
gate array is suitable for use in video memory and cache memory 
applications. The company will start taking design orders in 
September in Japan and the U.S. An 18,000-gate model with 
64Kbits of RAM supplied in a 160-pin package is priced at 5,000 
yen ($47.62) apiece in lots of 10,000. Hitachi plans to increase 
production to 100,000 units a month by June 1995. (Tokyo NIKKAN 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 7 Jun 94 p 7) 
  NTT will completely overhaul its satellite communications 
service. It will abolish its current rule of dedicating each 
transponder to one channel, and switch over to a system whereby 
a single transponder can be devoted to multiple channels for 
different customers. It will also permit use of ground stations 
and other earth equipment not procured by NTT. After working out 
the details of the service, NTT will apply to MPT as early as 
this year for approval for the changes. (Tokyo NIHON KOGYO 
SHIMBUN 7 Jun 94 p 1) 
  Fujitsu has developed a 64Mbit synchronous DRAM and will 
begin shipping samples in August. Designed using 0.35 
double-metal CMOS processes, 140 million elements are integrated 
on a 232-sq.-millimeter chip, about the same size as a 64Mbit 
DRAM chip. The synchronous DRAM, which comes in two types, the 
MB81164440 configured 16Mword x 4bit x 4bank and the MB81164840 
configured 8Mword x 8bit x 4bank, has a three-step pipeline 
structure and operates at a clock speed of 100MHz on 3.3V. The 
chip also uses the company's proprietary interface, Terminated 
LVTTL, for data transfer between memory and a CPU. The 8bit 
model achieves a data transfer rate of 100Mbyte/s, the 
equivalent of sending 260 newspaper pages in 1/12 of a second, 
and an access time of 6ns. Sample prices will be set at 
150,000-200,000 yen ($1,429-1,905). The chip maker's Mie plant 
will initially produce 64Mbit synchronous DRAMs, but Fujitsu 
will install 8-inch wafer processing equipment for volume 
production at its Iwate plant to begin production at 1 million 
units per month three years from now. (Tokyo DEMPA SHIMBUN 8 Jun 
94 p 1, Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 8 Jun 94 p 7, Tokyo NIHON 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 8 Jun 94 p 9, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 8 Jun 94 
p 1, 11, Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 8 Jun 94 p 12, Tokyo KAGAKU 
KOGYO NIPPO p 9) 
  KDD has developed an OSI (open systems interconnection) 
communications hybrid IC. The OSI Engine integrates a 16bit CPU, 
64Kbyte RAM, communications control LSI, gate array, and other 
circuits on a 3x2.5cm silicon substrate. The use of the hybrid 
IC reduces the number of components needed for an OSI 
communications board to about 10, 1/5 the number required of 
conventional boards, and considerably cuts costs. The new IC 
takes 1/4 the space on board and enables third parties to 
develop card adapters for handheld information devices. KDD is 
considering selling a low-priced PC communications board using 
the OSI engine through subsidiaries and supplying the IC to 
system makers. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 8 Jun 94 p 1) 
  NEC has developed an LSI circuit which enables operations on 
1.2V at 1GHz, 10 times faster than conventional circuits. The 
MOS current mode logic, which integrates MOS and bipolar 
transistor techniques, has the same structure as MOS transistors 
and yet is capable of regulating current and provides both 
economy and performance. The circuit also uses an adaptive 
pipeline control circuit to reduce power consumption to 1/5 the 
level of CMOS circuits. The use of the new circuit will enable 
portable phones and battery-operated devices to improve 
performance and extend battery lifespan. (Tokyo DEMPA SHIMBUN 8 
Jun 94 p 1, Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 8 Jun 94 p 7, Tokyo NIHON 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 8 Jun 94 p 8, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 8 Jun 94 
p 5, Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO 8 Jun 94 p 9) 
  NEC has developed a technique for removing particles from 
wafers using ionized alkaline water. The technique is 
particularly effective in removing particles that are generated 
a chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP) process. In an experiment, 
the company confirmed that the new technique reduced the number 
of particles on wafer from over 20,000 just after the CMP 
process to less than 100. Ionized alkaline water can reduce the 
amount of particles to 1/5 the level achieved by alkaline 
chemical with comparable pH. Once the new technique is put into 
practical use, cleaning chemical neutralization processes will 
significantly be simplified and production costs will be 
reduced. (Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 8 Jun 94 p 9) 
  MPT plans to reexamine Japan's current telecommunications 
sector dichotomy whereby NTT handles domestic operations 
exclusively while KDD provides only international services. The 
ministry is getting ready to review NTT's overall business, 
including further divestiture slated for fiscal 1995, and a 
reconsideration of the long-standing dichotomy will be part of 
this effort. International communications operations were split 
off from Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation to 
form KDD in 1953, and Japan's unusual telecommunications 
industry dichotomy, unique among leading industrial nations, has 
remained in place ever since. (Tokyo DEMPA SHIMBUN 8 Jun 94 p 2) 
  Tokin has developed the industry's smallest optical isolator 
for use in 0.98-micron communications systems. The 4mm-diameter 
isolator uses CdMnHgTe (cadmium manganese mercury telluride) 
crystal and features lower noise than that of a 1.48-micron 
optical isolator which is used as a substitute for a 0.98-micron 
isolator, halving the power consumption of an excitation light 
source. The new isolator helps reduce the optical amplifier 
size. The company will start producing it in October, aiming for 
sales of 10 billion yen ($96.2 mil) in fiscal 1996. (Tokyo 
NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 9 Jun 94 p 1) 
  Fujitsu Laboratories has developed a ferroelectric memory 
transistor based on a metal oxide substrate made of strontium 
titanate. Although metal oxide is usually an insulator, the new 
material to which impurities are doped behaves as a 
semiconductor. With conventional ferroelectric memory 
transistors based on a silicon substrate, oxygen atoms contained 
in the ferroelectric layer are diffused in the substrate and 
adversely affect semiconductor characteristics, making 
development of high- density devices difficult. Since the 
strontium titanate is also an oxide, this problem can be 
avoided. The new substrate is optically transparent and 
therefore will help develop brighter LCDs if it is used for LCD 
thin-film transistors. The company will announce the results at 
the International Device Research Conference to be held at the 
University of Colorado beginning June 20. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN 9 Jun 94 p 1) 
  Mitsubishi Electric has developed a technique for regulating 
ATM (asynchronous transfer mode) switch efficiently. The 
technique requires less than 1/10 the amount of memory needed by 
conventional ICs to regulate data traffic. The company has 
developed a 2x6mm prototype controller chip designed using a 
0.5-micron CMOS process incorporating the technique. With 
link-ups to 16 lines, the chip is capable of processing data at 
622Mbit/s, the equivalent of 150,000 lines. The company is 
aiming to develop a commercial version of the chip one year from 
now. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 10 Jun 94 p 1) 
  Mitsubishi Electric has developed two next-generation DRAM 
processing techniques. One of them is intended for 256Mbit DRAM 
production and is to form a capacitor which is made of BST 
(barium strontium titanate) films with a dielectric constant of 
350 and uses a platinum-made electrode. Since the high 
dielectric constant is conducive to storing more charges per 
area, capacitors can be made into smaller flat sheets, 
simplifying a cell structure. Capacitors usually use nitride 
films with a dielectric constant of 7.4, requiring 
three-dimensional structure to secure enough capacity. The new 
technique can cut capacitor formation processes by half compared 
to conventional processes and guarantee a yield of more than 
90%. The other technique which MITSUBISHI plans to use for 
1Gbit DRAM production develops a vertical transistor shaped like 
a Greek character, phi. The technique places a capacitor 
directly on a transistor and builds a bit line into an SOI 
(silicon on insulator) substrate. The company claims that the 
transistor helps reduce memory chip size by 35-48%, the 
number 
of processes by 15-31%, and production costs by 
45-64% 
compared to conventionally available approaches. (Tokyo DEMPA 
SHIMBUN 10 Jun 94 p 6, Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 10 Jun 94 p 9, 
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 10 Jun 94 p 6, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN 10 Jun 94 p 5, Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO SHIMBUN 10 Jun 94 p 9) 
  Hitachi has developed a technique for reducing LSI data 
transfer bus power consumption. The "charge distribution" method 
features an additional signal line to a set of signal lines used 
to transfer information. The additional line helps reduce the 
amount of charges that must be removed to turn the signal level 
from high to low. The company fabricated a 16bit- wide test 
device using 0.5-micron technology and confirmed the device 
consumed just 1.4mW in data transfer mode at a clock cycle of 
40MHz, down from conventional 11mW. The technique is expected to 
help reduce entire LSI power consumption by 20%. (Tokyo 
NIKKAN 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 10 Jun 94 p 8) 

