Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Corinne Moutout: "Alain Juppe on Official Visit </F>
to Johannesburg"] 
  [Text] After a stopover in Cairo, Alain Juppe arrived in 
Johannesburg yesterday evening on an official three-day visit -- 
the first French foreign minister to do so in 18 years. Long 
awaited by current South African leaders, this visit should 
render official the "normalization" of relations between the two 
countries after a decade of open hostility. 
  With just four months to go to the first multiracial, 
general 
elections, Edouard Balladur's government is seeking to give 
greater emphasis to "French support for the current process of 
transition," a communique from Quai d'Orsay [Foreign Ministry] 
indicated. The visit by the foreign minister therefore marks 
his "confidence in the South Africa of tomorrow and in its will 
to give new impetus to bilateral relations," the communique 
added. 
  Edouard Balladur showed his interest in the development of 
democracy in South Africa with a private visit a few months 
before last year's legislative elections. For the future prime 
minister of a government of the right, it was primarily a 
question of renewing contact with the ANC [African National 
Congress], which had previously maintained "exclusive" relations 
with the Socialist government. Spearheading a Western crusade 
against the apartheid regime, in 1985 Laurent Fabius 
unilaterally imposed economic sanctions against South Africa, a 
decision that ranked France clearly alongside the ANC while 
concurrently benefiting its principal competitors -- Great 
Britain and Germany, which did not follow its lead. 
  Following in the footsteps of Edouard Balladur, Alain Juppe 
-- who will meet President Frederik de Klerk; ANC President 
Nelson Mandela; and Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the leader of the Zulu 
Inkatha Party -- must complete this rebalancing, which is 
essential to new French policy in Africa. In fact, France has 
been trying for several months now to secure "fruitful 
partnership relations" with South Africa, the most advanced 
country in Africa and the continent's future center of 
development. There is a need to find additional outlets for 
French companies which, despite some spectacular deals (such as 
selling seven A-320 Airbuses and doubling investments (3 
billion francs) in three years), have little chance of making up 
for lost ground on the South African market. 

