Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] After satisfactorily finishing all the items on the 
agenda of the session, the six-day second session of the seventh 
Shandong Provincial Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference [CPPCC] ended at the auditorium of 
Jinan's Dongjiao Hotel on the afternoon of 4 March. Lu 
Maozeng, chairman of the provincial CPPCC committee; and Zhai 
Yongbo, Tian Jian, Kong Lingren, Wang Yuyan, Cui Weilin, Wu 
Fuheng, Wang Zunong, Su Yingheng, Miao Yongming, and Li Gongjiu, 
vice chairmen of the provincial CPPCC committee, attended the 
session. Jiang Chunyun, Zhao Zhihao, Li Chunting, Han Xikai, Li 
Zhen, Tan Fude, and Han Yuqun, leading comrades of the 
provincial party committee, the provincial people's congress 
standing committee, the provincial government, and the 
provincial discipline inspection commission; and Yu Peigao, 
president of the provincial higher people's court, attended the 
session to convey congratulattion on its successful convocation. 
Some former chairmen and vice chairmen of the provincial party 
committee and veteran comrades of the province, including Tan 
Qilong, Liang Buting, Li Zichao, Wang Zhongyin, Zhou Xingfu, Li 
Sijing, Zhang Zhusheng, Zhou Zhenxing, Xu Wenyuan, Ding 
Fangming, and Jin Baozhen, attended the session. Standing 
committee members and members of the eighth National CPPCC 
Committee staying in Jinan, including Pan Qiqi, Qu Jining, Xu 
Chunyang, Yan Qingqing, Ma Changgui, and Wang Shenyin; and Zheng 
Guangchen, standing committee member of the provincial CPPCC 
committee and deputy commander of the provincial military 
district, were invited to attend the session. 
  Presided over by Tian Jian, vice chairman of the provincial 
CPPCC committee, the session elected Liu Hongren as vice 
chairman of the provincial CPPCC committee; and Fang Xian, Liu 
Baochun, (Mu Chuanli), (Sun Juan), Li Zuheng, (Song Qihuan), 
(Zhang Wentian), (Zhou Diyi), (Meng Qingfeng), (Zhao Chengfu), 
(Huang Jingsan), (Yao Suyu), and (Cui Kemao), as standing 
committee members of the provincial party committee. The 
session adopted the resolutions of the second session of the 
seventh provincial party committee. 
  Chairman Lu Maozeng made a speech at the closing ceremony. 
  He said: The year 1994 is a key year when Shandong should 
continue to maintain the good economic development trend as well 
as a key year to promote reform. Under the leadership of the 
Shandong Provincial CPC Committee, we should conscientiously 
implement the general principles set forth by the central 
authorities, positively exercise the functions for political 
consultation and democratic supervision, and strive to 
continuously press ahead the CPPCC work. 
  Lu Maozeng pointed out: To achieve the people's political 
consultative work in the new situation, we should persistently 
take the theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the basic line of the party as guidance, 
further emancipate the mind, and renew our ideas. To achieve 
the people's political consultative work in the new situation, 
we should conscientiously exercise our basic functions and 
consciously submit ourselves to and serve the provincial work 
situation. We should further strengthen self-construction and 
create favorable conditions for bringing into play the wisdom 
and intelligence of the CPPCC members. 
  Lu Maozeng concluded: We should further closely rally around 
the party Central Committee with Comrade Jiang Zemin as its 
nucleus, work under the leadership of the Shandong Provincial 
CPC Committee, conscientiously implement the guidelines of this 
session, implement 1994 tasks and measures, work with one heart 
and soul, unite as one, [words indistinct], and make new greater 
contributions to building socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
  The session concluded amid the majestic national anthem. 

