CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by U.K. and J.D.: "Dada Vujasinovic's Death"] </F>
  [Text] The death of Radislava "Dada" Vujasinovic, a 
journalist of the Belgrade newspaper DUGA, has evoked 
reflections about the risks of this profession, but also about 
the effectiveness of the police and the court system. In a brief 
police report marked "confidential" of the duty service of the 
SUP [Secretariat for Internal Affairs] for 11 April of this 
year, there is a statement that "on 9 April at 0100 hours 
Radislava Vujasinovic, born 10 February 1964 in Capljina, 
committed suicide with a bullet from a hunting rifle in the 
apartment of her parents in New Belgrade." The report goes on to 
say that the body was transferred to the Institute for Forensic 
Medicine for an autopsy by order of the investigating judge of 
the district court in Belgrade. 
  Meanwhile, there has been no official announcement, and the 
record of the inquest, we have learned, has been sent by the 
police to the district public prosecutor's office in Belgrade. 
The complete file should consist of the autopsy finding, a 
sketch of the scene of the event, photographs, and the report of 
the technical department on gunpowder traces ("the paraffin 
glove"). It has been learned that the prosecutor has asked the 
police for additional analysis in order to determine whether 
this was really a suicide or a crime (for example, forced 
suicide). A copy of the report also went to the Department for 
Violent and Sexual Crimes of the Belgrade SUP, whose inspectors, 
even before the order from the prosecutor's office, began to 
check out certain details. 
<H5>  A Lapse </H5>
  It is of interest that the inquest was not attended by the 
duty investigating judge of the district court, nor by the duty 
deputy district public prosecutor, which is a lapse sometimes 
difficult to make up for. It seems that in this case the police 
did not even inform the duty investigating judge, in spite of 
the fact that the death of a person well-known to the public was 
involved. Thus, room was created for suspicion and speculation, 
especially in the knowledge that Dada Vujasinovic had criticized 
many bigwigs in writing about the army, the police, crime, 
corruption, the war.... Many journalists, it is true, peacefully 
"cover" these topics without being tempted to threaten their own 
security. Dada Vujasinovic, however, took her job seriously. 
  The threats she had been receiving were also serious. One of 
the most characteristic was published in her article "The 
Survivors Will Be Innocent" (DUGA, No. 513, covering the period 
from 23 October to 5 November of last year). In the article, she 
writes clearly: 
  "I asked him nicely to comment on the wave of violence 
against well-off individuals. Unfortunately, the otherwise 
well-bred and accommodating people's deputy Raznatovic snapped 
back: `If you are interested in who is next, write that it is 
you and that I told you so.'" 
  Zeljko "Arkan" Raznatovic, former people's deputy, was not 
the only one: Dada Vujasinovic had been threatened by known and 
unknown, beginning with the anonymous thugs from Krajina who 
were bothered by her article about the arrest of Veljko Dzakula 
last fall, and going all the way to the "group of pilots" who 
sent her a threatening letter in which they charged that she 
contributed to the removal of General Bozidar Stevanovic, known 
as Mika Sprajs, former commander of the Air Force, who failed to 
become minister of the armed forces. Aside from threats which 
forced her to purchase a reinforced door (she lived alone), Dada 
Vujasinovic was also exposed to other types of pressures: 
Borisav Jovic, a top official in the SPS [Socialist Party of 
Serbia] and a former member of the SFRY [Socialist Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia] Presidency, filed a private complaint 
against her, allegedly because of slander. The trial was 
postponed several times, once even on grounds that "the judge 
had chicken pox" (!?), which drove the visibly upset Dada 
Vujasinovic to declare that one day she would sit in the front 
row when Borisav Jovic was tried for war crimes. 
<H5>  Debt </H5>
  One gets the impression that these pressures and the fact 
that what she wrote did not fit into the increasingly obvious 
"hyperpatriotic" changes in the editorial policy of DUGA 
certainly had an impact on Dada Vujasinovic. However, there was 
no indication in her behavior that she might be thinking about 
suicide. At this point, of course, nothing can be said with 
confidence, but it is of interest that her family did not 
publish a death notice, no speech was made at the funeral, and 
the funeral was conducted according to Orthodox custom. The 
family is silent for the present and waiting for the official 
version of the event, and in the editorial offices of DUGA there 
is uneasiness and fear. Many questions are being put: Who first 
entered the apartment, and how? Was anything taken from the 
apartment, and what? Did Dada Vujasinovic have documentation, 
and where is it? 
  Answers should be expected from the district public 
prosecutor's office, which is to judge whether there are grounds 
for possible initiation of an investigation, or whether it will 
confirm the original conclusion of the police. The Executive 
Committee of the Independent Association of Serbian Journalists 
has announced that it is calling upon the government to "make an 
investigation as soon as possible and make public all the 
circumstances which led to the tragic death of our colleague." 
The Democratic Party is also calling for light to be shed on 
this event, saying in its press release that this is not just a 
question of a legal obligation, but also a debt "to a journalist 
who dared to write about things others did not dare to write 
about." There is no need to emphasize that increasingly 
frightened individuals also expect the death of Dada Vujasinovic 
to be cleared up, and the shaken confidence in the rule of law 
might be restored at least a little provided the police and 
prosecutor's office do their job properly. 

