Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ndjamena, 7 Mar (AFP) -- The Chadian-Libyan talks in 
Ndjamena over Tripoli's withdrawal from the Aozou Strip "have 
failed," Chadian Interior Minister Abderamane Izzo Miskine said 
today following the adjournment of the talks. He was speaking 
at a news conference. Asked to comment about a possible 
resumption of the discussions, the minister was skeptical 
stating that in his views the talks were "a failure" because 
they did not attain their goal. Adding that Chad remained "open 
to dialogue," Mr. Izzo stated that "we shall no longer hesitate 
on the legal means to recover our land," meaning that his 
country might go to the UN Security Council to force Libya to 
evacuate the Aozou Strip following the 3 February ruling by the 
International Court of Justice [ICJ] at The Hague. This decision 
reaffirmed Chad's sovereignty over this desert territory 
situated at the border between the two countries and occupied by 
Libya for more than 20 years. "The Chadian delegation has noted 
that the Libyans are simply refusing to discuss any question 
relating to the implementation of that ruling, preferring to 
drown this crucial matter in a multitude of redundant issues," 
Mr. Izzo explained. 
  The two Chadian and Libyan delegations this morning 
adjourned 
their discussions which began on 4 March as soon as Libyan 
President Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi announced that the conflict was 
"settled for good" by the ICJ's ruling. According to a Chadian 
communique, the talks were stalled following Libya's intention 
to demand the implementation of a general agreement signed by 
the two countries in Algiers in 1989. "Considering that the 
Algiers general agreement has become completely redundant, Chad 
rejected this proposal which constitutes an unacceptable 
condition," Mr. Izzo added. In addition to the implementation 
of the Algiers general agreement which provides, in particular, 
for the release of war prisoners, the Libyan delegation "pressed 
for" the signing of "a treaty of cooperation and good 
neighborliness before the implementation of the ruling," the 
minister said. The Libyan delegation also said it was competent 
to decide the withdrawal or the timetable saying that this 
"issue can only be solved by technicians," Mr. Izzo stated. He 
described the Libyan demands as "a diversion." The Libyan 
delegation was received today by President Idriss Deby for talks 
on which no details were given. 

