SUMMARY 

                              In the wake of the State Duma's declaration of a political 
amnesty, President Boris Yeltsin has attempted to regain the 
political initiative and increase pressure on opposition groups 
by proposing the adoption of a national reconciliation agreement. 
Yeltsin's "memorandum of accord," however, contains a number of 
conditions--such as a ban on early elections and politically 
charged constitutional amendments--that are unlikely to be 
acceptable to the opposition, and a new center-left coalition, 
"Accord for Russia," is attempting to outmaneuver Yeltsin with a 
competing accord proposal.  The apparently irreconcilable aims of 
the rival accord proposals will probably fuel more political 
confrontation in Moscow while diverting attention from important 
issues such as economic reform. 

                        END SUMMARY 

   At a 31 March press briefing, presidential spokesman Vyacheslav 
K6stikov summarized the main points of Yeltsin's draft memorandum 
of accord and said that Yeltsin had submitted it to both 
parliamentary chambers for review.  Kostikov said the memorandum 
is needed to establish a "moratorium on political bat ties" and to 
reach "political accord among various social forces" (Izvestiya, 
1 April).  As outlined in press summaries, the memorandum 
attempts t6 define the limits of acceptable political activity 
until terms for the president and current parliament expire in 
1996--as set in the constitution's transitional provisions (See 
Note 1)--and new elections are held (see box 1). Yeltsin 
presented the draft accord to State Duma Chairman Ivan Rybkin and 
Federation Council Chairman Vladimir Shumeyko on 31 March, with 
the understanding that they will submit it for parliamentary 
discussion, and he optimistically asserted that the draft will be 
ready for "Russia's main political forces" to sign on 28 April 
(Interfax, 31 March; ITAR-TASS, 31 March, 1 April).  Rybkin, 
however, has indicated that the Duma sees Yeltsin's draft as only 
a starting draft, to be reconciled with at least one other 
version being prepared (see box 2). 
   (Note 1) Under the constitution's transitional provisions, 
Yeltsin has the right to serve out his term of office, to June 
1996.  However, Yeltsin has never officially rescinded his 23 
September 1993 edict scheduling presidential elections for June 
1994. 

   Motivation for Memorandum 
   Yeltsin appears to have seized on the idea for the memorandum of 
accord in the wake of theDuma's 23 February adoption of a 
political amnesty as he searched for a way to force the Duma to 
accept accountability for the actions of the amnestied prisoners. 
At a meeting with Rybkin on 1 March, Yeltsin apparently extracted 
a" pledge that the Duma would adopt a memorandum on the 
responsibility of state institutions and politicians for 
preserving civic calm in Russia" (Moscow radio, 1 March). 
Yeltsin himself articulated the need for a memorandum of "civic 
peace" at a cabinet meeting on 4 March, stating that the 
memorandum should include "mechanisms stipulating accountability 
for decisions that are adopted" and adding that the Duma's 
"leadership" had "reacted positively to this proposal" (Moscow 
radio, 4 March).  Speaking to reporters at a commemoration for 
Soviet astronaut Yuriy Gagarin, Yeltsin stated that a document on 
"civil peace" "must be reached among various parties, movements, 
and branches of authority" (Interfax, 9 March). 
   Whereas Yeltsin previously had seemed to count on the adoption of 
the new constitution to put an end to the protracted battling 
between the executive and legislative branches, he now appears to 
feel the need to promote the memorandum of accord to provide him 
an additional tool for maintaining the political upper hand.  In 
his 24 February address to the Federal Assembly, Yeltsin 
optimistically called the constitution the "legal basis of future 
constructive accord" (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 25 February).  However, 
Yeltsin's public statements and the priority he is giving to the 
memorandum suggest that, having found the constitution no 
obstacle to the Duma's declaration of amnesty for his bitterest 
political foes, he thinks the memorandum can provide an 
additional tool to forestall future political challenges: 
   --  In an interview given to Izvestiya (26 March) while he was 
still on vacation, Yeltsin called the adoption of the memorandum 
of accord "the most important matter which, in my view, will 
determine the political health of society."  At the same time, 
however, he said he does not expect the memorandum to "resolve 
all problems," though he is "convinced" that it is one "step." 
   --  Kostikov indicated that finalizing the memorandum of accord 
will be the "main item" on Yeltsin's agenda in April (ITAR-TASS, 
31 March). 
   Comments by other reformist political figures suggest, however, 
that rather than expecting the memorandum to actually succeed in 
bringing about reconciliation, Yeltsin instead hopes to use it to 
enhance his sagging popularity by casting himself as the 
initiator of national reconciliation while putting the spotlight 
on groups that refuse to sign it and publicly branding them as 
promoters of continued social and political strife: 
   --  Yeltsin's National Security Assistant Yuriy Baturin, an 
outspoken opponent of the amnesty, bluntly stated that the 
memorandum of accord will "prove its worth" if it results in a 
published "list" of political leaders and organizati6ns that 
refuse to sign it, and by so doing, admit that they "do not want 
to move toward accord" (Izvestiya, 19 March). 
   --  Mikhail Mityukov, first deputy chairman of the Duma and a 
member of the pro-Yeltsin Russia's Choice bloc, combatively 
suggested that those who refuse to sign the memorandum of accord 
would be flouting the wishes of an electorate exhausted by 
Moscow's political infighting and increasingly apathetic to it: 
"To oppose this idea would be to oppose the prevailing opinion 
among the population that it is time to end confrontation, that 
peace and accord are needed" (Rossiyskiye Vesti, 12 March). 
   --  Party of Russian-Unity and Accord leader Sergey Shakhray, 
whose own version of a memorandum of accord was part of the 
package of amnesty decrees adopted by the Duma, has said- 
-apparently referring to Yeltsin's draft--that the memorandum of 
accord could be codified in law and warned that any "parties and 
movements refusing to sign-it will--remain outside- the political 
process" (Interfax, 30 March). 

   Little Support for Accord 

   Despite reformers' efforts to generate pressure to support 
Yeltsin's accord, a number of hard-line opposition groups- 
-including some opposition parties in parliament--oppose the 
accord or have stipulated conditions for signing that Yeltsin is 
unlikely to accept: 
   --  In a report to a Communist Party of Russia (CPRF) Central 
Executive Committee plenum on 15 March, party leader Gennadiy 
Zyuganov declared that the CPRF, which went along with Shakhray's 
memorandum of accord, has "formulated further conditions 
necessary for national reconciliation."  They included some 
conditions certain to be unacceptable to Yeltsin, such as: a 
"change of socioeconomic course," the "formation of a government 
of national confidence based on a parliamentary majority," and 
the "restoration of a renewed union state on a voluntary basis" 
(Sovetskaya Rossiya, 17 March). 
   --  The nationalist parliamentary group "Russian Way" led by 
Sergey Baburin and 1991 coup plotter Anatoliy Lukyanov dismissed 
Yeltsin's memorandum of accord, calling it an "hypocrisy" and a 
"memorandum of humility" (ITAR-TASS, 17 March). 
   --  Former Vice President Aleksandr Rutskoy, recently released 
from prison under the amnesty act and a declared presidential 
candidate, reacted to Yeltsin's accord proposal by asking why 
there should be any "compromise with those who plundered and 
ruined the country and bombed the parliament"--a polemical but 
transparent reference to Yeltsin and his government (Interfax, 22 
March). 
   Of the major anti-reform figures, only Liberal Democratic Party 
of Russia (LDPR) leader Vladimir Zhirinovskiy has publicly 
supported Yeltsin's accord initiative, though only tepidly. 
Zhirinovskiy said that the LDPR is "ready" to sign the memorandum 
of accord but claimed that the document is likely to have only 
"moral significance" and prove ineffective because it is "naive 
to think" that its adoption will bring about national 
reconciliation (Interfax, 29 March). 
   Even some of Yeltsin's advisers have expressed wariness about his 
accord proposal out of concern that it will divert attention from 
more pressing problems.  Presidential Council member Leonid 
Smirnyagin expressed concern that the "struggle" for a memorandum 
of accord "will appear to voters as merely a deal struck between 
politicians in Moscow."  Clearly expecting the memorandum to have 
little practical effect, Smirnyagin contended that "it is time to 
get down to specific tasks rather than the infighting between 
various authorities" (Rossiyskiye Vesti, 26 March). 

   Rival "Accord for Russia" 

   A head-on challenge to Yeltsin's memorandum of accord comes from 
the formation in mid-March of a center-left coalition, "Accord 
for Russia" (Soglasiye vo Imya Rossii), which has issued a 
competing appeal for accord.  The publication of the coalition's 
appeal, which occurred while Yeltsin was on vacation, appeared to 
be an attempt to keep him on the defensive and take the accord 
issue away from him.  The appeal spoke of the need for a "social 
contract between all patriotic forces, movements, ideologies, and 
faiths that reject violence, racism, and nationalism."  Former 
Constitutional Court Chairman Valeriy Zorkin--described as one of 
the coalition's initiators--asserted that Accord for Russia aims 
to "unite various social and political forces" and claimed that 
its appeal is not intended to be "in opposition to" Yeltsin's 
memorandum of accord (Interfax, 28 March).  In just one 
indication of the appeal's anti-Yeltsin thrust, however, it lists 
as one of its goals putting a stop to "reforms 'for reforms' 
sake'" (Pravda, 18 March; Sovetskaya Rossiya, 19 March).  In 
response to the coalition's appeal, Yeltsin's press service 
issued a statement that said, in part: "The president's 
Administration expects the new association to make a specific 
contribution to the preparation of an agreement on civil peace in 
Russia and. . . to its practical implementation" (Radio Rossii, 
Interfax, 18 March). 
   Unlike earlier attempts by the nationalist and comiTiunist 
opposition to form a common front--the hard-line National 
Salvation Front (NSF), for example--the new coalition is 
potentially a more powerful force because it includes 
representatives of moderate opposition forces and appears to be 
deliberately excluding extremists.  The coalition describes 
itself as "open" to such disparate social groups as "liberals and 
communists, entrepreneurs and workers, private farmers and 
kolkhoz workers . . . republicans and supporters of presidential 
authority."  Rutskoy, Zorkin, Baburin, the CPRF's Zyuganov, 
Agrarian Party leader Mikhail Lapshin, centrist Democratic Party 
of Russia (DPR) deputy Sergey Glazyev, and other notables signed 
the appeal.  Significantly, the appeal was not signed by 
political extremists such as Zhirinovskiy or former NSF 
cochairman Ilya Konstantinov (Pravda, 18 March; Sovetskaya 
Rossiya, 19 March).  Zhirinovskiy indicated that he knew 
"nothing" about Accord for Russia before its appeal was published 
and asserted that the coalition's leaders "had never asked him to 
sign the document" (Interfax, 17 March).  Underscoring the 
coalition's reluctance to associate with Zhirinovskiy, Zyuganov 
stated at a press conference that "our movement does not set the 
aim of making dashes to the south"--a reference to Zhirinovskiy's 
expansionist aims and the title of his autobiography (Sovetskaya 
Rossiya, 19 March). 

   Anticipating Early Elections 

   Russian journalists across the political spectrum have linked the 
formation 9f Accord for Russia to the start of an election 
campaign, anticipating-alike some prominent politicians--that 
elections will be held before 1996 (see box 3).  In introductory 
comments to its publication of Accord for Russia's 
appeal, Pravda (18 March) noted that "various political blocs, 
coalitions, and alliances are taking shape ahead of possible 
presidential elections."  An article in the official government 
newspaper Rossiyskiye Vesti (23 March) noted that Accord for 
Russia's leaders had formed an "election coalition" in a "normal 
attempt to win the upcoming presidential campaign."  Izvestiya 
(19 March) warned that Accord for Russia represents the 
successful "consolidation of antireform forces rejecting broad 
civil accord" and assailed the "passivity" of reformist parties, 
contending that they had opened the door to a rival "organization 
that can pool its efforts in the fight for power." 

   Outlook 

   A movement to establish a national accord can be successful--as 
in the case of the Moncloa agreement in post-Franco Spain, for 
example--if the major political forces seriously desire to avoid 
the danger that political conflict will escalate into 
unacceptably costly violence.  Despite the violence of early 
October, political figures in Russia appear more interested in 
posturing before the voters and scoring political points against 
their opponents than in making the difficult compromises needed 
for an effective accord.  Given the continuing deep divisions 
between Yeltsin and his opponents and their eagerness to exploit 
what they see as his weakened authority in order to force early 
elections, Russia's competing proposals for accord appear more 
likely to fuel rather than dampen political conflict. 
   BEGIN BOX 1 

            Main Points of Yeltsin's Memorandum of Accord 

   President Yeltsin formally presented his idea for a memorandum of 
accord at a 10 March meeting attended by parliamentary leaders, 
political figures, and some trade union representatives--probably 
from the reformist Independent Miners' Union and the Sotsprof 
organization.  Leaders of major opposition groups which Yeltsin 
claims to want to win over were apparently excluded, however 
(Izvestiya, 11 March).  According to press summaries, Yeltsin's 
draft: 
   --  Prohibits the holding of national elections before the 
expiration of Yeltsin's and the current parliament's terms in 
1996 and the introduction of "destabilizing" amendments to the 
constitution (an earlier draft had reportedly set a two-year 
prohibition on any amendments).  These are probably the most 
controversial provisions 9f the memorandum, and Communist Party 
leader Gennadiy Zyuganov has already indicated that he is against 
them (Interfax, 1 April). 
   --  Obligates signatories not to use "interpretations" of last 
autumn's constitutional crisis or the August 1991 coup attempt as 
a "pretext" for further confrontation.  This provision is an 
obvious attempt to forestall opposition efforts to publicly 
challenge the constitutionality of Yeltsin's September 1993 edict 
dissolving the legislature. 
   --  Precludes Federation components from altering their 
constitutional status (i.e., oblasts declaring themselves 
republics) and concluding bilateral treaties with federal 
authorities such as the one recently signed by Tatarstan, a move 
that may run into opposition in the Federation Council and from 
the Federation components. 
   --  Prohibits workers from striking for additional state funding. 
   --  Establishes a "Conciliation Commission" to be composed of 
representatives of all signatories and vested with the authority 
to demand that individuals and political groups that violate any 
of the accord's provisions be "removed from office" or otherwise 
"excluded" from political-activity. 
   Sources:  Pravda, 23 March; Kommersant-Daily, 26, 29 March; 
Interfax, 31 March; Izvestiya, 1 April. 

   END BOX 1 

   BEGIN BOX 2 

               Drafting the Memorandum of Accord 

   Yeltsin entrusted the drafting of his memorandum of accord to a 
five-part working group headed by Boris Topornin, cochairman of 
Yeltsin's Public Chamber--an advisory body representing non-state 
political and social organizations (ITAR-TASS, 1O March).  At the 
same time, a parliamentary working group headed by Women of 
Russia leader Alevtina Fedulova was also established to work on a 
parallel draft evidently to be incorporated in the final version. 
The group reportedly includes representatives of all party 
factions in the Duma (Rossiyskiye Vesti, 18 March).  Yeltsin's 
draft was reportedly completed on 29 March, but he has indicated 
that it will not be published "for the time being" to allow 
political parties and groups time to review it and make 
"suggestions" (ITAR-TASS, 29 March, 1 April). 

   END BOX 2 

   BEGIN BOX 3 

                 Maneuvering for Early Elections 
   Although both President Yeltsin (Izvestiya, 26 March) and Duma 
Chairman Rybkin (Die Woche, 3O March) have said that elections 
will not occur before 1996, a number of political figures have 
predicted early presidential elections: 
   --  Sergey Shakhray has predicted that there remains "as little 
as a year and a half" before presidential elections and, contrary 
to expectations, announced that he will not be a candidate (ITAR- 
TASS, 23 March; Segodnya, 31 March). 
   --  Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, who makes no secret of his 
presidential ambitions, has stated that elections "may take place 
already this year" (RIA, 19 March). 
   --  At the CPRF Central Executive Committee plenum, Gennadiy 
Zyuganov said that early presidential elections may prove "the 
best way out of the situation of confrontation" (Sovetskaya 
Rossiya, 17 March). 
   In the meantime, political organizations are regrouping and 
maneuvering in the kind of activity reminiscent of last summer, 
when the Congress of People's Deputies was still resisting calls 
for early elections, but their scheduling was nonetheless 
anticipated: 
   --  Russia's Choice leader Yegor Gaydar has announced his bloc's 
intention to become a formal political party, even though the 
move risks losing the support of the loose-knit Democratic Russia 
movement (Segodnya, 31 March).  According to Gaydar, Yeltsin will 
support the new Russia's Choice party and will not try to 
establish a rival presidential party (ITAR-TASS, 1 April). 
   --  In an example of the fluid political groupings that occur in 
Russia, Segodnya on 1 April announced the creation of a new 
Russian "patriotic movement" called "People's Alliance."  Unlike 
other, usually highly nationalistic movements that call 
themselves "patriotic," however, this one includes such moderate 
figures as constitutional specialist Oleg Rumyantsev, the DPR's 
Glazyev (who also signed Accord for Russia's appeal), and Yuriy 
Boldyrev, a cochairman of the moderate reformist Yabloko 
parliamentary faction. 

   END BOX 3 
(AUTHOR:  O'CONNELL.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, ANALYSIS BRANCH, (7O3) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH cs 6/0057z apr 

