Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lembit Annus, correspondent: "It's Advantageous </F>
To Trade With Russia: Estonian Ministry of Economics Makes a 
Discovery"] 
  [Text] Economics Minister Toomas Sildmae has given a 
flattering assessment of this past year's results. He 
particularly emphasized the fact that "just during the last few 
months of last year the indicator of the Gross Domestic Product 
rose for the first time in a long time. And its growth has now 
become quite marked. The authoritative prestige of the Estonian 
economy has become stronger, and--in comparison with our Eastern 
neighbor--it is now in a more advantageous, winning position. 
The volume of services within the GDP [Gross Dometic Product] 
has just about reached 50 percent of the total, and--according 
to this indicator--our republic will soon reach that level (55 
percent), which is present in the developed countries." 
  The minister noted the "increased role played by the 
ministry 
in formulating the Estonian state's economic policy." By way of 
affirming this, Sildmae cited the one statistic which--in the 
opinion of that great wheeler-dealer, Ostap Bender--means 
everything. "Today our ministry has jurisdiction over more than 
two-thirds of the state enterprises which--just during the first 
nine months of this past year--produced more than 5 billion 
Estonia kroon (one kroon now equals 91.63 Russian rubles). These 
enterprises acquired profits of 100 million kroon." 
  Of course, not everything is so cloudless under the Estonian 
sun. Just as before, the situation in the Russian-speaking 
northeastern part of the country is still causing headaches. In 
Narva, for example, one out of every five city-dwellers is 
entering upon the new year as an unemployed person. It was here 
that the Estonian government just barely managed to avert a mass 
street demonstration on New Year's by allocating to the 
employees of the Baltiyets Plant 2 million kroon as partial 
payment of the wages which they have not been receiving since 
autumn. But this is merely a drop in the bucket if we take into 
account the fact that this plant owes its own collective some 
8.5 million kroon. Moreover, some of the workers here have 
already been unemployed for a long time, whereas no end to 
privatization is in sight. Therefore, we cannot agree with the 
minister's conclusion to the effect that the "situation in the 
northeastern portion of this republic remains complicated." It 
is not only complicated, but also totally explosive. 
  "As of now, our ministry's relationship to this region is 
that of a fire brigade, whereas the enterprises have turned out 
to be helpless in handling their own affairs. But we can help 
only those who want to help themselves." Such was the 
philosophical conclusion in the reply to my question directed at 
the Estonian economics minister. 
  It is indisputable that Mr. Minister is correct in his 
opinions. But I am still disturbed by the thought that in Narva 
work even at the once leading Krengolmska Manufacturing Combine 
has now--as the saying goes--dwindled down to a trickle. Here 
one cutback has followed another in an unending stream. And even 
those persons still working here are doing so only half-time. 
Could it be that the reason for this lies in the dismissal of 
the director, Gennadiy Klushin? 
  The ministry views the principal tasks of 1994 as continuing 
the economic policy of open doors, as well as solving the 
problems of the agrarian sector. Also included among the 
top-priority tasks are continuing talks with Russia and the 
European Community, increasing export potentials, and solving 
the problem of property ownership. In this connect, we cannot 
fail to note the fact that trade with Russia has been given one 
of the top priorities for the new year. But that means that 
political policy and economic policy have each been assigned 
their own separate places. And it turns out that it is not only 
inevitable to trade with Russia, but even advantageous to do so. 
The only regret is that this truth is only beginning to be 
realized now--at a time when many economic ties with Russia have 
already been irreversibly disrupted. 

