Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on an interview with 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, </F>
minister of planning and development, by Kamal Jaballah in 
Sanaa; date not given] 
  [Excerpts] Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, minister of 
planning and development, has expressed his hope that all state 
officials will return to perform their duties in the capital, 
Sanaa, soon after the pledge and accord document is signed. The 
signing of this document is expected to take place in the 
Jordanian capital of Amman on 20 February. 
  In an interview with AL-AHRAM held at his residence in 
Sanaa, 
Dr. al-Iryani said that the signing of the pledge and accord 
document must be accompanied by the ending of the crushing 
political and economic crisis the unity state has been 
experiencing since 19 August 1993 on security, military, 
administrative, and institutional levels. [passage omitted] 
  The prominent Yemeni figure in the General People's Congress 
Party said that all accusations and claims of conspiracy against 
the cadres and leaderships of the Yemeni Socialist Party are 
political claims without any material evidence to back them up. 
The state is not responsible for them. Also, there are no 
conspiracies to assassinate Yemeni Socialist Party Leader 'Ali 
Salim al-Bid, Prime Minister Haydar Abu-Bakr al-'Attas, or the 
defense minister. 
  He added that the liquidations in the Socialist Party are 
remnants from the past, which have been reflected in the history 
of the party. 
  Dr. al-Iryani warned that the problem of internal terrorism 
in his country is not linked to the state. There are no Yemeni 
political forces practicing terrorism and political action at 
the same time because they are all seeking to gather popular 
support for themselves. Those who claim otherwise must provide 
the evidence for their allegations. 
  Regarding reports that some Yemeni sides supported terrorism 
abroad, Dr. al-Iryani said that the truth in this matter has 
been presented to President Husni Mubarak. Yemen is still 
waiting for Egyptian security units to visit and see for 
themselves the truth of this claim and other reports that there 
are three terrorist camps in the northern governorates and five 
in the southern governorates. 
  The Yemeni official denied reports about external support to 
kindle the current crisis in his country. He said: "This is not 
true and there is not one single shred of material evidence 
about external support for secession, apart from confirmations 
by a foreign diplomatic source residing in Sanaa. These 
confirmations said that contributions gathered in Saudi Arabia 
to help alleviate the catastrophe of the floods before unity in 
1990, which hit mostly the southern governorates, were seized by 
the Socialist Party leadership in Aden at the end of 1993. The 
amount is somewhere in the region of $37 to $39 million. 
[passage omitted] 

