Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Serdar Dimli from Bucharest] </F>
  [Text] Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin, who is currently 
visiting Bucharest with President Suleyman Demirel, spoke to 
Turkish reporters this morning on the recent UN Security Council 
resolution. Cetin said that since the onset of the incidents in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Turkey announced that it is willing to 
contribute troops to the UN force. The necessary infrastructure 
needed for this has been under preparation for a long time, 
Cetin remarked, adding that intensive efforts are under way with 
the UN secretary general and the permanent members of the 
Security Council to this end. Finally, Cetin noted, the United 
Nations asked Turkey to participate in the peace force in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  According to Cetin, the UN request at this stage consists of 
a 2,700-person mechanized unit. The composition of this force 
will be 1,200 infantry, 500 support personnel, and 1,000 
logistics personnel. Cetin declared that a delegation comprised 
of members of the Foreign Ministry and the General Staff will 
meet with UN officials and draft a protocol. The protocol will 
outline where and when the unit will go as well as other 
details. Cetin said: Our troops can assume duty in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina one week after the signing of the protocol. 
  The foreign minister explained that when the government was 
sending troops to Somalia, it obtained the necessary 
authorization from the Turkish Grand National Assembly with 
regard to Bosnia-Herzegovina as well, and the necessary 
preparations were undertaken on this matter. Cetin added: Our 
force will go to Bosnia-Herzegovina as soon as possible in a bid 
to contribute to peace and stability. Our aim is to put an end 
to the pain and drama in Bosnia-Herzegovina, which has been 
experiencing the biggest tragedy of the century for the past two 
years. This is what we seek and what we aim to do. We 
contributed to this at every level and at every phase. We 
submitted proposals. Late as it may be, our proposals are now 
being considered. This delay cost the lives of tens of 
thousands of people and many tears. As we approach peace, I 
believe that our peace force will greatly contribute to peace. 
  Answering questions, Cetin said that there are certain 
recommendations with regard to the location of the Turkish unit. 
Pointing out that both the Muslims and Croats in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina requested Turkish troops, Cetin noted: 
Therefore, we naturally want to serve in their areas. Cetin 
concluded by saying that Turkish troops gained great experience 
in Somalia for this task and inspired confidence in the world on 
this subject. 

