Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Christophe Parayre] </F>
  [Excerpt] Monrovia, 9 March (AFP) -- The disarming of 
Liberia's three rival factions has got off to a difficult start, 
with one of the civil war foes failing to cooperate because f an 
apparent leadership crisis. Troops of the African peacekeeping 
force ECOMOG [Economic Community of West African States 
Cease-Fire Monitoring Group], which has set up eight assembly 
points and disarmament centres, had by late Tuesday [8 March] 
been able only to collect weapons from 150 soldiers of the Armed 
Forces of Liberia (AFL). But at Todee, 40 kilometres (25 miles) 
north of here, ECOMOG troops waited in vain for their first 
"clients" from the United Liberation Movement [for Democracy in 
Liberia] (ULIMO). 
  General Kunle Togun, the commanding officer at the centre, 
said that the delay stemmed from a rift in the ULIMO leadership, 
where the head of the faction's military wing, General Roosevelt 
Johnson, has been claiming since the end of February to have 
replaced ULIMO chief Alhaji Kromah. 
  At Konole, 70 kilometres (43 miles) north of the capital, 
several dozen soldiers of ULIMO's main rival, Charles Taylor's 
National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), turned up but said 
they were still waiting for orders to hand over their weapons. 
  The members of the AFL, the army of late president Samuel 
Doe, who was assassinated in September 1990 in the second year 
of a brutal civil war, arrived aboard three lorries Tuesday at 
the Schiefflin camp, 2O kilometres (13 miles) from here. In the 
presence of UN special envoy to Liberia Trevor Gordon-Somers and 
a group of journalists, they formed ranks and turned in their 
weapons on the orders of their commander, Colonel Erasmus Flahn, 
who had taken off his uniform to don a white T-shirt and light 
trousers. About half of the AFL soldiers were also dressed in 
civilian clothes. Three at a time, some 100 of them handed in 
AK-47 assault rifles or Italian-made Berettas to the 
white-helmeted troops of the Nigerian-led force. The others 
said they had lost, sold or been robbed of their guns. Once the 
exercise was over, the AFL troops were taken in hand by UN 
personnel who gave them food and medicines, but no money, as 
Gordon-Somers stressed. 
  The demobilised men all told journalists that they wanted to 
see a lasting peace after almost four years of a war that 
claimed 150,000 lives, according to UN estimates, before a peace 
pact was signed in July last year under the aegis of the United 
Nations and the Economic Community of West African States 
(ECOWAS), which first sent peacekeepers to Liberia in August 
1990. 
  Neither ECOMOG nor UN personnel expressed undue concern 
about 
the slow start to the disarmament process, which follows the 
formation Monday of a five-member collegial State Council, 
including members of the NPFL, ULIMO and the interim national 
government in Monrovia. [passage omitted] 

