Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ren Kan: "New Funds To Aid Bond Sales"] </F>
  [Text] China is expected to see a breakthrough in the 
development of investment funds in 1994. 
  The country is considering the establishment of some 
treasury 
bond investment funds this year, according to an official with 
the Bank of China. 
  He said the country is expected to issue 100 billion yuan 
($17.5 billion) worth of government bonds in 1994. Of these, 80 
percent will be sold to financial institutions and the rest to 
individuals. 
  The official said the investment funds are expected to 
smooth 
the issuing of treasury bonds, which encountered some problems 
last year. 
  Furthermore, the official said, several investment funds 
will 
be launched for some key construction projects. 
  For example, the Three Gorges Project, which will involve 
more than 95.4 billion yuan ($16.7 billion) in investment, will 
probably launch some funds to pool capital. 
  The official said more domestic institutions and ventures 
will cooperate with overseas partners to set up overseas-based 
funds. 
  These funds will be used to raise foreign capital to invest 
in domestic construction projects. 
  He said some American institutional investors are 
negotiating 
with Chinese partners about setting up some electric power 
investment funds. 
  The official said many investment funds are expected to be 
listed in the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets. 
  The funds will play an important role in the stabilization 
of 
the stock market since funds are usually engaged in long-term 
investment instead of short-term speculation. 
  And the investment funds will also offer a new form of 
investment to Chinese punters, since most of them know little 
about securities, and allow them to play the stock market more 
safely. 
  China's first investment fund was born in 1991. So far there 
are 50 funds involving 4.5 billion yuan ($789 million) in the 
country. 
  The country last year originally planned to allot 3 billion 
yuan ($526.3 million) in quotas to the investment funds. 
  But the plan had to be postponed to ensure enough capital 
for 
the country's key construction projects because the country's 
capital resources are in short supply. 
  He said the country will launch a massive programme this 
year 
to standardize the existing investment funds. 
  And the central bank has drafted a set of regulations on the 
management of funds. The draft has been submitted to the State 
Council and is waiting for final approval. 
  He said the country will set up specialized fund-management 
corporations in some areas. 
  And a fund union will be established this year to enhance 
the 
self-management of the funds sector, the official said. 

