Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Zhou Zhifang (0719 1807 2455) and Deng Ying </F>
(6772 4481)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 9 Feb (XINHUA) -- According to a briefing 
by the National Nuclear Safety Administration [NNSA], in recent 
years, China has participated in international nuclear safety 
cooperation and exchanges and has actively offered to hold 
safety talks with developing countries on the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy. 
  Nuclear safety is a decisive factor affecting the prospects 
for the development of the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy, and it has become an important matter followed with 
interest by every country in the world. It has been learned 
that in recent years, China successively entered into agreements 
on bilateral nuclear safety cooperation with the United States, 
France, Italy, Spain, Pakistan, and Germany, and that it 
established friendly cooperation and carried out extensive 
exchanges of nuclear-safety technology with some countries, 
including Japan and Russia. More than once, the NNSA has sent 
relevant personnel abroad to receive technical training in 
nuclear safety laws and regulations, the safety supervision and 
inspection of nuclear power stations, the analysis of nuclear 
accidents, the use of nuclear power plant simulators, and in 
quality guarantees. According to statistics, so far a total of 
scores of nuclear safety experts have received standardized 
international training. In addition, the International Atomic 
Energy Agency [IAEA], the UN Development Program, and the EC 
have provided experts and funds to help China hold training 
sessions for nuclear safety supervision and control. More than 
once, Chinese nuclear safety officials have participated in 
various IAEA-sponsored conferences. 
  In basing itself on its actual conditions, China has used 
advanced foreign technologies and management experiences for 
reference, has further improved its nuclear-safety control 
system, and has kept raising the overall level of its nuclear 
safety work through cooperation and exchanges. China has begun 
providing to developing countries some safety technologies 
related to the development of nuclear power as well as 
experience in supervision and control. China is giving play to 
its due role in international nuclear safety cooperation and 
exchanges. 

