BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Zhang Xia: "Self-Study Provides New </F>
Skills at a Lower Price"] 
  [Text] Studying at home is all the rage these days. 
  For those who fail the entrance examinations for higher 
education, teaching oneself has become the thing to do. And it 
has become a popular and effective way to learn new skills, said 
a Chinese educator at a recent international seminar in Jinan, 
Shandong Province. 
  Hu Jiajun, director of the Self-taught Examination Office of 
Shandong, said the home-study method has helped many Chinese 
work their way up the career ladder. 
  Those interested sign up at provincial bureaux, which offer 
courses and textbooks on a wide range of subjects. 
  Students can choose a specific subject, study on their own 
and take a final exam at an approved university. Course credits 
are given and college-equivalent diplomas are awarded to those 
who pass enough classes. 
  In the past decade, the country's rapid development has 
increased the need for a highly educated work force . 
  But the number of graduates coming out of the country's 
universities is too small to meet this demand. 
  So high school students who do not qualify for college and 
middle-aged workers are finding other ways to obtain an 
education. 
  The generation that grew up during the "cultural revolution" 
(1966-76) was deprived of higher education in their youth and 
are especially eager to study. 
  To meet this demand, various forms of adult education have 
started in the past 15 years. 
<H5>  Night Classes </H5>
  Most popular are night classes at universities, self-study 
and correspondence schools. 
  Some classes are geared towards illiterate adults, other 
towards providing employees with professional training. 
  Self-study was initiated in 1981 as an experiment in 
Beijing, 
Tianjin Shanghai and Liaoning Province. Three years later it 
spread across the nation. 
  This is by far the cheapest way to get schooling -- and 
therefore suitable to China, which is suffering from a shortage 
of education funds. Students pay only for their textbooks, 
registration and test fees. 
  According to United Nations statistics, China's education 
fund accounted for only 1.8 percent of world spending on 
schooling -- appealingly little considering it shoulders nearly 
a quarter of the world's population. 
  Efforts need to be made to improve education. And self-study 
is a quick way to provide schooling when funds are scarce, said 
Hu. 
  For example, the State spends 7,500 yuan ($860) to put a 
student through a technical school. To get the same level 
diploma through self-study costs only half as much. 
  Moreover, those who go through self-study can continue 
working at their jobs while schooling. 
  Self-study graduates can enjoy equal treatment as their 
college counterparts. 
  And self-study is more open and flexible. 
  Unlike night universities and correspondence courses, people 
do not have to pass tests to enroll. And there is no age limit. 
  But Hu said self-study must be regulated and courses should 
be set by experts after careful research. 
  Provincial self-taught examination offices must report to 
the 
State Education Commission (SEC) the courses and majors they 
offer as well as the university that supervises examinations. 
Offices can enroll students only after SEC approval. 
  Self-study is based on a credit system. Normally it takes 
two to three years to receive a diploma, but students who earn 
enough credits may graduate early. Students also have the 
option of taking as long as they need to complete the course. 
  By the end of 1993, 222 self-study majors were offered 
nationwide. More than 1 million students have graduated and 
received diplomas, helping to ease the country's shortage of 
professional personnel, Hu said. 
  This year 5 million people are enrolled in self-study. 
  And to ensure quality, Hu said certified educators are sent 
to supervise exams. Students found cheating are severely 
punished. 
  Reports show that most graduates of self-study schooling 
have 
a good command of basic knowledge and have good problem-solving 
skills. Because of this, self-study has a good reputation, he 
said. 
<H5>  Advisors </H5>
  The employees at two law firms in Yantai, Shandong Province, 
for example, received their legal training through self-study. 
They act as legal advisors for more than 50 enterprises and 
institutions in the city. 
  And with their excellent counsel, they have helped 
enterprises save 38 million yuan ($4.4 million). 
  But the self-study system is not perfect, Hu said, adding 
that the programme should cater to economic development needs. 
  Majors used to be limited to law, insurance, accounting and 
literature. In the future, engineering might be offered if 
teaching institutions allow students to use their equipment, Hu 
said. 
  Other fields may be opened to self-study in the future as 
well. 
  Self-taught examination offices could also help evaluate 
students and the quality of teaching at primary and high schools. 
  Doing so would save the State money and manpower, Hu said. 
  The seminar, co-hosted by Shandong Teachers' University and 
University of Nottingham, drew 80 educators from six countries. 

