BFN 

  [Text] According to a military source, the U.S. 
imperialists brought in succession overseas-based 
fighter-bombers, pursuit-assault planes, vertical takeoff and 
landing assault planes and an early warning plane, and tanker 
planes to South Korea, and staged provocative joint air war 
exercises against the North. 
  On 4 April, an E-3 early warning plane, FA-18 
pursuit-assault 
planes, AV-8 VTOL [vertical takeoff and landing] assault planes 
and KC-135 tanker planes rushed to bases of U.S. Air Force in 
South Korea. Following this, on 5 April, formations of military 
airplanes belonging to the U.S. Marine Corps and tanker planes 
again flew into bases of the U.S. Air Force in South Korea. 
  These military airplanes, deployed from overseas bases, ran 
amok with exercises, such as a surprise bombing on ground 
targets, air attack and support of ground attack, with the skies 
above Oeyon islet, Chungju, Tanyang and Pyongchang as 
operational theaters, in coordination with several hundreds of 
fighter-bombers, pursuit- assault planes, observation planes and 
reconnaissance planes of the U.S. Air Force in South Korea and 
the puppet air force. 
  On 4 April, an E-3 early warning plane, called a flying 
commanding post, commanded airplanes, which ran wild with joint 
air war exercises, by searching targets under the protection by 
formations of pursuit-assault planes. 
  On 4 and 5 April, KC-135 tanker planes refueled 50-odd F-16 
fighter-bombers and A-10 assault planes engaged in air war 
exercises, by making shuttle flights between the skies over the 
sea off Kunsan and Tokchok Island for a long time, thus 
instigating an atmosphere of war. 
  These gun powder-reeking and frenzied war exercises were an 
extremely dangerous play with fire aimed at promoting actual 
combat capabilities of overseas-based airplanes for mobilization 
to bases in South Korea and for a surprise northward attack 
under coordination with formations of airplanes belonging to the 
U.S. Air Force in South Korea and the puppet Air Force. 
  Meanwhile, the South Korean puppets ran wild with exercises 
by firing guns and conducting helicopter operation before our 
eyes in the foremost frontline. 
  On 4 and 5 April, large-caliber artillery units of the 
puppet 
Army, which were mobilized and deployed in areas in Majon-ni, 
Yonchon County, and in Kangsan-ni and Sangsan-ni in Chorwon 
County in South Korean Kangwon Province, indiscriminately fired 
more than 60 shells at areas near the Demilitarized Zone. Armed 
hooligans of the puppet Army occupied the attack starting points 
in Pangmong-ni, Paju County, Chokkori, Yonchon County, and 
Oechon-ni and Yulli in Chorwon-up, Chorwon County in the South 
Korean Kangwon Province, and fired more than 1,000 shells of 
large-caliber machine guns and automatic rifles, thus showing 
war hysterics. 
  On 5 April, formations of helicopter gunships and transport 
helicopters of the puppet Army staged missile strike and 
airlifting exercises, making low- and ultralow-altitude flights 
in the skies above Paju and Yonchon areas. 
  Warplanes mobilized in various air war games against the 
North which were staged over South Korea on 4 and 5 April 
totaled more than 700. 
  Such provocative military moves by the U.S. imperialists and 
the South Korean puppets, which are becoming more reckless at a 
time when frenzied, bellicose remarks were made by the U.S. 
military leaders one after another, are indeed alarming. 
  The U.S. imperialists and the South Korean puppets must act 
with discretion, clearly mindful of the seriousness of the 
tensions created on the Korean peninsula. 

