Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Avner Regev: "Lebanon First"] </F>
  [Excerpts] The disparity between the headlines heralding 
progress in the political process and the information about the 
situation in the territories delivered in various forums 
presents us with a serious dilemma. If, as reported by the 
media, the Palestinians are prepared to assume control, and the 
delay is the result of minor disagreements, how do we explain 
the pronouncement of army officers involved in the territories 
population's everyday life that the confusion there is so great 
that practical discussions on the transfer of rule cannot be 
launched? [passage omitted] 
  Even now the Palestinians are trying to secure external 
manifestations of political independence. For them, the interim 
arrangement is close to an independent state. For them, the 
permanent arrangements go beyond the achievements of the interim 
arrangement, and they will deal mainly with the borders of the 
state-to-be, the status of Jerusalem, and the refugees' right of 
return. Thus the prime minister, who understands the dilemma 
and has reservations about the Palestinian stands -- and is 
occasionally prepared to accept certain demands while never 
forgetting the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] officers' assessments 
-- has a problem on his hands. He can slow down the process 
with the Palestinians until the situation on the ground permits 
the transfer of control to be made. He can make a unilateral 
move, such as withdrawing from Gaza, or he can make a 180-degree 
turnabout, launching serious negotiations with Syria, Lebanon, 
and Jordan with the objective of reaching full peace. 
  One of the ideas discussed recently in political corridors 
speaks of a special gesture toward Syria in Lebanon. The exit 
from certain Lebanese areas and the reduction of the security 
zone's size in the first stage may display goodwill that will 
help the Syrians to evince more flexibility at the negotiating 
table. In addition, a unilateral gesture in Lebanon will be 
welcomed by the Americans, who, while favoring the negotiations 
with the Palestinians, have repeatedly shown their 
dissatisfaction with the Oslo accord. The U.S. Administration 
takes a positive view of negotiations with bona fide countries, 
even dictatorial ones, and a less than positive view of talks 
with organizations which have no established territorial basis, 
organizations whose aspirations for independence may not even 
have the support of other countries in the region. 
  An accelerated process with Syria stands a chance of 
culminating in a positive outcome that will impact the region no 
less, and perhaps more, than a fragile interim agreement with 
the Palestinians. An accord with Syria will result in an 
arrangement in Lebanon and peace with Jordan, isolating the 
Palestinian problem. 
  The al-Asad-Clinton summit has created a certain momentum 
and 
the prospects of progress are good. A move with the Syrians 
that includes significant territorial withdrawal will enjoy the 
support of Likud figures -- unlike the emerging agreement with 
the Palestinians. Rabin called on al-Asad to make another 
courageous move, to meet him halfway. If al-Asad has indeed 
come to the conclusion that peace is a strategic goal, he can be 
trusted to make a move that will convince the prime minister of 
the seriousness of his intentions. 
  In parallel, Israel can make a unilateral move in south 
Lebanon, one that will not impair its security while helping to 
ease the tension between the two countries. This category 
includes King Husayn's declaration in Washington concerning his 
willingness to openly meet with Rabin. An overt meeting would 
be a natural sequel to the clandestine meetings held over the 
years, and one may safely assume that this time it will 
culminate in understandings that will lead to a signed agreement 
with Jordan. We can presume that Husayn made his Washington 
declaration after coordinating positions with Damascus, and it 
should be seen as a clue to al-Asad's desire to reach full peace 
on all fronts, including Jordan and Lebanon. 
  When he entered office about 18 months ago, Rabin waited for 
some signal from al-Asad -- secret or overt -- that would supply 
him with a good reason to move faster in the political process. 
For a long period, al-Asad took his time, and that brought 
about the Oslo agreement. Perhaps the opening Rabin has been 
expecting for months has just been breached, and it will now be 
possible to move on to a new era on the northern border, one in 
which no security threats will loom over Israel any longer. 
Lebanon First may be a possible and a desirable solution. 

