CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by GUDOK correspondent A. Mudrakov, Kharkov: "The </F>
Arithmetic of Sloppy Work"] 
  [Text] It seems to have become a habit--no money, no fuel, 
no materials for track repairs, no this that and the other 
thing. This being so, why call anybody to account? Perhaps this 
is what A. Boldyr had in mind (he was the track supervisor on 
the Kupyansk Junction Division, but is no longer) when he was 
supervising repairs on a switch. 
  They installed new metal parts, but there wasn't much to 
think about regarding switch ties. There was not a single new 
set on the division, and the old ones were no good at all--five 
or eight in a row were rotten and untrustworthy. 
  In his report later, A. Boldyr would write: "I wasn't able 
to 
eliminate the cluster rot because there are ties or switch 
ties." However worried he might have been, however, the 
supervisor still opened the section to traffic. 
  A week later, Train No 238 from Moscow to Donetsk entered 
Kupyansk Junction. 
  An excerpt from engineer V. Kuzin's report: 
  "On passing the entry semaphore I used the service brake to 
slow to 9 km per hour. After the brakes were released while 
proceeding through the station, the speed was increased to 15 
kph. At that moment I heard a shunt in the train and applied the 
service brake. The train stopped immediately. I sent the 
assistant engineer to inspect the train. On returning he 
reported that three cars had left the rails" (as it turned out, 
four). 
  The cause of the derailment is simplicity itself: the 
inquiry 
found that after the switch was replaced, nobody weeded out the 
bad switch ties, and large sags were left in the track, 
resulting in widening of the gauge. 
  One would think someone ought to sound the alarm, and 
someone 
did... but only in the railroad office. The next day a telegram 
was sent to Kupyansk ordering immediate steps to eliminate the 
safety hazard--in particular, to promptly inspect the crossover 
and switch segments; to allow passenger trains only on the main 
tracks; to prohibit the replacement of switches without first 
weeding out bad ties and switch ties; and to consider the 
possibility of dismantling low-traffic yard tracks and switches 
and using them on main and receiving-shipping tracks. 
  But the message never got to the person it was addressed to, 
and so a new report: "During the receiving of Train No 170 on 
its way from Donetsk to Minsk, at 7:46 two cars were derailed 
due to widening of the tracks." Where do you think it was? At 
switch No 25 again! Truly, disasters don't come singly. 
  Bad luck, perhaps? Well, no. The inquiry reveals otherwise. 
During repairs to the tracks following the derailment of Train 
No 238, S. Starorublevtsev, the acting chief of Division 15, and 
L. Stupakov, the NODP [Division Chief of Line Services] of the 
Kupyansk Department, who had been ordered to get the necessary 
work done, were guilty of outrageous negligence. The rail 
support segment of the switch curve at switch No 25 had been 
spiked without installing standard reinforcement plates, and the 
bad switch ties had not been completely weeded out (that lesson 
sure didn't take). After the track was opened to traffic nothing 
was done to monitor the track's condition. In other words, 
really slipshod work. 
  Yet none of the persons involved were novices. Track 
supervisor A. Boldyr has been working on the railroad for 19 
years, and he has a reputation as an intelligent, industrious, 
specialist who gets the job done. S. Starorublevtsev, L. 
Stupakov, and acting track foreman T. Chepurko have plenty of 
experience. Yet the accident was the logical result of each 
one's negligence. 
  A week before the accident, the track measurer had reported 
sloppy work at the same place, switch No 25. The switch was 
closed to traffic, but all the track supervisor did was 
eliminate a 5-degree gauge deviation in the butt of the stock 
rail and didn't check further. 
  S. Starorublevtsev failed to follow up on the correction of 
gross deviations in maintenance of the switch assembly or to see 
that the work was done properly. NODP L. Stupakov, who had 
accompanied the track measurer, on his return did not inquire as 
to the cause of the unsatisfactory assessment of the maintenance 
of the switch, and failed to take measures to rectify it. His 
report includes this passage: "No one notified me to take 
measures"--a rather naive statement for a senior NODP. 
  There can be only one conclusion. Track measurement and 
inspection is strictly a formality on divisions of the Kupyansk 
Junction. 
  On the Kupyansk Junction division, at least, every alarm 
warning should have been taken seriously; people still remember 
very well what happened at the Mokhnach station in August 1991, 
when passenger train No 228 had an accident due to similar 
causes. 
  Of course, things are tough for everyone these 
days--finances 
have been cut to the limit, repair materials are lacking, and 
crews are undermanned. Under such conditions, though, extra 
vigilance is called for, and every effort to prevent accidents. 
  Now for a little arithmetic. Putting the cars back on track 
cost 1,880,480 karbovantsy [Ukrainian rubles], repairs to them 
cost 8,779,006. Two switches cost 57,205. Labor costs were about 
135,913. It all adds up to about 11 million karbovantsy. 
  And that's just one incident, but surely not the only one on 
the Southern Railroad. Maybe the reason we're not getting paid 
on time, and funds are short for everything, is that sloppy 
workmanship is wasting millions. 

