BFN 

<F P=106> [Anhui Government Work Report delivered by Anhui Governor Fu </F>
Xishou at the Second Session of the Eighth Anhui Provincial 
People's Congress on 6 April] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies: 
  On behalf of the provincial people's government, I now 
submit 
the government work report for your examination and approval as 
well as for suggestions and comments from the provincial members 
of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and 
other comrades attending the meeting as observers. 
<H5>  I. A Review of the Work for 1993 </H5>
  Over the past year, inspired by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
important remarks, guided by the guidelines set forth at the 
14th CPC National Congress, and led by the Anhui provincial CPC 
committee, people of all nationalities throughout the province 
emancipated the minds, rose in unity with force and spirit, 
resolutely carried out indepth reform, and achieved great 
progress in economic construction, new development in various 
social undertakings, further enhancement in building a socialist 
spiritual civilization, and a gratifying phase of thriving 
development in the province. 
1993 Marked the Fastest Growth and Best Development of the 
National Economy Since Carrying Out the Policy of Reform and 
Opening UpThe total output value of gross domestic products 
reached 94 billion yuan, up 22 percent over the previous year. 
The gross output value of agriculture was 41.7 billion, an 
increase of 8.5 percent. Total grain output was 25.96 million 
tonnes, representing an increase of 10.8 percent; output of 
other agricultural products also showed varying degrees of 
growth. The total output value of village and township 
enterprises topped 110 billion yuan, obtaining new heights. The 
gross output value of industry was 140.02 billion yuan, an 
increase of 44.6 percent and an improvement of economic 
benefits. Industrial output value at village level or higher 
was 94.9 billion yuan, an increase of 26 percent, propelling our 
province's ranking in the nation from 14 to 12. Energy and raw 
material production showed steady growth. The output of high 
value-added products increased by a large volume. Revenue 
topped 7.32 billion yuan, up 32.8 percent, achieving a balance 
in revenue and expenditures. Commodity supplies were abundant. 
The overall retail amount of social products grew by 15.9 
percent. New progress was made in basic construction and 
technological transformation. The building of a 2,500-cubic 
meter blast furnace at the Maanshan Steel Plant was completed; 
the Hefei-Jiujiang Railway was extended to Anqing; the roadbed 
project for Hefei-Tongling Highway was completed; 
under-the-bridge structural work along the Tongling section of 
the Changjiang Bridge was completed; the entire Pihe-Huaihe 
Waterway was open to navigation; the 200,000 kwh [kilowatt hour] 
generating set at the Huaibei Power Plant and the two 125,000 
kwh generating sets at the Wuhu Power Plant began supplying 
electricity; and expansion projects at Xinji, Number Two 
Liuqiao, and Xinzhuang Coal Mines were completed. We realized 
the goal of installing program-controlled telephone exchanges 
and digitalized long-distance communications equipment, and of 
establishing mobile telephone networks in cities. New progress 
was made in irrigation works on the Huaihe, Honghe, and Xinhe. 
Reform and Opening Up Made Greater StridesThe process 
of building a market economy in rural areas was accelerated. 
The household contract responsibility system which links 
remuneration with output was steadily promoted and improved. 
Enterprise reform was carried out in earnest, with over 70 
percent of state-owned enterprises conducting 
intra-entrepreneurial reform in three areas. Maanshan Steel 
Plant, Anhui Energy Company, and Meilin Enterprise transformed 
their management systems, successfully listed their stocks on 
the stock market, obtained 7.236 billion yuan in construction 
funds, and conducted beneficial exploration for building a 
modern enterprise system. Further expansion of the private 
economy provided one more sector of economic growth in our 
province. The pace to increase the building of a social 
security system was accelerated. Reform of the public-funded 
medical care system and housing reform were promoted 
step-by-step. Development of a commodity market and a market 
for major means of production showed excellent momentum. We 
steadily promoted commodity price reform, with the ratio of 
commodity prices that were decided by the market being raised 
over 90 percent. We opened ourselves up wider to the outside 
world. The overall export amount increased by 16 percent. We 
delegated import-export rights to localities. We approved the 
establishment of 1,040 Sino-foreign joint ventures, cooperative 
enterprises, and wholly foreign-owned enterprises. A total of 
$370 million in foreign funds was utilized, up 1.6-fold from the 
previous year. Construction increased at the Hefei New and High 
Technology Development Zone as well as the Wuhu Economic and 
Technology Development Zone. Port construction was increased. 
We continued to develop international tourism. In order to 
promote friendly relations, we sent a provincial government 
delegation to visit Maryland in the United States. 
  New progress was made in social undertakings. Our 
scientific and technological advances were further applied in 
economic development. We tackled 85 major scientific and 
technological problems, achieved success in 645 provincial-level 
scientific and technological projects, developed 1,977 new 
products, and achieved remarkable results in popularizing the 
application of technologies. Scientific and technological 
undertakings run by local people developed rapidly, and the 
technology market became more and more brisk. New achievements 
were made in educational reform and development. Further 
development was made in making elementary education compulsory 
and universal; developments were also made in secondary 
vocational and technical education. The illiteracy rate among 
young people decreased by 2.9 percent. Higher education was 
further restructured. Non-governmental sectors became a new 
force for running schools in both urban and rural areas. The 
cultural, art, radio, cinema, television, press, publication, 
and social science fronts actively conducted academic research 
and art creation, and produced a number of highly commended good 
works on such important occasions as the publication of the 
third volume of "Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping" and the 
commemoration of Mao Zedong's birthday centennial. Our 
population growth rate decreased to 17.18 per thousand, the 
first time it was below the nation's average. Rural public 
health work was strengthened, and urban medical care service 
further improved. The province won 11 gold medals during the 
seventh national games, its competitive sports maintained a 
rising trend, and its mass sports activities continued to 
develop. New achievements were made in auditing, statistics, 
archives, nationalities affairs, religious affairs, and 
recording local history. 
  The people's standard of living further improved. The 
average amount of per-capita income that urban residents used 
for living expenses was 2,026 yuan, up 403 yuan, while the 
per-capita net income of peasants was 724.5 yuan, up 151 yuan; 
after adjustment for price changes, the incomes increased by 9.1 
and 9.4 percent respectively. Nearly 1 million people in poor 
regions solved their problem of basic needs in food and 
clothing. With accelerated housing construction in both urban 
and rural areas, the average floor space occupied by each urban 
resident was 7 square meters, and the average floor space 
occupied by each rural resident was 10 square meters. With the 
people of various nationalities concentrating their energies on 
economic construction, the political situation of stability and 
unity was further consolidated. Leading cadres performed their 
duties honestly and exercised self- discipline. Initial success 
was achieved in investigating and handling important cases and 
correcting unhealthy tendencies. The government further 
improved its legislative work and accomplished its annual plans 
for drafting and enacting local administrative rules and 
regulations. The province continued comprehensive efforts to 
improve public order, and achieved positive results in waging 
special struggles against "railroad and highway bandits." 
  Fellow deputies: Last year was one in which we persisted in 
reform and opening up and kept forging ahead. The practice 
during the year has further confirmed our confidence in 
developing a socialist market economy. At the same time, it has 
also enriched our experience. To sum up, we have gained the 
following experience: 
  -- We must persistently regard the emancipation of the mind 
and the deepening of reform as tasks of prime importance. We 
should guide the cadres and people, particularly cadres in 
economic departments, in order to foster new ideas of a 
socialist market economy, free themselves from the ideological 
fetters of traditional planned economy, and overcome 
difficulties and solve problems by deepening reform. It is 
necessary to keep forging ahead, enhance the awareness of 
competition, and overcome the passive attitude of inertia. We 
should unify our thinking in seizing opportunity and 
accelerating development. The emancipation of the mind and the 
renewal of ideas were transformed into a powerful motive force 
which propelled last year's reform and construction. They will 
also certainly yield a far-reaching impact on our future 
development. 
  -- We must persist in making rapid progress as well as 
carefully organize and exercise macroeconomic regulation and 
control. Since we studied and implemented Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's important talks made during his southern China 
inspection tour, the province has developed its economy in an 
all around way and enjoyed good momentum in economic 
development. How to make efforts to keep the momentum for a 
comparatively longer period is the key to the further 
development of Anhui's economy. We have always adhered to the 
basic guidance that "development is the last word"; we have 
never wavered in the face of difficulties and problems. Since 
the beginning of last year, we have increased the survey of 
economic trends and promptly adopted measures to solve such 
problems as the slowing down of industrial growth and fund 
shortages. Since the central authorities published 
macroeconomic regulations and control measures, we have 
unswervingly implemented them. At the same time, we do not 
demand uniformity, and we have considered our own realities and 
avoided sharp fluctuations. As a result, we have achieved a 
sustained, rapid, and healthy development of our economy. 
  --We Consistently Regarded Agricultural and Rural 
Work as the Primary TaskWe concentrated our efforts on 
reducing the peasants' burden, making payments for the purchase 
of agricultural products, implementing the preferential policy 
on grain and cotton production, and building up grass-roots 
organizations, thereby preserving and rallying the peasants' 
enthusiasm for production. Considering that work on readjusting 
the agricultural structure was carried out rather slowly in some 
localities, we launched agricultural systems projects and 
developed good-quality, high-yield, and highly-efficient 
agriculture in these localities. Regarding rural reform, we 
established five policies designed to quicken the pace of market 
economic development in rural areas and to encourage peasants to 
enter the market. These measures played an important role in 
developing the rural economy in an all-round manner and in 
increasing peasant incomes by a large margin. 
  --We Made Persistent Efforts To Do More Things To 
Benefit the People and Endeavored To Improve Our Work 
StyleWe defined the work objectives of the current 
provincial government, organized and mobilized people across the 
province to achieve the 12 major objectives aimed at enabling 
Anhui to move up to a new level in five years, concentrated our 
efforts on properly carrying out 50 practical jobs to bring 
about major development to Anhui within three years, and signed 
responsibility contracts with units responsible for carrying out 
this work. In general, all work was carried out effectively. 
  In reviewing last year's work, we should fully affirm the 
achievements we have made, and yet soberly realize that problems 
remain to be solved. They are: adjustment of the economic 
structure has been carried out too slowly; the economic 
efficiency of some enterprises, especially medium and small 
enterprises, is poor; more enterprises have been operating at a 
loss; agriculture's relative efficiency is poor; the gap between 
industrial and agricultural products has widened; peasant 
incomes are low; some localities have withheld teachers' wages; 
price increases have been relatively high; workers in some 
money-losing enterprises and the masses of poor have had 
difficulty making ends meet; public security is poor in some 
localities; and corruption still exists among a small number of 
government workers. Although we have taken some measures to 
deal with these problems, we need to work harder to 
fundamentally wipe them out. 
  Deputies, 
  Although Anhui's economy has begun to develop rapidly, we 
are 
still in a developing status. To invigorate Anhui's economy is 
an extremely arduous task. 
  Anhui's economy will continue to develop in 1994, which is 
an 
important year for Anhui in advancing reform. Therefore, it is 
extremely important to do this year's work effectively. The 
central authorities have emphatically pointed out that seizing 
the current opportunity to deepen reform, to broaden the scope 
of opening up, to quicken development, and to maintain stability 
is the general work guideline of the entire party and country, 
and work in all spheres should conform to and meet this 
guideline. Taking Anhui's reality into consideration, we should 
creatively carry out our work; properly handle the relationship 
between reform, development, and maintaining stability; and 
uncover and cope with in a timely manner new situations and 
problems pertaining to development so as to win new victories in 
Anhui's reform and construction. 
  II. Strive To Maintain Sustained, Rapid, and Healthy 
Economic Development 
  The basic tasks in Anhui's economic work for this year are: 
to comprehensively implement the guidelines of the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee and the 10th 
enlarged plenary session of the Fifth Anhui Provincial CPC 
Committee; to increase the establishment of a socialist market 
economic structure; to open up wider to the outside world; to 
strengthen and improve macroeconomic regulation and control; to 
optimize the economic structure; to increase economic returns; 
to control inflation; and to maintain rapid economic growth. 
The growth rate of the total output value of goods and services 
is set at 13-15 percent; of the output value of industries at 
and above township level is 20 percent; of total agricultural 
output value is 4 percent; and of sales of consumer goods is 20 
percent. The investment in fixed assets is planned at 35 
billion yuan, up 21 percent, and revenue is targeted at 8.5 
billion yuan. The annual rate of increase in prices of consumer 
goods should be maintained under the average national level. 
The abovementioned objectives are positive and attainable 
through efforts. In the meantime, we should be aware of the 
arduousness of the task despite the good trend of rapid growth 
over the past two years. In the course of development, on the 
one hand all localities should uphold the principle of rapid 
development as soon as possible, and on the other avoid blind 
competition with each other. They should achieve sustained, 
rapid, and healthy economic development by relying on solid and 
meticulous work. 
Comprehensively Develop the Rural Economy and Strive To 
Increase the Peasants' IncomeAnhui is a major agricultural 
province, and agriculture is a traditional industry of the 
province as well as the most important aspect of its economy. 
Agricultural and rural work must be placed above all other 
tasks at all times. Under the current circumstances, doing an 
effective job in agricultural and rural work has decisive 
importance to properly handling relations between reform, 
development, and stability. This year, we should further deepen 
rural reform, stabilize the party's basic policy in rural areas, 
conscientiously enforce the "Law on Agriculture," and continue 
to implement the strategy of "achieving one steady growth and 
stepping up two developments." Having maintained a steady 
growth of grain, cotton, and edible oil, we should increase the 
readjustment of the agricultural structure, improve agricultural 
efficiency, and strive for greater increases in the peasants' 
income. 
  A sound land contracting system is the key to maintaining a 
steady rural policy. The central authorities have made new 
provisions in this regard. These new provisions stipulate that 
when contracts expire, they can be extended for 30 years without 
any changes being made to the document. During the contracting 
period, the central authorities recommend that we utilize a 
method which allows us to "increase manpower without increasing 
land acreage, and reduce manpower without decreasing land 
acreage," thus permitting us to lawfully transfer land-use 
rights and be compensated for the transfer. Our province, which 
takes into consideration its actual situations, stipulates that 
during the contracting period, land-use rights can be leased, 
collateralized, or used for shareholding. It also stipulates 
that contracts for the use of barren hills, wastelands, deserted 
shoals, and unutilized water can be extended to between 50 to 70 
years. Relevant provincial departments should draw up measures 
to decontrol land-use rights. Efforts to improve the land 
contracting system involve a large number of households and are 
strongly policy oriented. All localities should proceed from 
reality and work enthusiastically in a sure and steady manner. 
The adoption of policies facilitates a rational distribution of 
basic production factors in rural areas, the management of land 
on a suitably large scale, and the transfer of surplus rural 
labor to other sectors. These policies will give impetus to the 
development of rural economies for a long time. 
  In the 1990's, we have predominantly switched from seeking 
quantitative increases to stressing both better and higher 
yields as well as high efficiency in agriculture. This marks a 
great turning point in agricultural development. We should make 
corresponding changes in work-related guidance in order to 
adjust ourselves to the change. We should make arrangements to 
implement systematic agricultural projects; to promote 
operations which combine trade, industry, and agriculture into 
one; to promote development of industrialized, regionalized, and 
serialized products; and to promote development of highly 
efficient and high-value-added industries as well as agriculture 
which reaps foreign exchange. We should focus on developing 
such serialized products as good quality rice, cotton, 
oil-bearing crops, tea leaves, domestic animals, poultry, 
pongee, fruits, vegetables, marine products, Chinese medicinal 
materials, Chinese chestnuts, and edible mushrooms; we should 
also turn vast numbers of such products into commodities. In 
practice, we should highlight regional features and provide 
guidance accordingly. Beginning this year, the state will be 
selecting and providing key support to 500 commodity 
grain-producing counties, 150 counties which produce 
high-quality cotton, and a group of zones which showcase highly 
efficient forms of agriculture that provide greater and better 
yields. Our province is hopeful that 41 of its grain and 
cotton-producing counties, and one of its exemplary zones, will 
be selected; all localities should earnestly see to it that we 
succeed. The province will select and implement a "project to 
showcase comprehensive agricultural development" in 10 key 
counties, 20 bases of certain scale, and 50 administrative 
villages; the province will promote "a highly efficient form of 
agriculture that provides greater and better yields." We should 
continue to expand the Huang Hai-Huai Hai comprehensive 
agricultural development project and the Huaibei agricultural 
irrigation project. Enterprises involved in farm reclamation 
have skilled personnel, technologies, and facilities as their 
assets; they should play the lead role in developing a 
market-oriented agriculture. We should continue to focus on the 
"fifth eight-year" afforestation and greening plan. This is the 
last year for us to develop barren hills, so we must complete 
our tasks. We should also pay attention to solving the problems 
facing mountain regions and should develop those regions' 
economies. 
  We should increase the input into agriculture through 
various channels. Beginning this year, we must see to it that 
the increase in the input into agriculture is higher than the 
growth rate of regular fiscal revenues, and that banks allocate 
at least 10 percent of their new loans for agriculture. We 
should continue to implement the strategy of invigorating 
agriculture with science and technology, stabilizing the 
contingent of scientific and technical personnel in rural areas, 
popularizing fine seeds and practical techniques, and further 
mechanizing farm work, thereby bringing into play the role of 
science and technology in agricultural development. In the 
course of developing a market-oriented agriculture, farmers will 
make more urgent demands for socialized services. Therefore, we 
should expedite the establishment of a sound socialized service 
network at the county, township, and village levels which can be 
run either by the government or by the masses, and which focuses 
on providing services in circulation, science and education, and 
information. 
  On the condition of raising quality and efficiency, we 
should 
promote the development of village and township enterprises. We 
should unswervingly carry out the "1235" [numerals as published] 
project, increase assistance to the six counties along the Huai 
He, and pay close attention to helping backward areas begin to 
move forward. The present scale of village and township 
enterprises in Anhui is rather small. We should accelerate the 
pace of optimizing their organizational structure and build 
their strength while introducing the new tax system. In 
evaluating the performance of village and township enterprises 
this year, the focus should be shifted from output value to 
sales volume in order to prompt enterprises to more 
expeditiously optimize structure and improve efficiency. We 
should actively develop the economy at the village level and 
build up the economic strength of collectives. The partnership 
system in the form of stock sharing is a mode of managing assets 
which can help clearly define property rights, change operating 
mechanisms, and formulate effective accumulation. This system, 
which is quite popular in society and very suitable for village 
and township enterprises, should be supported and developed. The 
development of village and township enterprises should be 
organically combined with the construction of small rural towns. 
Meanwhile, we should reform the household registration system in 
small rural towns to promote rational mobility of rural labor, 
and strive to bring about a major change in the outlook of 
Anhui's rural areas. 
  To help backward areas shake off poverty and become well off 
is an arduous task confronting us today. Based on the state's 
aid-to-the-poor plan, Anhui has drawn up a program to assist the 
poor. Under the program, we shall help 3 million impoverished 
people solve the problem of food and clothing in three years, 
cast off poverty in five years, and lead a well-off life in 
eight years. It is necessary to implement various policy 
measures, improve the management of aid-to-the-poor projects, 
raise the efficiency of using funds earmarked for assisting the 
poor, lay equal emphasis on assistance and development, develop 
pillar industries, and build up the stamina of backward areas 
for self-development. All local governments and departments 
concerned should do everything within their capacity to help 
poor areas become well off as soon as possible. 
  Governments at all levels should effectively strengthen 
leadership over rural work, and on the basis of consolidating 
the achievements already made, continue to pay keen attention to 
implementing the various rural policies of the party and 
government. They should work relentlessly to reduce burdens on 
peasants. Fees explicitly abolished by the central and 
provincial authorities must be discontinued so as to protect and 
harness the enthusiasm of peasants at large and to quicken the 
pace of advancing towards moderate prosperity. 
  It Is Necessary To Improve the Industrial Structure 
and Increase Economic EfficiencyWe should vigorously 
support pillar industries, develop high quality products with 
added value, increase economic efficiency, and promptly create a 
favorable situation for economic development. In the 
development of the machinery industry, we should lay stress on 
developing the manufacturing of automobiles and engineering 
machinery. We should pay attention to the production of 
automobile, forklift, hydraulic excavators, and digital 
controlled lathes. In the development of the steel industry, we 
should attach importance to developing the Maanshan Iron and 
Steel Company as well as to renovating the Hefei Steel Mill and 
other medium and small iron and steel enterprises. In the 
development of the nonferrous industry, we should increase the 
economic scale, support mining operations, and do an effective 
job in multipurpose use of materials. In the development of the 
building materials industry, we should give prominence to 
developing large cement plants and should expand the production 
of new building materials. In the development of the chemical 
industry, we should pay attention to stabilizing the production 
of items for supporting agriculture. Meanwhile, we should 
accelerate the reorganization and renovation of enterprises, and 
vigorously develop the production of high quality products. In 
the development of light industry, we should quicken the 
adjustment of production structures, develop name brands and 
high quality products, keep up with market demands, actively 
develop new products, and constantly increase the market share. 
In the production of household electrical appliances, we should 
give full play to the advantageous position of backbone 
enterprises such as Meiling, Yangzhi, and Rongshida and the 
Jianghuai Air conditioner plant, developing the serial products 
of those enterprises. In the development of the electronics 
industry, we should consolidate the output of television sets 
and develop audio-video equipment, magnetic materials, and other 
advantageous products. We should also accelerate the 
development of electronic information engineering. In the 
development of the medical industry, we should pay attention to 
developing the production of Chinese traditional remedies, 
health food, medical apparatus, and other materials for medical 
use. In the development of the tobacco industry, we should 
control total output and increase the proportion of high and 
medium grade cigarettes. Presently the textile industry is 
faced with many difficulties, and we must take full advantage of 
state support, lay stress on intensive processing, and strive to 
create a new situation. All trades and professions should 
adjust their production structures by following the needs of the 
market and the principle of "increasing the production of easily 
marketable goods, limiting the production of items in average 
demand, and stopping the production of overstocked items." In 
this year, the entire province should develop 1,850 new products 
and begin production of over 70 percent of those new items. 
  Importing high technology and technological transformations 
is an effective way to improve production structures and raise 
economic efficiency. We should speed up technological 
transformation of various enterprises. We should carry out 
technological transformation for 40 percent of large and medium 
sized enterprises and 30 percent of state-owned enterprises. 
This year, we will invest a total of 11.2 billion yuan for 
technological transformation, of which 8 billion yuan will be 
invested in state- owned enterprises. In addition, we will 
import technologies worth $350 million. We should attach 
importance to major technological transformation projects at the 
state, province, and county levels. The province will organize 
113 enterprises to carry out 119 technological transformation 
projects to "achieve high quality, develop news product and 
quicken production," and change them into large-scale backbone 
enterprises with sales volumes exceeding 100 million yuan and 
profits and taxes exceeding 10 million yuan each. We should 
continue to implement the "production research" project, and 
strive to have Rongshida, Meiling, and other large and medium 
sized enterprises as well as digital control and laser 
technology projects included in the state scientific and 
technological development program. We should do an effective 
job in conserving energy. We should reduce the consumption of 
coal per 10,000 yuan of output to under 2.7 tonnes, or reduce 
the rate of energy consumption by 3.5 percent. The 
establishment of a technological transformation fund is an 
effective measure to promote the technological transformation of 
various enterprises. The provincial government has decided to 
increase appropriation for the technological transformation fund 
on the basis of the starting amount of 20 million yuan last 
year. According to their respective financial situation, 
various locales should appropriately establish special funds and 
increase their investment in technological transformation. 
  We should properly organize production in industry and 
communications; take emphatic charge of converging production 
with sales in the fields of energy, raw material, 
communications, and transportation as well as of coordinating 
the use of current capital from enterprises; pay close attention 
to market situations; promptly solve new problems arising in 
production; and ensure the normal functioning of communications 
and industrial production. Enterprise management should be 
strengthened. Enterprises should conscientiously strengthen 
internal management; properly conduct personnel training; 
enforce technological, labor, and financial discipline; and 
implement a responsibility system for cost management throughout 
the entire production and operation process. They should 
strengthen production safety and eliminate all kinds of 
potential hazards. It is necessary for them to earnestly 
implement the Product Quality Law, improve technical 
supervision, and carry out proper quality control. We are to 
take serious charge of the work to make up deficits and increase 
surpluses in enterprises, as well as comprehensively analyze and 
classify enterprises which are running at a loss and give them 
separate guidance. We will help enterprises make up deficits 
and increase surpluses through such effective measures as 
establishing development funds for eliminating losses. Being 
the subject of eliminated losses, enterprises should further 
implement an internal target responsibility system for 
eliminating losses and continually upgrade economic efficiency. 
It Is Necessary To Further Invigorate Distribution and 
Stabilize Commodity Prices on the MarketAccording to this 
year's market forecast, there will be a basic balance between 
supply and demand for industrial goods for daily use, and a 
slightly tight supply of a small number of agricultural and 
sideline products as well as capital goods. State-owned 
cooperative commercial enterprises should play an effective role 
in supplying daily necessities and major agricultural capital 
goods, and in making arrangements for materials needed for key 
production and construction projects. They should pay close 
attention to the procurement of grain, cotton, and oil to ensure 
the state has in hand an adequate supply of goods and has a 
strengthened ability of regulation and control. They should 
work hard to open up urban and rural markets, actively unfold 
activities to promote sales, widen the field of consumption, and 
satisfy consumption needs at different levels. Privately and 
individually-owned commerce is a weak link in the province's 
distribution sector that calls for vigorous development. The 
peasants' income increased substantially last year, providing 
favorable conditions for invigorating the rural market. 
Distribution enterprises should take various measures to promote 
the two-way flow of industrial and agricultural products. 
  Since the market is the medium of distribution, the demand 
on 
market building grows as the economy develops. We devoted 
efforts to market building in recent years, forming a number of 
specialty wholesale markets such as Haozhou's Chinese medicines, 
Yingshang's Nanzhao rice, Wuwei's Liudu timber, and Fanchang's 
Eqiao tea, as well as a number of large general shopping malls 
such as the Hefei Department Store. We also devoted efforts to 
rapidly developing various capital goods markets and playing an 
important role in invigorating distribution. We should continue 
to accelerate market building, emphatically establish a number 
of large and medium wholesale markets and large shopping malls, 
and vigorously develop various capital goods markets in order to 
gradually form a distribution network that integrates large, 
medium, and small, general and specialty, wholesale and retail, 
as well as urban and rural markets. We should accelerate the 
development of markets as regards production factors such as 
personnel, labor, capital, technology, and information; we 
should also establish various intermediary organizations for the 
market. We will continue to smooth distribution channels, 
improve market rules, strengthen market management, and sternly 
crack down on the production and sale of fake and shoddy goods. 
  The price index was relatively high at the beginning of 
this year, so it is rather difficult to achieve price control. 
Governments at various levels must pay close attention to this 
and take various measures to maintain relative price stability. 
It is necessary to vigorously establish or improve the system 
for stockpiling important commodities such as grain, cooking 
oil, and meat as well as to establish a price-regulating fund 
for non-staple food. The grain stockpiling system has been 
instituted for two years; this year we should ensure the amount 
of grain is stockpiled as planned. Now we should establish a 
risk fund for grain production. We should continue to implement 
the system of full responsibility for mayors and effectively 
carry out the "vegetable basket" project by protecting and 
expanding the acreage sown to vegetables and stabilizing the 
prices of non-staple foods in towns and cities. Efforts should 
be made to strengthen control over the prices of commodities 
that are deregulated, and to particularly strengthen the 
monitoring and inspection of the prices of 20 necessities and 
services needed by residents in daily life. The prices of all 
commodities and services should be clearly marked, and 
supervision and inspection of such prices should be 
strengthened. The price index of consumer goods should be 
strictly controlled. As we are striding forward in reform and 
as prices are rising rather sharply, we should pay close 
attention to the livelihoods of people living in 
poverty-stricken areas, retired people, and enterprise workers 
facing great difficulties, and we should help them solve 
problems. 
We Should Strengthen the Building of Infrastructural 
Facilities To Increase Our Staying Power of Economic 
DevelopmentWe should continue to do a good job in building 
collieries in Huainan and Huaibei whose coal is for unified 
distribution, as well as coal mines in Renlou, Xinji, and other 
places. Every effort should be made to have the province's coal 
output reach 11 million tonnes, and to build the Wuhu Power 
Plant's fourth-stage extension projects and the Huaibei No. 2 
Power Plant. We should accelerate the coordinated construction 
of power grids and make efforts to solve the problem of power 
supply for 2 million people in remote and poor areas. In 
railway construction, we should complete the track-laying task 
for the Anhui section of the Hefei-Jiujiang Railway; increase 
construction of the Fuyang and Hefei railway hubs and the Qinglu 
Railway; and actively make preparations for the construction of 
a bridge over Chang Jiang at Wuhu, the Tongjiu Railway, and the 
Hefei- Luan section of the Ningxi Railway. In highway 
construction, we should efficiently build such key projects as 
the Hefei-Wuhu, Hefei-Tongling, and Dunxi-Huangshan roads; the 
Dalong section of the Hefei-Ningguo; and the highway bridge over 
Chang Jiang at Tongling. We should increase the construction of 
infrastructural facilities and public works in urban areas. We 
should make efforts to build postal and telephone service 
networks in urban and rural areas, and to double the 
telephone-exchange capacities in those areas. 
  We should persistently increase the building of water 
conservancy projects, especially the new Huaihong He project, 
flood control projects along Chang Jiang and Huai He, and the 
supportive projects in the Pi-Shi-Hang irrigation area. We 
should begin harnessing Baokuai He, increase the rebuilding of 
dangerous reservoirs, and vigorously build capital construction 
on farmland. We should effectively strengthen the management of 
projects, perform our work in flood control and drought 
fighting, and increase our ability to overcome natural 
disasters. Enough funds should be raised for water conservancy 
projects, and they should be put to good use. We should 
continue to implement systems and measures that have been proved 
effective, such as rural labor accumulation [nong cun lao dong 
ji lei gong 6593 2625 0525 0520 4480 4797 1562] and the 
irrigation project construction month. 
  At no time should we slacken our efforts at environmental 
protection and land management. We should continue to stress 
the prevention and treatment of pollution in Huai He and Chao 
Hu, and should treat the major sources of pollution within a set 
time. We should make preparations for treating the polluted 
water in Chao Hu by using a loan from the Asian Bank, and try to 
start the actual treatment as soon as possible. We should 
further strengthen land management and check up on spontaneous 
land transactions, as well as develop and standardize the land 
market. We should implement a fundamental system for farmland 
protection, speed up the development and utilization of reserve 
land resources for farming, and strive to maintain a balance 
between the increase and decrease in farmland. 
  We Should Expand Sources of Funds and Increase 
Investments. Last year, Anhui's investments in fixed 
assets grew by 34.9 percent, which was still below the national 
average and the investments of the peripheral regions. The fixed 
asset projects planned for this year require us to put in more 
funds, to do everything possible to expand sources of capital, 
to increase the total amount of investment, and to optimize 
investment patterns. We should, first of all, try to list more 
projects under the state plan on loans; second, we should 
utilize foreign capital in various forms to make up the shortage 
of funds; third, we should build up our capability to raise 
funds through issuing shares and bonds; fourth, we should 
improve the management of construction funds and conserve 
capital; and fifth, we should diversify investment sources and 
encourage collectives and individuals to invest in public 
welfare undertakings. 
  Fellow deputies, I would like to call special attention to 
the issue of macroeconomic regulation and control. As we are in 
transition from a planned economy to a socialist market economy, 
strengthening and improving macroeconomic regulation and control 
is of particular importance. The success of macroeconomic 
regulation and control last year has once again testified that 
the deeper reform goes and the faster the economy develops, the 
more necessary it is to exercise effective macroeconomic 
regulation and control over economic activities. From now on, 
the provincial people's government will attach greater 
importance to the work in this field; will comprehensively apply 
planning, fiscal, taxation, and other regulatory means; and will 
bring into play the role of auditing, supervisory, statistical, 
and industry and commerce administrative departments to step up 
economic coordination in day-to-day work and to ensure normal 
operation of the national economy. 
III.Press Ahead With Overall Reform, Achieve Breakthroughs 
in Key Areas, Accelerate the Establishment of a Socialist Market 
Economic Structure 
  The convening of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC 
Central Committee was a hallmark that China's economic 
structural reform entered a new stage of pressing ahead with 
overall reform. The focuses of reform for this year are: 
continuing to change the operating mechanisms of state-owned 
enterprises; actively exploring effective ways for establishing 
a modern enterprise system; expediting the reform of fiscal and 
taxation, banking, investment, and foreign trade systems; and 
establishing a macroeconomic regulation and control system in 
keeping with the demand of a market economy. We should comply 
with the central authorities' unified arrangements in pressing 
Anhui's economic structural reform ahead and striving to achieve 
breakthroughs in reform to promote economic development. 
We Should Accelerate the Pace of Changing the Operating 
Mechanisms of Enterprises, and Should Actively Explore Ways To 
Establish a Modern Enterprise System.Since reform was 
extended from the countryside to cities, enterprise reform has 
always been the core of economic structural reform. This year 
we should start with tackling some deep-seated contradictions. 
The centerpiece of enterprise reform should be shifted from the 
policy readjustment stage of delegating more powers to 
enterprises and allowing them to retain a portion of their 
profits, to a new stage of instituting a new enterprise system 
focused on the clear definition of relations of property rights. 
The establishment of the modern enterprise system is a 
pioneering undertaking. We should explore effective ways for 
setting up such system by trying it out at selected points and 
summarizing the resultant experiences. Two or three enterprises 
in Anhui will experiment with the state pilot project, while 50 
more will try out the provincial pilot project. In addition, 
Bengbu City has been tasked with experimenting with the national 
project for "optimizing capital structure and strengthening 
enterprise vitality;" and Tongling and Xuanzhou cities, with the 
national projects on comprehensive city and county reform, 
respectively. All local governments and departments concerned 
should earnestly implement the pilot projects and strive to 
obtain tangible results as soon as possible. 
  We will push forward reform of the system covering 
enterprises' property rights. We will allow more state-owned 
enterprises to be operated by civilians, publicly owned 
enterprises to be operated by private investors, encourage the 
leasing of these enterprises to be managed by private investors, 
and gradually standardize such enterprises according to the 
requirements of a modern enterprise system. We will accelerate 
the establishment of markets for the trading of property rights 
and encourage enterprises to merge or form associations. We 
will promote the readjustment of the organizational structure of 
enterprises by vigorously developing enterprise groups linked by 
property rights. To reform small state-owned enterprises, we 
will adopt a flexible method combining leasing and contracting, 
including selling such enterprises. Losing enterprises unable 
to save themselves and unable to pay debts should be allowed to 
declare bankruptcy. When the assets of enterprises are to be 
transferred, they must be carefully appraised in order to 
prevent the loss of state property. 
  The system of shareholding is a new system suitable for 
Anhui's economic development and is also an integral part of the 
effort to establish a modern enterprise system. We should 
continue to conduct experiments in the shareholding system and 
strive to have 20 percent of the large-and medium-sized 
state-owned enterprises, about 100 enterprises, change to a 
shareholding system within this year. Those enterprises which 
have changed to a shareholding system should observe rules and 
truly operate in accordance with the new system. Maanshan Iron 
and Steel Company, Anhui Energy Company, and Meiling Company, 
whose stocks have been listed, should accelerate changing their 
operating mechanisms so as to provide new experiences for the 
establishment of a modern enterprise system. 
  Establishing a modern enterprise system is a new process. At 
present, we should continue to implement the "Enterprise Law" 
and the "Regulations on Transforming the Operating Mechanisms of 
Industrial Enterprises Owned by the Whole People" and clearly 
define the rights and responsibilities of enterprises. We 
should conscientiously implement state regulations and policies 
on the supervision of state property, draw up implementation 
rules for our province, and thoroughly reappraise the stocks and 
assets of enterprises. Enterprises within the budget, whose 
second-round of contracts has already expired, should, beginning 
this year, switch to a unified tax system in accordance with the 
requirements for reform of the state financial and taxation 
systems. Local tax reductions and exemptions for enterprises 
which were approved by the provincial government prior to 30 
June 1993 but which have not yet expired must be reported to the 
Ministry of Finance and the State General Administration of 
Taxation for reexamination and confirmation. Beginning in 1994, 
we will adopt the method of taxing these enterprises first and 
then reimbursing them later. 
Strive To Improve Financial Work by Earnestly Undertaking 
the Reform of the Financial and Taxation Systems.Reform of 
the financial and taxation system is the central link of several 
major reforms this year. For this reform there will be a 
transitional period. At the beginning, we will implement the 
dual-track system, with the old and new systems operating 
simultaneously. This is because it is hard to get rid of all 
the problems left over from the old system. Our interests might 
be harmed if we fail to keep up with our work. Therefore, in 
doing our financial work this year, we must combine reform with 
development in order to ensure a steady increase in revenues and 
taxes. 
  The following principles will be adopted by the provincial 
government for the reform of the financial and taxation systems 
of prefectures and cities: with the actual income in 1993 as the 
base figure, the revenues of various localities will be ensured; 
under the premise that the income of localities will not be 
affected, the provincial finance department will take 
appropriate measures to centralize financial resources in order 
to strengthen its ability to exercise macroeconomic regulation 
and control. Through reform, we will gradually standardize the 
distribution of financial resources among governments at all 
levels, eliminate the distribution of financial resources at 
will, and enhance the initiative of governments in managing 
their finances. We will rely on our own efforts to achieve a 
balance in receipts and expenditures. 
  As Anhui's expenditures this year will be increased 
considerably, we must exercise stricter control over revenues 
and strive for a specified increase in both central and local 
tax collections to ensure a balanced budget for the year. Our 
important tasks are currently as follows: First, we should 
adjust our ways of thinking so that more revenue sources will be 
identified in line with central policies and in consideration of 
local realities. Second, we should tighten tax imposition and 
collection management, insist in full collection for all 
mandated central and local revenues, and take effective measures 
to rectify the practice of "unaccounted revenue circulation," 
and strictly enforce the new tax system by freezing all 
unauthorized new tax deductions and exemptions. Third, we 
should rationally arrange and strictly control expenditures by 
adhering to the key principle of setting aside funds to 
guarantee workers' wages and the unavoidable administrative and 
case investigations expenses. We should reform ways of sharing 
budgeted funds by popularizing zero-based budgeting methods. 
Strict control over administrative institutions' group 
spending power should be continued and the scope and eligibility 
for fund appropriations should be conscientiously screened and 
rectified. Fourth, we should straighten out financial work, 
enhance the quality of financial and taxation personnel, improve 
approving procedures and systems, tighten financial budgets, and 
establish a strict investment and return management system. 
Fifth, we should separately set up central and local taxation 
offices according to the State Council's uniform arrangements. 
Successfully promoting reform of the financial system and 
improving financial work.Taking into consideration Anhui's 
reality, cadres and staff and workers within the financial 
circle should help reform the financial system so that a 
uniform, open financial market with orderly competition and 
strict control can be gradually established. 
  We should fully bring out the main functions of state-owned 
specialized banks, strive to increase total credit funds, and 
work harder to meet the targets of a 10.3-billion-yuan increase 
in bank deposits and a marginal increase of extended credits 
reaching the average national level. Banks should provide good 
service in settling accounts, reducing funds in transit, and 
accelerating cash flow. Guided by the industrial policy, we 
should optimize the credit structure and pursue a sound lending 
policy by adhering to the principle of "supporting the good one 
and restricting the bad one." We should guarantee funds needed 
for the construction of key projects, appropriately solve the 
problem of extending loans to medium- and small-sized 
enterprises to be used as circulating funds, be positive in 
supporting loss-making enterprises with good chances for 
recovery and capabilities of repaying loans, and mobilize more 
funds for production purposes by enlivening deposited funds and 
maintaining an appropriate fund reserve ratio. 
  Perfecting Anhui's local financial system is an important 
task to be carried out. We should actively create conditions to 
facilitate the Communications Bank carrying out business in 
Anhui as soon as possible and set up urban and rural cooperative 
banks on a trial basis, with a view to turning them into 
financial organizations primarily serving the local economy and 
the medium- and small-sized enterprises. We should guide the 
healthy development of the rural cooperative funds that serve as 
genuine mutual-help financial institutions in the neighborhoods, 
aggressively seek state approval to make both Hefei and Wuhu 
open cities financially, develop various types of non-banking 
financial organizations, and regulate stock issuance and 
listings to promote the development of a security market. 
  It is necessary to deepen the reform of the investment 
system and strengthen the investment risk prevention mechanism. 
In this regard, we should do a good job in four respects: 1. 
We should formulate the reform plan of this province in 
accordance with the basic orientation and principle of the 
reform of the investment system. We should rationally divide 
the administrative responsibility, powers, and rights among 
provincial, prefectural, city, and county governments. We 
should establish the provincial-level investment system and 
capital-raising system step by step, keep improving them, and 
encourage investment from various investors. We should organize 
personnel to screen existing investment channels, and formulate 
policies which will help widen investment channels and improve 
the mode of capital flow. 2. We should step up the recovery of 
loans extended, in lieu of state appropriation, by the 
provincial government over the previous years. We should make 
construction funds circulate faster and raise the efficiency of 
investment. 3. We should establish and improve the investment 
information system, step up the collection and analysis of 
investment information, and provide effective service to 
investors. 4. We should implement a corporate project 
responsibility system. From now on, a principal responsible 
person must be clearly identified before the start of any 
construction project, so as to strengthen the investment risk 
prevention mechanism. 
  It is necessary to accelerate the reforms of social security 
and the housing system. With the deepening of enterprise and 
other reforms, it is imperative for us to establish a sound 
social security system. We should set up a unified social 
security management organ in accordance with the principle of 
"unified management and separation of administration from 
business," and accelerate the establishment of a multi-level 
social security system. We should pay attention to improving 
the retirement pension system and the unemployment insurance 
system for enterprise workers. We should combine organizational 
funding with individual payments so that both the organization 
and the individual share the burden of pension funding and 
medical insurance premiums for urban workers and staff members. 
A further step should be taken to improve the unemployment 
insurance system, with the premium paid by enterprises according 
to a fixed percentage of the total wages of its workers and 
staff members. We should universally establish a job-related 
injury insurance system for enterprise workers and staff 
members. By summing up the experience of the experiments 
conducted at select rural spots on guaranteed pensions, we 
should practice a system of voluntary individual retirement 
accounts among peasants in rural areas with the necessary 
conditions. 
  We should promote the reform of the medical care system. The 
provincial government has already issued procedures for 
reforming and improving the administration of free medical care. 
All levels should formulate as soon as possible detailed rules 
for implementation and operate according to the new procedures. 
At present, we should pay attention to solving the problem of 
waste in free medical care and curb excessive increases in 
medical expenditures. 
  We should accelerate the reform of the housing system. We 
should establish a public accumulation fund system, actively 
promote rent reform, promote the sale of public-owned houses, 
and speed up the commercialization of housing. In housing 
sales, we should adopt various forms of property rights. In 
rent reform, we should pay attention to ensuring a reasonable 
ratio between rents and house values. The public accumulation 
fund should be managed by an intermediary organ established by 
the government. All localities should firmly strengthen 
leadership and strictly implement policies to ensure sound 
reform of the housing system. 
IV. Open Wider to the Outside 
  In last two years, this province achieved fairly notable 
progress in opening up. We should open up wider in more fields, 
maintain a steady growth of exports, make better use of foreign 
capital, promote economic exchanges and cooperation with foreign 
countries, and make new progress in the development of an 
export-oriented economy. 
  The state will take a further step in reforming the foreign 
trade management system. The reforms of the banking, finance, 
and taxation systems concern foreign trade work. These reforms 
will create a more relaxed external environment for foreign 
trade. At the same time, they will push foreign trade 
enterprises onto a track of fair competition. Foreign trade 
enterprises should accelerate the change of operational 
mechanisms. The companies which have been authorized to 
practice the shareholding system should operate according to the 
new operational mechanisms. Foreign enterprises which have the 
necessary conditions should develop themselves toward forming 
enterprise groups. We should continue to improve the internal 
management of foreign trade enterprises, promote the reform of 
the personnel system and the distribution system, and enlarge 
the scope of the hiring system and the contract system. 
  It is necessary to give priority to earning foreign 
exchange through exports in order to develop an open economy. 
The export mix should be readjusted according to the changes of 
the market. Efforts should be made to open international 
markets and to expand our foreign trade. We should continue to 
implement the market-diversification strategy, with product 
quality as a top concern; consolidate and develop the 
multichannel export network; and strive to maintain the steady 
growth of foreign exchange earned through exports while 
attaching importance to economic efficiency. This year the 
province plans to earn $1.1 billion in foreign exchange through 
exports, an increase of 15 percent over last year. 
Provincial-level foreign-trade companies, which are the main 
foreign-exchange earners, should continue to make the best of 
their favorable conditions to expand their export volume. 
Prefectural- and city-level foreign-trade companies should also 
work hard to increase their exports. The province now has 41 
production enterprises which are licensed to export products 
themselves, and they are a new force in earning foreign exchange 
through exports. They should pay attention to their credit and 
strive to open up channels for exports and to maintain a 
long-term share of the international market. Relevant 
departments should simplify procedures for exporting products by 
the three kinds of partially or wholly foreign-owned 
enterprises, improve their services for such enterprises, and 
give them vigorous support. Banks should do everything possible 
to help raise needed funds in earning foreign exchange through 
exports. Foreign-trade enterprises should participate in 
developing products, guide companies in developing products with 
competitiveness and prospects for export, and encourage the 
export of complete sets of equipment, machinery, and electrical 
products. While consolidating and developing markets in 
developed countries, we should further open up markets in 
developing and new countries in order to diversify markets and 
reduce market risks. As for the economic and trade 
organizations we have set up outside the country, the 
departments in charge and comprehensive management departments 
should strengthen their supervision and control over such 
organizations to make them really play a role in expanding our 
foreign trade and economic relations with other countries. 
  We should make better use of foreign capital by readjusting 
the structure of foreign-capital utilization and expanding the 
fields in which such capital is used. The three kinds of 
partially or wholly foreign-owned enterprises have developed 
rapidly in the province; among them, however, there are not too 
many infrastructure projects, large production projects, or 
projects that are capable of yielding high value added or 
earning foreign exchange through exports. Counterpart funds 
provided by the Chinese side are inadequate, and the rate of 
such projects going into operation and their economic efficiency 
are not ideal. Various localities should conscientiously sum up 
their experiences, strengthen their macroeconomic guidance, and 
improve their work efficiency and the investment environment to 
promote the better and faster development of partially or wholly 
foreign-owned enterprises. In giving guidance in industrial 
policy, it is essential to encourage foreign businessmen to 
invest in projects in transportation, energy, raw and 
semifinished materials, foreign-exchange-earning agriculture, 
and high value-added products. It is now an urgent task to make 
a success of existing partially or wholly foreign-owned 
enterprises. There is a lot of work to do in managing such 
enterprises because they are scattered in vast areas, and the 
relationship of the jurisdiction over them is complicated. 
Relevant departments in various parts of the province should 
improve their services, protect investors' legitimate rights and 
interests according to the law, and help such enterprises solve 
concrete problems arising in their operations. We should 
gradually improve the management of the three kinds of partially 
or wholly foreign-owned enterprises. We should make better use 
of loans from foreign governments, international financial 
institutions, and international commercial banks; use such loans 
for appropriate projects, optimize the structure of foreign 
debts, and increase our ability to repay such debts. 
  We should strengthen our overall planning and leadership in 
opening to the outside world. Hefei and Wuhu cities should give 
full play to their role as forerunners in opening to the outside 
world, make full and flexible use of preferential policies 
granted by the state, and vigorously develop an open economy so 
as to promote economic development in their surrounding areas. 
The Hefei New- and High-Technology Development Zone should 
maintain its momentum of speedy development, and the Wuhu 
Economic and Technological Development Zone should concentrate 
on completing its projects under construction, having them go 
into operation as soon as possible, and turning out products to 
their capacity. The 11 development zones approved by the 
provincial government should complete the construction of their 
elementary infrastructure facilities and have their overall 
plans appraised and approved. Management organizations and 
enterprises in such development zones should employ a new 
management system and new operating mechanisms according to the 
requirements of the market economy. Other cities along the 
Chang Jiang, key cities serving as railway hubs, and cities 
along highways should make full use of their convenient 
transportation facilities to increase their strength and improve 
their conditions in opening wider to the outside world. 
Customs, port, and commodity inspection departments should 
serve better the purpose of opening up. 
  It is necessary to quicken the development of an 
international tourist industry centered on Huang Shan. We 
should develop central, eastern, western, and northern tourist 
regions to establish a tourist trade that corresponds with that 
of southern Anhui. Localities with rich tourist resources 
should incorporate the tourist industry into the national 
economic and social development plan. We should further utilize 
foreign funds to develop tourism and invite foreign investors to 
participate in comprehensive tourism development projects. We 
should make vigorous preparations to expand the Tunxi Airport 
and renovate roads leading to important scenic spots. We must 
vigorously develop tourist merchandise so as to increase foreign 
exchange earnings from the tourist trade. We should strengthen 
the management of the tourist industry and strive to improve the 
quality of our service. We should organize well major events of 
tourist attractions such as Huang Shan tourism and Jiuhua Shan 
temple festivals. 
  It is necessary to further develop friendly overseas 
contacts 
as well as fully exploit the role of provinces, regions, and 
friendly cities as economic and trade partners. We should 
actively establish exchanges and cooperation in the scientific 
and technological, educational, cultural, health, and sports 
fields with them. Foreign and Taiwan affairs departments should 
strengthen their contacts overseas as well as with Hong Kong, 
Macao, and Taiwan to enhance mutual understanding, make Anhui 
more well known abroad, and establish a new image. 
V. Effectively Restructure Government Institutions; 
Promote the State Public Service System 
  Institutional restructuring is an important condition for 
establishing the socialist market economic system and promoting 
economic development as well as an urgent task for the 
restructuring of the political system. Anhui will implement 
institutional restructuring in accordance with the central 
authorities' unified plan. In institutional restructuring, it 
is necessary to abide by the principle of changing functions; 
regulating relations among government departments; streamlining 
administrative functions; and upgrading efficiency, as well as 
implement such restructuring measures gradually, progressively, 
and steadily from top to bottom. First, plans for 
provincial-level institutional restructuring have been approved 
by the party Central Committee and State Council, and are being 
implemented. The task will be basically completed in the first 
half of this year. Second, prefectural- and city-level 
institutional restructuring will begin in a suitable time in the 
first half of this year, to be completed within the year. 
Third, county- and village (township)-level institutional 
restructuring will be fully implemented in the fourth quarter of 
this year, and we will try to complete the task in the first 
half of next year. While proceeding with government 
institutional restructuring, it is necessary to vigorously 
promote reform in enterprise units in accordance with the 
principle of separating government and enterprise functions. 
  Institutional restructuring is a complex project, and full 
preparations and a meticulous job are required. We must base 
our task on the demand for developing the socialist market 
economic system and on actual conditions, as well as firmly 
focus on the key task of changing functions to find various 
specific restructuring methods. The institutional restructuring 
is obviously a transitional task. The provincial government 
will give localities certain self-governing rights and 
flexibility in establishing institutions. Apart from some 
essential ones, the establishment of suitable local institutions 
will be decided by localities themselves. The government will 
not insist that localities exactly follow government 
institutions. Of course, in practice, it is also necessary to 
maintain a continuation of top-to-bottom relations and ensure a 
smooth transition and succession of work. It is necessary to 
consider the overall task, implement strict discipline, and 
realistically do a good job in personnel distribution. 
Principal departments of various trades must not interfere with 
local institutional establishments and personnel placement. All 
localities and departments must avoid initiating unauthorized 
upgrading of the level of institutions, break rules to promote 
cadres, or take advantage of occasions to distribute money and 
materials. 
  We will accomplish the task in institutional restructuring 
this year and implement the state public service system 
gradually according to plans. Meanwhile, reform of the wage 
system will be correspondingly implemented for institutions and 
enterprise units. Effective implementation of these reform 
measures is significant to strengthening a clean government, 
upgrading personnel quality, and increasing the efficiency of 
government administration. All localities and departments must, 
in accordance with the unified plans of the central and 
provincial authorities, strengthen leadership as well as 
strictly and meticulously enforce policies to ensure smooth 
progress of the three reform measures. 
  While promoting institutional restructuring and implementing 
the state public service system, it is necessary to improve 
institutions' work style. Government offices and personnel at 
all levels must always firmly uphold the fundamental aim of 
serving the people wholeheartedly, establish a sense of public 
service, work through the grass-roots level and masses, forge 
close relations between cadres and the people, curb bureaucracy 
and formalism, speak the truth, and do practical work. We must 
strengthen discipline and ensure the smooth enforcement of 
administrative orders so that every policy is implemented to the 
letter. Provincial government organs should strive to do a good 
job in improving their work style. 
  VI. Accelerate the Development of Social 
Undertakings by Taking Economic Construction as the Central Task 
  Science and technology is a primary production force and is 
the forerunner of and decisive factor for economic development. 
We will make further efforts to reform the science and 
technology management system and to create a better environment 
for scientific and technological development and for science and 
technology to serve economic construction in a better way. 
Adhering to the principle of "holding fast to one end and 
leaving the whole field open," we will continue to support 
research in basic sciences, strengthen research in applied 
sciences and in new and high technology, and encourage 
developmental- and application-oriented scientific research 
institutions to integrate science and technology with the 
economy by establishing science and technology enterprises or by 
directly joining enterprise groups. Judging from Anhui's actual 
conditions, the development and application of science and 
technology should focus on solving urgent problems, such as 
developing high-efficiency agriculture giving high yields, 
technical transformation of enterprises, application of new and 
high technologies in industrial enterprises, and the 
assimilation of imported advanced technologies. We will increase 
investment in science and technology and establish, as soon as 
possible, a provincial fund for the popularization of scientific 
and technological achievements and a risk fund for the 
development of new and high technologies. We will make vigorous 
efforts to cultivate technology and information markets, train 
more scientific and technological personnel, and strengthen the 
intermediate links responsible for putting scientific and 
technological achievements to use in production. Enterprises 
should enhance their ability to absorb and assimilate scientific 
and technological achievements and accelerate their technical 
transformation and progress. Nongovernmental scientific 
research institutions which have emerged in recent years now 
constitute a new force. There are 1,200 such institutions in 
the province, all of which are demonstrating strong vitality. 
We should encourage them to grow by adhering to the principle 
of "support, guidance, service, and management." We will pay 
attention to scientific and technological work at grassroots 
units, strengthen guidance over, and provide better service for 
their work. We plan to convene a provincial science and 
technology conference and organize an exhibition trade fair on 
scientific and technological achievements. All areas and 
departments should earnestly make preparations for this event. 
  Modernization depends on the training of professional 
personnel and the enhancement of the educational level of the 
citizens. We should conscientiously implement the "Outline of 
Educational Reform and Development in China," give priority to 
the strategic task of developing education, and increase 
investment in education. We will strengthen basic education and 
make the nine-year compulsory education system universal in 19 
new counties (cities, districts) this year, with the aim of 
reducing the illiteracy rate among the middle-aged and young 
people to 11.3 percent. We will actively develop vocational and 
technical schools and adult education by establishing 100 
county-level demonstration vocational senior middle schools in 
stages. We will raise the educational level of government 
functionaries by promoting education and in-service training. 
Schools of higher learning should reform their educational 
system, readjust the curriculum structure, strengthen internal 
management, and improve teaching quality. We will concentrate 
on improving Anhui University. All departments directly under 
the provincial government should strive to create a condition 
for Anhui University to take part in the "211 project" of the 
state. The provincial government will allocate 10 million yuan 
in special funds for Anhui University each year for the next 
five years, starting with 1993. At the same time, the 
provincial government will support Hefei Industry University and 
other universities and colleges to join the "211 project." We 
will eliminate the old practice in which education was 
monopolized by the government, gradually establish a new system 
in which the government plays the central role in running 
schools, and all walks of life pool their efforts to expand 
education. The government will play the central role in 
developing basic education, and trades, enterprises, 
institutions, and all sectors of society will gradually play the 
leading role in running vocational and adult schools. We will 
mobilize all walks of life to continue carrying out the "hope 
project." We will encourage and support civilians to run 
various types of schools. Under the premise of insisting on 
conditions for running schools, we will relax policies on 
running schools and simplify the examination and approval 
procedures. We will conscientiously implement the "Law on 
Teachers," promote the custom of respecting teachers and 
knowledge, protect the legitimate rights and interests of 
teachers, strengthen the training of teachers for civilian-run 
schools and raise their educational level, and strive to build a 
contingent of teachers who have high moral integrity and are 
professionally proficient. To solve the problem of the failure 
to pay teachers on schedule, the provincial government has 
ordered the departments concerned to draw up relevant measures 
in line with state provisions to ensure that teachers are paid 
in full on schedule. 
  We will make further efforts to promote a good custom of 
respecting knowledge and professionally trained people and will 
strive to create an environment for talents to emerge and play 
their full role. We will gradually build up a mechanism where 
talents can move from place to place in a rational manner; 
attach equal importance to training and employing professional 
people; continue to improve intellectuals' working and living 
conditions; and attach importance to training middle-aged as 
well as young intellectuals. We will strengthen management of 
and improve services to students who returned to China after 
studying abroad, so as to enable them to play their role in a 
better way. 
  Cultural undertakings should gear themselves to serving the 
people and socialism; adhere to the "double hundred" principle; 
energetically serve the central task of economic construction; 
and deepen reform in order to promote the development of 
literature and art. Literary and art workers should demonstrate 
a strong sense of devotion to their job as well as a sense of 
responsibility by creating more and better intellectual products 
that reflect the spirit of the era, that reflect the people's 
wishes and sentiments, and that are healthy, useful, lively, and 
rich in content. Theatrical troupes at the provincial, 
prefectural, and city levels should continue to forge ahead in 
invigorating and enriching Anhui's literature and art. We will 
improve cultural work at grassroots units and restore or set up 
rural cultural stations in order to enliven mass cultural and 
recreational activities in the countryside. We will strengthen 
administration of markets for cultural products according to the 
law; improve the quality of radio and television programs; 
expand the areas covered by radio and television programs; run 
rural cable broadcasting facilities well; improve the quality of 
publications; enrich the publishing industry; strengthen the 
protection of cultural relics; and attach importance to archival 
work. 
  We will expand health care services and sports activities so 
as to improve the people's health. We should attach a high 
degree of importance to health care work in rural areas, 
vigorously popularize primary health care services in rural 
areas, actively expand and improve rural cooperative health care 
services, strengthen the building of town and village clinics, 
county-level disease prevention, and health centers for women 
and children, and accelerate the completion of projects to 
improve drinking water and lavatories in rural areas. We will 
strive to bring iodine deficiency diseases under control and 
strengthen immunization against poliomyelitis. We will 
accelerate the elimination of endemic diseases, strengthen 
administration of pharmaceuticals, set strict standards for 
civilian-run or individual-run hospitals, and ensure good market 
order for pharmaceutical products. We will develop mass sports 
activities to improve the physical fitness of the people. We 
will be ready for the eighth national games and seriously 
prepare for the eighth provincial games. 
  We will earnestly intensify birth control work. The 
province's birth rate is still in its third peak period. This, 
coupled with great increases in the transient population brought 
about by economic development in urban and rural areas, has made 
birth control an extremely formidable task. We must continue to 
uphold the principle of being enthusiastic and forceful, of 
adopting stronger measures, and of moving to a new stage in 
order to effectively enforce birth control. Principle 
government leaders at all levels will personally attend to birth 
control work, and institute a strict system under which 
governments at all levels are responsible for attaining given 
objectives for birth control. We will strengthen fundamental 
work, improve the quality of four types of birth control 
surgical operations, tighten planned management over fixed and 
transient rural population, and speed up construction of a 
network which oversees birth control work in counties, 
townships, villages, and organizations. This year, we will 
ensure that we meet birth control objectives set by the state, 
and strive to lower our population growth rate to below 17 per 
thousand and the natural population growth rate to around 11 per 
thousand. 
VII. Intensify Efforts to Build Socialist Spiritual 
Civilization and the Democratic and Legal System 
  The keynote and focus of socialist spiritual civilization 
are 
on promoting the main theme of the epoch. We will adhere to 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics, and strengthen propaganda, education, 
ideological, and political work according to the demand made by 
Comrade Jiang Zemin at the national conference on propaganda and 
ideological work. We will intensify research work in philosophy 
and social science under guidance of Marxism-Leninism and Mao 
Zedong Thought, and take the roles of philosophy and social 
science seriously. We will conduct extensive ideological 
education on patriotism, collectivism, and socialism. We will 
also vigorously commend heroes and models from all front lines, 
emulate the lofty ideals and heroic deeds of Xu Honggang by 
showing readiness to take up the cudgels for a just cause and 
defy brute force, and promote the Lei Feng spirit of the new 
era. We will educate the vast numbers of cadres and people to 
become people who have lofty ideals and a sense of discipline 
and pay attention to unity and the overall situation. In 
particular, we will guide and educate teenagers more and 
cultivate a generation of new socialists. We will have a 
clear-cut stand in opposing money worshipping, out-and-out 
egoism, and decadent life style. We will conduct extensive 
education on civic mindedness and professional ethics, and 
promote hard work, thrift, and the spirit of waging hard battle 
so as to improve social ethics. 
  Democracy is an intrinsic characteristic of Socialism. 
Governments at all levels should conscientiously accept 
supervision by people's congresses and their standing 
committees; further enhance the functions of Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference committees, personages from 
democratic parties, public figures without party affiliation, 
and people's organizations in political consultations and 
democratic supervision; and improve on the democratic and 
scientific procedures for decisionmaking and handling 
administrative work. We will further foster closer ties between 
the government and masses, pay attention to letters sent in by 
the masses and visits by them, and earnestly accept rationalized 
suggestions from the masses. We will strengthen construction of 
political power in townships and towns, and improve 
village-level self-governing organizations. We will earnestly 
enhance the functions of workers' congresses, neighborhood 
committees, and village committees, and further arouse 
enthusiasm and stimulate the creativity of the broad masses of 
the people in building socialism. 
  We must strengthen the legal system in order to develop the 
market economy. We will strengthen legislative, judicial, 
administrative, and law enforcement work according to objectives 
set on construction of the legal system by the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee. We will actively 
govern the province and insist on administering according to 
law. We will conduct in-depth propaganda and education about 
the legal system; effectively carry out, from beginning to end, 
the "Second Five-Year Plan" to disseminate legal knowledge; and 
enhance society's awareness toward laws. Leading cadres at all 
levels will take the lead to study law and become adept at using 
legal means to manage economic and social affairs. We will 
develop the legal service ranks and improve their 
professionalism. We will fully bring into play the active 
functions of non-government mediation in grass-roots democratic 
construction. 
  We will make unremitting efforts to conduct education on 
national defense to enhance people's awareness in this respect. 
Governments at all levels will pay attention to national 
defense construction and support the army so that the latter 
will complete all tasks. We will further accomplish the task 
concerning militia reserve duty. The people's armed police force 
will strive to reform and reinforce itself. We will launch 
extensive and in-depth campaigns to promote support for the army 
and preferential treatment to families of revolutionary armymen 
and martyrs, support for the government and acts which cherish 
the people, and joint construction by the army and people as 
well as the police and people. We will implement the policy 
which gives special care to disabled servicemen and to family 
members of revolutionary martyrs and servicemen, earnestly help 
settle down armymen who have been transferred to civilian work 
and armymen who have retired, safeguard the armymen's lawful 
rights and interests, and consolidate and develop unity between 
the army and government, and the army and people. 
  We will earnestly implement policies toward nationalities 
and 
religions. We will effectively conduct propaganda and education 
on policies toward nationalities, strengthen management of 
religious affairs according to law, develop economics of 
nationalities, and promote unity between nationalities. 
  We will further fight corruption and promote honesty. We 
will intensify efforts to build a clean and honest government. 
A fundamental task in the construction of political power is to 
combat all corrupt phenomena. This is also an important 
guarantee for smooth progress in reform and development. 
Compared to what the central authorities demand and what the 
vast numbers of cadres and people want, our efforts to fight 
corruption and promote honesty have not yet been carried out 
evenly, even up to now, and we still face a rather arduous task. 
Governments at all levels must not relax their efforts at all. 
We must understand the urgency, difficulty, and complexity of 
our anti-corruption struggle; rely fully on the masses; treat 
the root cause as well as outward signs; and strive to score new 
results. We will strictly abide by central provisions 
concerning honesty and self-discipline among leading cadres, and 
seriously investigate cases involving violation of laws and 
discipline, particularly major and important cases. When 
checking unhealthy tendencies in trades and professions, we will 
continue to focus on curbing arbitrary collection of fees and 
use of public funds for overseas tours, and check unhealthy 
tendencies in key departments, trades, and professions. We will 
strengthen supervision and inspection, increase transparency in 
work to fight corruption and promote honesty, and ensure 
implementation of measures to fight corruption and promote 
honesty. 
  We will launch extensive campaigns to improve all facets of 
public order and severely crack down on all types of crimes. 
Improvement of public order is of immediate interest to the 
broad masses of people. It is also a prerequisite for smooth 
progress in reform, opening up, and economic construction. We 
will direct our efforts to further improve all facets of public 
order against new problems which have currently cropped up in 
public order, and severely crack down on all types of criminal 
activities and serious economic crimes. We will launch 
extensive struggle to wipe out the "six vices" and crack down on 
pornography. We will expand the public security and judicial 
ranks and strengthen their ideological education, set strict 
standards of conduct for the police, and improve the quality of 
our personnel and their law enforcement ability. 
  Stability is the important guarantee for reform and 
development [wen ding shi gai ge he fa zhan de zhong yao bao 
zheng 4489 1353 2508 2395 7245 0735 4099 1455 4104 6850 6008 
0202 6086]. Without a stable political situation and social 
order, we will not be in a position to say anything. The 
present situation on the whole is good, but we still have some 
hidden elements of instability [dan reng qian fu zhe yi xie bu 
an ding yin su 0141 0095 3383 0126 4192 0001 0067 0008 1344 1353 
0936 4790]. Governments at all levels, especially leading 
cadres at all levels, should be consciously aware of this. When 
we draw up measures for reform and development, we should insist 
on proceeding from actual conditions, foster close ties with the 
masses, listen attentively to them, and safeguard their 
interests. We should correctly handle contradictions among the 
people, work hard to nip elements which affect stability in the 
bud, and create a favorable social environment for reform and 
development. 
  Dear deputies, 
  We are at a very crucial period, and the heavy 
responsibility 
of building a socialist market economy and accelerating economic 
development have historically fallen on our shoulders. Let us 
move along the path shown by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics, unite more 
closely around the party Central Committee with Jiang Zemin as 
the core, firmly and unshakably implement the party's basic 
line, be of one heart and one mind and do practical work under 
the leadership of the Anhui Provincial CPC Committee, and 
struggle hard to fully vitalize all undertakings in Anhui! 

