the   1990s 

<F P=102> 946B0067 Beijing SHUILI FADIAN [WATER POWER] in Chinese No 
2, 12 Feb 94 pp 52-55 </F>

<F P=103> 946B0067 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing SHUILI FADIAN [WATER POWER] </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhang Tao [1728 3447] of the Northeast China </F>
Electric Power Industry Management Bureau] 
  [Text] While the Northeast China Grid's installed 
hydropower generating capacity only comprises 16.7 percent of 
the grid's total capacity, its peak regulation, frequency 
regulation, phase regulation, and load and accident reserve 
roles have significantly improved the quality of power supplies 
and ensured safe operation of the grid, and provided the grid 
with inexpensive power that has alleviated fuel shortages. 
Moreover, hydropower also has significant flood control, water 
supply, irrigation, and other comprehensive economic benefits. 
However, for a variety of reasons the pace of hydropower 
development in the northeast China region has been slow and it 
is not playing a greater role. 
<H5>  I. The Current Situation and Main Problems Facing the </H5>
Northeast China Grid 
<H5>  A. The Current Situation in the Northeast China Grid </H5>
  The Northeast China Grid covers the three provinces of 
Liaoning, Jilin, and Heilongjiang, as well as three leagues and 
one city in the eastern part of Inner Mongolia Autonomous 
Region. At the end of 1991, the grid had an installed generating 
capacity of 23,410MW, of which 3,920MW or 16.7 percent was 
hydropower. Its annual power output was 104.2 billion kWh, of 
which hydropower provided 11.07 billion kWh or 10.6 percent. The 
grid's largest power generation load was 14,330MW and its 
maximum peak-to-valley differential was 5,525MW. 
  The northeast is China's primary industrial base area. As 
our 
national economy develops and people's living standards improve, 
power use loads have grown quickly. The rate of growth in demand 
for electric power has exceeded the rate of growth in power 
output, peak-to-valley differentials have continued to grow, and 
there is a shortage of peak regulation power sources. These have 
resulted in extremely irrational phenomena of the grid 
restricting power at peak loads and being forced to shut down 
generators during valleys in cold reserve. 
<H5>  B. Main Problems Facing the Grid </H5>
  1. Insufficient power sources. Starting in the 
early 1970s, the pace of power construction in the Northeast 
China Grid has consistently lagged behind the rate of growth of 
our national economy. During the Seventh 5-Year Plan, its 
installed generating capacity grew at an average annual rate of 
8.0 percent, which was 1 percent lower than our national 
average. The grid has serious power shortages and an installed 
generating capacity shortage of about 4,000MW. Its power output 
shortage is about 20 billion kWh. In 1990, the average daily 
restricted power load was 1,708MW. 
  2. Insufficient electric power for peak 
regulation. Rapid growth in the Northeast China Grid's 
power use loads, changes in the structure of electricity use, 
and significant changes in the characteristics of system loads 
have caused peak-to-valley differentials to rise each year, from 
1,640MW in 1980 to 5,525MW in 1991. However, the proportion of 
installed hydropower generating capacity which has primary 
responsibility for peak regulation functions has declined each 
year, from 44 percent in 1957 to 16.7 percent in 1991. At the 
end of 1991, the grid's total installed hydropower generating 
capacity was 3,920MW, while the actual amount of hydropower 
involved in peak regulation capacity was 2,500MW, which is about 
47 percent of the peak-to-valley differential, so there is an 
additional 3,000MW in peak regulation capacity that must be 
borne by thermal power generators. Projections indicate that the 
maximum peak-to-valley differential will reach 13,760MW in 2000, 
so there will be an even greater shortage of peak regulation 
power. 
  3. Energy resource shortages. Northeast China has 
a heavy industry type economic structure in which the raw 
materials industry is the main factor. In 1989 its energy 
resource consumption per 10,000 yuan in industrial value of 
output was 82.62 tons, which was 13.56 tons higher than the 
national average. The northeast China region's industrial value 
of output accounts for 15 percent of our national total, 
including about 20 percent of our national heavy industry value 
of output, but the region has only 63.7 billion tons of coal 
reserves, just 9 percent of our national total, and they are 
developing slowing. Northeast China also has limited 
conventional hydropower resources, just 2.3 percent of China's 
theoretical reserves. It has 14,188MW of developable and usable 
hydropower resources, just 2 percent of our national total, and 
it is developing slowly. 
  4. Capital shortages. The main reason that the 
northeast China region's coal and electric power industries have 
developed slowly is a shortage of capital. During the Seventh 
5-Year Plan, the State invested 4.14 billion yuan in capital in 
electric power construction in the Northeast China Grid, just 
8.9 percent of the national total (46.3 billion yuan). The 
investment in hydropower was even smaller, only 750 million 
yuan, equal to 5.9 percent of the region's total investments in 
electric power (12.7 billion yuan). 
<H5>  II. Accelerate Hydropower Development, Fight To Build 5,000MW </H5>
  The energy resource shortage is the primary factor 
restricting China's national economic development, and major 
efforts to accelerate hydropower construction are an important 
part of northeast China's energy resource development strategy. 
Currently, the northeast China region's installed hydropower 
generating capacity, as a proportion of the region's total 
installed generating capacity, has been declining each year and 
is expected to fall to 13 percent by 1995. The development and 
utilization rate of hydropower resources is rather low, about 27 
percent. Growth in installed hydropower generating capacity has 
been slow, averaging 3.4 percent annually from 1986 to 1990. 
This situation obviously cannot meet economic development 
requirements. For this reason, electric power industry 
construction prior to 2000 and in the future should take full 
advantage of hydropower resources and make major efforts to 
develop hydropower. In particular, we should seize the great 
opportunity at present to accelerate and intensify reform, move 
hydropower construction in the northeast China region up to a 
new stage (doubling [the capacity]), and fight to build 5,000MW 
in installed generating capacity. 
<H5>  A. The Northeast China Grid's Need for Hydropower </H5>
  1. To solve the large grid's peak regulation, frequency 
regulation, and accident reserve problems, ensure safe and 
economical operation, and increase the number of utilization 
hours for thermal power generators, its installed hydropower 
generating capacity should comprise 25 to 30 percent of its 
total installed generating capacity. Based on this estimate, the 
installed hydropower generating capacity required by northeast 
China region as a whole will be 10,000MW in 2000 and 25,000MW in 
2020. 
  2. Hydropower has primary responsibility for grid peak 
regulation tasks and assumes responsibility for peak load 
operation in daily load charts. The grid will require a peak 
regulation capacity of 13,760MW in 2000 and hydropower will have 
to be responsible for 10,000MW. The daily operation time for 
hydropower should be three to five hours. Prior to 2000, the 
Northeast China Grid will place a large number of 300MW and 
600MW thermal power generators and nuclear power plants into 
operation in succession, growth in household electricity 
consumption in its power use structure will continue to be 
greater than growth in industrial electricity use, load rates 
will also drop, and peak-to-valley differentials will become 
larger, so it would be best for the number of utilization hours 
for hydropower generators to be 1,300 to 1,600 hours/year. 
<H5>  B. Accelerate Construction of Conventional Hydropower </H5>
Stations 
  Based on the northeast China region's hydropower resource 
distribution characteristics, development conditions, and peak 
regulation requirements, we should accelerate the development of 
conventional hydropower stations in the three provinces over the 
next decade and strive to complete 1,540MW of capacity by 2000. 
The main projects are: two medium-sized cascade power stations 
at Gaoling and Jinkeng in Liaoning Province with a design total 
installed generating capacity of 145MW (I suggest 240MW). In 
Jilin Province, the Songjiang He cascade power station with a 
total installed generating capacity of 510MW, where preparations 
to begin construction are now in progress, and Liangjiang power 
station with a planned installed generating capacity of 60MW (I 
propose 120MW). In Heilongjiang Province, Lianhua hydropower 
station with a total installed generating capacity of 550MW 
where construction is now underway and Xin'e power station with 
a planned installed generating capacity of 100MW (I propose 
120MW). 
<H5>  C. Accelerate Construction of Pumped-Storage Power Stations </H5>
  Pumped-storage power stations have dual roles in peak 
regulation and filling valleys. They can serve as fast emergency 
accident reserves in electric power systems and improve the 
reliability of grid power supplies, and they have become a 
publicly-acknowledged economical peak regulation power source 
all over the world. 
  Liaoning and Heilongjiang provinces have already done 
pumped-storage power station planning and reliability research 
work and Jilin Province plans to undertake planning work in an 
effort to complete 2,950MW of pumped-storage power stations by 
the year 2000. The main projects are the first-phase project at 
Pushi He pumped-storage power station in Liaoning Province which 
will have a total installed generating capacity of 1,000MW and 
an ultimate capacity of 2,000MW, and an effort will be made for 
a formal construction start in 1995. A second one is Huanggou 
pumped-storage power station in Heilongjiang Province, with a 
total installed generating capacity of 1,200MW. This power 
station will use Lianhua hydropower station as its lower pool, 
so it would be best if its construction was synchronized with 
Lianhua hydropower station. I suggest that preparations for 
construction be made in 1994 and that construction be formally 
started in 1995. Another project is Baishan pumped-storage power 
station in Jilin Province, where I propose a total installed 
generating capacity of 750MW and a formal construction start in 
1996. 
<H5>  D. Accelerate Construction of Expansion Projects At Old </H5>
Hydropower Stations 
  Because the northeast China region has very few hydropower 
resources, it should consider gradual expansion of old 
hydropower stations while it is building new hydropower 
stations. During the 1970s we expanded Jingpo Hu hydropower 
station (expanded capacity 60MW) and in the 1980s we also 
expanded Shuifeng power station (on an international river) and 
added 135MW of capacity. In 1992, the Baishan second phase and 
Fengman second phase expansion projects were placed into 
operation, with 600MW at Baishan second phase and 170MW at 
Fengman second phase, which increased the northeast China 
region's total installed hydropower generating capacity to 
4,305MW (including an expansion of 965MW). By the year 2000 we 
will strive to make an additional expansion of 670MW in 
installed generating capacity, which will mainly include the 
Fengman hydropower station third phase project with an installed 
generating capacity of 280MW where a construction start is 
expected in 1993 and an effort will be made to place the first 
generator into operation to generate power by the end of 1995. 
Another project is the second phase project at Hongshi 
hydropower station which will have an installed generating 
capacity of 120 to 140MW where we will strive to begin 
construction in 1995, and we should speed up preparatory work. 
Huilongshan hydropower station will have an installed generating 
capacity of 120MW, and I suggest that the preliminary design be 
completed in October 1993, the project should be established in 
1994, and construction should begin in 1995. At the Huanren 
hydropower station second phase project, for historical reasons 
the normal water impoundment level at Huanren hydropower station 
has been lowered 32 m and the installed generating capacity 
reduced by one-half. The most ideal program is to increase the 
height of the large Huanren dam and raise the normal water 
impoundment level, which could increase the installed generating 
capacity by 200 to 300MW. However, because of the extreme 
difficulty involved in requisitioning the land and resettling 
the population, in the present stage we can only do research on 
how to increase the installed generating capacity without 
increasing the height of the large dam. The preliminary research 
plans to utilize two middle openings in the dam to increase the 
installed generating capacity by 100 to 150MW, and I propose 
that preparatory work be speeded up. 
<H5>  E. Spur Development and Construction of Boundary River Power </H5>
Stations 
  International rivers account for about 25 percent of the 
northeast China region's hydropower resources, with about 
3,000MW on the Heilong Jiang, about 1,200MW on the Yalu Jiang, 
and about 110MW on the Tumen Jiang. Thus, we must think of ways 
to create the conditions to develop and utilize international 
rivers. 
  At present, Linjiang hydropower station on the Yalu Jiang 
has 
an installed generating capacity of 400MW/2 and examination of 
the preliminary design has been completed. I suggest that the 
Sino-Korean Council focus on working with the Korean side and 
try to complete it and foster its benefits by 2000. 
<H5>  III. A Strategic Program for Hydropower Development in </H5>
Northeast China for 2020 
  After 2000, as industry and agriculture develop, the 
Northeast China Grid's installed generating capacity will more 
than double, which will also require substantial development of 
hydropower. The overall development principle is a combined 
focus on building conventional hydropower stations and 
pumped-storage power stations. Conventional power stations will 
be focused on the Heilong Jiang and Nen Jiang, while 
pumped-storage power stations will be centered mainly on 
Liaoning and Heilongjiang provinces. The main projects are: in 
Liaoning Province, the Pushi He pumped-storage hydropower 
station second phase project with an installed generating 
capacity of 1,000MW, Buyunshan pumped-storage power station with 
1,000MW, and the Qingshiling pumped-storage first phase project 
with 1,760MW. In Jilin Province, they are Linjiang hydropower 
station with 400MW/2, Manjiang hydropower station with 150MW, 
and Hadashan key water conservancy facility hydropower station 
with 80MW. In Heilongjiang Province, they are Erdaogou 
hydropower station with 50MW, Changjiangtun hydropower station 
with 210MW, Mohe hydropower station with 2,000MW/2, Lianjin 
hydropower station with 1,000MW/2, Sanjianfang pumped-storage 
power station with 900MW, and Wuchang pumped-storage power 
station with 2,025MW. In eastern Inner Mongolia, they are: 
Nierji key water conservancy facility hydropower station with 
250MW, Liujiatun hydropower station with 125MW, and Gugu He 
hydropower station with 175MW. 
  After 2000, these three provinces and one autonomous region 
should first develop Mohe and Lianjin power stations on the 
trunk of the Heilongjiang and conventional hydropower stations 
on the Songhua Jiang and Nen Jing, while at the same time 
accelerating construction of Buyunshan, Wuchang, Sanjianfang, 
and other pumped-storage power stations in Liaoning and 
Heilongjiang provinces, for a projected total installed 
hydropower generating capacity of 19,943MW by 2020. 
<H5>  IV. Primary Measures That Should Be Adopted </H5>
<H5>  A. Accelerate Preparatory Work, Increase Design Reserves </H5>
  One characteristic of hydropower station construction is a 
long period of preparatory work and large investments. Moreover, 
doing good preparatory work for hydropower is also the 
foundation for hydropower construction. Thus, on a foundation of 
doing good river basin planning and electric power planning, we 
certainly must do design and optimization work well, and fully 
foster the decision-making role and flexible role of designs in 
hydropower construction to meet the requirements for design 
document compilation, examination and approval, and reporting of 
project establishment, start of construction, and progress in 
project construction in order to attain the objective of 
shortening construction schedules and conserving project 
investments. 
  At present, capital shortages for hydropower preparatory 
work 
in the northeast China region have resulted in very few design 
reserve projects and seriously inadequate reserve strengths. For 
this reason, I propose that we set aside 3 to 5 percent each 
year from the major overhaul and upgrading funds for hydropower 
stations that are already generating electricity, about 4 to 6 
million yuan, for hydropower planning, feasibility research, and 
preliminary design work. After a project is established it can 
be repaid or continue to be used as preparatory work funds. 
  Grid bureaus (provincial bureaus) should focus on 
preparatory 
work in a planned manner and strengthen their relationships with 
design departments and local governments in an effort to have 
more reserve projects for selection. 
<H5>  B. Establish Stable Hydropower Construction Funds </H5>
  If we wish to accelerate hydropower development in the 
northeast China region, a prominent issue is providing the 
investments. This is only possible by relying on reform and 
policies. In the future the state cannot substantially increase 
its investments in hydropower, so we can consider adopting the 
following measures. 
  1. First, we must set aside 0.02 yuan per kWh from the power 
generated by hydropower and invest all of it in hydropower 
construction. At present, the Northeast China Grid is generating 
7 to 10 billion kWh of hydropower annually, so this could raise 
140 to 200 million yuan in capital. The construction funds that 
are set aside should be under unified calculation and deduction 
and unified control of the grid to change from the method of 
turning them over to the local area for management. This could 
reduce unnecessary functional organizations and guarantee 
rational utilization of the capital. 
  2. We must actively promote the raising of capital via 
multiple channels and from multiple areas, fully foster the 
initiative of central authorities and local areas, and undertake 
inter-provincial and inter-enterprise joint hydropower 
development. For example, Heilongjiang Province and Inner 
Mongolia could jointly develop hydropower stations on the Nen 
Jiang. We must also increase the number of hydropower 
utilization hours and give hydropower's peak regulation to a 
portion of thermal power's increased power output that is used 
to compensate for newly built hydropower stations to be able to 
entice enterprises to invest in hydropower. 
  3. We should raise it from existing hydropower station 
benefits, repay the interest to banks for those cases in which 
the original investment was in the form of bank loans, repay the 
principal and then re-borrow loans to be used for hydropower 
development. We should implement peak and valley electricity 
prices and expand the differential. Newly built hydropower 
stations should implement new prices for new electricity sources 
and adopt prices equal to those of thermal power for electricity 
supplied to the grid. On this basis, calculate the power 
generation benefits of hydropower and use part of this capital 
as investments in hydropower construction. 
  We can also implement continuous development of cascade 
power 
stations by using the benefits from power generation from the 
previous power station for continued investment in building the 
next hydropower station, establish funds, engage in rolling 
development, and do continuous construction. We can also study 
issuing bonds, repaying the principal and interest after going 
into operation, and other measures. 
<H5>  C. Intensify Reform of the Hydropower Construction System </H5>
  China's reform and opening up have now entered a new 
development stage. Northeast China's hydropower development and 
construction should seize this favorable opportunity, further 
liberate ideology, transform concepts, accelerate hydropower 
construction, and strive to move up to a new stage. 
  1. The grid bureau must strengthen unified management work 
over hydropower development and construction, improve 
understanding, and implement organization. This means that it 
should establish specialized organizations such as a Northeast 
China Hydropower Development and Construction Corporation, or 
call it the Hydropower Development and Construction Project 
Department to assume responsibility for long-term hydropower 
programs, feasibility research, preliminary designs, bidding, 
project management and construction examination and acceptance, 
production and operation, and other work. Only in this way will 
unified arrangements and rational deployments appear in 
hydropower development in the northeast China region and create 
a new situation of design reserves for conventional, 
pumped-storage, and old hydropower station expansion with 
rational time-sequence development and gradually achieve river 
basin management (the "four remote things"). 
  2. Comprehensively implement a proprietor responsibility 
system, bidding contractual responsibility system, and 
construction supervision and management system, and the grid 
bureau should strengthen its macro control over projects. 
Project supervision and management should adhere to giving 
responsibility to proprietors. The basis of supervision and 
management work is the signing of contractual responsibility 
contracts between proprietor units and construction units, 
approval of design documents, rules, regulations, decrees, and 
laws promulgated by the state, and instructions from proprietor 
units during the implementation process. Project supervision and 
management represent proprietors in supervising the entire 
process of project implementation, primarily through supervising 
progress, quality, and finances. Supervision is used to spur and 
assist contractual responsibility units in fully completing 
their contractual tasks. 
  3. Implement bidding or negotiated bidding for design and 
equipment manufacturing. Proprietors manage design units and 
manufacturing plants according to contracts, spur them to adopt 
advanced design standards, apply advanced technology, optimize 
programs and designs, reduce the amount of engineering, and 
shorten construction schedules to attain the goal of conserving 
investments. 
  4. Accelerate internal reforms in hydropower construction 
staffs. Currently, this type of large and complete engineering 
bureau, which is like a small society, is incapable of adapting 
to the new situation in major hydropower development, so I 
propose establishing specialized crack hydropower construction 
staffs to move construction enterprises out of their difficult 
straits as quickly as possible. Select people with high 
professional levels and organizational abilities to strengthen 
leadership and command on the first line of hydropower 
construction, reorganize staffs, establish quality supervision 
systems, raise construction technology levels, strengthen 
internal accounting, and so on to meet the requirements of the 
hydropower construction situation. 
  The hydropower construction tasks of the northeast China 
region in the future are magnificent as well as extremely 
arduous. If they rely on reform and policies and strive 
shoulder-to-shoulder, the expected goal of doubling the 
installed hydropower generating capacity can certainly be 
achieved. 

