Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Naresh Fernandes: "Poultry Epidemic in </F>
Country: Consumers To Bear the Brunt"] 
  [Text] Bombay, November 7--Four months after "Gumboro 
disease" ravaged India's poultry industry, killing over 13 
million chickens and forcing shut an estimated 40 per cent 
poultry farms nationwide, the epidemic is beginning to hit 
consumers in the pocket. 
  Though the disease has now been wrestled into submission by 
a 
new vaccine, it has decimated breeding and laying stock in 
several production centres, resulting in losses of around Rs 50 
crores and widespread panic in the poultry industry. 
  The epidemic has left in its wake a severe shortage of eggs 
and chicken that has sent prices soaring; industry observers 
reckon that it will be at least eight months before the 
situation returns to normal. 
  Isolated instances of infectious bursal disease (popularly 
called Gumboro disease, because it was first detected in a town 
of the name in Delaware, U.S.) were first noticed at the 
beginning of the year in farms in the east. Though farmers 
routinely vaccinate their birds against this disease, the 
outbreak proved resistant to available medication. 
  "We found that our birds were dying in very large numbers, 
even though we had vaccinated them," said Mr M.P. Merchant. He 
is among the more cautious, since the first outbreak ever 
recorded in India occurred in 1978, on his Vasai farm. 
  Veterinarians soon realised that they were battling a new 
strain of the birnavirdae virus. "The disease is like AIDS," 
said Dr Sangeeta Dasgupta, a consulting immunologist at a 
Nashik-based farm. "It attacks the bird's bursa, the organ which 
gives immunity against infection." 
  Thus, the birds are as likely to die from other poultry 
killers as Raniketh disease as from Gumboro disease itself. She 
hastened to add the Gumboro disease was not communicable to 
humans. "No poultry disease, besides salmonellosis, can affect 
human beings," she said. 
  While the old strain of the virus usually killed between 8 
per cent and 12 per cent of flocks, the 1993 variety led to a 
mortality rate of between 75 per cent and 90 per cent. 
  "Only later we realised that we were dealing with a more 
dangerous form of the virus," explained Dr V.S. Narsapur of the 
Bombay Veterinary College. The new strain was identified as VVIB 
(very virulent infectious bursal disease) which caused great 
damage to Europe's poultry stock last year. 
  As scientists struggled to cope with the threat, the mutated 
virus travelled aboard trucks carrying eggs, chicken and feed, 
wreaking havoc in every poultry pocket in the country when the 
epidemic peaked in August and September. 
  Losses were most extensive in the three southern states of 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, which accounted for 
around 9 million of the 13 million poultry deaths reported 
nationwide. 
  Speaking to this newspaper from his farm in Hyderabad, 
India's largest supplier of parent birds, Mr Sheikh Imam, said: 
"At least 5 million chickens have died in this area." Experts 
estimate that the 100-km area around Hyderabad city had a 
poultry population of around 14 million before the disease 
flared up. 
  The Namakal area of Tamil Nadu's Salem district was also 
badly hit, losing 3.5 million of its 9 million birds. 
  In Maharashtra, the first signs of Gumboro were detected in 
Yavatmal, in February. "The virus spread to Ahmednagar and, in 
no time at all, we found that it was all over the state," said 
Mr G.R. Naik, the deputy director of poultry in the directorate 
of animal husbandry. 
  He estimated that at least 2.5 million birds had fallen prey 
to Gumboro disease in the state, losses being especially heavy 
in Satara, Sangli and Kolhapur districts. 
  After several weeks of heavy losses, a team from the 
livestock health surveillance division of the department of 
animal husbandry and dairying in New Delhi extensively toured 
the affected areas. 
  "We found that overcrowding and improper disposal of 
carcasses was contributing to the high mortality rate," said Dr 
Lal Krishan, one of the members. In its report, the Central team 
recommended that sanitary measures on hatcheries be improved, 
the hatcheries be properly registered, that a proper vaccination 
schedule be followed, and that the quality of the vaccines be 
checked. 
  The virus was finally reined in by October, after a new 
pattern of vaccination was introduced. "We now recommend that 
our farmers vaccinate the birds three times, at the age of eight 
or nine days, with simultaneous doses of `live' and `killed' 
vaccines; then a fortnight later with `killed' vaccine again," 
said Dr P.G. Chowdhury, technical director of a Pune-based 
Venkateshwara Hatcheries, the largest producer and supplier of 
vaccines in the country. 
  He said that his company had to develop a new form of 
vaccine, incorporating the virulent strain of the virus. 

