BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Sixto Duran-Ballen; place and date not </F>
given -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] Fellow citizens: Tonight, it is my pleasure to 
announce that after a complex negotiating process, my government 
has reached an agreement with international commercial banks 
that will finally allow us to restructure the Ecuadoran foreign 
debt. The national government, faithful to its historic duty of 
transforming the country and with a firm determination to 
seriously manage state problems, could not allow Ecuador, 
because of its status as a repeatedly delinquent debtor, to 
become unworthy of international trust and to face serious 
difficulties in its relations with friendly countries and 
international financial organizations. 
  Fellow citizens, in the current issue of a very prestigious 
publication, Ecuador topped the list of countries in 
international arrears for the longest time. If one considers 
the periods during which Ecuador has not kept its international 
commitments, as it has been doing for the last (?seven) years, 
you can see that the country has been in arrears for 112 of its 
164 years of republican life. 
  What has all of the above cost us? It has given us a country 
with enormous problems attracting foreign investment, creating 
sources of employment and production, obtaining technology to 
progress and vigorously incorporate ourselves into a world that 
is increasingly more competitive and demanding; a country with 
serious problems obtaining credits; a country that must resort 
to costly loans because of the high-risk status that a country 
in arrears represents; a country without the capability to 
generate the necessary domestic and foreign capital to promote 
great projects for its development; and a country that has seen 
a substantial reduction in opportunities for the progress and 
well-being that we all desire. 
  Ecuador could not continue like that. If we needed to 
promote foreign investment, if we wanted to obtain new 
technologies, if we wanted to create new job sources, and if we 
aspired to enter the international capital market as a basic 
condition for developing our potential, we had to reach an 
agreement with our private international creditors. That is why 
I instructed the economic front to undertake the negotiations 
and to obtain an advantageous agreement with our creditors that 
would not commit more resources than those the country was 
prepared to make available for that purpose. As every action of 
my administration, I ordered a restructuring of the foreign debt 
with private creditors under the most advisable terms for the 
country, making sure that the agreement would not place 
financial pressure on future governments. Our proposals were 
accepted, allowing me to announce today that Ecuador has reached 
an advantageous agreement with its private creditors. 
  We have agreed on terms and discounts better than those 
generally obtained by Latin American countries that have reached 
agreements of this type. We have obtained clearly favorable 
conditions, even though Ecuador had a long record of 
noncompliance and one of the highest rates of overdue interests 
payment on its obligations. We have restructured the capital 
debt for 30 years with a 45-percent discount. We have 
refinanced accrued interest for 20 years with a very good 
interest rate and a 10-year grace period. With this agreement, 
we have ensured that the country will not be pressured in the 
future regarding its ability to make payments. 
  Fellow citizens, I make this announcement with great 
satisfaction because it marks a decisive step toward our 
permanent objective of resolving the greatest national problems. 
The decision I have adopted is a clear demonstration that I am 
running a serious and responsible government that works for the 
future and does not act for momentary political [word 
indistinct]. 
  Fellow citizens, we have resolved a problem that affected 
everyone, absolutely everyone, because it prevented real social 
and economic development despite our great potential. 
  This evening, upon giving you this important news, I 
reiterate that I will continue working for the country's welfare 
and to give you definitive solutions to national problems, 
solutions that have been irresponsibly deferred. I insist that 
I work to build a better Ecuador for future generations. This 
is a commitment I have to you, Ecuadoran people. Thank you very 
much. 

