BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Victoria Stegic] </F>
  [Excerpts] Sarajevo, April 1 (AFP) -- Bosnian Serbs shelled 
the beleagured enclave of Gorazde again Friday [1 April] in one 
of several Serb attacks on Moslem pockets amid growing evidence 
of a new wave of ethnic cleansing, UN officials said. 
  Rob Annink, spokesman for the United Nations Protection 
Force 
(UNPROFOR) said the situation in Goradze in eastern Bosnia 
remained tense, hours after Bosnian sources said the death toll 
from bombardments Wednesday and Thursday had reached at least 
30, with around 100 wounded. 
  Major Annink said UN observers counted 21 shells early 
Friday 
falling on the enclave, only hours after the Bosnian government 
urged the UN to protect Gorazde in line with the enclave's 
status as one of six UN-designated "safe havens." [passage 
omitted] 
  Meanwhile a spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR) expressed alarm over the safety of Moslems in 
the northern Banja Luka region. Spokesman Kris Janovski said at 
least seven civilians had been killed there in recent days, 
apparently in revenge attacks sparked after the corpses of seven 
Serb policemen killed on the front lines were brought back to 
the town. He added that the UNHCR had only sketchy details of 
the deaths, which were reported by acquaintances of the victims 
and confirmed by Banja Luka's Moslem humanitarian association, 
Merhamet. 
  Janovski also cited evidence of a fresh wave of ethnic 
cleansing by Serbs in Sanski Most, 30 kilometres (18 miles) from 
Banja Luka. Under the pretext that Moslem houses are too large 
for their occupants, Serb police in the town are forcibly 
installing Serb families in their place, he said. The tactic has 
emerged amid an influx of Serb refugees into the Banja Luka 
region from north and central Bosnian frontline towns, notably 
Maglaj, Zepce and Zenica. Janovski said more than 850 Serbs had 
entered the region as refugees in the last three months. 
  On Thursday, Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic said he had 
proof that around 300 Moslems and between 150 and 200 Bosnian 
Croats were being forcibly expelled from Banja Luka every day. 
Izetbegovic charged that the UNHCR and UN peacekeepers were 
helping the evacuation of Moslems and Croats "instead of 
guaranteeing their security," and called on both communities not 
to "give way to terror" and to remain in their homes. 
  Meanwhile Annink said violent fighting had broken out in the 
northern Maglaj pocket, with infantry clashes and heavy Serb 
shelling Thursday near Tesanj, 10 kilometres (six miles) from 
the town. [passage omitted] Annink said 84 Serb shells landed 
on the pocket Thursday, while its Moslem defenders riposted with 
eight projectiles. 
  A British UN armed vehicle which skirted frontlines after a 
navigation error came under fire from Serb artillery but was not 
hit, the spokesman said. A total of 13 Serb shells also fell on 
Zenica, Travnik and Turbe, central Bosnia, Thursday. Annink 
added that a Bosnian army liaison officer was hit by Croat 
sniper fire in the southern city of Mostar, in violation of 
peace accords sealed Wednesday with the creation of the 
Moslem-Bosnian Croat federation in Bosnia. 
  UNPROFOR also reported serious violations of the Sarajevo 
ceasefire Thursday, during which one government soldier was 
wounded. 
  Separately, Annink said that the UN's new civil adminstrator 
for the Bosnian capital, US diplomat William Eagleton, was due 
to arrive in the city late Monday. Appointed under UN Security 
Council resolutions adopted last month, Eagleton's brief is to 
oversee the rebirth of Sarajevo's shattered public services. 

