BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Carlos Roberto Reina in Tegucigalpa on </F>
10 May] 
  [Text] Fellow citizens: On concluding the first 100 days of 
government, I think it is very important to address you on the 
state of the nation and to continue this frank and open dialogue 
on the situation of public administration regarding our most 
serious and pressing problems. 
  If democracy implies coordinating who should govern and how, 
nothing could be more appropriate than this communication 
between the people and their authorities, to obtain the 
consensus of all sectors on essential aspects of our national 
life. 
  To my fellow party members, I say that supporting the plan 
of 
my government's moral revolution does not only mean voting for 
it, but wholly supporting it so that it can advance. If we 
destroy the moral revolution, vast corruption would return. 
Such a state of affairs would mire us again in the situation 
that we want to overcome. It would be absurd to think that 
destroying the project of an authentic moral revolution would 
improve the Hondurans'economic situation. 
  Those opposed to my government consist of two principal 
groups: those who were overwhelmingly defeated at the polls, who 
were part of the old style of government, which was described by 
the U.S. Senate as one of the most corrupt in the world; and 
those impatient fellow citizens who rightfully want to see their 
expectations of participating in public administration fulfilled 
expeditiously. 
  Once again, I must note that Honduras' current problems stem 
principally from the ethical and administrative blunders of the 
former government. There is hardly any sector of the government 
during this period in which there has not been more than one 
illicit act or an act directly intended to favor a privileged 
group of public officials or a close political ally. 
  Administrative management, also, at the outset was deficient 
and incomplete, above all, in the field of economic 
reorganization. Not only were acquired commitments not 
fulfilled, but the actions of the new government were burdened 
by contracting new obligations which they never intended to put 
in practice. In this sense, the sacrifice of the people 
signified little or nothing. 
  Dishonesty among state workers was one of the most serious 
flaws of the former government. The massive communications 
media have consistently and in the most plausible manner 
denounced these facts throughout the presidential term. Thanks 
to the dedication of this group of Hondurans, actions such as 
the dilapidation of important resources of the country, which 
would have further depleted the wealth of our nation, were 
averted. 
  It is important that the people know how they were governed 
recently because this will make it easier for them to understand 
the multiple efforts that must be made to return to the path of 
development for all. On the one hand, the damage caused must be 
remedied. On the other hand, new actions must be undertaken in 
all aspects of national life. 
  In light of this situation, it is not fair to leave those 
who profited from the most shameless forms of corruption 
registered in recent Honduran history go unpunished. That is 
why we created the Commission To Prevent and Struggle Against 
Corruption, formed by different sectors of the population. 
Soon, this commission will report the first results of its 
investigations and the measures that must be taken to punish 
those responsible and return to the people what should have been 
theirs. 
  On this occasion, however, I can report to the Honduran 
people that at the initiative of ministers and managers of 
decentralized institutions, the following cases are being 
investigated: car imports from Italy; administration of the 
Property Registry Office; product imports by Banasupro [National 
Supply Agency for Basic Products]; sale of Honduran passports to 
Asian citizens; the Permanent Committee for Emergencies' 
handling and administration of resources to aid the homeless; 
customs administration; and the administration of the Teachers 
Retirement and Pension Institute, the Teachers' Social Security 
Institute, the National Autonomous Aqueduct and Sewage Service, 
among others. 
  It should be made clear to the public that the actions aimed 
at punishing the corrupt who have caused so much damage are only 
intended to make justice prevail and return to our society the 
unwithering values of honesty and loyalty to the Republic. This 
must not be viewed as an act of vengeance and much less as an 
act of political vengeance. 
  In the government program I presented to the people during 
the last electoral campaign, I said we would undertake economic 
policies that would not only favor growth but also distribute 
equality. We stressed the need to follow the path of equitable, 
sustainable, and verifiable economic growth with an option for 
the country's poor. 
  To carry out a long-term program that strengthens and 
transforms national production is a task we have undertaken 
since the beginning of our administration, for without a general 
development policy plan it is not possible to see clearly where 
are we leading the country in the coming years. But while we 
devise these medium- and long-term policies, it is urgently 
necessary to implement provisional actions leading to an 
indispensable waiting period, while the economy in general is 
reactivated. 
  The aforementioned statement becomes more critical because 
when we planned the Liberal Party government program, the data 
we had led us to believe that a three- to six-month waiting 
period was essential to implement the necessary corrective 
actions in the fiscal sector and then devote our attention to 
most urgent tasks favoring the needy and economic growth tasks. 
  This was and is the perception and the clear, definite, and 
fundamental objective of the government. As the first weeks 
passed, however, and we learned the reality of the data on the 
country's financial and economic situation, we have reached the 
cruel but realistic conclusion that the Honduran economy, in 
early 1994, is facing the need to make several corrective 
measures. 
  I say this based on the data on the finances of the public 
sector, the balance of payments deficit, the foreign debt 
payment, the handling of controlled prices, and the signing of 
mandatory contracts preventing the reduction of public 
investment. 
  This last factor, the exorbitant spending that has no 
priority in public investment and which lacks a cost analysis 
and benefits for Hondurans, and which does not consider its 
impact on the fiscal deficit for the years after 1993, worsens 
the situation we have depicted. The expansion of telephone 
lines, which represent an investment of over $200 million in 
less than 18 months; the contracts signed for the construction 
of the ring road in Tegucigalpa and compensation payments for 
the owners of properties that neighbor the road; and other 
projects are good examples. 
  The current situation is also pressing because the 
mishandling of the monetary policy increased the interest rates 
prevailing in the banking sector, thus raising costs for the 
productive sectors. 
  As for prices, in addition to the agreements businessmen 
accepted, the decree to freeze prices that enabled the former 
administration to keep inflation down artificially stands out. 
A low inflation level was also maintained through the use of 
international reserves that kept the exchange rate at a lower 
level than that of the market. This manipulative conduct by the 
former government resulted in transferring an inflation rate 
that surpassed a 2 percent monthly average in the past three 
months to the economy and the population. 
  The following figures speak for themselves: The unadjusted 
public sector deficit for 1994 exceeds 2.7 million lempiras, 
which represents over 11 percent of the GDP. By the end of 
January 1994, there were $143 million in late debt payments, 
including $6.5 million with some Paris Club creditors. Over 170 
million lempiras in prospective government revenues coming from 
the sale of cement assets [activos] were used to finance public 
spending for the previous year. The use of domestic savings 
increased by filing promissory notes worth over 120 million 
lempiras in public retirement institutions. In addition, the 
former government did not comply with IMF goals regarding the 
nation's macro economy and public finances. This is why we 
began our government with measures leading to reorganize that 
situation, including an increase in customs compensation during 
the first days of February 1994. 
  For lack of other measures, we have had to allow the 
exchange 
rate used by sellers and buyers to stand at eight lempiras to 
the dollar. We have also had to accept a partial 
liberalization, at the import level, of oil by-products through 
the price adjustments already announced. 
  What is being branded, in the economic area, as slowness or 
hesitancy by my government is neither. On the contrary, it is 
an objective and calm evaluation on how to approach the various 
sectors to persuade them that there is no other responsible and 
serious solution. We must act honestly and adopt measures 
unfulfilled by the former government that currently affect most 
Hondurans. In addition, we are not doing this to follow 
guidelines foreign to Hondurans, but we are totally convinced 
that not adopting them would lead to an even more adverse 
situation. 
  To sum up: We received the country with negative 
international reserves, a foreign debt volume -- larger than 
1989 -- that now absorbs over 35 percent of exports and over 30 
percent of the government's budget. Honduras is a country with 
a wary and uncertain private sector, a sluggish export level, 
almost nonexistent private investment, and a contained high 
inflation level. 
  Our recommendations to Congress this month seek to rescue 
government credibility, which has been weakened since 1993 by 
the implementation of flawed economic policies. We also seek to 
obtain the support of international financial institutions and 
friendly countries for projects under way as well as new social 
projects for an amount exceeding $600 million in the coming 
three years. Thus, the country will have foreign exchange to 
meet its obligations to begin an in-depth stabilization of the 
national economy. Our proposals also seek to restore trust in 
the country's sectors and reduce the social cost to achieve an 
economic recovery as soon as possible. 
  In this regard, I urge workers and businessmen to 
immediately 
sign an economic stability plan that enables businessmen to 
establish a rational control for staple prices. These measures, 
designed to stop the decline of the purchasing power of the 
majority, are not incompatible with an adequate return on 
capital and other production factors. Our goal is to introduce 
stable criteria to maintain prices that people can afford, 
precluding speculative distortions or excessive profit margins. 
  As for the labor sector, its contribution to socioeconomic 
peace in the country would be determined by a realistic stand 
regarding demands for a salary increase. The labor sector would 
help the national recovery by adjusting their demands to the 
true situation of the productive apparatus and the pressing 
demand to increase job opportunities. In sum, workers need to 
adopt salary expectations that help diminish inflation effects 
and exorbitant price increases. 
  On the other hand, the government is bent on controlling the 
fiscal deficit and reaching a stable rate of exchange that will 
contribute to restraining inflationary prices. In turn, this 
will allow other macroeconomic variables, such as interest 
rates, to reach levels that will encourage production 
development and the creation of productive employment. 
  We expect to sign this economic stabilization agreement 
within the next few months. In this respect, interested parties 
are already cooperating with each other, and I can say with 
satisfaction that the understanding of the sectors involved 
allows us to look upon an agreement of this nature with 
optimism. This will open the door to more in-depth decisions 
and commitments with respect to prices, wages, and employment. 
  I have given instructions to transfer 100 million lempiras 
to 
Banasupro and the immediate restructuring of this institution in 
order to mitigate the situation plaguing the prices of the basic 
staples basket. This will allow the lower income groups to have 
access to essential goods by paying reasonable prices. 
  We will supply Banasupro with the items consumed daily by 
the population. The constant increase in market value of said 
items represents one of the deepest concerns for the Honduran 
household that is not part of the circle of privileged 
minorities. 
  Within the aforesaid context, I report to you with 
satisfaction that we are advancing significantly in establishing 
the national system of food security, which represents, as 
stipulated by our government program, one of the main pillars of 
the agriculture policy of the current administration. 
  We are determined to reverse the current situation of food 
insecurity within a realistic concept, one based on national 
production and not importing products. It is a matter of 
furnishing the people with essential food products in 
appropriate amounts, times, places, and at the right prices. 
  The Ministry of Natural Resources, the National Agrarian 
Institute (INA), the National Agricultural Development Bank 
(Banadesa), the Honduran Corporation for Forest Development 
(Cohdefor), the Honduran Agricultural Marketing Institute 
(IHMA), Banasupro, FHIS [Honduran Social Investment Fund], the 
Secretariat of Planning, Coordination, and Budget (Secplan), the 
organizations of producers, manufacturers, and transformers of 
agriculture products and peasant organizations, all coordinated 
through the secretary of state at the Ministry of Natural 
Resources, prepared and presented to the president of the 
Republic an integral and integrated plan for food security. I 
have already instructed that this plan be implemented during the 
present agriculture cycle, including the credit policy, 
technical assistance, the supply of inputs, the marketing 
system, and the resources for small irrigation projects. 
  Even before taking office, we expressed our constant 
interest 
in protecting and preserving the tropical dry and rain forests, 
the productive permanence of forest resources, and the 
conservation of vital processes and biodiversity. In this 
regard, we have ordered a three-month wood cutting suspension so 
as to stop the unnecessary and incomprehensible depredation of 
our forests. During this period, we will formulate and 
implement a forest policy aimed at reorganizing the forest 
administration of the state and revising its juridical framework. 
  This was done based on the fundamental principles of 
sustainable handling of the resources, multiple uses, and 
sustained output in the areas of forest interest. It is our 
objective that this policy be implemented with the participation 
of the private sector and with modern and compensatory 
techniques for exploiting the wood. This will permit our 
children and grandchildren to enjoy this wealth for a long time 
to come. 
  The wood-cutting prohibition will have special importance 
for 
the hydrograhic basin of the Francisco Morazan Dam, Yojoa lake, 
the Merendon mountain range, the Rio Platano biosphere, as well 
as the basins of such rivers as Comayagua, Cangrejal, Grande or 
Choluteca, Guayapoe, Patuca, Sico, Aguan, Wans Coco or Segovia, 
Ulua, Chamelecon, and Humuya and the regions of fragile and 
over-exploited soils. 
  Officials from Cohdefor, the Ministry of Natural Resources, 
the State Secretariat for the Environment, Secplan, and the 
corresponding municipalities and provinces will meet this month 
to coordinate and harmonize actions for enforcing the 
prohibition. The Armed Forces will offer their assistance to 
this effort. 
  The first measure of this new policy will be the absolute 
prohibition of using chain saws to cut wood and the complete 
closure of sawmills, [word indistinct] and other activities to 
cut and extract wood from the aforesaid areas. 
  Compatriots, in the Liberal Party government program for the 
1994-98 period we said: "Honduras is on the verge of an 
unprecedented energy crisis, caused by the lack of policies and 
planning in this area. In the last few years, there has been 
concern to expand the demand, but without taking provisions for 
increasing the supply." 
  The discouraging prediction has come true and the crisis 
emerged. At no time did the previous administration take the 
precautions that national and international organizations had 
recommended. 
  We have had to overcome insufficiencies in the electricity 
sector through extraordinary means, such as buying energy from 
neighboring countries, leasing new means of generation, and 
rationing the use of electricity. At this time, we can proudly 
say we have overcome the most acute part of the crisis. The 
timely and firm actions adopted by the executive branch have 
allowed us to deal with the problem from several angles. 
  Undoubtedly it is essential to resolve this problem. It is 
also necessary to implement the law on the electricity sector, 
which has been submitted to the Congress, and to restructure the 
National Enterprise for Electric Power. 
  Honduran people, As our fellow citizens know, we have 
submitted to the Legislative Assembly the law that regulates 
voluntary-educational military service. The assembly 
unanimously supported the initiative to reform the Constitution 
in order to change the mandatory military service. This new 
method of serving the fatherland, through the 
voluntary-educational military service, constituted one of the 
fundamental issues of my election campaign. Today, I can say 
with satisfaction that we have kept our promise to the people. 
  Honduran youths now have the alternative of choosing between 
a professional military service or voluntary training that will 
permit them to defend the fatherland and its institutions 
whenever it is required. In reality, this constitutes a 
historic step and is evidence that the understanding between the 
Armed Forces and civilian society is not only possible, but has 
served as a national strengthening mechanism to open new avenues 
of understanding in the future. 
  Just as we have done with the military service, in the 
coming 
days we will be taking the necessary steps to implement the code 
of ethics for public workers, which is another promise that I 
made to the people. This corps of people are a valuable 
expression of the moral revolution, which will not conclude as 
long as the corrupt actions and insidious handling of state 
affairs persist. 
  Regarding the projects and actions to be carried out in the 
medium term, they are all aimed at increasing production, 
especially of our workers. With this we will improve the 
efficiency of Honduran producers and, hence, competitive levels 
both in the national and international markets. 
  It is with this long term vision that my government has 
launched the strengthening of the agricultural and forestry 
sector initiatives. The objective is to allow the private 
sector to find a field of action in which its investments will 
have legal security and its presence can be seen by Honduran 
communities as a dynamic factor of progress. 
  Government actions, such as issuing land titles, permitting 
the free use of the land according to the law, and opening the 
forestry sector through the process of auctions will permit us 
to increase foreign investment. As an example, I can state that 
private investment in the coffee and banana sector stands at 
over $100 million, along with other products in which 
investments reached similar levels. On housing, our objective to 
build 50,000 homes in the next four years will be achieved with 
the active participation of the private sector. 
  The electricity crisis has evidenced the urgent need for 
giving guarantees so that private investors can participate in 
this sector, both in the generation and the distribution of 
electricity. Investment prospects in this sector range from 
over $200 million for immediate solutions to sums equivalent to 
$500 million for medium term solutions. 
  Regarding privatization, we will continue to include in this 
process several state enterprises, or some of their branches, 
such as the Honduran Telecommunications Enterprise [Hondutel]. 
I have expanded the privatization commission to give it greater 
representation and sufficient moral authority so that it can 
present the method of privatization of Hondutel and inform the 
people about it. This privatization could generate over $400 
million in the next three years. This would allow us to achieve 
not only a more efficient telephone service, but also an influx 
of foreign exchange that would also permit us to achieve the 
objective of contributing to create foreign exchange stability 
and vast resources to finance the social action program to fight 
poverty. 
  Various sectors have initiated a public discussion on the 
interests of foreign investors in building a large refinery in 
Puerto Castilla. This debate must continue so the people and 
the government are convinced that we are abiding by our 
environmental protection laws as well as of the real benefits 
this $2-billion investment would represent for Honduras. 
  As for the benefits, we can plainly state that such a 
significant investment will help us attract more foreign 
investment. As president of all Hondurans, I urge investors to 
follow the example of those foreigners and show their patriotism 
and confidence in the prevailing investment conditions by 
increasing their business activities. It is true these 
investments could lead to an annual economic growth rate of 5 
percent in real terms, but the generation of new employment 
sources will not end there. 
  In the industrial area, we will give preferential treatment 
to small and intermediate industries and establish programs for 
micro-entrepreneurs. We already have specific projects that 
could receive support from international financial institutions. 
The projects we have in mind exceed $100 million, including 
resources for an industrial reconversion operation pending since 
1993. 
  We will meet our announced goal of increasing by 100,000 the 
number of workers in the industrial processing areas. We have 
decided that these industrial centers should operate in 
different locations of the country to generate local jobs. 
  As for the social aspect and the reactivation of productive 
sectors, we have negotiated and continue to negotiate $600 
million in nonreimbursable loans from foreign cooperation 
programs for the 1994-97 period. Thus we will develop and 
strengthen areas such as health; education; production training; 
potable water and sewage treatment; agricultural-livestock 
production and irrigation; environmental protection; support for 
private enterprises, especially small and micro enterprises; 
tourism; and various aspects of government reform, particularly 
regarding the legal system, municipal decentralization, and 
administrative reform. 
  Our agricultural-livestock policies deserve special 
recognition. Regarding property, particularly agrarian reform, 
we will immediately conduct a thorough evaluation of this 
program and the corresponding legislation. This evaluation will 
help us draft an effective program to reinstate peasants in the 
productive process. We will guarantee landownership by issuing 
property deeds and by establishing an official land register, 
both of which are essential for agricultural credit. 
  The Natural Resources minister, as head of the agricultural 
public sector, the executive director of the INA, and the 
president of Banadesa, will submit the evaluation to me three 
months from today. Meanwhile, my administration has allocated 
120 million lempiras to finance basic grains in the current 
agricultural period. Banadesa contributed 30 million of the 120 
million lempiras. 
  Regarding children, we have already thoroughly evaluated the 
progress made in implementing the national plan to help 
children. This national initiative includes goals and specific 
resources geared toward increasing protection and improving 
living conditions for children, specifically those facing 
difficult circumstances. Major advances in this aspect include 
the latest inoculation campaign, which reached over 90 percent 
of the children, the certified eradication of polio, and a 
strong fight against cholera. 
  The first lady is reorganizing the programs of the National 
Social Welfare Board to more effectively orient attention to 
abandoned children, children who are the most socioeconomically 
vulnerable. The first lady is focusing in particular on street 
children, orphans, and children who work. Health, water, and 
environmental sanitation are fundamental to healthy and 
productive living conditions. The health care system is being 
rehabilitated and strengthened, and we have earmarked an initial 
28 million lempiras increase for medicine. Beginning Thursday, 
12 May, the ministers will issue detailed reports on what we are 
doing and what we intend to do in investments and short- and 
medium-term plans. 
  Fellow citizens, No one should be surprised that in a 
society 
in which democracy is the form of coexistence, demands and 
requirements often emerge silencing dictatorships. We will 
never oppose people's demands when they are based on justice and 
equality. Such events, in any case, must be channeled within 
the legal framework and must have as boundaries the right of 
others and the common interest. 
  Premature or unjustified strikes, forceful takeovers of 
private or public properties, such as roads and public buildings 
are reproachable means of vindicating rights or groups' 
accomplishments. This is particularly true in a government that 
keeps the avenues of communication and understanding open. 
  We hope our working class and their leaders can understand 
our position and end these actions. We have enough means in the 
nation's juridical arsenal to achieve said objectives. Before 
this year is over, we will reform labor legislation in agreement 
with workers and businessmen so that this instrument, according 
to the most modern concepts, defines the steps that must be 
followed when conflicts between workers and businessmen emerge. 
  This is the dawn of a new era in worker-employer relations, 
in which increases in productivity and adapting to technological 
advancements are essential factors for achieving development 
that favors all. In this new atmosphere, which paves the way 
for greater competitive capacity in the markets, the 
confrontation and antagonism of classes must be overcome through 
negotiations and within a framework of growth with equality. 
  The aforesaid statement is part of the juridical-political 
security that must prevail in the state. Arbitrary actions must 
be eliminated for always from all sectors of society. 
  Fellow countrymen, in case of social conflicts stirred by 
groups and unions, as commander in chief of the Armed Forces, I 
instructed them to pledge themselves to safeguarding public 
order, preventing violent abuses, and letting courts solve 
conflicts based upon the stateliness of juridical laws. 
  As for the modernization of the state, among other efforts 
we 
will make, I hereby announce that we will create conditions 
under which municipalities may have full autonomy immediately. 
The following issues will have the same priority: the 
reorganization of the internal and external supervision of the 
executive branch; juridical and institutional reforms of the 
system of constitutional rights; the defense, strengthening, and 
development of human rights, and the strengthening of the 
Attorney General's Office, as well as sweeping reform of the 
judicial system. 
  As for international relations, we have progressed in tune 
with the new world order. Our joining the UN Security Council 
in January 1995 is praiseworthy. We are living in special times 
on the international scene: the end of apartheid in South 
Africa, the return of the Central American sister nations to 
social welfare programs, the opening up of international 
financial institutions to programs and actions to help the 
lowest-income sectors. All these achievements confirm our 
commitment with the people, especially with poor sectors. 
  Fellow countrymen, the great national consensus on 
extracting the country from its most serious and terrible 
problems was formed when the people overwhelmingly entrusted us 
with steering the nation's destiny. We now have to translate 
that ample consensus into widespread and local endeavors that 
will emanate from an agreement among all interested parties. 
  We have already started that significant task with some of 
the country's most important unions and political parties. We 
have met with teacher and labor union representatives to discuss 
the serious problems we are currently facing that so affect our 
nation, in the firm conviction that this is the path to greater 
milestones in Honduran history. 
  We will achieve those projects on which we have already 
embarked with said groups as soon as possible with the help of 
other sectors by signing, with the support of all, a social pact 
that will commit us to ensuring that everyone will benefit. 
This is how we will inaugurate a national plan needed by the 
country to follow a clear and certain path with a view to the 
challenges that the end of the millennium and the century pose. 
  This is the path I promised as part of my platform when I 
said: "It is essential for all the nation's sectors to sign a 
social pact to establish the basis for reaching a national 
consensus on such nationally important issues as national 
identity, civilian participation, reform and modernization of 
the state, economic reactivation and recovery, equitable growth, 
improvement of the domestic market, regional integration and 
economic internationalization, human development, environmental 
protection, and sustainable development. This government 
program constitutes the Liberal Party's contribution toward 
reaching said social pact and is complemented by operational 
measures that include, among other items, administrative 
decentralization and financial and operational restructuring of 
certain public institutions and organizations." 
  As a candidate, I said I would promise the people only what 
I 
could deliver; as president, I am keeping my word. We have kept 
our promises by selecting a capable working team, by eliminating 
confidential accounts, and by creating a volunteer and 
educational military service. We also reactivated the FHIS and 
revived the program of bonuses for mothers who are heads of 
household; we returned investigative services to civilian 
control and broadened judicial reforms and the modernization of 
the state. 
  We are currently consolidating the national convergence 
process. We are also honoring our international commitments and 
negotiating the best possible conditions for the people. All of 
this in only 100 days of government. 
  Those who talk about lack of action or lack of cohesion in 
the administrative arena have eyes that do not see and ears that 
do not hear; they are unaware of how much time it takes to 
organize a new government. Instead of making constructive 
criticism that will help guide action that can benefit national 
causes, they seek only to satisfy their personal interests and 
expect the moral revolution to fail, thus ensuring that they 
will remain hidden behind impunity and will return to power only 
to usufruct it to the detriment of Honduras. 
  As president of all Hondurans, I salute all my fellow 
countrymen and invite them all to work courageously and 
continuously to ensure that the material goods and spiritual 
values to which are entitled will blossom in our land. 

