Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Quito--The chief of operations of the police, 
Colonel Telmo Erazo, revealed that two police officers were 
directly involved in the illicit activities of the Colombian 
money laundering gang that was broken up in Quito last week 
through Operation "Azteca." 
  According to EL UNIVERSO's exclusive report, Lieutenant Hugo 
Alfredo Jativa Sotomayor and Second Lieutenant Wilson Marcelo 
Salgado Guzman are cited in the preliminary police report on the 
money laundering activities conducted in Ecuador during the past 
seven years by the Colombian Montenegro Freire family. 
  The two uniformed police officers working in the Immigration 
Service (Jativa in Guayaquil and Salgado in Quito) were used to 
facilitate the entry of couriers bringing money from Mexico that 
was sent by the group's leader, Humberto Montenegro, a Colombian 
drug trafficker with ties to a well-organized drug trafficking 
cartel headed by his compatriot Antonio Bermudez. 
  The report also states that in addition to helping the 
couriers to elude customs and immigration inspections, 
Lieutenant Jativa is also charged with extortion from a member 
of the money laundering family, as he demanded $10,000 for 
supposedly diverting the police and for support activities. 
<H5>  More Officers Implicated </H5>
  Colonel Erazo did not deny that other police officers may 
also be involved indirectly with the money launderers. He said 
this will be established during the course of the investigations. 
  The police report also lists the name of Captain Fernando 
Navarro who, according to the investigation, knew of these 
illegal operations. For eight months this officer even had in 
his possession a 9-mm weapon belonging to Fernando Montenegro 
Freire, a member of the gang now broken up by the police. 
<H5>  Police Arrested </H5>
  Jativa and Salgado were arrested at the order of the General 
Command. After the investigation has been completed, the two 
officers will be turned over to the civilian courts, to be tried 
along with the gang members. Before that they will be discharged 
from the police, indicated Erazo. 
  Captain Navarro was also arrested, and his situation is 
being 
reviewed by a police tribunal. It is expected that he will also 
be discharged since, although he was not involved in the illicit 
actions conducted by the money launderers and his 
comrades-in-arms, he knew of their activities. 
<H5>  Member of Powerful Cartel </H5>
  Colombian national Humberto Segundo Montenegro Freire, the 
head of the money laundering gang broken up by the Ecuadoran 
police, is a member of one of Colombia's most powerful drug 
cartels. 
  According to media accounts in Mexico, based on 
investigations by the PGR [Office of the Attorney General] of 
Mexico, Montenegro Freire, who was also known as Alberto 
Rodriguez Garcia or Alberto Garcia Aleman, had ties to a major 
drug trafficking organization headed by another Colombian, 
Antonio Bermudez. 
  On 18 and 19 December 1993, in an operation conducted in 
Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, PGR agents struck a harsh blow to 
the Bermudez gang by arresting 21 of its members, who were 
caught with 711 kilos of pure cocaine. Also seized were six 
automobiles of the latest models, a tanker type armored vehicle, 
and a passenger bus. 
  Among the persons arrested was Humberto Segundo Montenegro 
Freire, the leader of the group laundering drug money in 
Ecuador. He had been sending large amounts of money to his 
relatives in Quito, which they used to buy real estate and other 
assets as a means of laundering this dirty money. 
  In Mexico the Bermudez drug trafficking organization 
distributed Colombian drugs from the southeast to various points 
of Mexico, including well-known tourism spots like Cancun. 

