Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Taipei, March 15 (AFP)--China would resort to the 
use of M-9 and M-11 missiles to attack the western coast of 
Taiwan in the event of an invasion of the island, according to a 
defense ministry report. The report is yet to be released, but 
excerpts published by the United Evening News said China had 
authorized its military to deploy the surface-to-surface 
tactical ballistic missiles. 
  The report says China has never given up on invading Taiwan, 
and would be encouraged to attack if the island declared 
independence, in the event of large scale chaos or riots, the 
weakening of Taiwan's defense force or foreign intervention into 
Taiwan's internal affairs. China would also be encouraged to 
invade if Taiwan developed nuclear arms, or in the event of 
unstable political conditions in the post Deng Xiaoping era, the 
report adds. 
  The report lists what it says are the six most likely ways 
Beijing would attack Taiwan, including the seizure of 
Taiwanese-held offshore islands, using jet fighters to violate 
Taiwan's air space, bombarding its west coast with missiles, and 
starting fishing disputes to give the Chinese navy an excuse to 
invade. China has regarded Taiwan as a renegade province since 
the 1949 civil war, and has threatened to attack if Taiwan 
declares independence. 
  The report says China has actively promoted its offensive 
capability by buying more sophisticated arms and technologies 
from Russia, and says Taiwan will also seek to modernize its 
forces. Admiral Liu Ho-chien, chief of the General Staff, has 
warned that the next two years would be pivotal for Taiwan in 
trying to keep China's increasingly superior armed forces at bay. 
  Taiwan takes delivery in 1996 of 150 F-16 and 60 Mirage 
2000-5 jet fighters it has ordered from the United States and 
France, plus several foreign-made warships, but says an absence 
of modern weaponry leaves it particularly vulnerable until that 
time. 
  The report, entitled Defense Ministry White Paper, will be 
published between late March and early April, a ministry 
official told AFP. 

