BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Gan Zhebin (3927 0772 2430) and You Xiayin </F>
(3266 1115 5419): "Xu Bin, Deputy Director of the State 
Administration of Exchange Control, on New Developments in 
China's Foreign Exchange Market"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 10 May (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--At a 
symposium held here the other day, Xu Bin, deputy director of 
the State Administration of Exchange Control, elaborated on the 
structure and composition of China's foreign exchange market and 
revealed new ongoing developments in the interbank foreign 
exchange market. 
  Xu Bin: At present, China's foreign exchange market can be 
divided into three markets. The first part is the retail 
market, specifically the foreign exchange market between the 
appointed foreign exchange bank and the enterprise. The second 
is the foreign exchange swap market between foreign-invested 
enterprises. It retains its previous role as a swap center and 
specifically offers swap services to foreign-invested 
enterprises. The rates at which foreign-invested enterprises 
buy and sell foreign exchange are the same as the foreign 
quotations published by the People's Bank of China plus 0.15 
percent in handling fees. The price disparity method is not 
used. The third is the interbank foreign exchange market. It 
mainly offers the service of covering the position of appointed 
foreign exchange banks, because they typically either overbuy or 
oversell in the course of settling foreign exchange 
transactions. When such a situation occurs, it can be balanced 
through the interbank foreign exchange market. 
  Xu Bin specifically spoke about the interbank foreign 
exchange market, saying: The interbank foreign exchange market, 
which is now operating healthily, is a nationwide unified and 
standardized exchange market based on the national swap center. 
It has a computer network which is linked with other networks. 
Beginning from 1 March this year, the first five cities linked 
their computer networks and started transactions. On 1 April, 
another 10 cities linked computer networks and began 
transactions. Twenty exchange network points will be linked in 
the near future, making it possible to radiate to all parts of 
the country. 
  He said: The interbank foreign exchange market practices the 
membership system. All banking and nonbank financial 
institutions which have been approved to deal in renminbi and 
which deal in the foreign exchange business at the same time can 
become members of the market. Presently, foreign banks, which 
cannot offer banking services for the import business of Chinese 
institutions, can only engage in one-way sales of foreign 
exchange in the foreign exchange market of the same trade. 
Non-financial institutions, namely industrial and commercial 
enterprises, cannot directly trade in the interbank foreign 
exchange market, because their foreign exchange transactions are 
already handled at the counters of appointed foreign exchange 
banks. 
  Regarding the China Swap Exchange Center recently set up in 
Shanghai, Xu Bin said: The center is a market organization 
which is independent of the State Administration of Exchange 
Control. It only offers settlement and exchange services and 
does not have administrative, examination, or approval functions. 
  Xu Bin made the above remarks at "The Impact of Renminbi's 
Integration With the World Market on the Operations of Foreign 
Enterprises in China," a symposium held by the China Hong Kong 
(Regional) Chamber of Commerce. 

