BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following review of the 31 May issue 
of Cairo 'AQIDATI summerizes articles that are Islamic in nature. 
<H5>  Contents: </H5>
  1. 'Ulemas Talking to Repentant Youths Interviewed 
  2. Mufti Reconciled With Opponents 
  3. Awqaf Minister Reports on Pilgrimage 
  4. Pilgrims, Saudi Government Blamed for Mecca Chaos 
  5. Columnist on Uselessness of Dialogue With Repentant 
Youths 
  6. Al-Azhar Shaykh Notes Need To Educate Youths in Islam 
  7. Article Terms Age `Age of Dialogue' 
  8. Islamic Media Evaluated as Low-Voiced 
  9. Islamic University Professor Interviewed 
  10. Columnist Angry Over Media Unfairness Toward Egypt 
  11. Chief Editor Defends Newspaper's Stances on Islam 
<H5>  'ULEMAS TALKING TO REPENTANT YOUTHS INTERVIEWED </H5>
  Page 1 carries a summarized 150-word report on the 
"dialogue" 
recently broadcast over television between 'ulemas and 
professors from al-Azhar University and "repentant youths." The 
moderator of the dialogue was Hilmi al-Buluk, who explains the 
"secrets behind this dialogue" to 'AQIDATI. He says the idea of 
a dialogue was born "when a large number of youths announced 
that they have returned to the correct and righteous religion 
and renounced extremism." 
  Pages 10 and 11 carry a detailed report on interviews with 
Hilmi al-Buluk and some of the 'ulemas and professors who 
participated in the dialogue. Al-Buluk says: "The idea of 
holding these meetings stemmed from the desire of a group of 
youths currently serving their prison sentences to discuss their 
experiences. We immediately responded to this need." He 
maintains that when the dialogue went on for over six and a half 
hours, he offered to stop it, but the youths themselves were 
keen on continuing. He explains how the 'ulemas who conducted 
this dialogue were chosen. "The 'ulemas for the most recent 
meetings were professors at al-Azhar University, who are, 
undoubtedly, highly educated and well-versed in jurisprudence, 
each in his own field," al-Buluk adds. 
  Dr. Nash'at 'Abd-al-Jawad, professor of philosophy and 
doctrine at al-Azhar University, claims that the "responsibility 
for aggravating this extremist thinking is a joint one between 
al-Azhar and the state." He accuses the state of not having 
"paid any attention to al-Azhar's 'ulemas, and placed them in 
the tenth rank." The state realized it had to find another way 
to confront this problem, he says, so it resorted to freedom of 
expression of ideas and discussion with clarity and frankness. 
It "could not find anyone better than the al-Azhar 'ulemas to 
express themselves in this language," 'Abd-al-Jawad states. He 
concludes that they were interested in listening to the youths 
and in making the youths hear their opinions, "and whoever is 
more capable of convincing the other party will obviously win, 
and that course will be adopted." 
  Dr. Muhammad 'Abd-al-Sami' Jad, professor of Islamic call 
and 
education, clarifies: "The most important short-term result of 
this open dialogue and frank discussion is the response of these 
youths whose minds were fogged up. The long-term results 
include the increased turnout of the youths to such meetings of 
their own free will to rectify their thinking after realizing 
the error in their ways. Officials in all sectors must increase 
the number of such meetings because the youth comprise 60 
percent of Egypt's population." 
  Jad accuses those who initially called for dwarfing the role 
of al-Azhar and its 'ulemas, and distancing them from 
participating in and expressing their opinion on events, of 
being the major reason for spreading such erroneous thinking. 
"It is time," he announces, "for people to get the correct 
Islamic knowledge from the true source and from the specialized 
'ulemas." 
  Dr. Muhammad 'Abd-al-Fadil al-Qawsi, another religion 
professor at Cairo University, explains that from this dialogue 
emerged the fact that these youths were misinterpreting a set of 
Koranic verses stipulating how the government should be run. He 
maintains that certain factors-- unemployment, lack of religious 
awareness--made them susceptible to influence from any ideas 
cloaked with a veneer of religion. He also stresses that the 
Islamic media could be an eye-opener for these youths and could 
guide them back to the path of righteousness. The report 
concludes with a statement by al-Azhar Professor Dr. Isma'il 
al-Daftar who says that they are always ready to talk to the 
youths if given the chance to do so. 
<H5>  MUFTI RECONCILED WITH OPPONENTS </H5>
  Page 1 also carries a short 100-word report by Mahmud 'Ushub 
that 'AQIDATI has learned that al-Azhar University professors 
have managed to reconcile Mufti of the Republic Muhammad Sayyid 
Tantawi with Dr. Sha'ban Isma'il and others regarding the 
dispute between them, which had reached the courts. Both sides 
have agreed to resolve the matter out of court. 
<H5>  AWQAF MINISTER REPORTS ON PILGRIMAGE </H5>
  A 100-word report on page 1 says the awqaf minister is 
preparing a detailed report for the prime minister on the 
activities of this year's pilgrimage delegation to Mecca. The 
report contains the positive and negative aspects of this 
pilgrimage. It also proposes forming an independent agency to 
organize the Egyptian pilgrimage. 
<H5>  PILGRIMS, SAUDI GOVERNMENT BLAMED FOR MECCA CHAOS </H5>
  Samir Rajab's 400-word column "Rightfully I Say" on page 1 
blames both the pilgrims and the Saudi Arabian Government for 
the chaos during the pilgrimage in Mecca, which leads to many 
deaths each year. He says the Saudi Arabian Government should 
organize processions better. He calls for improving conditions 
at the pilgrimage site. 
<H5>  COLUMNIST ON USELESSNESS OF DIALOGUE WITH REPENTANT YOUTHS </H5>
  Basyuni al-Halawani's 700-word column "In All Frankness" on 
page 6 entitled "Dialogue With the Repentant Youths and the 
Morals We Have Learned" maintains that this dialogue is useless 
since these youths have already joined the righteous path. He 
proposes that "effective dialogue from which we expect results 
should be with the other elements who still believe in the ideas 
of violence and extremism." Continuing, he recommends that 
confronting terrorism should take place on many levels. Once 
the security level succeeds, confronting extremist and terrorist 
thinking is the responsibility of the 'ulemas and Islamic 
intellectuals. "The real confrontation of extremist thinking," 
he concludes, "dictates that we should confront those people who 
hoist slogans on the freedom of thinking and expression and 
attack everything that is Islamic. They are no less dangerous 
than the terrorists who carry arms and kill innocent people." 
<H5>  AL-AZHAR SHAYKH NOTES NEED TO EDUCATE YOUTHS IN ISLAM </H5>
  Page 7 carries an article by al-Azhar Shaykh Jad-al-Haqq 
'Ali 
Jad-al-Haqq who advocates that the youth in Egypt should be 
taken care of and educated properly in religion so that they do 
not misinterpret religious texts or behave contrary to God's 
teachings. He cites many Koranic verses with regard to this 
point. He concludes that the first and final reference for 
correct Muslim behavior is the Koran itself and that by reading 
it and following its teachings correctly, we will be guided by 
its light. 
<H5>  ARTICLE TERMS AGE `AGE OF DIALOGUE' </H5>
  An article on page 11 entitled "The Age of Dialogue and 
Reconciliation Thinking" signed by the initials M.Y. praises the 
dialogue between al-Azhar 'ulemas and repentant terrorists. The 
writer notes: "With the number of returning youths, the Islamic 
call has gained a new group of people who have kept company with 
deviant thinkers, and learned about them and about their 
objectives and secrets. Therefore, they will be more competent 
and effective in spreading the call among their former brothers 
who have yet to return to the righteous path." The writer also 
notes that the preparatory meeting to form the national dialogue 
committee was held at the same time. "Both these meetings and 
others," he concludes, "clarify that we are now in an age that 
we can safely call the `Age of Dialogue.' Experience has proven 
to us that dialogue is the only way out for a nation from its 
crisis and problems." 
<H5>  ISLAMIC MEDIA EVALUATED AS LOW-VOICED </H5>
  Page 18 is dedicated to Islamic media issues. In a 250-word 
report, Muhammad 'Abd-al-Sami' Shabanah, counselor at al-Azhar, 
evaluated Islamic media, claiming that it has "a very low 
voice." However, he believes that in comparison to other forms 
of media, the radio is "splendid." He then claims that visual 
Islamic media needs a great deal of work in order to rise to the 
required level. 
<H5>  ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR INTERVIEWED </H5>
  Page 20 features an interview by Tariq 'Abdallah with Dr. 
'Abd- al-'Aziz al-'Ubaydi, professor of Islamic history at the 
social sciences college in al-Imam Muhammad Bin Sa'ud Islamic 
University. He analyzes the dangers to the Islamic nation from 
outside, such as cultural and economic siege imposed by the 
enemy, and from inside such as inter-Muslim differences. 
<H5>  COLUMNIST ANGRY OVER MEDIA UNFAIRNESS TOWARD EGYPT </H5>
  The same page carries a 200-word column by 'Adil Dayf in 
which he expresses his anger over the media's unfairness in 
reporting acts of violence in Egypt, as compared to reporting in 
the United States, Europe, Russia, and the former Soviet 
republics. He concludes that the reason for this is: "The 
media's total bias to the West, total disregard for our nation, 
and complete hostility to us." He addresses western media 
asking them "not only to be fair, but to be just and to reveal 
the truth, no more." He closes his column by claiming that 
security in Egypt is much better than that in any other 
developing or non-developing country. 
<H5>  CHIEF EDITOR DEFENDS NEWSPAPER'S STANCES ON ISLAM </H5>
  On the back page of 'AQIDATI, Chief Editor Al-Sayyid 
'Abd-al-Ra'uf writes his "A Call To Reason" column in which he 
defends his newspaper and refutes claims that it is the 
"civilian wing of terrorism." He highlights the fact that the 
newspaper's objective from the beginning was to enlighten people 
about true Islam. He uses the recent dialogue between the 
'ulemas and repentant terrorists as an example to show that the 
'ulemas are the prime source on Islam. The 'ulemas are the ones 
"capable of guiding our youths, who have the seeds for real 
belief in their hearts, by the hand from the path of sin to the 
path of righteousness, from hostility to society to 
reconciliation with it, from killing and destruction to repair 
and construction." Defending the 'ulemas' role in educating the 
people and propagating the true religion, he concludes: "These 
dialogues very clearly order the rats of culture to go into 
their holes or stop their fervent screams heard by no one but 
themselves." 

