BFN 

  [Text] Lagos, June 7 (AFP) -- Former senators who went into 
hiding after criticising Nigeria's military regime, indicated 
Tuesday [7 June] they would surrender within 48 hours. A 
spokesman for the group told AFP by phone that they would 
surrender "en masse within the next 48 hours". 
  He expressed the hope that former members of the dissolved 
house of representatives, also sought for opposing the November 
takeover of General Sani Abacha, would surrender themselves to 
the security agents after the senators have done so. 
  Four of the senate members have so far been arrested and 
detained in the past week for their opposition to the government 
and for calling the Abacha government "illegal" in a communique 
issued last Wednesday. In it they called on Abacha to stand 
down to pave the way for the installation of Chief Moshood 
Abiola, the undeclared winner of presidential elections held 
last June 12 and cancelled immediately afterwards. 
  Two of the ex-senators under arrest, namely former Senate 
president Ameh Ebute and Polycarp Nwite were formally charged in 
a federal high court on Monday with "conspiracy and sedition", 
an offence punishable by life imprisonment on conviction. Many 
other legislators are being hunted by the police, some of them 
stated from their hidouts. 
  "The legislators are prepared to pay the price for 
democracy. 
Democracy is not achieved on a platter of gold, anywhere in the 
world and so, we must keep on the struggle to achieve it, not 
minding the pains that go along with it", one of the ex-senators 
said. "If we (legislators) are arrested, that may not be the end 
(of the struggle). Rather, I strongly believe that it will be 
the beginning", he told in a call to AFP by cellular phone. 
  The senators said Monday that plans were afoot to groom "a 
relief group" that would take over the struggle if the present 
crop of legislators in the forefront of the struggle were jailed. 
  One of the events being organised by the legislators in 
conjunction with the recently-formed National Democratic 
Coalition (NADECO) opposition group, is a "solidarity visit" on 
Wednesday to Abiola's Lagos residence by representatives of some 
pro-democracy groups who will urge him to form a government. 
  The deputy leader of the military junta Lieutenant-General 
Oladipo Diya warned on Monday in the northern town of Kaduna 
that the regime would "not spare" any individual or group who 
threatened its transition programme, press reports said Tuesday. 

