BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with People's Deputy Valyantsin Holubew by </F>
Lyudmila Klaskowskaya on 30 March; place not given: "Valyantsin 
Holubew: `Constitution Gives Our People a Chance for 
Self-Deliverance'"] 
  [Excerpt] On the birthday of the Belarusian Constitution 
-- on the day of its coming into force [30 March 1994] -- we 
spoke with one of the "fathers" of the fundamental law of our 
young independent state -- People's Deputy Valyantsin Holubew. 
  [Klaskowskaya] At a news conference held just after the 
adoption of the Constitution, one of your colleagues said the 
following: "This Constitution is a product of compromise." 
Thus, are you not fully satisfied with the results of your work? 
  [Holubew] Even though I was one of the authors of the 
Belarusian Constitution, I did not vote in favor of its 
adoption. Why? I think that the Supreme Soviet took the wrong 
approach, having put three chapters to a vote -- chapters on the 
presidency, parliament, and bodies of local self-government -- 
without any discussion. There are problems there, and I think 
that these problems will crop up again in the future. However, 
I refused to vote only because I wanted the Constitution to 
become better. 
  In general, while assessing the Constitution, it should be 
stated positively: It is a high-class law which we have never 
had before. I mean, in this century; in the past, the Statute of 
the Grand Duchy of Lithuania [law code adopted in 16th century] 
was a document of the highest legal order, which was used as a 
fundamental law by even some European countries. 
  The new Constitution includes practically all the world's 
democratic legal norms. In the future, some amendments may be 
introduced, but its foundation -- I mean the chapters "On the 
foundations of constitutional order" and "On individual, 
society, and state" -- are stable. Our fundamental law has 
absorbed basic ideas from constitutions of the most advanced 
nations. 
  It is a pity that not everything that was planned has been 
accomplished. I believe that a new Supreme Soviet will go 
further than that -- it will vote in favor of a professional 
parliament as well as write down that our national flag is 
white-red-white and our national coat of arms is the Pahonya 
[knight in pursuit]... 
  [Klaskowskaya] However, let us return to compromises... 
  [Holubew] Let us take Article 17, which stipulates that "the 
official language of the Republic of Belarus is Belarusian." 
The second part reads: "The Republic of Belarus secures the 
right of the free use of Russian as a language of interethnic 
relations." I think that this could have been omitted. Who has 
the right to determine in which language people will converse? 
Suppose, interlocutors can speak English or Polish fluently... 
it is not a compromise, but pressure on the part of a 
professional [as published] majority. 
  Life has amended the Constitution in the process of its 
drafting. Thus, the first version of Article 19 provided for 
incomplete secondary education. However, what have we attained? 
Having completed the 9th grade, youngsters are practically sent 
out into the streets. It is more expedient for the state to 
keep them under its control until they reach full age. The new 
Constitution guarantees available and free general secondary 
education for everyone. 
  [Klaskowskaya] The first line of the Constitution -- "We, 
the people of the Republic of Belarus..." -- makes one 
automatically think of the U.S. Constitution. There have also 
been reports that you actively used the Constitution of Germany 
as a starting point for your work. If so, is the final document 
not a copy of Western constitutions? If not, what is the 
difference, what is original in the Belarusian Constitution? 
  [Holubew] I am one of the authors of the preamble to the 
fundamental law. We have not copied the U.S. version or any 
other -- it came from the heart. It was important to show 
historical prerequisites for the promulgation of our 
Constitution. We have noted that we were guided by our 
historical advancements in the sphere of the constitutional 
building in Belarus, that is, by our old codes of law, the 
Statute of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the constituent 
declarations of the Belarusian Popular Republic [issued in 
1918], and the Constitution of the Belarusian Soviet Socialist 
Republic. By this, the distinctiveness of the Belarusian 
Constitution has been preserved. For the first time, it was 
certified that Belarusian statehood has an old and distinguished 
history. 
  By acquainting ourselves with democratic norms in other 
countries, we examined the applicability of those norms to our 
reality. Thus, for example, we have not only recognized the 
equality of all religious denominations before the law, but also 
provided that endowing any one denomination with certain 
advantages is inadmissible. By the way, our fundamental law 
forbids the activities of religious organizations which can 
infringe upon state sovereignty, the constitutional order, and 
civic accord; such a provision is not included in constitutions 
of other countries. This refers not only to the Orthodox and 
Catholic Churches, but also to those sects and groups which are 
being actively advertised on posters in Belarusian cities. Our 
people have habits, traditions, and a culture of their own, 
which should be defended by the state. 
  [Klaskowskaya] It has already become commonplace to cite the 
example of Stalin's constitution. As known, this document, 
drafted primarily by Nikolay Bukharin, was attractive and 
democratic in its outward appearance, but it did not prevent the 
mustached leader from carrying out genocide against his people. 
Can you guarantee that our Constitution will not be only a piece 
of paper for purely ornamental purposes? 
  [Holubev] There are guarantees in the Constitution. It is 
stated unequivocally that the only source of state power is the 
people; the people exercise their power directly, through 
representative bodies. However, you can find virtually the same 
statements in the old Constitution. And let me remind you, when 
the people tried to express their opinion in a referendum, the 
highest legislative body simply ignored it. Is this possible in 
the future? 
  I have voiced my anxiety about an incomplete match between 
the chapters regarding parliament, the presidency, and local 
self-government. I think that legislative elections should 
precede presidential ones. Just imagine a democratic president 
assuming this high post, while there still remains the old 
parliament which objects to him and boycotts every one of his 
resolutions... 
  [Klaskowskaya] As is known, the introduction of a presidency 
in Russia was followed by a harsh conflict between the branches 
of power, which finally turned into a bloody confrontation. Are 
we insured against such a danger? 
  [Holubew] I would not draw any parallel between Belarus and 
Russia. Belarusians will not allow civil war to break out in 
their country. The creed of the Belarusian Popular Front, of 
which I am a representative, is to fully obey the law. Our main 
slogan states that no political achievement can be worthwhile if 
it has been accomplished by bloodshed. 
  The Constitution will not be only a declarative document, if 
the people, as Kupala [Belarusian poet] said, arise from their 
sleep. This Constitution grants many rights to the people. When 
Belarusians realize that their deliverance depends not on some 
politicians or foreign uncles from the ruble zone, but on their 
own will, then people's woes will recede. Let me recall Kupala 
once more: "I will fight for freedom with all my heart, I will 
go for it through fire and water." In short, the Constitution 
gives our people a chance for self-deliverance. [passage omitted] 

