BFN 

  [Text] The Philippines and Malaysia agreed yesterday to 
issue border-crossing passes to their nationals in Mindanao and 
Sabah in a bid to clear a major irritant in their diplomatic 
relations. 
  Officials from the two countries also agreed to work out 
ways 
to regulate and improve border trade, curb piracy, gunrunning, 
drug trafficking and other crimes, and control the spread of 
disease and marine pollution. 
  The measures were drawn up during a three-day meeting of the 
Philippines-Malaysia Joint Committee on Border Cooperation, 
which ended yesterday. 
  Another meeting will be held by the committee in Kuala 
Lumpur 
in December to finalize details of how the regulations will be 
implemented, possibly by 1 January next year. 
  Diplomatic relations between the Philippines and Malaysia 
were upset with the roundup in March of almost 2,000 suspected 
Filipino illegal workers in Kuala Lumpur, Penang, and Labuan. 
  Foreign Undersecretary Rodolfo Severino, head of the 
Philippine panel, said special passes will be issued to those 
crossing the border between Southern Philippines and East 
Malaysia. 
  In a press conference, Severino said the border cooperation 
agreement will benefit Filipinos who are staying in Sabah. 
Estimates of the number of Filipinos in the Malaysian state vary 
from 190,000 to 500,000. 
  He said entry points will be designated by both countries 
where the special documents for people and vessels can be 
secured. 
  Documents obtained by KYODO NEWS SERVICE showed that the 
Philippines and Malaysia have both designated three border areas 
and crossing points where entry and exit of people and vessels 
will be monitored. 
  According to a copy of the draft of minutes of the joint 
committee's first meeting, Manila has designated as border areas 
the municipality limits of the provinces of Tawi-Tawi and Sulu, 
and the Balabac Island group. 
  Malaysia, for its part, designated Sandakan, Semporna, and 
Tawau, an official said. 
  The border-crossing passes, the document said, will be 
issued 
only to Filipinos or Malaysians who have been residents of their 
respective border areas for at least three years preceding the 
date of application, or a lesser period mutually agreed upon. 
  It will be valid only for single entry and for 60 days from 
the date of issue, and for a period of stay not exceeding 30 
days from entry into the border area of the other country. 
  Severino and his counterpart, Tan Sri Ahmad Kamil Jaafar, 
secretary general of Malaysia's foreign ministry, agreed that 
border crossing has been one of the most serious irritants 
facing the two countries. 
  "Between two neighbors, there is bound to arise both 
opportunities and problems with respects to any kind of human 
activities," Severino said. 
  "Some are related to the movement of people and goods and it 
is therefore necessary to regulate these movements." 
  Jaafar acknowledged that relations between the two countries 
have been abnormal. "But we are now putting that behind us now. 
We have spent too much time in the past 30 years and we must 
now move it to a higher plane," he said. 
  The joint committee will also establish border patrol, 
customs and immigration offices in designated entry points. 
  Created last 10 December during the first meeting of the 
Philippines-Malaysia Joint Commission, the committee is in 
charge of facilitating and regulating activities of people 
between the 
border. 

