Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota--In the first week of August 
1993, the prosecutor general met in his office with the members 
of the law firm Ristaud &amp; Abbel, who claimed to represent an 
organization of some 60 drug traffickers from the Valle del 
Cauca. Gustavo de Greiff told EL ESPECTADOR yesterday that "they 
came to be instructed on the rules for drug-trafficker 
surrenders, and I explained to them the entire legal framework 
of the policy on surrendering to justice authorities." One of 
them, Abbel, had been a high-ranking official of the U.S. 
Justice Department, in the very section that handles 
applications for extradition from Latin American countries. 
  Romulo Gomez, a Cali attorney, and Juan Fernandez 
Carrasquilla, a former magistrate from Bogota, visited the 
prosecutor general later on to give him the details of a formal 
proposal for the drug traffickers of the Valle del Cauca to turn 
themselves in. They made it clear that formally, they were only 
representing Gilberto Rodriguez O. and Julio Fabio Urdinola G., 
but that soon news would be received regarding other 
"colleagues." 
  "They mentioned that the Rodriguez Orejuela's had been 
cooperating with the authorities in the war against the Medellin 
Cartel, and that they had supplied data and information that 
helped the authorities in their fight against Pablo Escobar 
Gaviria. They wanted that to be taken into consideration," said 
the prosecutor general yesterday. 
  But when these contacts were made public, the inmates in the 
Itagui Prison, led by Roberto Escobar Gaviria, also sent the 
Prosecutor General's Office a letter naming the alleged members 
of the Pepes (Persecuted by Pablo Escobar) Group and demanding a 
judicial investigation of them. The prosecutor general responded 
that an offender's cooperation could only be taken into 
consideration after he turned himself in, not before, and the 
attorneys did not call back. 
<H5>  Neither Pepes Nor Jail </H5>
  But in late 1993, after Pablo Escobar's demise, there was 
talk in Cali of a plan for the "staggered surrender" of 200 
major drug traffickers, in which each would benefit by providing 
information on the next person to turn himself in. 
  At present, Justice Minister Andres Gonzalez has 
acknowledged 
to EL ESPECTADOR in an interview, there is only one indictment 
against Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela from a U.S. court and none 
arising out of Colombian investigations, so the most important 
thing is for him to confess when he surrenders so that the 
American case will not be pursued. 
  Although Rodriguez Orejuela's and Julio Fabio Urdinola's 
attorneys insist that their "cooperation" in the search for 
Escobar should be recognized, they deny any ties with the Pepes 
and their organization to commit crimes through a cartel. 
  "With regard to that alleged organization (Pepes)," said De 
Greiff, "the Prosecutor General's Office and the Attorney 
General's Office have pursued many investigations, but there 
have been no witnesses or documentary evidence to allow us to 
identify its members individually." 
  While the letter bomb that practically blew up in Roberto 
Escobar's face confirmed the Pepes' threats, a letter in which 
Carlos Mario Alzate ("El Arete" [earring]) asked the director of 
prisons not to take him out of his maximum-security cell at La 
Picota even for judicial proceedings revealed the panic that 
this group's actions have instilled in members of Escobar's 
organization. 
<H5>  New Contacts </H5>
  In open letters sent by Roberto Escobar from his cell to the 
Prosecutor General's Office, two of the people accused of 
belonging to the Pepes, plus one other person, met with Gustavo 
de Greiff in his office on 14 January. He gave them 
documentation attesting that no summons had been issued in their 
names and that they were the subject of investigations to 
determine their involvement in certain interrogations, pursuant 
to Article 369E of the new Code of Criminal Procedure, through 
which they had managed to mislead the authorities in a drug 
enforcement operation in the Valle del Cauca and evade capture. 
  Although various witnesses interviewed this week by EL 
ESPECTADOR confirmed that the head of the Drug Trafficking Unit 
of the Prosecutor General's Office, Cruz Helena Aguilar 
Echeverri, last Monday mediated a "peace pact" between two men 
close to the late chief of the Medellin Cartel and Luis 
Guillermo Angel, an alleged middleman for the "Cali people," De 
Greiff emphatically declared that "the Prosecutor General's 
Office did not, does not, and will not have any involvement, 
either institutional or private, in any agreement between 
criminal organizations." 
  "What happened there," explained the prosecutor general, 
"was 
the continuation of some witness examinations and a report by a 
witness on cases he was familiar with for the purpose of 
comparing his statements with those of the defendants." 
<H5>  What Happens Next </H5>
  The house arrest requested by the drug traffickers was also 
ruled out in the discussions. "What must be verified now is how 
much they are willing to cooperate and what mechanisms can be 
implemented to make sure they do not continue to commit crimes 
through third parties," stated the prosecutor general, "but the 
government must also make sure that the work being done on the 
Cali and Palmira prisons will guarantee that they cannot escape." 
  History will be the judge as to whether this "surrender" 
will 
result in impunity. 
<H5>  [Box, p 13A] </H5>
<H5>  Government Explains Surrender </H5>
  The national government broke its silence on the various 
interpretations of the application of Article 369E of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure (CPP), which establishes measures to allow 
persons implicated in crimes to cooperate fully with the 
authorities. It stated its legal position on the matter in a 
letter to Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff. 
  Justice Minister Andres Gonzalez Diaz explained the purpose 
of the regulations and warned that some trial attorneys are 
trying to manipulate the system to obtain decisions that will 
make it easier for their clients to escape prosecution. 
  The minister took this stand after the alleged members of 
the 
Cali Cartel, Helmer Herrera Buitrago, Jose Olmedo Ocampo, and 
Juan Carlos Ramirez, appeared before the Prosecutor General's 
Office to request that an investigation be opened pursuant to 
the aforementioned CPP article. 
  Gonzalez Diaz stated that the mere fact that a person 
appears 
before the appropriate authority on the pretext that he is being 
sought by law enforcement is not legal grounds to issue an order 
to open a preliminary investigation or hold a probable cause 
hearing, and went on to say that this would put the 
responsibility for initiating criminal action exclusively in the 
hands of those who are trying to inveigle the authorities into 
filing criminal charges against them. 

