BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by No'omi Levitsky: "Scenario on Syria"] </F>
  [Text] The more the negotiations with the PLO on security 
arrangements in Hebron progressed, the more heads turned north 
to the main focus, Syria. When the Hebron agreement was 
completed in Cairo on Wednesday, Damascus once more drew our 
attention because since his latest meeting with Clinton, Yitzhaq 
Rabin has been fully aware that the moment of truth over the 
Golan Heights can no longer be put off. 
  And it is now clear to all, Shim'on Peres, Ambassador Itamar 
Rabinovich, the Army top brass, but more than anybody else, to 
Rabin himself, that immediately after the Gaza-Jericho agreement 
is completed, the time will come to do real business with Hafiz 
al-Asad. Clinton made it clear to Rabin: He wants a settlement 
with Syria, and fast. 
  In fact, the new fare, prepared according to an American 
recipe, is already being readied in the political kitchens. 
There are no longer semantics like: "Al-Asad must first define 
the substance of the peace and then we will define the depth of 
the withdrawal." It is no longer "the depth of the withdrawal 
will depend on the depth of the peace." The time has come for a 
new ball game. 
  It is unclear who invented this brain wave. There are those 
who point to Dennis Ross, head of the U.S. peace team. There 
are others who claim that Rabinovich presented the new formula, 
while there are still others who have once again observed Peres' 
fingerprints, since he is the most creative member of the band. 
Whatever the case, the Americans believe that a redeeming 
formula, which will extricate the negotiations with Syria from 
the deep freeze, has been found. That formula is called a 
package deal. 
  Before Passover, when Ross and his peace team came to 
Jerusalem from Damascus, they brought the al-Asad message. Up 
to then, he had also insisted on first hearing an unequivocal 
Israeli declaration that it is prepared to withdraw from the 
entire Golan Heights. Al-Asad has now changed that tune and is 
playing new music, which is very pleasant to Ross' sensitive 
ears. 
  With open glee, Ross told Rabin that al-Asad has agreed to 
talks in terms of a package deal. In other words: Peace with 
all its trappings, security and all its trappings, withdrawal, 
Golan Heights, Lebanon, and all that involves. "I believe," 
al-Asad told Ross, "that a package deal has to be offered. 
Peace, security arrangements, U.S. involvement, Lebanon, 
withdrawal, a timetable. Everything. Okay, I agree to Israel 
presenting a comprehensive package deal." 
  The Americans were thrilled. They believe that toward the 
end of summer an agreement of principles will be signed between 
Syria and Israel. They can already imagine a repeat of the 
signing ceremony for the Oslo agreement on the White House lawn. 
Al-Asad and Rabin, or Peres and Faruq al-Shar'. A boost for 
Clinton's somewhat pale image. 
  Rabin is worried. In Washington he met a restive, even 
nervous Clinton, who kept moving in his chair and who seemed to 
be suffering from a backache. The Whitewater affair, which 
refuses to vanish from the headlines, left its marks on him. 
Rabin received the impression that Clinton is looking for 
international achievements, hoping that this will deflect the 
spotlight from the unfortunate affair in which he is stuck up to 
his neck. 
  The Americans nearly always support Israel in relation to 
the 
Palestinians, yet Rabin found Clinton in a different mood in 
relation to the negotiations with al-Asad. Clinton told Rabin 
al-Asad has already said he agrees to full peace with Israel, 
and that he (Rabin) knows Israel will have to withdraw from the 
Golan. He (Clinton) therefore fails to understand why Israel 
refuses to finalize things and sign the agreement. Rabin told 
Clinton there are security problems. Clinton answered that in 
the security sphere the United States is the address and will 
provide security arrangements. 
  And now the package deal is being worked out. The United 
States is indeed the address for security issues. Immediately 
after the Gaza-Jericho agreement is signed, Israel will 
intensify its work on formulating its proposal to al-Asad. The 
proposal will be finalized in anticipation of the resumption of 
the Washington talks in late April and another shuttle round of 
the region for Christopher. 
  Until recently al-Asad behaved as though he had all the time 
in the world, but now he has made a certain shift and is 
behaving as though he is pressed for time. Rabin, for his part, 
counted up to now on semantics, settling for the occasional word 
on the Syrian issue. Now he too understands this game is over. 
Now everyone is talking business. The general working 
assumption is now full withdrawal in exchange for full peace. 
Everything else stems from this. 
  The Israel-Syria border has been under dispute for years. 
There is no clear and fixed border between the two countries, 
no Green Line. There is the border line known as the 4 July 
1967 border, which at a certain point almost reaches Lake 
Tiberias, and there is the international border. According to 
this border all of Lake Tiberias and the southern slopes of the 
Golan Heights, including al- Hammah, are parts of historic 
Palestine. As far as Israel is concerned this is not Syrian 
territory. 
  There will probably be a sharp argument for years after a 
peace agreement with Syria is signed over which of the two 
borders is the correct one. It is possible that the seeds of an 
arbitration process similar to the Taba arbitration are already 
being sown. 
  Israel, even when it recognizes Syrian sovereignty on the 
Golan Heights, will fix its sight on the international border. 
Even when it agrees to say "complete IDF [Israel Defense 
Forces] withdrawal," it will not specify where to. It will 
demand, on the other hand, a timetable of eight years, but will 
gladly settle for six years. 
  Peres, Rabin, and Rabinovich realize that the problem is 
that 
al-Asad is thinking about the Egyptian model. Israeli 
withdrawal in the south was conducted in three stages over a 
period of three years. Al-Asad will also demand a three-year 
withdrawal process. There is also the problem of the 
settlements. With Egypt we only had the problem of the Rafah 
Approaches settlements, and that was limited to the third and 
last stage of withdrawal. The Golan Heights, on the other hand, 
is completely covered with settlements -- 12,000 settlers are 
spread over all parts of the Golan Heights. 
  Whenever he picks up a map of the Golan, Rabin's heart 
probably sinks. Whichever way he turns it, however he may shape 
the package deal, he will have to deal with one settlement or 
another in the first stage of the withdrawal. A withdrawal, 
however minor, will per force have to include Aloney Habashan, 
to cite just one example. 
  That is why in the package deal being formulated by Israel 
Rabin wants to leave the settlements the option of evacuating if 
they wish, or remaining under Syrian sovereignty. Al-Asad is 
hardly likely to agree to such an arrangement, and neither is 
any Jewish settlement. The Americans realize that, and so does 
Rabin. However, just as in the case of Netzarim and Hebron, he 
prefers to create a situation whereby the settlers themselves 
will want to leave rather than forcing him to evacuate them. A 
matter of character. 
  Of course, Israel demands a full demilitarization of the 
entire Golan Heights. The Syrians agree, but demand the 
demilitarization of an area equal in size within Israeli 
territory. According to this scenario, the entire Galilee would 
be demilitarized. However, the point is that nobody is taking 
this Syrian demand seriously. Negotiating games -- this is how 
it is dubbed in Washington. 
  In contrast, a demilitarization of the Golan is a sine qua 
non. When Clinton told Rabin that he was the address for 
security matters he really meant it. Washington is prepared to 
send a military force to the Golan to uphold the peace treaty. 
At this point, reference is to two U.S. Army brigades which 
would deploy in the Golan Heights, two early-warning stations -- 
one Israeli and one Syrian -- and joint Israeli-Syrian control 
of the water sources. 
  Mount Hermon is a problem onto itself, a real security 
problem. Israel plans to wage a real battle over this mountain, 
"the eyes of Israel," as a Golani Brigade solder nicknamed it in 
the Yom Kippur War. If Israel loses it, Israel will demand an 
appropriate reward from Clinton. 
  An arrangement with Lebanon has a place of honor in the 
package deal. To date the Lebanese delegation has been 
conducting some kind of make-believe negotiations in Washington, 
seeing that it is clear to all that Lebanon is just a 
marionette, a Syrian puppet on a string. Henceforth, 
negotiations about an arrangement in south Lebanon will be 
conducted in the most official way possible, as part of the 
negotiations with Syria and the package deal. 
  Israel is prepared to withdraw from south Lebanon and does 
not object to a continued presence of Syrian troops in Lebanon. 
In exchange, it demands that Syria totally disarm Hizballah and 
all other Palestinian terror organizations in Lebanon. Israel 
would initially withdrawal from the town of Jazzin. Later, 
after a six-month trial period, it would proceed to implement 
the second phase of the withdrawal. Israel would go ahead with 
the withdrawal only if all terror activities against Israel and 
the security zone including against the SLA [South Lebanese 
Army], stopped. 
  The SLA is in a bind. It has been angry ever since Operation 
Accountability and the arrangement Syria imposed on Hizballah, 
whereby Hizballah may not fire katyusha rockets at Qiryat 
Shemona but may fire them at Marj 'Uyun. What is wrong with 
you, Antoine Lahd asked, is the blood of Israeli children redder 
than that of Lebanese children? The SLA feared Israel had 
abandoned them. As far as they were concerned, this was a sign 
of things to come. 
  Uri Lubrani, coordinator of government activities in 
Lebanon, had to work hard to placate the SLA. Perhaps through 
Lubrani's doing, Rabin is now demanding from the United States 
that the SLA be part of the package deal with Syria and that the 
United States assume responsibility for the well-being of its 
personnel after Israel's withdrawal. According to the emerging 
deal, the SLA would become a regional brigade within the 
Lebanese Army. Antoine Lahd has already given his consent. 
  Al-Asad, who is in a hurry to reach an arrangement with 
Israel, is playing his Lebanese card for all it is worth. Last 
week, when Ross asked him to rein in Hizballah in south Lebanon, 
al-Asad replied: If Rabin wants quiet in the north, let him 
work out a comprehensive arrangement with me. 
  One must admit that Rabin is not having an easy time of it: 
Almost endless difficulties in the Gaza-Jericho deal, the 
horrible massacre in Hebron which disrupted the timetable, hurt 
the delicate and fragile equilibrium, and fully exposed the 
regrettable hatred, racism, and hostility toward the Arabs. 
Rabin told Clinton that al-Asad must persuade the Israeli 
people that he really means peace and must take steps to build 
its confidence. 
  As far as Rabin is concerned, the joint news conference held 
by Clinton and al-Asad in Geneva was a big miss, as he put it. 
He had expected al-Asad to appeal to the Israeli nation, to 
look straight into the camera and tell Israelis that what he has 
in mind is true peace, that they can trust him, that there will 
be no more wars; something along the lines of what al-Sadat 
said. Instead, al-Asad barred Israeli journalists from the news 
conference, mumbled a few words about peace, and let Clinton 
explain what he had in mind. 
  Ross conveyed Rabin's remarks to al-Asad. It would be very 
wise, Ross told him, if you were to make some 
confidence-building step vis-a-vis Israeli public opinion. 
Rabin, too, has difficulties, he said. Al-Asad promised Ross 
he would do something. This is the message Ross brought to 
Jerusalem. Now everybody is looking forward to mid-April, 
waiting with bated breath for the dramatic step promised by 
al-Asad. 
  Professor Itamar Rabinovich, Israel's ambassador to the 
United States and chief negotiator with Syria, has in his own 
way been trying to persuade the Syrians to make some move. 
Rabinovich wants the Syrians to invite a group of Israeli 
journalists to Damascus. These should not be Arab or Druze, but 
Israeli journalists bearing Israeli passports, without any kind 
of religious, racial, or sexual discrimination. 
  "If you are not prepared to invite Israelis to Damascus at 
this point," Rabinovich told the Syrians, "at least arrange a 
meeting between Foreign Minister Faruq al-Shar' and Israeli 
journalists outside Syria at a venue of your choice, in Europe 
or in the United States. You must, you simply must open up to 
the Israeli media," Rabinovich said. 
  Two moves made by al-Asad were perceived by Washington and 
Jerusalem as confidence-building measures. The first was to 
allow Syrian Jews to leave the country, and the second was to 
permit the visit of an official U.S. Congressional delegation to 
look into the question of Israeli MIA's. However, as far as 
Israeli public opinion is concerned, these moves were not 
dramatic enough. 
  The problem lies with a difference in perceptions. What 
al-Asad considers a confidence-building measure and what Rabin 
does are as far apart as Jerusalem is from Damascus. Al-Asad 
even regarded the visit of 'Abd-al-Wahhab Darawshah with a 
delegation of Israeli Arabs as a real sacrifice on his part, as 
a compromise, as a confidence-building measure. Rabin expects a 
different thing altogether, to put it mildly. 
  At some point al-Asad consented to informal talks between 
Israeli and Syrian academics. Three meetings were held in which 
Israel was represented by Dr. Yosi Olmert, Ze'ev Schiff, and 
'Amos Gilbo'a. A minor scandal ensued when the meetings were 
publicized. Rabinovich told Muwaffaq al-'Allaf, head of the 
Syrian delegation to the talks in Washington, that the 
subsequent Syrian repudiation of the meetings could not be 
construed as a confidence-building move. 
  On the eve of Passover, in an interview with IDF Radio, 
Rabin 
spoke about a new phase in the negotiations with Syria. "Of 
course, I look forward with faith," he said. "Syria, Jordan, 
and Lebanon have already agreed to resume the Washington talks 
at the end of April. I believe they will take a somewhat 
different form. 
  "There will no longer be algebraic-like formulas defining 
what constitutes peace and what constitutes withdrawal, but 
rather a far more comprehensive view of peace and withdrawal as 
packages, withdrawal in stages without committing ourselves to 
the final line and, of course, security arrangements and the 
subsequent U.S. aid." 
  Rabin also mentioned confidence-building measures. He does 
not just mention them, but whenever the opportunity arises he 
appeals to al-Asad and asks him to make a move. "Al-Asad," 
Rabin told IDF Radio, "is no al-Sadat. Al-Asad has a different 
approach which makes progress in the peace process more 
difficult. The State of Israel and its people are democratic. 
The Israeli public has to be convinced that the Arab leader it 
is negotiating with really means peace and is willing to hold 
public meetings at the most senior levels. 
  "At this stage of the negotiations with Syria, only 
relatively low-level contacts have been held. If this does not 
change at some stage -- if higher-level contacts are not held, 
if the Syrian media does not show greater openness, if Syrian 
leaders do not issue clearer public statements on their 
intention to reach peace -- it will be very difficult to make 
progress in the negotiations." 
  Some change began to emerge in the latest round of talks in 
Washington. In fact, the talks reverted to tete-a-tete sessions 
between Rabinovich and al-'Allaf, with Dennis Ross joining them 
on occasion. The Americans have been keeping a high profile in 
the talks with the Syrians. 
  However, the talks between Rabinovich and al-'Allaf look 
more 
like a diplomatic war of attrition than like peace talks. Rabin 
claims that al-'Allaf does not have enough powers. On the other 
hand, Rabinovich is Rabin's confidant. He arrives at the talks 
with powers and leeway, and seated opposite him he encounters a 
junior clerk who cannot move even one inch without al-Asad. As 
far as Rabin is concerned, there are only two options: Either 
replace al- 'Allaf or give him leeway. 
  In a private session this week Peres said that they would 
seriously proceed to tackle the negotiations with Syria 
immediately upon the completion of the Gaza-Jericho agreement. 
As everybody knows by now, when Peres says seriously, he 
definitely means it. As far as he is concerned, serious 
negotiations mean overt diplomacy to prepare public opinion, 
official talks, and high-level meetings such as between foreign 
ministers. However, more than anything else, as far as Peres is 
concerned, serious negotiations mean secret talks. 

