Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 10 Mar (NA) -- Foreign Minister Guido 
Di Tella said today that the British "need to pay more heed" to 
the Malvinas Islands in light of the diplomatic "pressure" being 
imposed by the Argentine Government. 
  Di Tella said that both the British and the islanders "have 
realized that the level of activity of the Argentine Government 
has increased drastically compared with past levels." 
  In making an evaluation of the "Operation Charming" by which 
the Argentine and British Governments are trying to effect a 
rapprochement, Di Tella admitted that "sometimes we do well, and 
sometimes we do not." 
  He showed confidence, however, in the progress of the talks, 
and believes that it would be useful "to have more contacts." 
  Regarding the real lifting of the arms embargo, Di Tella 
said 
the exact date is not yet known, but added that this issue has 
in any case "gone into the shadows, as something past and 
overcome." 
  Despite this, he said, a monthly evaluation of the issue 
will 
be made in the future. 
  In comments made on the radio, Di Tella admitted there is a 
possibility of buying Rolls Royce engines for Argentine Navy 
ships. He said: "After the first weapons are sold the embargo 
issue will no longer hold any water." 
  Di Tella also said that the unofficial talks to bring 
British 
secret agents to train their Argentine counterparts "have 
nothing to do" with the rapprochement being carried out by the 
Argentine and British foreign ministers. 
  "That was a discussion held by Hugo Anzorreguy," said Di 
Tella, who then explained that the issues discussed by the head 
of the SIDE [Secretariat for State Intelligence] were not those 
published by the newspapers. 
  Di Tella denied there was any contradiction in the idea of 
bringing British secret agents to Argentina, because "relations 
between intelligence services are considered normal, something 
that has to occur, and not anything abnormal." 
  He concluded by saying: "The same thing has to occur at all 
levels, with all friendly countries, and we are friends with 
Great Britain. Despite the differences we have over a given 
issue, there must be understanding, comprehension, and 
cooperation." 

