BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Baltic Business Weekly" feature] </F>
  [Text] The foreign ministers of Estonia, Latvia and 
Lithuania at a meeting with their counterparts from the EU 
"troika" countries Belgium, Germany and Greece in Brussels 
agreed May 17 that association talks between the Baltics and the 
EU will start already this year. 
  The talks are to start after the signing of free trade 
treaties between the EU and the Baltic countries, Estonia's 
Ambassador to the European Union Clyde Kull said. 
  Kull said the EU officials had been content with the current 
situation of the free trade talks. 
  The free-trade talks between Estonia and the European Union 
are making progress, Mari-Ann Rikken, a Foreign Ministry 
spokeswoman, told BNS. 
  Foreign Ministry Deputy Chancellor Priit Kolbre, after his 
return from another round of textile talks in Brussels, 
characterized the meeting as a substantial piece of business 
"where the ice was broken," Rikken said. 
  "Serious attention was paid to Estonia's position in issues 
concerning textiles, and the meeting passed in a constructive 
spirit," she told BNS. 
  Officials from the European Commission foreign relations and 
industry directorate visited Tallinn earlier this month. They 
negotiated a textiles protocol to be annexed to the Estonian-EU 
free-trade treaty and toured Estonia's major textile and 
clothing manufacturers. The leader of the EC delegation, David 
Dailey, noted that Estonian sewn products are of a better 
quality than those produced in other East European countries. 
  Rikken said the third official round of free-trade talks 
will 
probably be held at the beginning of July in Brussels. "Despite 
the postponement of the round, we're not behind schedule and 
nothing prevents the Estonian-EU free-trade agreement from being 
initialed in the summer and stepping into force on January 1, 
1995," the Foreign Ministry spokeswoman claimed. 
  Latvia wants the European Union to grant its textile goods 
and fish products easier trade terms in view of the 
inconsiderable mutual trade turnover, Latvian Acting Foreign 
Minister Egils Levits told reporters commenting on the current 
free trade talks. 
  Possibilities to start talks on Lithuania's associate 
membership in the European Union may appear in late June at the 
best, Lithuanian Foreign Minister Povilas Gylys said. 
  The EU will start to consider possibilities of granting 
associate status to the Baltics only when free trade talks are 
completed, Gylys told a news conference. In his words, 
Lithuania's free trade talks with the EU are "constructive, but 
not easy." If no hindrances appear, the free trade agreement may 
be ready after another two rounds of talks in May, the minister 
said. 

