Was   Lost 

<F P=102> 94UM0389F Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK in Russian No 1, 
1994 (Signed to press 28 Dec 93) pp 59-60 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0389F </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Captain 1st Rank B. Tyurin: "How the Large </F>
Antisubmarine Warfare Ship `Vasiliy Chapayev' Was Lost"] 
  [Text] In the brigade of antisubmarine warfare ships which 
Captain 1st Rank I. Bolshedvorskiy commands, ships, that are 
either being prepared to be written off or have already been 
written off and are now subject to being cut up for scrap, 
compose an entire group. You can immediately determine them 
because the radar antennas, artillery, torpedo, and 
antisubmarine warfare weapons on them have been partially or 
completely dismantled and -- although the St. Andrew's Flag is 
fluttering on the flag staffs -- the watch crew is rarely seen 
on the decks, already not talking about other members of the 
crew. Of course, we can't even talk about the brilliance and 
cleanliness that always was inherent to even old surface 
combatants, and especially to the "large" ones that are in the 
line. 
  Today the Design 1134-a "Admiral Oktyabrskiy" and "Vasiliy 
Chapayev" large antisubmarine warfare ships (BPKs) and also 
several Design 1135 escort vessels (specifically, the 
"Gordelivyy" and "Poryvistyy") are among those ships. As they 
told me at the Pacific Fleet technical directorate, by way of 
illustration, the "Vasiliy Chapayev" BPK, due to current 
circumstances, did not serve the prescribed period (18 years 
have not passed since its entry into the line). Today, its fate 
is far from a conclusion and, unfortunately, not only for the 
Pacific Fleet. "Vasiliy Chapayev" BPK Electromechanical 
Department Commander Captain 2nd Rank Oleg Ivanovich Isakov 
shared his pain with me, let's state it quite frankly, for the 
tragedy of his native ship. 
  O. Isakov is a "Chapayev" veteran; he arrived here 
immediately after graduation from the Higher Naval Engineering 
School imeni V.I. Lenin in 1980. He began as commander of the 
machine-stoker division, having served in that position for 
three years. In 1983, he performed the duties of brigade 
assistant flag engineer and the next year he was once again on 
the "Chapayev" in the position of traffic division commander. 
From 1985 until the present time (nearly 10 years!) -- BCh-5 
commander, master of military affairs. He had the opportunity to 
participate in the "Chapayev's" last combat service and to 
"place" it, as it turned out, in its last repair which has also 
not been completed, during the course of which the ship's fate 
was drastically altered... 
  "... If you glance at `Chapayev's' biography and its service 
record, it becomes obvious that this is a ship-laborer. The 
first combat service was immediately after its transfer from 
Leningrad where they built it. Then, in the winter of 1979 
during the military conflict between China and Vietnam, the BPK 
ensured our state interests in that area. In 1982-1983, combat 
service in the Indian Ocean, in 1985-86 -- in the South China 
Sea with the accomplishment of inter-cruise repairs at the 
Soviet Naval Base on the territory of Vietnam -- at Cam Ranh 
Bay." 
  What happened to the ship, equivalents of which serve a 
somewhat longer period abroad? Who could have assumed that a 
turning point in the ship's fate would occur in May 1987 when 
the BPK, under its own power, entered the water area of 
Vladivostok Naval SRZ [ship repair plant] No 178 and was moored 
there to accomplish medium repairs and that the "Chapayev" had 
arrived at the location of its "death"? No, at that time the 
crew began to repair the ship with confidence in the ship's 
future. 
  "...The first ring of the impending `crash' was heard on the 
ship already at that time when, in accordance with the protocol 
of the approval of the volume of work and other documents that 
regulated its repair and which were approved in that same year 
-- the beginning of work was determined to be February 1988, 
that is, nearly a year after its arrival at the plant! But they 
considered this to be the result of temporary financial 
difficulties and our bureaucratic red tape. Both this and 
subsequent years were devoted to dismantling some of the 
equipment that was designated for replacement or for its 
restoration for defects, after which the plant finally began the 
unhurried repair of the ship practically only since 1990, having 
begun hull work on the BPK itself and repair of mechanisms 
removed from it in the shops. The situation was complicated by 
the fact that, according to ship operating standards, all of 
that should have already occurred in 1987; that is, 11 years 
after construction but was begun 14 years later. But this was 
nothing new for the navy!" 
  The "alarm bell" sounded with all its might when it became 
clear that the plant would be able to begin the partial assembly 
of repaired equipment only at the beginning of 1992. Moreover, 
all of that affected first of all that equipment that ensures 
the ship's survivability -- even its anchoring at the plant was 
not safe without that. You can imagine the state of the 
"Chapayev's" crew which, from the time of the survey of defects 
and the disassembly of the mechanisms at the end of 1989 and 
docking (at that time, they had removed the shafts and screws, 
approximately 40% of the organic bottom-side fittings 
from the 
BPK, having temporarily capped the openings that had been formed 
in the hull) had awaited the beginning of the reassembly of the 
repaired fixture for three whole years! Nevertheless, this 
"process sort of proceeded". Since the beginning of the year, 
they managed to accomplish the assembly of two diesel 
generators, two electrical fire-fighting pumps, 40% of the 
electric fans of the ship electrical fire-fighting system, the 
steam-ejection refrigeration units, one evaporation 
installation, an electric windlass, (ship's personnel themselves 
repaired its electromechanical portion), galley cooking stoves, 
boilers and some other work. Although all of this could hardly 
have provided what was necessary for life support and everyday 
activities of ship personnel but, as they say, it was as if 
"light had appeared at the end of the tunnel". They already 
practically did not recall that the "Vasiliy Chapayev" BPK's 
initial planned repair period was designated in 1988 with 
completion of the work in 1991. Everyone understood: The 
problems of supplying ZIP [spare parts kits] and deliveries of 
other materials had been exacerbated as a result of perestroyka 
in the country and in the Navy: They saw that there was a 
continuous drain of cadres at the plant and that there weren't 
enough workers. And yet the hope had emerged among the crew that 
they would repair the ship... 
  The primary misfortune arrived in the summer of 1992. In 
that 
year which it is customary to consider as the beginning of the 
new era in Russia's history, it turned out that there wasn't an 
approved budget in our country for the first time(!)! At that 
time, the Navy's command authorities issued a directive on 
"cessation of repair and writing off ships in December 1993". In 
accordance with it, they removed "V. Chapayev" from the plant in 
September and put it on the ship brigade's own wharf (33rd 
slip), and without restoring the heating system and with a total 
of 50% of the fire protection system on line. The 
mechanisms 
and electrical equipment that had been submitted for repair 
practically all remained there..." 
  However, while objectively examining what had happened with 
the "Vasiliy Chapayev", we must admit that the conditions for 
such a finale had already developed not in 1992 but 
significantly earlier. They had arisen already at the time when 
they had been compelled to place the BPK for repair at that ship 
repair plant which, in contrast to the other -- Vladivostok's 
"Dalzavod" Ship Repair Enterprise, was not prepared to repair 
these ships. Indeed, while striving to find a solution from its 
"dead end situation", the Pacific Fleet's Technical Directorate 
and SRZ No 178 reached an agreement with "Dalzavod" on the 
involvement of its specialists in the repair work on the ship's 
boilers, its main turbogear assemblies, and on an entire series 
of other systems and mechanisms associated with the power plant. 
However, in the future, as a result of the establishment of new 
financial relations, previous contractual obligations ceased to 
have force. This was the next major cause of the nonfulfillment 
of the appropriate volume of work. And the dramatic restriction 
of financing of the Navy in 1992 placed a period to the fate of 
this (yes and others) ships of that same Pacific Fleet in a 
similar situation. And another series of causes of "premature 
death" during recent years have graphically illuminated the 
Pacific Fleet's extremely unsatisfactory technical support -- 
the low level of training (first of all, special and repair) of 
all types of ship personnel (especially in recent years), 
beginning with compulsory service personnel and ending with 
officers and warrant officers. 
  What awaits "Vasiliy Chapayev" in the foreseeable future? 
The 
crew has been officially told that "the manning levels on the 
ship are being closed on 31 December 1993". After that, they 
will tow the ship to a dock to conduct work on conversion, that 
is, welding side openings and accomplishment of other measures 
to ensure that it is kept afloat. Part of the crew will be on 
the BPK until the work is completed. However, the completion of 
this work and its time period will depend on the availability of 
financial resources and the ship will be at the wharf for the 
time being. But on it today are only 10% of the actual 
personnel strength. There are a total of eight personnel in the 
104-man (according to approved strength) electromechanical 
compartment! The usual undermanning for the repair period has 
exceeded all limits with the "Chapayev's" departure from the 
plant. After obtaining the directive on writing off this ship, 
the "Chapayev's" crew did not receive a single junior seaman! A 
new question: How do you ensure safety while anchored if it is 
not extended? 
  But, it was as if everything was clear about the ship's fate 
-- the decision had been made. And what are the officers' 
prospects for future service? Some of them (first and foremost, 
junior officers and, of course, those officers who agree to 
continue to serve under these conditions and with this type of 
experience) will be assigned to other ships and military 
subunits. For others, service in the navy will sooner end... 
  Almost everything said about the "Vasiliy Chapayev" is close 
to the fate of the other ship of this design, the "Admiral 
Oktyabrskiy" and its crew. In conclusion, I need to say a few 
words about the escort ships "Gordelivyy" and "Poryvistyy". At 
the present time, they also are "ships of sediment". Indeed, one 
third of the authorized crew strength that is currently on them 
does not know its future prospects. What will the near future 
yield for their ships: Will they be repaired or will they also 
be written off?... 
  COPYRIGHT: "Morskoy sbornik", 1994. 

