Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] In his annual address to Congress, U.S. President 
Bill Clinton finally admitted that crime and lack of security 
are at the head of American society's problems. Reacting to 
strong congressional criticism of the growing crime and violence 
crisis in the United States, Clinton pointed out that a bill to 
add 100,000 policemen to confront violence and crime has been 
approved. But he did not make any promises on this force's 
capability to curb the growth in everyday crime. 
  Earlier, unprecedented congressional efforts to convince the 
government to adopt measures to prevent crime and address the 
lack of security indicate that American society needs serious 
efforts, now more than ever, to fight crime. The growing crime 
rate, lack of security, and improper conduct have drawn the 
public's attention to this national crisis. THE NEW YORK TIMES 
wrote that Americans today are vulnerable to murders, beatings, 
assaults, robberies, and other frightful crimes and that no 
place is safe from crime and assaults. The paper remarked that 
the more dreadful reality is too hard to follow up or report. 
  Statistics published by different American organizations and 
institutions indicate that there is a national catastrophe. 
According to a report by the American Child Protection Society, 
the United States went through its most violent period between 
1978 and 1991 because of growing crime. A total of 150,000 
persons under 20 years of age were killed with firearms during 
that period. Studies by health authorities also indicate that 
murders exceed road accidents; the number of people killed with 
weapons in the past 22 years is much higher than those killed in 
road accidents. In other words, murders increased by 60 percent 
between 1968 and 1991, while the number of people killed in road 
accidents dropped by 21 percent during the same period. Murder 
with various weapons will become the number one killer in nine 
years, by the year 2003. 
  Therefore, the media are urging religious leaders, 
academics, 
civil and social rights leaders, and ordinary citizens, 
particularly parents, to find ways to confront this national 
crisis. Sociologists believe that the American people are today 
experiencing an identity crisis because the prevailing social 
system has destroyed American humanitarian and ethical values. 
This lack of identity is due to the fact that the American 
people suffer from a sense of loss and feel that they are living 
in a world of carelessness, dreadful ignorance, and fear. 
  The growing violence and the resulting social crisis in 
America indicate that by adopting the wrong policies, the people 
running the country's affairs have failed to avert a historic 
crisis. It is thus surprising that the U.S. President some time 
ago claimed that America should lead the world. A question 
comes to mind here: How can a state whose president admits that 
crime and lack of security are at the head of its problems be in 
charge of the world's security and administration? 

