BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Paola De Paoli: "Awward Goes to Paper Made From </F>
Seaweed"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] Finally, Fabrizio De Poli's 
project for a system to manufacture paper from seaweed 
predominated in the "Environmental Technology" thematic section. 
This system is already being used at the Favini paper-mill in 
Rossano Veneto. 
  The technology of this process, which has gone into its 
first 
production stage, is completely Italian. Favini Managing 
Director Clemente Nicolucci added that the seaweed paper project 
has also been approved as part of the EC's LIFE [expansion 
unknown] program for the so-called clean technologies, and that 
there are plans for further joint studies to be made by ENEA 
[National Agency for New Technologies, Energy, and the 
Environment], the Lisbon Institute of Agronomy, and the Favini 
paper mill. 
  About 50,000 tonnes of excess seaweed come out of Venice's 
lagoon each year. This has been systematically collected by the 
Venezia Nuova consortium since 1989. As well as avoiding 
unpleasant smells and ecological unbalances, it means saving 
about 30,000 tonnes of trees. It has a positive energy balance: 
The energy required to convert trees into cellulose is 
approximately double that required to transform fresh seaweed 
into flour to make paper mixture. 
  "The possible industrial use of this abundant raw material, 
that perishes rapidly and has a modest commercial value, is 
being approached along three lines; the production of biogas, 
animal foodstuffs, and paper. The latter is a winner. After 
the ulva seaweed from the lagoon has been dried, using the 
traditional technique for alfalfa, it is transformed into a 
flour that, blandly pretreated using a process know-how that has 
been perfected by the paper mill, is incorporated in the paper 
mixture in its integral form." The technicians say that the 
material obtained has better characteristics than normal paper 
produced from virgin cellulose; it is 30-43 percent stiffer, 
35-80 percent more tear resistant, and 42-47 percent more energy 
is required to tear it. 
  The testing history of this "sea lettuce" has the flavor of 
the old crafts. It is a rediscovery of the ancestral logic of 
the conservation of the grape and its transformation into 
currants. Nicolucci says that, "If the ulva seaweed flour is not 
very swollen, it behaves as an organic filler when it is put 
into water and improves the biodegradability of the paper. It 
acts as a binder with physical-mechanical characteristics that 
can be compared with those obtained using cationic starch if it 
is made to swell a lot." The production costs, compared with a 
paper of analogous characteristics, have also been notably 
reduced; from the increase of 300 percent for the first 
industrial test in which 700 kilograms of paper were obtained, 
there has been a reduction to 15 percent for 400 tonnes. 
Successive steps to optimize the harvest, the drying, the 
grinding, and the relative treatments have led to estimate costs 
that are five percent lower than the traditional ones. Of the 
24,000 tonnes of paper produced annually by Favini, eight 
percent are already made from seaweed. This already represents 
the utilization of one third of the excess production of the 
lagoon that would not be used otherwise. 
  There are many uses: from waste disposal to writing paper, 
paper for photocopiers, laser printers, and for packing. They 
are already looking at recycling the small amount of residual 
organic and mineral sludge from the production, originating from 
various materials, to make backing-block cardboards. Thanks to 
innovation an environmental problem is becoming a development 
factor, in which Japan has already shown its interest. 

