BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by special correspondent Viktor Litovkin datelined </F>
Gali-Sukhumi-Gudauta: "Wearing Bulletproof Vests and Blue 
Helmets Beneath Abkhazia's Sultry Sky. Report by IZVESTIYA's 
Special Correspondent Viktor Litovkin from the 
Georgian-Abkhazian Conflict Zone"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Backup for Reconnoitering Operations </H5>
  Heavy transport aircraft approached the Bombora military 
airfield in Gudauta from the sea and, one after another, landed 
on the scorching concrete strip. They disgorged space, 
tropospheric, and radio relay communications stations, as well 
as command-staff and engineering obstacle-clearing vehicles, 
bulldozers, excavators, graders, and bridgelayers. Soldiers 
carrying heavy loads on their shoulders ran down the ramps, 
while Colonel General Kondratyev, Russia's deputy defense 
minister, called a briefing for journalists who had arrived in 
the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict zone. 
  "Let me make it clear to you once more, gentlemen," he said, 
"that what you are seeing is not at all the start of a 
peacemaking operation but just the preparations for embarking on 
it." 
  Some 30 minutes earlier the general had a telephone 
conversation with Moscow. He was told: A major scandal had 
erupted at the State Duma because the introduction of Russian 
peacemaking forces in Georgia has yet to be approved by the 
Federation Council while the military, ignoring this decision as 
usual, have already launched their actions. 
  "Let me repeat," Gen. Kondratyev said, "that the peacemaking 
troops will not arrive before the 21st [of June], I am convinced 
that the deputies will -- and cannot but -- back the president, 
while at present we are only deploying communications centers, 
we are here to clear mines and repair bridges using engineering 
equipment, we are conducting reconnoitering...." 
  What is the meaning of the word "reconnoitering," a meaning 
that is so obscure to civilians? Any military school graduate 
or platoon leader can rap out -- as if reciting the Lord's 
Prayer -- that it means the visual study of a locality and the 
enemy. It is conducted by the commanding officer in person when 
organizing combat operations, moving troops, or selecting sites 
for their placement. Its purpose is to confirm decisions made 
using topographic maps. 
  This is how it was conducted at the rayon center of Gali, 
where the staff of the first control zone, a communications 
center, and two battalions -- an amphibious landing battalion 
and an engineering-sapper battalion -- are stationed. 
  "There is our military commissariat," Galskiy Rayon 
Administration Leader Ruslan Kishmariya pointed at a small 
building surrounded by palm trees. "Right opposite you have the 
former Georgian high school, with two buildings ready and 
waiting to accommodate your soldiers." 
  The "ready and waiting" buildings are an older two-story 
block and a newer three-story block; the glass is missing from 
most windows, having been shot out in the course of battles; 
there are no tables or desks; the sanitary equipment, 
electricity cables, and light bulbs have been plundered. But 
this does not intimidate anyone. While in Tskhinvali, our 
soldiers wintered in the shot-up barracks of the former 
helicopter regiment. 
  "Fine," Gen. Kondratyev nodded. "We will site the staff and 
the communications center at the military commissariat, park the 
equipment in the school yard, and station the battalions inside 
the buildings. Sapper," he summoned the representative of the 
engineering troops chief, "bring along glass panes, cement, and 
whatever else is needed to repair the buildings, let us leave 
them behind as new. We will install a bakery...." 
  "There is no need to bring a bakery, Comrade General," the 
administration head interrupted, "ours is working below full 
capacity. We will be only too happy to bake bread for the 
Russian soldiers. But flour is the only problem...." 
  The bread situation is very difficult in Abkhazia, now 
enjoying plentiful supplies of fruit and vegetables, but 
suffering from fire damage and semideserted because a good 
one-half of the population has fled the country seeking to 
escape the war. There is virtually no bread in Sukhumi, 
Gudauta, or Ochamchira, let alone Gali. There is no need to 
further amplify the meaning of Ruslan Kishmariya's offer. But 
the deputy minister did not go into details. 
  "Very well," the general said. "We will bring in flour, as 
well as all the rest -- like gasoline, diesel fuel, and 
construction materials. Our army will be completely 
self-sufficient." 
  A colonel whom I know, representing the General Staff, 
whispered: 
  "Where are we going to get the money for all this? Last 
year's peacemaking operations cost the Army 26 billion [currency 
not specified]; costs during the first quarter of this year 
reached 14 billion, the introduction of battalions in Abkhazia 
cost 3 billion, while the cost of their stay here, added to the 
costs incurred in the Dniester region, in South and North 
Ossetia, and in Tajikistan, runs at 0.5 trillion every six 
months. And all this comes out of the military's purse. You 
would think that it is the Ministry of Defense, rather than the 
state, that needs Russia's presence in the Caucasus and peace 
along its borders." 

<H5>    Mine-Detecting Dogs -- Another Item in Short Supply in </H5>
Our Army 
  Some 1.5 km away from the high-altitude Inguri hydroelectric 
power station, Abkhazian regimental commander Alik Arshba used a 
topographic map to show Lieutenant Colonel Aleksandr Karkodola, 
deputy commander of the Russian engineering-sapper team, the 
sites of mine fields along the Abkhazian-Georgian border in the 
sector of the zone assigned to him. 
  "They are everywhere along the Inguri floodplains," Alik 
said. "On both sides of the border. There are plenty of them in 
the forest, here for example," and he moved his pencil along the 
green areas around Hill 2176, "and here," the pencil moved about 
a centimeter lower down, "and here.... We do not have a 
continuous frontline, there is a shortage of men, saboteurs and 
sundry other rabble sneak through constantly, and so our guys 
have scattered mines wherever they could," he explained. 
  "Do you have any documentation -- mine field maps, any other 
paperwork?" 
  "You must be joking. Do you think we employ specialists? 
Let me tell you, I personally am an English language teacher, I 
was an instructor at the Komsomol [Communist Youth League] rayon 
committee until perestroyka times," Arshba laughed out. "The 
war forced me to take up arms. Others as well." 
  I met Col. Karkodola on the flight to Gudauta. It emerged 
that, back in 1984, he commanded a platoon of the Bagram 108th 
Motorized Rifle Division's engineering-sapper battalion. While 
on official travel in Afghanistan, I had met some of his 
comrades and had written about them. We reminisced about the 
mine-detecting service's sheepdogs Chana, Bina, and Nord which 
had helped our soldiers to clear the deadly implants placed at 
every step of the way along the roads and in the villages there. 
They each had about 100-150 detected mines to their credit. 
  "Chana would be quite useful here," the lieutenant colonel 
said, "even though she was already past her peak in 1984. A 
mine-detecting dog's service life is not long, just two years, 
after that -- having sniffed and breathed in plenty of TNT -- it 
dies of cirrhosis of the liver. But the dog is irreplaceable in 
mountains and forests or along river banks -- heavy equipment 
cannot get there." 
  Aleksandr gave me a detailed account of how dogs are trained 
in mine detection. Apparently, they do not add tolite to their 
feed as I had previously thought, but feed them on explosives. 
The sheepdog gets used to the smell while feeding. And then it 
seeks food, not mines. A mine detection service team consists 
of two instructor soldiers and two dogs. A male and a female 
dog without fail. Otherwise they would fight and would not get 
down to work. The male dog leads the way, the female follows so 
as not to distract him with her smell. 
  It takes nine months to train a dog for this work, and 
five-and-a-half months to train its instructor. They can detect 
mines together for only six months -- the serviceman then has to 
be discharged in the reserve. Getting the sheepdog used to a 
new handler also takes almost six months. But this is 
unavoidable. The number of professional contract servicemen in 
the Russian Army's mine detection service can be counted on 
one's fingers. None of them is here in Abkhazia. 
  The explanation is simple. The Army is now experiencing a 
shortage not only of draftees, contract servicemen, and 
officers, but also of mine-detecting dogs. 
  They used to be trained at the Dmitrovskaya Military 
Dog-Handling School, Russia's only such school, which at one 
time used to have about 50 sheepdogs highly trained in mine 
detection. But, due to the increasingly frequent raids on 
arsenals and arms dumps, all these dogs have been retrained to 
guard ammunition and have been dispersed among the various 
military districts. There is no money to train replacements -- 
one such trained dog costs almost 1 million. 
  A grand total of...10 mine detection teams, in other words 
10 
soldiers and just as many mine-detecting dogs, have been found 
in Leningrad Military District to cover the entire 
Georgian-Abkhazian conflict zone with an area of 4,368 square 
km, with some 100,000 mines and other explosive surprise gifts 
like unexploded shells and land mines scattered all over the 
place, and nobody knows where and how they have been planted. 
  "God forbid," Lt. Col. Karkodola said, "that one of our guys 
should be injured by a mine -- blame will be pinned on everyone 
but those who are skimping on our soldiers' safety. Do you know 
the value of our lives here, in the 'hot spot'? 100,000 net. 
You cannot even dig a grave for that money nowadays." 

<H5>    The UN Mission -- Out of Play </H5>
  I met with Brigadier General John Hvedegard, chief military 
observer and leader of the UN mission in Georgia, in his office 
on the third story of the "generals' block" at the Sukhumi 
sanatorium owned by the Moscow Military District. 
  The sanatorium suffered virtually no damage during the 
two-years long war, although it is without water or light, like 
the rest of the city. A battalion of Russia's 345th Airborne 
Assault Regiment was stationed here all these months and, 
following unambiguous warnings, both warring sides were afraid 
to shoot at it. True enough, the UN men have brought along all 
their own equipment in addition to white Jeeps with blue "UN" 
insignia on the side and space communications stations -- 
including a power and water supply station and a computer 
installed in the general's office. 
  The general has been joined by 22 military observers. They 
are from Denmark, like the general, as well as from Bangladesh, 
Hungary, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland, and the FRG. The 12 
civilian staffers come from Chile, the Dominican Republic, the 
United States, Canada, Belorussia [Belarus], and Trinidad and 
Tobago. The mission's purpose is to implement the UN mandate and 
monitor the observance of the cease-fire. Four of his officers 
are on the Georgian side, on the eastern bank of the Inguri 
River, the rest are here, on the western bank. 
  The general declined to tell me which of the sides is more 
to 
blame for breaching the cease-fire. "We report such information 
only to New York," he declared, but went on to add that his 
colleagues have filed complaints against both parties to the 
agreement signed in Geneva. 
  The general shows understanding for the Russian Army's 
peacemaking role in the Georgian-Abkhazian conflict. He thinks 
it only natural that the United Nations has not extended its 
mandate to our own military, does not pay for their peacekeeping 
operation, and has even refused permission to have their armored 
personnel carriers and vehicles painted in the white UN color. 
"The armed clash between Georgia and Abkhazia," Hvedegard said, 
"is an internal affair of the CIS, not of the United Nations." 

<H5>    June. Sukhumi. "Dead Season" </H5>
  The most powerful impression of Sukhumi was not produced by 
the city's burned down rayons, where flowering summer gardens 
and the clusters of bright red pomegranate and pink oleander 
cannot conceal the black shells and ruins of former luxury 
mansions and the gaping windows, here and there covered with 
plastic sheeting, of plundered multistory apartment blocks. As 
a matter of fact, no matter how cynical and bitter this may 
sound, you somehow -- unfortunately -- quickly get used to this 
in the course of official travel to the "hot spots." 
  You are no longer amazed -- no matter how painful the sight 
might be -- by the half-dead old men and women who stand for 
hours in line outside the bread stores or by the fierce clashes 
between them when the doors suddenly open and they see the tray 
with a dozen or so loaves for free distribution. The prices at 
local markets and stalls -- "dirt cheap" when compared with 
Russia -- appear normal and easy to comprehend. They are geared 
to local wages. 
  Seeing that a teacher or a physician earns 10,000 rubles 
[R] a month and a pensioner gets just R2,500 -- even though 
their money has not been paid for months -- paying R500 for 1 kg 
of medlar or an 0.5-liter jar of yogurt or R250 for a glass of 
"Izabella" does not seem all that cheap. The unemployment that 
has spread everywhere and the deserted streets and squares in 
the hot and generous subtropical city, which used to be merry 
and crowded with countless boarding houses, sanatoriums, small 
cafes, and restaurants, inspire no hope of an opportunity to 
earn something by trading. Even though brand new goods are 
hardly on sale here now. 
  It is perhaps this surprising lack of people in Sukhumi in 
June, its silent and deserted silken sand and pebble beaches, 
this "dead season" in the midst of the traditional festival of 
life, that creates the most vivid impression of the deserted 
southern city. 
  No shots are fired there today. Or rather, no shots are 
fired from mortars, artillery guns, and salvo-fire systems like 
the "Grad," but nobody would risk going out into the streets 
after 1800 hours. It is very easy to get hit by a stray bullet 
fired by someone of unknown nationality, wearing civilian 
clothes and carrying an assault rifle. 
  Indiscriminate banditry is the main problem in Sukhumi 
today. 
We are no longer talking about the looting of abandoned 
apartments, the theft of cars, or the division of war spoils -- 
people are robbed of their last possessions. 
  Aunt Lora, an elderly Russian woman standing in line for 
bread, who grew up in Sukhumi, told me how her neighbor -- an 
Abkhazian woman called Zhuzhana who can no longer walk because 
of old age and weakness -- had her home raided by 
"confederates," gunmen from the group of North Caucasian 
irregulars who have been given apartments formerly owned by 
Georgians fighting on the other side, who stole the canned food 
from her refrigerator. Nobody in the line disputed this fact or 
was amazed by it. 
  "Nothing unusual," I was told by an elderly Armenian wearing 
the ribbons of the "For Valor" and "For Victory over Germany" 
medals on his faded shirt. "There is nobody to protect us. Our 
children have either gone away or died on the border with 
Georgia, chaos rules here." 
  "Our republic's main problem," I was told by one of 
Abkhazia's leaders, "does not lie in mutual relations with 
Georgia, Russia, or the world community -- everything will get 
sorted out in time; but those who have experienced the power 
wielded by weapons, those who have risked their lives but in a 
couple of hours made more money that they would have done in 10 
years of hard labor plowing their field or garden, they will 
find it difficult to return to normal work." 
  The majority in Abkhazia pin their hopes on the Russian 
soldiers. Gali Mayor Ruslan Kishmariya told me that the 
deployment of peacemakers in their rayon would enable almost 
40,000 families of Mingrelian refugees to return home -- people 
who did not participate in the war but fled their homes in fear 
for their lives. 
  "We will not touch the innocents," he declared, "let them 
return to their land. But there is not and there never will be 
any room here for those who shot their Abkhazian brothers, those 
who burned and plundered their homes." 
  ...Through the four days of my official travel to Abkhazia I 
was accompanied by Paratrooper Valeriy Korotayev. He comes from 
the city of Votkinsk in Udmurtia, whose machine building plant 
produces the famous "Topol" strategic missiles. That is where 
his father works. 
  Valeriy is a strong guy, 1.80 meters tall, straw-blond, and 
always ready to smile; he has been serving with the airborne 
assault troops for six months now, completed his training in 
Omsk to qualify as driver of a BMD-3 fighting vehicle. This is 
his first month with the 345th Regiment. He likes it very much 
here, even though he admitted to me that for the last week he 
had never taken off his 12-kg bulletproof vest, he never got the 
chance. He even got a suntan in it. 
  He has not yet written to his parents to tell them he is in 
the Abkhazian "hot spot," he does not want to worry them, but he 
has hinted as much to his 17-year old younger brother. But he 
did give me permission -- if I somehow managed to work it into 
my report -- to tell his father and mother that in the fall, 
when the fruit harvest where will be plentiful, he intends to go 
on leave and take them some gifts. 

