Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tehran, Feb. 10, IRNA -- Fifteen years in the life 
of a nation, said KAYHAN INTERNATIONAL, is like 15 seconds "yet 
in this period we managed to come a long way and have little to 
fear." 
  The English daily which brought out a special 24-page issue 
on the eve of Bahman 22 (Feb. 11), the anniversary of the 
triumph of the Islamic revolution, was referring to the 
ceaseless plots of America and its close confidante Britain 
against the Islamic Republic which ended their illegitimate 
interests around the globe. 
  It said that "save the direct bombing of Iranian cities by 
U.S. fighter planes (the U.S. did shoot down one of our 
passenger planes in 1988 killing 300 civilians on board) the 
Carter, Reagan, Bush and Clinton White House did everything to 
first bring the Islamic state to its ruin..." 
  The daily went on to recall plots engineered by the "great 
Satan" against Iran over the last decade and a half ranging from 
"Saddam Husayn's full-fledged military invasion of Iran to 
sponsoring resolutions against 'Tehran's human rights 
violations' at world forums." 
  It also took note of the depressing oil prices, difficulty 
in 
procuring technology for peaceful purposes and other plots which 
"temporarily disturb our lofty mission... We do not need to run 
away from the truth. Yes our country has some problems, which 
country doesn't?" 
  However, said KAYHAN, these problems have proved to be 
"blessings in disguise" and contrary to what the west likes to 
publicize, "Islamic Iran had no identity crisis." 
  The daily continued: "As regarding our proclamations of 
peaceful coexistence, the international community once clearly, 
though reluctantly, had endorsed this position (the U.N. 
admitted that Iraq started the war against Iran). 
  "Ours is basically a Muslim society that has unfathomable 
belief in justice of the kind practiced by our Imam Ali (A.S.)... 
  "We have already accepted that the 21st century will be the 
century of Islam. With this in vision, we are minding our own 
business and expect the U.S. to do likewise," the editorial 
concluded. 

