BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Chilean Economy Minister Alvaro Garcia by </F>
Nestor Restivo: place and date not given] 
  [Text] [Restivo] The Chilean economy showed some signs of 
slowing down in 1993 and, for the first time in many years, the 
trade balance was negative. How will you face this new 
situation? 
  [Garcia] We will pursue the successful path that the 
national 
economy has been following during the past few years. Problems 
experienced by our export customers are partly responsible for 
this slowdown. These problems had an impact on the income and 
volume of Chilean exports. For example, copper prices dropped 
by 16 percent, fish meal prices by 21 percent, and cellulose 
prices by 26 percent. These products together represent 55 
percent of our exports. Considering all this, we expect the GDP 
to grow less in 1994 than in recent years (when the average GDP 
was more than 6 percent). It will grow by between 4 and 5 
percent. The Central Bank increased interest rates and 
moderated the fiscal policy, which caused public savings to 
grow, in order to compensate for the exports situation. But we 
are satisfied with the general situation. The Chilean rating 
abroad, established by leading risk rating companies, has 
improved. 
  [Restivo] It has been said that the Chilean domestic market 
has reached its ceiling and that, for this reason, a 
considerable amount of capital is being invested abroad. How do 
you view this market? 
  [Garcia] Income has been growing at a rate of 5 to 6 percent 
per year: In other words, the domestic market will continue to 
grow. Nevertheless, the foreign market is our driving force. 
Over the past decade, exports have grown 10 percent per year 
(this rate slowed down in 1993) and capital investments have 
grown 9.5 percent per year, totalling more than 27 percent of 
the GDP in 1993. 
  [Restivo] Nevertheless, the internationalization achieved by 
Chile prompted a degree of dependence. You mentioned last 
year's trade deficit that was prompted by a decline in the 
income and volume of Chilean exports... 
  [Garcia] Certainly, we had a $980-million deficit after many 
years of surpluses. Nevertheless, the main problem involved 
basic products. Foreign sales by manufacturers increased by 17 
percent. This is our challenge: To increase sales of 
manufactured products. 
  [Restivo] What proportion of Chilean services are exported? 
For example, Chile's tourism is growing notably. 
  [Garcia] Correct. Services and exported services produced an 
income of $2.6 million in 1993. Of this, $825 million came from 
tourism which has a huge potential. In 1993, tourism grew 18 
percent, the highest growth rate in Latin America. Argentina 
contributes a substantial 36 percent of this as some 800,000 
Argentines come here every year. 
  [Restivo] When [former President Patricio] Aylwin was 
inaugurated, he pledged to pay special attention to the social 
debt bequeathed by the military regime. Not very much was 
achieved. What are you proposing now? 
  [Garcia] One of the quantitative goals of [Chilean President 
Eduardo] Frei's administration involves removing extreme poverty 
by the end of its term -- that is, by the year 2000. During 
Aylwin's administration, progress was made by reducing the 
extreme poverty rate from 13 to 9 percent of the population. 
Economic growth helped to achieve this goal because more job 
opportunities were created for the poorest sectors of the 
population and minimum wages were increased 33 percent in real 
terms over the four-year period. Subsidies increased 55 percent 
and were better used. Nevertheless, democracy actually has a 
debt. Under this administration, efforts will be made to pass 
from an assistance oriented policy to an integral policy 
involving investments in human resources and labor training. 
For example, labor training will involve specific programs for 
small- and medium-size enterprises where the poorest segments of 
population are employed. 
  [Restivo] What about education, health, and housing? 
  [Garcia] We wants a more balanced education system. During 
the Aylwin administration, basic education was emphasized. We 
will now concentrate on kindergarten and secondary education. 
Concerning health, we will promote increased efficiency in the 
public sector and cut subsidies that favor higher-income 
sectors. Concerning housing, we will continue to raise housing 
solutions. The coalition alliance government built 90,000 
houses in 1993, compared with 33,000 houses built by the 
military government. 
  [Restivo] What will be your government's next steps 
concerning Mercosur [Common Market of the South] and NAFTA? 
  [Garcia] Chile believes in a multilateral policy followed by 
bilateral agreements. Our foreign trade is divided into three 
equal parts: Asia, America, and Europe. Mercosur is of 
paramount importance. Argentina receives 6.3 percent of our 
exports; Brazil receives 4.3 percent; and Uruguay and Paraguay 
receive more than 1 percent each. In other words, these four 
countries represent 12 percent of our sales. We are satisfied 
with the growth of our industrial goods exports. Many of these 
industrial goods exports have reached levels that we would like 
echoed by our other customers. In 1994, we will begin to 
negotiate with Mercosur on tariff exemptions for third countries 
within the framework of ALADI [Latin American Integration 
Association]. We will seek greater trade deregulations, but we 
cannot fully join Mercosur due to tariff differences. 
Concerning NAFTA, or at least a bilateral agreement with the 
United States (we already have one with Mexico), we hope to 
begin concrete negotiations during the second half of this year 
and sign an agreement in 1995. 

