Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, March 24 (CTK) -- The followers of 
former Premier Vladimir Meciar and the Slovak National Party 
(SNS) protested today against the "purges" carried out by the 
new government of Jozef Moravcik. 
  The demands referred to today's dismissal of chairman of the 
Supreme Inspection Office (NKU) Marian Vanko and NKU two vice 
chairmen. 
  The demonstrators, numbering some 2,000 to 5,000 people, 
shouted slogans like "Long live Meciar's government," "Shame on 
traitors" and "Dismiss President Kovac," thus showing belief 
that dismissed Meciar would return to power after the 
autumn-scheduled elections. 
  "We shall never recognize a government united only by hatred 
for Meciar's cabinet and a desire for power," SNS Deputy 
Chairman Eva Slavkovska told the crowd. "We must redress this 
wrong as the nation gains strength only by fighting for truth," 
she added. 
  Meciar did not attend the rally because the organizers were 
not able to guarantee his personal security, HZDS (Meciar's 
Movement for a Democratic Slovakia) Deputy Chairman Sergej 
Kozlik said. 
  After the rally some 500 people moved to parliament 
building, 
shouting anti-government and anti-president slogans. 
  "What we have not done in two years in power, this cabinet 
will certainly achieve," Ivan Luptak, an HZDS deputy, told CTK 
on the "purges" of the new coalition in the state institutions. 
"Within a few days in power they have been able to remove 
several official with top expertise. Now it is the turn for the 
directors of the district offices. They are subjected to strong 
pressure to tender their resignations," he said, adding that 
Meciar had left the opposition Christian Democrats in their 
posts. 
  According to Luptak, when dismissing the NKU officials, the 
government was evidently motivated by political grounds: "Can 
you imagine they would admit that the NKU director would uncover 
their dealings during the government session?" 

