BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo by </F>
unidentified ESTRATEGIA reporter in Santiago, Chile; date not 
given] 
  [Text] [ESTRATEGIA] Several months after achieving the 
economic goals -- the curbing of the inflation rate and high 
economic growth -- established by the Menem administration, what 
problems still affect the Argentine economy? 
  [Cavallo] Of all of the strictly economic problems affecting 
our economy only those of the agricultural sector, prompted by 
low international prices, and some regional economies, mainly 
conducted by provincial governments, are worth mentioning. 
Nevertheless, we face a great challenge in social services 
areas such as education, health, justice and social security. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] What about the high unemployment rate, which is 
about 10 percent, and the commercial deficit, which increased by 
800 percent in the first two months of the year? 
  [Cavallo] Our economy has been creating new jobs and 
increasing the labor rate at 2 percent per year, which is not 
bad for a country with an annual population growth of 1.3 
percent per year. Despite this increase of jobs in 1993, the 
unemployment level increased because many women and immigrants 
have joined the labor force. Additionally, we had the paradox 
that the labor force increased by 5 percent between 1992 and 
1993. Although this is a negative indicator, we believe it is 
also an opportunity to quickly increase our economic growth 
because Argentina may witness a sharp increase in the 
construction industry, which will absorb quite a lot of the 
currently idle labor. As is well-known in Chile, the key to 
reactivation of the construction area lies in an increase in 
medium and long-term savings levels. This year we are about to 
implement in Argentina a social security reform which will 
promote such savings. We hope the reactivation of the 
construction industry will create enough jobs to return 
unemployment to its normal levels. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] How about the commercial deficit? 
  [Cavallo] We experienced an increase of capital goods 
imports 
in Argentina because a large part of investments were used to 
purchase foreign-manufactured equipment, which I believe is very 
healthy for our economy. In addition, the commercial balance 
deficit is accompanied by an important surplus in capital in the 
balance of payments. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] When will you implement a devaluation 
  [Cavallo] Never! (adamant). Why should we devalue if we 
have a monetary system that has allowed us to achieve 
unprecedented stability in Latin America. Argentina has 
achieved a 3 percent annual inflation rate, and we have done so 
on the basis of a monetary system of which we are proud. We do 
not believe we need to devalue in order to promote exports. We 
believe production costs must decrease and that we must 
streamline and eliminate distorting taxes. In Argentina's case, 
a devaluation will not help exports. 
  It is not mandatory to use a national currency in the 
Argentine economy nor are there any fixed prices in national 
currency. Any currency can be used in our economic system and 
in many cases prices are fixed in dollars. To change the value 
of the Argentine peso in relation to the dollar would only cause 
instability at the macroeconomic level and would not improve the 
level of Argentine exports. No one considers the government 
will devalue the peso in Argentina anymore. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] Let me change the question. Under what 
circumstances would you consider devaluation? 
  [Cavallo] Under no circumstances because it does not make 
any 
sense. (In a categorical and irritated tone) 
  Nobody is thinking of devaluation in Argentina. Only abroad, 
where people without understanding of our exchange system apply 
their own economic reasoning and think of devaluation. In my 
country nobody thinks of devaluation. This is shown by the 
parity between interest rates in pesos and dollars, which are 
nearly identical. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] What will happen to exporters who complain 
about 
their loss of competitiveness? 
  [Cavallo] We have a traditional agricultural and cattle 
exporting sector that is currently suffering low international 
prices. Our industries have always concentrated on the domestic 
market, producing low quality products using specifications and 
designs that are inappropriate for the international market; so 
we are currently investing in our productive capacity which must 
be better prepared to produce goods and services like those 
demanded abroad, and we are attaining this. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] What economic results do you expect for 1994? 
  [Cavallo] We expect 3 percent annual inflation, measured by 
the cost of living index, and about a 6 percent growth of the 
GDP. We expect our exports to increase by 10 percent and 
investments to increase by 12 percent. We expect an increase in 
the internal savings rate which already climbed from 14.3 
percent to 16.7 percent. This year we expect to increase 
savings by something between 1 and 1.5 percent of the GDP. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] How did the increase in U.S. interest rates 
affect the Argentine economy, especially the stock exchange and 
foreign investments? 
  [Cavallo] It lowered the value of the private and public 
foreign debt long-term bonds, just like in other developing 
countries. In the past few weeks, however, these bonds began to 
recover their value. The same happened in the stock exchange: 
It was bearish at the beginning but has been recovering lately. 
We managed to launch shares in the Transportadora Gas del Sur 
company at a time when public share offers from other countries 
had to withdrawn from the market. We managed to sell all the 
shares we placed on the market at a price within what was 
expected. Shares from Argentine companies have been received 
well abroad. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] What reforms do you intend to implement to 
further modernize Argentine economy? 
  [Cavallo] Well, we still have the whole privatization and 
deregulation process. The fact that capital goods imports are 
not taxed will help increase investments, especially productive 
investments. We are attaining impressive results in the field 
of increased productivity. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] It is said that because of next year's 
elections, the government of Carlos Menem has programmed greater 
public spending to calm social demands. What effect will that 
program have on the current economic goals? 
  [Cavallo] President Menem has announced the enlargement of 
the public works program for the interior of the country but 
this will be done with savings on routine federal government 
spending. The level of public spending approved by the 1994 
Budget Law is maintained. The public spending in Argentina is 
$49 billion and the additional public works program is $300 
million. The additional public works program is being financed 
from savings on routine federal government spending. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] Are the social disturbances a threat for the 
Argentine political and economic stability? 
  [Cavallo] No. I would just say that Argentina had very few 
social conflicts over the last five years. Some of the 
disturbances, like the one in Santiago del Estero, were caused 
by the corruption and inefficiency of local officials who 
irritated the people. When a member of the economic team became 
the federal interventor and put order into that province, we 
went from losing the 3-October elections to overwhelmingly 
winning the 10-April elections. It is clear the disturbance was 
not a reaction to the social costs created by the economic 
adjustment but a popular reaction against the corruption and 
inefficiency of local officials who used obsolete political ways 
which the people no longer want. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] The resurgence of the left in the April 
elections was interpreted in some circles as punishment for the 
government as a result of the political and social cost of the 
Convertibility Plan. What is your opinion? 
  [Cavallo] There is no indication that the emergence of the 
left was related to the political and social costs of the 
Convertibility Plan. The left was positive toward the economic 
reform and centered its electoral campaign against corruption. 
I believe the left received votes from other parties in the 
April elections. It received the support from people who were 
against the agreement between President Menem and ex-President 
Raul Alfonsin. When it comes to electing a government in 
Argentina, the votes from the Radical Civic Union and other 
political sectors that went to the left will return to their 
parties. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] People are already beginning to talk about the 
second phase of the Convertibility Plan in your country. What 
are the measures of that phase? 
  [Cavallo] As part of the Argentine economic reform plan, we 
are now progressing on issues like health, education, justice, 
security, labor, culture, and especially in the reform of the 
provincial and municipal public sector. These are phases of the 
same economic plan which must gradually cover a diversified 
group of economic and social activities, and which must be 
extended to all government levels. This is nothing new, it is 
the same plan extending its geographic area and institutional 
coverage. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] What is happening to the project to save 
private 
companies? Is there such a thing as future statization? 
  [Cavallo] No. We have a very bad bankruptcy law because when 
a company fails, all the assets, know-how [preceding word in 
English], patents, and human resources are lost because the 
judges take years to sell the assets and this makes the 
continuity of those companies impossible. We have established 
an out-of-court system in cases if the state, through the 
internal revenue organizations or official banks, is an 
important creditor of a company. So, instead of sending it into 
bankruptcy, the company assets are sold in a more expeditious 
manner. This is how we hope to keep companies which, except for 
financial problems, are healthy. Like this they can recover, 
totally or partially, their credit balance. We are doing that 
because we have great experience in privatizing companies. I 
call this the privatization of private companies because they 
are companies that accumulated large debts with the state and 
are thus virtually state companies because their main creditor 
is the state. They will be privatized like this. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] What is happening regarding taxes in Argentina? 
It has been announced that taxes on real estate will be 
increased. 
  [Cavallo] We are lowering taxes. You are referring to a 
direct tax on real estate in some of the wealthiest districts of 
the federal capital, but the municipal councils will have to 
decide that. This has nothing to do with a tax increase that 
makes production costs more expensive. On this issue, we are 
reducing taxes like those affecting salaries -- the so-called 
employer's contributions. We are also eliminating taxes on 
provincial gross incomes, which affect production costs, 
financial transfer costs, and contracts. We also have a policy 
for eliminating taxes that distort. Of course, we continue to 
adjust the mechanisms for tax collection to prevent evasion. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] In face of the resurgence of the left, and of 
the discontent among Argentine people because of unemployment 
and corruption, will Menem be reelected? 
  [Cavallo] I believe President Menem is leading a great 
process of economic transformation in Argentina, within the 
context of the full functioning of democratic institutions. The 
perception is that the public supported and continues to support 
this transformation. I believe there is a great chance of his 
being reelected in 1995. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] You also have great popular support. What post 
would you select in the new government: minister of health, 
Cordoba governor, vice president, or economy minister? 
  [Cavallo] (he laughs) I will, most probably, continue as 
economy minister. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] Do you consider yourself Menem's political 
heir? 
  [Cavallo] (laughing more heartily) No, no way. I am just the 
economy minister. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] But you are perhaps the most popular minister. 
  [Cavallo] I am a minister who is supported by the people, 
but 
in my capacity as economy minister. The Argentine people 
normally regard me as their economy minister, nothing else. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] Corruption is a problem that is currently 
affecting many countries. What is Argentina doing in this 
respect? 
  [Cavallo] Well, for the time being we are promoting economic 
reforms that will result in the removal of opportunities for 
corruption. Privatizations, deregulation, and the economic 
stability we are promoting are causing public decisions to come 
under the people's scrutiny, and are thus reducing the chances 
of corruption. There are, however, public and private areas 
where there are still opportunities for corruption, where there 
are both people willing to corrupt and those willing to be 
corrupted. These actions fall within the jurisdiction of the 
courts, and we in the executive branch are working -- each 
within his area of responsibility -- to identify and remove 
corrupt officials. The fact that the newspapers are carrying 
frequent reports on corruption cases testifies to the openness 
promoted by the Argentine political and economic system. We 
should take corruption charges as a positive sign, as evidence 
of a political and economic openness that will allow us to 
eradicate this scourge. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] What advantages does Argentina offer to foreign 
investors, namely Chilean investors? 
  [Cavallo] Chileans can use their know-how and the experience 
they have acquired in their process of privatization and 
increased production. They could also make very good profits by 
investing in Argentina precisely because the Argentine process 
of privatization and transformation of public companies is very 
similar to that of Chile. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] In which areas of the Argentine economy could 
new Chilean investments be made? 
  [Cavallo] In everything concerning energy, oil, gas, 
electricity, and related services, because these can also be 
exported to Chile. Investments could be made in everything 
related to agro-industries, lumber, cellulose, paper, and 
especially in the mining area. This because Chile has wide 
experience in mining, and we could engage in joint undertakings 
because our mining resources are located near the Chilean border. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] If the award in the case of Laguna del 
Desierto is unfavorable to Argentina, how would this affect 
trade between Chile and Argentina? 
  [Cavallo] That subject falls within the jurisdiction of the 
Foreign Ministry, and only Foreign Minister Di Tella or 
President Menem may comment on it. Besides, I never like to 
answer speculative questions. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] What would be your evaluation of our bilateral 
relations? 
  [Cavallo] Our bilateral trade has increased. We have agreed 
to open mountain passes, and are conducting joint feasibility 
studies to build new infrastructural facilities to deepen our 
integration. Argentina wants to move toward promoting mutual use 
of our port facilities. Additionally, conditions for 
investments in the two countries can be improved through the 
signing of a mutual investment protection treaty. We are also 
improving our tariff structure. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] Do you believe Argentina stands a good chance 
of 
joining NAFTA sooner than Chile? 
  [Cavallo] No, I don't. Chile is closer to joining NAFTA than 
Argentina. Besides, my country has not yet discussed the 
possibility of joining NAFTA. 
  [ESTRATEGIA] Would you be in favor of or against Chile 
joining Mercosur [Common Market of the South]? 
  [Cavallo] I am in favor of negotiations to promote free 
trade 
between Chile and Mercosur. I would, of course, like it if 
Chile joined Mercosur. I realize, however, that this would not 
be realistic, as it would bring uncertainty into the Chilean 
tariff policy, an area in which your country has had much 
success. To do this would not make sense. It would be most 
practical and beneficial to everyone if we, the four Mercosur 
member countries on the one hand, and Chile on the other started 
a free trade agreement. 
  Yet we consider it desirable and possible for Mercosur and 
Chile to start negotiations to create a free trade area. In 
this respect, Chile could join the Mercosur member countries, in 
what will be our goal during the first stage of the treaty -- 
that is, the free circulation of goods and services between our 
nations without any type of tariff or similar restrictions. 
  I think Mercosur is going to progress well. First there will 
be a free trade area formed by the four Mercosur member 
countries, and a while later we will agree on a common external 
tariff that will make us function as a customs union. 
Meanwhile, we are making progress in coordinating our economic 
policies, and it is our objective to succeed in creating a true 
common market. 

