CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Finance Minister Pirro Dishnica by Golik </F>
Trebeshina; place and date not given: "Advantages for Foreign 
Investments"] 
  [Excerpts] [Trebeshina] What was the economic situation 
inherited by Albania and what are the aims of the democratic 
government in expanding economic reforms in the country? 
  [Dishnica] [passage omitted] When the democratic government 
came into power in April 1992, an overall program was undertaken 
to implement a policy of transition to the market economy. The 
government put its entire intellectual arsenal into implementing 
this program and we are all witnesses to the noticeable economic 
successes of the government: the fight against inflation, the 
continuing efforts to control the budget deficit by means of a 
rigorous policy on expenditures, and the presentation of a tax 
system based on the market economy, restrictions on bank loans, 
bank interest rates based on the rules of the market, and the 
restoration of confidence in the country's monetary unit. It 
should be stressed that in the implementation of this program, 
considerable financial assistance was obtained from abroad, such 
as the "standby" agreement with the IMF. After the successful 
implemention of this agreement, it became possible to sign a 
medium-term agreement (ESAF) with the IMF in July 1993, for 
assistance in the medium-term program of economic reform. There 
was also the World Bank loan for critical imports and the EC 
support for the balance of payments. 
  At the same time, a number of foreign countries provided 
food 
assistance and humanitarian aid and carried out development and 
technical assistance projects, in particular Italy, the United 
States, Germany, Turkey, and other G-24 countries. [passage 
omitted] 
  The government's budget deficit decreased from 40 percent of 
the GDP at the beginning of the economic stabilization program 
in the first half of 1992 to less than 10 percent in the first 
half of 1993. These favorable results were achieved by 
implementing tight control over expenditures. Even though the 
budget deficit is still high, the results so far show that the 
process of reducing the budget deficit continues. 
  Since 1992 the external debt of Albania has been less than 
planned due to fewer imports and improvements in exports. 
Exports are expected to be 25 percent higher in 1993 than in 
1992. There were shortfalls and delays in medium-term and 
long-term financing but they were partially compensated for by 
private transfers of funds and the receipt of more capital than 
was planned. Another positive development is the inclusion of 
the private sector in foreign trade. Currently the private 
sector dominates imports and plays a big role in exports. In 
this framework, noticeable progress has been made in the 
implementation of the price policy and the reduction of 
budgetary subsidies. In general, retail and wholesale prices 
have been liberalized. The policy of increasing prices is aimed 
at reducing the obstacles to increasing production and imports. 
  [Trebeshina] What are the developmental parameters of the 
Albanian government's economic program? 
  [Dishnica] Our data indicates that production has stopped 
decreasing and that there are signs of an increase. In 
particular, agriculture has shown noticeable signs of 
improvement in response to price reform and privatization. After 
the privatization of cooperatives and the liberalization of 
prices of food products, the attention of the government has 
been concentrated on the privatization and restructuring of 
state farms, the completion of the price reform for agricultural 
products, the rehabilitation of the rural infrastructure, and 
the privatization of distribution and processing enterprises. 
The World Bank and other donors are close collaborators in the 
execution of this reform. The privatization and restructuring of 
state farms and the raising of the prices of agricultural inputs 
up to the level of imports are priority targets. It should be 
stressed that the measures to transform the Agriculture and 
Development Bank into a new institution, completely subject to 
the law on banks, are of special importance for the role which 
this bank will play in providing support for the new structures 
in agriculture. In the government's program, the infrastructure 
has remained within the financial limitations on the basis of 
the general opinion that the largest part of the public 
infrastructure of Albania is inadequate for the development of a 
modern economy and for attracting investments in various 
branches of the economy. 
  Although the transportation system has been evaluated as 
adequate, on the whole it is far from meeting the essential 
quality parameters and conditions have become so bad that 
economic development is hindered. The government is placing a 
priority on repairing the main highways and expanding roads in 
the mountainous areas, reconstructing the port of Durres and the 
Rinas Airport, and, in particular, constructing international 
highways such as the Durres-Skopje-Sofia highway with a branch 
leading to Kapshtice or Durres-Kakavije. I would like to add 
here that a positive sign of the rapid development of the 
transportation sector is the predominance of private 
transporters in interurban transportation and international 
transportation of passengers and goods. 
  The telecommunications infrastructure in Albania is very 
limited. In the framework of the master plan, for the execution 
of a $30-million program financed by the European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development and by Italy, Switzerland, and 
Austria, there will be restructuring; it is thought that 
resources will be found for the rapid installation of modern 
telecommunications systems, which is an essential condition for 
attracting investors and tourists. 
  There has been noticeable improvement in the construction 
field, both in the villages and in the cities. Private 
investments by individuals are predominant in this area. To 
eliminate the lack of housing and to improve the quality of 
existing housing, the government has aimed at increasing the 
role of the private sector and improving the costs. A law aiming 
at the rapid privatization of the inventory of housing units has 
been passed and is being implemented. To provide incentive for 
the private construction of housing, rents for newly constructed 
housing units have been liberalized. Work has resumed on the 
completion of the construction of apartments which were being 
built. By the end of September 1993, some 1,451 apartments were 
completed and handed over for use. During the same period, 
investments of more than 713,000 leks were made. Some 8,401 
housing units and 24,090 economic units have been built by 
private concerns and many others are in the process of 
construction. 
  The privatization program aims at increasing private 
activity 
in two directions: 
  a. the creation of private enterprise activities in the 
entire economy, without any restrictions, and 
  b. the privatization of state property. 
  To accelerate the process of privatization within the 
strategic framework, the law on privatization has been reviewed, 
there have been reorganizations of structures directly concerned 
with privatization, and an incentive-providing fiscal policy has 
been implemented. The enactment of the laws on the bankruptcy of 
enterprises and on the return and compensation of owners are 
expected to have a positive influence in this area. Despite the 
objective difficulties which have appeared, all efforts are 
being made to provide compensation as soon as possible by means 
of bonds and to create opportunities for bondholders to take 
part in the privatization process. 
  [Trebeshina] How does the legal system create an appropriate 
climate for the economic development of Albania and, in this 
context, how does it provide guarantees for foreign investors? 
  [Dishnica] The legislative system for the market economy is 
rapidly being created. During the past year, the parliament 
approved the law on commercial companies, a banking law, a law 
on the Bank of Albania, a law on bankruptcy, the law on 
accounting, as well as labor legislation. Finally, we have 
approved a liberal law on foreign investments which facilitates 
registration procedures. The main thing is that any 
disagreements will always be resolved by international law. Laws 
on taxes and customs have been rewritten so that they are fully 
suited to the market economy. The increase in investments by 
borrowing foreign capital is one of the most important actions 
for putting the economy back on its feet. Despite the problems 
which have appeared, foreign firms and investors have had an 
increasing interest in Albania. Firms with a total investment of 
about $50 million, part of $100 million in contracts, have 
signed contracts and begun their activities. Other firms have 
concluded contracts for a total investment of $70 million and 
are expected to begin their activity. 
  The government is constantly trying to create an attractive 
atmosphere for foreign investments. In the foreign investment 
law, foreign investments and investors are treated the same as 
Albanians. In addition, foreign investors are not subject to 
controls over capital and are free to transfer their profits. 
Soon all investors who invest in the production sector will not 
have to pay taxes for a four-year period and this period will be 
extended for those firms which reinvest and for those firms 
which invest in the tourismn sector. In addition, investors will 
profit from liberal exemptions from customs taxes for goods 
which are used in the investment creation process. At present, 
foreigners can rent land for 99 years at a reasonable price and, 
for some projects, they can buy land. The foreign investment law 
stipulates that disagreements connected with expropriation or 
compensation for expropriation or discrimination will be 
resolved by international bodies such as the International 
Center for the Resolution of Investment Conflicts. Another more 
important point is the exemption from procedures for seeking 
authorization to make an investment, procedures which still 
exist, even today, in some Eastern European countries, such as 
Romania, Poland, and others. I am convinced that the approval of 
the civil code which will permit private ownership of the land 
and the rights which result from this ownership will give a new 
incentive to foreign investors to come to Albania. 
  In conclusion, I would like to say that many bilateral 
investments and tax agreements have been signed by our 
government to facilitate foreign investments, with all those 
countries whose investors have or will have an interest in 
investing in Albania. 

