BFN 

<F P=106> [By C. C. Huang and Y. C. Tsai] </F>
  [Text] Mbabane, May 12 (CNA) -- Republic of China [ROC] 
President Li Teng-hui Thursday [12 May] called on Mainland China 
to renounce the use of force against Taiwan and to recognize the 
ROC as a sovereign political entity, thereby paving the way for 
China's eventual reunification. 
  Li made the appeal during a dinner party hosted in his honor 
by the Chinese community in Swaziland. 
  The ROC Government, which has taken a pragmatist policy to 
promote its external relations during the past four years, has 
won recognition from many countries, he noted. "We look forward 
to active participation in international organizations and to 
thus return some of the help we received from the international 
community in earlier years." 
  The president pledged that the ROC would do its best to give 
a helping hand to overseas Chinese in return for their past 
support. 
  Li also expressed his thanks to officials of the ROC Embassy 
and members of the Agricultural and Handicraft Missions in 
Swaziland, saying their sustained efforts have greatly enhanced 
friendly relations between the two countries, and helped 
Swaziland become a staunch ally of the ROC. 
  Li and his entourage arrived in Mbabane at noon for a 
three-day state visit, marking the first time an ROC president 
has visited Swaziland since the two countries established 
diplomatic ties in 1968. 
  King Mswati III greeted Li at the airport and later 
entertained him at a luncheon party. 
  Mswati told Li that he will do his part to cement the 
cordial 
relationship between the two countries. The king expressed the 
hope that Taiwan's successful experience in economic development 
could help rebuild the Swazi economy. 
  "I was greatly impressed with Taiwan's rapid economic 
development during my visit in 1989," he said. 
  The king said he has been particularly grateful for the 
assistance the ROC Agricultural and Handicraft Missions have 
given to his country. 
  President Li, in return, thanked the king for his warm 
hospitality and for Swaziland's full support for the ROC bid to 
join the United Nations. 
  Swaziland is the final leg of Li's four-nation tour. He has 
already visited Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and South Africa, and is 
scheduled to return to Taipei Monday. 

