BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yevgeniy Stanislavovich Dovgel, director of </F>
the Scientific-Economic Center `Ekon,' by unidentified reporter; 
place and date not given: "We Have One Circulatory System But 
Two Heads...."] 
  [Text] A monetary merger pact has most probably divided the 
people into two groups -- supporting and opposing. 
Nevertheless, we can assess this pact using objective science. 
Our expert Yevgeniy Dovgel, director of the Scientific-Economic 
Center "Ekon," ponders the issue of an economic union and a 
joint monetary system. 
  [Dovgel] This idea is not so bad, however, it is not modern. 
It has a lengthy history and big prospects. Many people support 
the idea that all obstacles for labor and capital on earth 
should be removed, and a highly developed language of 
international contacts and a stable international currency 
should be introduced. The question is only how this can be 
implemented, so that each state gains benefits. To realize 
"people's dreams," it is necessary to provide for two 
conditions. First, the international currency should not be 
subject to inflation; second, sovereign states-members of this 
union should have nondeficit budgets. If these two conditions 
are not observed, this union will not last long. The emission 
center will work as a huge vacuum cleaner, that is, it will suck 
resources and goods from neighboring states from its allies by 
issuing noncovered money and credits; at the same time, the 
states -- with deficit budgets -- will become dependent on this 
center and will be forced to introduce their national 
currencies. This simple theory has been proven in practice. 
The United States and Canada, for example, set up their single 
economic space long ago but still cannot have a single currency 
(with the dollar being a world authority!). The European Union 
members lift economic borders and customs checkpoints, but 
preserve their currencies and gradually, with great effort and 
caution, establish their international currency -- the ECU. The 
Viskuli agreement regarding the CIS was an example of such a 
quick "resolution" to the problem. They agreed to establish a 
single economic space, a unified budget policy, coordinated work 
of customs offices, and the free transit of goods. However, we 
had all these conditions earlier and the states were members of 
a single ruble zone. Nevertheless, everything collapsed too 
quickly because economic laws cannot be abolished by government 
decrees. 
  [SEM DNEY] Yevgeniy Stanislavovich, could we obtain the 
results similar to those of the Viskuli agreement? 
  [Dovgel] According to the initiators of the signed 
agreement, 
it just mirrors various agreements, which formulated the 
establishment and functioning of the CIS as a union of 
independent states, each of which wishes to preserve its own 
legislature and government. At the same time, the goal is to 
set up a single ruble zone of the USSR-type, a "circulatory 
system" in a single organism, to set up an organism which will 
have one circulatory system but two heads. An enterprise having 
two boards and two managing directors can serve as an example of 
this case. Or we can compare it with two families living 
separately but using one budget. 
  [SEM DNEY] Sometimes, the issue of this pact is raised in 
the 
following way: "What part of our sovereignty have we lost?" 
  [Dovgel] I understand the sovereignty as a priority in 
domestic matters and an opportunity to independently formulate a 
foreign policy. For example, an old-age pension in Belarus is a 
little higher than in Russia, while prices for bread, milk, and 
some other products are considerably lower. When we shift to 
Russian taxation and a single budget (even if it is called a 
"Consolidated" budget, written with an upper case), everything 
will be unified. Otherwise, the Russian Government will have to 
pay larger subsidies to Belarusian pensioners than to those 
living in Russia. Issuing subsidies to lower prices in Belarus 
from a unified budget will also be unreal because Russia has 
already introduced market prices. To say nothing about issuing 
credits to the agricultural sector that our National Bank did 
not long ago by a decision of the Supreme Soviet. As for 
foreign policy, we have already adopted the Russian customs 
legislation. We will have to look back to the center when 
receiving foreign loans, because repaying loans will have to be 
included in the unified budget. 
  [SEM DNEY] That means that the sovereignty of the Republic 
will be restricted to some extent. 
  [Dovgel] Probably, that is so. However, the sovereignty is 
not an end in itself. If only integration of the Republic with 
Russia could raise the welfare of our people, we could seriously 
discuss this subject. However, the standard of living in Russia 
is decreasing more quickly than in Belarus. National income in 
Russia has shrunk by 14 percent in 1991, by 22 percent -- in 
1992, and by 14.6 percent -- in 1993 (while in Belarus -- by 
2.11 percent and 10 percent, respectively). I would also advise 
reading articles by S. Govorukhin in SOVETSKAYA BELORUSSIYA. 
Russia is far from being the state that we knew, remember, and 
love. Many do not realize this. We should be careful not to get 
out of the frying pan into the fire after our election campaign. 
  [SEM DNEY] Do you mean that currently an economic union with 
Russia is unachievable or unwelcome? 
  [Dovgel] It is both achievable and welcome! Moreover, not 
only with Russia but with all other states, and we cannot speak 
about any isolationism. A single currency could be of use to 
all the members of this economic union, and their sovereignty 
would not be infringed on. Only two conditions should be 
fulfilled that I have already spoken about. We can make a 
proposal on how to do it. If customs checkpoints at the borders 
are liquidated (there were some attempts in Belarus), and the 
motives for work at the enterprises and stimuli for development 
of production are not created, then resources and goods will 
simply "run away" from Belarus to places where prices for them 
are higher, and earnings will be used for buying various 
licenses and quotas, as well as for building new cottages. 
  [SEM DNEY] What is your attitude to statements declaring 
that prices will not be increased anymore and only wages will 
grow? 
  [Dovgel] We no longer require statements, we had many. We 
require precise and meaningful decisions which could organize 
our people in creative and efficient labor. People should have 
an opportunity to work for themselves and for their families at 
enterprises and they will then be able to move mountains, 
otherwise, they will work on their private plots irrespective of 
what zone we have -- ruble or "hare." Whichever unions are 
signed, we should realize that foreign economic conditions -- 
favorable or unfavorable -- could only indirectly affect the 
national economy because the same people will work. 
  [SEM DNEY] What does the "Ekon" center propose? 
  [Dovgel] We propose a program formulating how to stabilize 
and quickly recover the Republic's economy. This program has 
already been put to a test; it is supported by authoritative 
researchers, working collectives, trade unions, and has been 
approved at an international conference. In addition, we 
propose a package of documents regarding specific methodology 
for raising the economic efficiency of enterprises (with all 
technical specifications) that had been tested in practice. 
  Recently, we established the Republican civilian association 
"Ekon" to foster economic development and promote our concept. 

