BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Andrey Kurguzov] </F>
  [Text] Brasilia, 4 Jun -- Russia is to sell Brazil air 
defense missiles and launchers. Agreement on this was reached 
here during talks which ended on Friday between the leadership 
of the Ministry of the Army of this major Latin American country 
and representatives of the Rosvooruzheniye [Russian armaments] 
association. 
  In an interview with an ITAR-TASS correspondent, Col 
(?Cupertino), a spokesman of the Army Ministry, stated Russia 
will sell Brazil 112 Igla missiles used against helicopters and 
other low-flying targets and 56 missile launchers. To purchase 
this combat equipment Brazil's military chiefs have used part of 
the 100 million dollars allocated by the government for the 
modernization of the army. An ITAR-TASS correspondent received 
confirmation from a spokesman of the Russian Embassy in Brasilia 
that the deal had been concluded. 
  Col. (?Cupertino) stressed the deal was concluded as a 
result 
of the talks that were held in Moscow last September by Zenildo 
de Lucena, minister of the army, and the inter-governmental 
protocol of intent on trade and economic cooperation that was 
signed last December during the visit to Russia by Jose Andrade 
Vieira, then minister of industry, commerce and tourism. The 
protocol envisages, among other things, increasing the volume of 
Russian-Brazilian trade to four billion dollars in the next four 
years. The ministry spokesman said it was possible that other 
agreements in the military sphere would be reached in future and 
Brazil was interested in pursuing this. In connection with 
this, Gen. Gilberto Serra, head of the center for social 
relations of the Ministry of the Army, in an interview for the 
GLOBO newspaper said "Brazil is interested in buying from Russia 
as large a volume of armaments as possible at the least cost." 
At the present time Brazil is studying the possibility of 
organizing production of Igla type missiles in the country, he 
stressed. 

