Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Klaus-Peter Schmid: "Divided and Yet </F>
United--European Monetary Union: With the New Year the Second 
Phase Begins, but Many Points of Contention Are Still 
Unresolved"] 
  [Text] The beginning of the new year is a great hour for 
Frankfurt, because beginning 1 January 1994 a new institution 
for which many countries exerted themselves will have its 
headquarters in the financial metropolis on the Main: the 
European Monetary Institute (EMI). It is the preliminary stage 
for a future European Central Bank, the heart and brain of the 
European currency planned for the turn of the century at the 
latest. It is clear that the money gurus in Manhattan are 
counting on a substantial lift for their business from the 
presence of the European institution. 
  Initially, however, it is a matter of anything but 
transactions in finance or currency markets. Members of the EMI 
are the central banks of the 12 countries of the European Union 
[EU]. So the EMI is above all an agency whose top objective will 
be "to strengthen cooperation between the national central 
banks" and "to strengthen the coordination of the monetary 
policies of the member states with the goal of maintaining price 
stability." So states the Maastricht Treaty, which sets forth 
the stages for the European Monetary Union [EMU] and thus for a 
common European currency. 
  What appears to be pure bureaucratic work is actually 
political dynamite. How, for example, can one coordinate the 
monetary policies of 12 countries if one can only give 
recommendations rather than instructions? The answer is clear 
for the Bundesbank: the competence of the national banks of 
issue remains untouched and consequently the EMI can at best 
serve to "strengthen the process of coordinating monetary policy 
between the issuing banks of the member states." 
  That is not enough for other countries. They are already 
calling for development of the position of the EMI in such a way 
that no one can get around its decisions. More than before, the 
ulterior motive is to limit the dominant role of the mark in 
Europe's currency markets. Precisely in accordance with the 
experience of the last two years, in which the partners 
complained about the "dictates of the mark," they would like to 
restrict the freedom of movement of the Bundesbank. But the 
German central bank stresses: "The responsibility for monetary 
policy in the transition phase remains at the national level." 
  Many countries are also lured by the fact that the EMI is 
permitted to accept gold and currency reserves from the national 
central banks and to manage them. It is above all the have-nots 
who are already casting longing glances at the treasures of the 
Bundesbank and would prefer to see the largest possible share of 
the national reserves combined even now. The joint fund could be 
used, for example, to prop up weak currencies. It is no wonder 
that this idea is also disliked by the guardians of the currency 
in Frankfurt. 
  A third function of the EMI should give no reason for 
bickering: the practical preparation of the common currency. 
This ranges from the harmonizing of the clearing systems and 
statistics to the question of how a future European Central Bank 
can function and what its political instruments ought to look 
like. Two themes about which the specialists of the EMI will 
have to rack their brains may well be especially interesting: 
What are the common banknotes to look like and how are they to 
be exchanged most appropriately for the national currencies 
valid until that time? 
  Even if every member state will initially retain its central 
bank, the Maastricht Treaty prescribes a decisive change for the 
second phase of the monetary union: all national monetary 
institutes are to be given their independence and hence may no 
longer take instructions from the government. That has long been 
the case in Germany and the Netherlands. Other countries such as 
France and Belgium took this step in the past year. In this way, 
politicians can no longer directly influence monetary policy and 
above all interest rates. 
  Some governments are therefore tempted to delay this step, 
for it obstructs an unlimited source of financing. Thus, it has 
heretofore been customary in Italy or Greece for the state to 
finance its large budget deficits through the central bank and 
hence the printing press. But this inflationary abuse was 
expressly forbidden in Maastricht. The rules are so strict that 
henceforth the Bundesbank was not even allowed to give cash 
credits to the Federal Government and laender, although the 
Bundesbank Law expressly provided for this possibility. 
  A curious thing about the EMI is that its end is already 
planned but it remains uncertain when its hour will come. As 
soon as the third phase of the monetary union begins, the EMI 
will become the European Central Bank. At that time, the 
autonomy of the central banks will end in those countries that 
are giving up their national currency and bringing them into the 
uniform European currency. That will happen on 1 January 1997 at 
the earliest and two years after this date at the latest. 
  At least in principle. For no one knows what the Maastricht 
agreement is really worth. Scarcely any country in Europe 
presently fulfills the criteria, without which there can be no 
participation in the common currency. The disorder in the 
currency markets is still too great to permit a responsible 
final fixing of the exchange rates. And the crisis is still such 
a burden on the European economy that for years to come it will 
probably not be possible to fulfill the starting conditions. 
  But anyone who believes that there is no longer any interest 
in the monetary union must think again. Just a few days before 
the start of the second phase, a dispute arose that is hard to 
understand. Spain, Greece, and Portugal do not want the four 
countries that are presently negotiating on joining the EU to be 
allowed to participate in the decision on the beginning of the 
third phase. The candidates Austria, Sweden, Norway, and Finland 
bring with them relatively stable currencies and are therefore 
serious candidates for the European currency. Obviously the 
"Club Med countries" see their hopes disappearing that the 
strict criteria for joining could be relaxed at the decisive 
moment, allowing them to come into the circle of the chosen 
through the back door. 
  In any case, this week the 64-year-old Belgian banker 
Alexandre Lamfalussy will begin his job as first president of 
the EMI. Heretofore he was chief of the Bank for International 
Settlements (BIZ) in Basel and his appointment was applauded 
everywhere. There is only one thing to mar his start in the new 
post: the EMI Secretariat has not yet been able to find a 
suitable house in Frankfurt. They are still looking into this on 
the Main. 
  So for the time being Europe's currency popes will continue 
to meet in the futuristic tower of the BIZ at the bend of the 
Rhine in Basel. Of course they will be coming to the metropolis 
on the Main for the first meeting on 11 January, where in the 
Frankfurt town hall they will elect one of the 12 central bank 
chiefs as vice president of the EMI. After that the EMI team 
will once again withdraw to Switzerland. They will not move 
until the fall. 

