BFN 

<F P=106> [By Yindi Loetcharoenchok] </F>
  [Text] The Burmese junta has accused two rebellious ethnic 
groups of co-operating militarily with opium warlord Khun Sa and 
warned that such an association "can hinder" continuing peace 
talks. 
  Spokesmen for the Karen and Karenni flatly rejected the 
charges as "groundless" accusations aimed at discrediting the 
anti-Rangoon ethnic movement. 
  In an interview yesterday, the Burmese Armed Forces Attache 
in Bangkok, Col Thein Swe, said the Karen National Union (KNU) 
and the Karenni National Progressive Party (KNPP) had each sent 
a delegation last month to meet Khun Sa. 
  He claimed that a three-member Karenni team led by Deputy 
Chief of Staff Aung Mya subsequently signed a "military 
alliance" with Khun Sa's Mong Tai Army (MTA). 
  Thein Swe said he did not know the contents of the pact but 
suspected they had "probably" agreed not to let a third military 
force pass through territories they respectively control. 
  He accepted that the Burmese army would need to pass through 
the Karenni area to successfully attack the MTA. He said the 
State Law and Order Restoration Council (Slorc) will launch 
offensives against Khun Sa's forces, but "it is not yet the 
time". 
  The attache also charged that a five-member Karen delegation 
met Khun Sa during April 10-12 and that a KNU landmine expert, 
Lt Col Isaac had taught the MTA how to produce anti-personnel 
mines and helped set up a weapons factory. 
  The MTA's move implied that it was aware of Slorc's pending 
offensive and had taken the preventive measure of planting 
landmines in the likely path of advancing Burmese troops, 
according to Thein Swe. He said such military cooperation with 
Khun Sa "can hinder" negotiations between Slorc and the two 
ethnic groups. 
  Khun Sa's group could not be reached for comment. 
  In separate interviews yesterday, both the Karen and Karenni 
guerrillas agreed they had sent teams to Khun Sa's area in 
southern Shan State, but rejected as "groundless" the 
accusations that they were cooperating militarily with the 
warlord. 
  Khun Sa, or Chang Si-fu in Chinese, controls a narrow strip 
of territory east of the Salween River in southern Shan State 
alongside the Thai border province of Mae Hong Son. 
  Although he claims not to be a drugs trafficker and says he 
only imposes a tax on opium or heroin passing through his 
territory to finance the Shan state's struggle for independence, 
Rangoon and the world community have branded him a drugs baron. 
Despite his denials, US courts have accepted 10 separate 
narcotics-related charges brought against him. 
  A Karenni spokesman who requested anonymity said the KNPP 
delegation's visit was in response to a recent letter purporting 
to be from Khun Sa to three ethnic movements -- Karen, Karenni 
and Mon -- urging them to unite and cooperate politically and 
militarily with him to counter Slorc. 
  The three groups had discussed the letter. It was ambiguous 
and they had been suspicious of its authenticity and wary of 
being used by an outside party. 
  Khun Sa later confirmed that he had sent the letter, he 
added. 
  The Karenni spokesman confirmed that Aung Mya and two other 
KNPP members did go to see Khun Sa to seek clarification. 
  But he rejected Thein Swe's accusations of a "military 
alliance" with Khun Sa as "groundless propaganda," intended to 
"discredit" the Karenni movement. 
  "We, the KNPP, are not stupid. He deals in drugs. How could 
we (reach an agreement with Khun Sa)... If we did, people would 
think that we deal in drugs and we would then lose our political 
objective (Karenni independence)," he said. 
  The Karenni have a policy to continue peace talks with Slorc 
but no date or venue had been agreed on for the next meeting, he 
said. The KNPP was still pressing for the talks to be held 
outside Burma. 
  Likewise, a Karen spokesman while accepting that a 
delegation 
was sent to Khun Sa's area, denied the team was there to teach 
the Mong Tai Army how to produce mines. He said it was 
"possible" that the trip was in response to the warlord's letter 
but he had not seen the letter itself. 
  "Some small officers went there just to see the place. There 
is no agreement whatsoever signed with Khun Sa," he said. 
  Although the Karen have agreed to enter bilateral ceasefire 
talks with Slorc, no meeting has ever taken place. The two 
sides can not agree on a venue as the Karen want the meeting 
outside Burma while Slorc insists that it takes place inside the 
country. 

