Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Excerpt] Officers of the Royal Cayman Islands Police Drug 
Squad seized more than 350 pounds of ganja and arrested a total 
of seven people in two separate operations over the weekend. 
  Drug Squad Superintendent Trevor Cutts called the seizures 
"an excellent start to the new year," and "bodes well for 
further 1994 operations." 
  The first operation was on Friday, 31 December. Mr. Cutts 
said the Drug Squad received a call from authorities at 
Northward Prison. Two prisoners had allegedly tried to get about 
a pound of ganja into the prison. 
  Drug Squad officers responded immediately. "We took our dogs 
and Customs assisted with their dogs. There was good liaison all 
around," he said. 
  Several small amounts of ganja were recovered from areas 
immediately surrounding the prison, but not from any secure 
area, Mr. Cutts pointed out. As a result of the recovery, two 
prisoners were arrested and are being dealt with by prison 
officials. 
  The second operation, over New Year's Eve and through the 
night, culminated around 4:00 p.m. on New Year's Day with the 
recovery of 272 pounds of ganja and the arrest of a male West 
Bay resident. 
  The ganja was seized in an area of East End, but Mr. Cutts 
declined to be more specific. He did note, however, that the 
person arrested was a resident of West Bay. 
  As a result of enquiries in connection with the New Year's 
Day arrest, on 2 January, the operation continued with the 
arrest of three other men and a female person. Two of the people 
were arrested in West Bay. An additional 80 pounds of ganja was 
confiscated, Superintendent Cutts said, bringing the total 
amount recovered in the operation to 352 pounds with a street 
value estimated at around CI$340,000. He anticipated that at 
least three of the people involved would likely appear in court 
today (Tuesday, 4 January). 
  He characterized those involved as part of a group involved 
in drugs sales in Cayman. 
  The investigation is continuing and the Superintendent did 
not rule out additional arrests or the confiscation of drugs 
and/or assets. [passage omitted] 

