BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Koretskiy report: "Draft Treaty on Baykonur </F>
Ready. Moscow Has Yet To Ponder Kazakh Draft"] 
  [Excerpts] The Russian-Kazakh wrangle over Baykonur is 
nearing denouement. Pointing to this is a draft treaty on 
leasing the space center worked out in Alma-Ata [Almaty] and 
passed on to the head of the Russian Space Agency [RSA]. It 
does not transcend the framework of the March understandings 
between the presidents of the two countries as regards its 
principle positions. Kazakhstan's confidence this document will 
be signed soon, however, is clearly premature. [passage 
omitted] 
  The draft leasing agreement received by RSA head Yuriy 
Koptev 
from his Kazakh counterpart Aysultan Kalybayev contains, in 
addition to general, "non-negotiable" -- as Mr. Kalybayev put it 
-- terms of the lease -- the sum and the duration (20 years with 
a possible extension for another 10 years) -- also contains 
terms that the men in Moscow decline to comment on for the time 
being. For example, Alma-Ata intends to charge extra for water 
and electricity supply to the space center and for temporary 
right-of-way status for territories in the path of falling 
separating parts of booster rockets. True, Mr. Kalybayev 
promises, the cost of these services "will not exceed the level 
envisioned for internal consumers." Neither has the question of 
including in the cost of leasing the additional "space-related" 
services (doing research on commission, flights by Kazakh 
cosmonauts and many other things) been decided. These costs, 
experts believe, may amount to 50 percent of the proposed 
leasing sum. 
  In this connection, the hopes nurtured in Alma-Ata for the 
signing of the treaty as early as end of June are so far 
premature. More so because, as your KOMMERSANT-DAILY 
correspondent has managed to learn, at the moment the RSA is not 
even talking about looking at the Kazakh version. Considering 
the fact that Russia, as they have advised at the RSA, "has its 
own ideas" about the leasing pattern, as well as a mechanism for 
making such decisions, one can say in full confidence that the 
signing cannot take place before two or three months from now. 
If no new snags develop. 

