BFN 

<F P=106> [Robert Focken report: "Exact Figures Are Inexact"] </F>
  [Text] Bonn, 7 April -- According to preliminary 
calculations by the Federal Office for the Protection of the 
Constitution (BfV), in 1993 the number of left-wing extremist 
and right-wing extremist acts of violence came close to one 
other. Left-wing extremist acts of violence increased from 980 
(in 1992) to 1,078, which continued the trend of the past years; 
right-wing extremist acts of violence, which had risen since the 
end of 1990, on the other hand, declined from 2,638 (in 1992) to 
1,814, but were still considerably above the 1991 figure. 
  The acts of violence, which are only a part of the extremist 
crimes, include homicide, bodily injury, arson and bomb attacks, 
as well as offenses against the law relating to civil disorders 
and rioting, and "malicious damage with considerable use of 
force." Other crimes include offenses such as threats and 
coercion. So-called propaganda crimes are particularly frequent 
in the rightist scene. This is due, among other things, to the 
classification of what is propaganda. Thus, the swastika a 
student might spray on the wall of a house is considered to be a 
right-wing extremist crime; the abbreviation RAF [Red Army 
Faction], however, which is sprayed on the wall of a house, is 
not classified as a left-wing extremist deed, according to the 
Bonn police. 
  Another peculiarity must be taken into account when counting 
violent crimes: For "statistical reasons each act of violence 
is counted only once, even if it consists of several individual 
deeds," the 1992 Constitutional Protection report says. Thus, 
in 1992 the street riots on the "revolutionary 1 May" in Berlin 
were counted as a single (left-wing extremist) case of breaching 
public peace. At that time 104 policemen were injured. 
Similarly unimportant for the statistics was the demonstration 
in Bonn against the amendment to the asylum law on 26 May last 
year, which was attended by many people from the independent 
scene and during which there were many cases of bodily injury 
and coercion. 
  Statistical comparison of the crimes is also difficult 
because the BfV, the Federal Office of Criminal Investigations, 
and the laender have been able to agree on a common definition 
of what is and what is not to be counted as a crime only in the 
case of right-wing extremist excesses. Thus, a preliminary BfV 
statistic of December 1993 reports 8,109 such crimes (including 
acts of violence) for last year. A BfV list on left-wing 
extremism contains 1,336 crimes for 1993. The figures provided 
by the laender are quite different in this respect. Berlin 
police alone registered 3,349 left-wing extremist crimes last 
year, compared with 2,060 right-wing extremist ones. 
  The Berlin internal affairs senator says that the so-called 
autonomous activists, who "fight" against the renovation of the 
city and Berlin's expansion to the seat of parliament and 
government, are showing not only "further increasing militancy" 
but also a rising dissemination of "discriminating writings." 
These are often lists with addresses, telephone numbers, and 
car license plates of "fascists," that is, of political 
opponents. Recently right-wing extremists from the Rhine-Main 
area imitated this procedure with the brochure DER EINBLICK, 
which circulated in Main and listed addresses of "antifascists" 
all over Germany. Because of the suspected "particular 
dangerousness" of this action, the chief federal prosecutor 
assumed responsibility for the case. Since February a 
25-year-old man from Frankfurt/Main has been in detention 
pending trial. 
  Concerning left-wing extremists, the investigating public 
prosecutor's offices are less successful. A functionary of the 
German League, who was shot dead by unknown persons on 4 April 
1992, was mentioned in the independent pamphlet INTERIM in the 
form of a wanted poster two weeks before his assassination. In 
February and March this year, unknown persons carried out 
attacks on a Schleswig-Holstein functionary of the Liberal 
Workers Party and on the owner of a discotheque in Hesse. Both 
persons had been mentioned in "hit lists" of the scene before 
the attacks. 
  Security experts say that increased left-wing extremist 
activities are due to more intensive communication in the 
"scene"; the assumption that "antifascism" reacts only to the 
challenges from the right is "only half" correct. By means of 
"electronic mailboxes" in personal computers, better 
coordination at a nationwide level is possible. More actions 
are the result. The rightist scene is also up to date, and now 
uses a mailbox and telephone announcements. However, the often 
mentioned neo-Nazi interchange is just at its inception. 
  In Bonn concern is expressed that the rising violence of the 
left-wing extremist scene is not sufficiently understood by the 
public because of restrained media coverage. Left-wing 
extremists are choosing their victims with great care, it is 
said in the chancellor's office. When "rightists" are attacked, 
the leftists expect a certain empathy and tacit tolerance by 
segments of the population. Now there is the danger that this 
might come true, since coverage concentrates generally on 
xenophobic and neo-Nazi activities. Even though it is primarily 
right-wing extremists who are responsible for deaths, today all 
kinds of extremism and violence must be eradicated. 
  How difficult violence is to eradicate becomes clear when 
looking at projects such as the Anti-Racism Information Center 
(ARIC) in Duisburg, which was recently opened. The center, 
which is basically financed by the Caritas organization and 
Protestant church groups, urges children and youth groups as 
well as "multipliers" [Multiplikatoren] to recognize fascisms in 
its early stages. Leftist violence, on the other hand, is not on 
the curriculum. The ARIC co-founder Posselt, who is responsible 
for youth work in the Protestant Church in Westphalia, knows 
that the enemy is on the right: In his Violence and 
Racism Project manual, he claims that two Christian 
Democratic Union Bundestag deputies are members of a "right-wing 
extremist network." 

