Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, Feb 5 (AFP)--Chinese and Taiwan 
negotiators signed a joint communique here Saturday, indicating 
progress on a series of bilateral disputes and the possible 
signing of a written accord in late March. 
  The communique came at the end of four days of talks here 
between Taiwan's semi-official Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) 
and its mainland counterpart, the Association for Relations 
Across the Taiwan Strait (ARATS). 
  While a "high-level of understanding" had been reached on 
certain issues, further efforts are needed to overcome remaining 
differences "so as to reach a written agreement as soon as 
possible," said the communique, signed by SEF and ARATS 
vice-chairmen Chiao Jen-ho and Tang Shubei. 
  Both sides have agreed to hold further working-level 
negotiations in Beijing during the last 10 days of March. Any 
agreement arising from those talks will then be signed in Taipei 
by the two vice-chairmen. 
  In a clear reference to the thorny question of Taiwan 
handing 
over mainland hijackers, the communique said only that a degree 
of consensus had been reached on the need to repatriate those 
who crossed the Taiwan Strait illegally. 
  The word "hijackers" was noticeably absent from the text, 
indicating continuing disagreement over the key issues of 
jurisdiction and sovereignty that have dominated the divisive 
repatriation dispute. 
  While both sides agree in principle that mainland Chinese 
who 
divert planes to the Nationalist island should eventually be 
repatriated, Beijing is unwilling to recognise Taipei's rights 
of jurisdiction in dealing with the hijackers. 
  China views Taiwan as a renegade province and refuses to 
take 
any steps that may be construed as a recognition of the island 
as a political entity. 
  However, Tang had said Thursday that the latest negotiations 
had seen "differences shrinking" over repatriation, illegal 
immigrants and fishing disputes. 
  The communique stressed that future negotiations should 
focus 
on the practicalities of cross-Strait relations and avoid 
sensitive legal or political issues. 
  According to the communique, the March talks will focus on 
combatting piracy, strengthening intellectual property rights 
and enhancing judicial cooperation. 
  They will also discuss a second summit meeting between the 
SEF and ARATS chairmen, Ku Chen-fu and Wang Daohan, who last met 
in Singapore in April. 
  Both sides also agreed to promote scientific and 
technological exchanges and reciprocal visits by Chinese and 
Taiwan journalists. 
  Chinese nationalists fled to Taiwan in 1949 after losing a 
civil war to the communists on the mainland. Beijing and Taipei 
both claim to be the legitimate government of all China. 

