BFN 

<F P=106> [By Flor Wang] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, May 30 (CNA) -- Most women feel they are 
not equally respected or granted the same rights as men in 
Taiwan, a survey conducted and made public on Monday [30 May] by 
the cabinet's research, development and evaluation commission 
found. 
  The telephone survey on women's rights cgvered 1,012 men and 
1,007 women aged more than 18 years. The survey had an error 
margin of plus or minus 2.2 percent. 
  Almost half the respondents said women do not have the same 
job opportunities or potential to advance in their jobs as men 
do, whether because of their sex, age, marital status or because 
they are mothers, as against 40 percent of the respondents who 
said this was not the case. 
  About 78 percent of the respondents agreed that women have 
the same freedom to express themselves within their families 
that men have, while 62 percent said parents educate their 
children in a consistent way regardless of the child's sex. 
About 58 percent said female family members should have the 
same right of inheritance that males do. 
  Nearly half said women should be free to make decisions on 
their own regarding their sexual activities, while 35 precent 
were opposed to the idea. Additionally, 36 percent said women 
should be free to decide whether they want to have an abortion, 
while 44 percent said they should not. 
  And 66 percent, 58 percent and 67 percent of the 
respondents, 
respectively, said property management, disposal rights, and 
children's custody regulations in the civil code discriminate 
against women. 
  Nearly 50 percent said women who are abused, raped or 
abandoned do not receive sufficient protection or help from the 
government. 
  The survey also found that more than 90 percent of the 
public 
think men should share the burden of child care and housework at 
home, while 73 percent said they are in favor of male workers 
being given child-care leave. 
  Additionally, 62 percent said the number of posts reserved 
for women candidates in government elections should be 
guaranteed, according to the survey. 

