BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Maryukha report: "How Is the Black Sea Fleet To </F>
Be Divided?"] 
  [Text] Will the Agreement on the Phased Settlement of 
Black Sea Fleet Problems give a boost to cooperation or will it 
undermine relations between Russia and Ukraine? 
  The 10-day period provided for in the Agreement on the 
Phased 
Settlement of Black Sea Fleet Problems, which was signed 15 
April, is expiring implacably, but there is still no mechanism 
of splitting the fleet in new proportions. Ukraine, however, 
continues to interpret unilaterally the document approved at the 
highest level, something that does not contribute to the 
attainment of accord. For instance, Ukrainian sailors and 
politicians have put forward an idea of setting up an Ukrainian 
naval base in Sevastopol so as to start talks on leasing it to 
Russia afterward. Given the agreement that the Black Sea Fleet 
and Ukrainian Navy ships will be based separately, the Black Sea 
Fleet will effectively lose for some time, if not forever, its 
main base. At the same time, in Sevastopol, local residents and 
the city administration stand for handing all Black Sea Fleet 
units and formations deployed in Crimea over to Russia and for 
Russian jurisdiction over the fleet's main base. 
  To all appearances, difficulties are also bound to emerge 
when specific shares of the two sides are calculated. First, 
because 15-20 percent of Black Sea Fleet ships are by no means a 
specific value. Second, Ukraine is not going to take into 
account in the negotiating process the part of the fleet it has 
already seized unilaterally, including a number of Black Sea 
Fleet ships and facilities. Despite the appeal by Vice Admiral 
Vladimir Bezkorovaynyy, commander of the Ukrainian Navy, to 
refrain during the expert talks from the "Ukrainization" of 
Black Sea Fleet units, pressure on Black Sea Fleet sailors in 
garrisons far-flung from Sevastopol continues with no sign of 
letup. The Ukrainian Defense Ministry, for instance, plans to 
set up a Ukrainian Navy Water Area Protection brigade on the 
basis of an Izmail-based brigade of small naval combatants as 
early as by 1 June. 

