Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Al-Shar' Visit Enhances Arab Coordination"] </F>
  [Text] The Syrian foreign minister's visit to Jordan and 
his meeting with Crown Prince Hasan to brief him on the results 
of the al-Asad-Clinton summit is yet another practical, positive 
step toward enhancing and bolstering coordination and 
consultation between the two fraternal countries. 
  This is especially true since this visit comes at a time 
when 
His Majesty King Husayn is scheduled to visit Washington shortly 
and meet with President Clinton. 
  Jordan is satisfied with the results of the Clinton-al-Asad 
summit, especially since the U.S. Administration, as al-Shar' 
said, stresses comprehensive peace that is based on the Madrid 
conference, the resolutions of international legitimacy, and the 
land-for-peace principle. 
  No doubt, His Majesty King Husayn's visit to Washington and 
his meeting with President Clinton will further bolster the 
success of the al-Asad-Clinton summit. King Husayn will talk to 
President Clinton in the name of the cordon states and the Arab 
nation to stress the constant Arab principles and Arab concern 
about a comprehensive, just, and lasting peace on all tracks. 
  It is common knowledge that Jordan has never accepted a 
division of the peace process or the conclusion of a separate 
treaty with Israel. Jordan regards the occupied Syrian, 
Palestinian, and Lebanese territories the same way it regards 
its own occupied territories. Israel should withdraw from all 
of these Arab territories, and the fraternal Palestinian people 
should regain their national rights. 
  The success of the al-Asad-Clinton summit will be enhanced 
and promoted after the Husayn-Clinton meeting, thanks to Arab 
coordination that is founded on credibility and sincere 
intentions that believe in the importance of a unified Arab 
position and insistence on regaining all Arab rights and 
territories on all tracks. 
  Therefore, all the cordon states should adhere to this 
successful, fruitful coordination which is based on mutual 
understanding and conviction to adhere to the resolutions of 
international legitimacy, the land-for-peace principle, and a 
comprehensive solution on all tracks. 

