BFN 

<F P=106> ["DPRK Foreign Ministry Spokesman on S. Korean Authorities' </F>
Slander on DPRK's Peace Overture -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, May 6 (KCNA) -- A spokesman of the 
Foreign Ministry of the DPRK answered a question of KCNA today 
concerning the abuses heaped by the South Korean authorities on 
the DPRK's proposal for peace negotiations contained in the 
Foreign Ministry statement dated April 28. 
  He said: 
  The statement of the DPRK Foreign Ministry proposing 
negotiations to the U.S. side for the establishment of a new 
peace arrangement that will replace the present armistice 
arrangement in Korea has evoked great repercussions upon the 
world public. The South Korean authorities, however, are trying 
hard to decry it. 
  The "unification minister" and the "foreign minister" of 
South Korea made a fuss, claiming that the establishment of a 
peace arrangement is a matter that must be discussed between the 
North and the South of Korea, not between the DPRK and the USA 
and that the proposal is a "negotiation card" to get concessions 
at the third round of DPRK-USA talks. 
  This is an obtrusive and imprudent act of those oblivious of 
their lot. 
  The DPRK Government proposed to the United States that the 
two countries hold negotiations for the establishment of a new 
peace arrangement, taking into account the legal and practical 
conditions that the United States is a signatory to the 
Armistice Agreement and it is in actuality holding the military 
prerogative in South Korea. 
  The South Korean authorities categorically opposed the 
signing of the Korean Armistice Agreement at the time of its 
conclusion and now have no complete military prerogative in 
South Korea, so they have no authority and qualification for 
participating in peace negotiations. 
  The replacement of the Korean Armistice Agreement with a 
peace agreement and the establishment of a new peace arrangement 
that will replace the present armistice mechanism are urgent 
problems raised by the present situation on the Korean peninsula. 
  Such complicate problems as the "nuclear issue" have cropped 
up on the Korean peninsula because the United States shipped 
nuclear and other mass-destruction weapons into South Korea in 
violation of the Armistice Agreement. And the tensions are now 
mounting because the United States is accelerating arms buildup 
and increasing military threat to the DPRK. 
  This shows that the Korean Armistice Agreement and armistice 
mechanism are incapable of preventing arms buildup and 
recurrence of war and preserving peace on the Korean peninsula. 
  To terminate the state of truce that causes only political 
distrust and military confrontation and establish a new peace 
arrangement at an early date is the only way of easily solving 
the pending issues between the DPRK and the USA including the 
"nuclear issue." There has been adopted a North-South agreement 
with nonaggression as its keynote and organised a North-South 
joint military committee pursuant to it. So the establishment 
of a new peace arrangement would facilitate their effectuation 
and, further, the problem of preserving a durable peace on the 
Korean peninsula would be resolved completely. 
  In mid-April the South Korean authorities revoked the 
exchange of presidential envoys between the North and South as a 
precondition for the DPRK-USA talks, saying that if the DPRK-USA 
talks were promoted, "replacement of the Armistice Agreement 
with a peace agreement" would be put on the agenda and then the 
North-South dialogue will go well. But now they blindly oppose 
our practical proposal for replacing the Armistice Agreement 
with a peace agreement. This makes it plain that they are 
weathercocks who have no clear principle concerning peace and 
reunification of the Korean peninsula and blow hot and cold. 
  What they are advised to do is to refrain from following a 
big power and imprudently poking their nose into other's affairs. 

