Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Cao Min: "Minimum Wage Set To Protect </F>
Labourers"] 
  [Text] The Chinese Government has created the first 
minimum wage for urban employees in a bid to protect, their 
living standards. 
  The lowest wage for each municipality or province will be 
determined after consultation with the local governments trade 
unions and businesses, according to rules recently issued by the 
Ministry of Labour which has been drafting the regulations for 
18 months. 
  The minimum wage will not be less than half the local 
average 
wage scale, according to the instructions. 
  Shanghai has set the city's minimum monthly wage at 210 yuan 
($24) while Shenzhen and Zhuhai, the two economic special zones 
in South China's Guangdong Province, have set minimum wages at 
280 yuan ($32) and 326 yuan ($38), respectively. 
  Beijing and the other provinces are still deliberating their 
own standards, said an official from the Labour Ministry, which 
is supervising the nationwide minimum-wage system. 
  All the provinces and municipalities must establish their 
minimum wage before July this year, the official said. 
  Provincial labour departments will implement wage systems in 
their areas, especially for enterprises that have been empowered 
to decide their own wages, according to a State policy 
introduced in July, 1992. 
  The minimum wage aims to guarantee a reasonable standard of 
living for employees at a time when the gap is widening between 
different groups of people as a result of intensifying 
competition for jobs, the official said. 
  A critical target is low-wage earners, who have been 
affected 
by rising prices in a period of economic growth he added. 
  Though cheap labour helps to lure foreign and overseas 
investments that create employment opportunities, the new system 
will ensure that workers are treated fairly in overseas-funded 
enterprises that sometimes neglect the welfare and safety of 
their labourers, the official added. According to the 
Beijing-based China Ocean News, a joint venture in Fujian 
Province has forced its workers to work 16 hours and 
occasionally 18 hours a day. 
  An overseas-funded toy factory in Zhuhai City of Guangdong 
Province owes more than 1.6 million yuan ($183,000) in back 
salaries for the period between 1989 to 1991, the newspaper said. 
  The same conditions exist in some State-owned enterprises 
that have been contracted to individual managers. 
  Without a minimum wage mandate, it is difficult to mobilize 
employees to be more productive or increase enterprise 
efficiency, said Su Hainan, an official from the Ministry of 
Labour. 
  "It will be in the interest of a huge number of urban 
labourers, who used to be ill-paid," Su said. "On the other 
hand, workers will get a powerful weapon to protect themselves." 
  The minimum-wage system is a symbol that China plans to 
adopt 
international practices, said Su. 
  The enterprises that embezzle or delay paying workers' wages 
will be penalized according to the regulations, the official 
said. 

