Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Shakhabutdin Zaynutdinov: "Presidents Resolve </F>
Aral's Problems"] 
  [Text] Nukus -- A representative conference devoted to 
comprehensive issues of the protection of the Aral Sea ended in 
Nukus with the signing of a statute on an interstate council on 
the problems of the Aral Sea basin and the approval of a 
long-term program for the region's socioeconomic development and 
the improvement of the ecological situation in the Aral region 
in the next few years. 
  Official delegations from the following took part in the 
work 
of the conference: Kazakhstan, headed by President Nursultan 
Nazarbayev; Kyrgyzstan, headed by President Askar Akayev; 
Tajikistan, headed by Emomali Rakhmonov, chairman of the Supreme 
Soviet; Turkmenistan, headed by President Saparmurad Niyazov; 
Uzbekistan, headed by President Islam Karimov; and the Russian 
Federation, headed by Vice Premier Yuriy Yarov. Representatives 
of international organizations also took part. 
  Opening the conference, the head of Uzbekistan noted that 
much has been done to supply the inhabitants of the Aral Sea 
region with drinking water and medical supplies. Fewer 
chemicals are now being used in agriculture. Thanks to the 
efforts of the leaders of the countries of the region the 
decline in the water level in the sea has been halted but the 
tragedy of the Aral Sea is affecting the health of people far 
beyond the sea basin. All this is directly connected with the 
uneconomic use of water resources and the shortage of money. To 
rectify the situation joint efforts are needed by all Central 
Asian states with the assistance of the international community. 
  This idea was supported by Kazakhstan President N. 
Nazarbayev, chairman of the international fund to save the Aral 
Sea, who informed those present that messages of support had 
been received from the leaders of the United States, France, 
Britain, Spain, Belgium, and Turkey. Khalid Malik, Uzbekistan's 
permanent UN representative, gave an assurance that 
international organizations are prepared to render every support 
in this common cause. 

