Language: <F P=105> Kazakh </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Maqash Tatimov, demographer, member of the </F>
National Kenges for State Policy under the Republic of 
Kazakhstan cabinet of ministers, candidate in pedagogical 
science, recorded by Zhanar Qurmanqulqyzy: "I Am One of the 
Those Responsible for Beginning the Great Caravan."] 
  [Text] [Qurmanqulqyzy] Mr. Tatimov, the people know you 
well as a scientist who has carried out a great deal of 
research, in spite of your youth, with the future of your nation 
and its prosperity in mind. They also know you well as a social 
activist who has never softened his valuable suggestions but has 
expressed them directly. I would like to begin our "discussions" 
with your own family. 
  [Tatimov] In general, I think it a mistake to become 
involved 
with a man's personal life in the pages of the press and to 
belabor it. However, it is possible that the thought has emerged 
from time to time that since I have been a demographer "we 
should see what kind of contribution this scientist is making to 
his own demographics in practice." 
  My first wife and I did not get along at all and we 
divorced. 
The name of my wonderful mate of the present is Mayra. She is a 
bibliographer by specialty. She is a graduate of the Moscow 
Cultural Institute, and is a doctoral candidate and an assistant 
professor. 
  I am the father of five children. My oldest child is a girl, 
23 years-old, a student. Kenzhem, my son, is nine. He is a 
student in the third grade of School No. 141 in Almaty. 
  During my youth I traveled a great deal in various parts of 
the republic. When my comrades, living in the four corners of 
the republic, saw a round yellow baby resembling me they decided 
it was "my child." "There is nothing shameful in words of 
greatness." (Tatimov was joking). 
  My wife did not think I was too eager. However, she was 
educated and I wanted to understand her. Thus, even if we were 
not totally in agreement about everything, we made our peace, 
came to understand one another, and are living a good life. 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Since we have begun to establish state 
relationships with foreign countries, our kinsmen, who were 
forced to migrate due to past blows of fate, have begun to 
return. Among them there are many who, taking the view that "it 
is better to be a slave in one's own country than a sultan among 
foreigners," have returned once and for all in spite of our 
grave economic conditions. What kind of a contribution will such 
individuals make to the growth of our people's numbers? 
  [Tatimov] Indeed it is true that a great caravan of 
migration 
has begun to flow into our country. Our kinsmen were forced to 
leave their country far behind, throwing their fates to the 
winds. They encountered oppression from conservatives at the 
time of the civil war, were annihilated by leftist persecution 
at the time of Goloshchekin, and were alarmed by racist 
oppression during the era of colonialism. For a time we 
blackened the reputation of these innocents, but now a just 
political evaluation is being assigned, and we are not being 
sparing in our help to all of those expressing a desire to 
"return" to their native land in spite of the fact that our 
sovereign country is itself barely on its feet. This process is 
going forward with the direct support of the government and the 
president. I am one of those directly responsible for 
beginning what is in truth the last great migration, for its 
proper management, and for its timeliness. The Ministries 
of Labor, of Foreign Affairs, and of Internal Affairs are 
involved with such problems as the settlement of our kinsmen 
returning from abroad. 
  One in three of our kinsmen in Mongolia, that is to say, 
more 
than 50,000, have returned. We may say that the caravan has 
started and has taken the road. This great caravan will be 
continued from still other countries... 
  Kazakhs living in Tajikistan became refugees last year due 
to 
the effects of the civil war started by religious extremists. 
Our president has given them great assistance. Food, clothing, 
and drugs have been delivered by special trains. Some 6,000 of 
the 9,000 Kazakhs in Tajikistan have been evacuated 
simultaneously on the trains. Some 1,200 families have been 
resettled in Southern Kazakhstan Oblast, primarily in Zhetisay 
Rayon. 
  At the time of the 1990 Osh Incident, I was in Qorghantobe 
Oblast, in Qolkhozabat Rayon. At that time I advised our kinsmen 
in that area to return quickly to their country. Most listened 
to what I had to say, but some seemed to want to continue to 
think about it. Resources were adequate to evacuate them. Those 
remaining behind, who did not migrate, regretted it and in the 
end had to be removed involuntarily at the time of the civil 
war. Thus, there were also losses. In general it is a good thing 
to listen to experts thinking about what to do in such questions. 
  New focuses for migration have emerged. By the end of the 
year, a total of 7,000 persons, 1,000 families from Iran and 400 
families from Turkey, will migrate. A new Migration Department 
is now carrying out preparatory work. The heads of this 
department, Ghaziz Yesmuqanov, Pamir Kameldiyev, and Nurlan 
Ralqymzhanov, are doing a great deal of work. First of all, they 
are planning to evacuate military refugees who deserted at the 
time of the war in Afghanistan. This is because they are 
citizens of no country, lack employment, suffer from poor living 
standards, and, for that reason, should be returned to 
Kazakhstan quickly. 
  The proverb states: "it is difficult to begin a trek." If we 
understand how to be humane by creating favorable conditions for 
those coming for the first time and for those now leaving, I 
think that the 15,000 Kazakhs still remaining in Iran and the 
25,000 in Turkey will want to return to their homeland. Our 
"butter-heals" from Iran will primarily find a place to live in 
warm Southern Kazakhstan Oblast. The reason is that we cannot 
send those coming from warm climates to places where the weather 
is severe. They might not become acclimatized there! 
  There is something which must be said here: we are 
predisposed not to like but to hate Kazakhs. Instead of taking 
our countrymen who have come from foreign countries into our 
midst and making them our kinsmen, we accuse them by saying: 
"Oh!, are we to take this to mean that you have not forgotten 
Kazakh customs? You say one thing and do another." We call those 
returning from Mongolia "Mongols," and those come from Turkey, 
"Turks." Those come from Europe we accuse for their inability to 
speak Kazakh at all. There are now those who assign guilt 
because we accept some people who do no work at all. Instead of 
acting like this and looking for problems, I can say that if, 
above all, we make it possible for them to support themselves, 
and help them to get used to the new country, everything will be 
fine. 
  I do not know whether or not you understand, my dear, when I 
call our foreign countrymen "butter-heals." I have my reasons 
for calling them this. What have your Kazakhs not experienced!? 
During the time of the "Lake Alqa flight" [Dzungarian 
invasions], they put one foot behind the other [in the snow] and 
became "white-heals." During the era of colonialism they 
suffered oppression as "yellow-heals." During the time of the 
civil wars they wandered as "black-heals." During the time of 
Goloshchekin they suffered slaughter as "red-heals." There is 
the wise teaching of our forefathers that "there is a good side 
to every difficulty." In fact, there must be good sides to each 
of these four difficulties. The first good side, I think, is 
that our kinsmen who have gone to foreign countries have 
returned as "butter-heals." They will make a contribution to the 
flourishing of our nation with their work, goodness, honorable 
intentions, and experience in the school of life. It is 
well-known that "butter-heal" immigrants are those who have made 
countries such as America, Australia, Argentina, New Zealand, 
and Canada flourish and develop. 
  Similarly, three million of the "butter-heals" resident in 
foreign countries will make a major contribution to the 
flourishing and enrichment of our sovereign nation. For that 
reason, we must put our white tablecloth on the table before 
them and we must assemble them together in our black yurt called 
Kazakhstan. 
  We have mentioned the migration which we have recently 
organized. We have observed other, disorganized elemental 
migration. There are also many who have returned to their native 
country with their own resources, or by force. Thus, 20,000 
people came last year from Russia, 14,000 from Uzbekistan, and 
6,000 from other republics, 40,000 in all. All of these migrants 
will have a favorable influence on the exhausted 
ethno-demographic shape of our republic. 
  Something else which I would like to mention: I think that, 
God willing, and if the world does not end, a new campaign will 
begin in the new future to move gradually local people remaining 
behind in the ecological disaster of the Aral to northern 
oblasts and rayons which are ecologically healthy but are still 
weak in their ethno-demographic structure. This would comprise, 
first and foremost, Aral, Qazaly, and Shalqar rayons which 
remain in the disaster area. Later, if possible, we will have to 
take up the question of returning our kinsmen living in 
Karakalpakistan to the motherland. That migration would occupy a 
particular place in the ethno-demographic development of 
Kazakhstan. According to my calculations, if we were to move at 
least half of the 600,000 of our Karakalpak kinsmen living in 
the vicinity of the Aral in an organized manner to the recently 
mastered regions, that alone would change the ethno-demographic 
shape of Northern Kazakhstan in our favor in a fundamental way. 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Children were once many in the families of 
Kazakhs who knew how to repeat the proverb: "a house with 
children is a bazaar, a house without children a dry graveyard." 
It has been said that the number of large families has been on 
the decline in recent years. What kind of evidence can you offer 
in regard to this? 
  [Tatimov] This question is one which is dear to my heart and 
well known to me. Since I understand the question well, I have 
been endeavoring to instill demographic thoughts and traditional 
attitudes into the minds of Kazakh women. Facts from my own 
research are offered in my book, "Tale of the People or Numbers 
and Thought," and in my recently published eighth book "Kazakh 
World (How Many Kazakhs Are there? When and Where Have Kazakhs 
Been Driven Out? When and Where Have They Been Oppressed, 
Shot?") These two books must still have not reached readers. The 
first copies of the first book were put into the pockets of 
those attending the World Conference of Kazakhs. The book is 
still not on sale and may never be on sale! The second book has 
only recently been published with a run of 60,000 from the 
"Ata-Mura" Press headed by an intellectual called Muqtar 
Qulmukhametuly. For that reason, let me repeat these facts again 
for Kazakh women from what is in this book: according to the 
1926 Census, each married Kazakh women had on the average 10 
children. After that the birth rate abated. The reasons for this 
were the deterioration of the health of the people, hunger, and 
Russian settlement. It could be said that the Russians had a 
role. Russian women at that time too took good care of 
themselves and did not have large families. Was not this 
characteristic of theirs beginning to infect Kazakh women? 
  In 1959 the number of births per woman had fallen to seven. 
However, since infant mortality decreased along with the 
birthrate, a demographic wave, a new explosion appeared. The 
reason was that, whereas women had previously borne 10 children 
while only one or two or survived, now only one or two of seven 
children died and five-six lived to maturity. Thus a demographic 
explosion was created. This was a general process taking place 
worldwide. Kazakhstan made its own contribution. The demographic 
wave lasted until the 1970s. 
  According to 1989 census information, the high birthrates of 
recent times had strongly declined, and we were near a three 
child threshold. Thereby we approached a level of two children 
in the cities and of four children in rural areas. This must 
give Kazakh women a great deal to think about. In particular, 
the market place was exerting a negative influence. While the 
birthrate continued to decline, the number of children given 
birth by Kazakh mothers in absolute terms stayed more or less 
the same. 
  The fact that this year the number of children given birth 
to 
by Kazakh women in the republic will be in the vicinity of 
202,000-205,000 is only because the demographic structure of our 
people is young. The reason is that those born during the period 
of the demographic explosion now have families and are bringing 
children into the world. I emphasized in an interview given to 
the newspaper ZHAS ALASH the need to struggle for a fourth 
child. The reason is that if the first child is a son, it 
replaces the father, and if a girl the mother, and the second 
child simply replaces the parents. The third child compensates 
for our various deficiencies, those not marrying and old maids. 
Thereby we maintain our numbers at a set level. It is the fourth 
child which provides growth. I myself am the tenth and last 
child of my father and the last child of my mother, the fourth 
son. But for such Kazakh characteristics of my parents, I would 
not have come into the world in 1940, just before the war, 
during the last difficulties of a time of persecution. If that 
was so, who would be now talking to you here about demographics. 
(Tatimov laughed loudly when he said this.) 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] One of the questions which you have raised 
and which has gained the attention of the nation during the last 
two or three years is getting one or two children from women who 
are still young but have not found mates. For this purpose they 
become junior wives or second wives to men who already have 
senior wives. There are many who are against this. Have you now 
changed your support for this policy? 
  [Tatimov] No! This is a very complicated question. It should 
not be oversimplified in this manner! A Kazakh has said: "the 
most difficult struggles are the struggle for land and the 
struggle of widows." However, today the struggle of those "old 
ladies" must be more difficult than any. It would not be too 
much to devote an entire interview just to that question. 
  Let me first of all tell who these "old ladies" are and 
provide an explanation. That is because some go on about "old 
ladies," "old ladies," but do not know who they are. "Old 
ladies" are those of the female sex who are over 25 but not yet 
50, who have never married, never established a household, and 
have had no children. In developed countries an expression like 
[Kazakh] "old ladies" is altogether absent. Kazakh women fear 
gossip and remain in their inappropriate state. Today they 
cannot extricate themselves from their dilemma. My advice is as 
follows: let us get a child or so from them all. This "severe" 
advice may seem a little coarse to others but life proves that 
it is correct. Is not becoming a mother and loving a child 
better than living alone? When we realize that most of today's 
"old ladies" are office workers, [we know that] they live in 
front of people. For that reason, they fear malicious words. In 
my opinion, it is criminal for them to waste their lives because 
people gossip. There are at present 110,000 "old ladies" among 
the Kazakhs and if they had only one-two children this would 
bring a generation of 220,000 into the world. Just like the 
proverb: "a voracious horse is no good horse," to be called an 
"old lady" is no honor for a woman. The words of the people are 
one thing, the laws of life are another. There is no need to 
issue a special law on the taking of two wives. It would be 
proper if this question were decided with the participation of 
the mosque. All we have to do is to drop Article 208 of the "Law 
on Marriage and the Family." It is stated there that taking two 
wives is forbidden. According to my research, no one has been 
brought to trial on the basis of that law since the war; that is 
to say, this law is entirely ineffective. Thus we must drop a 
dead law which no longer functions. After that, as the Russians 
say, "we can do anything which is not forbidden." 
  I know that some people do not agree with my views on "old 
ladies." That is to be expected. Everyone will not agree with 
every suggestion that is made. There will be proponents and 
opponents of every innovation. That is life. I know well that 
when I first made this suggestion that there would be opposition 
and that my opponents would primarily be those women supporting 
a false emancipation who are literate and who think themselves 
equal to their husbands (some times even superior). Moreover, 
they indeed came out against me and we were unable to cast light 
on this vital question. Only when this has been done can we 
cautiously approach this question as impartially possible and in 
a serious manner. It would be proper for us to look at the issue 
in such a way that no one is insulted and no one's feelings are 
hurt. 
  Those in favor of polygamy, in order to back up their 
position, make the point that Kazakhs formerly practiced 
polygamy and that this ancestral custom must be renewed. I am a 
supporter of limited polygamy but have no desire to present 
deceptive evidence in support of my views. As shown by the 1897 
census, only three-four percent of the Kazakh men of the time 
had two wives and those with three wives were one in a thousand. 
Thus, if our women who have remained unmarried become second 
wives to around four-five percent of all Kazakh men, the problem 
would thereby gradually be solved. 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] It would seem as if another of the ideas 
which you have advanced, your thoughts on recognizing mothers of 
large families, has found expression in the presidential edict 
on this topic. Thus you are making plans for the carrying out of 
your suggestions related to the presidential edict. When will 
the day arise when the appropriate mothers get "golden prizes" 
and "silver prizes?" In honoring these mothers will only the 
number of children brought into the world be considered or will 
there be other measures as well? 
  [Tatimov] Indeed, I am making plans. It will not be long 
until such prizes are awarded. Competitions for these gold and 
silver prize honors are being announced. Nominations are being 
reviewed but no selections have been made. 
  The golden prize will be given to mothers who have borne and 
raised eight or more children. In my view, the level should be 
reduced to seven since the number of mothers with large families 
is on the decline and the number seven is a lucky number for the 
Kazakhs. The words "sufficient" [zhettik] and "adequacy" 
[zhetistik] have come from the word for seven [zheti] and the 
ideas of offering seven of something, of preparing seven cakes 
have arisen from that superstition. 
  The silver prize will be given to distinguished mothers who 
have raised five or more children. However, I have expressed the 
view that mothers with three children or more should also be 
included among the ranks of those with large families. Likewise, 
I have offered the suggestion that if there are distinguished 
mothers who raise and educate still more children, the president 
himself, or the premier, or the governor of the appropriate 
oblast or rayon should award them a special prize. 
  To be sure mothers who have borne many children, but who 
have 
not educated them properly or even abandoned them will not 
receive such honors. Far from it! 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Mr. Tatimov, please do not hold it against 
me 
if I seem disrespectful and ask a question that is too direct. 
You, to be sure, are one of those interested in the growth of 
you country and in this regard have come out against artificial 
abortion. However, who knows better than women the soul and 
circumstances of women? For example, if a husband's income is 
inadequate to raise and educate five-six children, who gains 
from the bearing of children who crowd together for a miserable 
hand-to-mouth existence. In addition, an era of total 
destitution such as the present and the ecological environment 
are having a considerable negative impact upon the health of 
mothers. Every other pregnant women is anemic. It is well known 
that women with this disease do not bear healthy children. Thus, 
it would seem appropriate that the decision in this area to have 
children or limit a family belong to the family, and to women 
themselves. 
  [Tatimov] Indeed, I am opposed to abortion. You are correct. 
The decision to limit or not limit the number of children is 
something which concerns husband and wife equally. First the 
woman and then the man. Many women do not take into 
consideration their husband's views on this question. This is 
the reason for the increase in the number of abortions and the 
use of the loop. The man must also participate in determining 
family sizes. I think that it would be appropriate in the future 
to introduce a law that married women must have their husband's 
permission to get an abortion or to have a loop installed. In 
particular, smart women too often think of their own concerns 
and are having a negative influence on our demographics. To give 
numbers, whereas 204,000 Kazakhs were born in Kazakhstan in 
1992, during the same year 100,000 abortions were performed in 
the republic, 50,000 loops were installed, and various other 
things were done to prevent the birth of children. As a result, 
more than half of the children brought to life by Kazakh women, 
some 250,000, were eliminated. The number of children who could 
have been born but were not born exceeded the number of children 
born. We are not saying that families should not be limited. 
Each mother should be concerned about her health. However, the 
fact that 300,000 children of Kazakh women capable of bearing 
children were voluntarily suffocated and rejected makes my 
insides seethe. Is that Islam? This leaves aside humanitarian 
considerations. 
  Last year 47,000 Kazakhs died. Some 300,000 children were 
born, and, even with the death of 55,000, our people could have 
gained not 157,000, but 245,000. We, we ourselves, thus 
extinguished a substantial 88,000 of our natural increase. 
  There are the lamentations "Black Old Woman," "Black Old 
Man," "Black Child." Leaving their sorrow alone, who is 
expressing sorrow for the child never born and who feels the 
loss? There is no artist to produce a song about this or to 
write words. The greatest of sorrows is the sorrow of the unborn 
child. I miss them, although I am only a demographer... 
  My words to my daughter-in-law were when she had had a child 
and was in difficulty because of it: My Kazakh it is said, each 
child has its own fate. There is a Kazakh folk saying: "if one 
extra lamb is born, there will be one more plot of grass." 
  I am against limiting families with the excuse that as the 
market place has gained so much power we cannot support them. 
Let me consider each child separately. 
  The first child is always born for the father and replaces 
him. The second child is born to replace the mother. The third 
child is born to compensate for deficiencies. The fourth child 
is necessary for demographic law, for growth. If the fifth child 
comes to life, it does so for the people. The sixth child is for 
the fatherland, for the flourishing of our sovereign country. 
The seventh child, that is an honored number, and words which 
fulfill the desires of Heaven. When the eighth child is born, 
the spirits are satisfied. When the ninth child is born it 
satisfies the Muslim Religion, the will of Allah. If you say 
that we are nine children in our home, then your mother and 
father, Aqqaysha and Qurmanqul, are persons who have satisfied 
the will of Heaven in the blue sky, of the spirits of the dark 
earth, and of Allah, the only God. I would like to say thanks 
and express my satisfaction to your mother in particular and 
thereafter to your father for increasing and making flourish the 
numbers of the Kazakhs. 
  As for anemia, this disease is due to dietary and vitamin 
deficiencies. For that reason, slaughter a sheep and give it to 
a woman who has just given birth, just as [one does] before she 
gives birth, as a qalzha [special food for pregnant women]. It 
would be appropriate if the place where she works, or if she 
does not work, the place her husband works, or the kolkhoz or 
sovkhoz where the family lives were to provide it. I think this 
is something for local governors to think about.!.. 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Let us return to the question of "old 
ladies" 
discussed above. There are many unmarried men. In my view, it 
would seem proper for this issue to find its own proper solution 
without some special state policy. What new facts and 
suggestions do you have to offer about this? 
  [Tatimov] Some have complained that I talk a lot about the 
problem of "old ladies." There are lots of old bachelors, why 
not pick on them? The reason is that women are the fundamental 
demographic support. It is they who increase or decrease the 
number of people. For demography, if a man remains unmarried, 
"with no shame at the words of greatness," if he is impotent, 
this means nothing since another man will take his place. 
However, if a woman does not marry, or remains sterile, or dies, 
another woman cannot replace her. The position of every woman is 
special in demographics. If a man dies, this is just one minus 
for demography. However, when a woman leaves the world, we must 
produce several minuses. If the woman is young, this means that 
four children, 12 grandchildren (at three each) from the 
children, 24 great-grandchildren from the grandchildren (at two 
each) will not be born. For this reason, in demography the 
problem of 110,000 "old ladies" is more of a problem than 44,000 
old bachelors! 
  The reason for the increase in the number of old bachelors 
is 
the worsening of ecological conditions in the republic. Some of 
the children being born in the environmental disaster areas 
suffer from impotency. 
  When we spoke of "old bachelors," we refer to males who have 
never married between the ages of 30 and 55. 
  Recently, I collected statistics throughout the republic on 
those assaulting [and killing] one another. Looking at this 
information, it was primarily men who assaulted [and killed] one 
another. Their numbers were three times more than the women. I 
wondered if the increase in the number of people killing each 
other was due to impotence. This is only a hypothesis. We must 
look at the question more deeply. Among women there are also 
"uninterested women" (frigid women), that is women who are not 
interested in men. However, they do not kill each other for that 
reason. However, impotency is a great grief for men. 
  I have stated above that "old ladies" cannot get out of 
their 
difficulty on their own, but I repeat that, in addition to the 
state, the mosque should become involved in this question. 
However, our mosques still take a mistaken view of them. I call 
this their social "impotency." 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Mr. Tatimov, are there questions which 
concern you more than others just now as a person who loves his 
country? 
  [Tatimov] Tomorrow I will leave on a trip to Koshetaw. My 
purpose in going there is to carry out preparatory work for 
transferring there the Migration Department established under 
the Ministry of Labor. The reason, as I have already stated, is 
that the northern oblasts are still weak demographically. For 
that reason we have decided to move this department to Kokshetaw 
with the aim of preventing such manifestations as separatism, 
harming our young nation as we change the ethno-demographic 
shape of the oblasts. After that I will be in that city to carry 
out public opinion research on moving the capital to Aqmola. As 
a member of the National Kenges on State Policy, and as a 
specialist in demographic science, I will be very much involved 
with making specific suggestions. 
  [Qurmanqulqyzy] Thank you! 

