BFN 

  [Excerpts] [No dateline as received] As reported earlier, 
during an official visit to Russia by the President of 
Kazakhstan, the two heads of state signed a memorandum on the 
principles of settling issues related to the citizenship and 
legal status of citizens of Kazakhstan permanently residing on 
the territory of the Russian Federation and those citizens of 
the Russian Federation permanently residing on the territory of 
Kazakhstan. [passage omitted] 
  Nursultan Nazarbayev and Boris Yeltsin have reaffirmed their 
adherence to widely recognized norms and freedoms. The 
memorandum reaffirmed the intention to settle the 
above-mentioned issues by simplifying the procedure for 
obtaining relevant citizenship by citizens of any of these two 
countries and their relatives arriving in Kazakhstan or Russia 
for permanent residency. Thus it should ensure that citizens of 
one country who are permanently residing on the territory of 
other state, except for certain cases, enjoy equal rights and 
obligations. 
  The document grants citizens of one country the right to 
work 
on a contractual basis at works and enterprises of the other 
country. This is also the case with the military service on the 
contractual basis. 
  Also under consideration is the possibility for simplifying 
procedures related to movements and travel of citizen of one 
country on the territory of the other country. 
  The sides would also guarantee their citizens the right to 
travel without visas; the governments won't level any taxes, 
impose any administrative restrictions, or insist on the need 
for registration except for the cases of infringement of the law 
or departure for a third country. There is also a plan for 
simplifying the customs regulations related to border crossings 
between the two countries. 
  The memorandum also says that conditions will be created 
that 
will enable individuals and juridical bodies to carry out 
currency exchange and financial transactions on the agreed scale 
from one country to another. 
  One of the important principles is granting the right to a 
citizen of one country who is residing on the territory of the 
other to ownership, use, and management of his property in 
accordance with the legal acts of the country where he resides. 
  The presidents of Kazakhstan and Russia reaffirm their 
intention not to allow on the territories of their countries any 
action on the part of organization or groups and certain 
individuals which inflame interethnic tensions or [word 
indistinct] against individuals or certain groups of the 
population on the basis of their nationality, religion, or 
political adherence. An interstate agreement is being 
elaborated on the basis of these principles. It is due to be 
ratified after President of both countries sign it. 

