Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Appeal from Peasant Party of Ukraine and Party Candidates </F>
for Supreme Council Deputy Seats to Citizens of Ukraine] 
  [Text] Esteemed Citizens of Ukraine! 
  The nomination phase of the Supreme Council election has 
come 
to an end. The campaign has entered a new stage--meetings of 
candidates for deputy seats with the voters. This communication 
should result in a common acknowledgement of the need for the 
most resolute steps in the renovation of the supreme bodies of 
governmental authority, so that they will be capable of making 
genuinely national policy, returning security, hope, and 
abundance to each family, protecting low-income strata, and 
defining the conclusive strategic guidelines of Ukraine's 
development. 
  This is the time when you, dear Voters, will be asked to 
support the platforms of different political parties and 
movements and will decide the future of our state and our life! 
Each and every party is promising improvement, prosperity, and 
progress. In view of the total collapse of the economy, 
galloping inflation, flourishing corruption and crime, and the 
indigent state of much of the population, the platforms of all 
parties and movements seem appealing, and this will complicate 
your choice. 
  It will be important to make the right choice and to express 
support for the campaign platform defending the vital interests 
of the people, a platform accessible, agreeable, and 
comprehensible to the people who create the state's national 
wealth with their labor. This is the kind of platform we 
propose--the candidates for deputy seats in the Supreme Council 
from the Peasant Party of Ukraine (SelPU). 
  Our main goal is the establishment of the necessary 
political 
conditions and constitutional guarantees for the revitalization 
of the national economy through the development and 
stabilization of agriculture. At this time, only the vigorous 
development of agricultural production and related branches of 
industry can prevent the absolute disintegration of the economy, 
put an end to poverty and the degradation of society, and lay a 
strong foundation for the accumulation of capital and for 
emergence from the state of crisis. The economic and social 
reforms our party proposes are dictated by our daily life. They 
reflect the ideas and wishes of the peasants, workers, 
employees, and members of the intelligentsia who are still 
sowing and reaping, building homes and schools, and teaching and 
training our children in spite of incredible difficulties. 
  The Peasant Party of Ukraine advocates the further 
democratization of society. The equality of all citizens, 
irrespective of nationality and of social and educational 
status, should guarantee the construction of a modern civilized 
state. This should also be the goal of the present campaign. We 
feel that actions capable of causing ethnic discord and 
confrontations should not be part of this campaign. Instead of 
looking for enemies, we must work together to unite all of the 
people who love Ukraine. 
  Esteemed Voters! The consequences of your choice will be so 
pivotal! By supporting the platform of the Peasant Party, you 
will create new opportunities for the economic revitalization of 
the rural community and, consequently, of all Ukraine! We hope 
that our nomination of members of the laboring public, people 
who know the value of labor and who can and will work for the 
good of society, as candidates for the deputy seats in the 
Supreme Council, will evoke the appropriate feelings of approval 
and support in your hearts! 
  You have done us a great honor, and now we are ready 
and willing to take responsibility for the future of Ukraine. We 
are relying on your support in the election on 27 March 
1994! 

