Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The guest of Afrique Soir is Destin Arsene Tsati 
Boungou, legal adviser and spokesman for Congolese President 
Pascal Lissouba. The crisis is still going on in Congo. 
Negotiations do not really seem to be on the agenda, and the 
Army has once again blocked access to the opposition stronghold, 
i.e., the districts in the south of Brazzaville. The Army 
blocked these roads on 17 January. Monique Mas asked Destin 
Arsene Tsati Boungou to explain the strategy of the parties 
close to the presidency on this: 
  [Begin recording] [Boungou] Bacongo and Makelekele are today 
the stronghold of opposition militias. The issue is whether we 
should see to it that arms no longer reach these districts. It 
will then be up to the state to take some measures likely to 
minimize the risk, as it were, of arms being circulated in these 
districts. 
  [Mas] Minimize the risk through a blockade? Is a blockade 
likely to prevent the circulation of weapons? 
  [Boungou] No, not a blockade, but checking people entering 
or 
leaving Bacongo. For instance, an officer was recently 
kidnapped by opposition militias, and we have not heard anything 
about him to this day. But there are any number of similar 
cases in Brazzaville today. In such circumstances, a state 
cannot be idle. 
  [Mas] How do you explain the fact that the Congolese Army 
was 
not able to get the upper hand over the rebels, on one hand, and 
that it resorted to heavy weapons in districts where civilians 
live, on the other? 
  [Boungou] You should know that our army was inherited from 
the single-party regime. Repression was its vocation. There is 
no longer a police force as such, nor a gendarmerie. In today's 
context, when the ninjas, as they are called--i.e., the 
opposition militias, attack soldiers that are sent to these 
districts--what do you think they can do, apart from using the 
defense means at their disposal? Not that this is a method 
likely to make us move toward peace, I don't think so, but the 
fact that--as far as the urban guerrilla war developing in 
Brazzaville is concerned--we do not yet have security forces and 
gendarmes prepared for this type of operation has to be taken 
into account. We are working on this. 
  [Mas] Isn't the Army also affected by the division of the 
country? 
  [Boungou] On the whole, the Army is still committed to the 
desire later expressed by the National Conference to move toward 
democracy [sentence as heard]. But it goes without saying that 
it would be wrong to say that the Army is not also shaken by the 
ethnic and tribal-political upheavals the country is going 
through, since the Army moves in the same environment as 
everyone else. It is nevertheless a fact that on the whole, the 
Army is still committed to the democratic principle. 
  [Mas] At the end of the day, one is under the impression 
that 
political life in Congo is being reduced to a mere power 
struggle between, on one hand, an opposition that you are saying 
has militias, an opposition in which a former president plays a 
certain role, and, on the other hand, an elected president who 
chose a general as prime minister and who himself recruits what 
some call militias. 
  [Boungou] I think that you are misinformed. And if it is not 
the duty of a president and a prime minister, of a government, 
to set up forces able to see to the safety of the citizens, and 
to restructure and recruit them, I would like to know what a 
government can do. No. The issue is whether our people are 
aware of the situation, the rift in our national fabric. [end 
recording] 

