Viewed 

<F P=102>   94WD0355A Shanghai SHEHUI [SOCIETY] in Chinese No 4, Apr 94 
pp 14-16 </F>

<F P=103> 94WD0355A </F>
<F P=104>  Shanghai SHEHUI [SOCIETY] </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Ke (3769 3784) and Yu Junde (0060 0193 </F>
1795): "West China: Drug Ban and Drug Enforcement--the True 
Record"] 
  [Excerpts] 
<H5>  The Drug Threat in Western China </H5>
  As international drug dealing activity adds fuel to the 
flames, some drug dealers outside of China dream of using 
mainland China as a stepping stone or "golden channel" for 
shipping drugs from southeast Asia to Hong Kong and the Americas 
by taking advantage of China's special geographical location 
bordering on the world's biggest drug planting and producing 
area, the "Golden Triangle". Chinese drug dealers, in collusion 
with dealers outside China, have established two major drug 
shipping channels, and one of these is the 
Yunnan-Guizhou-Guangxi-Guangdong-Hong Kong line, the earliest 
drug shipping route in China. After suffering severe setbacks, 
criminals have taken advantage of such things as the vast spaces 
of northwest China, the various nationalities living there, a 
backward economy, a high level of illiteracy, the low 
educational level of the population, and the critical phenomenon 
of drug planting and drug use which existed before liberation. 
They have created another overland drug shipping channel in for 
such drugs as heroin and opium, shipping them via Yunnan-western 
Sichuan or Tibet-Qinghai-Gansu, making Gansu's historical silk 
road into today's "drug shipping channel." There is now also 
illegal hemp planting in Xinjiang, with the hemp spreading 
chiefly toward the eastern coastline via long and narrow Gansu. 
After the drugs are collected in Gansu, they are distributed 
following individual lines: Lanzhou-Xian-Zhengzhou, then south 
down to Guangzhou along the Jingguang railway line via 
Zhengzhou, and to Xuzhou along the Longhai railway line; 
Lanzhou-Yinchuan-Huhehaote. Drug dealers appreciate this "land 
transmission line" very much, calling it a gold channel for 
"staying clear of the government's main forces and striking at 
the government's weak points." Where the drug dealers are most 
crafty is in not only taking advantage of such weak points as 
northwest China's backward economy and shortages of police, but 
also evilly exploiting such weak points the government's 
minority policy and imperfect legal system. 
  This golden channel which brings huge "profits" to drug 
dealers brings unprecedented drug disaster to the people who 
live along this line. Some cities along the line have one by one 
walked into the black whirlpool. Following Yunnan, the nation's 
first critical drug disaster area, Gansu, Qinghai, and Ningxia 
have also become areas in which drugs run wild. Among these, the 
situation in Gansu is a relatively serious situation. In such 
places as Lanzhou's Little West Lake area, drug dealers and drug 
users are running wild. Some criminal elements are audacious in 
the extreme, daring even to commit crimes in the very face of 
the government's war on drugs. Some of them deal in drugs to 
support their own use, and some deal in drugs just for financial 
gain, although they fully understand the dangers involved. 
  On 3 December 1993, the LANZHOU WANBAO, the most popular 
newspaper in the Lanzhou area with a circulation of nearly 
200,000, carried an item which must have frightened the drug 
dealers: "The drug lord Escobar, head of the Colombian Medellin 
drug cartel, the world's biggest, was killed on 2 December." On 
27 November, the newspaper reported that on 23 November, with 
the assistance of the masses, police officers caught a drug 
dealer who carried 96.3 grams of heroin. On December 4th, the 
newspaper carried another item in a prominent spot in its first 
edition concerning firm prohibitions on drugs, and the severe 
punishment of drug dealers: "Three drug dealers who were dealing 
in less than one gram of drugs were sentenced." This news 
announced that: "The Municipal Intermediate People's Court has 
firmly implemented the National People's Congress Standing 
Committee's `Decision concerning prohibitions on drugs' and the 
directives of upper level courts which asks that every county 
and prefectural court should in general hand down sentences in 
cases of sales, transport, and manufacture of 1 gram or more of 
heroin once they are prosecuted. For a few drug cases with 
critical histories, even if the quantity is less than 1 gram, 
once they are prosecuted, their crime should still be announced 
and the sentences tend to be harsh. The Metropolitan District 
Court's recent sentencing of drug dealers Zeng Zhiyong [2582 
2535 0516], Yu Wenji [0060 2429 4949] and Wang Hanjie [3076 3466 
2638] set a precedent in this city for sentencing criminals 
dealing in less than one gram of heroin. Zeng Zhiyong was 
sentenced to one year's surveillance and fined 300 yuan, Yu 
Wenji was sentenced to one year's imprisonment, and Wang Hanjie 
was sentenced to six months' imprisonment." 
  This bit of news made drug dealers and users tremble with 
fear, and brought rejoicing to Lanzhou residents who have 
suffered the damages of drugs and worry about drugs running out 
of control. It is really strict enforcement since dealing one g 
of drugs will be punished. Since a drug user uses 1 gram of 
heroin per day, who will dare to use them anymore? 
<H5>  What Shows in the Drug Rehabilitation Center </H5>
  Drugs are threatening western China, a white devil attacking 
our golden cities. It is urgent that we attack drug dealing, and 
it is also an efficient measure. By speedily helping drug users 
to escape drug addiction, we can avoid having drug users follow 
the criminal path of theft, robbery, murder, pornography, etc., 
to obtain the money they need to buy drugs. It will prevent 
their losing their minds when addicted, and adopting 
self-destructive and suicidal behavior, crazy behavior such as 
destroying property and even endangering the safety of others. 
This has become another difficult task which must be 
accomplished during the war on drugs. 
  "In the history of drug rehabilitation throughout the world, 
there are two major routes to rehabilitation: forcible drug 
rehabilitation through education via labor in places of labor 
education, and active drug rehabilitation through hospital 
treatment. The first kind is not only injurious to health, it 
has had extremely bad results. Currently, China lacks the 
financial capacity to conduct isolated drug rehabilitation, 
while group drug rehabilitation causes addicts to follow others 
in their evil deeds, so more rehabilitation means a firmer drug 
problem. Once they are released from labor education without 
forceful control, drug users return to the wrong road again 
under the pressure of drug addiction. There is a quite high 
recidivist rate of drug use after release from labor education. 
Hospital drug rehabilitation is divided into medical drug 
rehabilitation treatment and psychological drug rehabilitation. 
It can rehabilitate drug addicts both physically and 
psychologically, and has a lower rate of those returning to drug 
use." These were the words of China's first generation drug 
rehabilitation expert, Associate Senior Physician Xu Fusheng 
[1776 4395 3932], Director of the Air Force Lanzhou First 
Hospital Drug Rehabilitation Center, and Chief Member of the 
Gansu Provincial Physical Restoration Association, during our 
interview at the hospital on 4 December 1993. 
  This drug rehabilitation center is one of the first work 
units in the northwestern five provinces to conduct drug 
rehabilitation. It has strong actual strength, significant 
achievements and rapid results. By adopting Chinese traditional 
medicine, Western medicine, and the means of combining Chinese 
and Western medicine, drug users can be rid of their addiction 
in three days, and can be restored and leave the hospital in 
about half a month. There have been especially good results from 
the "Miracle stop drug addiction" herbal medicine. Since March 
of 1988, this hospital has accepted for rehabilitation over 
12,200 drug users from throughout the nation, and has handled 
more than 5,000 personal inquiries at the clinic. Drug users and 
their families call it "the world's heavenly palace for 
rebirth," and "a crucible for the return of prodigal sons." 
After paying a visit, one writer praised it highly, saying, 
"Nothing can compare with the return of prodigal sons; good 
doctors make drug users get rid of their addiction!" [passage 
omitted] 

