Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Alois Mock by Hans Rauscher </F>
and Christoph Kotanko; place and date not given: "It Is Not Yet 
Over"] 
  [Text] [KURIER] What are the chances that we will have 
successfully concluded the negotiations for European Union [EU] 
membership by the end of February or the beginning of March? 
  [Mock] The negotiations are not yet over at all. On 2 March 
we will know, but until then, we have to use the time to brief 
our various friends on our position. 
  [KURIER] What is expected for the big concluding event at 
the end of February; what will be the main issues? 
  [Mock] Some agricultural issues.... The closer we come to 
the conclusion of negotiations, the more political the decisions 
will become. There will be some issues referring to 
agriculture; there may also be questions, for example, relating 
to the European Union conflict regarding the monetary union -- 
this is the business of the European Union in Spain. I do not 
think there should be first and second-class members, but this 
should not be the issue that makes the negotiations fail. 
  [KURIER] One must assume that the European Union also needs 
a success and cannot afford a failure of the negotiations. 
  [Mock] I think this is correct. There is certainly a lot of 
political will on both sides. 
  [KURIER] We do not have any great leeway for negotiations 
regarding transit traffic. Minister Klima has summarized the 
positions, which he does not want to give up in any case: 
duration, 38-tonne limit for trucks, etc. What kind of leeway 
for negotiations does Austria have in this connection? 
  [Mock] The areas are very much linked to one another, with 
traffic policy, with the transit issue, with the budget 
problems, with agricultural policy.... If one person is 
satisfied, then the other one will be less satisfied. However, 
we must avoid that the benefit that the entire state derives 
from EU membership is achieved at the cost of individuals -- for 
instance, the farmers. The European Union must also see that in 
this way. 
  [KURIER] If the transit treaty is giving up, then one can 
forget the diet elections in Tirol and Salzburg. 
  [Mock] The issue of transit traffic has a high symbolic 
value and great importance regarding its contents and plays a 
real pioneering role in Europe.... I assume that we have a 
number of allies in this respect. If you read the 
transportation concept of the European Union today, you have the 
ecological criteria anchored in a way that would have been 
ridiculed eight years ago. 
  [KURIER] The negotiations must be concluded by 1 March. 
There will not be any additional negotiations. We will not go 
beyond the diet elections in mid-March? 
  [Mock] No, certainly not. The essential issues must be 
concluded by 1 March. However, it would be harmful to interrupt 
negotiations. When things work, one should stay with them -- if 
necessary, until 0600. 
  [KURIER] You have repeatedly said that, if this is not 
achieved, an "open window" might be closed again. How dramatic 
is that in reality? What are the dangers if Austria does not 
manage to join the European Union on 1 January 1995? 
  [Mock] The risk is great because one cannot predict it 
exactly. At best, it would be that the negotiations will be 
resumed in two or three years. The main danger lies in the 
political situation. The European political climate of 
integration has not been what it used to be for decades. The 
pressure from the East has disappeared. If we do not get in 
now, by the time we try again, those in the European Union might 
have gained ground who think that it is better to first "deepen" 
the European Union instead of expanding it. Then there will be 
even more who say this. 
  [KURIER] Mrs. Schaumayer, the president of the Austrian 
National Bank, said that if it should not work, Austria would 
become an "Albania." Can you tell us in three or four sentences 
what the negative effects will be if we are not admitted into 
the European Union. 
  [Mock] There will be a lot of negative effects. Investments 
will decrease, some people will leave with their companies. The 
opportunities for the people will get generally worse. We will 
have to take over and obey a lot of issues that are decided 
elsewhere without us having an opportunity to have our say. We 
will become second-class Europeans. We will have to be 3-5 
percent cheaper to hold our own in competition. We will have to 
make sacrifices in modernization, in income, in the social 
sphere, etc. Furthermore, one should not underestimate the 
effect of standing politically in a corner. 
  [KURIER] It is said that Austria should join the European 
Union just for security considerations. Others say that if this 
is so, it would be better to be neutral again and come to an 
arrangement with the Russians. 
  [Mock] Security today means being integrated with others 
that have the same goal. One should not have any illusions that 
we are so far away from anywhere. Anyone who would have 
predicted 10 years ago what is happening in Yugoslavia now would 
have been told that he had a sick imagination. 
  The argument of neutrality is based on an enormous 
misconception. In neutrality we found a means, but it was never 
tested. It was a unique stroke of luck, not a guarantee. And 
then, one must know where it did not pay off, where it did not 
work: in Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg.... 
  However, I believe that a healthy state always looks for 
those instruments that offer the maximum in security. 

