Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev by Boris </F>
Kalyagin in Moscow on 23 February; from the "On the Way to New 
Partnership" program--live or recorded] 
  [Text] [Kalyagin] Andrey Vladimirovich, your meetings with 
the Czech, Polish, and Hungarian leaders coincided with the 
Russian initiative in Bosnia. As one knows, the countries of 
the Visegrad group reacted differently to the NATO ultimatum, 
and how did they perceive our initiative? How close are our and 
their approach to the settlement in Bosnia? 
  [Kozyrev] I think everyone perceived our initiative 
unanimously positively. This was said in public and, in 
particular, we were discussing it in detail during our meetings. 
Why? Because, as Hungarian President Arpad Goncz said publicly 
-- and he is one of the authoritative leaders in Central Europe 
-- first of all, we have saved Yugoslavia -- Serbia -- from an 
escalation of the conflict which nobody wants, on the contrary, 
there is too much violence there and it should be extinguished. 
  Second, according to him, we have saved NATO from the 
necessity of taking the measures which are unpredictable by 
their consequences. Imagine, if the air strikes had taken 
place, what would have followed? Indeed, the situation is 
unpredictable. 
  Of course, our initiative was welcome. We are interested in 
using the momentum of the positive movement created by President 
Yeltsin's initiative not for gaining points for ourselves, but 
for uniting everyone's efforts in order to resolve the tragic 
situation in Bosnia. 
  [Kalyagin] I would like to return to the issue of our 
relations with the Central European countries which you have 
visited. You said that we have wonderful relations with all 
members of the Visegrad group. But one problem still exists -- 
joining NATO. They agreed to take part in the Partnership for 
Peace program, but they underline that they consider it to be 
the first step on the way to joining NATO. What is our position? 
  [Kozyrev] I would like to tell you that the attitude is 
already changing. We all would be bad politicians and bad 
diplomats if we thought that somebody said something and then we 
were right whatever was happening. The logic of life says that 
the diplomacy should be flexible, and we do take into 
consideration what our Central European partners are saying. 
This was the meaning of my visit -- not only to say what we 
think but also to listen to them because we should understand 
what people in Central Europe think. Life there is not the same 
either. For example, there was a news conference this morning. 
This was my joint news conference with Andrzej Olechowski, the 
foreign minister of Poland. This is the country which, let us 
say, tried most actively to join NATO. He even said that at the 
moment it is very important to have partners and then we shall 
see what to do, maybe we all join NATO -- by the way, maybe even 
Russia, we do not rule out that at some stage or after some 
stage we will also join NATO. He even said that it is possible 
that NATO will dissolve or transform into some wider system of 
security. You can see that some variations have already 
appeared. 
  [Kalyagin] You took part in a conference which focused on a 
search for ways towards a new partnership. What recipes for 
achieving a real partnership does the Polish side offer? 
  [Kozyrev] It was not to their desire to join NATO that 
Olechowski devoted most of his speech at the conference today. 
This was not the leitmotif of his speech. The leitmotif was: 
we must cooperate both in the West and in the East. You see 
what sort of an idea this is. Former COMECON links have been 
severed but we must restore them on a new foundation, on the 
basis of mutual advantage, market relations and so on. Does 
this not show that things are being seen differently now? This 
means that we have been understood, we have been heard. After 
all, NATO -- you may cooperate with it as much as you like -- 
but NATO is a military-political bloc, and where does this leave 
economy? Where does economy stand in this process, or the human 
rights, or democracy, or cultural links -- is there no need for 
these things? And now, you will have noticed that 80 percent of 
the Polish minister's speech was about economic ties, the ties 
in the East, with Russia. 
  [Kalyagin] You paid very great attention to economic 
interaction, especially in Hungary. What specific results were 
achieved? 
  [Kozyrev] I think that we need to prepare the specific 
results. We are drawing up agreements to avoid dual taxation and 
to protect investments. Just pay attention here to the words. 
It is not as it used to be -- an agreement that we would supply 
them with a certain amount of goods and they would supply us 
with a certain amount of goods. That was under the planned 
economy. Now it is a question of protection against dual 
taxation, that is to say, of the involvement of commercial 
interests on both sides. That is to say, we are not imposing 
anything on anyone, but the government must create the 
conditions for economic revival. 
  [Kalyagin] Summing up the results of your whole trip, what 
would you regard as its chief outcome? 
  [Kozyrev] I think the chief outcome is that I have managed 
to 
fulfill the task set by the president. That task lay in the 
fact that, after there had been a certain collision or clash of 
views over the question of immediate NATO membership, some 
people in Central European countries were of course insisting 
that it was essential to become NATO members immediately. We 
said: let us not be precipitate, let us think it over for a 
while. The task was to achieve a normal dialogue precisely on 
those issues about which you have been speaking: how to organize 
our security and how to cooperate economically. You see, it was 
about removing tension and arriving at a normal agenda. I think 
that we managed at least to a considerable extent to fulfill 
this task set by the president. 

