Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kazuhisa Yamagiwa, editorial staff] </F>
  [Text] In its Patent Gazette, the Patent Office addressed 
the issue of whether mathematics can be patented, an issue which 
received attention with the U.S. company AT&amp;T's optimal 
resource 
allocation formula. A patent for the mathematics itself was 
turned down, but when AT&amp;T appealed, it succeeded in 
convincing 
three judges. 
  The optimal resource allocation formula is a kind of 
mathematical solution for linear programming formulas. It is 
called the Kamakar formula because it was developed by Nahrendra 
Kamakar, Ph.D., of AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories. In 1988 it gained 
three U.S. patents for solutions more than one hundred times 
faster than before. 
  The Kamakar formula was developed to get the most rational 
response when complex conditions apply. It is extremely 
effective insofar as it can be applied to large systems. It can 
be used for making airline passenger schedules, moving troops to 
many fronts, or production management. 
  A Japanese patent was applied for in 1986 and the Patent 
Office denied it in 1991. AT&amp;T appealed and twice rewrote the 
patent application claim that is now public. 
  When the claim was rewritten it became more precise compared 
to the U.S. patent. Upon reading the Patent Gazette it is 
roughly possible to write a program, and the application claim 
is clearer. 
  However, the judges probably couldn't help but think about 
U.S.-Japan friction over technology. The U.S. government would 
demand an explanation if something that was approved as a U.S. 
patent were not approved in Japan. Accordingly, if no objections 
are made within three months the Kamakar formula will patented. 
  In 1989 AT&amp;T created a product called KORBX which 
incorporates the Kamakar formula. It was a very expensive system 
costing $8.9 million for the software on a special computer. 
After that XMP, a U.S. software company, began selling OB1 
software which solves more than ten times faster for about $500. 
Since then KORBX has completely stopped selling. 
  Although specialists generally believe that OB1 does not 
infringe on the Kamakar patents, AT&amp;T accused XMP of patent 
infringement and succeeded in winning a five percent share of 
OB1's earnings. ``Sales might be banned while the matter went to 
court and the court costs would be high,'' explained XMP. 
  AT&amp;T has already given up on selling products related 
to the 
Kamakar formula, so what is its motive in going after a Japanese 
patent? It appears AT&amp;T wants patent use fees from software 
using solutions similar to the Kamakar formula. 
  ``We are preparing an objection,'' said Professor Hiroshi 
Konno of Tokyo Industrial University's engineering faculty. 
``The Kamakar formula isn't appropriate for a patent. It lacks 
novelty since it closely resembles formulas developed twenty 
years earlier by researchers in the former Soviet Union. It's 
basically mathematics and if it's patented it will prevent 
scholarly development,'' said Konno. 
  Even in the U.S. which has strengthened the protection of 
intellectual property is seeing a movement to reconsider. Fair 
judgments from the Patent Office would help keep the patent 
system from being a tool only for exercising rights. 

