Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Core" column article by A. Portov in Vladivostok and </F>
Foreign News Department reporters Yoshihide Ito and Hitoshi 
Inokuma: "Russia, North Korea, and China Aim for the Same 
Economic Benefit -- Background of DPRK's Purchase of Worn-Out 
Submarines" ] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted on introduction] 
<H5>  Economic Conditions in Russia] </H5>
  Captain Liyazenchev [name as published], who has a high- 
sounding title as director of the Military Property Export 
Department of the Pacific Fleet Headquarters (and chief of the 
Management Bureau of the Resources External Affairs of the 
Russian Defense Ministry), is the officer who has signed a 
contract for export of submarines. During our interview, 
Captain Liyazenchev, who is in charge of export, received phone 
calls many times from a person whom we don't know and answered 
with annoyed look: "Delivery (of submarines to North Korea) is 
suspended for a while." 
  Under the contract, Russia is supposed to sell 12 submarines 
-- one each of Golf I and Golf II Class and 10 Foxtrot Class -- 
and these are all diesel-powered submarines. The Golf Class 
submarines are capable of carrying ballistic missiles. The 
Foxtrot Class can carry torpedoes and is an offensive submarine. 
Both the Golf Class and the Foxtrot Class were built in 1950's 
and 1960's, and the Golf Class has already been decommissioned. 
  The captain said "those submarines are scrap materials, and 
Russia will keep watch over how the submarines are dismantled," 
thus ruling out possible use of them as weapons by North Korea. 
He then stressed that the transactions are not illegal. One 
out of the 12 submarines was delivered to Nachin Port in North 
Korea last December. Nevertheless, Russia has suspended 
delivery of the rest of the submarines, and it seems that the 
reason for this is that it cannot categorically deny that North 
Korea will not use the scrapped submarines for military 
purposes. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Business Structure </H5>
  The contract documents specify that the submarines to be 
delivered to North Korea are "empty submarines," noting such 
devices as power plants were dismantled. It is also specified 
in the documents that: "The submarines shall be sold on the 
condition that they will be turned into iron scrap. The 
purchaser shall present a document certifying that the 
submarines are broken up." Thus the document endorses what 
Captain Liyanzenchev said. However, the problem is that the 
document specifies that the submarines will be dismantled not in 
Russia, but in North Korea. 
  Concerning this, Akiyoshi Shibata, president of Toen trade 
corporation, a party to the contract, explains: "It can be said 
that the contract has been concluded on the condition that the 
submarines will be dismantled in North Korea. Iron plates used 
in military warships and submarines are alloyed metal. But we 
cannot sell it at high prices because it contains a lot of 
impurities. The point is that we have to lower the cost for 
dismantling. In North Korea, the labor cost is dirt cheap." 
  According to the president, a bargain was originally 
proposed 
by North Korean trading firm called "Bondeisan" [as published], 
which the president says has business connections with his 
company. He said that although the North Korean trading firm 
had directly proceeded with negotiations on submarine 
transactions with the Russian Pacific Fleet, Russia had said to 
North Korea that "it cannot conclude a contract directly with 
North Korea" because North Korea's payment capability was 
doubtful. The president then said that his company concluded 
the contract for North Korea as an agent. In other words, 
actually, the submarines will be sold directly to North Korea. 
In return for its conclusion of the contract, Toen trading 
company has obtained the right to buy up scrap dismantled in 
North Korea and sell it to China. 
  It is estimated that Russia, North Korea, and Toen trading 
will be able to make a profit of $30-50 per ton respectively. 
[passage omitted] 
<H5>  View of Experts on Military Affairs </H5>
  [Passage omitted] 
  According to information obtained by TOKYO SHIMBUN, a North 
Korean high-ranking naval officer visited Moscow and Vladivostok 
last September, when negotiations on the submarine deal were in 
progress, and checked condition of the submarines. A person 
connected with the Russian military in Vladivostok said that "I 
wonder why he looked at the submarines so carefully which are to 
be sold as scrap materials." Moreover, the naval officer is 
directly involved in the signing of the contract. Meanwhile, 
South Korea, whose naval strength is said to be weak, purchased 
submarines from Germany last year, and it is reported that South 
Korea plans to promote the construction of home-made submarines 
with the aim of having 18 submarines in the future. 
  It is apparent that North Korea cannot remain indifferent to 
such a move by South Korea. Therefore, we wonder if the 
decommissioned submarines will be exported as "scrap" or 
"weapons." 

