BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 28 KYODO -- New Chief Cabinet Secretary 
Hiroshi Kumagai served as minister of international trade and 
industry under the previous cabinet of Morihiro Hosokawa, the 
predecessor of Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata. 
  Kumagai, 53, a member of the coalition's core party, 
Shinseito (Japan Renewal Party), is known as a right-hand man of 
Ichiro Ozawa, Shinseito secretary general and the coalition's 
primary strategist. He replaces Masayoshi Takemura, head of New 
Party Sakigake (Harbinger), as the chief government spokesman 
and the chief of staff to Hata, who heads Shinseito. 
  His appointment to the post reflected Hata's intention to 
secure a chief government spokesman from among Shinseito's 
members, who all know him well. 
  Relations between Takemura and Hosokawa, head of the Japan 
New Party, were sour between last December and the time of the 
collapse of the coalition government, chiefly because of 
differences over government policies. 
  Sakigake, a member of the previous seven-party coalition, 
decided not to seek a post in the new coalition government and 
instead to offer support from outside the group. 
  Kumagai is known as a tough, hard-nosed politician, who is 
unequivocal about what Japan should say and do in its economic 
ties with the United States. Some describe his character as 
pugnacious because he always appears ready for a fight. 
  But the latest round of the so-called trade "framework" 
talks 
with Washington, in which he kept his cool when the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry (MITI) was severely criticized 
as a major foot dragger on the bilateral talks, has shown that 
there are other sides to his character. 
  Under the Hosokawa administration, Kumagai emphasized the 
importance of Tokyo devising viable and effective plans in the 
macroeconomic and microeconomic fields to ease U.S. frustration 
with the slow progress in opening Japan's markets. 
  Kumagai shows a tendency to cause waves. He recently forced 
the resignation of a senior MITI official, tipped as the 
strongest new candidate for the prestigious post of 
administrative vice trade minister, because the official had 
handed another bureaucrat a promotion immediately before he was 
about to run in a parliamentary election. The disciplinary 
action was criticized by the bureaucracy which regarded it as 
political interference in its personnel affairs. 
  Hailing from Shizuoka Prefecture, Kumagai joined MITI in 
1964, as a career bureaucrat, upon graduation from Hitotsubashi 
University. In 1974-1975, Kumagai was sent to Harvard 
University. 
  He left MITI in 1975 and ran in the House of Councillors 
election as a candidate of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), 
the then ruling party of Japan, and won an upper house seat. 
Kumagai shifted to the House of Representatives in 1983. 
  When Hata and Ozawa defected from the LDP to form Shinseito 
in the summer of 1993, during the political turmoil over 
electoral reforms, Kumagai immediately joined them. 
  Kumagai has been elected to the powerful lower house for 
four 
times. 

