Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Wio Joustra commentary: "Kooijmans Opts For Caution"] </F>
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] It is precisely the fear of the 
same vulnerability in Bosnia which is at present influencing 
international diplomacy. And which -- quite suddenly although 
not surprisingly -- has led to a more balanced approach on the 
part of the Netherlands. The deployment of the reinforced 
battalion of the light mobile brigade in a Serb-controlled area 
of east Bosnia is largely to explain for this. 
  With the strong support of a virtually unanimous Parliament, 
the position of the Dutch Government has been interventionist 
since the very beginning of the crisis in the former Yugoslavia. 
But the successive foreign ministers -- Van den Broek and 
Kooijmans -- often seemed to be no more than voices crying in 
the wilderness with their pleas for maximum international 
involvement, with air strikes against Serbian positions not 
being ruled out. 
  Alliance members with ground troops in Bosnia were much less 
strident. In The Hague, the positions adopted by London and 
Paris for example always met with more understanding among 
senior military officials at the Defense Ministry than among 
senior diplomats at the Foreign Ministry. The generals were 
guided by a firm adage from military history: "What you start 
in the air, you must finish on the ground." The most recent and 
best example of this is the Gulf War. 
  Applied to the situation in Bosnia, this means that air 
"support" for the blue helmets has never been a subject of 
controversy as it is part of the execution of humanitarian 
tasks. But this controversy does apply to air "strikes" on 
Serbian artillery positions. This is because it has never come 
to protecting major troop contingents as originally proposed by 
UN Secretary-General Butrus Ghali -- at least 34,000 troops to 
protect the Muslim safe areas. Even the later "soft option" of 
7,600 troops has never been anywhere near reached. 
  After a reserved response to the bloodbath in Sarajevo, 
Minister Kooijmans came out strongly in favor of guarantees on 
Wednesday via his NATO ambassador in Brussels. Just like the 
British have been doing for some time now, hundreds of Dutch 
soldiers will soon also be face to face with the Serbian 
military. 
  Kooijmans is also trying as much as possible to avoid any 
appearance of partisanship. It is in this context that his call 
to extend the NATO ultimatum to the town of Mostar must be seen. 
This town is in the stranglehold of Bosnian and Serb troops. 

