BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Miguel de la Guardia Hernandez from the </F>
"Evening Information Review" newscast] 
  [Text] On 16 April, Basic Industry Minister Marcos Portal 
thoroughly discussed the current Cuban energy crisis before a 
panel of journalists from television and other media. Great 
expectations surrounded Portal's public appearance, considering 
the population is suffering daily power outages that last 
several hours. In addition, transportation service has been 
reduced to a minimum. Strict fuel shortages, frequent 
breakdowns in power plants, and the limitations resulting from 
the serious economic situation known as the special period have 
seriously limited the supply of gas. 
  This situation, which has caused severe and constant 
hardships among a population that works and strives courageously 
to preserve its social victories, would have triggered the 
collapse of any government or social system that did not have 
the firm support of the majority of its people, as is the case 
with Cuba and its revolution. In turn, the authorities feel 
obligated to inform Cubans fully and to give them all of the 
necessary information to inform them of the situation and the 
efforts being undertaken to overcome the crisis. 
  Minister Portal referred to the poor condition of Cuban 
power 
plants, which lack required regular maintenance because of a 
shortage of spare parts and accessories. The supply of these 
parts was interrupted by the sudden collapse of the Soviet Union 
and other socialist countries in Europe, which had provided Cuba 
with power plant equipment and the fuel required to operate the 
plants. 
  Minister Portal spoke of Cuban efforts to develop its oil 
industry with the assistance of foreign companies that have 
entered into joint investments with the Cuban Government. 
Portal pointed out that 1994 production in regions that have 
already been explored will greatly exceed 1 million tons of 
petroleum, and Cuba will be able to increase the ceiling on 
petroleum used to generate electricity. 
  Along this line, Minister Portal had to refute false rumors 
rival radio stations air to Cuba. These rumors claimed that the 
heavy crude being extracted from some of the country's fields 
had damaged the power plants. The information provided by 
Minister Portal has been properly conveyed to Radio Havana 
listeners worldwide -- especially on this continent -- and has 
been welcomed by a population confident its revolutionary 
government is doing all it can to resolve the problems. The 
Cuban Government has the committed support of its people to 
confront the current critical situation. 
  One aspect of Minister Portal's speech deserves special 
attention because it reflects the sensible path authorities are 
following -- namely, the policy to avoid depending on a single 
country, a single economic and commercial source to ensure the 
functioning and development of Cuban society. Cuba currently 
has trade and economic development relations with a wide range 
of countries, including Spain, Canada, France, the Netherlands, 
Great Britain, and Latin American countries, with which it can 
conduct exchanges for mutual benefit. Therefore, the Cuban 
economy will experience flourishing and stable growth, and no 
power will ever be able to enforce a blockade or cut supply 
lines to Cuba in an attempt to impose its political interests 
and views. 
  We, the Cuban people, are facing a critical situation, but 
we 
are reaping very useful lessons from the struggle, and we will 
become increasingly harder to defeat. 

