Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 23 (XINHUA) -- The private schools 
boom last year here in Beijing has met with a mixed reception, 
according to a wide range of sources. 
  City officials said that ten private primary and middle 
schools were set up in the capital last year. 
  The well-designed teaching programs and a comfortable study 
environment in such schools have drawn flocks of parents keen to 
provide the best possible education for their children. 
  However, more parents have been held back by the 
frighteningly high tuition and other fees. For instance, when a 
student is enrolled, he must pay as high as 43,000 yuan or more 
than 4,000 U.S. dollars of the tuition and other fees in the 
first year, almost equalling to ten years' income for an 
ordinary Chinese worker. 
  According to an official survey, the pupils in such schools 
are mainly the offspring of the newly-rich. 
  The survey revealed that 39 percent of the parents are heads 
of companies and factories or senior executives of high-tech 
enterprises; 17.9 percent are employees in Beijing of firms and 
institutions of other provinces; 14 percent have been abroad; 
8.6 percent work in foreign-funded ventures; 5.5 percent are 
self- employed bosses; and the rest come from other walks of 
life. 
  A self-employed boss said: "People like me now live a 
comfortable life and we lack nothing but time and energy to care 
for and cultivate our children. The private schools take all 
the responsibility for their study and living." 
  The private schools have been dubbed "schools for children 
of 
aristocrats", as they so far have largely remained a kingdom for 
children of people who have got rich fast. 
  An educator said that the "aristocrats' schools" phenomenon 
had caused a psychological imbalance among other parents. But 
he denied the possibility of providing all children with 
absolutely equal living standards and educational opportunities, 
as long as economic and income differentials continued to exist. 
  Private schools authorities said that high fees were a 
guarantee for the normal operation of the schools. Without 
money they could not have comfortable class-rooms and advanced 
equipment, which was one of the factors distinguishing private 
schools from the general public schools. 
  The principal of Jinghua Private Primary School, one of 
Beijing's most prominent ones, said frankly that his school had 
been established to serve the special needs of those capable of 
paying the high fees. 
  Officials said that private schools are very different from 
public schools in teaching programs, facilities, equipment, the 
layout of courses and had a markedly better teaching staff. 
  They said that most of the private schools were boarding 
schools, which appeal to parents who are single-mindedly 
pursuing their careers. 
  Meanwhile, they said, the teachers in private schools are 
among the best of the city's and they are often paid several 
times more than their counterparts in public schools. A teacher 
at the private Jinghua Primary School is paid more than 1,000 
yuan (about 115 U.S. dollars) a month, about three times the 
salary for a teacher in other schools. 
  Besides a well-designed school syllabus, a major appeal of 
the private schools is their wide set of interesting courses and 
extracurricular activities. 
  Learning English and computers, courses traditionally first 
introduced for junior middle school pupils or college students, 
starts in the first year in private schools, officials said. 
  They said that private schools also have smaller classes of 
no more than 25. They provide five meals a day, and 
air-conditioning in pupils' dormitories. 
  At a New Year get-together of teachers, pupils and parents, 
many parents said that their children have become healthier, 
more active, polite and eager to learn. They said they were 
satisfied with the progress their children had achieved in 
singing, dancing, typewriting, calculation and playing chess and 
musical instruments. 
  Several third-formers said that they liked to be strictly 
treated and liked their teachers. Parents said that they could 
sense the intimacy between their children and the staff. 
  However, city officials have cautioned that not all the 
private schools have been set up for the benefit of the pupils: 
some rather in pursuit of the irresistible high incomes 
obtainable. 
  The officials said that an unhealthy trend of only pursuing 
money had emerged in some of the private schools established 
without strict scientific studies. 
  They also said that a lack of supporting funds had affected 
the normal operation of the schools and is expected to force 
some of them to close. The officials warned that some private 
schools have neglected teaching social morals to pupils. 
  A well-respected expert from the city's education community 
said an overheating in running private schools must be avoided, 
as such schools are now faced with specific difficulties such as 
fund shortfalls, limited campus size and classrooms, short-stay 
teaching staff, insufficient sources of pupils and lax 
management. 
  The expert said that a headmaster of a private school has to 
be a combination of educator, social activist and a modern 
entrepreneur. 
  Officials said that most private schools are still not 
independent bodies and do not have their own campuses and 
classrooms. They have to rent those of public schools. 
  The officials pointed out that the establishment of private 
schools has caused a flow of primary and middle school teachers 
from public to private establishments in the city. 
  The high pay for private school teachers has led some 
teachers to the pursuit of nothing but material gains. 
  Relevant government sources said that private schools often 
fall short of the expectations of their teachers in housing, 
medicare and welfare, resulting in a drain of teachers. 
  "An unstable teaching staff cannot ensure the continuity of 
teaching," the sources warned. They also noted that some 
parents have covertly passed on the cost of their children's 
tuition to their work units. 
  Officials said that they have noticed the sharp contrast 
between the superior economic position of private schools and 
the country's difficulties in implementing universal nine-year 
compulsory education. 
  China's call last year for support for the "Hope Project", a 
nationwide program designed to help the poor and school 
drop-outs, was contrasted with the boom in "aristocrats' 
schools". This has aroused an unhappy social sentiment among 
the grassroots, officials said. 
  However, some educators and representatives in the municipal 
people's congress said the fast development of private schools 
was sure to have a significant impact on China's public schools 
as well as on the country's elementary education system. 
  "Private schools will not only reduce state financial 
burdens, but help nurture an atmosphere in which teachers are 
well respected and knowledge is well valued," they said. 
  Officials said that currently private schools are at their 
initial stages, with their number and enrolment remaining on a 
small scale. 
  To curb the blindness in establishing private schools, 
departments of Beijing municipality have been advised to take 
prudent measures and step up checking of applications to set up 
private schools. They said a reasonable ceiling will be placed 
on the number of private schools. 
  A senior scholar with a state educational institution has 
called for tighter government approval of private schools as 
well as stricter regulations to guard the development of such 
schools. 
  The scholar also urged related departments to learn from 
their foreign counterparts in running private schools, such as 
passing laws on private schools, and set up necessary 
organizations to standardize and supervise the operation of the 
schools as well as to protect the rights of private school 
teachers. 
  Officials said it is of utmost importance to drive home the 
fact that private schools, like public ones, are long-term 
systematic social projects, whose terminal objective is to train 
people for the next century. 
  They said that the development of private schools should be 
brought under the macro-control of the government, adding a 
coordinated relationship between private schools and public 
schools will help avoid a blind flow of teachers. 
  People from China's educational communities said that they 
are sure that private schools will become an important part of 
China's educational structure. 

