Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Khwaja Javed Ahmed: "Murtaza Bhutto's Arrival </F>
Can Vitalize Politics"] 
  [Text] In Sindh, especially the areas around river banks in 
outer districts such as Sakkhar, Larkana, Naushahroferoz, and 
Khairpur, robbers and organized kidnapping groups have created 
new problems for the farmers and other residents of villages 
around the national highways and near the jungles. If this 
problem is not rectified soon, then all the great goals set by 
the new government for its political, economic, and 
administrative areas will be left unfulfilled. Last week, as a 
result of the organized attacks by these robbers and antisocial 
elements, 15 people were killed, 30 were kidnapped, and over 20 
were wounded. In a face-to-face confrontation between the joint 
forces of the police and the military and the robbers in the 
Andal Sunderani jungle, a large amount of modern automatic 
weapons was recovered. One robber, Sidhauru, was killed in this 
confrontation. This robber carried a reward of one million 
rupees in Sindh and Punjab for his arrest. For the last few 
months it seems that such alertness was never seen among the 
police and the agencies responsible for maintaining law and 
order. In addition to taking immediate steps against robbers and 
instigators, the government must take action to make the 
administration and police more effective. The innocent people in 
the villages cannot face the robbers with their automatic 
weapons. In addition to an increase in the number of crimes, 
incidents of whole busloads of tourists being kidnapped are 
taking place, which are scaring the people. 
  The Elections Commission has declared the presidential 
elections, and the two prominent national parties have started a 
new campaign to elect a president for the next five years. This 
campaign will reach its climax on 13 November. Even though the 
names of prominent national leaders as possible candidates have 
already been published, we must remember that Air Marshal Asghar 
Khan, chairman of Tehriq-i Istiqlal (TI), announced at the 
beginning of the year his candidacy for this office. At that 
time, his party was part of the PDA [People's Democratic 
Alliance], and he was very friendly with the PPP [Pakistan 
People's Party]. The National Council of the TI had made this 
decision, which according to M.Y.R. Bhatti, member of the 
council and president of Sakkhar TI, was irrevocable. When this 
decision was made the TI had strongly expected that the PPP, 
because of its close relationship with it, would help it against 
Ghulam Ishaq Khan. At that time, Nawaz Sharif and Ghulam were 
together, and Benazir Bhutto was challenging them from afar. It 
does not take much time for politics to change, and now Asghar 
Khan and Benazir Bhutto are at "two different poles." It appears 
that the PPP will bring in a new presidential candidate, as per 
Ghulam Ishaq Khan's advice and help. It is also possible that 
the party brings in Ghulam Ishaq Khan as its candidate as its 
last trump card. According to political observers, since the 
general elections were held under a package deal with the armed 
forces, and former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif had agreed to 
dismiss the National Assembly just to meet the ceremonial 
requirement, and he had asked that Ghulam Ishaq Khan should also 
resign from his position along with him. Thus, when they both 
resigned, the former caretaker prime minister, Mueen Qureshi, 
was appointed to his position. 
  The way Nawaz Sharif assassinated Ghulam Ishaq Khan's 
character at the national and international levels referring to 
his service as a finance minister, chairman of the WAPDA [Water 
and Power Development Authority], secretary general of the 
Pakistani government, chairman of the Senate, and later, as 
president, has helped him a lot in Punjab and other areas during 
the election campaign. Even though many people had insisted that 
Ghulam Ishaq Khan provide ammunition to Benazir's election 
campaign with his exposures and statements, the former president 
refused to oblige. He believed that this would only hurt 
Benazir's campaign. Ghulam Ishaq Khan wanted to make sure that 
Nawaz Sharif did not get into power again. Thus, he must have 
noted that Benazir Bhutto, right after taking the oath of the 
position of prime minister, visited Peshawar the same night. She 
stayed at the governor's house, but did not visit Ghulam Ishaq 
Khan, who was staying in the government rest house just a few 
steps away. Only former caretaker Prime Minister Balakh Sher 
Mazari visited Ghulam Ishaq Khan alone. According to observers, 
Benazir Bhutto has emerged to power as a wiser and more tolerant 
politician, and she does not want to take the risk of nominating 
Ghulam Ishaq Khan as the president. 
  It is a welcome development that the prime minister and the 
opposition leader have assured solid and unconditional 
cooperation between their respective parliamentary groups. 
However, the persons who met with her in Peshawar on the night 
she took oath of her office, and advised her to vote for Aftab 
Ahmed Khan Sherpao, were responsible for a despicable action. 
Result of such an action will not be in favor of the PPP. 
  There have been negative effects of the boycott of the 
National Assembly by the MQM [Muhajir Qaumi Movement]. Sindh's 
chief minister, Sayyed Abdullah Shah, and the prime minister 
herself had promised the Urdu-speaking groups without 
identifying any ethnicity. Still, the MQM (Iltaf) leaders insist 
that election in urban areas of Sindh should be held all over 
again. They also want the operation against the MQM to be 
stopped. Mr. Naim Siddiqi, the MQM's Sakkhar zone organizer, has 
also challenged the elections held in Sakkhar P.S. 6. He lost 
here by 2,000 votes. Meanwhile, the Jamaat-i Islami Pakistan has 
started "to take turns" after the recent meeting of its central 
committee. One of its leaders, as well as former leader Mian 
Tufail Mohammed, has resigned from the central committee. Dr. 
Atahar Qureshi, secretary general of Sindh, told the journalists 
in Sakkhar that if a better candidate than Nawaz Sharif is 
available, then the Jamaat-i Islami will review its former 
policy and cooperate in the greater interest of the country. 
According to him, the country and Islam will never compromise on 
these two issues, and all parties can cooperate over it. 
  According to inner political circles, the PPP will have a 
very difficult time, both at the federal and state levels, in 
establishing its governments. The party leaders do not have to 
only keep their party members, but also independent members, 
with them. The arrival of Murtaza Bhutto in Sindh could also 
cause a lot of problems in a few days, because the ideological 
and serious workers of the party had a lot of reservations when 
deciding between Benazir Bhutto and Murtaza Bhutto. Even though 
Murtaza Bhutto ran for election from his father's platform, 
sooner or later, he will claim the party leadership, because, 
according to Sindh's culture and tradition, he is to inherit the 
political tradition of his father. It appears that his honorable 
mother is willing to relinquish her position to make him the 
party chairman, and to let Benazir be the prime minister. 
According to PPP bylaws, the party and government positions 
should be kept separate. The nationalist elements in Sindh and 
the hardliners (including Qadir Majsi, Mumtaz Bhutto, and G. M. 
Syed) need to be balanced. These group people and the agencies 
are paving the way for Murtaza Bhutto's return behind the 
scenes. They believe that Murtaza Bhutto can play a very 
important role in the country's politics in the future. 

