Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] State Duma's CIS Affairs and Links with Fellow 
Countrymen and Economic Policy Committees held hearings on 
Russo-Belarusian relations Wednesday [23 March]. 
  German Kuznetsov, deputy minister of cooperation with CIS 
member states and head of the Russian delegation in talks on the 
merger of monetary systems, told MPs about the differences that 
the Russian and Belarusian officials had not managed to 
overcome, such as the rate at which the Belarusian cash should 
be exchanged for Russian money. 
  While the Russian experts insisted on using the same rate 
for 
exchange of cash and monetary assets and promissory notes, 
material and other assets, the Belarusian experts believed that 
the exchange rate had to recognize the actual buying abilities 
of the Belarusian and Russian rubles. 
  The two sided had not agreed on leveling the prices for 
deliveries of products between Russian and Belarusian businesses 
or on the merger of budgets. The Russian experts believed that 
the two countries had to adopt legislation in 1994 that would 
enable the merger of the budgetary systems in 1995, extension of 
Russian financial and budgetary legislation to Belarus and 
restriction of the ability of Belarusian authorities to make 
decisions on these issues because the would have to abide by the 
Russian legislation. 
  The Belarusian experts propose laying the groundwork in 1994 
for gradual consolidation of the budgets by adopting numerous 
legislative acts in this field. They also propose leaving out 
the formula that the two budgets should merge in 1995. 
  The main stumbling block is the status of the National Bank 
of Belarus. The Russian negotiators wanted the Bank to be 
reorganized no later than December 31, 1995 into a subsidiary of 
the Central Bank of Russia which would take over all its assets 
and liabilities and proposed extending to Belarus the Russian 
legislation on banks and banking activities and currency 
regulation and control. The Belarusian experts wanted the 
National Bank to retain the right to manage the merged monetary 
system within Belarus, without turning it into a subsidiary of 
the CBR [Central Bank of Russia]. 
  Deputy Chairman of the Central Bank of Russia Dmitriy Tulin 
thought that "the viability and stability of the monetary system 
being created" would not be assured unless the National Bank of 
Belarus became a subsidiary of the CBR. He emphasized that even 
though any kind of responsibility can be incorporated into the 
agreement, in real life "the extent to which treaties are 
observed in not impressive." 
  Tulin said before the process of merging the monetary 
systems 
of Russia and Belarus was complete, "the scope of the treaty 
could not be expanded." 
  Deputy Economy Minister Sergey Ignatyev emphasized that "the 
treaty cannot be essentially equal" and that "one currency must 
have one manager." The treaty should specify that Belarus 
sacrificed some of its sovereignty in the monetary and crediting 
sphere and had to comply with the demands made by the Russian 
authorities. 
  Deputy Foreign Trade Minister Georgiy Gaboniya said that his 
ministry supported the merger of the two monetary systems but 
believed that there were no guarantees that the agreements would 
be implemented as long as there was no political alliance. The 
merger should, he thought, culminate in "building a common fence 
against the rest of the world" such as common import and export 
duties, a common list of goods on which quotas would be imposed 
and common rules of trade with third countries." 

