BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Sin Un-chol: "Sharing Destiny With Party Is </F>
Noble Virtue of Our People"] 
  [Text] The dear comrade leader has led the party's work 
for 30 years. 
  During this period, our people were able to cherish a noble 
ideological and spiritual ethos to share their destiny with the 
party with their single-hearted unity in the course of carrying 
out the revolution, thus upholding the dear comrade leader's 
leadership. 
  We cannot talk about the might of our single-hearted unity, 
as well as the invincibility of socialism of our own style, 
without the noble ethos of our people, who share their destiny 
with the party by upholding the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il. 
  The dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il has indicated: Here 
lies the high valued life and honor of revolutionaries, who die 
at their post of duty by endlessly fighting on carrying out the 
revolution, thus sharing their destiny with the party. 
  Sharing destiny with the party means that one would entrust 
one's destiny to the party forever and devote one's whole life 
to achieving the party's cause. In other words, this indicates 
that one would entrust one's destiny and future to the leader 
[yongdoja], who leads the party and the revolution; willingly 
devote one's youth and life for the leader [yongdoja]; and 
contribute one's wisdom and energy on carrying out the leader's 
[yongdoja] idea and leadership. 
  Sharing destiny with the party is the most important 
ideological and spiritual ethos the people -- who carry out the 
revolution -- should cherish. 
  The destiny of the party is just the destiny of the people 
carrying out the revolution. The party provides a guideline for 
the people to pioneer their destiny and gives them a noble 
political life, as well as a power and wisdom to glorify it. 
How the people enjoy their political, material, ideological, 
and cultural life, or what their life and their next 
generation's destiny could be in the future depend on the 
leadership of the party and the leader [suryong]. Only the 
people, who cherished such a truth deep in their hearts, will 
endlessly share their destiny with the party, thus firmly 
trusting in it in any difficult situation. 
  Today's circumstance in which our people carry out our 
revolution is as complicated as ever. The imperialists are 
eagerly plotting to isolate and crush [apsal] socialism of our 
own style, the life of our people. Under these circumstances, 
our people are even firmly resolved to absolutely trust in and 
defend the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il and to vigorously 
carry out a struggle along the road elucidated by the party, 
thus entrusting their destiny to the party and the leader 
[suryong], no matter what they say. 
  Ranging from old anti-Japanese fighters, the first 
generation 
of our revolution, to the third or fourth generation of the 
revolution, everyone has tried to totally entrust his destiny 
and future to the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il and to share 
his life, joys, and sorrows with him forever. This is the firm 
faith and will of our people. Our people's ethos has been 
developed into the most noble popular-oriented ethos, with which 
our society is now overflowing, as well as becoming a powerful 
might to strengthen the party and to give impetus to socialism 
of our own style. 
  The purity of the ideological and spiritual world of our 
people, who are to share their destiny with the party, has been 
clearly shown in their firm trust in and following of the great 
leader [yongdoja] as defender of their destiny and pillar of 
their hearts. 
  In the course of the whole life of the people, who embarked 
upon the road to carry out the revolution, the leader [yongdoja] 
is the savior of their destiny, as well as the pillar of their 
hearts. The true life of the revolutionary fighters can be 
started by the great leader [yongdoja], and, also, their life 
can be glorified forever in his bosom. We cannot talk, even for 
a moment, about the destiny of revolutionaries apart from the 
leader [yongdoja]. Therefore, the people carrying out the 
revolution would be able to follow the leader [yongdoja], thus 
firmly trusting in him as the benefactor of their life and 
savior of their destiny. 
  Today, in our country all the people firmly trust and 
follow dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il as the guard of their 
destinies. Just like anti-Japanese fighters absolutely trusted 
and followed the great leader as the lodestar of the liberation 
and the sun of the nation in early days, our people unanimously 
and endlessly admire and follow the dear comrade leader -- who 
is warmly taking care of the people with the responsibility for 
their destinies while practicing politics of love, trust, and 
benevolence -- as a benefactor of their lives and as their 
father. 
  As has been known all over the world, Comrades Corporal Kim 
Chol- chin and Private First Class Kim Kyong-chol of the Korea 
People's Security Forces could fight being true to their 
revolutionary fidelity to the last, even under the difficult 
situation in an area occupied by the enemy, because they firmly 
trusted and followed our general from the bottom of their 
hearts. No matter how the enemy threatened and tried to win 
them over to its side, they fought with the faith that they 
could return to General Kim Chong-il's bosom without fail, 
foreseeing their bright future in the seasoned leadership of the 
great general who always turns an adverse situation into a 
favorable one and a misfortune into a fortune with his 
extraordinary wisdom, outstanding leadership, and peerless 
braveness. Their struggle clearly demonstrated to the world 
that the determination and will of our people and People's Army 
to share their destinies with the party to the last are not 
empty words. 
  Our people's absolute admiration for the dear comrade leader 
is such stout and invariable as shown above since they hold the 
greatness of the leader's [yongdoja] ideology, leadership, and 
personality through experience. No other people in the world 
but ours are firmly trusting and earnestly following their own 
leader [suryong] and leader [yongdoja] as the guard of their 
destiny and their spiritual pillar. Our people will firmly 
trust and follow the great leader and the dear comrade leader 
like heaven under any circumstance and will devote their lives 
on the road of trusting and following them. 
  The loftiness of our people's ideological and spiritual 
world 
represented by their will to share their lives with the party is 
clearly expressed by their death-defying struggle to defend and 
protect the great leader [yongdoja] politically and 
ideologically. 
  The purity of the people's ideological and spiritual world 
is 
greatly displayed in resolutely defending and protecting the 
leader [yongdoja] of the revolution. To defend and protect the 
leader [yongdoja] is the most honorable and sublime duty in the 
revolutionary struggle. A revolutionary should be an unbending 
fighter who defends and protects the party and the leader 
[suryong] under any circumstance. Only those who have resolute, 
revolutionary determination to share their destinies with the 
leader [yongdoja] and to live forever in his bosom even after 
they die can glorify their honor as genuine revolutionaries. 
  Today, our people are stoutly fighting, upholding a slogan 
of 
loyalty urging themselves to become rifles and bombs to 
death-defyingly protect the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il. 
This slogan has a throb of the fervent loyalty of the 
anti-Japanese revolutionary fighters who, in early days, were 
willing to become human bombs to safeguard the great leader 
[suryongnim] and were willing to cast their valuable youth to 
keep secrets of the command. The slogan of resolute faith that 
expresses the will to become rifles and bombs has become an 
all-people slogan. This fact itself well shows the high level 
of the ideological and spiritual world of our people who are 
ready to share their destinies with the party. 
  Many revolutionary fighters -- who, as fortresses and 
shields, are resolutely defending and protecting the dear leader 
Comrade Kim Chong-il under any stormy circumstance and are 
willing to cast their youth and lives in the course of defending 
him -- have come forth out of our people. They are those 
revolutionary fighters who rushed into the violent fire to 
protect portraits of their leader [suryong] and leader 
[yongdoja] and those heroic fighters who sacrificed their 
valuable youth by shielding an exploring hand grenade. Even 
today, not in wartime with rain of guns and bombs, such heroes 
appear one after another. This is a proud reality that can be 
seen only in our society, a crystal of single-hearted loyalty 
and filial piety. 
  Today's reality clearly shows that there is no worthier or 
more brilliant life than that of a revolutionary fighter who is 
invincibly fighting with revolutionary resolution and 
determination to death-defyingly defend and protect the party 
and the leader. The loftiness of the ideological and spiritual 
world of our people, who share their destinies with the party, 
is also well demonstrated in the fact that they are making every 
effort to repay the grateful benevolence of the leader 
[yongdoja] who has advanced their destinies. 
  The leader's [yongdoja] boundless love and benevolence 
should 
be repaid with the fighters' trust and obedience. To repay his 
love and benevolence with trust and obedience is the 
revolutionary fighters' obligation and sense of duty. 
  All kinds of happiness, freedom, honor, and dignity that our 
people enjoy today have been prepared by the dear comrade 
leader. Without the great benevolence and love of the party and 
the leader [suryong], we can neither think of the fact that we 
have grown up to be resolute revolutionaries who contribute to 
implementing the socialist cause and to be honorable members of 
the Workers Party of Korea, nor talk about the fact that we have 
become the masters of our own destinies. This is why, whenever 
our people look up at the benevolent image of the dear comrade 
leader and think of the party's bosom, they cannot help being 
filled with strong emotion and hardening their determination to 
repay the benevolence of the party and the leader with their 
lives. This determination of our people has been hardened 
generation after generation and has become firmer as time goes 
by. 
  Today, our people are struggling with all their wisdom and 
energy to repay with loyalty the party and the leader, who gave 
them eternal political lives and advanced their genuine lives. 
Our people are burning with the sheer desire to well repay the 
great benevolence of the party and the leader. 
  Wherever the revolutionary struggle and construction are 
being carried out, we can see many loyal revolutionaries who are 
glorifying their lives by solving problems that the party is 
concerned about and intends to solve, regarding the solution of 
those problems as a worthy thing of a genuine life. If the 
party wants and intends, our people are willing to move to 
socialist construction sites, coal mines, and rural areas in 
groups and defend their revolutionary sentry posts until the end 
of their lives without wishing any honor or repayment. This 
exalted and beautiful trait is highly displayed today, and it 
well shows the lofty spiritual world of our people who try to 
devote their lives to the struggle to implement their leader's 
[yongdoja] ideology and policy, with single-hearted loyalty, 
keeping in mind the grateful benevolence of the party and the 
leader all the time. 
  Today, in our country the leader [yongdoja] and the people 
are united together and our revolution is advancing while 
overcoming hardships because all the people are faithfully 
upholding the party and the leader and sharing their destinies 
with the party. 
  All party members and working people should even more 
vigorously demonstrate the might of our party and the 
invincibility of socialism of our own style, by sharing our 
destinies with the party to the last, upholding the dear comrade 
leader and bearing the great dignity and pride in living and 
carrying out the revolution in the glorious age under his 
leadership. 

