Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Briefing" on Robin Raphel Visit] </F>
  [Text] Ms. Raphel continued her discussions today with 
senior officials in the ministries of commerce, external 
affairs, and finance. She met the commerce secretary and his 
senior colleagues followed by a meeting with the foreign 
secretary followed by a call on the minister of state for 
external affairs, Shri R.L. Bhatia. Later in the evening, she 
met the finance secretary. The joint secretary (America) [in 
charge of American affairs] hosted a working lunch for her which 
views were exchanged on various issues of mutual interest with 
some other joint secretaries in charge of territorial divisions 
in the MEA [Ministry of External Affairs]. [sentence as received] 
  Assistant secretary Raphel called on the minister of state, 
Shri R.L. Bhatia, following her discussions with the foreign 
secretary. The MOS (RLB) [Minister of State R.L. Bhatia] traced 
the changes in the global political situation following the end 
of the Cold War, outlined India's efforts to improve relations 
with our neighbours and countries in the Gulf, and CIS. 
Development of still friendlier bilateral relations with the 
U.S. was a major priority in India's foreign policy. As two 
vibrant democracies, there were bound to be some differences on 
some issues. He outlined India's consistent position on and 
preference for a global comprehensive and non-discriminatory 
approach on non-proliferation and security related issues. 
Assistant Secretary Raphel reciprocated MOS, Shri Bhatia's 
sentiments to improve Indo-US relations and to work towards 
reaching the understandings on issues the two countries had 
differing positions and perceptions. 
  The discussions with the foreign secretary covered a wide 
range of bilateral issues. Visits from USA by the secretaries 
(ministers) of commerce and energy were mentioned in this 
connection. Ms. Raphel expressed the hope that the prime 
minister of India would find it convenient to pay a visit to 
Washington on President Clinton's invitation. Turning to 
relations with Pakistan, the FS [foreign secretary] reiterated 
India's willingness to resume a dialogue under the Simla 
Agreement at foreign secretary's level and hoped Pakistan would 
eschew the path of internationalisation and support to 
trans-border terrorism. Ms. Raphel stated that the U.S. 
welcomed the continuation of the bilateral dialogue between 
India and Pakistan which was resumed in January 1994 and stood 
willing to encourage this process to facilitate resolution of 
all outstanding problems between the two countries. Referring 
to J and K [Jammu and Kashmir], the FS drew the attention to the 
resolution adopted by the Indian parliament and asserted that 
Pakistan's efforts to agitate the issue would not succeed in 
fulfilling its territorial ambitions. The foreign secretary 
regretted that Pakistan had taken steps such as the proposed 
closure of their consulate in Bombay and the embargo on Indian 
citizens crossing the land border at Wagah. Indo-U.S. bilateral 
cooperation on issues like narcotics control, education and 
culture and science and technology were noted with satisfaction 
as also the greatly increased levels of trade, investment and 
economic ties. The foreign secretary reciprocated Ms. Raphel's 
statement on behalf of the U.S. administration that the United 
States favours the strengthening of ties with India, building on 
the positive features of the present relationship and bridging 
areas where lack of understanding exists through regular 
dialogue. On non-proliferation, Ms. Raphel raised the 
possibility of discussing this issue in a multilateral forum. 
Referring to a U.S. proposal to discuss such issues within a 
small group of countries, the FS expressed certain reservations 
regarding this concept, underlining India's policies laid out in 
the 1988 action plan presented to the United Nations. 
  Turning to the possibility of amendment of the Pressler 
legislation or a one time waiver thereof, the FS expressed 
strong reservations on this approach, since any accretion of 
Pakistan's offensive military capabilities would escalate 
tensions in the region and seriously affect India's security 
environment. It was agreed that further discussions on these 
issues would be held during the visit of the deputy secretary of 
state, Strobe Talbott. 
  The discussions with the commerce secretary covered wide 
range of issues. These included developments following the 
conclusion of the Uruguay Round and specific issues on Indo-U.S. 
bilateral trade. Both the commerce secretary and Assistant 
Secretary Raphel expressed satisfaction at the increased 
momentum in the bilateral trade relationship, the growing 
interest in the U.S. business community in commercial 
interaction with India and expressed optimism about the 
potential in further growth in the bilateral trade. 
  Specific issues like difficulties being experienced by 
Indian 
software engineers in respect of HIB [expansion unknown] visa, 
apprehensions about the revival of Super 301 and other pressing 
issues of interest to U.S. were raised. Assistant Secretary 
Raphel said that the USG [U.S. Government] would use Super 301 
consistent with GATT and the results of the Uruguay Round. 
  The commerce secretary also outlined India's efforts to work 
out a preferential trading arrangement under the aegis of the 
SAARC [South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation]. He 
expressed the hope that Pakistan would join other SAARC members 
in this endeavour. 
  Both commerce secretary and the assistant secretary looked 
forward to further strengthening of India-U.S. trade relations 
and expressed the hope that the forthcoming visit of U.S. 
Commerce Secretary Ron Brown would provide an added impetus. 
New Delhi 
24.3.94 

