BFN 

  [Text] A round of official talks was held today at the 
Foreign Ministry between a Syrian delegation led by Foreign 
Minister Faruq al-Shar' and a Japanese delegation led by Foreign 
Minister Koji Kakizawa. The meeting was attended by Raslan 
'Allush, assistant foreign minister, and the heads of the 
Foreign Ministry's Economic, Organizational, and Asia 
Departments. On the Japanese side, the meeting was attended by 
(Takaya Sodo), director of the Middle East and Africa 
Department; (Hiroshi Hirabayashi), director of the Economic 
Cooperation Department; and the Japanese ambassador in Damascus. 
  Discussions touched on the situation in the region and 
developments in the Middle East peace process. In this regard, 
the two sides underlined their countries' desire to achieve a 
just and comprehensive peace based on the implementation of UN 
Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 and international 
legitimacy. 
  They also discussed the ties of cooperation and friendship 
between Syria and Japan and means of improving them in all 
fields. The two sides underlined their desire to strengthen 
these ties. In this regard, the two sides agreed to meet 
tomorrow on the level of experts to discuss economic cooperation 
between the two countries. 
  The Japanese minister and his delegation arrived in Damascus 
at noon today. He was received at Damascus International 
Airport by Foreign Minister Faruq al-Shar', the heads of the 
Foreign Ministry's Asia and Protocol Departments, and the 
Japanese ambassador in Damascus and the embassy staff. 
  Mr. Kakizawa made a statement to the SANA in which he 
praised 
the important political and economic position Syria occupies and 
the rich heritage from which it draws for its present and 
future. He praised Syrian-Japanese ties, which have seen 
tangible progress in recent years, stressing the need to bolster 
these ties in the future, particularly in the field of economic 
cooperation. 
  Regarding the peace process and Japan's role in achieving a 
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East, Kakizawa said: 
Japan has made a tangible effort to achieve security and peace 
in the world, both through its contributions to the UN budget 
and the disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation efforts. 
  He praised Syria's role and position in the Middle East and 
its role in finding the climate needed to establish just and 
comprehensive peace in the region, which cannot be achieved 
without Syria and its central role. He said: Japan supports 
the ongoing peace process and believes this process can be 
activated for the benefit of the peoples of the region. 
  Asked about the prospect for Japan's admittance as a 
permanent member to the UN Security Council, Kakizawa said: 
This quest is being supported by many countries in the world. 
Japan considers this support an evidence of these countries' 
appreciation of Japan's role in the international arena. 

