BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Pak Song-yong] </F>
  [Text] In February, a letter from G. Toloraya, Russian 
minister and deputy chief of mission in Seoul was delivered to 
THE KOREA TIMES. It was about North Korean escapees from 
logging camps in Siberia. In the letter, he said, "It is up to 
the government of the Republic of Korea to determine whether to 
accept them as refugees or not," apparently tossing the ball 
into Seoul's court. 
  "The escapees are free to go to South Korea. And needless to 
say, the Russian authorities do not restrict or prevent foreign 
nationals from exercising their rights, including the right of 
political asylum," he continued. 
  According to government sources, hundreds of North Korean 
have escaped from logging camps in Siberia notorious for their 
substandard working conditions. Since their escapes from what 
are often dubbed "concentration camps," they have been wandering 
around in Russia seeking settlement there or defection to South 
Korea. 
  Currently, an estimated 15,000 to 25,000 North Koreans are 
working at 16 logging camps in Russia, which are run by the 
Pyongyang government under a contract with the Russian 
government. And recently the number of North Korean escapees 
from North Korea into China is also reported to have been on a 
sharp increase. 
  News reports say that about 1,000 to 2,000 North Koreans 
have 
fled into China but exact number is hard to determine because 
they are hiding from North Korean intelligent authorities' 
manhunts. A rumor has even been spreading in the Korean 
autonomous prefecture in Yanbian, China that North Korean 
escapees have set up "Korean villages" in the deep forests 
there. "Because of the severe food shortage in Hamkyong and 
Yangso provinces in North Korea, it is common for residents 
there to cross the border after getting travel permits to secure 
food, and many of them don't go back to their hometowns," said a 
ranking government official. 
  The North Korean escapees in Russia and China are not 
"protected." Under the Convention and the Protocol Relating to 
the Status of Refugees, escapees from logging camps have the 
right to escape to Russia or third countries and if Russia 
refuses to cooperate, they can appeal to the United Nations High 
Commission for Refugees [UNHCR]. 
  The Seoul government has asked the UNHCR for help and 
discussion with the Russian government to solve the problem is 
underway. But the protocol faces an apparent limitation. And 
the government also fears it could provoke North Korea at this 
time when the tension between the two sides is extremely high 
because of the nuclear issue. 
  The state of the North Koreans who have escaped to China is 
worse because the Beijing government has not signed the 
convention or the protocol on refugees and it has an extradition 
pact with the Pyongyang government. The Chinese authorities 
repatriate North Korean escapees, regarding them as criminals 
who have violated the immigration law. 
  There are lots of "political problems" in South Korea 
getting 
Chinese help in solving the "humanitarian" issue. Meantime, the 
government plans to send a fact-finding team to China this 
month, hoping to find a solution in the interest of the 
desperate North Koreans. Besides this, a parliamentary team is 
to visit Moscow in order to help the roaming loggers come to 
South Korea if they so wish. 
  The move follows public outcries that the government should 
not turn its eyes away from the desperate situation of Koreans 
on the ground that the humanitarian value is universal, 
overriding political considerations. In a recent meeting of a 
panel of the National Assembly, lawmakers lambasted the 
government for not taking any action for the Korean wanderers. 
They demanded that the government should be resolute in helping 
the Koreans even at the expense of hurting North Korea. 
(endall) 3 Apr cb/ramirez/NCB53034.05/dr610304.13/cb 03/0534z Apr 
BT 
#2068 
NNNN 

