Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Norwegian Colonel Bengt Berlin by </F>
Anthony Loyd in Tuzla; date not given] 
  [Text] To open Tuzla airfield Lieutenant Colonel Bengt 
Berlin wants Leopard tanks. He also wants close air support. 
In the wake of Sarajevo's market massacre and the subsequent 
Western show of resolve, he may get both. 
  Colonel Berlin is second-in-command of the Tuzla-based 
Nordic 
Battalion, a composite unit including Swedes, Danes and 
Norwegians. His dry manner and piercing gaze through tinted, 
circular spectacles add a sinister edge to this belligerent 
Norseman. In November he deployed a Milan anti-tank missile and 
strike aircraft in an intimidatory role to secure the release of 
three Swedish soldiers taken hostage by a platoon of renegade 
Chetniks near Vares. 
  Now he has been ordered to prepare Tuzla airfield, closed 
since its destruction by the retreating Yugoslav National Army 
in May 1992, for UN aid flights. He has some definite ideas as 
to how to go about it. 
  "If anyone shoots at us with small arms, then we return fire 
with small arms. If it is heavy machinegun fire, then we reply 
with heavy machineguns. If they shoot at us with a tank, we 
must reply with a tank. Artillery we cannot see, so the only 
thing we can hit back with is close air support," he said in his 
forward headquarters near the damaged runway. 
  In addition to forcing the withdrawal of Serb guns around 
Sarajevo and effecting the UN troop rotation in Srebrenica, the 
UN has postulated close air support as a means of opening up 
Tuzla airfield. Now, in its present mood, which no longer 
agonises over potential withdrawal but instead over how, what 
and where to strike, the Swedes are within three weeks of 
preparing the airfield. 
  A stream of pilots, flight engineers and logistics experts 
have added their advice on layout and flight path. Built for 
military purposes in 1962, the airport could enable the UN to 
fly up to 200 tons of aid per day at maximum capacity directly 
into Bosnia, avoiding the overland routes through Herzegovina 
and Serbia. 
  "At present all aid has to pass through Bosnian Serb or 
Bosnian Croat territory. That means the warring parties have 
total control over everything coming into Bosnia," said Colonel 
Berlin "So its opening is a high-priority operation." 
  The Serbs are unhappy at the prospect and shell the runway 
regularly from hillsides only five miles to the east, with 
artillery and tank fire. A flow of aid into Bosnia over which 
they had no control would deprive them of a valuable bargaining 
chip. So in addition to the technical lighting, control, repair 
and instrument landing systems, Colonel Berlin wants his ten 
Leopard tanks, Ianguishing in Split on the Dalmatian coast as 
the UN prevaricates over details regarding their suitability in 
an aid operation. 
  "We need them, because if we are determined to open the 
airfield we must stay even if we are shelled," said the colonel. 
"The only thing we can do that with, at reasonable risk to my 
soldiers, is main battletanks." He plans to deploy the tanks 
first to secure the perimeter, then to provide mobile 
observation posts to monitor the Serb position that threaten the 
operation. Earlier wrangling between the UN and Bosnian Serbs 
over approval of the plan, in which the Serbs demanded the right 
to open their military airfield at Banja Luka in return for 
stopping their bombardments, have subsided as talk by Lieutenant 
General Sir Michael Rose of "determined approach", "robust 
means" and "consequences" takes effect. 
  "Unprofor [UN Protection Forces] doesn't have to have the 
approval of the Serbs to open Tuzla airfield. It would be 
entirely run by the UN, with Bosnian Serb monitors present, in 
the same way as Sarajevo," said Colonel Berlin. "The UN mandate 
here is to feed the needy population. That involves opening 
roads and Tuzla airfield. It is all part of the mission. We 
should be respected as a third party that is not part of the 
war. If someone doesn't respect us, they must take the 
consequences. Consequences are something they have not been 
taking recently." 

