BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by a "Japan-U.S. relations reporting team"; first </F>
in a series entitled "Japan and the United States -- the Picture 
Shakes": "President Becomes an `Organ'"; first graph is 
newspaper's introduction] 
  [Text] Just as the Cold War has ended and Asia is rising, 
Japan-U.S. relations are shaking up from the foundation in all 
aspects including politics, economy, and security. In the five 
decades since the end of the world war, Japan has depended on 
the United States for leads to finding "answers" to economic 
problems as well as "answers" to diplomatic issues. But now 
with the world changing, the leads are also becoming 
complicated. The two countries' relations have changed from 
those of Japan "running after" the United States to those of the 
two "running in parallel," with an eye on each other. 
<H5>  Disappeared Face of Human Rights </H5>
  Several influential local U.S. newspapers in their 31 May 
issues carried in their readers' letter columns a little 
extraordinary contribution. The letter related to a Clinton 
administration decision made earlier to extend the most favored 
nation (MFN) status for China. 
  "U.S. exports to China have generated new jobs for 150,000 
people. In the 21st century, China will become a major pillar 
of the world economy." Insisting so, the letter made fervent 
pleas that the extension of the MFN status was very beneficial 
to the United States. The letter ended with: "By Bill Clinton, 
U.S. President." 
  President Clinton has in the past repeatedly criticized 
China 
for belittling human rights, and has taken a cautious stand on 
the question of extending MFN status to that country. But in 
the letter, the president's face as a "human rights defender" 
was gone. 
  About a year and a half have passed since Mr. Clinton became 
the first president after the Cold War ended. The United States 
has begun to comment on Clinton in various manners. He has been 
called "inconstant," "unprincipled," "a commoner," "a president 
who talks to people open heartedly," and so forth. All of these 
expressions are rather right on target as far as we see in 
letters to newspapers. 
  But what is coming to be accepted more popularly in 
Washington recently is the view that this president has brought 
more fundamental change to the United States. "He has 
fundamentally changed the U.S. President's image" as Ann Luis, 
former vice chairman of the Democratic Party National Committee, 
said. 
<H5>  Political Robot </H5>
  A U.S. President is always compelled to make decisions and 
to 
carry them out. Kennedy did it at the time of the Cuban crisis, 
Reagan at the time of U.S.-Soviet arms reduction talks, Bush at 
the time of the Gulf War, and so forth. There has always been 
an image of a U.S. President being a "great gun on a great ship." 
  In contrast, however, President Clinton is a sort of 
"organ." 
He considers presidency as a function or an organ, and deals 
with issues mechanically. 
  Evidence that endorse this view is countless. Let us take 
the ranking officials' meetings in the White House. The 
president is said to often ask the following kind of question of 
the officials at those meetings: "Wait a minute. One of your 
subordinates said something a little differently 10 days ago. 
This way, we cannot make a correct judgment." 
  According to WASHINGTON POST reporter Bob Woodward, 
Greenspan, chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve Board, described 
his impression of Clinton on seeing him for the first time: "He 
does not need any presidential assistants. He himself is an 
assistant." 
  His abilities in collecting information is so great as to be 
called "the president who has met more executives than anyone in 
history" ranging from big corporation heads to small and medium 
businessmen." He has a superb memory. An American journalist 
said: "He can recall the name of a reporter whom he met more 
than a year ago, after staring at him for a while. 
  From him emerges an image of "a political robot equipped 
with 
high-tech components" rather than someone with resolve and power 
to carry out his resolve to quote a person with Heritage 
Foundation, a Republican Party think tank. As long as he is a 
"robot," he will not hesitate to change his position, depending 
on the information fed into him. 
  The extension of the MFN status for China was only one 
example. Over the Haiti issue, he did not hesitate to go back 
on his earlier word and to decide to accept refugees from there. 
When he found Congressional objections strong on the issue of 
reducing financial deficits, he did not hesitate to drop the 
idea of introducing a new energy tax that had been a major 
selling point [in his policy on reducing deficits]. "Being 
inconstant" is not the right expression for him because all 
these things are conclusions that a political robot would arrive 
at only naturally. 
<H5>  Neither White Nor Black </H5>
  One might ask if this new image of a president would 
continue 
even after Clinton. On that question, the prevailing 
observation in the present United States is that it would 
probably "continue" into the future. 
  The first reason for this is that Clinton was elected by the 
people of the "baby boomer generation" who were born after the 
world war -- the group now with dominant power in the United 
States. Arthur Michel, an attorney who is well versed in 
Japan-U.S. issues, remarked: "A major unique point of the baby 
boomers is that their sense of value varies. At this time when 
U.S. citizens' sense of values has diversified, if policies are 
set firm around some axis, they will work only to their 
disadvantage. 
  The second reason is that now with the Cold War structure 
gone, the other superpower, which the United States could use as 
an "opposite-pole yardstick" in making its own judgment, has 
disappeared. Consequently, U.S. behavior has come to bear a 
color that is "neither white nor black." 
  There can be differences of view on the question of whether 
the U.S. President's image has changed because of Clinton. At 
least there is no question to the fact that the present 
presidency has changed into a functional type and is able to 
change its positions easily. A key to understanding the 
present-day United States can be found in that fact, however 
strange it may sound. 

