BFN 

  [Text] Tehran, April 30, IRNA -- The catastrophe of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina shows that when the solution is not in the 
same direction with the policies and interest of each one of the 
permanent members of the Security Council they do not make an 
immediate decision to prevent that crisis even if it should cost 
the trampling on the rights of a nation. 
  Foreign Ministry spokesman Mahmoud Mohammadi who made the 
above remarks in an interview with IRNA here today, said the 
talks between the United Nations secretary general and foreign 
ministers of the contact group of the Organisation of the 
Islamic Conference (OIC) on the Bosnian crisis, confirmed for 
the first time in UN history, that the Security Council's 
problem of making decisions for solving disputes has not only 
been the characteristic of the Cold War era and the East-West 
dispute, "but the standard and the yardstick has been the 
interests of the permanent members of the Council that has made 
decision-making difficult and sometimes impossible." 
  He added that the OIC contact group with political and legal 
reasoning drew the attention of the Security Council to the 
tasks it has for peace and defending the rights of the peoples 
on the basis of the principles and goals of the UN Charter. The 
group criticized that failure to meet those goals has led to the 
weakening of sovereignty and the ethnic-cleansing in Bosnia. 
  The group maintained that in the post Cold War era following 
the previous policies is unjustifiable. 
  According to Mohammadi, the second issue is that the 
Security 
Council for the first time during two years of bloodshed in B-H 
and the efforts of the 51 Muslim countries and their solidarity 
in defence of Muslim rights, realized the presence of some new 
form of racial discrimination in the west similar to South 
African apartheid, and the frankness in the speeches of OIC 
ministers to which the secretary general has referred, naturally 
cannot be without effect in activities and future decisions of 
the Security Council. 
  Asked by IRNA whether the West intends to weaken the 
solidarity of Muslim states, he said obviously the establishment 
of this kind of Islamic solidarity in defending the Muslims of 
B-H was unexpected both for the Security Council and certain 
western states. 
  The spokesman said Iran has always made efforts at the OIC, 
the UN and the Non-Aligned Movement as well as in bilateral 
relations with other countries to prevent the savage ethnic 
cleansing and violations of international norms. 
  "Certain Muslim countries, too, have been harmonious with 
such positions and the formation of the OIC contact group at the 
UN in New York was based on the same common positions and 
Islamic solidarity," he added. 
  He commented that public opinion in the Islamic world is 
opposed to the inaction of international bodies against the 
crimes of Serbs and thinks that some type of new apartheid in 
the West is being formed which unlike the past is not only based 
on racial discrimination but also includes some sort of belief 
discrimination and for this reason they have the right to 
support those who share the same religion with them. 
  Questioned whether the British Government's allegations that 
Iran is supporting the Irish Republican Army (IRA) could colour 
Security Council decisions, he said: "Obviously that is not 
without relation. because Britain is among the permanent members 
which has always tried to consider the issue of Bosnia outside 
of the Security Council and by negotiation between the aggressor 
and the aggressed. This measure will cause both the lengthening 
of the time for decision making against the aggressor party and 
also the loss of many concessions and much human loss for the 
people of Bosnia- Herzegovina." 
  The public opinion of the Muslim world has been much aroused 
due to the deterrent policies of Britain in the Security Council 
and even NATO against the crimes of Serbs, he added. 
  "The judgement of Muslims about Britain is that the policy 
makers in London are the factor responsible for defeating any 
measure against the Serbs and opposed to any plan that 
guarantees the rights of the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina of 
which David Owen's plans are some typical examples," said the 
spokesman. 
  He said "London's unfounded claims emanate from internal 
problems and from the weakness to overcome those problems. 
Therefore, the traditional practice of these countries at the 
time of internal crisis is to show the foreign relations as 
being acute and divert the public opinion from the internal 
situation to the external situation in order to whitewash 
(internal) problems." 
  According to Mohammadi another incentive of British 
authorities for bringing up such false matters is the fruitless 
efforts of London and Washington for isolating Iran. 
  "After this much investment we see that the common policy of 
the United States and Britain has been isolated among Europeans 
and Japan. Therefore, the propaganda machinery of Britain, 
simultaneously and awkwardly comes up with the propaganda of 
Iran having connections with the Irish Republican Army, and the 
training of Japanese nationals for terrorist operations in 
Europe. 
  "The main goal of such propaganda, is to affect the 
cooperation based on mutual interests of the Islamic Republic of 
Iran with those countries," he added. 
  The Foreign Ministry spokesman said the London sources know 
well that the Islamic Republic of Iran is opposed to terrorist 
operations and violent acts in their various forms, and even 
cooperates with some countries in the direction of fighting this 
dangerous phenomena that was created by the West. 
  Asked to comment on the invitation to Iran for negotiations 
with the United Arab Emirates [UAE] that was in the communique 
of the joint session of the U.S. secretary of state and the 
countries of the Persian Gulf the spokesman said: 
  "We have always announced our readiness to remove 
misunderstandings with UAE, without any preconditions, within 
the framework of the letter of the head of the state of UAE 
Sheikh Zayed to the president of Iran. 
  "We consider bilateral talks for strengthening of good 
neighborly relations and provision of collective interests in 
the region which has united our security and interests. 
However, since we believe that outsiders seek their interests 
in creating unrest in the region and the surfacing of disputes 
between Muslim states, to involve them in the task of removing 
misunderstanding will not help solve the problem but it will be 
in the direction of their filthy intentions." 
  Asked for latest information about the status of Iranian 
diplomats kidnapped in Beirut way back in 1982, he said the 
Foreign Ministry through the Iranian ambassador to Beirut had 
officially called on the Lebanese Government to precisely 
consider the fate of the four Iranians, the longest held 
hostages in Lebanon. 
  Mohammadi said the measures have been taken in the wake of 
the arrest of Phalangist militia chief Samir Geagea, and the 
Lebanese Government, too, has assured to investigate the issue 
which, he said, is reason for hope on the Iranian side. 

