Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Washington, February 5 (XINHUA) -- The U.S. 
Government is to increase its financial assistance to the 
worldwide population control, official sources said here today. 
  "If we can't stabilize the world's population, we're not 
going to be able to control any other problems," said State 
Department Counselor Tim Wirth, who is in charge of population 
policy. 
  President Bill Clinton announced last Monday the 1995 U.S. 
Federal Budget will include 585 million U.S. dollars population 
control assistance, up from about 503 million dollars this year, 
press reports here said. 
  The U.S. is also teaming up with Japan to boost aid for 
population stabilization programs in poor countries. 
  When Japan's Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa visits 
Washington later next week, he and Clinton will announce an 
accord on population assistance. Japan is expected to commit 3 
billion dollars by the end of the decade for population programs 
and combating AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in 
developing countries, an AP report quoted U.S. Government 
officials as saying. 
  Population experts project today's world population of 5.5 
billion will grow by 1 billion over the next decade, and double 
to 11 billion in 40 years. 
  By the year 2050, it will reach 12 billion, with more than 
90 
percent of the growth occurring in developing nations. 
  The present U.S. population of 259 million, growing at a 
slower rate, is projected to reach 392 million by the year 2050. 
  The Clinton administration has decided that stabilizing 
population is crucial to alleviating poverty and hunger. 
  The 1995 U.S. Federal Budget of around 1.5 trillion dollars 
will boost U.S. assistance to the U.N. Population Fund - which 
was cut off during the Reagan and Bush administrations - from 
the current 40 million dollars to 60 million dollars a year. 
  Wirth said that he hopes the U.S. population assistance to 
the U.N. Population Fund to top 1 billion dollars by the end of 
the decade. The goal is to ensure that every woman who wants 
family planning assistance can get it. 

