BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Major General Oleksandr Skipalskyy, chief of </F>
the Ukrainian Security Service Military Counterintelligence, by 
Anatoliy Ben; place and date not given: "If Not by Numerical 
Strength, Than by Skills"] 
  [Text] "We will vote for people wearing epaulets. Perhaps 
they will restore order in the country..." -- one could often 
hear such opinions during the latest election campaign, and the 
voters were doing just that. As a matter of fact, not many 
people in epaulets -- officers and generals of the Army, the 
Militia, or the Security Service -- dared to engage in the 
electoral battle. Many of those who braved the election, 
however, won an overwhelming majority of votes in the first 
round. Among them was Major General Oleksandr Skipalskyy, chief 
of the Ukrainian Security Service Military Counterintelligence. 
He does not consider himself the leader of a possible 
parliamentary faction of "people in epaulets." He believes that 
there are not enough such deputies in the new Supreme Council. 
Yet, it should not be forgotten that they are disciplined and 
mobile people, that they fight not by "numerical strength, but 
by skills," and that they do not play the least important role 
in the configuration of parliamentary forces. Such servicemen 
as O. Skipalskyy, who has gone through the mill of political 
battle and earned experience working at the Security Service, 
are not remaining in the shadows. Our correspondent began his 
interview with the following question: 
  [Ben] Oleksandr Oleksandrovych, what prompted you to trade 
in your Military Counterintelligence Service identification card 
for a seat in parliament? 
  [Skipalskyy] I and my colleagues were led to the Supreme 
Council primarily by our concern over Ukraine's political and 
economic instability. External enemies are trying to rock our 
state. This is a purposeful action, and there is a vast area of 
legislative work ahead of us, specialists who have long been 
working in law enforcement bodies, particularly, in the Security 
Service, to disarray our foes in the legislative way. 
  [Ben] I recall Suvorov's [19th century Russian commander] 
saying that "they fight not by numerical strength, but by 
skills." Nevertheless, as I believe, there are too few "people 
in epaulets" in the new parliament, and there are not many of 
your followers either. 
  [Skipalskyy] Based on the most important thing -- the 
development of the independent Ukrainian state -- I expect that 
there will be an absolute majority of my followers in the new 
Supreme Council. 
  As for my followers on issues of military policy and 
development, the situation here is more complex. Among the new 
legislators, there are really too few servicemen who have 
experience in developing a new armed forces. Parliaments of 
civilized countries comprise many military officials who have 
participated in combat operations, which guarantees that 
mistakes will be avoided while forming military policy. 
  In the current parliament, there are almost 10 people who 
wear military uniforms. I think that they will contribute to 
the development of our Armed Forces and other power structures. 
  [Ben] Could you name them? 
  [Skipalskyy] Of course. I am convinced that such deputies 
as Colonel Omelchenko and Lieutenant Colonel Yermak will do a 
lot in the parliament, and that Admiral Kozhyn will contribute 
to the development of the Ukrainian Navy. I can also name Gen. 
Chykalo, deputy chief of the Zhytomyr Corps, Lieutenant Colonel 
Bilous, and Col. Bilas. There is a large group of reserve 
officers. 
  [Ben] Are your followers planning to form a separate 
faction in parliament, or are they going to unite in some other 
way? 
  [Skipalskyy] Everything will depend on the atmosphere in the 
Supreme Council. We have discussed this issue and come to the 
conclusion that factions are useful, but if there are too many 
of them, this can trigger fierce and sometimes even useless 
discussions. We are ready to join a faction which will 
implement progressive economic reforms, and we will be 
politically sympathetic with all supporters of the development 
of our independent sovereign state -- Ukraine. 
  [Ben] In your opinion, as a serviceman, what laws must 
currently be adopted, or which laws already in force must be 
amended or altered, for a more effective military policy of our 
state and the development of its Army? 
  [Skipalskyy] Unconditionally, the most important thing today 
is a new constitution. It is absurd when a state forms its new 
political and economic platform and its fundamental law remains 
unchanged. 
  I would not like the new parliament to get excited over a 
revision of laws in force. Certain laws, however, must be 
changed or amended. We are particularly concerned over the 
"delayed action bomb" implanted by the Supreme Council to 
strengthen separatist positions in Ukraine. I have in mind the 
direct elections for new oblast council heads. Excuse me, but 
this resembles independent principalities we saw in our history. 
We know what came about then. 
  Regarding legislative acts concerning the sphere of military 
policy, certain amendments must also be made here. We have 
worked out a legislative basis, and it is in force. We must 
immediately apply measures, particularly legislative ones, to 
strengthen military discipline. Legislation on military police 
must also be adopted. We currently do not have a precisely 
defined structure which would fight against crime in the Army. 
Such legislation has already been drafted. The crime-breeding 
situation in the Army requires that we adopt this legislation 
immediately. I think that legislative acts, which regulate 
conscription of our young men into the Army, must also be 
changed. Currently, a great many conscripts are evading 
military service: Those who have money -- buy their way out; 
those who do not -- serve in the Army. I could list a whole 
range of issues that should be resolved at the parliamentary 
level. 
  [Ben] There are currently many debates concerning problems 
related to reforming the system of military education. The 
current chiefs of the military department claim that their 
predecessors, particularly Gen. Prokofyev, "messed things up," 
and that the situation requires substantial changes. I would 
like to know your opinion in this regard. 
  [Skipalskyy] My opinion is unequivocal. I was once 
supporting (and I still support) many of Gen. Prokofyev's 
innovations. At the same time, I agree with those military 
specialists who consider Prokofyev's miscalculation the fact 
that he did not establish a mechanism for implementing his 
concepts of military education. Obviously, certain educational 
institutions were reformed too soon. 
  However, I would not dramatize the situation as a whole; I 
would not draw hasty, revolutionary conclusions, as certain 
people who are far from the Army do. Necessary corrections must 
be made in a calm manner. 
  I would like to note here that we fully endorse the position 
of the current Defense Minister Radetskyy on protecting 
Ukraine's interests in the Crimea and strengthening military 
discipline, and that we support him in achieving this. 
  [Ben] Thus, if I have correctly understood your intentions, 
deputies-servicemen are not going to demand cardinal changes in 
our state's military doctrine? 
  [Skipalskyy] Perhaps it will be worthwhile to amend the 
military doctrine in a certain period of time. Yet, in general, 
it currently conforms to Ukraine's political course. The main 
thing is to implement it, and to resolve painful problems. 

