BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vojislav Seselj, leader of the Serbian </F>
Radical Party, by Zeljko Garmaz; place and date not given: "I 
Support Tudjman and Kucan Because They Will Never Agree To 
Restore Yugoslavia!"] 
  [Text] A recent statement by [Serbian Radical Party leader] 
Vojislav Seselj, that Croats who remained in Serbia should be 
driven out, caused a furor even in notoriously Greater Serbian 
newspapers such as VECERNJE NOVOSTI, which severely criticized 
Seselj's threat. However, it is obvious that the commentary in 
VECERNJE NOVOSTI does not indicate an about-turn in Serbian 
policy toward the protection of minorities. Simply, Milosevic's 
regime wants to destroy its former ally politically; anyway, 
Vojislav Seselj will soon be on trial for the incident in the 
Serbian Assembly. 
  Asked why he did not attack President of the Parliament 
Radovan Bozovic physically as well, Seselj replied that "Tarzan 
never hit Cheetah!" Then we asked Seselj why he did not use his 
gun, with which he never parts. 
  [Seselj] I only draw my gun when I am attacked by five or 
more men. When there are fewer than five, I defend myself 
without a gun. I have been in dangerous situations many times 
before and did not use my gun. When I was attacked by three 
psychopaths at the restaurant "Russian Czar," and one of them 
hit me over the back with a chair and my head started bleeding, 
I did not draw my gun, for I was able to defend myself without a 
weapon even then. But it is true that the gun makes me feel 
safer and enables me to walk the streets of Belgrade on my own, 
without bodyguards. 
  [Garmaz] You have recently threatened the Croats living in 
Serbia with having to move to Croatia. The Croats and the 
Hungarians who remained in Serbia are being terrorized more 
often, as after every such statement of yours. A church has 
recently been blown up in Subotica [town in Vojvodina on 
Hungarian border]. 
  [Seselj] It was no threat. I am calling for a civilized 
exchange of population. The Croats and Tudjman's regime started 
this exchange in an uncivilized manner. The Serbs have already 
been expelled from Croatia, and we want those Serbs to exchange 
their property, apartments, and houses in Croatia with Croats 
living in the FRY [Federal Republic of Yugoslavia] as soon as 
possible. The process was going well through the mediation of 
the Catholic Church. I think that the Croats have always had 
the better deal in such exchanges, because they were better off 
when leaving.... The Serbs had to flee the country, but the 
Croats had the chance to think it over and be informed, through 
the Catholic Church, about the property they would come to. 
  [Garmaz] You call the exchange caused by threats a civilized 
and democratic process? 
  [Seselj] This proposal is not undemocratic and uncivilized 
at all. Anyway, it is based on history. You must know that 
Franjo Tudjman and Dobrica Cosic agreed on this some time ago! 
  [Garmaz] What did they agree on? 
  [Seselj] On the civilized exchange of populations between 
the FRY and the Republic of Croatia. At least that is what 
Cosic said in Belgrade. The Serbian press wrote about it and 
Cosic's statement was broadcast on television. 
  [Garmaz] When did Dobrica Cosic say that he and Tudjman had 
agreed on the exchange of population? 
  [Seselj] Right after the negotiations at which Prevlaka was 
the most important item on the agenda. I cannot recall the 
exact date, but that agreement is a well known fact in Serbia. 
  [Garmaz] In your opinion, how many Croats are there in the 
FRY? 
  [Seselj] We estimate that there could still be about 30,000 
Croats. 
  [Garmaz] And how many Serbs in Croatia? 
  [Seselj] Many more. About 300,000 Serbs were expelled from 
Croatia, excluding the Serbs from the "Serbian Krajina." For, 
when I say Croatia, I mean Croatia without the territory of the 
"Serbian Krajina"! Quite a few have fled to Western Europe. 
They are not registered as refugees.... 
  [Garmaz] How important are you for the political life of 
Serbia, anyway? Why should anyone take your statements 
seriously? Do you have the power to implement this "civilized" 
exchange of population? 
  [Seselj] The number of votes that a person received at the 
elections, i.e. the number of deputies in parliament, is the 
basic and formal way of assessing political power. At the last 
elections, 600,000 Serbian citizens voted for us. Therefore, 
that is the political force that we can safely count on. 
However, we got those votes under most adverse political 
circumstances, under a total media blockade, and in spite of a 
dreadful campaign by the ruling Milosevic regime against my 
party, which adds another element to the strength of our ratings 
and this should not be underestimated! Political rating is a 
changing category, so I would not like to talk about what I 
expect will happen in the future. My predictions may seem 
unrealistic to you, but they have come true many times before. 
  [Garmaz] How much did you lose as a result of the latest 
incident in parliament? 
  [Seselj] Those events have only boosted our ratings, as the 
Socialists realized as well, since they showed the event in 
parliament only once on television and no more. This has 
improved our reputation with the people even more: the tearing 
out of the microphone wiring, the struggle with the police, and 
throwing water at the deputies of the Chamber of Citizens.... 
Anyway, every network in the world reported on it, if only as a 
curiosity, and this enabled us to break the media blockade, 
which had lasted for a full eight months. 
  [Garmaz] The event in parliament shows you finally resorting 
to violence to realize your goals. 
  [Seselj] Nothing was forced there.... Milosevic's team say 
that was an act of vandalism, which is impossible, as there was 
no material damage. Throwing a glass of water at someone is not 
life- threatening and is not particularly violent. Only those 
who got wet could take offense. Since the water was not very 
cold -- meteorological conditions could not have made the water 
a health hazard -- the act could have also been interpreted as a 
welcome refreshment, as everybody sitting in parliament felt as 
though they were in a sauna! 
  As far as the struggle with the police is concerned, they 
simply attacked our deputies. It was not we who attacked the 
police, it was they who attacked us. They were ordered to 
escort only one deputy out. The police cannot violate our 
rights as deputies to sit in the seats assigned to us in 
parliament by carrying out only one order. The cannot tread on 
us just to carry some other deputy out of the parliament 
building. 
  [Garmaz] No political event over the past couple of years 
that has caused excitement in the Serb media has happened 
without you. How do you explain this? 
  [Seselj] I have a specific and a very efficient way of 
getting publicity, especially when I am being threatened and put 
under a media blockade. 
  [Garmaz] You do not think that threatening the courts, from 
the World Court in The Hague to this trial in Belgrade, is a 
serious matter and you are always happy to appear. Is that also 
part of your struggle for publicity? 
  [Seselj] It was not always like that. When I was tried in 
Osijek, I did not show up, nor at the trial in Dubrovnik. But 
in Belgrade, I cannot wait to appear. It all depends on the 
objective political interests of the particular period. It might 
have been politically beneficial if I had gone to the trials in 
Osijek or Dubrovnik. However, there was a serious chance of my 
being liquidated before I entered the courtroom. Consequently, 
objective political interest was outweighed by other factors. 
  [Garmaz] So you have decided to use the trial over the 
events in parliament to put the authorities on trial!? 
  [Seselj] Yes, I am going to use this trial to put Slobodan 
Milosevic and [his wife] Mira Markovic on trial.... 
  [Garmaz] Why Mira Markovic? 
  [Seselj] Mira Markovic has all the power in Serbia. 
Slobodan Milosevic has proved to be a henpecked husband, with 
his wife ordering him around and making all the decisions.... 
She is just like Elena Ceausescu! That is the main reason! 
Also, she is the leading ideologist of the League of 
Communists-Movement for Yugoslavia, a very dangerous political 
party, which is actually a terrorist organization that has 
already committed heinous crimes in these parts. 
  [Garmaz] But the League of Communists-Movement for 
Yugoslavia is not in power. 
  [Seselj] It is not in power but they are very influential, 
for they are fronted by the wife of the president of the 
country! The party organized the well-known kidnapping of 
Sandzak Muslims from the train. 
  [Garmaz] Can you prove that? 
  [Seselj] Of course I can. It was organized in Belgrade and 
many people were involved, including some 10 military trucks, 
which were parked in front of the train. You see, something 
like that, which happened a year and a half ago, in view of the 
involvement of so many people and so much equipment, cannot 
remain a secret. They carefully planned the crime so as to blame 
it on Radovan Karadzic at a suitable moment, at which they did 
not succeed! 
  Furthermore, we announced yesterday that the League of 
Communists -Movement for Yugoslavia participated in arming the 
Muslims in certain parts of Bosnia-Herzegovina.... 
  [Garmaz] Why would the League of Communists-Movement for 
Yugoslavia be arming the Muslims? 
  [Seselj] To win them over. They are still planning to 
restore Yugoslavia. Slobodan Milosevic fell for this, and we 
are now his bitter adversaries. While he was a patriot, he 
could count on our support, but now that he has changed 
completely so as to try to reach an agreement with the United 
States, we will depose him. Anyway, the process of reintegrating 
Yugoslavia is proceeding very well on the territory of all 
former federal units of the former SFRY [Socialist Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia]. This process is also there in 
Slovenia, where they are trying to overthrow Kucan. The United 
States wants to establish a new regime there, which will agree 
to be reintegrated into Yugoslavia. The process is increasingly 
evident in Croatia as well, and Tudjman's position is very weak. 
He will probably be overthrown soon. Now I am keeping my 
fingers crossed for Tudjman, for he will probably never agree to 
a new Yugoslavia! 
  [Garmaz] You support Tudjman? 
  [Seselj] Franjo Tudjman will never agree to return to 
Yugoslavia! Of this I am absolutely convinced! 
  [Garmaz] Do you think that any Croatian politician would 
agree to restoring Yugoslavia? 
  [Seselj] Those who oppose Tudjman would -- Mesic and Manolic 
-- and also people like Racan and Ante Markovic, and this would 
be a most dangerous solution. A new Yugoslavia could never 
function as a normal country, for it would be constantly 
weakened by internal political conflicts. Everything that we 
have endured over the past couple of years would be repeated in 
a decade or two. 
  Furthermore, there is a similar process in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina 
as well, and Izetbegovic will soon be overthrown. Milosevic is 
preparing to replace Radovan Karadzic, while Mate Boban has 
already been eliminated. After that follows the restoration of 
Croatia's integrity, but it will never be able to function. 
Croatia can function only if the "Krajina" is not an integral 
part of it. With Krajina as an integral part of Croatia, 
especially with a high degree of autonomy, Croatia will never be 
a serious country. 
  Bosnia-Herzegovina will never be a serious country, if it is 
composed of three federal units or two federal units. If, 
applying the same principle, Vojvodina, Kosovo, and Sandzak are 
given autonomy, Serbia will not be able to function as a serious 
country either! Nor could a new Yugoslavia with such complex 
domestic relations be a serious country. 
  [Garmaz] You have recently stated that "the Croats will 
create a fourth Yugoslavia!?" 
  [Seselj] That is not exactly what I said. The fourth 
Yugoslavia will first of all be created by the West, with the 
help of those Balkan politicians who accept that option. 
Milosevic has already accepted a new Yugoslavia, for he is 
counting on the United States to accept him as the head of the 
new Yugoslavia. That is where he is very much mistaken. The 
United States will use him in the process of creating new 
Yugoslavia, and then they will get rid of him. They were the 
ones who called Milosevic "the Balkan butcher," "a war 
criminal...." 
  [Garmaz] Do you seriously believe in a new Yugoslavia? 
  [Seselj] I cannot understand that you do not see it already 
happening in Croatia. 
  [Garmaz] Nobody in Croatia wants Yugoslavia! 
  [Seselj] Do not be so naive. 

