BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Violeta Cvetkovska: "Do as I Say, Not as I </F>
Do"] 
  [Text] "A bowed head will not be cut by a spade," our 
people say, seeking to justify an existential obedience. 
  When the government first promoted its Stabilization Program 
for 1994 it said openly that the program had been prepared in 
consultation with and with the full agreement of the 
international financial experts (missions of the IMF and World 
Bank visited our country during the past year). That 
endorsement of the Stabilization Program by the world's 
financiers created the main image of the program. It was the 
reason that it quickly passed the test in parliament and among 
public opinion. At first, however, it was not necessary to pay 
special attention to or understand the fact that moral support 
for the program also meant financial assistance in implementing 
it, which was announced by the government with the calculations 
of some international donations and credits for the annual 
budget, either in paying back foreign debts or in other segments 
of the program: strengthening the balance of payments, 
structural reforms, privatization, social programs, and so on. 
  It would be more than crazy to turn down this support, which 
could at least move us out of the development standstill we are 
in, bearing in mind the financial situation we have been facing 
for a prolonged period, without personal prospects, with the 
fall in the social product, the collapse of manufacturing and 
production, and the lack of investment. However, you do not 
need to be specially clever to realize that those giving 
assistance and money, particularly if they come from the rich 
Western world, where the market, interest, and profit are the 
only criteria in finance, will want the way the money is used to 
be justified and will want respect for their market criteria -- 
from the very beginning, before getting verbal support, up to 
the final realization of the extended assistance. In practice 
this means constant control and "monitoring" of the total 
implementation of the program, with the constant danger of 
sanctions or the assistance being held back because of possible 
inconsistencies and disrespect for their market criteria and 
principles. 
<H5>  Positive Grades </H5>
  This much was clear to everybody, even the government 
members 
from the very beginning, although we can freely say we (they) 
were not totally aware of what this might look like in practice. 
It is now three months since implementation of the 
Stabilization program began and the diligent and hard-working 
financiers have sent another mission to evaluate the course of 
the stabilization, and, by the way, give us some much needed 
advice on the more rational and efficient implementation of the 
measures. 
  The general assessment of the implementation of the 
Stabilization program given by the head of the IMF mission, Paul 
Thompsen, and also the claims of some government officials (the 
Minister of Development Sofija Todorova, for instance) was "very 
good." Of course, in some sectors the forecast was even 
exceeded. They gave the grade "excellent" for inflation 
control, for instance, or the denar exchange rate, the hard 
currency reserves, and control of salaries. However, the 
international officials also "peeped" into public spending, the 
resources for the social program, structural reforms, the 
restructuring of companies, and therefore also into the process 
of privatization. There we got or can still get bad marks. This 
was to be seen in the next part of the practical exam. We were 
almost given a "bad minus" in the sphere of credit and monetary 
policy, in the sector directly related to the interest rate for 
the commercial banking system. It was the attempt to make a 
"parallel slalom" of interest policy with inflation in the 
context of overall macroeconomic policy, via an agreement on 
interest policy for 1994, which started as an initiative of the 
National Bank of Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia -- FYROM] and ended as a "gentleman's agreement" among 
the banks and savings houses that was described as state 
intervention directly endangering the market principles of bank 
management. When they heard of this idea for regulating 
interest policy (linking it to the discount rate of the National 
Bank of Macedonia, which does not imply a "freeze"), the IMF 
representatives were very opposed, although they listened to the 
arguments of our financial experts, that is, the Macedonian 
National Bank. The world's financiers were not persuaded by the 
argument that the banks were not very flexible in adjusting 
enormously high interest rates to current falling inflation, 
thus creating enormous bank taxes such as exist nowhere in the 
world (over 450 percent at an annualized rate), are a great 
burden on the exhausted economy, and act as a boomerang on the 
banking balance (which remains in a constant "minus" because of 
the impossibility of paying the same interest rates). At a 
certain point in the argument the IMF strictly opposed any 
intervention by the Macedonian National Bank in interest rate 
policy, saying that that was not market management -- and you 
have committed yourself to the market economy -- and it 
imperiled further credit support. State intervention could 
imperil the second tranche of $17.5 million of IMF credit, the 
"stand by" arrangement with the IMF worth at least $35 million 
and the $60 million from the World Bank for structural reforms 
($40 million of which is to be used this year). Nobody could 
put these sums at stake. Therefore the Macedonian National Bank 
(the state, you could say) withdrew from interest rate 
policymaking, from its initiative, control and sanctioning, not 
to mention introducing a kind of discipline in the high bank 
interests. The logic of the IMF's good intentions was that the 
interest rates should be formed freely on the market. If they 
are high, so much the better, because they will serve as a good 
warning to those who do not pay promptly. Companies will give 
up the idea of obtaining expensive credits from the banks. As 
far as the present unsuitable situation is concerned in which 
many companies are not repaying their debts, the IMF has a more 
restrictive, but more effective recipe (in their opinion). 
  The banks must be prevented from immediately rewriting 
interest rates for companies that owe large sums of money, that 
is, from investing in such enterprises, thus disrupting the 
spiral of blockades, liquidations, and so on. In that way the 
bad companies and banks will be strictly weeded out (and 
liquidated) and a clear picture of the value of each one on the 
new market economy in the state will emerge. This is quite 
logical, but it is inapplicable in our circumstances. It means 
most of our companies will be shut down, liquidated, and the 
banks will not end up any better than if they try to give the 
money a little heart and soul for the national economy. 
<H5>  Double Standards </H5>
  The other advice of the international financiers on 
restructuring and preparation for privatization was also quite 
categorical: close down all your big systems and plants that are 
not currently making a profit (or have not been making profit 
for some time), liquidate the plants, and strip the companies of 
redundant workers. This means a massive social burden that has 
yet to be taken care of. There will be support for that, too -- 
but later on. In any case, you will have to start the 
restructuring yourselves. We can only give you advice, point 
out your "failures," and say where you cannot expect profit, and 
how many redundant workers you have. The moment the healthy 
segments step on good and profitable ground, we shall even 
finance you. Until then, no fresh capital. With that aim, 25 
of the biggest losers were identified, and they are not allowed 
to touch the expensive banking credits, unless the state becomes 
their guarantor. If it wants to save them, let it do so, as far 
as its guarantee and financial possibilities permit. It is 
unnecessary to state how far they do permit. 
  These two elements that have now come to the surface caused 
a 
lot of commotion regarding the principles and good will of these 
messages. Nobody denies the principles and the global approach 
(and financing) of these institutions, but one might have 
reservations regarding the choice of variant. Even our less 
experienced negotiators (after confidential discussions with 
members of the missions) were aware that the international 
officials entered all the negotiations with a dozen variants 
graded by severity and adaptability. First the strictest 
variant (for us) is presented, which is the most principled one 
for them. Then they withdraw, depending on the skill of the 
negotiators of the other side (ours). However, there is a limit 
beyond which it is impossible to go. Evidently, we, with our 
experience, are not very rich in variants to offer, nevertheless 
some experience gives us the right to have courage in the 
negotiations. 
  To be more precise, some of our globetrotters and experts 
following the world's financial trends are confused by the 
double standard in the behavior of particularly those who are 
bigger and richer in their market economies. Namely, as far as 
interest rates are concerned, even these international financing 
institutions, when giving credits, do not themselves act the way 
they profess in giving verbally declarations of support. In 
giving credits to Germany and Macedonia, they do not apply the 
same interest rates, that is, the interest for us is higher 
because we are a country of greater risk, regardless of the fact 
that we are poorer and need another type of support. As far as 
the free formation of bank interest rates is concerned, Milan 
Hrovat, vice president of the Chamber of Commerce, recently 
cited the example of the European Union holding summits on 
Germany's high interest rates (they said they were attracting 
all the capital from the other countries) and they forced it to 
lower the rates to a tolerable EU level. That was not state, 
but interstate intervention. 

