BFN 

<F P=106> [Press release from the UK Department of the Environment: </F>
"New Guidance on Release of Genetically Modified Plants"] 
  [Text] Reduced information requirements for applications 
for consents to release genetically modified plants were today 
announced by the Department of the Environment. 
  Details are published in a guidance note from the Department 
of Energy [DoE] and the Advisory Committee on Releases to the 
Environment [ACRE]. ACRE advises the Secretary of State on all 
applications to release genetically modified organisms [GMOs]. 
  All such applications have to provide prescribed information 
about the GMO and the potential receiving environment. This 
information is used to assess the risks associated with the 
intended release. However, ACRE's experience of releases of 
genetically modified plants has enabled them to identify the 
information required in the application which is not relevant. 
The guidance note sets out in detail which information is no 
longer required. 
  These reduced requirements come shortly after the 
publication 
of guidance on fast track procedures for releases of low risk 
GMOs. Together they contribute significantly to the Government's 
programme of deregulatory activities in this area, which are 
designed to lighten the burden on applicants without 
compromising safety. 
  This is the third in a series of DOE/ACRE Guidance notes. 
Other technical guidance notes are expected in the next few 
months. 
<H5>  Notes To Editors </H5>
  The guidance notes are published by the DOE on the advice of 
the Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment (ACRE) and 
in association with the Scottish Office, the Welsh Office, the 
Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, and the Health and 
Safety Executive. 
  Acre has been appointed as the committee under s124 of the 
Environmental Protection Act 1990 which advises the Secretary of 
State on matters relating to consents and environmental safety. 
The guidance notes relate to Part VI of the Environmental 
Protection Act 1990 and The Genetically Modified Organisms 
(Deliberate Release) Regulations 1992 (SI 1992/3280) which came 
into effect on 1 February 1993. The legislation introduced a 
consent scheme for all GMO releases. DOE/ACRE Guidance Note 2, 
"Fast Track Procedures for Certain GMO Releases" was published 
in January 1994. 
  DOE/ACRE Guidance Note 3 is available by post from the 
Department of the Environment Publication Sales Unit, Block 3, 
Spur 2, Room 1/2, Government Buildings, Lime Grove, Eastcote, 
HA4 8SE (telephone 081 429 5101), price 9.00 pounds (inclusive 
of post and packing). All orders for the guidance should be 
accompanied by a cheque made payable to the Department of the 
Environment. 
  Press Enquiries: 071 276 0929; (Out of Hours: 071 873 1966); 
Public Enquiries Unit:071 276 0900 

