Language: <F P=105> German, </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Otfried Maus, senior graduate engineer, Schkopau] </F>
  [Text] Engineering diagnosis of electrical operating 
equipment and systems increases their reliability and prevents 
their depreciation. It thus becomes an important tool for 
environmental protection. 
  If the saying that runners never have time needed 
validation, 
Otfried Maus would be the living proof. Previously active at the 
Buna in Schkopau throughout his professional life and now a 
university instructor, he tirelessly espouses his belief to 
students during lectures and to European enterprises during 
conferences: "The state of the insulation in electrical 
operating equipment can be checked and monitored by diagnostic 
methods. Diagnostic measurements are performed in the course of 
periodic inspection." 
  He stuns his audience not by just stating this proposition, 
which can be looked up in every better textbook. Rather, he does 
so with his practical accomplishment the field of diagnostics 
during his work at the Buna in East Germany. This senior 
engineer has often even stunned managers of prominent Swedish, 
Austrian, and Swiss firms as well as of German ones. 
  At that chemical enterprise he did, first alone and later 
with a staff of assistants and in collaboration with 
universities, perform diagnostic measurements long before they 
had been included in international maintenance standards. One 
thing always interested him in cables, electric motors and 
generators, transformers and switchgear: "I recognized the 
possibility of ensuring fitness-oriented maintenance by 
consistent analysis of causes of anomalies occurring after 
repair. In this way I was able to minimize the probability of 
disturbances and accidents, thus increasing the reliability of 
the operating equipment." 
  Otfried Maus wanted more. By means of diagnostic engineering 
measurements, he tried again and again to determine the state of 
the insulation in electrical operating equipment and the state 
of bearings in rotating or driven mechanical equipment. On the 
basis of the readings, he not only wanted to devise inspection 
and maintenance schedules but also wanted to be able to estimate 
the remaining service life of operating equipment and components 
so that necessary new investments for replacement could be made 
on time. 
  "We had to recognize very soon however," recalls Maus, "that 
the results of diagnostic measurements cannot be interpreted 
upon a simple evaluation of the readings. Their interpretation 
requires a great deal of expert knowledge, experience, and 
self-reliance". It cannot be done without team work and exchange 
of ideas. Collaboration was needed even more so during the GDR 
(German Democratic Republic) era, because the necessary 
measurement technique often could not be purchased. Own in-house 
developments and cooperation with fellow specialists, say at the 
Technical Universities in Dresden and in Prague, led time and 
again to realization of new instruments and methods. 
  And today Maus continues to advocate exchange of experience. 
In October 1992 he issued invitations to a conference in 
Schkopau on "Environment-Friendly Maintenance of Electric 
Machines and Plants." This conference was a continuation of the 
traditional biennial 1983-1989 series which he had organized at 
the Buna Works jointly with the Technical Department "Electrical 
Engineering" at the Chamber of Technology (GDR) and the 
Technical University in Dresden. The good response to this 1992 
new version encouraged Maus to conceive another such conference 
to be held in fall 1994. 

