Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Law on ``Fundamentals of Health Care Legislation of the </F>
Ukraine,'' signed by L. Kravchuk, Ukrainian president, on 19 Nov 
92] 
  [Text]Each person has the natural, inalienable and 
inviolable right to health care. Society and the government are 
responsible to present and future generations for their health 
and preservation of the gene pool of the Ukrainian people, they 
provide for priority of health care in activities of the State, 
improvement of working, educational, living and recreational 
conditions for the public, solutions of ecological problems, 
improvement of medical care and adoption of a healthy lifestyle. 
  The Fundamentals of Health Care Legislation in the Ukraine 
regulate social relations in this field for the purpose of 
assuring harmonious development of physical and spiritual 
strength, high degree of work fitness and long active life for 
the people, elimination of factors having a deleterious effect 
on their health, prevention and lowering morbidity, disability 
and mortality, improvement of heredity. 
<H5>  Section I. General Statutes </H5>
<H5>  Article 1. Ukrainian health care legislation </H5>
  Ukrainian health care legislation is based on the Ukrainian 
Constitution and consists of these Fundamentals and other 
legislative acts approved in accordance with the former, which 
regulate social relations in the field of health care. 
<H3>  Article 2. International agreements of the Ukraine in the 
field of health care </H3>
  If international agreements involving the Ukraine set rules 
other than those provided by Ukrainian health care legislation, 
the rules in the international agreement apply. 
<H3>  Article 3. Concepts and terminology used in health care 
legislation </H3>
  In these Fundamentals and other health care legislative 
acts, 
the main concepts have the following meaning: --health: a state 
of complete physical, emotional and social well-being, rather 
than solely the absence of diseases and physical defects; 
--health care: a system of measures aimed at assuring 
preservation and development of an individual's physiological 
and psychological functions, optimum fitness for work and social 
activities with maximum, biologically possible individual life 
span; --health care institutions: enterprises, institutions and 
organizations whose task is to meet the diverse needs of the 
people in the field of health care, by means of rendering 
medical-sanitary care, including a broad spectrum of preventive 
and therapeutic measures or medical services, as well as to 
perform other functions on the basis of professional activities 
of medical workers; --medicosanitary care: a set of special 
measures directed toward helping improve health, broaden 
knowledge about sanitation, prevention of diseases and 
disability, early detection of disease, aid to individuals with 
acute and chronic diseases, rehabilitation of the sick and 
disabled. 
  The content of other concepts and terminology is defined by 
Ukrainian legislation in special glossaries of concepts and 
terms of the World Health Organization. 
<H5>  Article 4. Basic principles of health care </H5>
  The basic principles of Ukrainian public health are: 
--recognition of health care as the priority direction of 
activities of society and the State, one of the chief factors in 
survival and development of the Ukrainian people; --adherence to 
human and citizen rights and freedoms in the field of health 
care and provision of related State guarantees; --humanistic 
orientation, priority of general human values over class, 
ethnic, group or individual interests, increased sociomedical 
protection of the most vulnerable strata of the population; 
--equal rights of citizens, democracy and accessibility to all 
of medical care and other services in the field of health care; 
--material-technical and financial support must conform, with 
scientific validation, to the objectives and level of 
socioeconomic and cultural development of society; --direction 
toward modern health standards and medical care, combining 
national traditions and achievements with worldwide know-how in 
the field of health care; --preventive-prophylactic set of 
social, ecological and medical approaches to health care; 
--mixed health care economics and multi-channel funding thereof, 
combining State guarantees with demonopolization and incentives 
for entrepreneurism and competition; --decentralization of State 
administration, development of self-administration of 
institutions and independence of health care workers on a legal 
and contractual basis. 
<H3>  Article 5. Health care as the mutual obligation of society 
and State </H3>
  State, social and other agencies, enterprises, institutions, 
organizations, officials and citizens must provide for priority 
of health care in their own work, without causing harm to health 
of the public and individual people, to provide within the 
limits of their competence care for patients, invalids and 
victims of accidents, cooperate with workers in health care 
agencies and institutions, as well as perform other duties as 
provided by health care legislation. 
<H3>  Section II. Citizen Rights and Duties in the Field of Health 
Care </H3>
<H5>  Article 6. The right to health care </H5>
  Each Ukrainian citizen has the right to health care, which 
provides: 
a) a standard of level, including food, clothing, housing, 
medical care and social services and security, necessary to 
maintain health; 
b) an environment that is safe to life and health; 
c) sanitary-epidemic welfare of the territory and population 
center where the individual resides; 
d) safe and healthy working, schooling, living and recreational 
conditions; 
e) qualified medicosanitary aid, including free choice of 
physician and health care institution; 
f) reliable and prompt reporting about the health of the 
individual and health of the people, including existing and 
potential risk factors, and severity thereof; 
g) participation in discussion of drafts of legislative acts and 
offering suggestions on shaping State policy in the field of 
health care; 
h) participation in health care administration and social 
expertise on these matters according to procedure stipulated by 
legislation; 
i) opportunity to form social organizations for the purpose of 
cooperating in health care; 
j) legal protection against all illegal forms of discrimination 
related to health status; 
k) compensation for harm done to health; 
l) complaints about illegal decisions and actions of health care 
workers, institutions and agencies; 
m) opportunity to obtain an independent expert medical opinion 
expertise in case of the citizen's disagreement with conclusions 
of State medical experts, being submitted to forced treatment, 
and in other cases if the actions of health care workers could 
infringe upon universally recognized human and citizen rights. 
  Ukrainian legislation can also define other citizen rights 
in 
the field of health care. 
  Ukrainian citizens abroad are guaranteed the right to health 
care in the forms and scope provided by international 
agreements, in which the Ukraine is a participant. 
<H5>  Article 7. Guarantee of right to health care </H5>
  In accordance with the Ukrainian Constitution, the State 
guarantees to all citizens the expression of their rights in the 
field of health care by means of: 
a) creation of a branched out network of health care 
institutions; 
b) organization and implementation of a system of State and 
social steps to safeguard and strengthen health; 
c) delivery to all citizens of a guaranteed level of 
medicosanitary care to the extent established by the Ukrainian 
Cabinet of Ministers; 
d) implementation of a State system of gathering, processing and 
analyzing social, ecological and special medical statistical 
data; 
e) establishment of liability for violating rules and legal 
interests of citizens in the field of health care. 
<H5>  Article 8. State protection of rights to health care </H5>
  The state recognizes the right of each Ukrainian citizen to 
health care and health protection. 
  In the event that legal rights and interests of citizens in 
the field of health care are violated, pertinent State, social 
or other agencies, enterprises, institutions and organizations, 
their executives and citizens must take steps to restore 
violated rights, protect legal interests and make restitution 
for damage caused. 
  Protection of the right to health care in legal form is 
implemented according to procedure established by legislation. 
<H3>  Article 9. Limitations on citizen rights related to health 
status </H3>
  On the basis of and following procedure stipulated by 
Ukrainian laws, citizens may be declared temporarily or 
permanently unfit because of health for professional or other 
activities related to increased danger to others, as well as to 
performance of specific State functions. 
  Use of forced medical measures on individuals who have 
committed socially dangerous acts, limitation of the rights of 
other citizens in the form of forced medical examination or 
forced hospitalization, as well as in connection with quarantine 
measures, are allowed only on the basis of and following 
procedure stipulated by Ukrainian laws. 
  Decisions on limiting citizen rights related to their health 
status may be appealed in legal form. 
<H5>  Article 10. Duties of citizens in the field of health care </H5>
  Ukrainian citizens are obliged to: 
a) be concerned about their health and the health of children, 
and not harm the health of other citizens; 
b) undergo preventive medical examinations and receive 
inoculations in cases stipulated in legislation; 
c) give emergency aid to other citizens who are in life- and 
health-threatening states; 
d) perform other duties stipulated in health care legislation. 
<H3>  Article 11. Rights and duties of foreign citizens and 
stateless individuals </H3>
  Foreign citizens and stateless individuals residing on 
Ukrainian territory enjoy the same rights and have the same 
obligations in the field of health care as Ukrainian citizens, 
unless otherwise stipulated in international agreements or 
Ukrainian legislation. 
  The rights and duties in the the field of health care of 
foreign citizens and stateless individuals who are temporarily 
on Ukrainian territory are defined by legislation and pertinent 
international agreements. 
<H5>  Section III. Bases for Organization of Health Care </H5>
<H3>  Article 12. Health care, the priority direction of State 
activities </H3>
  Health care is one of the priority directions of State 
activities. The State shapes health care policy in the Ukraine 
and provides for its implementation. 
  State health care policy is funded by budgetary allocations 
in an amount conforming to its scientifically validated needs, 
but no less than ten percent of the national income. 
<H5>  Article 13. Shaping State health care policy </H5>
  The Ukrainian Supreme Soviet lays the foundation for State 
health care policy by means of securing constitutional and legal 
aspects of health care, defining its goals, main tasks, 
directions, principles and priorities, establishing norms and 
scope of budgetary funding, creating systems conforming to 
credit and finance, tax, customs duty and other regulators, and 
approving the list of comprehensive and special-purpose national 
health care programs. 
  In order to solve problems of shaping State health care 
policy, consultant and expert offices manned by health care 
specialists and representatives of the community may be formed 
under the Supreme Soviet of the Ukraine. The procedure for 
establishing and activities of such agencies are stipulated by 
the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet. 
  The health care policy of the Republic of Crimea, local and 
regional comprehensive and special-purpose programs, which are 
prepared by the Supreme Soviet of the Crimean Republic, local 
and regional self-government agencies constitute an integral 
part of the State health care policy of the Ukraine, and they 
reflect the specific health care needs of the population of 
pertinent territories. 
<H5>  Article 14. Implementation of the State health care policy </H5>
  Implementation of the State health care policy is delegated 
to of State executive agencies. 
  The president of the Ukraine is personally responsible for 
it. In his annual report to the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet, the 
Ukrainian president reports on the status of implementation of 
State health care policy. 
  The Ukrainian president is the guarantor of citizen rights 
to 
health care, implements adherence to health care legislation 
through a system of State executive agencies; he carries out 
State health care policy and exercises other powers stipulated 
in the Ukrainian Constitution. 
  The Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers organizes elaboration and 
implementation of comprehensive and special-purpose national 
programs; he creates economic, legal and organizational systems 
to stimulate efficient performance in the field of health care; 
he implements development of a network of health care 
institutions; he signs intergovernment agreements and 
coordinates international collaboration on health care issues, 
and also exercises, within the limits of his competence, other 
powers placed upon State executive agencies in the field of 
health care. 
  Within the limits of their competence, ministries, 
departments and other central State executive agencies develop 
programs and forecasts in the field of health care, define 
unified, scientifically validated State standards, criteria and 
requirements which should assist in health care for the public; 
they prepare and place State orders for material and technical 
support of this sector; they implement State supervision and 
oversight, and other executive-management activities in the 
field of health care. 
  The Crimean Council of Ministers, representatives of the 
Ukrainian president and subordinated local state administration 
agencies, as well as executive committees of rural, village and 
urban councils of people's deputies implement State health care 
policy within the limits of their authority, as stipulated in 
legislation. 
<H5>  Article 15. Health care agencies </H5>
  The Ukrainian Ministry of Health, whose competence is 
defined 
in a statute approved by the Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers, is 
the specially authorized central agency of State executive power 
in the field of health care. 
  The duties of specially authorized State executive agencies 
in territorial-administrative entities of the Ukraine are 
delegated to the Health Department of the Crimean Council of 
Ministers and local State administrative agencies. 
<H5>  Article 16. Health care institutions </H5>
  Sanitary-preventive, medical-preventive [therapeutic and 
preventive care] therapeutic physical culture, sanatorium and 
resort, pharmacy, medical research and other health care 
institutions are directly involved in public health care. 
  Health care institutions are established by enterprises, 
institutions and organizations with different forms of 
ownership, as well as private individuals, in the presence of 
the necessary material and technical base, and qualified 
specialists. Procedure and conditions for establishment of 
health care institutions, State registration and accreditation 
of such institutions, as well as procedure for licensing medical 
and pharmaceutical practice are stipulated in Ukrainian 
legislative acts. 
  The health care institution performs its activities on the 
basis of a charter approved by the proprietor or his authorized 
agency. 
  Regardless of juridical status of a health care institution, 
it can be managed only by an individual that meets the 
State-established unified qualification requirements. 
Independence in making decisions on all issues related to health 
care must be granted to the administrator of a health care 
institutions. 
  The Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers and its authorized 
agencies, as well as local self-government agencies within the 
limits of their authority, have the right to suspend the 
activities of any health care institution, if it violates health 
care legislation, fails to meet State requirements as to quality 
of medical care and other activities in the field of health 
care, or if its actions are in contradiction to its charter. 
<H5>  Article 17. Individual entrepreneurial health care activities </H5>
  The State supports and encourages individual enterpreneurial 
activities in the field of health care. 
  A permit (license) for such activities is issued following 
procedure stipulated in legislation. Disputes concerning denial 
of permit (license) are examined in legal form. 
  Engagement in medical and pharmaceutical practice without 
the 
appropriate license is subject to liability as stipulated in 
legislation. 
<H5>  Article 18. Health care funding </H5>
  Health care is funded by the Ukrainian State budget, Crimean 
budget, local and regional self-government budgets, health 
insurance funds, charitable funds and any other sources that are 
not prohibited by legislation. 
  Funds from the Ukrainian State budget, Crimean budget, local 
and regional self-government budgets, which are allocated for 
health care, are used to provide the public with a guaranteed 
level of medicosanitary aid, funding State and local health care 
programs and basic research on these matters. 
  The extent of budgetary funding is determined on the basis 
of 
scientifically validated norms per capita. 
  The Ukrainian State budget, Crimean budget, local and 
regional self-government budgets fund health care institutions 
accessible to all. Funds that have not been used by a health 
care institution are not returnable and are not deducted from 
funding for the next period. 
  Departmental and other health care institutions servicing 
only some population categories according to occupation, 
department or other factor unrelated to the health status of an 
individual are funded, as a rule, by the enterprises, 
institutions and organizations that they service. It is allowed 
to give financial support to such institutions at the expense of 
the State or local budgets if workers of the pertinent 
department, enterprise, institution or organization constitute a 
significant part of the inhabitants of a given locality. 
  All health care institutions have the right to use 
resources, 
to enhance the quality of their work, given voluntarily by 
enterprises, institutions, organizations and individual 
citizens, as well as to fix payments for health care services 
with the permission of a proprietor or his authorized agency. 
  The State provides for establishment and operation of a 
system of health insurance for the public. Ukrainian State 
budget, funds of enterprises, institutions and organizations and 
citizens' contributions pay for this insurance. Matters of 
organization of health insurance and use of insurance funds are 
stipulated in pertinent legislation. 
<H5>  Article 19. Material and technical support of health care </H5>
  The State organizes material and technical support of health 
care to the extent necessary to provide the public with a 
guaranteed level of medicosanitary aid. All health care 
institutions have the right to make independent decisions on 
matters of their material and technical support. The State 
assists in production of medical apparatus, instruments, 
equipment, laboratory reagents, drugs, prostheses, hygienic 
supplies and other items necessary to health care, as well as 
development of trade in such goods. 
  For this purpose, there are provisions for implementation of 
State programs of priority development of the medical, 
biological and pharmaceutical industries, it encourages 
entrepreneurism and international collaboration in the area of 
material and technical support of health care, creates a system 
of relevant taxation, prices, customs and other preferential 
treatment and regulators. 
  The State can restrict export of merchandise essential to 
health care and raw materials to manufacture it, if it could be 
detrimental to the health care interests of the Ukrainian people. 
  In order to provide for proper quality of goods needed for 
health care, their use is permitted only after mandatory trial 
carried out following procedure coordinated with the Ukrainian 
Ministry of Health. 
<H5>  Article 20. Scientific support of health care </H5>
  The state assists in development of research in the field of 
health care and adoption of its results in the practice of 
health care institutions and workers. Research carried out by 
academic and departmental research institutions, educational and 
other scientific institutions and subdivisions or individual 
scientists is funded on the basis of competition by the State 
budget, as well as any other sources of financing that are not 
in contradiction with legislation. 
  All State health care programs and most important measures 
for their implementation are subject to mandatory prior 
scientific expertise in the leading national and international 
institutions named by the Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers. 
  The Ukrainian Academy of Medical Sciences, which is 
independent in carrying out research and development, is the 
highest scientific medical institution of the Ukraine with the 
status of a self-administered organization. 
<H3>  Article 21. Tax-related and other preferential treatment in 
the field of health care </H3>
  Health care institutions and individuals engaged in 
enterpreneurial health care, as well as business entities that 
produce items necessary to support the activities of health care 
institutions enjoy tax-related or other preferential treatment 
as stipulated in legislation. 
<H3>  Article 22. State monitoring and oversight in the field of 
health care </H3>
  Through specially authorized executive agencies, the State 
monitors and oversees adherence to health care legislation, 
State standards, criteria and requirements aimed at providing a 
healthy environment and sanitary-epidemic well-being of the 
public, norms of professional activities in the field of health 
care, requirements of the State Pharmacopoeia, standards of 
medical services, medical materials and equipment. 
<H3>  Article 23. Higher oversight of adherence to health care 
legislation </H3>
  Higher oversight of adherence to health care legislation is 
implemented by the Prosecutor-General of the Ukraine and his 
subordinate prosecutors. 
<H5>  Article 24. Community participation in health care </H5>
  Health care agencies and institutions must assist in 
implementation of citizen rights to participate in health care 
management and public expertise on these matters. 
  Public consultant or oversight councils may be formed in 
health care agencies and institutions, to assist in their work 
and inform the public, and effect public monitoring in the field 
of health care. 
  Professional societies of health care workers and other 
associations of citizens, including international ones, may 
participate in defining the content and means of implementation 
of national and local health care programs, pertinent measures, 
decisions on personnel, scientific and other problems of 
organizing State activities in this field. 
<H5>  Section IV. Providing Healthy and Safe Living Conditions </H5>
<H3>  Article 25. Maintenance of public standard of living 
essential to health </H3>
  The State provides a standard of living, including food, 
clothing, housing, medical care, social services and security 
that is essential to maintain the health of the people. 
  For these purposes, on the basis of scientifically validated 
medical, physiological and sanitary-hygienic requirements, 
unified rates are fixed for minimum wages, pensions, 
scholarships, social benefits and other incomes of the public, 
in-kind, including free, supply of food, clothing, drugs and 
other essential items is organized for the most vulnerable 
strata of the population; a set of measures is carried out to 
meet essential needs of refugees, homeless and other individuals 
who have no definite place of residence; free medical care and 
social services are provided for individuals who are in 
difficult financial straits presenting a threat to their lives 
and health. 
  Medical, physiological and sanitary-hygienic requirements 
pertaining to standard of living are approved by the Ukrainian 
Supreme Soviet. 
<H5>  Article 26. Environmental protection </H5>
  The State provides for environmental protection as an 
important prerequisite of human life and health, by means of 
protecting animate and inanimate nature, protecting people 
against negative ecological factors, achieving harmonious 
interaction of individuals, society and nature, wise use and 
reproduction of natural resources. 
  Relations pertaining to environmental protection are 
regulated by pertinent legislation of the Ukraine and 
international agreements. 
<H3>  Article 27. Providing sanitary-epidemic welfare of 
territories and population centers </H3>
  Sanitary-epidemic welfare of territories and population 
centers is provided by a system of State incentives and 
regulators aimed at strict adherence to sanitary-hygienic and 
sanitary-epidemic-control rules and standards, a set of special 
sanitary-hygienic and sanitary-epidemic-control measures and 
organizations of State sanitary oversight. 
  In the Ukraine, unified sanitary-hygienic requirements are 
established for: planning and construction of population 
centers; construction and operation of industrial and other 
entities; purification and decontamination of industrial and 
municipal emissions, garbage and waste; upkeep and use of 
residential, industrial and business buildings and territories 
where they are located; organization of public catering 
facilities and water supply; production, use, storage, 
transportation and burial of radioactive, toxic and potent 
substances; upkeep and slaughtering of domestic and wild 
animals, as well as for other activities that could endanger 
sanitary-epidemic welfare of territories and population centers. 
<H3>  Article 28. Providing beneficial working, educational, 
living and recreational conditions Unified sanitary-hygienic 
requirements are established for the organization of industrial 
and other processes related to human activities, as well as for 
the quality of machinery, equipment, structures, consumer goods 
and other things that could have a deleterious effect on health, 
in order to provide working, educational, living and 
recreational conditions that are beneficial to health, a high 
level of work fitness, to prevent traumatism and occupational 
disease, poisoning and other possible harm to health. All State 
standards, specifications and industrial prototypes must be in 
agreement with health care agencies following procedure 
established by legislation. </H3>
  Proprietors and administrators of enterprises, institutions 
and organizations must provide in their work for adherence to 
labor safety rules, industrial sanitation and other labor safety 
requirements, as stipulated in labor legislation, and must not 
allow any factors that are deleterious to human health and the 
environment. 
  The State implements oversight and monitoring of creation of 
working, educational, living and recreational conditions 
beneficial to health, and cooperate in public monitoring of 
these matters. 
<H3>  Article 29. Preservation of genetic pool of the Ukrainian 
people </H3>
  The State implements a set of measures aimed at elimination 
of factors that have a devastating impact on the human genetic 
system, as well as establishes a system of State genetic 
monitoring, organizes medicogenetic aid for the public, assists 
in enrichment and dissemination of scientific information in the 
field of genetics and demography, in the interests of preserving 
the gene pool of the Ukrainian people, preventing a demographic 
crisis, assuring the health of future generations and prevention 
of hereditary diseases. 
  Medical interventions that could impair the human genetic 
system are prohibited. 
<H5>  Article 30. Prevention of dangerous infectious diseases </H5>
  The State provides for regular, scientifically validated 
prevention, treatment, localization and eradication of mass 
scale infectiousdiseases. 
  Individuals who are carriers of pathogens of infectious 
diseases that are dangerous to the public are removed from work 
and other activities that could be instrumental in the spread of 
infectious diseases, and they are subject to medical supervision 
and treatment at the State's expense, with payment, if 
necessary, of social insurance benefits. Mandatory physical 
examinations, preventive inoculations, therapeutic and 
quarantine measures may be carried out, following procedure 
established by Ukrainian laws, for some particularly dangerous 
infectious diseases. 
  In case of danger of onset or spread of epidemic diseases, 
the president of the Ukraine, in accordance with Ukrainian laws 
and recommendations of health care agencies, can call for 
special working, educational, traffic and transportation 
conditions and schedules over the entire Ukrainian territory or 
individual localities, which are aimed at averting the spread of 
such diseases and eradicating them. 
  Local State administrative, regional and local 
self-government agencies must actively cooperate in 
implementation of epidemic-control measures. 
  The list of particularly dangerous and dangerous infectious 
diseases, and conditions for declaring that someone has an 
infectious disease or is a carrier of the pathogen of an 
infectious disease are determined by the Ukrainian Ministry of 
Health and published in official sources. 
<H5>  Article 31. Mandatory physical examinations </H5>
  Preventive physical examinations are organized, for the 
purpose of safeguarding public health, for minors, pregnant 
women, employees of enterprises, institions and organizations 
that have deleterious and hazardous working conditions, military 
personnel and individuals whose professional or other activities 
are related to services for the public or increased danger to 
others. 
  Proprietors and administrators of enterprises, institutions 
and organizations are held responsible for timely mandatory 
physical examination of their employees and consequences that 
are deleterious to health of the public, which have been caused 
by permitting individuals to work without undergoing a mandatory 
physical examination. 
  The list of population categories subject to mandatory 
physical examinations, their frequency, sources of funding and 
procedure of such examinations are determined by the Ukrainian 
Cabinet of Ministers. 
<H5>  Article 32. Furthering a healthy lifestyle </H5>
  The State assists in the public in developing a healthy 
lifestyle by means of dissemination of scientific information on 
health care matters, organization of medical, ecological and 
physical education, implementation of measures aimed at 
improving hygienic education of the public, provision of 
necessary conditions, including medical supervision, for 
physical culture, sports and tourism, development of a network 
of preventoriums, recreational bases and other health-improving 
institutions, at control of habits that are deleterious to human 
health, establishment of a system of socioeconomic incentives 
for individuals who have a healthy lifestyle. 
  Holding healing sessions and carrying out other analogous 
measures involving use of hypnosis and other mental or 
bioenergetic methods aimed at a mass audience are prohibited 
without special permission of the Ukrainian Ministry of Health, 
in order to prevent harm to health of the public. 
<H5>  Section V. Treatment and Preventive Care </H5>
<H5>  Article 33. Providing treatment and preventive care </H5>
  Treatment and preventive care are provided to Ukrainian 
citizens by polyclinics, hospitals, dispensaries, clinics of 
research institutes and other accredited health care 
institutions, emergency medical care service, as well as 
individual medical workers with the appropriate permit (license). 
  Special medical-preventive institutions are established to 
give therapeutic and preventive care to Ukrainian citizens who 
enjoy appropriate benefits as established by legislation. 
<H5>  Article 34. Attending physician </H5>
  The attending physician can be chosen directly by a patient 
or assigned by the administrator of a health care institution or 
its subordinate department. The duties of the attending 
physician are prompt and qualified examination and treatment of 
the patient. The patient has the right to ask for another 
physician. 
  The physician has the right to refuse further management of 
a 
patient if the latter does not carry out medical instructions or 
intramural rules of the health care institution, provided that 
this would not endanger the life of the patient and health of 
the public. 
  The physician is not liable for the health of a patient if 
the latter refuses to carry out medical instructions or does not 
adhere to the regimen established for him. 
<H5>  Article 35. Types of treatment and preventive care </H5>
  The State guarantees accessible, socially acceptable primary 
treatment and preventive care as the chief component of 
medicosanitary aid which implies consultation of a physician, 
simple diagnostic procedures and treatment of the main and most 
widespread diseases, trauma and poisoning, preventive measures, 
referral of patient for specialized and highly specialized care. 
Primary treatment and preventive care are rendered mainly on a 
territorial basis by family physicians or other general 
practitioners. 
  Specialized (secondary) medical-preventive care is rendered 
by physicians who have the appropriate specialization and can 
provide more qualified consultation, diagnosis, prevention and 
treatment than general practitioners. 
  Highly specialized (tertiary) medical-preventive care is 
rendered by physicians or a team of physicians who have 
appropriate training in the field of diseases that are difficult 
to diagnose and treat, in the case of treatment of diseases 
requiring special diagnostic and therapeutic methods, as well as 
for the purpose of diagnosing and treating rare diseases. 
<H5>  Article 36. Patient referral abroad </H5>
  Ukrainian citizens may be referred abroad for treatment in 
case of need for a type of medical care that cannot be rendered 
in Ukrainian health care institutions. 
  State agencies are obliged to assist Ukrainian citizens in 
travel and stays abroad. 
  Procedure for referring Ukrainian citizens abroad for 
treatment is established by the Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers. 
<H5>  Article 37. Urgent and emergency medical care </H5>
  Medical workers must render first emergency care in cases of 
accidents and acute diseases. Medical care is provided by the 
medical first aid service or closest medical-preventive 
institution, regardless of departmental subordination and forms 
of ownership with subsequent reimbursement of expenses. 
  In urgent cases, when it is impossible to administer on-site 
care due to absence of medical personnel, enterprises, 
institutions, organizations and citizens must provide 
transportation to move the victim to a medical-preventive 
institution. In such cases, first aid should also be given by 
militia, fire department, accident service personnel, vehicle 
operators and representatives of other occupations upon whom 
this duty is placed by legislation and official instructions. 
  If there is a threat to a patient's life, medical personnel 
and other citizens have the right to use any available vehicle 
to get to the patient's location in order to administer urgent 
care or transport him to the nearest medical-preventive 
institution. 
  Administration of free medical care to citizens in emergency 
situations (natural calamity, accident, disaster, mass 
poisoning, epidemic, epizootic, radiation, bacteriological and 
chemical contamination, etc.) is the duty, first of all, of 
specialized brigades of the urgent medical care service, with 
reimbursement in full of necessary expenses of local health care 
institutions at the expense of centralized funds. 
  Citizens who were involved in rescuing people and helped 
render medical care in an urgent or emergency situation are 
guaranteed free treatment and financial compensation for harm to 
their health and property, if necessary, following procedure 
established by legislation. 
  Government agencies and special institutions that service 
medical institutions are held liable for delayed and poor 
quality of medical care. 
<H5>  Article 38. Choice of physician and medical institution </H5>
  Each patient has the right to free choice of physician, if 
the latter is available. 
  Every patient has the right, if warranted by his condition, 
to be accepted in any State medical-preventive institution of 
his choice, if this institution is able to provide the needed 
treatment. 
<H5>  Article 39. Obligation to provide medical information </H5>
  The physician must explain to the patient, in understandable 
terms, the condition of his health, purpose of suggested tests 
and therapeutic measures, prognosis of possible development of 
disease, including presence of risk to life and health. 
  The patient has the right to see his case history and other 
documentation that could be useful in subsequent treatment. 
  In special cases, when complete information could harm the 
patient's health, the physician can limit it. In this case, he 
informs family members or the patient's legal representative, 
with consideration of the patient's personal interests. The 
physician takes the same action if the patient is unconscious. 
<H5>  Article 40. Physician's confidentiality </H5>
  Medical workers and others who learned about a citizen's 
illness, physical examination, and results, his intimate and 
family life in the course of carrying out their professional or 
business duties, do not have the right to divulge such 
information, with the exception of instances stipulated in 
legislative acts. 
  When privileged medical information is used in the 
educational process or research, including instances where it is 
published in the special literature, the patient must remain 
anonymous. 
<H5>  Article 41. Sick leave </H5>
  Citizens are granted leave from their work for the duration 
of their illness involving temporary disability, with payment of 
social insurance benefits following procedure established by 
Ukrainian legislation. 
<H5>  Article 42. General conditions of medical intervention </H5>
  Medical intervention (use of diagnostic, preventive or 
treatment methods affecting the human body) is permitted only if 
it cannot cause harm to the patient's health. 
  Medical intervention that entails a risk to the patient's 
health is permitted as an exception, when there is an acute 
need, if the potential harm of the diagnostic, preventive or 
having therapeutic method is less than the harm expected if 
intervention is denied, and it is impossible to eliminate the 
danger to the patient's health by other methods. 
  Risky diagnostic, preventive or treatment methods are deemed 
permissible if they meet current scientifically validated 
requirements, are aimed at preventing a real threat to life and 
health of the patient, used with the consent of the patient 
after he is informed about the possible harmful consequences, 
and the physician takes all measures appropriate to such cases 
to prevent detriment to the patient's health and life. 
<H5>  Article 43. Consent to medical intervention </H5>
  The consent of an objectively informed competent patient is 
required for use of diagnostic, preventive and therapeutic 
methods. If the patient has not reached the age of 15 years, or 
is declared legally incompetent, or cannot express his wishes 
due to his physical condition, medical intervention can be 
performed with the consent of parents or other legal 
representatives of the patient. Such intervention can be 
performed on individuals 15 to 18 years old or with legally 
diminished capacity with their consent and consent of their 
parents or other legal representatives. 
  In emergency cases when there is a real threat to the 
patient's life, the consent of the patient or his legal 
representatives to medical intervention is not required. 
  If absence of consent could lead to serious consequences for 
the patient, the physician must explain this to him. If even 
after this the patient refuses treatment, the physician has the 
right to get a written confirmation from him and, if this is 
unfeasible, to certify the refusal in the appropriate form in 
the presence of witnesses. 
  If the refusal is made by the patient's legal representative 
and it could have serious consequences for the patient, the 
physician must report this to legal guardianship and trusteeship 
agencies. 
<H3>  Article 44. Use of preventive, diagnostic, therapeutic 
methods and drugs </H3>
  In their practice, physicians must use the preventive, 
diagnostic and therapeutic methods, and drugs permitted by the 
Ukrainian Ministry of Health. 
  In the interests of curing a patient and with his consent 
and, with respect to minors and those declared legally 
incompetent, the consent of their parents, guardians or 
trustees, the physician can use new, scientifically validated 
diagnostic, preventive, therapeutic methods and drugs, which 
have not yet been allowed for general use. With respect to 
individuals 15 to 18 years old or declared to have limited legal 
competence, use of such methods and drugs can be made with their 
consent and the consent of their parents or other legal 
representatives. 
  The procedure for using the above-mentioned diagnostic, 
preventive, therapeutic methods and drugs is established by the 
Ukrainian Ministry of Health. 
<H5>  Article 45. Biomedical experiments on humans </H5>
  Biomedical experimentation on humans is permitted for a 
socially useful purpose, provided: they are scientifically 
validated, the possibility of success outweighs the risk of 
serious consequences to health or life, there is announcement of 
use of the experiment, the subject is fully informed about what 
the experiment entails and has given his consent, and 
doctor-patient confidentiality is observed when necessary. It is 
prohibited to carry out research experiments on patients who are 
incarcerated or prisoners of war, as well as to carry out 
therapeutic experiments on people whose illness has no direct 
bearing on the purpose of the study. 
  The procedure for carrying out biomedical experiments is 
regulated by legislative acts of the Ukraine. 
<H5>  Article 46. Donation of blood and its components </H5>
  Blood for therapeutic use is donated voluntarily by 
citizens. 
It is prohibited to take blood by force, or from individuals 
whose diseases could be transmitted to a recipient or harm his 
health. Health care agencies and institutions, with the 
cooperation of administrators of enterprises, institutions and 
organizations, must develop donorship in every way. 
  Donors enjoy benefits as stipulated by Ukrainian 
legislation. 
<H3>  Article 47. Transplantation of organs and other anatomical 
material </H3>
  The method of donor to recipient transplantation of organs 
and other anatomical material is used according to specific 
legislative procedure, with their consent or with the consent of 
their legal representatives, provided that use of other means 
and methods of supporting life, restoration or improvement of 
health does not yield the desired results, and the harm 
sustained by the donor is outweighed by the harm that the 
recipient is facing. 
<H5>  Article 48. Artificial insemination and embryo implantation </H5>
  Artificial insemination and embryo implantation are 
performed 
according to conditions and procedure established by the 
Ukrainian Ministry of Health, at the request of a competent 
woman on whom such procedures are performed, provided there is 
written consent of her husband, donor anonymity and observation 
of medical confidentiality. 
  Disclosure of a donor's name could occur following procedure 
stipulated in legislation. 
<H5>  Article 49. Use of sterilization methods </H5>
  Sterilization methods can be used at the discretion or with 
the voluntary consent of the patient in accredited health care 
institutions when medically indicated, as stipulated by the 
Ukrainian Ministry of Health. 
<H5>  Article 50. Voluntary interruption of pregnancy </H5>
  Artificial interruption of a pregnancy (abortion) can be 
carried out in accredited health care institutions within 12 
weeks of conception at a woman's discretion. 
  Abortions can be performed betrween the 12th to 28th weeks 
of 
the gestation period with social and medical indications in 
individual cases and following procedure established by the 
Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers. 
<H5>  Article 51. Sex change procedures </H5>
  At the request of the patient and in accordance with 
biomedical and sociopsychological indications established by the 
Ukrainian Ministry of Health, medical intervention can be 
carried out at accredited health care institutions for the 
purpose of sex change (correction). 
  A medical certificate is issued to the individual who has 
undergone a sex change, on the basis of which the question of 
appropriate changes in his legal status is subsequently settled. 
<H5>  Article 52. Medical care of patients in critical condition </H5>
  Medical workers must render a full volume of medical care to 
a critical patient. Such care can also be administered in 
specially created health care institutions that enjoy benefits 
from the State. 
  Active life-support measures are stopped if irreversible 
death has been determined. Procedure for discontinuing such 
measures, concept and criteria of death are defined by the 
Ukrainian Ministry of Health, in accordance with modern 
international requirements. 
  It is prohibited for medical workers to practice euthanasia 
-- the deliberate acceleration of death or killing of an 
incurable person in order to stop his suffering. 
<H3>  Article 53. Special preventive and therapeutic methods for 
socially dangerous diseases </H3>
  Health care agencies and institutions must carry out special 
preventive and therapeutic measures for socially dangerous 
diseases (tuberculosis, mental illness, sexually-transmitted 
diseases, AIDS, leprosy, chronic alcoholism, drug addiction), as 
well as quarantinable diseases, in order to safeguard the health 
of the public. 
  The procedure for hospitalization and treatment of such 
patients, including forced steps, is established by legislative 
acts of the Ukraine. 
<H5>  Article VI. Supplying Drugs and Prostheses </H5>
<H3>  Article 54. Procedure for supplying drugs and immunological 
agents </H3>
  Citizens are supplied with drugs and immunobiological agents 
through pharmacy and medical-preventive institutions. 
  The procedure for supplying drugs and immunobiological 
preparations to the public free or on preferential terms is 
defined by Ukrainian legislation. 
  Pharmacy and medical-preventive institutions may dispense 
only the drugs and immunobiological agents, use of which is 
permitted by the Ukrainian Ministry of Health, and they are 
responsible for maintaining appropriate conditions for their 
storage and sale, as well as having the mandatory assortment of 
drugs and immunobiological agents, including the necessary 
reserve in case of epidemic diseases, natural calamities and 
disasters. 
  The Ukrainian Ministry of Health regularly informs health 
care workers and the public about drugs and immunobiological 
agents, the use of which is permitted. 
<H5>  Article 55. Manufacture of drugs and immunobiological agents </H5>
  Manufacture of new drugs and immunobiological agents for 
medical purposes is allowed with permission of the Ukrainian 
Ministry of Health, after determination of their therapeutic or 
prophylactic efficacy. 
  The quality of drugs and immunobiological agents must 
conform 
to requirements in the Ukrainian State Pharmacopoeia and 
specifications approved following established procedure. 
  The Ukrainian Ministry of Health monitors the quality of 
drugs and immunobiological preparations manufactured by 
enterprises of the Ukraine. 
<H5>  Article 56. Supplying prosthesis </H5>
  When necessary, prosthesis, orthopedic and corrective items, 
eyeglasses, hearing aids, equipment for therapeutic physical 
culture and special means of transportation are provided to 
citizens. 
  The categories of individuals eligible for free or 
preferential terms for the above items and supplies, as well as 
conditions and procedure for furnishing them, are established by 
Ukrainian legislation. 
<H5>  Section VII. Mother and Child Care </H5>
<H3>  Article 57. Incentives for mothers. Guaranteed health care 
for mothers and children </H3>
  The State protects and offers incentives for mothers. 
  Mother and child health care is provided by: organizing a 
broad network of gynecological, medicogenetic and other offices, 
maternity homes, sanatoriums and rest homes for pregnant women 
and mothers with children, creches, kindergartens and other 
children's institutions; granting maternity leave with payment 
of social insurance benefits and allowing work breaks to nurse 
the infant; paying, according to established procedure, benefits 
related to the birth of a child and benefits for staying at home 
to care for a sick child; prohibition of employment of women in 
heavy and unhealthy industries, transfer of pregnant women to 
light work with retention of average earnings; improvement and 
sanitization of living and working conditions; elimination of 
negative ecological factors; State and social assistance to 
families, and other measures following procedure established by 
Ukrainian legislation. 
  For purposes of safeguarding the health of a woman, she has 
the right to make the decision to have children. 
<H5>  Article 58. Medical care for pregnant women and neonates </H5>
  Health care institutions provide qualified medical 
supervision in the gestation period, in-hospital medical care at 
the time of delivery, treatment and preventive care of the 
mother and newborn infant. 
<H3>  Article 59. Concern for strengthening and protecting the 
health of children and adolescents </H3>
  Parents must be concerned about the health of their 
children, 
their physical and spiritual development, and having them lead a 
health lifestyle. If this duty is not performed, and this causes 
substantial harm to a child's health, the guilty parties can be 
deprived of parental rights in accordance with established 
procedure. 
  In order to rear a healthy young generation with harmonious 
development of physical and spiritual strength, the State 
provides for development of a broad network of nursery schools, 
boarding schools, health centers, vacation camps and other 
children's institutions. 
  Children who are reared in children's institutions and 
attending school are provided with the necessary conditions to 
safeguard and strengthen health, and hygienic education. 
Conditions for study and work load, as well as requirements as 
to class schedules, are defined in coordination with the 
Ukrainian Ministry of Health. 
<H5>  Article 60. Medical care of children and adolescents </H5>
  Medical care is provided to children and adolescents at 
medical-preventive and health institutions, pediatric 
polyclinics, departments, dispensaries, hospitals, sanatoriums 
and other health institutions. Children are given free travel 
passes to State pediatric sanatoriums. 
  Children and adolescents are under clinical supervision. 
<H5>  Article 61. Child nutrition </H5>
  For children up to 3 years old, the State provides for 
high-quality formulas and other baby food produced commercially 
from ecologically pure raw materials. 
  State sanitary oversight agencies are charged with 
monitoring 
sanitary-hygienic and other standards for baby foods. 
<H3>  Article 62. Monitoring child health protection in 
child-rearing and educational institutions </H3>
  Health care agencies and institutions, along with public 
education agencies and institutions, with the participation of 
public organizations, monitor health protection of children and 
implementation of health-improving measures. 
<H3>  Article 63. State aid to citizens in caring for children 
with physical or mental developmental defects </H3>
  Children with developmental physical or mental defects 
requiring sociomedical aid and special care may, at the 
discretion of their parents or individuals who replace them, be 
placed in child centers, children's homes and other children's 
institutions at the State's expense. 
  Sociomedical aid is provided for families or other 
individuals and institutions with such dependent children 
following procedure established by the Ukrainian Cabinet of 
Ministers. 
<H5>  Article 64. Benefits for mothers with a sick child </H5>
  When it is impossible to hospitalize a sick child or there 
are no indications for hospital care, the mother or other family 
member caring for the child can be given leave from work, with 
payment of benefits from the social insurance fund in accordance 
with established procedure. In the case of hospital treatment of 
children up to 6 years old, as well as severely ill older 
children, requiring maternal care in the opinion of physicians, 
mothers or other family members are given the opportunity to 
remain with the child in the medical institution, with provision 
of free food and living conditions, and payment of social 
insurance benefits in accordance with established procedure. 
<H3>  Article 65. Monitoring vocational training, apprenticeship, 
and working conditions of adolescents </H3>
  On-the-job training of adolescents is permitted in 
accordance 
with legislation in occupations that are consistent with their 
age, physical and mental development, and health status. 
Vocational and on-the-job training are carried out under regular 
medical supervision. 
  Health care agencies and institutions, together with 
proprietors of enterprises, institutions, organizations, as well 
as vocational-technical education agencies, public education 
agencies and public organizations monitor adolescent working 
conditions, as well as implementation of special measures aimed 
at disease prevention. 
<H3>  Article 66. Mandatory medical certification of working 
adolescents </H3>
  Medical certification of adolescents is mandatory for their 
employment. Medical certification of employed adolescents must 
be carried out regularly, at least once a year. 
<H3>  Section VIII. Medicosanitary Support of Sanatorium-Resort 
Care and Vacations </H3>
<H3>  Article 67. Medicosanitary support of sanatorium and resort 
care </H3>
  Sanatorium and resort institutions carry out their work 
following procedure stipulated in resort legislation. In order 
to provide for appropriate treatment and preventive care, the 
opening of a sanatorium-resort institution, establishment of its 
specialization (medical field), medical indications and 
contraindications for sanatorium and resort therapy are 
coordinated with the Ukrainian Ministry of Health or its 
authorized agency. 
  The need for sanatorium-resort treatment is determined by a 
physician on the basis of the patient's condition and backed up 
by medical documentation in accordance with the form established 
by the Ukrainian Ministry of Health. 
  Health care agencies must give scientific-methodological and 
consultant aid to sanatorium and resort institutions. 
  State monitoring of treatment and preventive care in 
sanatorium-resort institutions is implemented by the Ukrainian 
Ministry of Health and its authorized agencies, which have the 
right to suspend the activities of such institutions due to 
violation of legislation on health care or legal rights and 
interests of children, in accordance with procedure established 
in legislative acts. 
<H5>  Article 68. Medicosanitary support of vacations </H5>
  Proprietors and administrators of rest homes, boarding 
houses, tourist centers, other enterprises, institutions and 
organizations involved in organizing vacations for the public 
must provide healthy and safe conditions, adhere to health care 
legislation and sanitary-hygienic standards, and offer the 
opportunity for rendering necessary treatment and preventive 
care to vacationers. 
  Health care agencies implement State control of 
medicosanitary support of the vacationing public. 
<H5>  Section IX. Expert Medical Opinions </H5>
<H5>  Article 69. Sociomedical expertise on incapacity for work </H5>
  An expert opinion on temporary disability of citizens is 
provided at health institutions by a physician or commission of 
physicians, whodetermine the necessity for work leave because of 
illness, injury, pregnancy and childbirth, to care for a sick 
family member, during quarantines, for prosthetic services, 
sanatorium-resort treatment; they determine the necessity and 
duration of temporary transfer of an employee to a different job 
because of illness following established procedure, and they 
also make decisions on referral to a sociomedical expert 
commission for determination of existence and severity of 
prolonged or permanent disability. 
  Expert evaluation of long-term or permanent disability is 
made by sociomedical expert commissions, which determine the 
severity and cause of disability, indicate jobs and occupations 
that invalids can handle, check propriety of using the labor of 
invalids according to the conclusion of the expert commission, 
and assist in restoring their fitness for work. 
  The conclusions of sociomedical expert agencies as to 
conditions and nature of employment of invalids are binding on 
proprietors and management of enterprises, institutions and 
organizations. 
  Procedure for organization and implementation of 
sociomedical 
expertise is established by the Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers. 
<H5>  Article 70. Military medical expertise </H5>
  Military medical expertise determines fitness for military 
service of draftees, military personnel and reservists, it 
determines the causative relationship of diseases, wounds and 
trauma to military service, and the necessity and conditions for 
use of sociomedical rehabilitation and aid for military 
personnel. 
  Expert military medical opinions are provided by military 
medical commissions formed under military commissariats and 
health care institutions under the Ukrainian Ministry of 
Defense, Ukrainian Security Service and other military 
formations. 
  Procedure for organization and providing a military medical 
expert opinion is established by the Ukrainian Cabinet of 
Ministers. 
<H3>  Article 71. Forensic medical and forensic psychiatric 
expertise </H3>
  Expert forensic medical and forensic psychiatric opinions 
are 
ordered by an individual conducting an inquest, investigator, 
prosecutor or court according to procedure established by 
legislation, in order to answer questions requiring special 
knowledge in the field of forensic medicine or forensic 
psychiatry. 
  The Ukrainian Ministry of Health implements organizational 
supervision of the forensic medical and forensic psychiatric 
services. 
<H5>  Article 72. Autopsies </H5>
  Autopsies are performed in order to determine causes and 
mechanisms of patient death. 
  Autopsies are mandatory if there is suspicion of murder, as 
well as when death of a patient occurred in health care 
institutions, with the exception of cases stipulated in the 
third part of this article. 
  An autopsy may not be performed if there is written 
objection 
by close relatives or documented expression of the decedent's 
wishes, in the absence of suspicion of a violent death, or on 
the basis of religious and other valid reasons. 
  Procedure for performing autopsies is determined by the 
Ukrainian Ministry of Health. 
<H5>  Article 73. Alternative medical expert opinion </H5>
  If a citizen disagrees with the State medical expert opinion 
and in other instances stipulated by legislation, an alternative 
medical (medicosocial, military medical, forensic medical, 
forensic psychiatric and others) opinion or autopsy may be 
carried out at the request of the citizen. 
  Alternative expert medical opinions are provided by 
specialists in the pertinent field and with the appropriate 
qualifications. Citizens make an independent choice of expert 
institution and experts. 
  Procedure and conditions for obtaining an alternative expert 
medical opinion are determined by the Ukrainian Cabinet of 
Ministers. 
<H5>  Section X. Medical and Pharmaceutical Activities </H5>
<H5>  Article 74. Engaged in medical and pharmaceutical work </H5>
  Individuals with appropriate specialized education who meet 
unified qualification requirements may engage in medical and 
pharmaceutical work. 
  As an exception, by special permission of the Ukrainian 
Ministry of Health or authorized health care agency, individuals 
without specialized education are allowed to work in the field 
of folk and nontraditional medicine. 
  Unified qualification requirements for individuals engaged 
in 
specific types of medical and pharmaceutical work, including the 
field of folk and nontraditional medicine, are established by 
the Ukrainian Ministry of Health. Administrators of health care 
institutions and agencies which have the right to issue permits 
(licenses) for individual entrepreneurial activities in the 
field of health care are responsible for adherence to the said 
qualification requirements. 
  Individuals who have undergone medical or pharmaceutical 
training in educational institutions of foreign countries are 
permitted to engage in professional activities after their 
qualifications are checked in accordance with procedure 
established by the Ukrainian Ministry of Health, unless 
otherwise stipulated in legislation or international agreements, 
in which the Ukraine participates. 
<H3>  Article 75. Training, retraining and advanced training of 
medical and pharmaceutical workers </H3>
  Training, retraining and advanced training of medical and 
pharmaceutical workers are provided by pertinent secondary 
specialized and higher educational and research institutions, 
institutions for advanced training and retraining of personnel, 
as well as internship, clinical residency, postgraduate and 
doctoral programs, in accordance with educational legislation. 
  Syllabuses and curriculums for training, retraining and 
advanced training of medical and pharmaceutical workers are 
coordinated with the Ukrainian Ministry of Health in accordance 
with established procedure. 
<H5>  Article 76. The Ukrainian physician's Oath </H5>
  Graduates in medical specialties of higher medical 
educational institutions take the Ukrainian physician's Oath. 
  The text of the Ukrainian physician's Oath is approved by 
the 
Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers. 
<H3>  Article 77. Professional rights and benefits of medical and 
pharmaceutical workers </H3>
  Medical and pharmaceutical workers have the right to: 
a) engage in medical and pharmaceutical activities in accordance 
with their specialty and qualifications; 
b) appropriate working conditions; 
c) advanced training and retraining at least once every 5 years 
in pertinent establishments and institutions; 
d) free choice of tested forms, methods and means of work, 
adoption of modern advances in medical and pharmaceutical 
science and practice in accordance with established procedure; 
e) free use of social, ecological and special medical 
information essential to performance of professional duties; 
f) mandatory insurance at the expense of the proprietor of the 
health care institution in case of harm to their life and health 
related to performance of professional duties, in the instances 
stipulated by legislation; 
g) social aid on the part of the State in case of illness, 
mutilation or other cases of disability occurring in connection 
with performance of professional duties; 
h) establishment in State health care institutions of average 
rates and salaries on a level no lower than the average wages of 
industrial workers; 
i) shortened work day and additional paid leave in the cases 
established by legislation; 
j) preferential pensions; 
k) free use of apartment with heat and electricity for those 
living in rural areas, preferential terms for land taxes, 
credit, acquisition of a farm and construction of their own 
housing, acquisition of motor vehicles; 
l) priority in receiving medical-preventive care, drugs and 
prostheses; 
m) form scientific medical societies, professional unions and 
other social organizations; 
n) legal protection of professional honor and dignity. 
  Legislation may provide for other rights and benefits for 
medical and pharmaceutical workers. Employee benefits 
established by enterprises, institutions and organizations to 
which said workers render medicosanitary aid may also extend to 
them. 
<H3>  Article 78. Professional duties of medical and 
pharmaceutical workers </H3>
  Medical and pharmaceutical workers have the duty to: 
a) cooperate in safeguarding and strengthening the health of the 
public, prevention and treatment of diseases, provide prompt and 
qualified health and medical care. 
b) administer free urgent medical care to the public in case of 
accident or other emergency situations; 
c) disseminate scientific and medical information among the 
public, campaign for a healthy lifestyle, including presentation 
of said workers as models; 
d) adhere to requirements of professional ethics and deontology, 
and maintain medical confidentiality; 
e) constantly advance professional knowledge and skill; 
f) render consultant aid to their coworkers and other health 
care workers. 
  Medical and pharmaceutical workers also have other duties as 
provided in legislation. 
<H5>  Section XI. International Collaboration </H5>
<H3>  Article 79. International collaboration in the field of 
health care </H3>
  The Ukraine is a participant in international collaboration 
in the field of health care, member of the World Health 
Organization (WHO) and other international organizations. The 
State guarantees to said organizations appropriate conditions on 
the territory of the Ukraine, cooperates in expansion an 
deepening of the Ukraine's participation in measures that they 
carry out. 
  In accordance with its international legal obligations, the 
State participates in implementation of international health 
care programs; it exchanges ecological and medical information; 
it assists in professional and scientific contacts between 
health care workers, exchange of progressive methods and 
technology, export and import of medical equipment, drugs and 
other merchandise essential to health, activities of joint 
enterprises in the field of health care; it organizes joint 
training of specialists, develops and supports all other forms 
of international cooperation that are not in contradiction to 
international law and national legislation. 
  Health care institutions, citizens and associations thereof 
have the right to conclude, in accordance with existing 
legislation, agreements (contracts) with foreign juridical and 
physical entities concerning any form of collaboration, to 
participate in the activities of pertinent international 
organizations, and to engage in foreign economic activities. 
  Illegal restriction of international collaboration on the 
part of State agencies and officials may be appealed following 
established procedure, including court action. 
<H3>  Section XII. Liability for Violation of Health Care 
Legislation </H3>
<H3>  Article 80. Liability for violation of health care 
legislation </H3>
  Individuals guilty of violating public health care 
legislation bear civil, administrative or criminal liability in 
accordance with legislation. 

