BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "The Growth of Organized </F>
Crime--Gangs Are Increasingly Settling Into the World of 
Ordinary Life, CRI Says"] 
  [Text] Organized crime in the Netherlands is on the 
increase. Moreover, criminal groups are becoming more and more 
professional and are increasingly managing to settle into the 
world of ordinary life, claims the 1993 annual report by the 
Central Research Information division (CRI), which was published 
Wednesday [15 June]. 
  The CRI, which collects data on crime, confirms that in 
1993, 
there were 98 active criminal gangs that could be described as 
"highly organized." In 1991, there were 59, and when they were 
first inventoried in 1988 only three such groups were detected. 
  By organizing themselves in a more professional manner, 
these 
gangs are making increasingly large profits. For example, the 
CRI cites the ecstasy group that was broken up in 1992, which 
achieved an annual turnover of 300 million guilders [G], with a 
net result of G240 million. Only a few tens of millions could 
be traced. The rest has probably been invested in the world of 
ordinary life. 
  The CRI notes that the proceeds of crime are laundered on a 
large scale in the Netherlands. Already back in 1991, the 
Fiscal Information and Investigation Department calculated that 
G1 billion were being laundered every nine months, using 
exchange offices among other methods. According to the CRI, the 
control of unusual money transfers has now been improved. 
  One growing new trend is for criminal groups to attempt to 
counter the work done by the police and justice authorities. 
The gangs observe police officers at work and also eavesdrop on 
them, threaten senior officers in the course of investigations, 
and spread false reports aimed at portraying such officers in a 
damaging light. These defamation campaigns are causing the 
police and justice departments considerable nuisance because on 
each occasion an inquiry has to be made as to whether there can 
be talk of corruption. 
  Organized crime has a strongly international character. 
Criminal gains are channeled off to tax paradises where there 
is little monitoring of finances. Approximately 40 percent of 
the core members of highly organized gangs come from abroad. 
They mete out physical violence more often than criminal groups 
led by Netherlanders. In 1993, there were more than 100 fatal 
shootings, 23 of which were executions carried out among the 
criminal fraternity. 
  The annual report also provides data on specific offenses: 
Narcotic trafficking remains one of the most lucrative forms of 
organized crime. Several hundred criminal organizations are 
involved in such activities. According to the CRI, 85 percent 
of the heroin encountered in the Netherlands is brought in by 
Turkish gangs working the so-called Balkan route. Turkish 
coffee houses play a major role in such sales. 
  Smuggling cocaine to Europe is virtually entirely in the 
hands of organizations based in the Colombian town of Cali. In 
1993, more heroin and cocaine was intercepted than in 1992. In 
addition, a higher number of drug laboratories were closed down. 
However, the total amount of marijuana confiscated by the 
authorities decreased. 
  The number of attempted hold-ups increased from almost 2300 
to approximately 2700, but the number of successful hold-ups 
dropped. Financial institutions, hotels, and restaurants, and 
"other businesses" are the main targets of armed robbers. 
One-third of all hold-ups are committed within the area of 
jurisdiction of Amsterdam, which comprises the provinces of 
North Holland and Utrecht. 
  Relatively speaking, the number of hold-ups is increasing 
fastest (by 35 percent) in the police region of 
Rotterdam-Rijmond. For the fifth successive year, the 
percentage of solved hold-ups has decreased. The figure for 
1993 is 29 percent. 
  The number of car thefts has doubled in just 10 years. In 
1993, more than 33,000 motor vehicles were stolen. Cars 
manufactured by Opel are the favorite targets of car thieves, by 
a margin of almost 10,000 vehicles. Of all the vehicles stolen, 
59 percent are subsequently found, half of these within five 
days of being stolen. According to the CRI, this means that many 
thefts are instances of joyriding, i.e. "the fulfillment of a 
one-off need for a vehicle." 
  Finally, the annual report indicates that a higher number of 
financial and economic offenses are being committed. Since the 
Center for Reporting Unusual Transactions was set up two years 
ago, more than 5000 suspicious financial transactions have been 
reported, worth a total of G2.4 billion. It emerged that in 
half of these cases, the persons involved already had a criminal 
record. A considerably higher number of forged banknotes were 
confiscated, the 100-guilder note being the forgers' favorite. 
  Thanks to better registration by three special police teams, 
a substantially higher number of instances of computer crime 
came to light. One new form of computer crime involves the 
misuse of international telecommunications facilities. For 
example, it was discovered that long-distance calls were being 
made at the local Netherlands tariff from the Netherlands via 
Denmark. The Danish telephone company concerned lost 
approximately G2.5 million as a result. 

