BFN 

<F P=106> [By Salmy Hashim] </F>
  [Text] Washington, June 22 (OANA-BERNAMA) -- Malaysia 
appreciates U.S. concerns over the formation of the East Asia 
Economic Caucus (EAEC), but assures the United States that the 
proposed forum would not weaken or undermine APEC [Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation]. 
  Malaysian Defence Minister Najib Abdul Razak said here 
Wednesday it was rather disheartening to learn that the United 
States has formally informed Japan that it is opposed to the 
ASEAN proposal of EAEC. 
  I found it rather surprising since the concept ideally 
promotes market-driven open regionalism and supports regional 
economic cooperation, he said when opening the two-day fifth 
U.S.-Malaysia colloquium jointly organised by ISIS [Institute of 
Strategic and International Studies] (Malaysia) and the Asia 
Foundation. 
  U.S. Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs 
Winston Lord, who was present at the gathering and stopped by 
journalists upon leaving, said that the U.S. had given its 
initial response on the EAEC proposal to its ASEAN friends as 
well as Japan. 
  While neither confirming nor denying U.S. opposition to the 
proposal, Lord indicated that the proposal, presented to the 
U.S. by ASEAN at the recent U.S.-ASEAN dialogue here, was more 
elaborate than we expected... But I'd rather not talk about it 
in this forum ... We just have to wait and see where we go from 
here. 
  Asked about U.S. concerns about the proposal, Lord said, we 
have stated our concerns many times... that we want to 
participate in the Asia-Pacific area in all aspects. 
  Najib, in his opening remarks, said that he was aware of the 
domestic public opinion in the U.S. and even Congressional 
opposition to such an initiative especially when it does not 
include the U.S. 
  I can also understand the concern of the U.S. about a 
one-voice East Asia, a united East Asia (being led by Japan), he 
said, but emphasised that the EAEC was not a unity concept but 
merely a loose consultative forum without a formal secretariat 
to discuss economic issues of mutual concern. 
  It is my personal hope that despite the apparent objection 
by 
the U.S. on this concept, they should not put up barriers by 
exerting pressure on others not to support it, said Najib, who 
is here on a nine-day visit covering Washington D.C., New York, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis. 

