BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondent Sergey Blagov] </F>
  [Text] Hanoi, 22 Apr -- The talks in the Vietnamese capital 
have confirmed that both sides wish to deepen bilateral 
cooperation. This was stated at a news conference today by 
Anatoliy Zlenko, who is here on an official visit. This is the 
first visit to Hanoi by a Ukrainian foreign minister since 
diplomatic relations were established between the two countries. 
  Vietnam occupies an important place in our foreign policy 
and 
foreign trade, A. Zlenko stressed at the news conference. 
Ukraine is aware of the benefits that relations with the SRV 
offer to both sides, and the talks in Hanoi have made it 
possible to clarify ways of deepening bilateral cooperation and 
mapping out new forms in which it can be conducted. There are 
good prospects for the development of economic cooperation 
between the two countries, including cooperation in oil 
refining, engineering, ferrous metallurgy, and sea transport, 
the Ukrainian foreign minister pointed out. 
  A. Zlenko held talks here with his Vietnamese colleague 
Nguyen Manh Cam. Today he was received by Vo Van Kiet, the SRV 
prime minister, and Le Duc Anh, the SRV president. The head of 
the Vietnamese Government confirmed his intention to pay an 
official visit to the Ukraine. A. Zlenko said this would open 
up a new page in relations between the two states. Agreements 
on encouragement and protection of investments and avoidance of 
double taxation are expected to be signed during the visit. 
These will be the basis of long-term cooperation between the 
two states. A. Zlenko told ITAR-TASS that the visit to Kiev by 
Vo Van Kiet -- the first by an SRV prime minister in the history 
of bilateral relations -- is scheduled for the first 10 days of 
June. 
  The great importance which both sides attach to the 
development of traditional cooperation on a new basis was noted 
during the meeting between the Ukrainian foreign minister and 
the Vietnamese president. A. Zlenko handed Le Duc Anh a 
personal message from Ukrainian President L. Kravchuk. 

