Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ye. S. Bazilevskaya and S. G. Skolotiyev, </F>
Geology Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow; UDC 
551.35] 
  [Abstract] Hydrothermal activity and manifestations of 
ferromanganese ore deposition were studied in the region of the 
juncture of the southern segment of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge with 
a fault zone at 1520'N (Cape Verde fault). A diagram of the 
work region is given showing two intersections of the rift zone 
of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge by the Akademik Nikolay Strakhov 
research ship. Along these intersections samples were taken 
which revealed significant changes in Fe-Mn encrustations. This 
zone is characterized by the presence of traces of hydrothermal 
activity, but it varies greatly from place to place. It is clear 
that anomalies in the composition of Fe-Mn deposits can be used 
in detecting endogenous activity on the ocean floor, but the 
problem of the reasons for these anomalies is more complex. In 
discussing this problem it is noted that in contrast to iron, 
much of which is removed from the geochemical cycle due to the 
formation of insoluble sulfides, the cycling of Mn in the ocean 
is much different. It does not form insoluble minerals but 
passes into solution and reenters sea water. Most of the Mn 
bound in Fe-Mn deposits was regenerated from ancient sedimentary 
deposits. This is attributable to the fact that any 
tectonomagmatic events on the ocean floor, from local 
manifestations of volcanism, spreading and subduction to global 
changes in the position of the continents on the planet, are 
always accompanied by the appearance of reduction conditions 
favoring the migration of earlier deposited manganese. The 
process of oceanic Mn accumulation is unique; it creates a 
background against which not only all events on the ocean floor 
occur, but also against which the maintenance of chemical 
equilibrium in sea water is dependent. The role of oceanic Fe-Mn 
deposits in maintenance of the ecological purity of the planet 
is comparable to the role of forests on the land. A study of the 
composition of the Fe-Mn deposits not only makes it possible to 
clarify problems involved in ore formation, but also provides 
additional possibilities for characterizing tectonomagmatic 
conditions in active regions on the ocean floor. Figure 1; 
references 8: 6 Russian, 2 Western. 

