BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Justice Minister Sabine </F>
Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger by Dieter Kopp on 10 April; place 
not given -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Kopp] An important test on 
how serious the FDP [Free Democratic Party] takes its role as 
advocate of minorities and human rights could be your opinion on 
the way in which delinquent Kurds should be treated. What 
should happen, and do you expect your party's unequivocal 
agreement at the FDP leadership's meeting in Bonn tomorrow [11 
April]? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] The FDP, and I am speaking for 
the party chairman and for myself here, has always emphasized 
that we will not accept violence in Germany, regardless of who 
commits it. I, as justice minister, must make clear that it is 
in our interest to punish people who violate our laws. The 
Kurds have done this by their violent actions. But, in applying 
the law on foreigners, we must also make it clear in every 
individual case that torture, inhumane treatment, and the death 
penalty are arguments against deportation. These facts must be 
examined; we cannot ignore them. 
  [Kopp] You are expressing your opinion. If what the 
chancellor said is right, you are not speaking for the 
government, let alone for him. Is this reprimand not unusual? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] I was surprised that the 
chancellor found my view different from his own. From what we 
have heard him say he has stated very clearly that our law must 
be enforced in Germany and that in the event of deportations, 
human rights must be safeguarded. This is precisely my view. I 
cannot see any difference of opinion in that. 
  [Kopp] The Federal Government and the laender interior 
ministers disagree on the number of those threatened with 
deportations to Turkey, where death penalty and torture cannot 
be excluded. How do you view this problem? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] There is no pat answer to this 
problem. Every individual case must be examined based on the 
situation of the person threatened with deportation, the 
information gained from reports, and the assessments from 
Turkey. In some cases there may be deportations, because there 
is no threat of torture or inhumane treatment. But there may 
also be different decisions. If there is a danger of torture, 
inhumane treatment, or the death penalty, deportations cannot be 
enforced. 
  [Kopp] There have been reports about a deportation agreement 
with Turkey, with Ankara guaranteeing humane treatment of the 
deported Kurds. Has this become more specific? Has the Federal 
Interior Ministry presented a draft yet? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] There are ongoing talks within 
the government on this issue, in particular between the Foreign 
Ministry, the Interior Ministry, and my ministry. We know and 
we are taking account of the fact that Turkey has signed 
international agreements against torture, the European Human 
Rights Convention. We are taking this into account and the fact 
that these agreements must not be downgraded in the debate, 
which is, however, far from concluded. 
  [Kopp] Do you think there is a chance of finding a common 
denominator that also can be made palatable to Turkey -- a 
sovereign Turkey that is already very annoyed over the 
suspension of weapons supplies? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] This cannot be answered and 
evaluated before the end of the talks. I think it is in all our 
interests that human rights be respected. This has been an 
issue at a number of talks held between the Federal Government 
and representatives of the Turkish Government. Foreign Minister 
Kinkel specifically made this quite clear earlier this year, 
together with his British colleague Douglas Hurd. We have to 
acknowledge we are in a difficult situation at the moment. 
  [Kopp] Do you see the suspension of weapons supplies as 
supporting your own course? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] This decision was initiated by 
the foreign minister because there have been reports -- the 
credibility of which still has to be examined and on which a 
final decision must still be made. I think Mr. Kinkel's signal 
was a correct one, and I can only support him in his position. 
I also think his position is consistent with what I have been 
saying in connection with deportations. 
  [Kopp] Kurdish violence in our streets has promoted the 
idea, advocated by Wolfgang Schaeuble before, of using the 
Bundeswehr domestically. Is this idea acceptable to Liberals? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] No, for Liberals there is a 
clear division of powers between the border police, the police, 
and the Bundeswehr, which is laid down in our constitution. 
There is no difference of opinion within the FDP, and this has 
always been stated clearly by the federal chairman and the 
secretary general. 
  [Kopp] Is the way in which the Kurdish-Turkish conflict is 
escalating on German territory and the way in which the German 
legislature is reacting to it not a situation that might promote 
xenophobia? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] I think that militant riots by 
foreigners in Germany increase the danger of right-wing 
extremist groups becoming stronger in their policy of xenophobia 
and racial hatred. This is why I strongly advocate dealing very 
unemotionally with these difficult issues in Germany, and this 
should also be reflected in the language we use. 
  [Kopp] Let me ask you about right-wing extremism: There has 
been outrage over the difficulties experienced by the 
legislature and the judiciary in coming to grips with the Nazi 
specter. This outrage has been triggered by the fact that 
[Republikaner chairman] Franz Schoenhuber gets away scot-free 
with slandering the chairman of the Central Council of Jews, 
Ignatz Bubis. Is this outrage not justified, and is it not high 
time to close loopholes in the law regarding instigation? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] Let me point out that 
right-wing extremist groups first of all must be countered by 
political means. We must not transfer the problems to the 
judicial authorities. We can only face these groups through 
joint action of all democratic parties and by socially outlawing 
these groups. This is the only way we can keep them out of 
parliaments. 
  [Kopp] Has there been too much sloppiness in the past? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] I think that we must make it 
much more obvious, that we must seek political confrontation in 
order to make people aware of the terrible and unrealistic ideas 
these groups represent. Mr. Schoenhuber's remarks have made 
this clear. With this he has lifted his mask. I, therefore, 
think these remarks will help increase people's awareness. I 
not only count on the judicial authorities and on new laws; as 
far as the law on instigation is concerned, the draft crime 
prevention act contains an amendment that will make it easier to 
punish slander of minorities and ethnic groups in general. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Kopp] At the FDP Rostock party congress there might be a 
coalition statement. Is it possible that it will not be in 
favor of the CDU/CSU [Christian Democratic Union/Christian 
Social Union]? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] I do not want to participate 
in speculation on coalition statements prior to the party 
congress. This will be discussed and prepared in the party 
panels. It is possible there may be a certain preference for 
the existing government coalition, because during the next few 
months we want to look back on the successes achieved in this 
coalition, of which the FDP is a part. 
  [Kopp] How do you judge the climate in the coalition? 
Following the attacks by the chancellor, you in particular 
should have every reason to be skeptical. 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] It is obvious that legal and 
domestic policy is an area where conflicts, different opinions, 
and heated discussions are very likely. This also goes for 
coalitions. Liberals have a different view of the state than 
the Conservatives. This becomes apparent in individual 
instances. But it is the nature of a coalition that there are 
several partners who contribute their positions. What the 
coalition partners' positions are must be clear. I, together 
with other FDP politicians, represent legal and domestic policy 
and these conflicts are nothing unusual for me, but rather 
something that is part and parcel of a coalition. [passage 
omitted] 

