BFN 

  [Text] Bonn -- Economic growth, the fight against 
unemployment, and internal security will be the central issues 
during Germany's half-year European Union [EU] presidency, 
beginning 1 July. Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel and Economics 
Minister Guenter Rexrodt (both Free Democratic Party of Germany) 
informed the press on Wednesday [22 June] about relevant talks 
that were held in the Federal Cabinet. On Thursday, Federal 
Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Klaus Kinkel will go to the European 
summit on the island of Corfu, which will end the Greek 
presidency. 
  In terms of external affairs, Bonn wants to speed up the 
"common foreign and security policy." This will include the 
project of securing the Ukrainian nuclear power plant at 
Chernobyl, which experts say is facing another catastrophe. 
Germany and France are planning a joint program to secure the 
three blocks that are still in operation and to concrete over 
the fourth block that exploded in 1986. Without renewing the 
Block Four "sarcophagus," costs are estimated at some 1.5 
billion German marks. So far, the EU partners have, however, 
hardly shown any interest in that project. 
  According to Kinkel, internal security will involve a 
harmonization of the asylum and immigration laws. He said he 
will continue to point out that Germany has taken in double the 
number of refugees of all the other 11 EU partner countries put 
together. 
  During its presidency, Germany will also make efforts to 
move 
the Central and East European states closer to the European 
Union by means of agreements on closer cooperation. As a kind 
of starting point, Russia's President Boris Yeltsin will 
participate in part of the Corfu Summit. On 24 June, he will 
initial the partnership agreement with the other heads of state 
and government, which will practically grant Russia 
most-favored-nation treatment in trade with the EU countries. 
For the first time, this will include services as well. 
  The Corfu Summit will also see the signing of the membership 
agreement by the four heads of government and the foreign 
ministers of the future members Norway, Sweden, Finland, and 
Austria, although the enforcement is still subject to 
referendums in some of these countries. The Federal Government 
considers the entry of the four new members particularly 
important. Diplomatic circles are hoping for a strengthening of 
the "northern" interests within the community. Economics 
Minister Rexrodt announced the introduction of an information 
system in which the states will monitor each other in observing 
a strict budget discipline, thus speeding up the progressing 
convergence of the individual economic and financial policies, 
including the ceilings for public debts. 

