CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pinhas 'Inbary: "Among Themselves"] </F>
  [Text] One does not have to be a prophet in order to know 
that the problem of Jerusalem will not wait until the time that 
was determined for it in the Oslo agreements, and that earlier 
than can be imagined, Israeli will have to seriously discuss 
possible solutions. Despite all the strident declarations, and 
the swearing of oaths by these or other Israeli leaders on the 
issue of Jerusalem, it must be clear to everyone: without a 
solution that will satisfy the Arabs, not only will there be no 
permanent solution for the Palestinian problem, but also the 
entire peace process cannot be realized, in the final analysis. 
  In fact, already this week one aspect of the problem of 
Jerusalem arose when Israel warned Palestinians not to establish 
the institutions of the Gaza and Jericho region in East 
Jerusalem. Doubt arose as to the status of the center of the 
Palestinian delegation in Orient House. To the Palestinians, it 
seemed that Israel was demanding the closure of Orient House, 
and they announced that this center was established before the 
Oslo and the Cairo agreements, and, therefore, those agreements 
have no standing regarding everything connected with its 
activity. 
  When the matters are clarified with the Israeli sources, it 
turns out that Orient House indeed constitutes a serious problem 
for Israel. But what especially angered Israel were two orders 
of the PLO leader, Yasir 'Arafat, regarding the establishing of 
Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem--one of the 20th of 
the month, on the establishing of a statistical center attached 
to Orient House, and the second of 16 January, regarding the 
establishing of an institution for environmental research, 
headed by Dr. Gi'ad Ishak, the head of the Palestinian 
delegation to the talks on matters of environmental quality, 
within the framework of the multinational convention. Out of 
this Israeli-Palestinian dispute an additional impression is 
liable to arise, as if the struggle for Jerusalem is mainly 
between Israel and the Arabs. But reality is much more 
complicated, and one of the main problems that will confront 
Israel one day will be the lack of an Arab address that is 
agreed to by all of the Arab forces. 
<H5>  A Nucleus for an Alternative Leadership </H5>
  On 30 May, the daily AL-QUDS published a small item, 
according to which the PLO is preparing the file on the Muslim 
Waqf and the Christian property in East Jerusalem for the 
discussions about Jerusalem in the stage of the talks on the 
permanent arrangement. Dr. Walid Khalidi is preparing this file, 
after he searched for about a year in the Khalidi library in the 
Old City. Khalidi, according to the report, will join the 
Palestinian delegation on the permanent talks. 
  The item seems innocent, but it is not. This, in fact, is a 
declaration of war over the status of Jordan, as the Waqf 
administration in East Jerusalem is attached to the Jordanian 
ministry of religions, and King Hussein has emphasized the 
Hashemites' historical responsibility for the holy places in 
Jerusalem. The choice of Dr. Khalidi also is not innocent, 
because his family is related to the Arab military leader Khaled 
Ben al-Walid, one of the Muslim conquerors of Jerusalem in the 
time of the Calif 'Omar. It is still too early to determine 
whether Dr. Khalidi will indeed be ready to join the war between 
the PLO and Jordan over the representation of the Jerusalem 
problem, but the smell of gunpowder is already in the air--not 
between Israel and the Arabs, but precisely between the PLO and 
Jordan. 
  'Arafat's two orders, which were the reason for the 
unofficial Israeli warning, are also not innocent. Al-Husayni 
and Ashrawi made it clear that Orient House was established 
before the Oslo agreements, while 'Arafat's orders were issued 
after Oslo. 
  It is customary to regard al-Husayni as 'Arafat's 
representative in East Jerusalem, and Orient House as a direct 
branch of Tunis. There is no doubt that al-Husayni represents 
the PLO, and his political battles are within the framework of 
the PLO and on behalf of the PLO. But in the struggles within 
the PLO, al-Husayni and 'Arafat are in opposing camps. There is 
no PLO decision to establish a center for the Palestinian 
delegation, and the vague name "Orient House" is not accidental. 
'Arafat relates to al-Husayni and to the center that he 
established in East Jerusalem as the nucleus for an alternative 
leadership, and this center worries 'Arafat no less than Israel. 
Not a small portion of the heating up of the problem of the 
status of Orient House does not only stem from objective 
reasons. This does not mean that 'Arafat is seeking to repress 
the problem of Jerusalem--the contrary is true--but that he 
wants to lead a struggle that will overshadow Orient House. 
'Ar'afat's determination to move forward the dealing with the 
status of Jerusalem stems, apparently, from his desire not to 
allow Orient House to lead this struggle. 
  As far as is known, the PLO did not give a penny of support 
for Orient House, and it is rather indifferent to the sight of 
its economic difficulties. It seems that all of the support that 
al-Husayni has received for the maintenance of Orient House has 
come from the Gulf. The institution, in any event, is still sunk 
in debts. 
<H5>  Al-Husayni Versus al-Rajub </H5>
  The status of Orient House arises now also due to the 
internal Palestinian struggle in the territories. Among the 
changes that occurred recently was the return of the chief of 
the Palestinian Shabak in the West Bank, Jibril al-Rajub. About 
a week ago, al-Husayni participated alongside al-Rajub, in the 
ceremony for the founding of the Palestinian Shabak office in 
Jericho. In front of those present, a dispute arose between 
these two. Al-Rajub said that he would extend his authority also 
to Jerusalem. Al-Husayni interrupted and said that the Orient 
House was established before Oslo and Cairo, and that, 
consequently, those agreements do not apply to it. Therefore, in 
the battle for Jerusalem are participating not only PLO factors 
inside and outside, but also persons who are struggling for 
supremacy in the territories, such as al-Husayni and al-Rajub. 
This competition has led to al-Husayni being compelled to take 
up al-Rajub's challenge, and that was the source of the concern 
of the minister of police, Moshe Shahal, over establishing 
Palestinian police frameworks in Jerusalem. 
  This internal competition also has inter-Arab implications. 
In getting organized against Jordan, 'Arafat seeks the aid of 
Saudi Arabia, while al-Husayni's relations with Jordan are 
improving. 'Arafat's courting of Saudi Arabia have not yet borne 
real fruit, and even after the meeting between 'Arafat and King 
Fahd, Saudi Arabia's assistance to the PLO remains very limited. 
  At the basis of the struggle between the Hashemites and the 
Saudis is the struggle over the legitimacy of the guardians of 
the holy places. Saudi Arabia is undermining Jordan's status in 
Jerusalem, in order to defend its legitimacy in Hijaz, from 
which it expelled the Hashemites at the turn of the century. 
King Hussein recently expressed several times a formula, which 
could bring about a reconciliation with the Saudis. He referred 
on two occasions to King Fahd as "the servant of the holy 
places" (in Hijaz). Recently, King Hussein also did not repeat 
his anti-Saudi rhetoric, and the impression was made as if the 
efforts at reconciliation between the two dynasties are 
continuing. 
<H5>  `Just Not the PLO' </H5>
  On the question of who will represent the Arabs on the 
subject of Jerusalem, it is impossible to err regarding Jordan's 
position--just not the PLO. Against the PLO formula, which 
'Arafat repeated on Wednesday--that Jerusalem is the capital of 
the Palestinian state--Jordan states that the sovereignty over 
the holy places is only "for God." That is, it presents a 
formula of interreligious administration, whose nature is not 
yet clear. If, indeed, there are secret contacts for 
reconciliation between Jordan and Saudi Arabia, it may be that 
the two states are discussing the nature of this administration, 
without the participation of the PLO. 'Arafat himself admitted, 
at one of his meetings with the Palestinian delegation last 
year, that all of the Arab states--including Morocco and 
Syria--do not support the establishing of a Palestinian capital 
in Jerusalem, but rather Jerusalem being a pan-Arab and 
pan-Muslim center. 
  That position has a practical implication: for a long time, 
the PLO has sought to convene in Jerusalem a large and 
impressive economic conference, with central personalities such 
as Abu al-'Ala, but the conference was postponed repeatedly. 
Recently, there has again been talk of its convening, but 
Palestinian economic sources informed 'AL-HAMISHMAR that one of 
the reasons for the repeated postponements is Jordan's 
opposition to this conference in Jerusalem and not in 'Amman. 
  Jordan has not yet revealed all of its cards. It should be 
noted that it is trying to convince the Palestinians, as much as 
it can, to transfer the center of their political activities to 
Ramallah. According to Palestinian sources, Jordan is promising 
the Palestinians that the day will come when it will put on the 
negotiating table a proposal to extend Jerusalem's borders to 
Ramallah and Bethlehem; the Palestinian capital will be, from 
Israel's viewpoint, in Ramallah, but from the viewpoint of the 
Arab world it will be in Jerusalem; the holy places in Bethlehem 
would be included in the arrangement for intercommunal 
administration of the Old City. Meanwhile, the PLO is not 
accepting this position. 
  One way or another, the negotiations over Jerusalem have, in 
fact, already begun, not in an orderly manner, and not by purely 
diplomatic means--but it is a multilateral struggle: not only 
between the Arabs and Israel, but among themselves. 

