BFN 

  [Text] China is currently carrying out large-scale 
infrastructure construction as part of its efforts to ensure 
sustained national economic growth. The annual plan for capital 
construction drafted by the State Planning Commission includes 
several hundred large and medium-sized projects which are funded 
by either central or local fiscal authorities. 
<H5>  Projects Under Construction </H5>
  1. Three Gorges Hydropower Project. The massive 
hydropower project, which involves a total investment of 60 
billion yuan, includes the Three Gorges Dam, the world's largest 
water conservancy project. The designed capacity of the 
reservoir is 40 billion cubic meters, and the power plant is 
expected to generate 85 billion kwh of electricity annually. 
  2. Pudong Economic Development Zone. The zone, which is 
the size of Singapore, calls for an investment of nearly 100 
billion yuan. 
  3. Yangpu Development Zone. The zone, located on the 
northwest tip of Hainan Island, covers 30 square km. 
  4. Beijing-Kowloon Railway. The 2,370-km railway, which 
passes through nine provinces and municipalities, is scheduled 
for completion at the end of 1995. 
  5. Tumenjiang Development Zone. Infrastructure 
construction is now under way in the US$30 billion zone which is 
located in east Jilin Province. 
  6. South China to north China water diversion project. 
Feasibility studies and designs have been completed for the 
project which will divert the water from the Jiangsu section in 
the lower reaches of the Yangtze River to the North China Plain 
via the Beijing-Hangzhou Grand Canal. A total of 30 billion 
cubic meters of water will be diverted annually to quench the 
thirst of six provinces and municipalities in north China. 
  7. Northwest China trunk railway double-tracking project. 
The project involves double-tracking the 1,600-km 
Lanzhou-Urumqi Railway, a section of the new Eurasian 
Continental Bridge. 
  8. Beijing-Dandong Expressway. The 850-km expressway, a 
section of the Tokyo-Pyongyang-Seoul-Beijing-Moscow-London 
international highway transport network, is scheduled to open to 
traffic at the turn of the century. 
  9. Beijing-Guangzhou Expressway. The 2,300-km 
north-south thoroughfare will pass through major cities in 
Hebei, Henan, Hubei, Hunan and Guangdong provinces. 
  10. Harbin-Ningbo Expressway. The 3,500-km expressway, 
which will link Qinhuangdao, Lianyungang and other important 
port cities in east China's coastal areas, is scheduled for 
completion before the year 2000. 
  11. Ertan Hydropower Station. The station, located in 
Panzhihua City, Sichuan Province, is the largest of its type 
currently under construction in China. Ertan, which features 
China's first 240- meter-high dam, will also have the country's 
largest turbo- generators with a generating capacity of 550,000 
kw each. Its combined installed capacity of 3.3 million kw will 
surpass that of the Gezhouba Hydropower Station, the largest of 
its kind currently in operation in China. The complexity of the 
technology and scale of construction are unprecedented in China. 
The 21 billion yuan project, funded jointly by the central 
government and the Sichuan local government, includes a loan of 
US$740 million from the World Bank. The river was successfully 
dammed at the end of last year. 
  12. Shenfu Dongsheng Coalfield. All-round development at 
Shenfu, which is one of China's major bases of energy reserves, 
is proceeding smoothly. The project is designed to cater to the 
strategic plan calling for a westward shift in the nation's 
energy foundation. The coalfield, located in north Shaanxi 
Province and the southern part of the Inner Mongolian Autonomous 
Region, has verified reserves of over 230 billion tons, or 
one-fourth of the nation's total verified coal reserves. The 
coalfield is also the largest of its kind in China and one of 
the eight largest of its type in the world. At present, 
favorable mining conditions allow the coalfield to produce 10 
million tons of quality coal annually. Construction is well 
under way on a key project with an annual production capacity of 
30 million tons, and preparatory work has been completed for 
another project with an annual capacity of 60 million tons. The 
massive project, which calls for a 20-year construction period, 
is expected to cost 33 billion yuan, based on constant prices 
from 1990. Construction over the last eight years has resulted 
in a large number of ultra-large modern coal pits which operate 
with highly efficient comprehensive mining equipment. Highways 
stretching 300 km radiate to all corners of the coalfield, and 
the amount of coal transported by railway has reached 10 million 
tons annually. Preparations are also being made to begin 
construction of Huanghua Port, a special coal dock with an 
annual handling capacity of 30 million tons. 
<H5>  Major Projects in Operation </H5>
  In 1982, in answer to the massive capital requirements and 
fairly long construction periods needed for infrastructure 
projects, the Chinese government adopted a long-term policy of 
concentrating limited financial resources, materials and 
manpower on rapid completion of projects which have a major 
influence on the national economy. The several hundred key 
state construction projects which have been completed and put 
into operation now function as the backbone of China's effort to 
improve its investment environment, readjust its industrial 
structure, enhance the nation's economic strength and improve 
the people's material and cultural well being. 
  Completion of the Qinshan Nuclear Power Station, which was 
designed and constructed by China alone, marked the end to the 
history of no nuclear energy industry on China's mainland. 
Since it began generating power on December 15, 1991, the 
station, located in Haiyan County, Zhejiang Province, has 
operated smoothly and generated a total of 2.15 billion kwh of 
electricity. Last year alone, the Qinshan station generated 
1.62 billion kwh of electricity, surpassing the annual plan by 
207.7 percent. The load factor hit 64.46 percent. The 
station's success in reaching its designed annual power 
generating capacity two years ahead of schedule has helped 
reduce the burden on the east China power grid. At present, the 
station is operating at full capacity on a trial basis with 
daily output reaching 7.2 million kwh. According to figures 
recently announced by the environmental monitoring department, 
radioactive materials released by the station through waste 
water and inert gas discharged from chimneys stand at 0.015 and 
0.7 curies respectively, much lower than the state-set limits of 
20 and 70,000 curies. 
  The Shanghai ethylene project, another key state 
construction 
project with an annual output of 300,000 tons, required a total 
investment of 9.07 billion yuan. The project comprises the 
fourth set of ethylene production equipment imported by China 
with an annual output of 300,000 tons, three sets of equipment 
with an annual output of 200,000 tons of chloroethylene and 
200,000 tons of polyethylene, and auxiliary processing 
equipment, production facilities and infrastructure. 
Construction of the project began in May 1987, and all 
facilities began trial production in 1989. Since that time the 
project has maintained an excellent safety record and has 
operated smoothly. By June 1993, the project had yielded a 
total of 5.53 billion yuan in industrial output value and 1.49 
billion yuan in profit and tax payment, and had begun repaying 
loans. At the end of last year, the project passed a stringent 
state quality appraisal. Completion of the project has 
significantly enhanced China's ethylene production capacity and 
the output of refined oil, plastics, rubber and other major 
petrochemical products. It also has a major impact on upgrading 
China's backward raw materials industry and expediting the 
development of the nation's petrochemical industry . 
  The Beijing-Wuhan-Guangzhou optical fiber trunk 
telecommunications line, the longest of its type in the world, 
began operation last October. The 4,700-km line, which passes 
through: eight provinces and municipalities and 22 prefectures 
and cities, links Beijing with Hebei, Henan, Hubei, Hunan and 
Guangdong provinces and extends southward to Haikou and westward 
to Nanning. The 500 million yuan project includes 105,000 
long-distance telephone lines. Areas along the recently 
completed line, which have long been a hub of 
telecommunications, previously relied on intermediate coaxial 
cable analog carrier and microwave telecommunications systems. 
However, owing to the considerable growth of information 
exchanges in recent years, only 10 percent or local 
long-distance telephone calls could reach their final 
destination. Completion of the project has greatly eased 
burdens resulting from the shortage of facilities and provided 
central China with a telecommunications expressway". The line 
is linked to the Beijing-Nanjing-Shanghai-Guangzhou optical 
fiber telecommunications line, with the former providing a 
high-capacity digital telecommunications thoroughfare in central 
China and the latter in east China. 
  Last year, construction of 150 key state projects focused on 
basic industries and infrastructure facilities. The 124 
projects related to energy, transportation, telecommunications 
and strategic raw materials accounted for 83 percent of the 
total number of key projects under construction. Investments in 
these projects amounted to 67.3 billion yuan, or 92 percent of 
total investments in capital construction, indicating that the 
government has already shifted its focus of investment to key 
construction projects. 
<H5>  Increased Production Capacity In 1993 </H5>
  Railways: 116-km new railway lines were completed, 619-km 
old 
lines double-tracked, and 193-km lines electrified. 
  Ports: 15 deep-water berths were built, increasing the 
handling capacity of the nation's harbors by 25.3 million tons. 
  Coal: 14 coal pits subject to the government's unified 
planning entered production, increasing the country's raw coal 
production capacity by 10.9 million tons. 
  Oil: the production capacity for continental oil rose to 
15.36 million tons, while that of natural gas jumped to 820 
million cubic meters. 
  Electricity: 62 large and medium-sized sets or generators 
with a combined installed capacity of 12.1 million kw were put 
into operation, including 14 sets for hydropower with a combined 
installed capacity or 3.1 million kw, and 48 sets for thermal 
power with a total installed capacity of 9 million kw. 
  Petrochemical industry: the production capacity for ethylene 
increased by 300,000 tons. 

