Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Guido Passalacqua: "Fini Tells League: National </F>
Unity or No Government; `Next Prime Minister? Berlusconi, 
Never'; Bossi Attacks Ally"] 
  [Excerpt] Milan -- [passage omitted] Exactly a week before 
the election [Northern League Secretary] Bossi, instead of 
softening his tone, is persisting in his polemic with his ally, 
[Forza Italia leader] Berlusconi, and refusing to hear any talk 
about [Italian Social Movement (MSI) and National Alliance (AN) 
leader] Fini's joining the "pole of freedoms." The League 
leader urged his supporters to vote for the "pole of freedoms" 
but warned them that the tiller must remain with the League, 
which will decide the right course; otherwise, if Forza Italia 
("the ones with the face powder and the toupees") were to win, 
there would a be a return "to the quagmires of old." 
  "Beware, my friends," Umberto Bossi shouted, "behind 
Berlusconi there stand a certain [former Prime Minister] Giulio 
Andreotti and a certain [former Italian Socialist Party 
Secretary] Bettino Craxi." People will "vote for the pole of 
freedoms because it is the lesser evil, but the problem is the 
balance of forces between the League and its recycled elements." 
  It was a brief but significant rally. It was held right 
outside the San Siro stadium, where Berlusconi perfected his 
ascent toward the public at large: Bossi does not miss a trick. 
  What about the charges leveled at Forza Italia of enjoying 
the Mafia's votes in the south? Bossi replied with a contorted 
argument, but did not defend Berlusconi -- on the contrary. His 
premise was that ever since 1947 the Mafia "has always colluded 
with politics" and that now, after the DC's [Christian 
Democratic Party] operation to destroy the League by means of 
Forza Italia "has failed," "the south no longer has the DC key 
to unlock the coffers of the north and is trying to find 
another; it is taking a businessman from the north and using him 
in the DC's place. How can the south not vote for Berlusconi if 
he is the key that will open the coffers of the north?" 
  [Interior Minister] "Mancino is complaining," Bossi said 
sarcastically, "and saying, `leave a little of the Mafia to the 
DC, too.'" Again Bossi focused on his usual topic: "I am not 
attacking Berlusconi; I am telling the truth." And according to 
Bossi, the truth about his ally is that "Berlusconi for prime 
minister is an impossibility, as I was the first to say. 
Someone with so many business interests -- both the many that I 
see and the many that I do not see -- cannot be prime minister. 
This is why the League is backing Maroni" [Northern League 
lower house floor leader]. In other words, Berlusconi "is an 
example of the old regime based on a duopoly." The regime that 
the League wants to destroy: "In the media, there is RAI [state 
radio and television] with the parties and Fininvest as its 
alternative. This situation must be changed. Beware: The big 
families live off our money, as does the system of party rule." 
This is why he again threatened "an antimonopoly body to 
eliminate privileges and protectionism. We will set up this 
antimonopoly body, and he [Berlusconi] will try to save his 
television stations." Asked why, then, he reached an agreement 
with Forza Italia, he replied: "Out of necessity, not because 
we like Berlusconi." He added: "Berlusconi is the last card 
played by the old regime." 
  What about Fini? "There is no place for the fascists in the 
pole of freedoms," Bossi explained; "they are completely 
excluded. They will never have access to the pole of freedoms, 
and this cannot be otherwise. The pole of freedoms will win, 
and we will govern together with Forza Italia." 
  This was an indirect response to what the National Alliance 
leader said late yesterday morning on the sidelines of a very 
crowded meeting (attended by over 20,000 people). Interviewed 
by a number of journalists about the possibility of forming a 
government with the Northern League, Fini seemed amenable, and 
set two conditions: "Absolute clarity on national unity and 
identity and equal clarity on the duties of a policy of 
solidarity between the strong and weak sectors of society." 
With regard to the National Alliance's chances, Fini said that 
he was certain that the movement will gain over 10 percent. 

