BFN 

  [Text] PHNOM PENH, April 21 (AFP) -- Cambodia's King 
Norodom Sihanouk said Thursday that the nominal leader of the 
Khmer Rouge [KR] had warned him to leave the country for his own 
safety ahead of a nationwide terrorist campaign. 
  "His Excellency Khieu Samphan requested that if I want to 
avoid accidents or danger I sould get out of the country as soon 
as possible," the king told reporters at the capital's Royal 
Palace. 
  The king said he received a "secret letter" from Khieu 
Samphan late Wednesday in which the guerrilla leader warned that 
the "Khmer Rouge would provoke turmoil in the whole country, 
including Phnom Penh." 
  The king said he was advised not to wait for a private plane 
but to take a commercial flight to Bangkok. Khieu Samphan 
requested that the king not divulge the contents of the letter, 
he said. 
  "But I cannot be quiet," he said. 
  "I have to tell Khieu Samphan through (state-run) television 
and radio that I will not run. Ever since I was young I never 
ran from danger." 
  The king said he was scheduled to leave for Beijing in June 
to undergo further treatment for cancer. 
  "But even if I am sick in June and there is turmoil in the 
kingdom created by the Khmer Rouge, I will not go," he said. 
  The king pledged to remain with his people in times of 
trouble. 
  "I will never leave my people," he said. 
  A government official, however, dismissed the guerrilla 
warning as "political bluff." 
  The king went on to say that the government's proposed move 
to formally outlaw the Khmer Rouge did not concern him. 
  "It's a matter for the Royal Government to decide," he said, 
adding: "The king reigns but does not govern." 
  Co-Premier Hun Sen told AFP Wednesday that the government 
had 
already drafted a law to outlaw the radical faction and would 
present it to parliament Monday. 
  The king also said it was also up to the government to 
decide 
whether to evict the Khmer Rouge representatives from their 
compound in the capital. 
  Another government official, however, said the king 
supported 
the move to outlaw the guerrillas. 
  "The king does not want to do anything to jeopardise the 
peace process. But the Khmer Rouge have got on his nerves," the 
official said. 

