Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the press review] </F>
  [Text] AL-THAWRAH comments that the Geneva summit showed 
that the Arabs are determined to pursue a just and comprehensive 
peace grounded in UN resolutions and the land-for-peace formula, 
which figured in Clinton's post-summit statement in which he 
told President Hafiz al-Asad that the United States is committed 
to a lasting and comprehensive peace. Success or failure of the 
ongoing bilateral talks in Washington will depend on whether 
Israel will go along with a comprehensive and just settlement. 
  The ball is now in the Israeli court and the world is 
looking 
to see how far Israeli officials are able to comprehend 
international developments after the Geneva summit. By 
reverting to shiftiness and the tactic of separate deals, Israel 
is thus passing up a valuable chance to achieve a settlement 
which it needs even more than the Arabs. A world so impressed 
by the outcome of the summit of the age and the personality of 
President Hafiz al-Asad continues to hope that the summit will 
still be able to push the peace process forward and then achieve 
the peace of the brave. The world will not tolerate another 
Israeli attempt to bypass the summit. Meanwhile, the U.S. 
Administration, which is firmly convinced Syria is seeking true 
peace, wants Israel to comprehend the new facts of the new stage 
and to help Washington make a go of the American initiative of 
the land-for-peace formula. Syria's idea of the land-for-peace 
formula is for Israel to effect an unconditional withdrawal from 
the occupied Golan Heights and southern Lebnaon, which is being 
demanded of the Israeli negotiators in Washington. The Israeli 
negotiators are not coming up with any better ideas than the 
ones they put forward in previous sessions. Their arrival in 
Washington was preceded by the bizarre and unwarranted call for 
a referendum to decide whether to withdraw from the Golan -- a 
call that runs counter to an international and American support 
for the right of the region's peoples to a just, comprehensive, 
and durable peace, the peace of the brave. 
  In another commentary, AL-THAWRAH writes under the headline 
"The New Opportunity:" The current round of the Washington 
talks is an opportunity to relaunch and break the deadlock in 
the peace process. Whatever the expectations held out for the 
Washington talks, it is important that they prove more 
productive than earlier rounds. In which case the optimism that 
the talks will yield results will have been justified. For this 
to happen, the Israeli negotiators need to adopt new postures 
and speak a new language, and stay away from equivocation and 
trickery. The paper notes that the Geneva summit gave the peace 
process a chance to succeed. But there is the risk of this 
chance being lost unless Israel shows seriousness and commits 
itself publicly and unequivocally to the parameters of a just 
peace as outlined by the Madrid formula and reiterated at the 
Geneva summit. Just how serious Israel is will be judged by 
whether it will state a clear intention to pull out from all the 
occupied territory and admit that a comprehensive settlement on 
all fronts without detriment to Arab rights is the only road to 
peace. 

