Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Miguel de la Guardia; from the "Commenting on </F>
the News" section of the "Evening Information Review" newscast] 
  [Text] The elaborate discussions of the economic measures 
that Cuba plans to apply to pull out of the deep crisis produced 
by the collapse of the socialist camp have concluded. The crisis 
has been augmented by the tightening of the economic blockade 
the United States has exerted on Cuba for the past 32 years. 
More than 80,000 workers' meetings were held throughout the 
country to discuss and debate the main economic measures the 
revolutionary government will gradually and in a timely manner 
impose to heal the nation's finances and bring normalcy to the 
people. 
  It cannot be said that even the most humble workers of the 
cities and the countryside discussed the measures because in 
Cuba there are no humble or forsaken workers. In Cuba, workers 
are the most important citizens, the main factor of society. It 
is also true that in Cuba they represent the absolute majority 
of society, a society of workers. Because of this, workers have 
the right to fully participate in the adoption of decisions that 
could affect them, and they fully exercise this right. 
  At the workers' meetings, which were called the Workers 
Parliament, they discussed regulations, taxes, savings, and 
losses and earnings, just as executives interested in having a 
profitable, productive, efficient, and dynamic enterprise do. 
This is what is needed at this critical moment and this will be 
the basis of the country's social and economic life. 
  The Cuban leaders already have in their hands the ideas, 
suggestions, and observations provided by the workers and this 
will be, undoubtedly, an important contribution to the work to 
be carried out in the next few days by the National Assembly of 
the People's Government which will draft laws defining the steps 
that will be adopted to pull out of the current crisis and 
embark on a true economic takeoff. 
  The people already know that the measures that have been 
discussed and announced will mean severe adjustments and 
corrections that will impose sacrifices on the citizens, but the 
people also know that the revolutionary leadership that led them 
to social levels almost unique in the world because it thinks 
about the people and work for the people, will know how to lead 
them based on their most legitimate interests and aspirations. 
All Cubans know that these are not demagogic promises because 
the revolution has demonstrated its stature without ever lying 
to the people, without hiding difficulties and sacrifices, 
always speaking the truth. 
  The recently concluded Workers Parliament process has 
demonstrated the solid unity of the Cuban people at the side of 
the revolutionary leadership, and this is the best guarantee of 
success for any endeavor. There have been many difficulties and 
difficulties will continue. The road ahead is long and 
difficult, but the Cuban people will know how to overcome the 
current problems and victory will be, as always, everybody's 
victory. 

