BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Algerian-U.S.-French Contacts To </F>
Find Coalition Formula Including Salvation Front"] 
  [Text] Algiers -- AL-HAYAH has learned that contacts at 
the highest level are under way between the Algerian 
authorities, the Islamists, the Americans, and the French to 
find a coalition formula acceptable to the various parties 
before the end of summer. 
  Western diplomatic sources have told AL-HAYAH that the 
Americans believe that the "lost time" was not in the interests 
of the ruling authorities in Algeria and that a solution could 
only be found through dialogue and national reconciliation. 
  Observers expect surprises in the Army if the dialogue fails 
or if the Algerian authorities do not urgently seek a solution 
within the next three months. They believe that the French, 
after President Bill Clinton's visit to Paris, are now convinced 
of the need to help in paving the way for a solution "that would 
be acceptable to the Islamists and that would be seen by 
Washington as an alternative to what happened in Iran." 
  Sources close to the leadership of the Islamic Salvation 
Front [FIS] say that it is not unlikely "that a secret agreement 
has been reached between some FIS leaderships and the U.S. 
Administration on a concept for the transitional period, or what 
the Americans call a national coalition government." 
  The sources speak of "U.S. guarantees given to these 
leaderships of a shift from military rule to civilian rule 
without bloodshed, with the U.S. interests in Algeria 
safeguarded." 
  In addition to that agreement, some European states and the 
United States have been holding intensive contacts with Hocine 
Ait-Ahmed, leader of the Socialist Forces Front, who has visited 
Washington and discussed with the U.S. Administration issues of 
human rights, revival of democracy in Algeria, and how the three 
major forces could contribute to that along with some 
independent forces. 
  Meanwhile, Abdelhamid Mehri, secretary general of the 
National Liberation Front [FLN], wrote the editorial of the 
first edition of YOUMIYAT EL HEWAR ["dialogue diary"] saying 
that "YOUMIYAT EL HEWAR is issued at this particular time under 
the pressure of political need." He reaffirmed the FLN's 
insistence on dialogue as the solution to the crisis. 
  According to unconfirmed reports, some patriotic figures 
have 
recently submitted a proposal to President Liamine Zeroual 
calling for the release of the FIS leaders on the occasion of 
the 32d anniversary of national independence which falls on 5 
July. 
  Observers believe that the only losers from the "coalition 
formula" and the participation of the three fronts [FLN, FIS, 
and the Socialist Forces Front] would be the horses France has 
been backing since the suspension of the election process to 
this day, thinking that they would be the alternative to the FLN 
and FIS. These horses are the secular group and the Francophiles 
led by Saeed Saadi. 
  Reliable sources have told AL-HAYAH that the investigations 
regarding the Israeli arms found in the possession of Saadi's 
supporters did not rule out the possibility of a link between 
him and some of the armed groups which recently assassinated 
figures loyal to the Islamic Groups and the Islamic trend, 
especially the lawyers. 
  In another development, sources close to the Algerian 
Interior Ministry say that a committee has been formed to draft 
"legislation" under which the publication of any reports on 
terrorism would be prohibited and papers and journalists doing 
so would be prosecuted. 
  AL-HAYAH has learned that at dawn yesterday the "special 
rapid deployment forces" stormed the home of Algerian writer 
Khalid Omar Kekah, editor of the weekly EL CHOROUK EL ARABI 
["Arab Dawn"], the biggest publication in Algeria with a 
circulation of 350,000, which also has a twin weekly publication 
called EL CHOROUK EL THAKAFI ["Cultural Dawn"]. 

