Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Chancellor Helmut Kohl at Christian Democratic </F>
Union conference in Hamburg; broadcast in progress -- live] 
  [Text] ...that's why I'm asking you, that's why I'm 
requesting you to return home from Hamburg and say to our 
voters: We the union of Germany want to win these elections I 
just mentioned. Our goal is to win, not just to place. 
[applause] 
  The first signal goes to Lower Saxony, to our colleague 
Christian Wolf and all our colleagues who are campaigning there. 
And my request here is that all those who are called upon -- 
there can never be enough -- join us in Lower Saxony. That 
they, along with us, seek out the voters and explain our 
policies and support our cause. 
  And we can do that easily in Lower Saxony. We have an 
excellent candidate [applause] who has all the qualities needed 
by a young candidate. [applause] And that is why -- and I'm 
saying this to our friends from Lower Saxony in particular -- it 
is not sufficient just to applaud here. Instead we must return 
home together and fight together, and not let cracks appear 
anywhere as if certain people have no wish to fight. That is a 
precondition if we want to win. [applause] 
  And in the examples of Lower Saxony and Hesse we are 
experiencing what Red-Green means in this dramatic moment in 
German history -- where it is no longer a question of keeping 
the status quo or strengthening assets and where we should be 
concentrating on securing the future and succeeding. And using 
the examples of Lower Saxony and Hesse, it is also possible to 
say how things would be if the Social Democrats [SDP] wishes 
became reality -- if Red-Green [coalition] took over power and 
responsibility in Germany. This is what we have to make clear 
to the voters. [applause] 
  The voter has to know what the issues are, where the 
differences lie, and, despite all those who give us advice on 
how we should move toward electoral victory like a slalom racer, 
the voter does not want the differences to be blurred. I am 
indeed in favor of a fair electoral campaign, but fair does not 
mean that someone lashes out at us and we, with Christian 
convictions, turn the other cheek -- we have no intention of 
doing that, church assembly. [applause] 
  Our country is setting its future course and everyone senses 
this. We must make clear what we stand for: for a policy for 
peace and freedom. This means that we should tell people that 
this is not a gift granted from heaven, but that the correctness 
of Bismarck's words that the fate of a nation is decided in its 
foreign and security policy has become noticeable again in 
recent days, weeks, and months. A policy of peace and freedom 
for Germany always means friendship and partnership with our 
neighbors. Since Konrad Adenauer it has been our important goal 
to be reliable friends and partners, and our success in the 
world has been based on this. [applause] 
  This means a policy to stop and reduce unemployment. We 
cannot and must not accept an unemployment figure of 4 million. 
This is the great domestic challenge facing our country, but 
this also means a policy for investment, a policy for growth. 
And I want to say this too -- this means that everyone must 
take part in this. It is not as easy as all that, just saying, 
when things were good, it was the companies and unions, and when 
things were bad, it was down to the politicians. We all have a 
joint responsibility here. [applause] 
  Growth and jobs with a secure future always mean that we are 
capable of reform and of a rethink. Many are surprised that we 
are facing a rather unusual situation in this election campaign. 
Those who on the election day will have had the responsibility 
for 12 years, talk about further development, safeguarding the 
future, and the need for a rethink, while those who want to take 
power talk about (?economic) assets. I like this division, 
because it forces us and makes it necessary for us to tell 
people what is going on, to say things that may appear 
uncomfortable, and to carry through what is required. Our 
country will have no future if we do not now take stock and see 
our future prospects, and if we are not capable of asking quite 
soberly what has gone well in this decade -- and many things 
have gone very well -- and what has proved not worthwhile. 
  The SDP is taking a very easy path, as they have done time 
and again in recent decades. With their plans they would lead 
the country -- if they had the responsibility of government -- 
into international isolation. 
  Willy Brandt said it: The German SDP against the rest of 
the world. And if you take a look now at the position of the 
German SDP within the Socialist International in Europe, you 
will notice that they are completely isolated. Friends, the 
word isolation must never again become a motto for German 
policy. [applause] We have paid a bitter price in this century 
for the occasions when our country isolated itself or when, as 
often happened, it allowed itself to be driven into isolation. 
We must remain capable of playing a full part in the alliance, 
and this is essential if we are to enjoy trust. There has just 
been a lot of talk, and rightly so, about the unification 
conference of the Union here in Hamburg [on 1 October 1990]. We 
would never have seen the day of German unity if our friends in 
the West, and our partners in the East had not trusted us -- and 
trust is the prerequisite for everything, both in private life 
and in politics. [applause] 
  This 1994 election year is a difficult year, not only here 
in 
Germany, but everywhere, in all industrial countries. This 
observation is correct, but it does not help us here at all. We 
are living through dramatic changes in the world, in Europe and 
in Germany. It is virtually impossible now for the ordinary 
citizen to grasp the meaning of the daily, rapid succession of 
images reflecting new, dramatic events. Many feel that it is 
all too much for them. This gives rise to a sense of 
uncertainty and to anxiety, and leads people to expect far too 
much of politicians. This then leads to that famous word, 
disillusionment [verdrossenheit], which we have already heard 
this morning. People then talk about disillusionment with 
politics [politikverdrossenheit], but I may add that all I can 
see is a general disillusionment: When I compare the Christian 
Democratic Union's [CDU] declining membership figures with those 
of the trade unions, proportionately speaking, I don't get the 
impression that one of us is any better off than the other. The 
dignified gentlemen in the employers' organizations don't talk 
about the numbers leaving them, but those figures are sizable, 
too. We also know about the figures for the churches and for 
sports clubs. 
  We are witnessing a development which extends far beyond 
everyday politics. People are becoming increasingly reluctant 
to make commitments, and this is naturally being reflected in 
politics as well. But precisely because this is the case, we 
cannot give in immediately to every passing trend. No! We must 
stand up for our program, we must present it in a language that 
people can understand, and we must act resolutely against those 
false prophets who seek to exploit anxieties and feelings of 
uncertainty for their own political ends. Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Rarely before have such persistent efforts been made to use 
belly-aching and the cover of pessimism to mount political 
campaigns. 
  A witness who is really worth quoting here is Martin 
Waltzer, 
who recently said the following in his honorary doctorship 
speech in Dresden on the topic "Unity Is Not failing." I quote: 
There are evidently people who are principally in a bad mood 
who cannot stand their own personal disillusionment. Thus, we 
are all supposed to share this disillusionment. Then he 
continues that a party that also uses historical difficulties 
for party political polemics shows it is unable to make any 
suggestion to resolve the difficulties. I have nothing to add to 
that. [applause] 
  This means that we, that I, will fight for every vote, that 
we will represent our beliefs on the offensive. And, Ladies and 
Gentlemen, on the offensive means being prepared for the fight. 
Offensive does not mean inviting people to background talks and 
telling them things -- if possible without stating who is saying 
it -- which one is otherwise too scared to tell the people. 
That is no great achievement. Offensive for me does not mean 
being afraid of one's own courage, giving in to those who 
believe they are powerful because they perhaps have had access 
to the opportunities provided by printed materials or television 
screens. We stand for our policies. We will win without giving 
in to anyone, friends. That is the decisive thing. [applause] 
  That does not mean the end of discussion, not by any means. 
A large party such as ours, a large political community such as 
ours has of course to struggle to find the correct future path. 
We must do this with respect for the views of others. We have 
to be capable of listening to arguments and weighing them up. 
But, Ladies and Gentlemen, we must not completely forget to 
think about the calender. When there is an election in a 
federal state parliament in three weeks' time, everyone in the 
CDU in Germany is obliged to think of the electoral campaigns 
that will take place in the evenings in that state in the snow 
and ice, and to put their heads on the block for this party. 
[applause] 
  And there cannot be for anyone, and I say anyone because I 
mean anyone, there cannot be for anyone a place in the box at 
the state theater of the republic where one watches with slight 
amusement the performance of some jester-like creatures on the 
stage. Those who now create an image for themselves at the 
expense of the whole exclude themselves from the community. 
[applause] 
  Therefore, dear friends, let's not now discuss how we will 
do 
in the elections. In case we finish badly, we may have a grand 
coalition and hide under the wing of the SDP. It's smelly, but 
it's warm. That cannot be our policy, dear friends. [applause] 
  We want to continue the coalition CDU/CSU [Christian Social 
Union] and FDP [Free Democratic Party]. And certainly not 
because of loving feelings. It is a question of reason. How 
can we decide questions about Germany's future that we are now 
facing with such overwhelming pressure? I think, and not just 
me, that despite all the things that sometimes annoy us in a 
day, that this is best possible with the FDP. Therefore, let us 
stop helping the SDP in their election campaign by addressing 
them from the outset as our future partner. When I say this, so 
that there is no doubt about this, I still maintain the 
statement that the Christian Democratic Union of Germany is 
naturally able to form a coalition with any democratic party. 
We have such coalitions in the federal states and I support 
them. However, for the federal government this does not augur 
well, but we want things to be good in our country and that is 
the decisive thing. [applause] 
  Therefore, dear friends, to state it briefly, this is our 
policy. Those who want a different policy have a chance between 
now and late Wednesday afternoon [23 February] to argue their 
case in this room. But when we go home on Wednesday, these 
debates are finished. Then we will fight together and those who 
don't want that will be isolated. That is clear. [applause] 
  It is also true, dear friends, that politics in the 
nineties, 
every decade has its characteristics, that politics in the 
nineties has become more difficult also because our country and 
our people are subject to more changes than in previous periods. 
This is reflected not only in opinion polls, it is reflected 
everywhere. I will give an example of how fast-moving we are. 
And I say this to myself, too. 
  You see, in Bad Kleinen in June 1993, officers of the GSG-9 
[special task force] and of the Federal Criminal Investigations 
Office apprehended terrorists. One GSG-9 officer was murdered 
in the operation. The killer, who was a terrorist, also died. 
It has now been shown to have been a suicide. In the days that 
followed, blame was pinned not on the perpetrator, but on the 
officer who had given his life for our country and our freedom. 
Now, Ladies and Gentlemen, if we allow -- and this is a matter 
for us, as we sit here, not just the concern of the chancellor 
and the party chairman, but our common concern -- if we allow a 
mood to be generated in Germany that compels the murdered man to 
prove that he is not a murderer, if we have a development where 
one can be prosecuted and forced to answer publicly for 
describing such a perpetrator as a murderer, and if we no longer 
even talk about the victim, that is intolerable for the 
atmosphere in this country. [applause] 
  I am glad to take the example of this GSG-9 officer as an 
opportunity to express gratitude to all those who spend day and 
night guarding our security and who receive far too little 
sympathy and support. [applause] 
  We should not let ourselves be upset by what is being said 
every day. Many people are looking at me now as if I were a 
rather strange creature, as if to say: How can he possibly 
still talk about winning the election? Ladies and Gentlemen: I 
am going by my experience, and my experience is that I have been 
constantly sustained by waves of support during these past 
decades, as you know. You know, I remember exactly what it was 
like in December 1982 and January 1983, when many, even in our 
own party, said we would have hardly any time in power and that 
we would fritter everything away by calling early elections. My 
argument that we could not go ahead with the deployment of the 
Pershings on the strength of a borrowed election result counted 
for little, at least at first. Our SDP colleagues and friends, 
who had moved out and were sitting with their suitcases in the 
parliament building, were saying it was just an accident and 
they would soon be back. It has been 12 years now, they have 
unpacked their cases, and I am in favor of them keeping those 
cases in the attic for a little while longer. [applause] 
  Ladies and Gentlemen: Where would we be today, what would 
have happened to German unity, and what would be happening right 
now to NATO in former Yugoslavia, if we had followed the SDP 
then? 
  I don't need to look back that far. Think of Lothar de 
Maiziere. Remember February 1990 -- surely we are still allowed 
to do that! I read -- and many of those who wrote it so wisely 
are watching me now, and that is why I extend a particularly 
warm welcome to them, Ladies and Gentlemen -- at that time I 
read the following: Those areas, in Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, 
Thuringia and so on, are ancient Social Democratic strongholds, 
and how can you possibly hope to campaign there? Our chances 
were rated as zero. There were many factors, I admit, but we 
won the election, Ladies and Gentlemen. We won the election to 
the first Volkskammer [People's Chamber] with Lothar de Maiziere 
and our friends. That is the reality. [applause] 
  Therefore, and I will put it quite simply, whichever way 
the wind blows, whether we can change its course depends 
crucially on us, and if we do not just talk about a close 
relationship with people, but we practice it, and if we take 
part in debates, and if we present our program and our 
representatives in a credible manner, then we have a very good 
chance. Therefore, let's get on with things together. 
  Here in Hamburg we have to say first and foremost why we 
want 
to take on the responsibility of government in Bonn again, why 
we are putting ourselves forward, and what our arguments are. I 
think that the first and most important factor is that in 
domestic policy we are capable -- despite 4 million unemployed 
and the problems associated with this -- of safeguarding Germany 
as a location for investment and business, that we know that 
without performance there will be no growth, no jobs for the 
future and no social security, and that, friends, whether we 
like it or not, there has to be a rethink, because the changes 
in the world have been so dramatic. As an industrial nation, we 
now have so much new competition that it is also necessary to 
call into question (?economic) assets. 
  We want to be elected because our social policy safeguards 
people's homes and orientation. We want to be elected because 
we stand for a strong liberal state based on the rule of law, 
not for a laissez-faire state, but for a state which provides 
protection and security for its citizens. And we want to be 
elected because we stand up for understanding between the 
generations, between young and old, for strengthening families 
with children, for recognizing, respecting, and showing 
affection for the elderly on whose shoulders we are standing. 
  We want to be elected because our foreign and security 
policy 
guarantees peace and freedom and because we are reliable 
partners. This also includes -- and I am referring here 
especially and expressly to all my predecessors in the post of 
party chairman, such as Rainer Barzel, as well as in the post of 
chancellor, insofar as they were from the CDU/CSU parties -- the 
fact that we are and remain the party of Europe. German unity 
and European unification are two sides of the same coin. 
[applause] 
  We also want to be elected because for us freedom, 
solidarity, and justice must be the guiding principles of our 
policy, and because the debate at this party conference on the 
key program makes this even clearer. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, we also want to be elected because we 
do not begin to sway in the wind when it is necessary to 
distance ourselves clearly and without hesitation from 
extremists on the right and left. For us right-wing extremists 
are living in the past and have not learned from history, and 
left-wing extremists are responsible for the material and 
spiritual devastation in one part of Germany. In other words, 
extremists on the left and right are a disgrace to our country. 
[applause] 
  Friends, we also want to be elected because we can point to 
our successes. Saying this also means, of course, that nothing 
more will be paid for this afterwards. But when you look at the 
documents you have about our successes and achievements over the 
last 10 years, and in particular in recent years, you will see 
that many outstanding things have been achieved over a brief 
period and we should keep reminding people of this. 
  It was nevertheless possible. And we did it. From 1983 up 
until shortly before German reunification we reduced the state 
quota drastically. The average income of an employee rose by 
almost 18 percent in real terms. And we proved that we could 
find jobs by creating 3 million new jobs. I am saying this 
because the SDP with their miserable policies want to cover up 
the fact that the stability of the former West Germany up until 
1989 had created the prerequisites required to overcome the 
economic challenges of the following year of German unification. 
[applause] 
  Friends -- leaving money aside for a moment -- we can look 
around this room today and see people from Brandenburg, from 
East Berlin, from Saxony, from Saxony-Anhalt and from Thuringia 
and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and we can say we are happy in 
the old German fatherland. That is the first thing and the most 
important thing. [applause] 
  And it really is a dream come true. When I spoke to Boris 
Yeltsin recently about the form this day at the end of August 
would take, 50 years later, when the last Russian soldiers 
withdraw, then I asked myself and I ask all of you, would we 
have ever believed it possible that this would happen in total 
friendship, in partnership, in close cooperation 50 years on? 
That is a fantastic thing. This is a reason to be pleased and 
not a reason to hide away this joy we may feel. [applause] 
  And friends, if we stop for a moment and ask ourselves -- 
and 
we can all answer this -- when in recent German history has 
there been a period in which the government of our country has 
had such excellent, friendly relations with Washington, with 
Moscow, with Paris and with London? That is our policy, so make 
sure you tell the people out there so that it is not gambled 
away by the SDP who would lead the country into isolation. 
[applause] And saying thank you should not become outmoded in 
our country, either in private or political life. For this 
reason it was a great joy for me to be able recently to express 
once again our country's thanks to George Bush and his 
colleagues in Washington, as I do with Mikhail Gorbachev at 
every possible opportunity. We don't want to forget what these 
two men and others did for us. [applause] 
  But friends, this gratitude should also include, in the 
states of former West Germany in particular, the thanks to our 
17 million fellow countrymen in the former GDR who were the ones 
who made this great achievement possible in the first place with 
their call for Germany, united fatherland. [applause] 
  We are not delving around in old files when we simply say 
that at this great hour for our people the SDP stood on the 
sidelines, that they were wrong. And I say this above all 
because it is something that I am reminded of every day. I get 
letters almost every day from mayors, lord mayors, state 
councillors, state politicians, not least from my own home 
state, who urge me to do everything to ensure that the Americans 
stay here at all costs. And they are the same people, Ladies 
and Gentlemen, who for years voiced anti-American sentiments at 
their council meetings; "Ami go home," they used to say. 
[applause] 
  It is not delving around in old files, or mudslinging, and I 
won't even touch these Stasi files, if I start from the 
experience of these years, such as the decision by the SPD 
Bundestag group, this is not some Stasi secret, it's an official 
resolution from 1984, on the issue of the office in Salzgitter, 
to stop the funds. What was this all about? It has to be said 
because people have forgotten it all in such a short time. 
After the experiences with the Wall and barbed wire, after the 
building of the Wall, it was about setting up an office in West 
Germany to document the acts of inhumanity, of crimes against 
humanity in Germany. 
  Afterall, during these years over 40,000 incidents of 
maltreatment, torture, and so on were registered, in order to be 
able to name those responsible at a later date. It was one of 
Honecker's most important demands, which he also made to me, to 
remove this thorn in the flesh of the henchmen of the then GDR. 
And, Ladies and Gentlemen, and if we now recall how intolerable 
it is for this to be trivialized today, we recall, Ladies and 
Gentlemen, that one could hardly demonstrate then for humanity 
and human rights in Chile or in South Africa while at the same 
time forgetting one's own compatriots. We say no more and no 
less than this. We will continue to exercise our right to do so 
during the election campaign, not least among the 17 million of 
our fellow citizens in the former GDR, which is now the new 
federal states, when carping criticism is made of the transitory 
problems which he have to solve together. [applause] 
  Nor, Ladies and Gentlemen, do we forget that leading German 
SDP were ready to accept Honecker's other awful demand for our 
compatriots with dual nationality to be expatriated. And since 
I was the one who negotiated with the Hungarian Government 
during the summer of 1989, I know what would have happened if we 
had kowtowed to Honecker when tens of thousands of our 
compatriots from the GDR and Hungary crossed the Austrian border 
into freedom. This is the experience of history, and it's not a 
matter of closing the file, as Mr. Thierse says, and then 
setting up a historical commission. I don't have anything 
against historical commissions, but they would reach exactly the 
same conclusion: That at a decisive phase in German history, 
leading German SDP betrayed a piece of our country's future. 
That is the truth. [applause] 
  Friends, we now have the equally important and difficult 
task 
of rethinking Germany's position as a business location with a 
view to the economic and social development of our country. 
That means, first of all, not giving in to the illusion that it 
is now sufficient to create improvements in our economic 
position without simultaneously removing the deep-seated faults 
that are the underlying cause of the economic slump. This was 
not, to quote, a normal economic slump. It is not a normal 
economic trough. Deep structural faults that have grown over 
the years have become visible. It is also true -- and I don't 
have to be a guru to know this -- that there are clear signs of 
an improvement in the economic situation, only we are not under 
any illusions. It will take a lot longer before we experience 
positive effects on the labor market. And the labor market does 
not mean a statistic of 4 million to me. Instead we should move 
away from statistics and look at the faces of the people -- 
those who want to work, not those who shirk work and abuse the 
social benefits system. But the many million who want to work, 
those people -- when they are not able to work and particularly 
those who have been unemployed for a longer period -- ask 
themselves ever more frequently: Am I of any use whatsoever? 
That is the question we are asking ourselves. And a Christian 
Democratic Union, which is committed to social justice -- we are 
not supporters of the market economy, we are supporters of the 
social market economy, Ladies and Gentlemen -- a Christian 
Democratic Union of this kind [applause] has to concern itself 
with this, has to think of everything that can be done and find 
a remedy as soon as possible. 
  There is no point in blaming one another. It is of course 
true that two signatures are required on wage agreements -- that 
of the employers and that of the employees. It is of course 
true that a dramatic overregulation has come about in many areas 
of our country over the decades. You can now see the effects of 
these terrible rules and regulations in the reconstruction 
process in the states of former East Germany. If Ludwig Erhard 
had had this overregulation in 1953, the upturn would not have 
been successful until decades later. We really must find the 
courage to say we want a state based on the rule of law rather 
than on the means of law enforcement, and we have to take the 
appropriate steps and do a great deal of dismantling. If we let 
it rest for five years, I believe that if the Federal Republic's 
construction laws -- which we, me included, were proud of at the 
beginning of the eighties -- if we were to put them on ice for 
five years, then we would build more and build better, that's my 
belief. [applause] 
  For this reason I am pleading passionately for us give it a 
try. We will make new mistakes, but doing nothing would be the 
biggest mistake of all. And we have just seen two examples of 
this. The railroad reform is an opus in itself. Here sits 
Matthias Wissman, our fortunate minister of transportation, and 
he deserves credit for his success, but Hans-Christoph Seebohm 
started it all at the end of the 1950's. Think: We needed 
decades to meet one of the crucial needs to lighten the burden 
on our roads and not to have all our goods being transported 
along the roads and autobahns, namely to build fast trains and 
get them running. For an industrialized country which wants to 
be among the best in the world this is a luxury which we can no 
longer afford. [applause] 
  Or take the postal service, which has many tens of thousands 
of the most modern jobs. Other countries depend on us. Our 
late friend Jozsef Antall, at one of the last cabinet meetings 
before his death, decided that Germany would be commissioned 
with modernizing the Hungarian postal service, and he did so 
with the classic justification, namely that the Germans would 
shortly have the world's most modern postal system. He believed 
it, so why don't we, my friends [laughter], why don't we believe 
it and why don't we bring it about, despite all the difficulties 
we have? 
  I believe, if we tackle the subject this way, and make 
securing Germany's economic future our main theme, that we will 
justifiably be able to point to tremendous results. I would 
wish, for example, that the presidents of all our chambers of 
trade and commerce, when they make clear what they want policies 
to achieve, which is well and good, would begin by saying that 
the reduction of corporate tax in Germany has led to the lowest 
ever level in this sector. And that it provides an excellent 
boost to growth and employment. 
  I would wish, second, that employers and unions, and I have 
to say in all honesty we, the state, the public sector, the 
chancellor, must all begin to implement flexible working hours 
and not just talk about them. [applause] Or put it another 
way: Does mass employment of this sort have to occur before 
practices are adopted in the auto sector in Rastatt or 
Kaiserslautern which were not possible before? Now some are 
saying we want to do away with keeping Sundays holy. Nothing of 
the sort is the case. But, Ladies and Gentlemen, we were well 
on the way to making Saturdays far holier than Sundays ever 
were, that is the point. [applause] 
  And now at last, after going back and forth for far too 
long, 
we have been able to update the law on genetic engineering. All 
this is contained in the question, will the Federal Republic of 
Germany, our country, be capable of meeting international 
competition? I cannot repeat often enough that we are not a 
rich country. With the exception of coal, we have scarcely any 
natural resources. And a word of warning to those who look only 
to the short term when it comes to coal, that this a 
short-sighted policy. Similar to agriculture, there are areas 
that should not be looked at solely in terms of the market 
economy. We need to secure our source of food through our 
farmers tomorrow and for decades into the future. We need a 
source of energy, and we will need coal as well, in the 21st 
century. I do not say this just because I'm in Hamburg. It is 
no good for a country with a coastline, with access to the sea, 
to say we will get out of the shipbuilding industry. There are 
three major areas of importance with which you won't win the 
Ludwig Erhard prize, I know, but you will secure a piece of the 
future. For this reason, I say we need an understanding here of 
the requirements necessary to maintain our position on the world 
market. 
  In other words, we did not get much worse than the others; 
they got better. We used to talk just about Taiwan and Japan; 
and now, my friends, the competition is at our own front door, 
and we want it this way. It is of elementary importance to our 
security that the Russians, the Ukrainians, the Czechs, and the 
Poles find their economic feet as soon as possible and that they 
become truly able to feed themselves. At our own front door, in 
the Czech Republic, they have a country which is home to one of 
the most intelligent peoples in Europe. And if 3 marks [DM] are 
paid for a skilled engineering worker at a major European 
company in this country, in Bruenn [Brno], and 40 are paid in 
Mannheim, the trend is clear to anyone. 
  This cannot mean that we go down from 40DM, nor can it mean 
that they stay at 3DM, but we must make a real mental effort in 
order to make up to a certain extent what we are losing in terms 
of our future development. That means investment in first class 
education and qualifications for workers. Furthermore, 
improving the infrastructure: I have already spoken about 
railroads, about postal services. We can do many things 
differently here -- what our local state chairman has just 
written to the mayor of Hamburg is part of all this -- 
concerning the Transrapid [fast route from Hamburg to Berlin]. 
  It means looking after the medium-sized companies, Ladies 
and 
Gentlemen. We have no problems with multicultural... [pauses] 
we have no problems with large companies, we have no problems 
with Europe-wide, worldwide companies. We are grateful for 
every job. However, Erhard's policy was always to recognize 
that what in those days was [words indistinct] is medium-sized 
companies in our economy, that is the driving, dynamic force. 
That must become clear again, along with all that it involves. 
[applause] 
  This entails something else as well. This will play a major 
role at this party conference, and I am in favor of it: The 
rational linking of the environment and the economy, of ecology 
and the economy. I would far prefer to use the word creation 
rather than environment, because it contains far more in terms 
of our ethical responsibility. We in our generation do not have 
the right to let the country go to the dogs from the point of 
view of the environment and of environmental protection. 
  If I summarize all this, then we need more flexibility, we 
need more innovation, we need stability. That has consequences 
for our budget and our currency. Flexibility, for example, 
means doing what is overdue, that is creating more part-time 
jobs. It is incomprehensible, Ladies and Gentlemen, that 2.5 
million people in the Federal Republic who have jobs say, when 
asked, that they would like to work part-time, but for reasons 
that are quite incomprehensible to me -- moreover in the civil 
service, which also sets a terrible example -- no progress is 
made here. In the Netherlands, every third employee is a 
part-time employee; here it is every sixth. If we introduced 
the Dutch example here, then we would have some 2 million jobs. 
We do not need to wait until the year 2000. We can get this 
moving now. The legal bases were created long ago. 
  In the agreement in the chemical industry -- and I would 
like 
to give due credit here -- we have examples of more flexibility. 
I will say quite openly, I cannot understand at all: If a 
large trade union such as that in the chemical industry can come 
to such agreements, why should there be serious talk at the 
moment about strikes and lock-outs? We are committing a crime 
against the future of our country if we allow ourselves to 
experiment like that right now. [applause] 
  When I spoke of a rethink with regard to innovation -- and 
there we have an unusual responsibility -- there is also the 
question of our responsibility in the past and our 
responsibility in the future for a favorable climate for 
technology and research in Germany. Ladies and Gentlemen, we 
have tolerated for too long this nonsense which was spread 
about, young people were persuaded they had to be afraid of 
taking a positive view of life and the future and should study 
for as long as possible because the outside world was cold. We 
need young people who are confident and this attitude has to be 
shaped at home, at school and, as far as I'm concerned, now and 
again during the sermon on Sunday. Both, all three, can be very 
useful for young people. [applause] 
  We are obviously very pleased when our sportsmen and women 
are successful. We can see this as the winter Olympics are now 
taking place. The medals will be counted and everyone, many 
people, will feel personally moved and the example of a young 
skier is obviously a motivation to hundreds of thousands of 
young people to achieve something themselves. Why don't we 
transfer this experience from the world of sport to the area of 
technology and science? Why don't we finally say a firm yes to 
this as a prerequisite for a functioning republic, namely a yes 
to an elite of achievers. No democracy can exist without an 
achieving elite. And that is particularly evident in this 
field. [applause] 
  Friends, I am not preaching a blind belief in progress here. 
At the end of this century we understand what this means. 
Progress, progress in science and technology must always have 
an ethical basis and responsibility to ensure that everything 
that is feasible is not necessarily allowed. But we cannot 
maintain our living standards and the social security in our 
country if we are not in the forefront of developments in the 
world, if our companies no longer consider that the results of 
research will produce more marketable products. This is not a 
primary objective of politics -- politics has to provide the 
framework and I'm in favor of that and industry can quite 
rightly demand that. But, Ladies and Gentlemen, when I 
occasionally hear people complaining about us, I think people 
should keep their own houses tidy before criticizing us. We 
have made mistakes but so have other people, and if everyone 
rectifies their own mistakes then the country will have a good 
future. It's that simple. 
  One more thing is important, stability which will secure the 
future -- we are all agreed on that -- stable state finances, a 
stable mark -- we cannot increase state debt any further. We 
reduced the state quota in 1949, in 1982 --it has increased to 
an intolerable level again. We cannot continue to increase 
taxes, because this will destroy the country and the people's 
desire to work. We have to see economic output in relation to 
the social welfare state. That is why we have to save. There is 
no further scope for the distribution of wealth. That is why we 
say honestly to one another what is possible and what is not. 
In a country like Germany, where social benefits total 1 
trillion with a 3 trillion marks GNP, a further increase is not 
possible. That does not mean we should dismantle the welfare 
state, but we should restructure it. We have to combat abuses, 
but we are not just talking of abuses of the unemployment 
benefit system -- although they unfortunately exist -- but also 
of tax and subsidy frauds. None of these three are trivial 
offenses. [applause] 
  Dear friends, we must do that. And I can only ask you 
again and again to tell people this because it is the prime 
basis for our future ideas. We must do it in a demographic 
situation whose effects are still not understood by many. It is 
the free decision of the Germans that we have one of the lowest 
birth rates in the world for people in their 20's. 
  It is gratifying that we have increasing life expectancy -- 
in the year 2000, it will be 75 for men and almost 81 for women. 
It is gratifying that we now have more than 3 million persons 
who are over 80 in Germany, and you know the effects on the job 
market, the social security system, the economy as a whole. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the number of pensioners is rising, and 
so I will say a frank word about that. These pensioners are not 
just anybody -- it is the generation of my parents, for the 
young here it is the generation of their grandparents. And a 
pension is not alms given to people by the state; it is the 
life's work of a man or a woman. If that is the case, they have 
a right to a secure pension. So let's stop experimental 
speculation about this, which can only make people unhappy in 
the end. That cannot be our policy. [applause] 
  We will stick to the principle of linking wages and 
contributions and securing people's living standards in old age. 
But the statistics show something that is one of the most 
incomprehensible things nowadays, that is the absolute necessity 
for nursing care insurance. We know -- and will stick to this 
-- that it must not be an additional burden for the economy. 
This must be done in such a way that it is not an additional 
burden. However, we have 1.8 million people in need of nursing 
care in Germany. And what are we doing now? We have 30 days of 
vacation, we have between 11 and 14 other holidays. That makes 
eight weeks of free time. What is important now is not even to 
cut two days of vacation, but to leave them as they are and not 
to pay for them in holiday pay, or to give the worker the 
opportunity to make up for them out of his leave entitlement. 
  We wrangle over this now, and the old ones -- I won't say 
senior citizens, because it is much closer to reality -- fall by 
the wayside. I find the way this matter is being discussed 
quite intolerable. [applause] 
  If at the same time in German cities the number of single 
people is increasing -- some 50 percent of the households, and 
of them, 6 million people between 25 and 65 -- then it is clear 
that hardly anything is changing in the overall climate of the 
country at present. Hence it is not a CDU obsession -- there 
are some strange utterances from the FDP that I cannot 
understand at all -- when we say that the topic of family and 
children is the central topic when we are talking about securing 
the future in the medium and long term. We have already set 
great things in motion from family allowances to parental leave 
and parental leave allowance. There is also our recognition of 
time spent rearing children for pension purposes and many other 
things. 
  This is not enough, however. I promise, with a view to the 
state's finances -- and our manifesto will look this way barring 
any great changes in the sums involved -- during the next 
legislative period we will have to do something in the tax area 
for industry to promote investment and eradicate unemployment. 
But we must also take a further step, even if it is only a 
small one, on behalf of families with children. And, Ladies and 
Gentlemen, this is not just any old issue, which is why I am in 
favor of a further reduction in the tax burden, for raising the 
level of statutory tax exemption, which is anyway necessary for 
constitutional reasons, in line with subsistence level, and we 
will certainly have to discuss a series of other issues. I 
would however ask that we discuss this in private before we do 
so in public, Ladies and Gentlemen. [applause] But -- and I 
add this by way of warning, because I'm afraid we have also 
fallen a little behind the times -- as important as all the 
material things are, there is something far worse to criticize, 
namely that there is no overseeing how cold our society has 
become in its attitude toward children, and that this is at 
least as significant as anything we can do in financial terms. 
Having a positive attitude to children is a wholly personal 
matter where the state has no business interfering. But where 
children are present, the state has to act protectively in 
another way. And the every day life of a family with children, 
and above all the every day life of single parents, not least 
single mothers, is such that it is depressing how society, our 
society, treats them. [applause] 
  Permit me to say a few words on the subject of our country's 
unity. I said, and it is an opinion we all share, that we are 
happy with the gift of unity. But it is also true that on this 
path to unity we found out that 40 years, 40 years of 
separation, had left far deeper marks than we, myself included, 
thought. It is also true that overcoming the legacy of the SED 
regime is the central task we face. But that's the way it has 
to be. And when we distribute public money -- we can spend it 
only once -- and more goes toward east Germany than the west, 
then I say, and this is something we have to tell people as it 
is also part of the truth, that it's now the turn of those who 
had to wait 40 years. And where I come from, where the building 
of a new bridge across the Rhine has been an important issue for 
30 years, for 30 years we have argued, for 30 years we failed to 
find a suitable site, and now it's the autobahn from Rostock to 
Luebeck that has priority, because without it there can be no 
development in Mecklenburg-West Pomerania. [applause] 
  Friends, let's not let ourselves be impressed by those who 
say they are speaking in the name of the people. The large 
majority of our people, also in the western part of Germany, 
know full well that this theory is correct. But what we now 
need to tackle -- in addition to what has to happen on the 
economic side of things -- is the question of the people living 
together, and this touches the lives of millions every day. 
  I must tell you what repeatedly fills me with consternation 
-- perhaps this is not the right word, hurts me -- is how little 
soul -- I will use that word -- is characteristic of our contact 
with one another. And many speak condescendingly after 40 years 
of their experience of the western administration system. 
People almost always forget what that means, what kind of 
people are now sitting in state federal government and are 
mayors. Five years ago they were doctors, surgical nurses, 
everything conceivable. Now they are negotiating with 
international concerns about the setting up of car factories and 
many other things. Of course, not everything runs smoothly. 
Anyone who examines local politics in western Germany cannot 
seriously say that everything is functioning perfectly there. 
Read the local newspapers, Ladies and Gentlemen. [applause] 
  All the people -- I myself included -- in the states of 
former West Germany have been impregnated and shaped over a 
period of many years by a certain type of politics. You know 
that if you are on camera you do up your jacket then you come 
out with hollow words when you don't want to say anything. 
That's the usual course of things. And then you are considered 
right and proper. But, Ladies and Gentlemen, this is not 
possible when you have lived on a different planet for 40 years. 
If you believed for 40 years that free public opinion was also 
your opinion. That has to be learned, and I have experienced 
that from our colleagues in the Bundestag and in the cabinet. 
What we need now are reasonable talks with one another: We 
need to have patience with one another, that is the most 
important thing that we need in Germany now. [applause] 
  But equally, part of the picture is that we tell our 
compatriots in eastern Germany that the standard of living 
reached in west Germany was not created in four years but took 
decades to achieve, and that we have to exercise patience with 
each other. I have no doubt, Ladies and Gentlemen, that 
together we can achieve whatever we want. Despite all the 
worries and [word indistinct] which I see and which you can see 
as well, the complete change in people's prospects, but when I 
see for example how the roads and autobahns look in east Germany 
today, and when I take just as a small example the fact that 
during the 40 years of the GDR precisely 1.8 million telephone 
lines were installed and that in just a few recent years the 
figure has been 4.1 million, to take one example [sentence as 
heard]. When I look at the trend in pensions, a subject 
particularly close to my heart, which amounted to 450 to 500 
Ostmarks after 45 working years before German unity, and which 
is now 1,250DM, then it is justified that we do so, we need make 
no excuses, this is a concrete example of solidarity in practice 
in Germany. [applause] 
  And I concede every day that we have made errors, I, Lothar 
de Maziere, when we were negotiating the agreements at the time, 
Wolfgang Schaueble and others. In April 1990, the GDR's assets 
were estimated at 1 trillion marks. And we were not the only 
ones. It was the great economic gurus not just here but on the 
other side of the Atlantic who made these estimates. And then 
we said we would write in the agreement that when everything had 
been calculated, that which remained -- Detlev Rohwedder named a 
sum of 600 billion -- the amount would be credited to the then 
inhabitants of the GDR. My friends, to make sure there's no 
misunderstanding, this was not 40 years ago, it was four years 
ago. When I recall the Bundestag debate on this, I don't want 
to bore you with it, every other [word indistinct] would have 
tortured ourselves if we had said we would not do it. The 
forecasts at the time were of an entirely different nature. And 
so I was wrong as well. I did not expect the Soviet Union to 
collapse and that 25 billion in trade would have shrunk to 
around 5 billion, and that only with the help of Hermes 
guarantees. But I was not wrong on one count. First, German 
unity and second, I still maintain, even if somewhat later, that 
there will be flourishing landscapes in the former GDR. 
[applause] 
  And, my friends, the whole world expects this of us. 
Francois Mitterrand has always used the same formula: The 
Germans have great problems, they would not be proper Germans if 
they did not master them. And here comes the sentence which is 
not my own, I quote: And afterwards they will be stronger than 
ever before. And, you see, this a central point which faces us 
at the moment. It is the question all our neighbors pose: What 
exactly is the matter with you Germans? What do you stand for? 
When Volker Ruehe negotiates with a counterpart, he is asked, 
well, are you actually allowed to do that? When the foreign 
minister goes away for negotiations he comes back and says: It 
was terrible. Everyone said this and that has to be done, but 
they all looked past me because we are unable to act. 
  You see, Ladies and Gentlemen, it goes against the honor, if 
I can put it this way, it is against the honor and dignity of 
our country that we are a member of the United Nations and can 
make use of the rights this brings, but shirk responsibility 
when it comes to obligations. [applause] 
  It does not speak in our political favor if we fail to find 
an answer to this question and turn instead to Karlsruhe 
[Constitutional Court] with the attitude that it is far easier 
to unload our burden in Karlsruhe than to do our duty ourselves. 
It does not speak in our favor, we should stop talking about 
disillusionment with politics when politicians are themselves 
not capable of providing the prerequisites necessary for action. 
  I think we are seeing in these hours, and I mean this quite 
literally, the possibility of a new chance. The way things look 
this morning, the objectives the NATO ultimatum intended to 
achieve will now be possible, at least in the Sarajevo area. I 
myself have contributed over the last few days, and I must say 
also the nights, to the efforts to end this terrible bloodshed, 
these horrible killings, first in that place and then elsewhere. 
  I would like to say expressly that I welcome the fact that 
with Boris Yeltsin and the Russian government another important 
force has assumed responsibility. I have tried to make great 
efforts to make this possible. 
  I would also welcome it if over the next few weeks -- we do 
not have much time -- we could invest all our strength in order 
to produce an overall plan, there are already some reasonable 
pieces, in order to end the whole suffering in the former 
Yugoslavia and, after careful preparation, to hold a very 
high-level international conference. We must do all we can to 
make our contribution to this, within our possibilities. 
  But this example shows that we Germans do not hide away in 
our niche when the storms of history break out. That would not 
be acceptable. We cannot be one of the strongest countries in 
Europe, we cannot want to take on an important role in the world 
and use the Red-Green coalition in Germany's motto: When it is 
to our advantage we will join in, when it is not, we will leave 
the playing field and wait in the shower until the storm is 
over. That is not politics, that would be a wretched thing for 
our country and for this reason we must also win the election to 
ensure that this wretched thing is not practiced throughout the 
world. [applause] 
  Friends, this kind of politics also includes a clear and 
unreserved yes to the Bundeswehr. There are few things 
[applause] which have affected me so badly over the last weeks 
as the necessary savings measures for the Bundeswehr and in the 
area of technical innovation. This cannot go on for ever. We 
have to enter areas and [word indistinct] but alongside the 
money, it is above all a question of thoughts and emotions. Is 
this the army of our children, our sons, or not? Should we 
allow a mood to emerge in our country and society where soldiers 
are reviled for the service they perform? Or, put more 
amicably, those who serve are regarded as stupid compared to 
those who don't. That is unacceptable. [applause] 
  My friends, given all my respect, and I have great respect 
for young people who do alternative service in hospitals in 
[word indistinct] or elsewhere, the priority lies with 
compulsory military service. It is important for the future, 
and I say with equal clarity, I am and remain a convinced 
supporter of general conscription. Changing this would change 
the fundamental structure of our country, this cannot be stated 
often enough, unpleasant as it may be. [applause] 
  Experience in Yugoslavia teaches us something else, 
something 
of extreme importance, I think. I also have to address this to 
myself. We have to concentrate our arguments in the fight for 
Europe's political unity increasingly on the truly decisive 
factors. We want the political union of the Maastricht Treaty. 
We want economic and currency union on the clear-cut conditions 
of a stable economy and above all a stable currency. But, my 
friends, all this will be in vain if we fail to maintain peace 
and freedom in Europe. The question which faces us now, after 
the experience of the last few years and months, is: Is the 
unification of Europe not above all a question of war and peace? 
  In six years the century will be over. And of course history 
does not repeat itself entirely exactly, but there was a time 
when Aristide Briand and Gustav Stresemann won the Nobel peace 
prize and when everyone, almost everyone in Europe and Germany 
believed there would never be another war between France and 
Germany. Eight years later came Hitler, six years after that 
the Second World War. History does not repeat itself. But does 
anyone in this hall honestly believe that the terrible example 
we see today of racial hatred and ethnic cleansing, religious 
hostility and the worst kind of chauvinism in the Balkans, that 
these evil spirits only live there and could never go elsewhere? 
Can we not hear from other parts of Europe, starting in Moscow, 
tones which -- we don't want to attach too much importance to 
them -- but which at least ought to make us stop and think. 
This means that this country, Germany, our country, at the 
center of Europe geographically and geopolitically, the country 
with most frontiers, is linked to European unification for good 
or ill. If we go it alone we will once again go into isolation 
and once again take the wrong path, that is the experience 
history shows us. [applause] 
  For this reason we want to build this Europe as our vision 
has always been, irrespective of what others may say for 
temporary opportunistic reasons ahead of various elections. 
That is not our policy. It should become what we have 
described in the motion which which will be submitted to you 
tomorrow. The shape of the European Union has to be that of a 
liberal, democratic, federal, subsidiarity-based federal state. 
Because Europe safeguards the future of nations, it also 
safeguards their identity. And the European identity will grow 
with the experience of joint action. It is the community of 
peoples' cultural roots and the fatefulness of their interests. 
Deep attachment to one's roots, national identity, and common 
European features complement and depend on one another. This is 
our Europe. We remain citizens of Hamburg, we remain people 
from Silesia and Holstein or Lower Saxony. This is our home. 
This Germany is our fatherland and our common future lies in 
Europe. If we understand it this way, the people out there will 
do so as well. [applause] 
  This is why our program of principles is so important. 
Day-to-day politics has its significance. Day-to-day politics 
delivers the headlines. But if the Community's compass loses 
direction, we lose viability for the future and with it our 
opportunity for the future. All this has been the chief idea 
behind our Union [CDU/CSU] since 1945 and 1946, which in part 
arose as a great new political instrument of change in our 
country and was the precondition for unification and for the 
most liberal system the Germans have ever had. 
  We have enjoyed the gift of peace for 48 years, 48 years, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, of which our founding fathers and mothers 
could only have dreamed. And it is almost 50 years since 
Wolfgang Borchert, here in Hamburg, wrote Draussen vor der 
Tuer [Outside the Door], a work which deeply shocked an 
entire generation. And it is now just 51 years since this town 
was destroyed in a terrible attack in which many thousands died. 
  When preparing this speech, I came across by chance, by 
happy 
chance, the recently published memoirs of Vernon Walters, the 
[former] U.S. ambassador and a friend of our country. He writes 
in his book of a visit here in 1946, with Averell Harriman, a 
great American who played a great role in German and European 
history. 
  I quote: In 1946, we visited a German family in the ruins of 
a bombed out building. They lived in the only part of the 
building which was still habitable, in the cellar. When we 
returned to the surface I asked whether I would ever see a 
rebuilt German city. Averell Harriman answered that I would, and 
very soon. He asked me if I had seen what the German family had 
standing on the table in their cellar. A bowl of flowers, I 
answered. Then Harriman said solemnly, people who amid such a 
sea of destruction can pick flowers and place them on the table 
are also capable of rebuilding everything else. 
  My friends, that was the generation of our parents and 
grandparents, and I think that during the second great challenge 
facing the Germans in the building of this republic, following 
the first great effort of the 1950s, that flowers are a good 
symbol. Let's make sure that the flowers stay on the table as 
the symbol of a peaceful and free Germany, an open and 
hospitable Germany, a Germany in which hatred toward Germans or 
foreigners can never find a home. Then this Germany will be the 
country we wish for ourselves, our delightful fatherland, and 
that is something worth working for. [applause] 

