BFN 

<F P=106> [By RENMIN RIBAO reporter Li Hongwei (2621 1347 0251) and </F>
XINHUA reporter Chen Weiping (7115 5398 1627)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 24 Jun (XINHUA) -- A literary and artistic 
performance was held to mark the 1994 university graduates' 
evening in Beijing this evening. Before the show began, Li 
Lanqing, member of the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau 
and vice premier of the State Council, cordially met with 
representatives of the graduates from Beijing's colleges and 
universities. 
  After listening to speeches by representatives of the 
college 
graduates, Li Lanqing said: In 1994, 650,000 college graduates 
will leave their campuses, and will report to their work posts 
where they will make contributions to the motherland. On behalf 
of the party Central Committee and the State Council, I extend 
our warm congratulations to all China's college graduates, while 
expressing our good wishes to all the students present and 
indicating our heartfelt respects to those students who are 
departing shortly to work in impoverished areas, including 
Tibet. Your future is as great as the sky where you can soar 
like a bird, and is as vast as the ocean where you can dive like 
a fish. I hope that after you have reported to your work posts, 
you will use your intelligence and talents in your various 
fields and contribute to enhancing China's socialist 
modernization drive. 
  He said: Reform and opening up have brought enormous changes 
in China and have enabled China to accomplish achievements in 
economic construction and social development that have attracted 
global attention. However, we should also notice: China has a 
vast territory and its regional development has been very 
uneven. Some localities, particularly remote border areas, are 
still quite backward. The construction of these places will all 
the more require a large number of specially-trained 
professionals. Their development will depend on meritorious 
service and prospective undertakings to be made by inspired, 
ambitious youths. 
  Li Lanqing said: In a new era when the socialist market 
economy is developing, some people's value systems have changed: 
They fear the test of enduring hardships in life. 
Nevertheless, students present here requested, of their own 
accord, to go to places, where you are most needed by the 
motherland, to do pioneering work and to make use of your 
talents there. It has fully demonstrated the exalted loftiness 
of our contemporary youths. I feel that this is precisely where 
China's hope lies and the broad masses of youths should learn 
from these pioneers. 
  While addressing the attendees, Li Lanqing mentioned two 
things expected of them: 
  First, you should continue to study. To understand the 
modernization drive so as to keep pace with the times, you 
should study scientific and cultural knowledge. Furthermore, 
you should also learn from society, from the masses of local 
people, and from comrades around you. Whatever you have learned 
from campuses can only be regarded as a foundation-laying stage. 
After you report to your work posts, it is most important that 
you continually learn from actual practice. 
  Second, you should seize opportunities and face challenges. 
After you begin working, you will probably encounter various, 
sometimes even unexpected, problems and setbacks. All of you 
should be fully prepared mentally. When you fail, you should 
not feel dejected or discouraged; on the contrary, you should 
seek support and help from various organizations. Relying on 
the unique graceful bearing and talents of the young 
intellectuals in the nineties, you should successively overcome 
a series of problems so as to justify the party's great trust 
and the people's high expectations of you. 
  At this evening's show, teachers and students from the 
Beijing Aerospace University, the Beijing University, the 
Qinghua University, the Fudan University, and the Suzhou Silk 
Industry College performed their own programs. Watching the 
show were responsible people from relevant departments including 
Zhu Kaixuan, Zhang Tianbao, Shen Rongjun, Yang Weiguang, Chen 
Changben, and Ma Shukuan, and more than 1,000 current graduates 
of various Beijing colleges. The show was held under the 
auspices of the State Education Commission and the China Central 
Television Station, and was assisted by Shenzhen Junan 
Securities Company Limited. 

