Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 19 Feb (EFE) -- Cuban Education Minister 
Luis Ignacio Gomez Gutierrez asserted today, "we don't have any 
unnecessary teachers" and, despite the island's economic 
problems, "no schools will be closed." The minister said in an 
interview published by the official GRANMA newspaper today: "In 
education, our criteria is that we don't have any unnecessary 
teachers or professors who have a vocation for this beautiful 
mission." 
  "The Revolution will never relinquish this socialist victory 
and no school will be closed," the Cuban education minister 
stressed. "Education is the Revolution's colossal achievement; 
its most beautiful treasure. In the past 35 years, we have 
organized and implemented the most accomplished education system 
ever conceived in an underdeveloped country. Our system is 
comparable to those in many developed nations," Gomez Gutierrez 
added. 
  The Cuban minister emphasized the good results obtained with 
the improvement of the education system's organization and study 
and textbook programs. "However, the country's most important 
achievement is the creation of a powerful army of teachers. 
They have been a decisive factor in the battle to attain 
quality education," he asserted. In this sense, Gomez indicated 
there are thousands of teachers in reserve "who are critical to 
being able to permanently improve the quality of teaching 
personnel." He observed that the current optimization of the 
education system "does not imply that personnel will be reduced. 
Rather, it will allow teachers, who are not currently required 
at schools during the next academic year, to further their 
academic training." 
  The minister added that starting in September, the 
Upper-Level Teachers' Institute will organize several 
improvement courses. Also, teachers who have not completed their 
studies will be able to get their degrees. Gomez said the 
enhancement of the teachers' academic standing, due to its 
contents, "is essentially a political task." 

