Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [by ITAR-TASS correspondent Lyudmila Aleksandrova] </F>
  [Text] Moscow January 11 TASS -- Election of speaker of the 
lower chamber of the Russian Parliament will not be smooth; such 
is the opinion of many chiefs and member in groups of various 
parties in the Duma whose first meeting opened on Tuesday. 
  They wish this post to be filled by a representative of some 
small parliamentary group. ITAR-TASS learned this from a number 
of interviews at the first meeting of the State Duma. 
  The speaker will not emerge after the first round, believes 
Kirill Ignatyev, representative of Russia's Choice bloc. He 
believes that the nomination of a candidate by one of small 
parliamentary groups would be most suitable. Russia's Choice 
would support a number of candidates from such groups. It does 
not insist on its own candidate. "Should an aggressive majority 
of forces which can pursue the ideology of national 
exclusiveness, war and violence form, Russia's Choice bloc will 
have to offer its own candidate", Ignatyev said. The main task 
in parliament is to prevent decisions that could reverse 
economic transformations. 
  Grigoriy Yavlinskiy noted that the Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin 
group is in favour of speaker from a small parliamentary group. 
He believes that in such case, speaker will be the least 
inclined to a standoff with large groups. He said that the 
priority task of groups in the lower chamber is to ensure normal 
operation of the parliament. He does not expect such a speaker 
to be elected promptly so that the regulations could be adopted 
and work begun. 
  Nicolay Travkin, head of the group of the Democratic Party 
of 
Russia, said that organising groups of deputies in the Duma is 
the main task at the first stage of its work. The election of 
speaker will depend on agreeing on a package. Unless such an 
agreement is reached, there will be voting on each individual 
candidate, and anyone can be elected. Travkin stressed the 
Democratic Party sees as its main task in parliament to turn it 
into an element of tranquillity and stability in the political 
life. Among the priorities of the parliamentary group of the 
Democratic Party will be the question of combatting crime. The 
choice of allies will depend on the matter at hand. 
  Leader of the parliamentary group of the Agrarian Party of 
Russia Mikhail Lapshin believes that the elections of speaker 
may pass smoothly and promptly if most of the groups of deputies 
show goodwill. 
  He said there were signs of goodwill before the opening of 
the Duma, and agreements could have been achieved if it were not 
for destructive stand of some groups of deputies. Among 
priorities of the group Lapshin named measures to protect the 
interests of peasants and the introduction of the passage of 
proposals connected with the functioning of the agroindustrial 
complex. The group of the Agrarian Party is prepared to 
cooperate with all the groups including that of the Choice of 
Russia. 
  The parliamentary group of the Communist Party of the 
Russian 
Federation is in favour of electing leading bodies of the Duma 
in a package, said the group's chief Gennadiy Zuyganov. He said 
that speaker could be elected form a small group and deputy 
speakers from large groups. He believes that each group could 
head one of the eight-ten committees. The leader of the 
Communist Party described the struggle for the change of the 
political and economic course, for conducting the "policy of 
construction, for the stabilisation of the political situation" 
as the parliament's chief task. 

