CSO 

  [Text] A research group composed of Honda Motor's research 
and development subsidiary Honda Technical Research Center and 
fellow researchers led by professor Morinobu Endo of Shinshu 
University's engineering faculty has succeeded in developing an 
electrode material which triples the capacity of lithium ion 
batteries which are considered promising as an energy source for 
next-generation portable electronic equipment. The development 
enables the absorption of lithium ion to a level three times 
that which was believed to be the theoretical limit in the past, 
providing for the fabrication of batteries that are small and of 
high energy density. Its potential applications include portable 
computer equipment and as an electrical energy source for 
electric vehicles. 
  The newly developed carbon material was synthesized by 
applying heat at 700 degrees centigrade to a synthetic material 
called poly (p-phenylene) with a series of benzine rings linked 
in pairs. Most commercially produced batteries contain a 
material which is crystallized graphite, but the new material is 
like an amorphous substance. 
  The electrical capacity of a lithium ion battery is 
determined by the amount of lithium ion stored in the cathode. 
The research group hardened the new material using a 
polyethylene binder, fabricated it into cathodes and immersed 
them together with anodes in hexafluorphosphate electrolyte in 
investigating its characteristics as a storage battery. 
  The battery was charged to a level of 1,000 amperes per one 
kilogram of electrode, enabling the discharge of 680 ampere 
hours at a one- to three-volt range. The electrical current 
density which indicates the discharge speed was recorded at 1.6 
milliampere per one square centimeter of electrode which is an 
order of magnitude faster than current batteries. An examination 
of the electrodes revealed no lattice images on metal lithium, 
confirmed the absorption within the electrodes of lithium ion in 
quantities equal to that reached when the battery is charged to 
a level of 1,000 ampere hours per kilogram of electrode at a 
one- to three-volt range. In the past, the chemical structure of 
lithium was such that the theoretical capacity was considered to 
be limited to 372 ampere hours. 
  A disadvantage with batteries using cathodes made of the new 
material is that it is not capable of producing instantaneous 
bursts of high voltage. Presently, only two times the 
theoretical limit of lithium ion is being used in charging the 
battery, but in the future, it appears that it will become 
feasible to use the full lithium ion capacity of the new battery 
as a result of determining characteristics of the discharge 
mechanism. 

