BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Terence White] </F>
  [Text] Kabul, June 28 (AFP) -- Kabul was targetted by the 
jets of ex-communist Uzbek General Abdol Rashid Dostam for the 
second successive day Tuesday [28 June], when 12 people were 
killed in a bombing run over the capital's centre, security 
troops reported. 
  "It is hard to estimate the exact number of killed because 
so 
many of the bodies were torn apart in the explosion," explained 
one security guard whose hands were caked in dry blood. 
  Shortly after 8:00 A.M. (0330 GMT) a Russian-made Sukhoy 
Su-22 jet-bomber swept over Kabul and dropped four bombs, one of 
which exploded in the main street outside the Central Post 
Office, killing at least 12 people and wounding several others. 
A doctor working for the French-based aid organisation Medecins 
Sans Frontieres (MSF) which supports the downtown Jamhuriat 
Hospital said only five victims -- with light injuries -- were 
treated after this jet attack. "No operations were necessary. 
All the patients were stabilised and transferred to other 
hospitals for further treatment," the expatriate doctor told AFP. 
  Not far from the CPO a second bomb ripped through the 
ferro-concrete roof of the state gynaecological hospital which 
was deserted except for eight security guards, all of whom 
miraculously escaped unhurt. These guards pointed out a hole at 
the entrance to the neighbouring Institute of Stomatology where 
they said a third bomb was buried unexploded. 
  Local witnesses reported seeing a fourth -- unconfirmed -- 
explosion further east towards Bala Hesar fortress. Bala Hesar 
was captured from the coalition forces of Dostam and his ally 
Prime Minister Golboddin Hekmatyar Saturday [25 June] by troops 
loyal to President Borhanoddin Rabbani. In addition, Rabbani's 
rivals have lost the strategic Maranjan Hill opposite Bala 
Hesar, and Darulaman Palace in south Kabul, prompting 
retaliatory air strikes by Dostam jets. 
  Fighting continues on the eastern city limits but only a 
handful of rockets have been exchanged crashed into the city 
proper. 
  Hekmatyar, who threatened severe military consequences for 
Rabbani if he did not resign the presidency Tuesday [28 June], 
has himself suffered a massive military defeat with the loss of 
Bala Hesar and Maranjan. Observers said although the current 
frontlines reflect recent gains by pro-Rabbani forces, they are 
in fact only a return to the respective positions held by these 
rivals during their first major battle in August 1992. However, 
with the considerable morale and materiel loss inflicted on 
Hekmatyar's Hezb-e Eslami faction and his Uzbek allies, it is 
not unrealistic to expect the jubilant pro-Rabbani forces to 
make more territorial gains. 

