Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By a JORDAN TIMES staff reporter] </F>
  [Text] Amman--Interior Minister Salameh Hammad on Sunday 
announced that two people had confessed to planting the 
explosive devices that went off in two cinema theatres and said 
there was a broader plot to destabilise Jordan through 
subversion. 
  The minister's comments, carried by the Jordan News Agency, 
Petra, indicated that the two suspects could be linked to an 
underground group called "Jaysh Muhammad" (Muhammad's Army) 
comprised mostly of Jordanians who returned home after fighting 
the 1980-90 Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. 
  Mr. Hammad said the two, Muhammad 'Ali Shihadah, 26, a 
construction material salesman, and 'Id Salih al-Jahalin, 31, a 
plumber, had admitted to planting the explosive devices at 
Amman's Rivoli theatre on January 26 and al-Zarqa's Salwa 
theatre on February 1. 
  The two blasts injured at least seven people, including Mr. 
al-Jahalin who suffered serious wounds to the lower part of his 
body at the al-Zarqa' explosion. 
  The nature of Mr. al-Jahalin's injuries were such as they 
could have been sustained only from a position of close 
proximity, possibly while handling the explosive device which 
went off prematurely, sources said. As such, they said, he was 
an immediate suspect after his removal to hospital and details 
he provided upon interrogation led to other arrests. 
  First reports spoke of five people arrested last Wednesday, 
one day after the al-Zarqa' blast. More detentions were 
reported shortly thereafter. 
  Mr. Shihadah and Mr. al-Jahalin also admitted to have been 
behind another bomb which was safely removed at al-'Akrush 
Supermarket at Safut, northwest of Amman, last year. 
  "The criminals have confessed that they carried out these 
attacks," Mr. Hammad said, paying tribute to the "strenuous and 
relentless efforts of the Public Security Department" for the 
arrest of the suspects. 
  The suspects "are part of a group which will be disclosed 
later," the minister said. "They have links with some people 
who have returned from Afghanistan." 
  "Investigations are continuing to uncover other details and 
plots aimed at harming national security and stability," he 
added. 
  The two bombings at the two theatres known for screening 
X-rated movies, coupled with the discovery of the device planted 
at the Safut supermarket which sells alcohol, had immediately 
made religious extremists prime suspects. 
  The nature of the bombs, described as crude, homemade 
devices 
consisting of acetone peroxide, were the same as the type used 
by members of Jaysh Muhammad in some attacks in 1991. The 
bombmaking technique was believed to have been acquired by Jaysh 
Muhammad members during their fight alongside the Afghan 
Mujahedeen. 
  Most of the group's members are believed to be Jordanian 
volunteers who fought with the Afghan rebels and returned home 
after the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan in 1990. 
  Eighteen members of the group were found guilty in 1992 of 
carrying out or plotting attacks against senior government and 
security officials, state buildings and foreign diplomats as 
well as liquor stores and night clubs. 
  Eight of them including two in absentia, were sentenced to 
death. The death sentences, except those on the two at large, 
were commuted to life terms by His Majesty King Husayn. 
  Jaysh Muhammad was at one point reported to be the "military 
wing" of the Muslim Brotherhood, but the Brotherhood strongly 
denied any such link with the group. 
  According to experts on the Islamic movement in Jordan, 
Jaysh 
Muhammad was set up by hardliners who were once members of the 
Brotherhood but who quit the group after being disillusioned 
over what they saw as the leadership's moderate approach and 
confining the group to the mainstream political process in 
Jordan. 
  Some of the so-called Arab-Afghan veterans--Arab volunteers 
who fought in Afghanistan--remain in Pakistan as well as 
Afghanistan and are suspected of directing militancy in Algeria 
and Egypt. 

