BFN 

  [Text] In connection with the issue of a Japanese trading 
company acting as a broker in exporting old Russian submarines 
to the DPRK (North Korea) for use as scrap metal, the Ministry 
of International Trade and Industry [MITI], in an unusual move, 
has asked the Russian Government to permit it "to send 
inspectors to make sure that the submarines cannot be 
recommissioned." As a result, it has become likely that there 
will be a considerable delay in settling the issue. 
  The situation is the result of mounting tensions regarding 
the issue of the DPRK's suspected nuclear weapons development 
program. Trading company officials thus must sit back in despair 
while saying, "It was just a bad time for this business deal." 
  The Toen Trading Company (based in Tokyo and capitalized at 
30 million yen) acted as the brokerage agent for the submarine 
dismantling contract. The company concluded a deal with the 
Russian Defense Ministry to take control of 12 old Russian 
submarines. When the first submarine was transferred to North 
Korea, U.S. intelligence agencies and other relevant agencies 
questioned the deal because they suspected that "North Korea may 
possibly recommission the submarines." MITI then put a "hold" 
on the remaining 11 submarines. If these submarines can 
actually be recommissioned, the trading company would be 
violating the Foreign Exchange Control Law, which prohibits 
commission trade involving weapons. 
  In response to MITI's inquiry about the submarines, the 
Russian Government said that "they cannot be used as 
submarines." The same conclusion was drawn when photos of the 
submarines submitted by the Toen Trading Company were analyzed. 
  However, MITI recently requested the Russian Government to 
permit it to send officials to conduct on-site inspections. A 
senior ministry official said, "If North Korea had not been 
involved, it would not have been necessary to confirm matters to 
this extent." He thus admitted that the nuclear issue has much 
to do with this situation. 
  The Russian Government has not yet responded to MITI's 
request. This is fine as far as MITI is concerned because it 
thus can stall for more time. MITI officials have reportedly 
told Toen Trading Company officials, "Let us take our time and 
do it gradually." 

