BFN 

<F P=106> ["Own Information" report: "Airwaves Put in the </F>
`Guardroom'"] 
  [Text] The Russian Federation Ministry of Defense 
Information and Press Directorate, so beloved of all military 
journalists, recently came down like a ton of bricks on the 
Defense Ministry's Central Television and Radio Studio. In a 
memorandum to the defense minister, General Kosarev, chief of 
this directorate, mounted a swinging attack on the whole of the 
Central Television and Radio Studio's activity: "It has been 
unable to give a wide and full representation on the television 
screen and on air of the process of developing and building the 
Russian Army. Positive aspects and problems have been left out 
of the picture altogether...," and so forth. Consequently, 
Grachev is informed, the "Slavyanka" radio station, for example, 
is virtually unlistened to in Tajikistan -- there the fighters 
are busy "tuning their radio sets to other wavelengths." 
  The general also brings to the minister's attention the fact 
that the Central Television and Radio Studio is rife with 
nepotism, financial irregularities, and illegal payments to 
private individuals. Kosarev proposes -- with a view to 
ensuring that everything is about highlighting the achievements 
of the Russian Army -- that it is necessary "to completely 
replace the former leadership of the Central Television and 
Radio Studio and bolster the studio with more experienced 
cadres.... A financial group should be established under the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Defense Information and Press 
Directorate to organize monitoring of the financial activity of 
the Defense Ministry Central Television and Radio Studio." 
  This memorandum has come as a bombshell to the Central 
Television and Radio Studio. Studio chief Colonel Yakubovskiy 
(not to be confused with General Dima Yakubovskiy) was on the 
point of rushing to Grachev with a memorandum of his own, 
accusing Kosarev of disinforming the defense minister, 
misrepresenting the facts, and other errors. The colonel also 
has a fair selection of arguments in reserve. Pavel Grachev is 
theoretically the arbitrator who is supposed to determine who is 
telling the truth. But he is too busy. Consequently the Central 
Television and Radio Studio is quaking in its boots, Kosarev is 
wandering ominously around the Ministry of Defense clenching his 
fists, Yakubovskiy is running from office to office in search of 
protection, and the decision has been postponed. Ordinary 
journalists are the main victims of this skirmishing in the 
military information structures. 

