CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Oleg Panfilov: "Negotiations Between Authorities </F>
and Opposition Postponed Again: Through UN Efforts, They Have 
Been Moved to 14 June"] 
  [Text] It had been reported that the second round of 
negotiations between the Tajik Government and the opposition, 
scheduled for 4 June in the capital of Iran, had been moved to 7 
June. INTERFAX reports, however, that according to Anatoliy 
Adamishin, Russia's deputy minister of foreign affairs, the UN 
secretary general's representative, Ambassador Ramiro 
Piris-Ballon, "was a little hasty in announcing this date." In 
Mr. Adamishin's opinion, "he coordinated this date only with the 
opposition and the Iranian authorities. Concurrence has not been 
given by the Tajikistan Government, and we drew Piris-Ballon's 
attention to this fact on several occasions." 
  In one of the latest issues of the Tajik weekly BUZNES I 
POLITIKA, Abdumajid Dostiyev, first deputy chairman of the Tajik 
Supreme Council, said that he considers the first round of 
negotiations in Moscow a success and supports their 
continuation. In this connection, and in order to press on with 
the UN efforts, UN Undersecretary General Marrack Goulding was 
in Dushanbe on 27-28 May and, according to reports from 
Dushanbe, spent many hours in conversations with Emamali 
Rakhmonov, as a result securing the latter's consent to continue 
the negotiations. An agreement was reached that the government 
delegation will arrive in Teheran and the second round will 
begin on 14 June. 
  However, even before the end of Mr. Goulding's visit to 
Dushanbe, Anatoliy Adamishin told an INTERFAX correspondent that 
"the Russian Federation MFA [Ministry of Foreign Affairs] has 
information that there is a plan to bring to the second round of 
inter-Tajik negotiations issues that are bound to result in 
arguments and confrontation rather than reaching an agreement." 
INTERFAX does not elaborate what Mr. Adamishin meant by this, 
although it is known that after the completion of the first 
round both delegations signed the agenda for further 
negotiations, which consist of three sets of issues. Neither 
then, nor now, did either side express any dissatisfaction or 
demanded putting additional issues on the agenda. Moreover, the 
only agreement--on forming a joint commission of 
refugees--already is being implemented. The commission commenced 
its work on 30 May in Moscow under UN sponsorship, and a group 
of government officials arrived from Dushanbe for this purpose. 
  Nevertheless, Mr. Adamishin points out several things in his 
interview. First, the increased number of terrorist acts, in 
which, in the diplomat's opinion, "the opposition also has a 
hand." Second, "in the course of the second round it is 
necessary to sign an agreement on cease-fire and suspension of 
hostile actions, agreement on which had been reached in the 
course of the Moscow round." Strangely, Mr. Adamishin does not 
mention that it was the opposition delegation that proposed to 
sign this agreement, and the government delegation refused. 
Third, he believes that "we need to look into how to bring the 
opposition into the internal political reform being carried out 
in Tajikistan." This does indeed need to be done; however, the 
ban on activities of parties and movements--with the exception 
of the Communist Party and two or three "pocket" parties--is 
still in effect in the republic. Moreover, the government never 
implemented the Law on Amnesty adopted at the Khudzhand session 
in the end of November 1992. 
  As it was in the end of March, when the Moscow round of 
negotiations was in the preparation stage, the "information war" 
already has began in the mass media. Since February, information 
has been coming from Dushanbe--especially from the Tajik MFA 
information department--on preparation of a "major offensive on 
the part of the opposition." Even the date was mentioned--21 
March, immediately after the Navruz holiday. Navruz has passed, 
however, and there was no offensive, while the negotiations did 
begin. By the beginning of the second round, the story with the 
"offensive" was repeated. In addition to the military, Mr. 
Adamishin began to bring up the subject, although it would be 
more logical to discuss the desire or lack thereof to conduct 
negotiations. In a situation of confrontation the position of 
Emamali Rakhmonov is far more advantageous, since he is 
protected by a very combat-capable contingent of the Russian 
Army. For some reason neither military nor diplomats want to see 
the results of the year-and-a-half rule of the regime: an 
economic catastrophe, refugees, and violation of all human 
rights. 
  The latest INTERFAX report from Dushanbe directly 
contradicts 
Mr. Adamishin's contentions. Characterizing the situation on the 
Tajik-Afghan border, Tajik Minister of Foreign Affairs Rashid 
Alimov said that "relative calm has settled there, which is 
partly caused by the overflow of the Pyandzh River, and partly 
by instability in neighboring Afghanistan." The minister also 
reaffirmed the authorities' willingness to continue dialog with 
the opposition. "We have no preconceived notions as to where to 
conduct negotiations. The important part is the substance, not 
location," he said. 

