BFN 

<F P=106> [Video report from Kubinka by Vladimir Lenskiy and Vladimir </F>
Avdeyev -- from the "Today" newscast] 
  [Text] [Presenter Tatyana Mitkova] A ranking Chinese 
general inspected the Russian aerodrome at Kubinka near Moscow 
today with a possible deal in mind. 
  [Lenskiy over video of Chinese, Russian officers viewing 
Su-25 taxiing, formation display by four Su-27] Colonel General 
of Aviation Cao Shuang-Ming, commander of the Chinese Air Force, 
viewed flights by Su-25 assault aircraft and Su-27 and MiG-29 
fighters at Kubinka today. 
  According to Russia's Frontal Aviation Commander Nikolay 
Antoshkin, the Kubinka airfield hosts up to 120 delegations a 
year. Some are shown aircraft to reinforce relations, others 
for advertising purposes. 
  Today's demonstration of the wonders of our combat aviation 
combined friendship and business. The Kubinka Sky Hussars' 
flight is named for Kozhedub, who is also a national hero in 
China. What is more, our great Eastern neighbor is buying Su-27 
fighters from Russia. But today the leadership of the Chinese 
Air Force was particularly interested in the MiG-29. Nikolay 
Antoshkin encouraged this interest in every possible way. 
  [Antoshkin] This is profitable for the state and the people. 
If we do not sell, someone else will. 
  [Lenskiy] Russia currently has to compete in the aircraft 
market with the FRG, the United States, France, Britain, and 
Italy. Even though specialists claim that a Western equivalent 
of the Su-27 will not be available before the year 2000. 
  The Chinese delegation was particularly happy to note that 
one of the Sky Hussars' aircraft is piloted by a woman. 
Lyudmila Pukito flies a Su-25 assault aircraft. She says that 
there are female military pilots in many countries. Lyudmila 
can't understand why she is being singled out. 
  [Pukito] But if our aircraft are made even more popular as a 
result, I will have served my purpose. 
  [Lenskiy] Raising the popularity of Russian military 
aircraft is not cheap for the Russian Air Force. A 
demonstration flight on one of these aircraft costs 200,000 
rubles at 1992 prices. However, the Air Force leadership 
believes that the game is worth the candle. 
  Vladimir Lenskiy, Vladimir Avdeyev reporting for NTV from 
Kubinka. 

