BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Ramiro de Leon Carpio marking the 6 </F>
June anniversary of his first year in office; place and date not 
given -- recorded] 
  [Text] People of Guatemala: 6 June marks my first year in 
the presidency and the anniversary of a commitment I made to 
you. This commitment, which is based on a number of principles, 
remains valid. I want to report that progress has been achieved 
during this period. 
  Despite major obstacles in the political, economic, and 
social realms, we have taken historic steps I would like to 
stress, because our government -- although we consider ourselves 
to be a transition government -- has not been idle but has 
tackled the country's most serious problems. Although this 
government does not plan to resolve all of these problems, it 
does plan to establish foundations for new structures in 
Guatemala. 
  In the realm of politics, our goal is to consolidate 
democracy and the de jure state. Fulfilling this goal is 
undoubtedly among one of the achievements of this government -- 
namely, the preservation and strengthening of our institutions 
within the framework of the law. 
  The Guatemalan Army is aware of its role within a democracy, 
and it has supported the government and its institutions. 
Therefore, it also has supported the democratic process. 
  The purging process stems from this effort to preserve and 
strengthen the government. It started in the executive branch 
itself. We fired officials who had supported a break in 
constitutional order and those who had been involved in 
corruption. Despite adverse conditions -- conditions of which 
all Guatemalans are aware -- we managed to conduct a popular 
consultation that allowed us to begin implementing viable 
constitutional reforms. 
  As a result, we will have a new Congress of the Republic and 
a new Supreme Court of Justice through legislative elections -- 
that is, through legal and peaceful means. The Guatemalan 
people wanted the renewal of the Congress, and we are renewing 
it, perhaps through the least popular means at this time but, 
nevertheless, the most solid and positive means in the long-term. 
  Constitutional reforms have already yielded results. We have 
a new independent prosecutor general and attorney general. We 
have banned the transfer of budgetary funds within the 
government. Confidential expenditures have been absolutely 
abolished. This makes the administrative-financial process more 
honest. A deputy was removed for the first time in history as 
the result of reforms of pretrial procedures. 
  As for our efforts in seeking peace, our progress is more 
than significant. One year ago, this process was at a complete 
standstill. We now have a commission specifically tasked with 
achieving peace, and we have presented to the Guatemalan people 
a national negotiation-based peace plan which is designed to end 
armed confrontation. This plan is based on the establishment of 
a permanent forum for peace and national reconciliation, and 
moreover, it is based on governmental efforts to meet the social 
demands of the people -- namely, the struggle against poverty. 
  On 29 March 1994, we signed with the URNG [Guatemalan 
National Revolutionary Unity] an agreement on a timetable for 
negotiations to attain resolute and lasting peace in Guatemala. 
It reaffirms the commitment of both parties to signing a peace 
agreement in 1994. We also signed a comprehensive human rights 
agreement that allowed a mission tasked with verifying human 
rights to visit the country for the first time in May 1994. 
This will lead to the installation of the International 
Verification Commission, which will be done as soon as possible. 
  Within this framework, over the past 12 months we have been 
able to guarantee the return of 4,830 Guatemalans, who represent 
1,014 households, by instituting the Labor Reinsertion Fund 
[Fondo de Reinsercion Laboral] with an initial working capital 
of 14 million quetzals, as well as by establishing the National 
Indigenous Fund and appointing its Board of Directors. 
  Now, one year after I entered office, the peace process has 
progressed to such an extent that the signing of an agreement 
for a firm and lasting peace has never been so near at hand -- 
an agreement that will make it possible to put an end to armed 
confrontation and successfully combat poverty in Guatemala. 
  In terms of public security, because of the rise in 
violence, 
we implemented an emergency plan which is supported by the 
Guatemalan Armed Forces and which encourages greater efficiency 
in the National Police and Finance Police. This program is 
starting to show results in curbing kidnappings, preventing auto 
theft, and in the struggle against drug trafficking. This has 
resulted in greater security for the people. 
  In terms of economic matters, restraint and honesty 
represent 
this administration's fundamental principles. Moreover, even 
though corruption has not been abolished, it is evident that the 
Guatemalan people are convinced they have a president who is 
here to govern and not to get rich or to conduct business deals. 
  The Guatemalan people are aware of the conditions under 
which 
I assumed control of the country. The treasury was depleted, 
and there was debt everywhere. Despite the problems we have 
faced in the political realm, our administration has been able 
to preserve economic stability. We were able to control 
inflation to such an extent that it totaled 11.2 percent in 
1993. This is much lower than the 14.2 percent registered in 
1992. Moreover, it has been forecast that inflation will not 
exceed 10 percent in 1994. 
  In part, price stability has been created by improved 
coordination of monetary and fiscal policy. This is evident in 
the performance of the Bank of Guatemala [Banguat] credit to the 
central government, which has decreased over the past 12 months 
by nearly 474 million quetzals. 
  By ensuring stability in foreign exchange, it has been 
possible to make the exchange system more flexible. Banguat's 
external debt was reduced by $173 million over the past 12 
months, and international monetary reserves now total $801 
million. 
  In terms of fiscal issues, the government is directing its 
efforts at reorganizing and sustaining public finances. 
Restraint, honesty, and openness have allowed us to reassign 
public funds to priority items, thereby supporting public 
investments. In an unprecedented event, we have been able to 
implement nearly 1.280 billion quetzals worth of public 
investments, which represent 77 percent of all planned 
investments. Our accomplishments are quite significant in terms 
of the past performance of government investments, which over 
the past decades never exceeded 50 percent of budgetary targets 
in any one year. Nevertheless, despite initial problems in 
redirecting efforts while establishing priorities within the 
government's current agenda, and despite the difficult financial 
situation, this administration has been able to implement 67 
percent [figure as heard] of its planned investments over the 
past 12 months. To all of this we must add 562 million quetzals 
administered by decentralized agencies. All of this has allowed 
us to implement 997 projects, which include 12,006 secondary 
projects, many of which are being carried out in the country's 
far-flung regions with the support of and efforts from many 
communities in the rural areas. 
  In the institutional sphere, and as result of the public 
workers strike, a Government Restructuring and Wage Policy 
Commission was created and tasked with advancing the 
modernization of the executive branch. We have continued to 
make progress with our institutional modernization policy, which 
ultimately will allow the government to improve the efficiency 
of the services it offers through a process of concessions and 
demonopolization. We are working within a legal framework, 
which the administration has made transparent to all sectors. 
Nevertheless, as tangible proof of these actions, we are 
restructuring the electricity subsector. [Word indistinct] is 
ready for privatization. 
  In terms of economics and support for investments, we have 
signed the Guatemala Protocol, which modifies and perfects the 
Federal Treaty of Central American Economic Integration. We 
currently hold the temporary secretariat of the Central American 
integration process, and we have made important progress within 
the framework of GATT, as well as in the offer by the U.S. 
Government regarding the possibility of the region's joining 
NAFTA. 
  The efforts under way are keeping open the possibility of 
our 
gaining access to the same advantages Mexico will obtain from 
NAFTA, while we negotiate the region's full inclusion into the 
treaty. 
  In the international field, we must stress the defense of 
the 
rights of Guatemala in the case of Belize, having obtained the 
latter party's recognition of the existence of a dispute. 
  In the social sphere, I must underscore that our 
achievements 
in the area of investment are the result of economic and 
administrative decentralization, which has been possible because 
we have promoted a culture of social participation. In this 
process, important roles have been played by the Development 
Councils which, at the same time, have managed to set up the 
Community Development Solidarity Fund. Another special 
instrument for development is the National Peace Fund. Through 
these two funds alone, we have executed projects worth 238 
million quetzals in the poorest areas of the country. 
  We have distributed to the municipalities 368 million 
quetzals in accordance with the 8 percent of the budget 
stipulated by the Constitution. This has been done directly, 
during visits I have made to 150 of the country's poorest and 
remotest municipalities and villages. 
  All of the aforementioned actions have allowed, improved, 
and 
expanded social supervision; in other words, they have fostered 
direct and participatory actions by the communities. 
  People of Guatemala: We are working with a new style of 
government and with a positive and constructive attitude, 
despite the difficulties we have encountered. We are 
approaching our problems with intensity, without losing 
ourselves in short-term views despite the provisional nature of 
our administration. This government thanks the Guatemalan 
people for their expressed confidence, which has been proved by 
recent polls that show the president with a 76 percent approval 
rating. 
  Before I conclude, I must tell you that I just returned from 
a trip to Peten. I was accompanied by my wife, top government 
officials, civilian and military authorities, and, in 
particular, by Costa Rican President Figueres. Today, 295 
projects were simultaneously inaugurated throughout the country 
at a cost of 52 million quetzals. These projects will benefit 
between 1.7 million and 2 million Guatemalans. I would have 
liked to have inaugurated all of these projects, but I preferred 
to do so in a very remote, poor, and needy village -- in Ixbobo 
village in San Luis, Peten, where we held a lovely ceremony and 
where the Costa Rican president and I, with great satisfaction, 
symbolically cut the ribbons that inaugurated all of the 
projects I have mentioned. In this way, we are combating 
poverty, attempting to eradicate violence, and raising the 
standard of living of all Guatemalans. 
  In conclusion, I must tell you, people of Guatemala, that I 
have a commitment to all of you. I am working and will continue 
to work to leave for the next government a country that will be 
in a different state than the one I found it in. Nevertheless, 
we must keep in mind that the creation of a different Guatemala 
is a task for all Guatemalans. We must adopt an attitude of 
solidarity and progressiveness that will allow us to build a 
country in which peace and social equality will prevail. Thank 
you very much. 

