Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Thomas Juknevicius: "The Project for the </F>
Reorganization of the National Defense Ministry Provides for 
Wide Epaulets for Almost Every Official"] 
  [Text] Following the reorganization of the National Defense 
Ministry, 123 people should be employed in it: 27 individuals in 
the Personnel and Social Welfare Department, 22 in Economics and 
Finance, 23 in International Communications. In the economic 
section, eight officers will be in charge of nine temporaries, 
electricians and chairwomen. It is planned to have a major serve 
as the minister's aide; his deputy, a state secretary, will be a 
general; and colonels will serve as department directors. The 
Ministry of National Defense between the wars had a total of 42 
officials. 
  In the opinion of K. Gaska, member of the parliamentary 
committee on national defense, this reorganization is just a 
"soap bubble," a waste of funds, and a militarization of the 
ministry, because most of the ministry personnel will be given 
official military ranks. 
  "I would understand it if the 27 people doing personnel and 
social welfare work would be taking care of the Lithuanian army 
structures, but this institution will have a department charged 
with the same functions," K. Gaska said. K. Gaska cannot 
understand why the project provides for a military "ministry of 
foreign affairs" -- that is how large the International 
Communications Department is. 
  Chief of general staff, Colonel S. Knezys, confirmed that, 
as 
a preliminary measure, personnel and social questions in the 
Lithuanian military command apparatus will be handled by five, 
economics and finance by nine, and military communications with 
abroad by six officials (including the three interpreters). 
  S. Knezys said that the separation of the functions of the 
army leadership from the National Defense Ministry was a 
complicated step, because a similar experience did not exist. On 
the other hand not only the army's institutions but also those 
of the state border control and civil defense are subordinate to 
the ministry. It is not yet known who will perform what 
functions. 
  "Each department could buy its own furniture, but the 
ministry would probably be able to buy the canisters for 
everybody at the cheapest price," S. Knezys said. According to 
him, the processes of the creation of the army apparatus and of 
the reorganization of the ministry are being coordinated; the 
number of people in each ministry department might change after 
two or three months. 
  The press representative of the National Defense Ministry, 
L. 
Zegeriene, said that his process of the reorganization of the 
ministry was not a final one. The reorganization may still take 
several months longer. The analogous experience of the West 
European states will be studied. L. Zegeriene thinks that the 
future ministry may not require a large department of protocol. 
The international relations department could also be smaller. 

