Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Brasilia Bureau executive director Josias de </F>
Souza, bureau director Gilberto Dimenstein, reporter Emanuel 
Neri, and bureau staff; all quotation marks as published] 
  [Text] The Workers Party [PT] preliminary proposal for a 
government program claims to be "socialist." This document 
obtained by FOLHA DE SAO PAULO advocates an audit of all 
Brazilian foreign debt contracts, leaves open the possibility of 
declaring a moratorium, and states that under Luiz Inacio Lula 
da Silva's "popular and democratic" administration the 
privatization program will be discontinued. Furthermore, some 
sales of state-owned companies will be revised. 
  This document was sent to PT executive board members. It is 
being used as the basis for discussing the party's government 
program. The proposal's contents displeased the less radical 
wing of the party, which will try to make changes. PT 
government program coordinator Marco Aurelio Garcia stated that 
the PT Executive Commission will meet next week to discuss the 
program's economic aspects. Garcia said the final draft has not 
been prepared yet. 
  The text the PT is using as the basis for its internal 
debate 
has clearly radical overtones, not in keeping with the image 
Lula is trying to sell: a moderate candidate open to 
compromise. Should Lula win the presidential race, the document 
forecasts a term in office fraught with conflicts. 
  It states: "The process of social, political, economic, and 
cultural changes that socialism implies will be carried out 
through a permanent battle between our plan and the currently 
prevailing capitalism." 
  The program's most controversial part is the economic 
chapter. Beside hardening Brazil's position with foreign 
creditors, it suggests greater control of foreign capital, which 
currently "is totally concentrated on short-term speculative 
applications." 
  As for the privatization program, the document asserts that 
during Lula's mandate only the public companies that can 
definitely no longer be expanded or modernized will be sold, and 
even when sold they will be put on sale for cash. The so-called 
rotten currency [securities for which the government does not 
pay what it promised] will no longer be accepted. 
  The document does not deal with an essential subject: 
curbing inflation. It argues that the strategy to reduce 
inflation may only be definitely prepared after the government 
structure and situation is learned once Lula takes power. 
  Regarding the foreign debt renegotiation, the document 
states 
that the PT government will not yield to IMF pressures. 
  The PT defends the restriction of exports, thus putting an 
end to the era of mega-surpluses in the trade balance. As an 
alternative it advocates the growth of the internal market with 
the creation of what the document calls a "market of masses." 
The document vehemently attacks neoliberal economics and defends 
economic growth with a better distribution of income. The 
document does not specify how the PT plans to accomplish these 
goals. 
  Another controversial proposal included in the preliminary 
PT 
program is the creation of a council, made up of representatives 
from society, to control Central Bank actions, especially the 
management of the exchange and monetary policies. 
<H5>  Document Criticizes Neoliberal Policy </H5>
  The preliminary version of the PT program includes a 
commentary that could further complicate the policy of alliances 
defended by the party's moderate wing: "[Former President] 
Collor was defeated, overthrown by a popular mobilization. 
However, the neoliberal plan continue to be implemented to a 
great extent by the current administration." 
  The objective is to stress an anti-Collor characteristic in 
the program. However, the criticism also hit President Itamar 
Franco and Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso (PSDB 
[Brazilian Social Democracy Party]), an ally desired by Lula. 
  With a view toward increasing the purchasing power of 
workers, the program establishes the "gradual and steady" 
increase of the minimum salary as a priority, "with the 
objective of doubling its current value." The text says this 
will happen within "the shortest possible time." 
  The document states: "This increase must be progressive and 
should be clearly announced so that economic agents are able to 
properly implement the transition to the new salary structure." 
  In order to guarantee the real value of salaries, the 
document proposes for implementation of a Collective Bargaining 
Contract "at a national, sectorial, and entrepreneurial level. 
According to the program, the objective is not merely to 
increase salaries, but to "democratically negotiate" new labor 
relations, preserving workers' interest in the making of 
economic policy decisions. The program also proposes the 
unification of databases. Another priority will be to expand 
"control measures" on manpower rotation and the "abuse" of 
overtime. 
  If he is elected president, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva will 
create the Defense Ministry, implement voluntary military 
service (which is now compulsory), and make significant 
investments in the Armed Forces. Lula's program for the military 
states: "The current status of military equipment, which has 
become junk, and the situation of soldiers, noncommissioned 
officers, and officers cannot be allowed to remain unchanged." 
  The PT does not make a quantitative estimate of military 
investment. Colonel Geraldo Cavagnari, whom Lula entrusted with 
the design of the Armed Forces program, proposed that the 
military budget grow from the current 0.5 percent to 2 percent 
of the GDP over the five-year government term -- which amounts 
to an investment of almost $8 billion annually. 
  Cavagnari's proposal awakened controversy inside and outside 
the party. In the program that will be proposed for final 
approval, the PT does not specify how much it will spend on the 
military. But the party promises to make major investments. 
Through the end of the decade the PT will channel funds for 
restructuring the Armed Forces, for equipment, and for personnel 
"upgrading." 
<H5>  Calha Norte </H5>
  The PT attaches special emphasis to military programs. It 
promises to continue the AMX subsonic fighter project and the 
space and Antarctic programs. The nuclear program also will be 
given special importance, but it will be tied to no research for 
nuclear weapons. The Calha Norte project will be revised to make 
it compatible with the policy of respect for indigenous people. 
<H5>  Missiles </H5>
  Lula's military program has many details. In the case of 
restocking the Armed Forces, it includes "tactical and strategic 
(medium-range) missiles, armored vehicles, artillery, electronic 
warfare equipment, and the nuclear submarine" as mechanisms for 
defending national sovereignty. It also proposes the creation of 
a rapid response force with the participation of the Army, Air 
Force, and Navy. 
  The PT proposal states that the judicial branch is 
inefficient, and advocates external control of this branch. One 
of the causes, according to the PT, is "the fact that a vast 
majority of judges disregard the law's social function." 
  The document states: "Infrastructure deficiencies and the 
insufficient rendering of auxiliary services have aggravated the 
situation, hindering the democratic administration of justice in 
Brazil." 
  According to the document, control over the judicial branch 
should not interfere with this branch of government's 
activities. Emphasis will be placed on the implementation of 
managerial and budgetary policies and "the disciplining action 
of its members." 
  The party advocates investment in the training of judges, 
the 
creation and implementation of judicial bodies, the filling of 
advisory and supervisory positions through public processes that 
respect salary equity, and the decentralization of justice 
through the creation of new lower courts and courts dealing with 
minor cases. 
  The PT program brings back to the political stage 
expressions 
of the ideological confrontations of the 1950's and 1960's. In 
defining itself as "socialist," the document states, for 
example: "The 13-year old economic crisis cannot be resolved 
through a bourgeois development project." This expression is 
reminiscent of the debates fueled by the old Brazilian Communist 
Party and other leftist groups. 
  In a paragraph that remembers the good old times of the 
class 
struggle, the document foresees the rise of a "hegemony" system 
led by workers and their allies as a result of the "bourgeois 
elites'" decline. The terminology reveals the theoretical 
influence of Italian Communist leader Antonio Gramsci, who was 
quite fashionable in the 1970's. His ideas served as the 
foundation for the European Communist Movement. 
  The preliminary PT proposal advocates the return of the 
so-called "Third-World" policy to Brazilian diplomacy, which was 
started by the military governments. The document advocates 
"special emphasis" on relations with China, India, Russia, and 
South Africa. Another priority in the document states: "Latin 
America will be the privileged area of Brazilian foreign policy." 
  The document criticizes the U.S. "interventionist position" 
and foresees a new polarization: It will no longer be an 
East-West (cold war) but the North-South (rich and poor) 
conflict. The document adds that the PT government will 
advocate, at all international forums, the end of the economic 
embargo on Cuba. 
  The document states that rich countries today exercise their 
predomination, adding that this influence is reflected within 
the United Nations, "especially within the Security Council and 
in organizations like the IMF and the World Bank." 
  Within this context, the PT government will not limit itself 
to engaging in new discussions on the Brazilian foreign debt, 
but might try to help "peripheral countries" renegotiate their 
debts. A world conference will be proposed -- like 1992's world 
environment conference -- for redesigning development at the 
world level and searching for ways to reduce unemployment. 
  The central point of the preliminary PT proposal for land 
reform is the redistribution of land for 1 million families in 
five years. The document states: "Expropriation on the basis of 
social interest for land reform purposes will be the main 
instrument for land distribution." 
  Each family will have a 30-hectare unit, which will 
consequently add up to 30 million hectares. This is 
approximately 3.5 times as big as Portuguese territory. This 
goal will be attained on the basis of the essential premise of 
"authority and political will." 
  The document makes no reference to settlement costs. 
According to Planning Ministry figures, taking into account the 
need for financing production, each settled family might cost 
the government $10,000. The total cost, therefore, will be $10 
billion over a five- year period. 
  The PT has chosen latifundia as one of its targets: "We 
propose the end of fiscal leniency with latifundia through the 
adoption of taxes based on the real value of unexploited land, 
using rapidly increasing, real-term, taxable percentages for 
abandoned land and decreasing taxable percentages for cultivated 
land." 
  The PT plans interventions in the state and private 
communications system. The program states that the government 
will adopt "measures that can guarantee the democratization of 
information at all levels." The program advocates the 
"classification of crimes linked to manipulation and disregard 
for the right to have access to information and communications." 
From a practical point of view, the program promises to 
implement interdiction in private groups that simultaneously 
control television channels, radio stations, newspapers, and 
magazines, and promises to put an end to tax exemptions for 
communications enterprises. 
<H5>  Main Points of the PT Program </H5>
<H5>  Economy </H5>

  -  End of the Denationalization Program and revision of some 
of the privatizations that already have been made. 
  -  The 
privatization of state-run companies will be authorized in 
return for cash, only if "companies have no possibilities of 
expansion." 
  -  All foreign debt contracts will be renegotiated, 
rejecting "impositions" by the IMF and World Bank. 
  -  The PT 
government reserves for itself "the right to adopt unilateral 
measures, including suspension of payment," that is, a 
moratorium. 
  -  Foreign debt contracts will be subject to 
auditing. 
  -  Definition of the "instruments of an anti-inflationary 
policy" will be postponed until the current situation and the 
inherited problems are clarified. 
  -  The policy of commercial 
mega-surpluses will be terminated, and the internal market will 
receive incentives through the formation of a "market of 
masses." 
  -  Development will be reactivated on the basis of a pact, 
with improved distribution of income. 
  -  A monetary council will be 
created, with representatives of society, to supervise Central 
Bank actions. 
  -  The financial system will be reformed to 
"dismantle the mechanism" of speculation. 
  -  The domestic debt will 
be converted into bonds, eliminating the pact for automatic 
repurchasing of public bonds. 
  -  Improvement of financial health 
and capitalization of federal and state banks. 
  -  Channeling of 
foreign capital toward "productive investment." 
  -  Credits for the 
rural sector will be tied to the variation of farm product 
prices. 
  -  State monopolies in the areas of telecommunications, 
energy, and petroleum will be maintained. 
  -  The number of taxes 
will be reduced and a progressive income tax will be enforced 
(the rich will pay more than the poor). 
  -  Taxes on unproductive 
land, either urban or rural, will be increased. 
  -  Fiscal 
incentives and subsidies will be restricted. 
  -  Proposals for 
privatization of the social security system will be rejected, 
"especially if they follow the Chilean model. 
  -  The Housing 
Financial System will be reformulated in order to increase the 
offer of credits. 
<H5>  Land Reform </H5>

  -  Settlement of 1 million families over a five-year 
period. 
  -  Each family will be given a 30-hectare unit. 
  -  Land owned 
by sugar mills will be negotiated for in exchange for the debts 
they owe the state. 
  -  Land owned by state enterprises will be 
distributed. 
  -  All land donations, transfers, and concessions made 
between 1962 and 1987 will be revised. 
  -  Partnership and land 
rental contracts will be valid for a minimum period of 10 
years. 
  -  More taxes will be levied on land considered unproductive 
while cultivated land will pay fewer taxes. 
<H5>  Communications </H5>

  -  Interdiction of private groups that simultaneously control 
television channels, radio stations, newspapers, and 
magazines. 
  -  Laws will be approved to prevent the formation of 
national oligopolies of radio and television stations and the 
print media. 
  -  Editors' committees will be compulsorily created in 
all communications enterprises. 
  -  Forty percent of artistic and 
cultural programs and newscasts should be produced locally or 
regionally. 
  -  Thirty percent of radio and television programs will 
be produced by independent companies. 
  -  Tax exemptions for 
communications enterprises will be eliminated. 
  -  All municipal 
governments will be entitled to operate a radio station and a 
television channel. 
  -  Medium- and low-frequency radio stations 
will be created for operation by social organizations. 
  -  An 
ombudsman or public defender will be designated for all 
communications areas. 
<H5>  Military Area </H5>

  -  Through the end of the decade, military spending should be 
oriented toward restructuring the Armed Forces, updating their 
equipment, and upgrading their personnel. 
  -  Creation of a defense 
ministry. 
  -  Professionalization of military personnel and 
implementation of voluntary military service. 
  -  Revision and 
continuation of military projects like the AMX, Antarctica, 
nuclear, and Calha Norte projects. 
  -  Creation of a rapid response 
force with land, naval, and air support. 
<H5>  Labor Area </H5>

  -  Gradual, steady increase of the minimum salary. 
  -  Adoption 
of a salary policy that can preserve the real value of 
salaries. 
  -  Unification of the databases of all labor 
categories. 
  -  Encouragement of the adoption of a collective 
bargaining contract. 
  -  Adoption of measures to prevent the 
rotation of manpower and the abuse of overtime. 
  -  Incentives for 
manpower training and upgrading. 
  -  Unemployment insurance 
allowances will be increased. 

