BFN 

  [Text] Prague, April 12 (CTK) -- The Czech Government 
coalition faces no crisis; however, some problems should be 
called by their true names, which would lead to redressing 
relations within the coalition, Czech Industry and Trade 
Minister Vladimir Dlouhy says in an interview published by the 
independent daily LIDOVE NOVINY today. 
  Dlouhy explains that he has been avoiding commenting on some 
political problems because he does not feel sure about some 
topics, as his post of industry and trade minister does not 
allow him to center on these problems in detail. 
  It is impossible to question the Senate (the parliament's 
upper chamber still to be created), as it is embedded in the 
Constitution, Dlouhy says. It should be less politically based 
in relation to the Chamber of Deputies (the lower chamber), and 
it should control its activities. Members of the Senate should 
be real personalities rather than people elected primarily 
according to electoral preferences, he adds. 
  Turning to the restitution of church property, Dlouhy says 
he 
preferred a compromise. It is impossible to insist that either 
everything or nothing be returned. The church should get back 
the property designed to serve religious, charity and 
humanitarian purposes. 
  The Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA, one of the four 
government coalition parties of which Dlouhy is deputy 
chairman), "has crystallized into a liberal-conservative party," 
which "has succeeded in selling its policy to people" and thus 
become the second strongest political party of these days, 
Dlouhy says, adding that the ODA should enter the next elections 
(scheduled for 1996) independently. 
  Dlouhy says he does not find reasonable casting doubt on 
Frantisek Benda as the Environment Minister by the (strongest 
coalition party) Civic Democratic Party (ODS). He considers it 
an example of unhealthy relations within the coalition (Benda is 
a member of the coalition Christian Democratic Party, KDS). 
"Coalition mechanisms will have probably to be examined and 
respected," Dlouhy stated. 
  "The ODS has (and mainly had) very specific vocabulary 
(which 
has discouraged the left-wing opposition), but from time to time 
it has accommodated its policy to the views of a large number of 
people from the whole of the political spectrum," Dlouhy says. 
  The ODS and the ODA have, Dlouhy believes, a chance to 
divide 
the political center in the elections. The ODA will be chosen 
particularly by liberals, as it will honor the basic "authentic 
conservative values," while the ODS will be favored by "people 
typical of the center, who adhere to the it because they wish 
their standards of living to be sure," Dlouhy says. 
  Speaking about Slovak developments, Dlouhy says that the 
former government of Vladimir Meciar had not made any principal 
mistakes in the economic sphere. But the abuse of technical 
obstacles, such as the introduction of import certificates and 
veterinary certificates has surpassed the reasonable measure, he 
adds. 
  Dlouhy rejects the idea of Czechoslovak union as mentioned 
again by Chairman of the Czech Social Democratic Party (CSSD) 
Milos Zeman. The reunification of the Czech and Slovak Republics 
could destabilize the political situation in Central Europe 
because the powers of the union and the individual republics 
would be taken up for discussion once again. "Only he who 
cannot come with nothing else can raise this banner. I don't 
understand Milos Zeman," Dlouhy says. 

