Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS commentator Ivan Ivanov] </F>
  [Text] Moscow February 17 TASS--It is no secret that two 
years of vigorous effort at economic reform have resulted in 
sharp erosion of the living standards in Russia, decrease of the 
birthrate and increase of the death rate. The stratification of 
society into the very rich and very poor has become more 
pronounced. The middle class, the reliable support for liberal 
transformations in any country, is virtually non-existent in 
Russia. Because of all this the government has come to realise 
the objective fact that it has no longer a social base for 
application of the "shock therapy" to the economy. 
  The basic principle that is expected to be announced at an 
enlarged meeting of the cabinet next weekend will most probably 
be "the priority of social policy during a stage-by-stage 
stabilisation of production". Sources close to the prime 
minister say that Viktor Chernomyrdin bears in mind these top 
priorities when speaking about the need to continue the reform 
in "non-monetarist ways". 
  It is yet hard to say if these priorities will become the 
lever by which the prime minister will be able radically to 
improve the economic situation. Going by statistics for 1993 
compiled by the Russian State Statistical Committee, the 
situation is extremely precarious in just these two aspects. 
Thus, after two years of reform, Gross Domestic Product dropped 
in 1993 by 29 per cent compared to 1991. The volume of 
industrial output declined by 31.3 per cent. Real monetary 
incomes of the population dropped by 43 per cent since 1991. 
Consumer prices rose 245 times. Almost 40 million of Russians 
or 26.7 per cent of the population, have the living standards 
below the poverty line. Over two years, unemployment rate grew 
13.5 times. 
  The basic goals of the government's social policy for 1994 
are defined in a lengthy report compiled by the Russian Ministry 
of Labour. The government proceeds from the premise that an 
effective and balanced social policy is the necessary condition 
for the continuation of reform, consolidation of its social 
basis and improvement of the social political situation. This 
is proclaimed in the report of the Labour Ministry, it was 
learned from informed sources. The main objective of the 
government's social policy for 1994 will be the stabilisation of 
the living standards in Russia with its subsequent rise as the 
economy stabilises. Experts believe this wording can justify 
the drawn-out expectation of economic and social results of the 
reform. Proceeding from modest financial opportunities of the 
state budget, the government will most probably concentrate on 
preventing the fall of real monetary incomes of the population 
by improving the ratio between the minimum wage and the living 
wage, on reforming the health, education and housing systems and 
on the impact of the state on the population's employment and 
stepped-up work for personnel retraining. 

