Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Viktor Kalashnikov and Marina Kalashnikova: </F>
"Russia as a Mirror of the American Revolution: Bush's Legacy 
and Clinton's Reform Ambitions"] 
  [Text] There has always been for the Russian observer 
an element of the enigmatic in the actions and fate of American 
presidents. An anxious looking back at their domestic concerns 
has arisen every now and then behind the natural and 
understandable great-power character of their foreign policy. 
Soviet propaganda with its anti-effectiveness did much to 
contribute to intra-American problems being perceived with us 
ultimately as contrived. All the more odd and implausible did it 
seem that omnipotent occupants of the White House were after 
triumphs in the world arena deprived of office on account of 
discrepancies in budget accounting and insufficient concern for 
the "needy strata" or following the discovery of a "bug" in the 
headquarters of political opponents. 
<H5>  President Learning on the Job </H5>
  In this sense Bill Clinton is a complete enigma. Barely 
having assumed office, he made his wife and himself hostage to a 
very risky broad-based reform of health care (the point at issue 
is the introduction of uniform medical insurance and general 
preventive medical examination). Major programs for upgrading 
the system of education, improving highways and communications, 
and combating crime and unemployment are in the offing. There 
will hardly be sufficient time for tangible returns from such 
designs before the next elections. On the other hand, like any 
major restructuring, they promise at the first stage higher 
taxes, the resistance of the bureaucracy, and immense and daily 
organizational problems. 
  Clinton has dealt in highly distinctive fashion with the 
groundwork in the creation of a "new world order" inherited from 
Bush. Instead of digging in on the Somalia beachhead and 
introducing "law and order" on Haiti on the basis of the 
experience of Desert Storm and the intervention in Panama in 
1989, he has in fact left these situations to their inner logic. 
The lowering of the plank of losses and risk to which the United 
States might now accede in "crisis regions" has been 
demonstrated to the world. It will be more difficult after this 
to count on the unquestioning loyalty of the allies and the 
sincere partnership of UN leaders. 
  True, a simplified version of the former global ideas geared 
to countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 
has recently been released. But this concept also will, most 
likely, be advanced without any particular energy in view of the 
quite exotic counteralliances (like that of Pakistan and North 
Korea) between "threshold" states which have already emerged. 
  On the whole, the geopolitical takeoff run of previous U.S. 
administrations is not today switching to ascent thrust. The 
words of Helmut Schmidt of two years ago: "Some people today 
take America to be the sole superpower. I consider this a 
delusion or, at least, an exaggeration; in a few years this 
euphoria will disappear," are being confirmed, evidently. 
  The capacity of the President and his team for maneuver and 
their readiness for the necessary tactical retreats merit 
attention under such conditions. Clinton is avoiding drastic 
steps with unpredictable consequences. This reflects both his 
recognition of the imperfection of methods that were effective 
18 months ago even and more profound factors. 
<H5>  It Is a Good Thing That There Is a Zhirinovskiy </H5>
  Inasmuch as there is more freedom, as distinct from 
democracy, in Russia than in America, radicals are the main ones 
engaged in earnest in ascertaining the potential of discontent. 
Within the framework of election and other political campaigns 
they at their expense bring to the surface the scale of 
rejection of the authorities by the populace and identify the 
real reserve of strength of the system. The simple and 
inexpensive indicator of social tension operates in good time. 
  In the United States there are costly means of ascertaining 
and suppressing the radicals themselves. For this reason the 
authorities have to rely more on the estimates of research 
services, intuition, and the criticism of respectable political 
opponents. All the more unexpected are instances where the seals 
and valves on the American social boiler fail, and one can see 
for oneself the real tension brewing within. 
  The two days of disturbances in Los Angeles, the second 
biggest city of the United States, in 1992 cost 53 lives and 
half a billion dollars' worth of physical damage. TIME Magazine, 
which is not usually given to socioeconomic determinism, 
acknowledged a year later that it was a question of 
unemployment, which in the "black" neighborhoods amounted to 50 
percent, the catastrophic shortage of funds for social needs, 
and the fact that the poverty level was in places higher than 
the indicator of 1965--the time of the previous large-scale 
unrest. Nor did TIME overlook the consequences of the drastic 
cutback in military production: this was the reason for the loss 
of over 150,000 jobs in the city. And the ethnic clashes and the 
violence, which got out of control, should be seen merely as a 
consequence of these circumstances. The gangs operating in the 
city have up to 130,000 combatants "under arms." For comparison: 
The United States intends to leave approximately as many in 
Europe to maintain the "balance of forces." 
  The events in Los Angeles were a kind of apotheosis of the 
preceding decade marked by Reaganomics, an arms buildup, the 
show and use of force, and the victorious conclusion of the cold 
war. The social results of this policy are as follows: In 1979 
some 19 percent of wage workers doing a full day's work received 
wages below the poverty criteria, at the start of the 1990's the 
proportion of these was in excess of 25 percent. Real wages 
declined constantly and the gap between the rich and poor groups 
of society grew in these same years. According to Harvard 
economist Richard Freeman, "the United States is evidently 
developing in the direction of a 'class-based society' of the 
type that exists in Latin America, with severely uneven income 
and unstable governments." 
  While drawing a distinction between social processes and 
econometric statistics, many American experts affirm that 
poverty under the present conditions could grow even with an 
increase in production. According to FORTUNE Magazine, what is 
frightening for millions of Americans is not the loss of their 
jobs themselves but "being condemned to work their whole lives 
without hope of achieving an acceptable living standard." In 
fact, it is in all this that the budget deficit and national 
debt which are being debated on Capitol Hill are manifested. In 
the figurative comparison of the well-known Russian America 
specialist V.S. Vasilyev, the national debt of the United States 
today (more than $4.5 trillion) is reminiscent of a vast 
man-made lake, which is at maximum potential being contained in 
the foundation area by a dam in the shape of the top federal 
leadership. The main component of the dam is the Bill Clinton 
administration. It is forced to constantly replenish this 
bottomless "lake," aware of the growing and almost irreversible 
threat to an economy situated in a "valley." Under these 
conditions it is excited less and less by overseas adventures or 
the ambitions of the "new democracies." 
<H3>  The Fall of the `Iron Curtain' Has Separated Russia and the 
United States Even More </H3>
  The level of geopolitical confrontation with Russia has been 
reduced, it would seem, to warnings against the suppression of 
its own democracy and half-hints at the undesirability of an 
undermining of the sovereignty of its CIS partners. For many 
people in Russia this serves as the best proof of the 
insidiousness of Washington's new policy. Some people simply 
cannot endure the absence of the former two-dimensional 
reference points: "We will not, they say, let the Poles, Czechs, 
and Hungarians into NATO, Russia must not be isolated." The 
response of the former enemy surprisingly does not contain an 
ultimatum: "Nor do we intend admitting them, particularly 
against your wishes. This is for us a secondary issue, and we 
will not cause any aggravation for the sake of it. You 
yourselves wanted to join, for that matter, as we recall?" 
  The winding down of the entire zone of military rivalry, 
where the bulk of the contacts and mutual attention between the 
United States and Russia was in fact concentrated, is 
objectively reducing the overall extent of their relations and 
the degree of urgent interest in one another. Inasmuch as 
bilateral economic, scientific, and cultural relations between 
them remain negligible, the contours of the United States on the 
horizon of the Russian world perception are being eroded, as it 
were. By virtue of the decline in the significance of the 
Russian and American military arsenals, the immense 
socioeconomic gap is now at the forefront as the measure of 
comparison: by a factor of six in terms of GNP, by a factor of 
10 in terms of inhabitants' car ownership, and so forth. All 
this is perceived and is essentially a giant barrier, which, as 
it might seem, has separated our countries forever. We are 
moving further away from one another in our national priorities. 
We should at least avoid losing an adequate understanding of the 
problems and aspirations of the other side. 
<H5>  How Might the Former Rivals Help One Another </H5>
  Russians were for a long time raised in fear of the 
well-nigh 
invulnerable transatlantic monster. Today the domestic media are 
steeped in an inordinate piety in respect to American power and 
its boundlessness. In actual fact, the emphasis on constant 
economic growth and the military rivalry have thoroughly 
undermined this power. The greatest damage has been done to the 
social sphere, where a significant charge of instability and 
conflicts has arisen. A recognition of the seriousness of the 
accumulated socioeconomic problems is prompting President 
Clinton toward a serious modernization of American policy not 
only overseas but primarily within the country. His main role at 
the present stage of the development of the United States 
consists of this attempt, possibly. 
  There are certain parallels between the domestic condition 
of 
the United States and Russia. If it is true that the less 
developed countries see the foremost countries as their future, 
it is just as true that the problems of the foremost have become 
particularly serious in the less developed countries. The 
factors of instability in Russia could be manifested in the very 
near future in the United States also. 
  The United States is not in a position to render Russia 
significant economic assistance, and Russia will hardly in the 
foreseeable future become an equal partner for America. But they 
could help one another, exchanging models and experience of the 
accomplishment of specific tasks, primarily in the sphere of an 
improvement in people's living conditions. It is obvious that an 
intensive accumulation of such experience has already begun in 
the United States under the leadership of Bill Clinton. Moscow 
would be making a big mistake were it to underestimate this 
aspect of the American President's activity. Washington's new 
policy could be an important reference point and opportunity for 
Russia, if the depth and similarity of many American and Russian 
problems are recognized. 

