CSO 

<F P=106> [Articles by Keith Flory] </F>
  [29 Mar 94 p 6] 
  [Text] New Delhi, March 28--A plus point of the Defence 
Ministry's Annual Report is the fairly comprehensive 
appreciation of the global and regional factors which influence 
security perceptions in our country. 
  Besides, the rather large dose of Pakistan-bashing in it is 
bound to be popular. 
  The document, however, is of little constructive 
significance, since it fails to effectively deal with the 
current state of Defence preparedness. Neither does it clear the 
serious apprehensions expressed by those concerned with the 
maintenance of national security. 
  The annual report of each Ministry is published to help 
M.P.'s [Members of Parliament] understand the "ground realities" 
of that particular Ministry. The reports also serve as the basis 
on which the M.P.s make presentations when demands for grants 
are debated in the Lok Sabha. 
  The reports are also useful during discussions on the 
working 
of the Ministries in the Rajya Sabha. The Defence report, 
however, will contribute little or nothing to these ends. 
  For quite some time now, Defence analysts have been 
demanding 
greater transparency on such matters. 
  They realize that a credible security apparatus cannot be 
put 
in place in the absence of informed public opinion, which is 
itself created by a comprehensive national debate. 
  Thus, when senior military personnel leave the galleries at 
the end of the parliamentary debate on the report, they will 
continue to be amazed at the lack of knowledge which most M.P.s 
display. 
  Consider the central issue of Defence expenditure. The 
report 
has three paragraphs dealing with what Pakistan has been 
spending, talks of a nine-fold increase in its Defence Budget 
between '78 and '93--an average annual growth rate of 
approximately 15 percent. 
  Last year, the report says, Defence accounted for 34.6 
percent of Pakistan's spending on the current account. The 
country's Defence expenditure, it adds, amounts to 7.14 percent 
of the Gross Domestic Product (1992 figures) and contrasts it 
with India's 2.75 percent. 
  However, India's Defence expenditure warrants a single 
paragraph and a couple of graphic displays of the major heads of 
spending. 
  While the graphs may reveal something, all that the lone 
paragraph states is that "given India's size and security 
concerns, the outlay on Defence, assessed either as a percentage 
of the total Central Government expenditure or of the GDP, 
continues to be one of the lowest amongst our neighbouring 
countries." 
  If this was intended to be self-congratulatory it has fallen 
flat. Whatever the report may say, it is undeniable that almost 
every Defence specialist has been stressing that in real terms 
the outlays have been falling over the past five years. 
  Also--and, perhaps, more significantly--the text of that 
single paragraph is a word-for-word repetition of what was 
stated in the reports for 1991-92 and 1992-93. 
  Surely, members of Parliament deserve more than that. It 
must 
be remembered that unlike other Ministries or Departments which 
release a fair amount of published information, the [text 
illegible] Defence Ministry can only be gauged from the Annual 
Report and the Budget papers. 
  Even the replies to questions in Parliament are calculatedly 
vague. 
  This "closed shop" attitude permeates the report. It does 
speak of the resource crunch at three or four places--but always 
stresses that there has been no compromise on Defence 
preparedness. 
  This, in a sense, is even worse than saying nothing, for it 
tends to present a misleading picture. 
  Just about every competent analyst has been drawing 
attention 
to the adverse impact of Defence expenditure failing to keep 
abreast of inflation and exchange-rates. The report suggests 
that they are all wide off the mark. 
  [30 Mar 94 p 6] 
  [Text] New Delhi, March 29--A virtue has been made of 
economy in the Annual Report brought out by the Ministry of 
Defence, which is regarded as the prime source of official 
information on the state of defence in the country. 
  There are paragraphs on that point in the chapters on the 
Army and the Air Force. 
  The Navy, however, has been "excepted." One of its officers 
jocularly remarked that it was because its share of the Budget 
was so paltry, in any case, that there was nothing to reduce. 
  While dealing with planning, also, the report talks of the 
endeavour to "balance the inescapable minimum maintenance 
requirements of our defence forces and the need to modernize 
them without unduly straining the national economy." 
  Are the forces worthy only of the "inescapable minimum?" 
  There can be no quarrel with the desire to ensure that each 
rupee goes the farthest possible. But just how serious the 
problem of low outlays has become, was proved by the mid-year 
increase of over Rs 2,200 crores [rupees] during the current 
financial year. 
  The increase was obviously necessitated by the increased 
commitment of the Army on internal security duties, especially 
those in Jammu and Kashmir. 
  The report, however, is silent about what forced this 
additional allocation. The Union Finance Minister, Dr Manmohan 
Singh, offered an insight while countering allegation that he 
had failed to contain deficits. 
  He told the Rajya Sabha: "What has happened in the last few 
months is now well known to this country. 
  "And I would not be worthy of being the Finance Minister if 
I 
were to say: `No, I have an obligation to meet the fiscal 
deficit target. Therefore, I will not meet the legitimate needs 
of India's armed forces in the circumstances of grave danger to 
national security that our country is facing'." 
  Would it not have been better if the Defence Ministry had 
utilized the report to educate M.P.s and the nation at large, 
about that "grave danger to national security?" 
  And did the Finance Minister actually admit that his initial 
outlay for '93-'94 failed to cater to the "legitimate needs" of 
the armed forces? 
  Pakistani involvement in Kashmir--if present at all--could 
not have developed overnight. And if, as the report repeatedly 
asserts, there was no compromise, would the proposed sale of 
F-16's to Pakistan sent so many shivers down political spines? 
  The report pays scant attention to several other important 
issues. There has been so much talk of the need for improving 
the "higher defence organization." 
  But the document suggests that all is well on the planning 
front, at least as far as its mechanisms go. 
  However, while replying to the last Defence debate in the 
Lok 
Sabha, the Prime Minister spoke of reviving the National 
Security Council in a modified form. Mr P.V. Narasimha Rao has 
not fulfilled his promise of "coming back" to the subject in a 
few months. The report, of course, is silent on that score. 
  It can be nobody's case that the Defence Ministry publicly 
quantify the difficulties it faces in carrying out its 
supremely, important task. 
  Not even the most severe of its critics would suggest that 
it 
parts with information that has genuine security implications. 
  Yet, if that were to be stretched--as is being done--to 
ensure that the nation remained ignorant of reality it would 
ultimately prove counter-productive. If all is well as far as 
our security considerations are concerned, as the report tends 
to indicate, then why has the Government spent Rs 23,000 crores 
on Defence? 
  Perhaps it would be an exaggeration to conclude that the 
report says little because virtually nothing is being done to 
restructure the military machine. 


