BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat to the Crans Montana </F>
Forum in Bucharest -- live, in Arabic with simultaneous 
translation into Romanian] 
  [Text] Esteemed Mr. Chairman of the conference: Please 
allow me to express my joy and satisfaction with my 
participation in this important international colloquium which 
reunites the elite of politicians, thinkers, and economic 
experts from various countries and continents. 
  The importance of this colloquium lies in the fact that it 
is 
a rostrum from which we will exchange ideas and we will 
deepen....[interpreter fades out] As you know, an international 
forum was organized over these days in Marakesh by the 
organization, the new world organization of commerce, and there 
they raised the issue of building a new world as we are entering 
a new century. It is necessary that we should act in the spirit 
of international justice, righteousness, and equality, and of 
not living in.... 
  [Announcer] There seem to be problems with the interpreter's 
microphone. The PLO chairman is referring to the struggle to 
fight the crises that are tormenting the world, creating 
explosive situations, and which led to local and regional wars, 
the phenomenon of hunger threatening to make whole nations 
disappear, and catastrophes threatening to make our planet 
perish. Large-scale blocs, large-scale groupings have emerged, 
which ignore the interests of....[announcer ends] 
  As far as our region, the Middle East region, is concerned, 
over the past half-century it faced many long-lasting and bloody 
conflicts and wars. We have now reached the threshold of a new 
era in that region, after having signed, together with the 
Israeli Government, the declaration of principles at the White 
House in Washington on 13 September 1993. That declaration was 
to be followed by the signing of other accords, in Cairo, in 
view of the implementation of the accord convened by the 
declaration. As you know, currently negotiations are taking 
place both in Cairo and in Paris. We consider that the 
continuation of negotiations has to be something that is 
progressing because the accord we have already concluded is a 
first necessary step on the road toward peace, the road that 
began in Madrid in 1991. 
  We have to open a new chapter, a new era in the Middle East 
region, based on peaceful coexistence and good neighborly 
relations, on cooperation, and the settlement of all conflicts 
by peaceful solutions, by dialogue and wisdom. We have to reach 
a stage....[pauses] In this sense we had many contacts with the 
Israeli Government, in various places: in Washington, Oslo, 
Paris, Davos, and Cairo. Besides the multilateral negotiations 
that took place in several capital cities of the world. 
  Today we meet at this international forum in Bucharest, the 
capital city of Romania, this country that was among the first 
ones to act vigorously and forward constructive proposals and 
creative initiatives aimed at achieving a just peace in the 
Middle East region and at finding a solution by negotiations and 
a just peace for the cause of [word indistinct]. 
  Since I arrived in Bucharest I have held talks, important 
and 
constructive talks, with His Excellency President Ion Iliescu, 
the president of friendly Romania. We approached issues related 
to strengthening of the peace process and ensuring its success 
by the implementation of the accords signed by the PLO and the 
Government of Israel. [words indistinct] attempt of His 
Excellency, what he had done, in this meeting between me and His 
Excellency Mr. Peres. We have to thank him with all our hearts. 
Thank you, thank you, thank you! 
  Mr. Chairman, ladies, and gentlemen, you doubtlessly share 
our opinion, according to which our region is one of the most 
important ones in the world and that it is a very sensitive one. 
There are very important energy resources there. That is very 
important for the great consumer markets, besides the strategic 
position of our region as a link in the chain linking Europe, 
Africa and Asia. Ancient Palestine, as you know, was the center 
of that region, where the Magreb and Mashrek, that is, the East 
and the West of the Arab world, met, where the three largest 
monotheist religions, the Mosaic, the Christian, and the Islamic 
ones met. They have spread over the world transmitting the 
message of love and the call for peace, cooperation, and 
brotherhood among all nations, regardless of their color, ethnic 
character, or sex. That is our deep conviction, and we assure 
you that the Palestinian people will continue to bear that 
humane message, especially considering that our people is one of 
the peoples that suffered most, that was confronted with very 
brutal wars and conflicts on the political, economic, social, 
and other planes. 
  However, we do not wish to be past-oriented, but rather to 
turn our experience to good account so that our people should 
exert its right to self-determination and the right to return to 
the territory of its homeland. The hope of our people is to 
build a new Palestine, a free country of the Palestinian people. 
The hope of our people is its right to erect an economy 
functioning on the basis of mechanisms able to make up for what 
happened during the occupation period. The hope of our people 
is to achieve security and safety for us and for all the peoples 
and states in the region, distant from any violence, 
violence-countering violence, and any other such reactions. Our 
hope is peaceful coexistence and cooperation on the basis of 
justice and welfare, progress, stability, and peace. 
  Mr. Chairman, ladies, and gentlemen, you doubtlessly wish 
to learn about the current idea, the configuration of the 
Palestinian economic, social, and political construction that we 
hope to be able to erect and for which we are acting on the 
basis of Palestinian national security. 
  Our regime will be based on the principles of democracy, 
political pluralism, and the freedom to set up parties, on 
nondiscrimination in public rights and freedoms, 
nondiscrimination among religions, ethnic groups, or skin 
colors, and nondiscrimination between males and females, on the 
basis of a constitution that stipulates the sovereignty of 
independent righteousness and justice, the observance of the 
human rights and democratic freedoms, and the erection of a free 
market. Such are the foundations on the basis of which we have 
begun to set up our national institutions, such as the Palestine 
Economic Council for Development and Reconstruction, the 
elaboration of the systems, laws, and regulations by which we 
intend to achieve the infrastructure and develop it. We will 
also take the private sector into consideration so that it would 
play an important and fundamental frontline role in the boosting 
of economy in all sectors and especially in the sectors of 
production, tourism, and services. 
  We have already begun to elaborate all the aforementioned 
systems, laws, and regulations that open the way for the 
promotion of the private sector that is to play a vital role. 
We have Palestinian national economic development programs that 
have been drafted for a period of seven years, that is, for the 
1994-2000 period. The first two years are dedicated to the 
normalization of economy, to its reconstruction, and to the 
development of the infrastructure, while the following five 
years are intended for the development process, in which we hope 
to achieve an adequate growth to offer to the Palestinian 
individuals the prosperity and the stability they are craving 
for, and to achieve such prosperity after they have suffered 
occupation and constraint for such a long time. 
  The sum of the investments necessary for the Palestinian 
development plan is assessed at $13.045 billion. By those 
investments we intend to develop the institutions and the 
resumption of development, the reequipment and the modernization 
of the infrastructure [words indistinct] 
  We are convinced that we will be able to surmount all 
difficulties we will be faced with while accomplishing those 
projects, and we will salute everyone who gives us a hand, 
intending to help us and cooperate with us. We will positively 
respond, and we have positively responded when 44 states pledged 
to help us at the international conference, in October 1993, in 
Washington, of the countries that displayed readiness to offer 
us their help. Those states announced their pledge to offer us 
$2.2 billion. I wish to express my deep gratitude in the name 
of my people, our people, to all the states that have announced 
that they will observe that pledge. 
  However, I have to say that the aforementioned amount is far 
too little compared to the volume needed by the plan drafted by 
us for the development of our territory. That is why we are 
hoping for development assistance in the form of bilateral 
economic cooperation, regional economic cooperation, and 
especially the regional cooperation. I wish to state here that 
it is the right of the Middle East region, after such a long 
period of wars, to benefit from a Marshall Plan of a new type, 
to the well-being of our people, our peoples, and our countries. 
  We call upon the countries that offered to grant us help not 
to hesitate to give us the assistance needed by the Arab 
Palestinian territories, especially their development programs, 
their programs devised to set up their institutions, to create 
jobs, and also for the activity of the Palestinian Economic 
Council for Development and Reconstruction. 
  The Palestinian people, which has suffered much over long 
decades of oppression and persecution, because of the 
occupation, is firmly determined to exert its authority and will 
and to use its experience in the reconstruction and the 
development of its territory. 
  You know that during this forum, that in this new era we 
will 
be facing new responsibilities and major challenges both on the 
Palestinian plane and on [words indistinct] There will be the 
challenge questioning our institutions, such as the Palestinian 
security and police forces, the ensuring of the requirements 
needed to create an appropriate security and safety basis for 
the Palestinian citizens, and the ensuring of the stability and 
the development process, including all their dimensions, within 
the peace process. 
  To achieve economic and social development, one process has 
to be active and efficient: the training of our cadres in 
cooperation with international institutions and the group of 
countries that offered us assistance. 
  Currently, the great issue and responsibility is to complete 
the process of negotiations and especially the implementation of 
Security Council Resolution 904, which ensures our people's 
international protection, halts the terrorism coming from the 
Israeli settlers, and to proceed, with a sincere will, to engage 
in negotiations to lay down the foundations of just and global 
peace on the basis of international legality. 
  As far as our region is concerned, we are facing the 
challenge of achieving security conditions to ensure stability 
and peace, of laying down a foundation guaranteeing the 
elimination of any kinds of mass destruction weapons, and of 
achieving a basis for a peaceful regional cooperation, as a 
catalytic, boosting, and encouraging factor, to ensure stability 
and peace, based on equality, fair mutual conduct, reciprocity, 
the observance of human rights, and the use of creative talent 
to overcome obstacles still hindering the commercial flow and 
the circulation of individuals. 
  I outlined some of the broader ideas of our economic 
conception in the perspective of accomplishing direct national 
Palestinian authority following the conclusion of the first 
stage, that of the withdrawal of the Israeli forces from the 
Gaza and Jericho areas, in concord with the Palestinian-Israeli 
accord. 
  We hope and expect you to develop cooperation and 
collaboration with us, which will help us in achieving the goals 
established by our economic and social development plans drafted 
by the Palestinian Economic Council for Development and 
Reconstruction. 
  From this rostrum we clearly state that any postponements, 
any delays in the implementation of that accord, will not be 
beneficial for peace. Our way is menaced by extremists. They 
want to sabotage the peace process by triggering incidents that 
cause a great number of casualties. 
  I wish to emphasize once more our commitment to the peace 
process and to the accomplishment of a global and just peace, 
and our condemnation of all acts of violence, regardless of 
their source. The hour of peace has come and no one is allowed 
to ignore that truth, to maneuver or to speculate to the benefit 
of certain interests, in the same way as it is not allowed that 
certain interests, any interests should prevail over that of 
peace, of achieving peace. 

