Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] San Jose, 8 Mar (DPA) -- Costa Rican President-elect 
Jose Maria Figueres today called on citizens of that country to 
tear down "the walls of intolerance and misunderstanding," after 
announcing the cabinet that will guide his administration, which 
he will assume on 8 May. 
  Figueres announced five areas of action, namely economy and 
commerce, health and social welfare, transportation and 
infrastructure, foreign policy, and institutional and moral 
renovation, coordinated by the vice presidents or advisers and 
collaborators of the future president. The future president 
insisted his cabinet will work under the concept of teamwork. 
Figueres stressed his administration will struggle to improve 
the standards of living of the middle class, affected by a 
phenomenon of impoverishment, as well as "the sectors that have 
less." 
  Regarding economic and commercial matters, the 
president-elect announced he will work to modernize the country, 
increase production efficiency, and "intelligently" join the 
large commercial blocs that are being formed currently 
throughout the world. 
  The government team announced by Figueres is characterized 
by 
a combination of young professionals and others of great 
experience in public administration. 
  The president-elect selected in the 6 February elections 
insists he will fight neoliberal policies promoted by the 
current Social Christian administration of President Rafael 
Angel Calderon. He added he will seek negotiations and 
"solutions Costa Rican style" with the international financial 
organizations. 
  Within this context, Figueres placed the coordination of the 
economic area in the hands of Carlos Manuel Castillo, current 
president of the National Liberation Party (PLN), the party that 
brought him to power. Castillo will also be the executive 
president of the Central Bank. 
  With this action, the president-elect intends to "tie" the 
decisions of the economic cabinet to the principles that in this 
area the PLN defends, which are of a social democratic 
orientation. 
  Economist Fernando Naranjo will be the new foreign minister. 
According to Figueres, Naranjo will have to study how to 
reorganize Costa Rican foreign policy to bring it in line with 
the new foreign policy ground rules and principles. 
  Figueres created a new ministry, rural development, which 
will be occupied by Roberto Solorzano. The president-elect 
explained that the creation of this ministry responds to a 
"commitment" with the agriculture sector. 
  Meanwhile, Figueres designated economist Luis Diego 
Escalante 
as the Costa Rican representative for international 
negotiations. An attorney, Juan Diego Castro, will be the new 
minister of public security and another attorney, Maureen Clark, 
will head the Ministry of Government and Police. 
  The government team that will be installed on 8 May is the 
following: 
Foreign Relations: Fernando Naranjo 
  Public Security: Juan Diego Castro 
  Government: Maureen Clark 
  Culture: Arnoldo Mora 
  Planning: Leonardo Garnier 
  Health: Herman Weinstock 
  Education: Eduardo Doryan 
  Housing: Edgar Arroyo 
  Rural Development: Roberto Solorzano 
  Finance: Fernando Herrero 
  Economy: Marcos Vargas 
  Agriculture: Mario Carvajal 
  Foreign Trade: Jose Rossi 
  Natural Resources: Rene Castro 
  Science and Technology: Roberto Robles 
  Transportation: Bernardo Arce 
  Presidency: Elias Soley 
  Information: Flory Rodriguez 
  Justice: Enrique Castillo 
  Labor: Farid Ayales 
  Tourism: Carlos Roesch 
  Minister Without Portfolio: [blank] 
  Special Projects: Longino Soto 
  Regional Coordination: Sergio Quiros 
  Figueres made this announcement at the National Museum in 
San 
Jose, the same place where his father Jose Figueres Ferrer, 
three-time president and the last great political leader of 
Costa Rica, abolished the Army 45 years ago after winning an 
armed confrontation defending clean elections. 
  The president-elect burst into tears when he held in his 
right hand the old mallet his late father used in 1949 to tear 
down a wall symbolizing the elimination of the Armed Forces. At 
that very moment, Figueres called for understanding, effort, and 
sacrifice to confront "the difficult challenges" facing his 
administration. 

