CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by M. Belova, ABI expert, under the rubric "The </F>
Banking Information Agency": "Is the 'Transferable Ruble' 
Returning? Or, a 'Little Europe' in the CIS"] 
  [Text] In the last issue of EKONOMIKA I ZHIZN, the 
Banking Information Agency [ABI] reported on the conference held 
a few days ago, "Possible ways to establish an efficient mutual 
settlement of accounts system for Russia with the states of the 
near abroad on the level of central and commercial banks," 
organized by Mezhekonomsberbank with the participation of the 
leaders of the central (national) banks of Russia, Ukraine, 
Belarus, Kazakhstan, Estonia, and Armenia, the Association of 
Russian Banks, the Interstate Bank, the European Union 
Commission, the Center for European Political Research, the 
Administration of the president of the RF, the State Duma, and 
commercial and savings banks of Russia and the CIS. 
  Today we offer for your attention excerpts from some 
speeches which allow the reader to make up his mind on the most 
important questions dealt with by the conference 
participants. 
  The deputy chairman of the expert council of 
Mezhekonomsberbank, Yu. Konstantinov, presented the 
"general concept of the establishment of an optimal mutual 
accounts settlement system on the level of the central 
(national) banks of the states of the former USSR" formulated at 
the council's initiative. 
  An efficient mutual accounts settlement system can only be 
formulated in a consistent, evolutionary way. Here are two 
acceptable methods for performing this task: 

  -  using nonconvertible currencies in settling accounts, 
bringing them into circulation, and later forming an 
international currency system like the Western European one; 
  -  combining monetary systems into a new type of ruble zone. 


    I would like to mention that a nonconvertible currency 
cannot 
play the role of an international means of payment. "Soft" 
national currencies have an unstable currency rate and are not 
properly supported with goods, gold, and other assets. As a 
rule, they rely on an inflationary economy, one in crisis, and 
frequently they move parallel to the U.S. dollar. 
  Taking into account the experience of 1950s Western Europe, 
creating a payments union of the republics of the former USSR is 
a step toward the convertibility of national currencies and the 
transition from bilateral account settlements to multilateral 
ones. Moreover, a payments union could at the same time help 
perform another pressing task, conserving means of payment 
through the mutual accounts settlement mechanism. 
  Settlement of accounts on nontrade payments, that is to say, 
a smoothrunning mechanism for citizens' money transfers, could 
become an inseparable part of an efficient system for mutual 
settlement of accounts on nontrade transactions. As yet there is 
still no clarity regarding the procedure for setting the 
currency exchange rate needed for nontrade settlement of 
accounts, the mechanism for linking nontrade circulation with 
trade circulation, or agreement between central (national) banks 
on norms for citizens and participants in money transfers to 
take out and bring in ready money. We must not allow national 
income to be pumped from one state to another. 
  Recently the idea of creating a unified currency in the 
context of the possible creation of a Eurasian Union expressed 
by the president of Kazakhstan, N. Nazarbayev, has drawn 
attention. If we start to create a payments union as an organ to 
assist multilateral settlement of accounts, then we will need a 
rated supranational monetary unit for it to function. 
  But the most important question may be the joining of 
monetary systems into a new type of ruble zone, taking into 
account the centrifugal trend which is becoming stronger. The 
creation of a single emissions center will be one of the 
mandatory conditions here. In this case the transition period 
presupposes coordinating the economic, tax, budget, and monetary 
policies of the states which have decided to integrate their 
monetary systems into the Russian one. 
  The position of the Bank of Russia was presented by the 
deputy chairman of the RF Bank of Russia, V. Solovov. 
It is that either a new ruble zone will be created under 
conditions defined by Russia or each national bank will have to 
resolve the problems of payments on its own. There is no way to 
create normal conditions for carrying out interstate settlement 
of accounts other than to ensure a sensible currency and 
monetary-credit policy, strengthen the national currency, fight 
against nonpayments within the country, and develop currency 
markets. Commercial banks are doing the main work on settlement 
of accounts between Russia and the former Soviet 
republics--those banks handle two-thirds of all payments. In 
supporting a large part of the payments, commercial banks can 
offer credits to the CIS countries in the form of overdraft or 
debit balance on a correspondent account. But because of late 
payments, the CIS countries also automatically receive a 
commodity credit from Russia (goods are shipped, but payment is 
not received). The behavior of Russia's partners is also 
notable: after signing documents on combining the monetary 
systems of Russia and Belarus and fixing the exchange rate, the 
National Bank of Belarus doubled emissions. This will obviously 
force Russia to raise the question of revising exchange rate 
ratios. The main condition of a ruble zone is the creation of a 
single emissions center and abandonment of the republic's right 
of emission. That is perfectly natural; a unified currency 
certainly requires a single emissions center. Whether the 
Central Bank of Russia should be this center is another matter. 
Perhaps the Interstate Bank, which will represent the interests 
of all participants, should assume this function. 
  The president of the Interstate Bank, V. Savanin: 
The Interstate Bank should ensure fair settlement of accounts 
among the states of the former USSR. Balanced foreign trade, 
state control over the dynamics of the exchange rate, and 
regulation of a positive payments balance are necessary for 
mutual recognition of the quotations of national currencies. 
Russia's relations with Western partners from the far abroad are 
similar to the relations of the countries of the near abroad to 
Russia. 
  To do this, the CIS countries need to take measures on 
currency regulation and control which ensure that currency 
earnings are returned during trade with Russia, measures similar 
to those which Russia takes in relation to trade with the West. 
The damage done to a country's economy because of the drain of 
capital to Russia or the West undermines the basis for 
settlement of accounts among the CIS countries. The situation 
with the medium-term balance of payments among the countries of 
the near abroad has deteriorated. Moreover, I must mention that 
the activity of the Central Bank of the CIS (if such a thing is 
created) and of the Interstate Bank must be stable and 
independent of the political situation. 
  Commercial banks help resolve day-to-day problems fairly 
well--interstate settlement of accounts among enterprises and 
the like, but they simply are unable to resolve more global 
questions such as stabilization of currencies and their 
quotations and regulation of the payment balance. That is the 
task of the Interstate Bank. But there are certain difficulties 
in organizing its work: as of today the capital stock has not 
been formed and the parties are not properly interested in its 
work. Today R5 billion (the amount of the bank's declared 
capital stock) is clearly not enough to support continuous 
settlement of accounts, and that may lead to the revival of the 
practice of offering technical credits. 
  M. Bronshteyn, the economics consultant at Estonia's 
embassy to the Russian Federation: Introducing a national 
currency in the summer of 1992 was advantageous for both Russia 
and Estonia. For Russia because it had stopped subsidizing the 
republic's economy. But for Estonia its own currency allowed it 
to establish and maintain a set rate in relation to the German 
mark and thereby check escalating inflation. The problem of 
settlement of accounts was immediately solved--commercial banks 
rather than the Central Bank make all payments. There is no 
problem of nonpayments in the republic. The fixed level of the 
Estonian kroon is the result of the independence of commercial 
banks and the absence of any settlement of accounts through the 
republic's Central Bank whatsoever; legislative restriction on 
the volumes of emissions; and the exclusive use of the kroon for 
payments and personal savings. 
  The possibility of normal settlement of accounts is based on 
this. But there can be a healthy currency only with a healthy 
balance. The introduction of world prices for oil and gas was a 
shock for Estonia too, and the problem of maintaining the 
equilibrium of the balance was extremely complicated. Despite 
strong competition on world markets, Estonia has reoriented the 
economy to trade with the West. 
  The deputy director of the Russian Academy of Sciences 
Institute of Europe, S. Karagenov, noted that all countries 
must recognize the absurdity of building a superstructure 
without a foundation and discussing minor questions before 
resolving global problems. If at least Russia decides what it 
wants and works out a long-term concept of development of 
economic and political cooperation with the countries of the 
former USSR, that alone will fundamentally facilitate the 
adoption of decisions on particular problems in cooperation with 
the CIS countries. 
  In the opinion of representatives of the Rossiyskiy 
kredit Bank, conversion of currencies with the 
participation of the national banks of the CIS countries is made 
difficult by ambitions regarding local currencies. Enterprises 
are obliged to sell ruble earnings at too low a rate and that 
causes prices to rise and earnings to be hidden. The lack of 
rubles at both national banks and at enterprises complicates the 
normal passage of payments to Russia. It is necessary to expand 
the group of participants in trade in "soft" currency and 
liberalize RF legislation in relation to CIS residents in order 
to resolve these problems. 
  The TOKObank advisor, A. Barnovskiy: The Russian 
ruble does not necessarily have to be the means for settling 
accounts among the CIS countries. A technically unified currency 
can be created on the basis of a weighted basket of national 
currencies. Today the multiple exchange rates of national 
currencies create speculation on cross rates, thereby causing 
the reciprocal export of inflation. The task of the Interstate 
Bank is clearing balances on unbalanced payments and regulating 
the net balance using credits, goods, securities, property, and 
so forth. 
  The advisor of the Center for European Policy Research, 
D. Gros, noted that using the experience of the European 
Community [EC] to create a system of payments in the states of 
the former USSR is problematical. 
  The point is that the structure of trade within the EC was 
very similar--most of them export and import similar goods. In 
contrast, the structures of the economies of the countries of 
the former USSR are fundamentally different. Some are exporters 
of raw materials, others depend on exports of agricultural 
goods, and yet others export industrially produced goods. 
Consequently, these countries have completely different 
interests and are subject to the influence of changes in the 
world economy in a different way. For example, higher prices for 
oil on the world market are good for some countries but require 
strict regulation for others. But in the EC all countries react 
the same way. 
  The second condition for successful integration into the EC 
was complete consensus on questions of economic policy. The tax 
systems of the EC member countries are similar, and stable 
prices and a stable national currency are a goal of 
monetary-credit policy common to all. The tax policy ensures a 
limited budget deficit in such a way that the government can 
service its debt without escalating inflation. There is no such 
accord among the countries of the former USSR now. Different 
countries are at different stages of reform; not one of them has 
stabilized its currency and there is not even accord on the 
question of the desirability of stabilizing it. 
  Until recently the CIS countries were part of one strongly 
integrated economy, and commodity exchange among the USSR 
republics was more intensive than among the EC countries. But a 
large part of the trade ties created in the past cannot be 
maintained for a long time. In the long run, all the CIS 
countries will trade more with other countries, especially with 
the EC countries, than with one another. For example, Russia's 
turnover with other former USSR republics now is roughly only 
one-third of the trade with the rest of the world. 
  The following conclusion can be drawn from what has been 
said: the countries of the former USSR do not now form an 
"optimal currency space." That is to say, from the purely 
economic standpoint, it would be unprofitable to create a common 
currency space with a common central bank. So the probability of 
the successful survival of the "new type of ruble zone" is 
small. Nonetheless, there is potential to stop the breakdown of 
mutual trade. To do this, all quotas, licenses, and tariffs on 
trade within the CIS must be abolished. The new national 
currencies must be stabilized and made convertible. Only then is 
the normalization of mutual payments possible. 
  The opinions expressed by the conference participants did 
not 
always match or did not completely match. But the question of 
the possibility of creating a common economic space and 
reintegration and accordingly the need to create special forms 
of unification of the CIS countries in order to handle 
international settlement of accounts, especially in the form of 
a "new ruble space," was the main disagreement between the 
representatives of the Center for European Policy Research and 
the Russian participants. 
  The question of creating a system of mutual settlement of 
accounts can be reduced not to the technical problem of 
organization, stabilization, and so forth, but to a political 
one: are the participating states (of the Interstate Bank or the 
ruble zone, for example) really ready to give up some of their 
interests and rights for the sake of creating an overall 
efficient system? For an "overall efficient" system will have 
some partial inconveniences for each participant. And now when 
young states which have just been formed are worried about 
preserving their "sovereignty" and "independence," can they 
abandon certain of their national ambitions? The answer is not 
an unequivocal one. 
  Another aspect is that the states which have been formed 
have 
different structures of economies, at times very irrational 
ones, and are at different levels of development and accordingly 
have different economic interests. So combining monetary systems 
may seem altogether economically unprofitable for some countries. 
  But if for subjective (political) or objective reasons, 
certain CIS countries lack incentive, then naturally there will 
be neither energetic work nor results. 
  In addition to that, there are altogether real 
contradictions 
among the subjects of the market within the country as well. For 
example, in most CIS countries there are contradictions between 
the state's goals (raising the exchange rate of its currency in 
relation to the ruble, supporting the national economy through 
its inflationary financing, and regulating currency in order to 
prevent the drain of capital) and the needs of enterprises 
(normal organization of interstate payments and the opportunity 
to freely buy and sell rubles and other currency at other than 
the real rate) as well as the needs of commercial banks which 
want to be able to work on the currency market unhindered. 
  The following conclusion may be drawn from everything which 
was said above: first of all, it must be clarified whether those 
countries for which integration is intended are interested in 
integration. Otherwise, even the optimal system worked out is in 
danger of not being realized in practice. Even with great 
incentive, the sides face a long path of realization in stages, 
one which has taken the countries of the European Community, for 
example, 50 years. 

