Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Newsletter" by XINHUA reporters Zou Aiguo (6760 1947 0948) </F>
and Tang Weibin (0781 5898 1755): "The Great Undertaking of the 
Three Gorges Project Will Shine a Thousand Years To Come -- A 
Report on Premier Li Peng's Inspection of the Three Gorges 
Project"] 
  [Text] Yichang, 23 Dec (XINHUA) -- Standing on the central 
axis line at the future worksite of the Great Three Gorges Dam 
with a pair of binoculars, Premier Li Peng commanded a full view 
of the water near him and a mountain in the distance. 
  The Tanzi Mountain is on the left bank and the Baiyanjian 
Mountain is on the right bank; a bustling worksite and the 
rushing Changjiang are also in view. 
  On 20 December 1993, accompanied by Chen Jinhua, minister of 
the State Planning Commission; Guo Shuyan and Li Boning, deputy 
directors of the State Council Three Gorges Project Construction 
Committee; and Jia Zhijie, governor of Hubei, Premier Li Peng 
arrived in Sandouping to inspect the preparatory work for the 
Three Gorges Project. 
  Sandouping, 40 kilometers away from Hubei Province's Yichang 
City, is the dam site for the Changjiang Three Gorges Key Water 
Control Project, a project that has attracted worldwide 
attention. The Three Gorges Project officially entered the 
preparatory stage on 26 July this year. The earth-and-stone 
work on the building of the cofferdam, the first stage of the 
project, began on 24 October on the right side of the river bed. 
The roaring sound of the motor shook and awoke the sleepy 
valley. 
  Ascending the platform of the Zhongbaodao cofferdam, Li Peng 
gazed in the distance. Great changes have taken place here 
during the past year. Zhongbaodao was quiet when Li Peng 
inspected the Three Gorges on 25 November 1992. But now the 
first stage earth- and-stone-work of the cofferdam task has 
begun. The experimental section of the 750-meter cofferdam, 
which was completed at the end of June, has stood the test of 
the peak of the flood season. 
  Standing in front of the "Map of the Changjiang Three Gorges 
Key Water Control Project," General Manager Lu Youmei and Deputy 
General Manager He Gong of the China Changjiang Three Gorges 
Project Development Corporation briefed Li Peng and others on 
preparations for the project, pointing out that the major 
objectives of this year's preparatory work have been basically 
realized following five months' efforts. 
  Li Peng said: "The project's preparatory work involves a 
heavy workload. We must do a good job. As we are building here 
the most modern and first-rate project in the world, we must set 
first-rate engineering standards." 
  A white central axis line was painted on the center of the 
platform of the cofferdam. Li Peng looked at the Baiyanjian 
Mountain in the right bank with his binoculars. He asked: "What 
is the height of this mountain peak?" Wei Yanzheng, deputy 
director of the State Council's General Office for the Three 
Gorges Project, replied: "240 meters above sea level." Li Peng 
continued: "After completion of the Three Gorges Project, the 
distance between that mountain peak and the 185-meter dam will 
only be 50-60 meters. You should build a forest park there to 
preserve the beautiful scenery and excellent ecological system 
in the dam zone. Turning around, Li Peng looked at the Tanzi 
Mountain in the distance on the left side of the bank and asked: 
"What about this peak?" "It is also about 200 meters above sea 
level," came the reply. 
  Li Peng walked up to the north side of the cofferdam's 
platform amid the din of the machine. Some 30 dump trucks were 
seen travelling back and forth to dump the full load of sand and 
stone into the river. Li Peng turned to Qiao Shengxiang, chief 
of the Gezhou Dam Engineering Bureau, who is responsible for 
building the cofferdam, and said: "Cofferdam building has a 
direct bearing on the formal beginning of the Three Gorges 
Project. You bear a great responsibility." Li Peng turned 
again to Lu Youmei: "The building of the Three Gorges Project 
must be mechanized. First-rate builders must be mobilized for 
this project." 
  Seeing Li Peng walking toward them on the cofferdam's 
platform, workers there greeted the arrival of the premier with 
warm applause, and Li Peng waved at them. Li Peng spoke to Chen 
Jinhua, Guo Shuyan, Jia Zhijie, Lu Youmei, and other comrades 
while walking on the platform: "We should introduce a 
competitive mechanism into the Three Gorges Project and adopt a 
bidding system so as to attract the most outstanding 
construction teams to the Three Gorges Project. Competition 
raises efficiency. A competitive mentality is needed in our 
effort to build a socialist market economy." 
  Li Peng showed concern for the Three Gorges Project, for the 
preparation of the project, and for millions of settlers. Prior 
to inspecting the project's preparatory site, he made a special 
trip to visit the people who were resettled at the Zhujiawan 
resettlement zone located at the lower reaches of the dam site. 
  The Three Gorges Project, being an extra-large and key 
water-control project, is confronted with a tough task of 
resettling the people. Premier Li Peng has repeatedly 
emphasized: "The success or failure of the Three Gorges Project 
depends on resettling the people." Following many years of 
experiments, the dam zone has gained many useful experiences in 
the work of resettling the people. The masses generally welcome 
the experiment, since then have experienced marked economic, 
social, and environmental benefits in various resettlement sites. 
  Walking on a gravel road, Li Peng headed toward a temporary 
resettlement area. Yichang County Head Chen Hua pointed at a 
residential building in the distance which is undergoing 
construction and told the premier: "That building is for the 
settlers. It can accommodate 162 settlers. A total of 92 
people from 26 households will move into their new houses before 
the Spring Festival. 
  With much interest, Li Peng inquired into the details of the 
new houses for settlers. In a makeshift house, Li Peng was 
found sitting together and chatting with the family of settler 
Zhou Bin. Li Peng asked: "How many rooms did you have in your 
former house?" "Two," came the reply. "What is the size of the 
new house?" "160 square meters." Li Peng smilingly said: "It 
is bigger than your former house." Zhou Bin said: "That is 
because of the meticulous arrangements made by the party and 
government." 
  Li Peng asked Zhou Bin again: "What was your original 
occupation? "I was a carpenter." "What have you done after 
moving?" "After moving here, I was recruited into the village's 
construction team." 
  Li Peng said: "Carpenters play a big role in house building; 
they make windows and furniture." Zhou Bin spoke with pride: 
"I make those things." Li Peng spoke in a tone of praise: "As 
you have skills, you will surely lead a comfortable life!" At 
this, Zhou Bin smiled. 
  Li Peng looked inside and outside the house of Zhou Bin. He 
said: "Your housing condition is much better than that of the 
house I was provided in Tangshan when I took part in post-quake 
relief work. I stayed in Tangshan for over three months. 
  After bidding farewell to the Zhous, Li Peng visited another 
makeshift house. Viewing the surroundings, Li Peng asked Yang 
Guanghua, master of the household, about the number of family 
members and the size of the house. The old man told him that he 
had 12 members in his family and that they lived in three big 
rooms. Li Peng said: "You surely have a big family with four 
generations living under one roof. Your housing condition will 
improve after moving into a new house." 
  During their chat, a woman holding a little girl walked into 
the house. The little girl said: "How are you, uncle?" Li Peng 
asked "What is your name?" "I am Yang Qin." The innocent look 
of the little girl made all at the scene laugh. 
  Li Peng moved around the neighborhood at the temporary 
settlement site. At one time, he was seen talking with the 
people, and at another, he was seen discussing the resettlement 
plan with provincial, city, and county level cadres. He said: 
"The Three Gorges Project will benefit future generations. A 
great number of settlers have made great sacrifices for the 
construction of the project. As the resettlement work affects 
many people, we must stick to the development-type resettlement 
policy and properly resettle them." 
  Li Peng spoke to comrades who are involved in the 
resettlement work: "Resettlement work requires comprehensive 
planning and must proceed in strict compliance with the 
"Changjiang Three Gorges Construction Project's Resettlement 
Regulations" promulgated by the State Council. It is necessary 
to determine short-term as well as long-term priorities in the 
resettlement work according to the progress of the project and 
to expedite the resettlement work on the premise of fund 
availability. The current priority should be given to 
resettling people who live near the proposed dam site." 
  "I greatly appreciate the slogan, `Serve the Great Three 
Gorges and Build a New Yinchang' advanced by Yichang City." Li 
Peng added: "The building of the Gezhou Dam has invigorated 
Yichang. The Three Gorges Project will paint an even more 
beautiful picture for Yichang's development prospects. Comrades 
in Yichang should foster the thinking of serving the Three 
Gorges Project and make positive contributions to the project." 
  When leaving Zhujiawan, Li Peng waved and bid goodbye to the 
people there. He wished them all a happy Spring Festival and 
hoped that they would enjoy their new houses. 
  Following the inspection of the Three Gorges Dam Zone, 
Premier Li Peng rushed to Yichang City by transiting through the 
Sandouping building site again. The roar of the drilling 
machines and the sound of the motor vehicles, like part of a 
majestic symphony, reverberated along the great rushing river. 

