SUMMARY 

                              Damascus has touted the upcoming U.S.-Syria summit as a pivotal 
point in the peace process, while alternating between optimism 
and skeptical reserve over prospects for the meeting's success- 
-an overall tack that serves both to underscore Syria's 
importance and set a positive atmosphere for the meeting, while 
deflecting blame should the summit yield no results, leave 
Washington dissatisfied, or be marred by regional violence. 
Clearly intent--at least in advance of the summit--on revealing 
no further political cards beyond its commitments to Washington 
on Israeli MIAs and exit permits for Syrian Jews, Damascus has 
put the onus for success or failure on Washington, giving no 
signal that President Hafiz al-Asad will bring new ideas to the 
meeting on key peace process or bilateral issues.  Accordingly, 
while  Syria's public posture in recent weeks has emphasized a 
general commitment to peace, Damascus has continued to avoid any 
clearer indication of its vision of peace and has reiterated 
criticism of the PLO-Israeli Declaration of Principles (DOP), as 
well as support for Palestinian rejectionists and their armed 
struggle against Israel. 

                          END SUMMARY 

   As it did on the eve of the November 1990 summit meeting between 
then President George Bush and Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad, 
Damascus has used the 16 December summit between al-Asad and 
President Clinton to highlight Syria's regional stature and key 
role in the Arab-Israeli peace process.  Repeatedly portraying 
the meeting as a milestone on the road to a comprehensive Arab- 
Israeli peace, Foreign Minister Faruq al-Shar' was quoted by 
Damascus radio as saying, "We look forward with optimism to the 
summit meeting in order to achieve results and successes that 
would help establish a just and comprehensive peace in the region 
on the basis" of UN resolutions and "the land-for-peace 
principle" (10 January).  For their part, Syria's closely 
controlled media have touted the summit as clear recognition by 
Washington that no Palestinian-Israeli agreement will succeed in 
the absence of a breakthrough on the Syrian-Israeli track.  For 
example, a commentary in the daily Al-Ba'th, as reported by 
Damascus radio on 3 January, asserted that "the recent U.S. move 
[to convene the summit] came after the U.S. Administration felt 
that the entire peace process was in danger, especially since it 
is now convinced . . . that partial, separate solutions would 
never achieve genuine peace." 
   Depicting the U.S. side as having primary responsibility for the 
summit's success, some media commentaries have anticipated that 
Washington will bring new momentum to the peace process, while 
others have cautiously withheld judgement.  A Damascus radio 
commentary on 2 January claimed that President Clinton "would not 
have arranged this meeting if he did not have anything new to 
justify efforts to push the peace process forward . . . ."  A 
subsequent radio commentary suggested the same, adding that 
"Syria is ready to listen to the ideas of the U.S. President and 
his convictions, but not on the basis of ceding what we struggle 
for and believe in."  Implicitly urging Washington to put 
pressure on Israel, the commentary concluded that "what remains 
to be seen are the actions of the U.S. Administration . 
toward the party that places hurdles and sets ambushes along the 
path of peace" (10 January).  The same theme was repeated in other 
commentaries, including one that claimed U.S.-Syrian cooperation 
"is apt to yield good fruits in the Geneva summit if the Clinton 
Administration shoulders its responsibility seriously and 
effectively to convince the Israeli rulers to comply with the 
terms of peace and to fully withdraw from the occupied 
territories" (Damascus radio, 13 January). 

   Several media commentaries have been more cautious in forecasting 
the results of the summit, citing alleged Israeli machinations to 
undermine it.  A Damascus radio commentary on 8 January asserted 
that, despite what it claimed were American expectations of 
"substantive progress" in the peace process stemming from the 
summit, "we do not want to prejudge things or express excessive 
optimism due to Israel's history of destroying peace opportunities 
and creating obstacles."  Other commentaries have vented particular 
ire at Israeli statements, most recently by Major General Yitzhaq 
Mordekhay, commander of the Israel Defense Forces Northern Command, 
calling on Syria to rein in Hizballah guerrillas in southern Lebanon 
who might provoke incidents to mar the summit (Tel Aviv Ha'aretz, 6 
January).  Referring specifically to Mordekhay's statement, an 
editorial in the daily Al-Thawrah reported by Damascus radio on 8 
January declared, "Perhaps it is not surprising that we are seeing 
desperate attempts and various techniques to disturb the summit," 
adding that "in this context we understand Israel's statements--or 
rather threats . . . about a military escalation in southern 
Lebanon."  The editorial claimed that the statements were part of 
an effort to "influence [the] results" of the summit "or derail 
it."  Even prior to Mordekhay's statement, Syrian media 
commentaries already had warned against Israeli "intrigues" and 
"disinformation campaigns" said to be aimed at undermining 
Syria's position at the summit (Damascus radio, 2 January; Al- 
Ba'th, as reported by Damascus radio on 4 January, respectively). 

   Khaddam, Media, Emphasize Peace 

   Since Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit to the region 
last month, Damascus has taken pains to emphasize its general 
commitment to peace, but without going any further than it 
already has toward spelling out the nature of peace it envisions 
with Israel--one of the major stumbling blocks in the Israeli- 
Syrian negotiations.  This approach was apparent in Vice 
President 'Abd-al-Halim Khaddam's address to a conference of Arab 
media officials on 4 January.  The address was mildly reminiscent 
of al-Asad's September 1992 "peace of the brave" speech--an 
oration intended to signal Syrian readiness for peace but 
composed nonetheless to sound unyielding and defiant.  According 
to Damascus radio's account of his speech, Khaddam declared that 
"we mean by peace a peace that will enable us to regain all our 
territories and the Palestinian Arab people's national rights" 
and stressed that "there will never be a peace that is not 
honorable and that does not guarantee our full rights."  He 
added, "The peace we want is the one of which we and our future 
generations will be proud, no matter how bad or complicated the 
circumstances become," saying that "for us, an inch of land 
represents the dignity, honor, and future of our country." 

   As reported by the London-based Arabic language weekly Al-Hayah, 
but not mentioned in the Damascus radio account, Khaddam also 
touched on the issue of normalization of relations with Israel--a 
reference that Israeli media seized upon with enthusiasm as a 
favorable signal to Israel (Al-Hayah, 5 January; Jerusalem Qol 
Yisra'el, 7 January, respectively).  According to the Al-Hayah 
account, Khaddam asserted--evidently in replying to a question-- 
that recognition of Israel and normalization of relations fall 
within "the framework of the concept of peace and this is 
currently a subject for negotiation," but that it is "premature 
to refer to one vision [of peace] or another."  Although 
Khaddam's reported comments gave no suggestion of Syrian 
willingness to normalize relations with Israel and were not 
mentioned in the Syrian account, they were more forthcoming than 
President al-Asad's response to a question on the same subject 
last spring.  Al-Asad, sounding irritated, then claimed that "the 
Syrian side has answered" the question of normalization already, 
accused Israel of using the issue "to obstruct the peace march," 
and declared that "peace is peace" and "there are not many 
interpretations of it" (Damascus TV, 27 March 1993). 

   For their part, Syrian media in recent weeks have demonstrated a 
particular concern with image-building prior to the summit by 
emphasizing the general theme of peace.  While not addressing 
Israel's demand that Syria spell out its concept of peace prior 
to Israel's defining how extensive a withdrawal it will make on 
the Golan, commentaries have implied that Syria's concept of 
peace would satisfy the Israelis. 

   --A Damascus radio commentary on 16 December stressed that, in 
putting forth the formula of "full peace in exchange for full 
withdrawal," Syria "announced that it means what it says and is 
ready for everything that this formula entails, provided Israel 
accepts it."  The same theme appeared in a 13 January Al-Ba'th 
editorial, which asserted that "Syria is committed to the peace 
it advocates and to all of its dimensions and results" (Damascus 
radio, 13 January). 

   --A Damascus radio commentary on 4 January asserted that "in 
return for Israeli withdrawal from all occupied territories, 
Israel would reap the fruit of peace on all tracks without 
exception."  It added that, while "neither Syria nor Lebanon will 
listen to Israel to conclude separate deals," Israel "will 
receive a favorable response if it really seeks an honorable, 
comprehensive, and just peace." 

   Criticism of PLO, DOP 

   In the weeks leading up to the summit, Damascus has continued to 
make clear its anger at the PLO for secretly negotiating an 
agreement with Israel.  Although Syrian officials have been 
characteristically more circumspect than have media commentaries 
in criticizing the DOP, they have left no doubt about the Syrian 
stand toward the PLO since the document's signing on 13 
September.  For example, in comments quoted by Syria's official 
news agency, SANA, on 27 December, al-Shar' implied that the PLO 
leadership would be virtually excluded from any further attempts 
at Arab coordination on the peace process.  "It is regrettable 
that one Arab side has abandoned inter-Arab coordination," al- 
Shar' was quoted as saying at the end of a visit to Amman, adding 
that "we hope this will be compensated by coordination among the 
other Arab sides . . . in the next phase." 

   Media commentaries have appeared almost to gloat as talks on 
implementation of the DOP have met difficulty and when it has 
seemed that the Palestinian side had been forced to make 
concessions to Israel.  A Damascus radio commentary on 21 
December declared that "those who signed the Oslo agreement and 
deviated from the unified Arab position and the constants of the 
just and comprehensive solution are reaping bitter fruit today." 
A subsequent editorial in Al-Ba'th asserted that "the Oslo 
agreement has begun to collapse under Zionist pressures" as "even 
the flawed and fragile autonomy accord appears to be rejected by 
the Israelis" (Damascus radio, 5 January). 

   Other media commentaries have portrayed the PLO leadership as 
treasonous capitulators and subjects of Israeli manipulation and 
have made clear Syria's backing for those Palestinians seeking to 
obstruct implementation of the accord. 

   --"There is a great difference," claimed an Al-Ba'th editorial, 
"between the heroes and those who have surrendered and 
disregarded the blood of the martyrs and sold it very cheaply". 
The editorial added: "We pin high hopes on those heroes who 
achieve victory through their sacrifices and who defeat all plans 
of surrender" (Damascus radio, 20 December). 

   --An editorial in the daily Tishrin declared that "Israel's 
effort to save 'Arafat is too late."  Claiming that "the 
intifadah has moved into higher gear," it asserted that "'Arafat has 
no control over the situation within or outside the occupied Arab 
territory."  It attributed the "desperate but futile" PLO attempts 
to fulfill its commitment to end violence in the occupied 
territories to the "Palestinian people's steadfastness" and "their 
mounting rejection of the agreement," as well as to a "determined 
Syrian stance that has kept the Arab position from unraveling and 
the Arabs from giving in to Israel's ambitions and terms" (21 
December). 

   Coverage of Rejectionists 

   At the same time, Syrian media, which are often selective in 
their reporting, have continued periodically to cover statements 
by PLO constituent, Palestinian rejectionist, and militant 
Islamic groups opposed to the accord.  For example, Damascus 
radio on 16 December carried a relatively lengthy report on a 
rally marking the anniversary of the Palestinian intifadah, at 
which officials of the Popular Front for the Liberation of 
Palestine (PFLP), the Democratic Front for the Liberation of 
Palestine (DFLP), and Lebanon's Hizballah denounced the DOP. 
Monitored Syrian media, which generally avoid reporting on the 
activities of Damascus-backed Palestinians, did report at some 
length on the formation of a new rejectionist umbrella 
organization--"Alliance of the Palestinian Forces"--aimed at 
opposing the DOP (Al-Ba'th, 7 January).  The full text of the 
group's announcement, which declared the need to topple the 
Gaza-Jericho accord, had been aired on 6 January on al-Quds 
radio, the Syrian-based station of Ahmad Jibril's Democratic 
Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command. 

   Support for Attacks in Occupied Territories 

   Recent Syrian news reporting and commentary have also expressed 
support, both directly and indirectly, for continued armed 
struggle against Israel, in one instance clearly including 
attacks on civilian settlers--a trend consistent with Damascus' 
longstanding differentiation between what it regards as 
legitimate resistance to occupation and terrorism.  A 28 December 
commentary on Damascus radio's Palestine Broadcast program--a 
daily feature on the Palestinian issue--referred to an earlier 
assassination of two settlers on the West Bank as an "execution" 
of "two criminal saboteurs."  Referring to the common chants by 
Israeli extremists of "death to the Arabs," the commentary 
concluded: "Arab strugglers have grasped the significance of this 
slogan sufficiently to train their guns on the invading and 
subversive parasites to teach them through the muzzle of the gun 
that they have either of two choices--get killed or clear out." 
A subsequent editorial in Tishrin warned somewhat less stridently 
that "no single Zionist settler will experience comfort or peace 
as long as the Golan is occupied" (Damascus radio, 6 January). 

   Syrian media have also continued occasionally to report 
statements by organizations claiming responsibility for or 
threatening attacks against Israeli targets, particularly in the 
occupied territories.  Thus, as recently as 6 January, Damascus 
TV reported a statement by a spokesman for Hamas in Jordan in 
which he threatened "to carry out major operations in the 
occupied territories," noting an increasing use of "automatic 
weapons and suicide operations." 

   Syrian Jews, Israeli MIAs 

   Although Damascus has avoided public discussion of promises made 
to Washington on issuing exit permits to all Syrian Jews who 
request them and helping investigate the fate of seven Israeli 
MIAs--promises announced by Secretary Christopher at the end of 
his last visit--it portrayed the issue on the eve of the summit as 
having been resolved.  Damascus radio thus quoted Rabbi Ibrahim 
Hamra, the spiritual leader of Syria's Jewish community, as telling 
the London weekly Al-Hayah that "the issue of the Mosaic community 
in Syria is all but settled" (11 January).  Evidently reflecting 
Syrian sensitivity on this matter, the radio omitted any more 
specific remarks by Hamra clarifying the nature of "the issue." 
According to Al-Hayah's account, Hamra specified that "some 550 
exit visas have been issued at the rate of 30 a day" and that 350 
applicants had yet to receive their visas. 

   Implications 

   Always concerned that Syria's stature as a key regional player be 
duly recognized, the Syrians--who have been seething over the 
PLO-Israel accord and the ensuing lavish Washington signing 
ceremony--view the summit itself as a significant gain.  Syria's 
interest in improving bilateral ties with the United States 
evidently has prompted it to yield on the issue of Syrian Jews by 
moving toward fulfillment of its promise to Secretary Christopher. 
How much further it is willing to go to ingratiate itself with 
Washington and challenge Israel with a significant new gesture is 
unclear, but Syrian media behavior offers no hint of an imminent 
breakthrough.  While al-Asad may go a bit further in indicating 
his willingness to seek a genuine settlement with Israel, he will 
undoutedly reiterate his longstanding demand for full Israeli 
withdrawal from the Golan.  In any event, the media's focus on 
alleged Israeli obstructionism will likely redouble should the 
summit fail to make progress on either the peace process or 
bilateral ties. 

(AUTHOR: BROWN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703-6094.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/jf 14/0022 JAN 

