CSO 

<F P=106> [Rendition of report by D.N. Nagumanov, minister of finance </F>
of the Republic of Tatarstan: "On Implementation of the Republic 
Budget for 1993 and the Draft Republic Budget for 1994"] 
  [Text] Esteemed people's deputies! 
  A total of 854 billion rubles [R] in taxes and revenues was 
collected in the territory of the republic last year, of which 
R529 billion was credited to the republic budget. 
  The rayon and city budgets were implemented with a surplus 
of 
revenues over expenditures of R12.9 billion, and the republic 
budget--with a surplus of R9.8 billion. 
  The expenditures of the consolidated 1993 budget came to 
R833 
billion, or 98.5 percent of the revenues raised. 
  Expenditures for the national economy account for the 
greatest proportion of the overall volume of expenditures in the 
republic--45.5 percent. The same percentage of expenditures in 
this section of the budget was planned in the projected 
consolidated budget. 
  Expenditures of the national economy from the republic 
budget 
were made in the amount of R180.4 billion, or 34.7 percent of 
all expenditures. 
  The expenditures of agriculture and other sectors of the 
agro-industrial complex, including subsidies, account for the 
largest proportion of the expenditures for the national economy 
out of the republic budget (65.7 percent). An additional R84.3 
billion was allocated from the republic budget for the 
development of these sectors. 
  With a view to supporting goods producers, rates of grants 
per unit of animal husbandry output far exceeding those 
officially established by the Russian Government were used in 
the republic through all of last year. For example, by the end 
of the year this rate was exceeded by a factor of almost seven 
for milk, more than eight for cattle, and more than nine for 
hogs. 
  The total amount of budget expenditures for the payment of 
subsidies for animal husbandry output in 1993 came to R80.3 
billion, which exceeds the projected statistic by a factor of 
almost three. 
  The establishment of higher rates of subsidization for the 
products of animal husbandry made it possible to contain the 
sharp growth of retail prices for the principal products of 
animal husbandry during the entire year. For other types of 
foodstuffs, the differences between wholesale transfer prices 
and retail prices were refunded with a view to making foodstuffs 
cheaper. About R25 billion was spent out of the budget for these 
purposes, which exceeds the projected level by a factor of 
almost four. 
  Some R42.1 billion was allocated to finance capital 
investment in agriculture; it was mostly used to defray 
expenditures for the construction of intrafarm roads, social, 
cultural, and consumer service facilities and housing, and for 
provision of gas in rural areas. 
  A total of R178 billion was allocated to develop the 
agro-industrial complex. The proportion of expenditures of the 
agro-industrial complex in the republic budget came to 25 
percent. 
  Subsidies coming to R18 billion (of which R15 billion to the 
enterprises of the Tatavtotrans) were allocated from the 
republic budget in 1993 to various transportation enterprises in 
order to cover losses in conjunction with the use of regulated 
rates of fares in urban and commuter transit. 
  Certain measures were taken in the reporting year to 
reinforce social protection for employees of the sociocultural 
sphere and low-income strata of the population. Expenditures 
from the consolidated budget for this purpose came to R306.3 
billion, or 35.5 percent of all expenditures. 
  The largest sums within this section of budgetary 
expenditures were allocated for public education and health care. 
  The expenditures of the republic budget to maintain the 
organs of state power and government exceeded R6 billion last 
year, and increased by a factor of 4.4 compared to the projected 
level. 
  Compared to the projection, outlays on maintaining the law 
enforcement organs increased by a factor of almost five, and 
came to R17.8 billion. 
  An amount of R39.8 billion was allocated to fund centralized 
capital investment made at the facilities of local soviets. 
  An amount of R127 billion, or R96 billion more than called 
for by the projection, was provided out of the republic budget 
as financial support in the form of grants to rayons and cities 
given in the course of mutual settlements. 
  Some R67.7 billion in loans and credit from the republic 
budget was extended in order to replenish the working capital of 
enterprises and organizations with a view to promptly solving 
important problems of a social and economic nature, which 
exceeds the level of last year by a factor of two. 
  During the reporting year, R310 billion were allocated to 
the 
republic budget for supplemental expenditures. This was 
necessitated by multiple increases in the wages of the employees 
of institutions financed from the budget, the systematic growth 
of the size of scholarships for the students of educational 
establishments, monthly compensatory payments for families with 
children, social benefits, and allowances for children paid to 
single mothers and other categories of the population, the 
growth of material costs in conjunction with growing prices for 
energy resources and other types of products, work, and 
services, the implementation of decisions of the Supreme Soviet 
on the priority development of the key sectors of the national 
economy, and the carrying out of programs adopted by the Supreme 
Soviet. 
  The speaker stressed that the year 1993 came to an end with 
a 
lot of strain, despite the apparently favorable implementation 
of the revenue side and the presence of a certain surplus of 
revenues over expenditures (R9.8 billion, or 1.8 percent). 
Individual directives and decrees of the government on the 
allocation of budgetary appropriations to defray the 
expenditures made, mainly in capital construction, were not 
executed in the fourth quarter because of a lack of funds. Total 
arrears by the end of the year exceeded R80 billion. 
  The areas of expenditure mentioned testify to the fact that 
the supplemental budgetary funds were allocated strictly within 
the framework of the budgetary legislation of the republic to 
ensure the vital operations of the critical sectors of the 
republic's economy and social protection for low-income strata 
of the population, taking into account the priorities set by the 
Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Tatarstan. I ask that you 
confirm a report on implementation of the 1993 republic budget 
in the amount of R529.5 billion on the revenue side and R519.7 
billion on the expenditure side, with a surplus of revenues over 
expenditures coming to R9.8 billion. 
  The 1994 budget message of the president of the republic is 
also submitted to you for consideration. The government worked 
on it for a long time. Since the message was submitted to the 
Supreme Soviet, it has been thoroughly worked on by standing 
commissions, and has been repeatedly discussed at the meetings 
of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. Within the government 
itself, painstaking work has continued to refine a projection of 
socioeconomic development and individual provisions of the 
budget. We could not fail to take into account the results of 
the first quarter of this year. For this reason, the government 
is compelled to submit a second version of the main documents 
that make up the budget message. 
  The main proposals that will be reflected in the findings of 
permanent commissions will form the foundation for the operation 
of the government, just as in the previous year. 
  We must admit frankly that the financial situation in the 
republic is unprecedentedly difficult. Both the slump in 
production in the republic and the nonpayments crisis, which 
became cataclysmic by the end of last year, are the main 
reasons. As a consequence, large arrears in payments to the 
budget emerged in the process. The failure of the budget to take 
in the planned amount of funds prevented the government from 
financing to the full extent the projects envisioned by the 
budget. The backlog of last year was carried forward to this 
year and became an additional heavy burden. Particularly large 
arrears remain in funding for capital investment. Despite the 
measures taken, arrears in last year's payments to the 
construction sector have not been paid to this day. 
  The nonpayments crisis is growing worse. As of 1 April the 
accounts receivable of enterprises and organizations, i.e. the 
debts to our enterprises, came to R1.5 billion, whereas now they 
have exceeded the R2 trillion mark. According to the most 
conservative estimates, more than R300 billion which has not 
been contributed to the budget constitutes nonpayments. 
  The situation remains difficult. Only R250 billion was taken 
in by the budget of the republic in the first quarter, with 
projected estimate of intake being R600 billion. Hence the 
difficulties with funding current expenditures whereby arrears 
have emerged for the first time even in the payment of wages to 
employees of institutions financed from the budget, to say 
nothing about other expenditure items in the budget. 
  Under the circumstances, various measures, at times 
desperate 
measures, to improve the situation in settlements between the 
enterprises of the Republic of Tatarstan have been taken in the 
republic: Mutual debts have been offset, including relationships 
with the budget, and the circulation of bills of exchange has 
been introduced. We have even succeeded in getting enterprises 
located outside of Tatarstan involved in such circulation. 
  We can now say that the republic has succeeded in 
undertaking 
a number of large projects in the national economy, primarily in 
the agro-industrial complex, as well as those to support the 
Kama Automotive Plant, some construction organizations, etc., 
solely due to such measures. 
  However, it is necessary to stress that it is extremely 
difficult for our government to radically change the situation 
under conditions whereby the lion's share of indebtedness to our 
enterprises for the products delivered is held by partners 
outside the republic. 
  The economy of the republic has been integrated into the 
economy of Russia, the CIS, and the world to such a degree that 
we are simply not in a position to counteract crisis phenomena 
without ameliorating the common economic space. Unfortunately, 
the Russian Government has so far not taken radical measures to 
fully resolve the nonpayments crisis. 
  I believe, the minister said, that we have succeeded in 
offering for the deputies' judgment the only possible budget 
which not only reflects present-day realities but also comes up 
with a projection for the future. 
  The income level has been forecast with average yearly 
prices 
growing by a factor of 2.59 compared to prices of the fourth 
quarter of 1993, profits growing by a factor of three, and the 
level of reduction in the physical volume of production coming 
to 17 percent. It would be absolutely incorrect to believe that 
the budget should be drawn up proceeding from today's situation. 
A realistic projection is definitely a necessity, which would 
make it possible to reflect the main directions of the budget 
policy and give the government an opportunity to work on 
accomplishing the tasks set by the Supreme Soviet. 
  The draft budget for the year [word illegible] was drawn up 
on the basis of the tax system in effect and proposals by 
ministries, departments, and the heads of administrations 
concerning the areas of fund disbursement, as well as measures 
to ensure a balanced budget. 
  At the initial stage the draft budget, which was drawn up on 
the basis of requests from ministries and departments and the 
indexes of the growth of prices to calculate certain budget 
expenditures, was put at R4.1 trillion on the expenditure side, 
proceeding from the volume of revenues in the amount of R 
[number illegible] trillion. The budget deficit was put at R1.5 
trillion, which exceeds 50 percent of the volume of revenues. 
Implementation of this budget could cause the financial 
situation of the republic to worsen sharply, the budget deficit 
to grow, expenditures not covered by revenues, and ultimately, 
the standard of living of the population to decline. 
  The concept of designing the budget system of the republic 
for 1994 is aimed mainly at ensuring the survival of the 
existing network of sociocultural institutions, providing social 
protection for the people, ensuring the completion of housing 
construction projects in progress and other facilities in the 
social sector which are nearing completion, and maintaining the 
necessary standard in the sectors of the national economy whose 
sectors and tariffs are regulated by the state. 
  What does the revenue side of the budget consist of? The 
principled position of the government is that the existing tax 
system is to be fundamentally changed. In the process, it is 
already difficult to make any proposals to amend tax legislation 
in the territory of the republic under the conditions of a 
common economic space and tax policy with the Russian 
Federation. For this reason, the government requests that the 
Supreme Soviet endow it with the necessary rights to grant 
relief of the main sources of taxes in the process of 
implementing the budget. 
  The raising of revenue sources in an amount exceeding R3.7 
trillion is projected in the republic as a whole. Under a treaty 
between the Government of the Republic of Tatarstan and the 
Government of the Russian Federation, between 20 and 23 percent 
of this will be transferred to the federal budget for the 
Russian Federation to exercise the powers delegated to it by 
Tatarstan and to carry out joint programs. The net revenue of 
the consolidated budget is projected to be about R3 trillion. 
  The following peculiarities are characteristic of the main 
sources of revenue in 1994. The value added tax is the largest, 
and at the same time the one whose impact on today's economy is 
ambiguous. The rates have not been changed, and come to 10 
percent for foodstuffs and merchandise for children and 20 
percent for other goods, work, and services. The intake of value 
added tax by the budget of the republic is projected to exceed 
R360 billion, or 12 percent of the total volume of revenues in 
1994. 
  Excise taxes, which call for appropriating for the budget 
additional profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages, tires 
for passenger cars, oil including gas condensate, fur products, 
and some other goods, are the next significant source of revenue 
for the state budget. The intake of excise tax by the budget of 
the republic is projected to exceed R720 billion, or 22 percent 
of the total volume of revenues. 
  Unlike value added tax, profit tax is an instrument that 
affects the pattern of the spending of funds by enterprises and 
organizations. In keeping with legislation in effect, it is 
envisioned to exempt from taxation up to 50 percent of the 
taxable profits of enterprise funds allocated for the retooling 
of production, construction and remodeling of facilities of 
social infrastructure, as well as conversion, repayment of 
credit, and replenishment of working capital. 
  The intake of profit tax in 1994 is projected to exceed R725 
billion. It is actually given in full to the local budgets; it 
is projected that less than one-third of the tax, or R232 
billion, will be taken in by the republic budget. 
  The receipt of individual income tax, the main source of 
revenue for local and in particular rural budgets, is projected 
to exceed R370 billion in 1994, with the growth of wages taken 
into account. 
  The total amount of budget receipts from resource user fees 
(the water fee, mineral fee, land fee) is projected to reach 
R104 billion. 
  Now about the special-purpose taxes to be introduced in 
1994. 
In keeping with Russian tax legislation, a transportation tax 
and a special tax for financial support of key sectors of the 
national economy have been introduced. The projection for them 
comes to R180 billion, or 6 percent of the volume of budgetary 
revenues. We recommend that the Supreme Soviet introduce two 
more taxes: a levy to meet the needs of educational institutions 
in the amount of 1 percent of the labor compensation fund of 
enterprises, organizations, and institutions, and a tax for 
maintenance of the housing stock and facilities of the 
sociocultural sector in the amount of 1.5 percent of the volume 
of product sales by enterprises. The projection for these two 
taxes comes to R156 billion, or 5 percent of the volume of 
budget revenues. 
  With a view to reinforcing the budgets of the local soviets, 
we propose to assign the property tax to the localities in full, 
the volume being more than R240 billion, or 8 percent of the 
volume of budget revenues. It is proposed to raise the level of 
the rate of this tax to 2 percent. 
  Subsequently, D.N. Nagumanov moved on to outline the budget 
policy of the economical disbursement of funds. The proportion 
of expenditures for maintaining sectors of the national economy 
is still considerable in the draft budget. The main task of the 
government is to gradually abandon comprehensive subsidization 
of the sectors of housing management and municipal facilities, 
passenger transportation by motor vehicles, and other sectors in 
which all residents of the republic enjoy preferences. It is 
necessary to make a gradual transition to a level of rates and 
the cost of services approximating actual outlays, with powerful 
social protection afforded at the same time to the least 
affluent strata of the population. 
  However, there are many objective difficulties in this 
instance. Thus, a clear-cut system of accounting for the incomes 
of citizens is lacking. Issues of registration of citizens by 
category have not been ultimately resolved at the local level; 
the mechanism of compensation for individuals in need of social 
protection has not been fully refined. This is why at present it 
is impossible to abandon the existing system of subsidization 
for the sectors of the national economy. As a result, it is 
expected that large sums will be allocated to offset the losses 
of the housing management sector and municipal services (R600 
billion) and to offset losses due to the use of regulated rates 
in highway, river, railway, and air transportation (about R100 
billion). 
  We propose to allocate more than R115 billion to maintain 
the 
departmental housing stock which will be, as needed, converted 
to municipal property and maintained out of the budget. 
  Support for the agro-industrial complex--the social 
development of rural areas, coverage for a proportion of the 
outlay of the producers of agricultural output on the 
acquisition of mineral fertilizer and pesticides, fundamental 
upgrading and reclamation of land, and so on--remains a priority 
area for budgetary expenditures. It is planned to allocate R370 
billion for these purposes. 
  It is envisioned to allocate about R250 billion as subsidies 
to the producers of agricultural output in order to maintain 
prices for food staples at a level affordable to the population 
of the republic. 
  It is proposed to allocate 20 [words illegible] for the 
conversion of enterprises in the defense complex. 
  Major funds are still planned for the sociocultural sphere. 
However, the current volume of envisioned expenditures for 
public education, culture, health care, and other sectors does 
not fully meet the now customary needs in this area in view of 
the absence of sufficient funds. 
  As far as expenditures for the maintenance of the organs of 
state power and government are concerned, the speaker stated 
that in the draft consolidated budget for 1994 they increased to 
2.4 percent compared to 2 percent of the actual expenditures 
based on the results of 1993. The main reason is found in the 
multiple increases in prices for the lease of premises, motor 
vehicle maintenance, municipal services, and office expenses. 
There is only way out: The strength of the government apparatus 
and the number of official passenger cars need to be cut deeply. 
  After protracted debate and discussions, a program of 
capital 
construction for the local soviets was set at a volume of R530 
billion. 
  In designing mutual relations between the republic budget 
and 
the budgets of the republic's rayons and cities, observed D.N. 
Nagumanov, the tasks of the government and the Ministry of 
Finance were to coordinate the entire economic potential of the 
republic with a view to stabilizing the situation in the 
national economy. The economic conditions are not the same for 
all regions at present. In some regions the defense complex with 
its problems prevails, whereas in others--highly profitable 
enterprises adapted to a market economy. At present, agriculture 
does not generate revenue for the budget at all, whereas the 
existing network of sociocultural institutions, as well as the 
production of agricultural output proper, require a large 
investment of capital. Therefore, the volume of subsidies and 
standard withholding rates were planned proceeding from the 
potential of the republic and individual regions to raise 
revenues, the structure of ownership in each rayon (city), and 
the need for all budgets to finance expenditures in keeping with 
the legislative and regulatory acts in effect. 
  In summation, the speaker stressed that the 1994 budget was 
drawn up with a considerable deficit, and even now is extremely 
difficult to comply with because of the current economic 
situation. Adjustments will have to be made continuously 
proceeding from the rapidly changing economic and financial 
situation. 

