BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jonathon Rees] </F>
  [Text] Maseru April 15 SAPA -- Two Commonwealth envoys 
arrived in the Lesotho capital Maseru on Friday [15 April] to 
probe the murder by dissident troops of Deputy Prime Minister 
Selometsi Baholo at his home early on Thursday morning. By 
Friday evening there had been no arrests or obvious government 
action on the killing, nor the kidnapping of four cabinet 
ministers who were released unharmed on Thursday night after a 
day in army barracks. 
  A government spokesman said an investigation was under way 
by 
military leaders. The government was unable on Friday to 
identify reasons for Thursday's events, although observers and 
diplomats pointed to an undisciplined military without loyalty 
to the one-year-old government of the Basotholand Congress Party 
[BCP]. 
  Soldiers continued to occupy strategic points on hills 
surrounding the capital on Friday, but told journalists this was 
routine. Short bursts of machine gun fire were heard in Maseru 
early on Friday morning. The city was otherwise quiet as 
residents went about their business. 
  Flags were not flown at half mast. However, the political 
situation remained "very tense", according to government 
spokesman Seeiso Sarutla. "The streets are not tense, but the 
situation is tense in government circles...they just lost their 
number two," a diplomat said. 
  Cabinet ministers and military leaders were unavailable for 
comment on Friday, and Prime Minister Ntsu Mokhehle, who is also 
minister of defence, declined to take questions from journalists 
after briefing Lesotho's Parliament and Senate. 
  There was no word from King Letsie III, who on Thursday 
convened an emergency sitting of his state council to deal with 
the crisis. 
  Lesotho's military is engaged in a long-standing dispute 
over 
demands for a 100 per cent wage increase. Government has lumped 
soldiers with civil servants and says all salaries are under 
review. 
  Conflict between soldiers over acceptance of a government 
pay 
offer saw two armed camps shell each other in Maseru earlier 
this year, prompting the Commonwealth to appoint an 
investigative task force. That force, in its report released 
recently, called for more dialogue between parties; a reduction 
in size of the 2,500 royal Lesotho Defence Force; and more 
government transparency. 
  Some observers said ministers targeted by the army were part 
of a clique resisting its demands and pressing for increased 
discipline and government control of the armed forces, which 
they said needed re-orientation towards serving a democratic 
government. 
  Mr Sarutla said the killing and kidnapping could have been 
an 
attempt to isolate Mr Mokhehle and render him ineffective. He 
said the new government had inherited an undisciplined force and 
was having problems imposing discipline. "As long as the army 
is undisciplined then the safety of everyone is under threat." 
  The Commonwealth emissaries who arrived on Friday, Mr Moses 
Anasu and Mr Max Gaylard, were scheduled to meet the prime 
minister and military leaders at the weekend in a bid to solve 
Lesotho's latest crisis. 
  The BCP holds 64 of the 65 parliamentary seats, having swept 
to power in March last year in the country's first democratic 
elections in 22 years. A BCP victory at the polls in 1971 was 
rejected by then Prime Minister Leabua Jonathan who banned the 
party and exiled many of its leaders. Jonathan was toppled by 
Gen Metsing Lekhanya in a military coup in 1986. 
  Gen Lekhanya was in turn overthrown in 1991 by a member of 
his military council, Gen Elias Ramaema, who led the country to 
elections in 1993. 
  South Africa was concerned at recent events in Lesotho and 
was ready to render all moral assistance to the landlocked 
mountain kingdom, South African Ambassador to Lesotho Gerhard 
Visser said. 

