BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in </F>
Tunis on 15 June--recorded] 
  [Excerpts] In the name of God, the merciful, the 
compassionate. Your majesties, your excellencies, ladies and 
gentlemen: We are now, with God's guidance and blessing, about 
to conclude our 30th regular summit meeting following three days 
of constructive talks and in-depth consultations on the 
situation on our African continent and on its future. [passage 
omitted] 
  Ladies and gentlemen: Thinking of a way to achieve the 
difficult balance between peace, security, and stability on the 
one hand, and development on the other, was at the focal point 
of our interest during this entire session. This was out of our 
belief in the tight link between these two elements. This has 
been reflected in all the results of our proceedings, as we 
exerted a large part of our efforts in examining ways to 
entrench the foundations of peace, security, and stability on 
our continent, not only by endeavoring to resolve tensions, but 
also by working to prevent any reasons that are likely to cause 
them. 
  Therefore, in our multilateral or bilateral talks, we 
devoted 
a great deal of interest to the settlement of conflicts raging 
in some of the African countries. We have been pleased at the 
first signs of detente that have begun to show in some of them. 
We have also tried as best as we could in some other cases to 
bring the conflicting sides closer and to urge them to look at 
the interests of their peoples before any other mutual and 
temporary considerations. 
  In this context, we have been satisfied with the cease-fire 
agreement reached by the two conflicting sides in Rwanda and 
their agreement to resort to dialogue and negotiation to settle 
the conflict between them. We consider the agreement reached 
here in Tunis on the occasion of this summit as a sign of hope 
with regard to similar issues. We have no doubt that your 
unanimity in adopting the honor charter--proposed by Tunisia as 
an additional tool to organize the links between our 
countries--constitutes a civilized commitment stemming from the 
deep-rooted heritage of our continent, which is based on the 
values of brotherhood, solidarity, and forgiveness. 
  Also, the eagerness shown by our states to support a 
mechanism to prevent conflicts and to manage and resolve 
them--and their readiness to participate in providing what is 
necessary to enable them to fully play their role--embodies the 
determination of all of us to rid our continent of the causes of 
conflict and its tragic consequences. [passage omitted] 
  Your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, in light of the 
profound changes witnessed in our contemporary world, it has 
become generally accepted that devoting ourselves to development 
is the only means of preparing to face the challenges of the 
next century. 
  Our realization of this fact was behind the special 
attention 
that we have given to the issue of development in our continent. 
[passage omitted] 
  We would like, in this context, to stop at two fundamental 
observations, the first of which is reflected in the keen 
interest shown by all the delegations in finalizing the Abuja 
treaty, which created the African economic community and the 
resolve to implement the strategy it had drawn within the 
framework of the endeavor to achieve more African integration 
and unification. 
  The second observation, which is closely linked to the 
first, 
is related to the necessity for coordinated, collective work to 
adapt to the new world market that will emerge in the shadow of 
the world trade organization. Undoubtedly, this market--which 
will be dominated by competition--will not be compassionate 
toward the weak. Therefore, we are called upon to carry out 
organized and patient work--not only to tackle the current 
situation, but also to look to the future and its possibilities 
in order to avoid being surprised with more pressures and 
restrictions that could be applied on us and could increasingly 
prevent our peoples from enjoying their resources. 
  Your majesties, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen: We 
cannot, at the end of our speech, help but praise our countries' 
firm determination to bolster the OAU and its structures and to 
furnish it with the necessary human and material means to carry 
out its tasks and services to our continent. 
  We would like to thank the OAU secretariat and all those who 
are working there for their tireless efforts. We would like to 
reiterate to them our total support. Also, we would like here 
to thank the media organizations and journalists for their 
coverage of this summit. [passage omitted] 

