BFN 

  [Text] Brasilia -- Venezuelan and Brazilian military forces 
will in the next few days implement a joint operation for 
removing the 136 gold miners who were illegally exploiting gold 
in the border zone between the two countries, near Roraima. The 
"Swann" column of GLOBO yesterday reported that the miners were 
besieged by Venezuelan soldiers, who last week intensified 
repression against miners in Venezuelan territory. 
  Acting Foreign Minister Roberto Abdenur yesterday reported 
that at the request of the Brazilian Government, Venezuela 
postponed an operation scheduled for this weekend to blow up the 
illegal airstrips that the miners had built in its territory. 
  "We asked for the postponement of the operation to avoid 
putting the Brazilian miners at risk," Abdenur said, adding that 
as a result of negotiations between the two countries, the 
possibility of unilateral action in the region has been ruled 
out. 
  Negotiations between the two governments began last week, 
after Brazilian gold miners charged that their camps had been 
attacked by Venezuelan forces. Itamaraty has reported that 
Venezuela is keeping the Brazilian Government informed about all 
the operations implemented against the miners. According to 
Itamaraty, during the first operation -- which was carried out 
on 1 April -- the miners resisted, one of them died, and two 
were wounded. The second operation was carried out 10 days 
later, its objective being to blow up the airstrips. 
  According to Abdenur, on 14 April the two countries began a 
coordinated operation to patrol the area and check the number of 
miners who are illegally operating in Venezuela. The patrolling 
is being done by military men from the Amazonas Military 
Command, the Army, and the Venezuelan National Guard. Abdenur 
emphasized that relations between the two countries are 
characterized by total cooperation. 
  According to the last reports received at the Roraima Public 
Security Secretariat, another eight miners were killed in a camp 
in Alto Amajari. Two miners who yesterday arrived in Boa Vista 
said that the attack was carried out by a beige helicopter used 
by the Venezuelan National Guard. A Roraima Civil Police 
helicopter was sent to the area, but found no evidence of the 
attack. Itamaraty has stated that it is not aware of this 
attack. 

