CSO 

<F P=106> [All quotation marks as published] </F>
  [Text] Hyderabad, March 20--The Bharatiya Janata Party 
President, Mr L.K. Advani, has asserted that Hindutva is the 
party's `ideological mascot'--the most distinctive feature of 
its identity and approach--and not a mere slogan. 
  In his opening remarks at the three-day National Executive 
meeting of the party which began here on Sunday, Mr Advani said 
Hindutva had been the hallmark of the party well before Ayodhya 
and would continue to be so "even after a magnificent Ram temple 
at the birth place of Rama becomes a fact of life." 
  He said the BJP believed that Indian secularism had its 
roots 
in Hindutva and the nation was secular because it was 
essentially Hindu. Theocracy was alien to Hindu tradition and 
history, he said. 
  Referring to the comments of the party's detractors on the 
`retreat of Hindutva' in the wake of the recent defeat of the 
party in the Assembly elections in the north, Mr Advani said 
that though the results had not measured up to the expectations 
of the party, they were in no way a setback to the party's 
ideology. 
  Mr Advani said for nearly four decades of Indian 
independence, Indian politics had been dominated by one single 
party--the Congress and all the elections were a combat between 
the Congress camp and non-Congress camp. In other words, 
elections were essentially a power struggle between the 
political haves and have-nots. Ideology was irrelevant to the 
confrontation. 
  "But the Ayodhya movement has changed all this. It has 
precipitated a national debate on what is the content of Indian 
nationalism and what is the true meaning of secularism as 
conceived by India's Constitution makers," he said. 
  The BJP believed that India was one country and that Indians 
were one people and the basis for this oneness was its age-old 
culture. "This concept of cultural nationalism is Hindutva," he 
asserted. 
  The BJP president said the Ayodhya movement had left such a 
deep impact on the people that even the worst opponents of the 
BJP had been forced to do some rethinking. Anti-BJPism might 
continue to be the great secular consensus but this was tempered 
by a grudging accommodation of Hindu sentiment. None of the 
parties talked any longer about reconstructing the Babri mosque 
at the site, he said. 
  Mr Advani said the politics of minority vote-banks had given 
birth to pseudo-secularism and the party had been carrying on a 
relentless crusade against it. "The Ayodhya movement marks a 
significant break-through in our efforts. The agitation enabled 
us to focus on Hindutva as an effective alternative to 
pseudo-secularism," he added. 
  Mr Advani described the talk about restarting the political 
process in Jammu and Kashmir as meaningless. While the situation 
in the State was so alarming, all that the government was doing 
was making periodical announcements about holding elections and 
restarting the political process. There was a total bankruptcy 
of policy on the domestic front, he said. 
  The first and foremost need was to restore the 
administration 
and curb insurgency in the valley with a firm hand, he said and 
suggested that if Pakistan's proxy war was to be defeated, its 
agencies in the administration must be ruthlessly weeded out. 
  It was a pleasant surprise to the BJP to find the government 
and other parties responding positively to its suggestion that 
Parliament adopt a unanimous resolution to let the international 
community know what was the nation's bottomline on the Kashmir 
issue, he said. 
  The party also took pride in the achievement of the Indian 
delegation led by Mr Vajpayee at the UN Human Rights Commission 
meet at Geneva in defeating Pakistan's bid to malign India, he 
added. 

