Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Amman, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- Differences have openly 
and officially erupted within the Islamic Action Front [IAF] in 
Jordan after a law suit was filed and a reply to it by three 
deputies was released in Amman yesterday. 
  The law suit was filed by IAF Executive Committee Member 
Ziyad Abu-Ghunaymah against three IAF deputies -- Hamzah Mansur, 
'Abd-al-Rahim al-'Akkur, and Dr. Mahmud 'Uwaydah -- who in turn 
issued a memorandum refuting Abu-Ghunaymah's claims. 
  The three deputies -- Mansur, who is considered to be the 
IAF 
spokesman, is the most prominent among them -- addressed a 
memorandum to House of Representatives Speaker Tahir al-Masri, 
ministers, deputies, and public opinion, repudiating the points 
made in Abu-Ghunaymah's complaint. 
  IAF sources have told AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT that the swift 
expulsion of Abu-Ghunaymah from the IAF and the Muslim 
Brotherhood has something to do with the political conflicts 
between the hawks and doves of the Islamic movement and the 
moderate stance taken by the IAF in relation to those who took 
part in the parliamentary elections. 
  In their memorandum, the three deputies said that the 
disagreement was mainly over the cancellation of Abu-Ghunaymah's 
candidacy for a seat in the House of Representatives because he 
was not unanmously supported in his constituency. 
  In his law suit against the three deputies, Abu-Ghuanymah 
requested that they should be stripped of their parliamentary 
immunity and brought to trial on charges of slander and 
defamation. 
  The problem originally started before the parliamentary 
elections in Jordan when the IAF preempted a number of 
candidates including Abu-Ghunaymah. It later transpired that 
the disagreement was over admission of new IAF members who were 
not acceptable to the IAF leadership itself. 
  Informed sources say that Abu-Ghunaymah's weight and 
influence in the IAF and the Muslim Brotherhood should not be 
underestimated, particularly among the young generation eager to 
operate in ways not acceptable to the traditional leadership. 
  The sources expect these differences to affect the unity of 
the Muslim Brotherhood, particularly as Abu-Ghunaymah runs the 
Muslim Brotherhood's Islamic Hospital and comes from northern 
Irbid, where his family is very influential and where the Muslim 
Brotherhood has a following which is bound to be affected by 
Abu-Ghunaymah's position. 

