Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Olga Semenova] </F>
  [Text] Moscow March 11 TASS -- The arrest of a Russian 
citizen accused of spying for Germany has been confirmed only 
very unwillingly by official representatives of either side 
involved. The reason does not lie in the Russian 
Counter-Espionage Service's modest desire to keep quiet about 
another success or in the German service's silent mourning of an 
agent. 
  There are many reasons, but the main one is that both 
agencies have agreed not to "hand their dirty linen out" for the 
whole world to see. This is not surprising, especially 
considering the fact that the matter concerns not only 
professional secrets, but the observance of human rights as 
well. Only a court can determine a person's guilt. To guard 
the suspect's rights both sides are covering up his name and the 
circumstances of his arrest. 
  The investigation is still going on, and it would be better 
if the matter was not made public at all. Apparently, the 
Counter-Espionage Service has yet to uncover the source of the 
leak about the arrest. A babble-mouth is truly a great find for 
a spy. 
  Having received a very sketchy confirmation of the incident 
from Moscow, journalists bombarded official representative of 
the German Government Dietier Vogel with questions. He stated 
that Bernd Schmidbauer, Helmut Kohl's top aide on intelligence 
issues, had a phone conversation with the head of Russia's 
Counter-Espionage Service. Vogel declared that the two sides 
"are not attaching a lot of importance to this incident, and it 
will not have any effect on the political relationship" between 
Russia and Germany. 
  The questions opened up by such events should be answered 
only by the intelligence officials of the two countries, the 
chancellor's representative explained. "The truth is, that 
intelligence operations are carried out all over the world, and 
they do not have particular political significance", he noted. 
  "Besides, the Russian and German espionage agencies 
cooperate 
with each other to some extent. The Germans have their 
intelligence mission in Russia, and the Russians, the former 
KGB, have one in Bonn. They are, so to speak, officially 
accredited. The two sides cooperate closely in many spheres, in 
particular, in the fight against terrorism and organized crime", 
he said. 

