Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Deputy Foreign Minister Surin Phitsuwan said 
yesterday Vietnam should be invited to discuss overlapping 
territorial waters over which Cambodia has called for talk with 
Thailand. Surin said Vietnam has also declared an exclusive 
economic zone of 200 nautical miles which creates an overlap 
with the waters of Thailand and Cambodia. 
  "Vietnam should be invited to discussions on unclear 
boundaries, so that the problems can be solved," said the 
minister. Thailand and Vietnam have held several rounds of 
talks, without the presence of Cambodia which at the time still 
had internal conflicts. 
  Recently a Cambodian minister called for urgent talks with 
Thailand on the disputed zone following discovery of oil near 
the area. Foreign Minister Prasong Sunsiri welcomed the move, 
saying Thailand is ready to talk on the issue. Thailand has 
urged Cambodia to set up a joint commission on boundaries but 
Cambodia shelved the matter for unknown reasons. 
  Surin said Bangkok and Phnom Penh have used different maps 
in 
defining boundaries. The problem is exacerbated by the fact 
that the Cambodians say they used the maps when they formulated 
their Constitution, Surin said without elaborating. "Cambodia 
doesn't seem to be ready for talks as it has just emerged from 
civil war and is busy with national reconciliation and 
reconstruction," he said. 
  The minister will next Wednesday visit Cambodia to deliver a 
speech at an international seminar. He said during his three-day 
visit to the country he would meet with senior Cambodian 
officials and the boundary issue would be among scheduled topics. 
  The military will adopt severe counter measures against 
Cambodian brigands if they continue robbing, harassing and 
sometimes killing local Thais living along the border, a senior 
military officer said yesterday. First Army Commander Chettha 
Thanacharo said Army Commander in Chief, Gen Wimon Wongwanit, 
has urged troops manning the border to subdue the Cambodian 
bandits and if they still resist, severe suppression would be 
used. "Armed persons have to surrender their weapons when they 
step into Thai territory," Chettha said. 

