Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 28 March Morning Edition] </F>
  [Text] The main points of the Comprehensive Foreign 
Economic Policy Package (tentative title) to be compiled by the 
government on 29 March have been finalized. 
  Provisions relating to deregulation, the main attraction of 
the package, are focused on easing regulations for market 
participation, and relaxing the standards and licensing systems 
for nine sectors considered effective in promoting market 
participation, including housing and land, information and 
communications, distribution, and the financial and securities 
industry. Liquor and tobacco marketing, trucking, and the 
registration of new, imported cars are also cited for 
consideration. 
  New measures are also to be adopted for the insurance 
sector, 
one of the three priority areas in the Japan-U.S. framework 
talks. Measures in this area include the introduction of a 
"broker" system, in which brokers are independent of insurance 
companies and recommend insurers to clients for the benefit of 
clients, and permitting foreign nonlife insurance companies to 
become members of the Marine and Fire Insurance Association of 
Japan. 
  The foreign economic policy package consists of: 1) 
macroeconomic policies, including income and residential tax 
cuts and other tax reform measures; 2) four categories of market 
liberalization measures -- promoting deregulation, encouraging 
imports and investments, reinforcing policy on competition, and 
improving government procurement methods; and 3) measures 
dealing with the three priority sectors in the Japan-U.S. 
economic framework talks -- government procurement in 
telecommunications and medical equipment, automobiles and auto 
parts, and insurance. 
  The above measures will be approved officially on 29 March 
at 
a meeting of cabinet members in charge of foreign economic 
relations. They are meant to emphasize Japan's serious efforts 
to liberalize its market and cut the current account surpluses 
with other countries. Japan will indicate its intention to 
continue to consider any issues for which it could not come up 
with concrete solutions this time. Additional measures are 
expected to be announced in June, prior to the meeting of 
leaders of the Group of Seven advanced nations (Naples summit). 
  Aside from abolishing regulations which actually obstruct 
participation in the Japanese market, the government plans to 
compile further deregulation measures by the end of June, 
focusing on adapting standards and licensing methods, and 
inspection and certification systems to international norms, and 
simplifying administrative procedures. 
  The other priority areas in the list of nine, apart from 
housing and land, and other sectors mentioned above, are: 
Distribution; home electrical appliances; food; automobiles; 
and pharmaceuticals, medical equipment, and cosmetics. 
Deregulation in these areas, where there is an enormous price 
gap between Japan and the foreign countries, will expand 
opportunities to supply Japan with cheap and desirable foreign 
products. Measures being considered include: Deregulation in 
the marketing of liquor and tobacco, a review of the regulations 
on communications and broadcasting, pharmaceuticals and medical 
equipment standards, storage business standards, electrical and 
gas equipment licensing standards, and easing the type 
certification procedure for automobiles. 
  The government will emphasize its efforts to introduce more 
transparency into administrative procedures, and to ease 
insurance regulations, one of the three priority sectors in the 
framework talks. This is because the existing Insurance Law and 
other laws on foreign insurers do not have explicit provisions 
on licensing standards and Japan has been criticized abroad 
because "licensing decisions are based on ambiguous and 
inscrutable standards." 
  The government will formally announce the introduction of a 
"broker" system. It has decided to accept this demand made by 
the United States at the framework talks, and to start preparing 
the necessary legislation and administrative procedures -- for 
instance, on the licensing of brokers. And membership by 
foreign insurers in the Marine and Fire Insurance Association is 
being included as an additional measure in light of the 
association's amendment of its charter last January. 

