Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Inaugural speech by President Martti Ahtisaari in Helsinki </F>
-- live; passages in quotation marks in Swedish] 
  [Text] Madame Speaker, representatives of the Finnish 
people! 
  Having been elected president of the Republic in a direct 
popular vote, and having made the solemn declaration before the 
Eduskunta as required by the Constitution, I shall begin to 
discharge the duties of president of the Republic during the 
term ahead. I feel great humility before the responsibility 
that the discharging of the duties of president involves. To 
the best of my ability, I shall discharge the duties incumbent 
on the president under the Constitution in good cooperation with 
the Eduskunta and the government that enjoys its confidence. 
  I thank you, Madame Speaker, for your good wishes. I would 
like to express my agreement with your thoughts about the tasks 
facing us. I hope in particular that the citizens, in as large 
numbers as possible, would and could take part in the work for 
our joint fatherland. 
  Receiving now the duties of the president of the Republic, I 
want, from the bottom of my heart and in the name of the nation, 
to express cordial thanks to President Mauno Koivisto, my 
honored predecessor, for the great contribution he has made for 
the benefit of our country and international security. 
President Koivisto, under your leadership, Finland has been 
able to strengthen and improve its international position at a 
time when the long-standing division of Europe has finally 
ended. You demonstrated courage and determination faced with 
big and far-reaching choices. Although the uncertainty still 
continues in the international community, Finland's position in 
it has developed in a favorable way. For this I am deeply 
grateful to you because it offers an excellent starting point 
for my own work. 
  You have given your support to parliamentarism, to the 
strengthening of its rules. Your contribution in this respect 
is historic. You are leaving a state ship that now has a strong 
democratic keel. 
  In the name of the nation, I want to express respectful 
thanks to you too, Mrs. Tellervo Koivisto. You have carried out 
your work in an exemplary way, and for this you deserve the 
undivided appreciation of all Finns. 
  Honored Eduskunta deputies! Good management of the matters 
of the realm always calls for the seamless cooperation between 
the president, the Eduskunta and the Council of State. For my 
own part, this is what I aim for. The president of the Republic 
must be a uniting political force. We Finns understand that a 
small nation is strong only when united. In a pluralistic 
society, understanding can, however, only be reached through 
open debate and by respecting the principles of a society of 
consensus. 
  The direct popular vote has, for its part, changed our 
political life and strengthened democracy. I want to develop 
the president's position and duties in such a way that the 
significance of the direct popular vote serves as well as 
possible what is best in the entire society. 
  "I take up my duties as president of the Republic in a 
situation that is still characterized by economic uncertainty, 
above all large unemployment. It will still take a long time 
before the economic growth leads to improved employment in a 
decisive way. The year that has started is the fourth in 
succession with an unemployment at an intolerably high level. 
During my election campaign, I was forced to witness a sense of 
hopelessness that, as a result of the difficult employment 
situation and the reduced standard of living, has affected large 
sectors of the population. Unemployment hits hard the sectors 
dominated by women. Unemployment threatens family unity, it 
hits hard the smallest ones, our children. 
  ``Therefore, in order to beat unemployment, readiness and 
courage are needed to take special measures. The economic 
policy, which has been pursued in our country, has in the last 
two years been mainly geared to attempting to save the people 
from the problems that have piled up. We must, however, beware 
of believing that only one alternative, only one way forward, is 
on offer. 
  ``We need extensive political cooperation to put an end to 
the depression and create new jobs. Human dignity must be 
brought out as a resource within the new policy of mutual 
understanding. It is important to ensure that our much-punished 
fellow citizens do not lose their belief in tomorrow. When many 
members of Finnish society are in great difficulty through no 
fault of their own, it is not the right time to abolish the 
support systems that have been developed for these situations. 
  ``I am convinced that the Finns want to develop their 
society 
in a balanced way, as a society of citizens where the Nordic 
ideals of equality and justice are fulfilled. But the state 
must not be an admonishing big brother, but a friend offering 
security and new opportunities.'' 
  Honored Eduskunta deputies! Under the Constitution, the 
most central task of the president of the Republic is to decide 
on the realm's relations with external powers. I shall act in 
such a way that I will be in charge of the country's foreign and 
security policy in cooperation with the Council of State and the 
Eduskunta. 
  Our foreign and security political surroundings have changed 
enormously in the last few years, and all changes are by no 
means over yet. This poses new challenges to us too, many of 
which are such that we will meet them best by intensifying 
cooperation with other countries. Our own economic prosperity 
is more decisively than before linked to the world economy and 
its very sudden fluctuations. Therefore, both our material and 
spiritual welfare is largely dependent on a favorable 
development of the world economy. 
  Nurturing good-neighborly relations is a sensible political 
aim for each country. The relations with the Nordic countries, 
Russia, and the Baltic countries form a working basis for our 
external relations. We Finns, who have paid for our 
independence in heavy wars, understand the importance of 
continuously strengthening the foundation of security. It is 
more a matter, not of raising a fence, but of opening a gate. 
  "After the division of Europe ended, it has not yet been 
possible to create a new security system to replace the former 
one. From the Finnish viewpoint, it is extremely important that 
a new division of the continent is prevented. A European 
security system, based on cooperation and mutual dependence, 
offers us the most encouraging prospects. The creation of such 
a Europe of solidarity constitutes perhaps the most significant 
challenge to our country's foreign policy in the 1990's. 
  ``The expansion of the European Union is proof that the 
affinity between the states assumes ever firmer forms. We are 
part of this process. This promotes both our national welfare 
and our security.'' 
  Membership in the European Union is an opportunity for us. 
With the help of the European Union, we Finns want to prevent 
the raising of fences and promote the opening of gates. We 
grasp this opportunity, relying on our Nordic values. It is to 
be hoped that eventually all Nordic countries who sought 
membership -- Finland, Sweden, and Norway -- should become 
members of the Union. 
  A thorough survey of the advantages and drawbacks of 
membership must be made in Finland before a referendum. The 
negotiation result is a significant factor for the forming of an 
opinion. As many Finns as possible should form a measured 
opinion of membership. As president of the Republic, I will do 
my utmost so that membership in the European Union shall not 
become a factor dividing our nation. 
  Madame Speaker, honored Eduskunta deputies! I want to base 
my activity on the principles of joint responsibility, fairness, 
openness, and cooperation. We Finns have a good reputation in 
the world. We are trusted and our tenacity is recognized. We 
do not give in, not now either. We look forward with 
confidence. Behind the mountains still facing us, a better 
tomorrow is already looming. Let it be the day when the Finns 
are again convinced that this dear fatherland of ours is the 
best country for us to live in and build our future. 
  As I now begin to discharge the duties of the president of 
the Republic, I wish for support from you and the entire Finnish 
people for my work. I shall seek to carry it out with all my 
strength and to the best of my ability, with the only aim being 
the happiness and success of the Finnish people. May God bless 
our fatherland and our people! 

