Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Olav Kruus: "Minister of Agriculture Jaan </F>
Leetsaar: Industry To Support Agriculture, Rural Reforms To Be 
Stepped Up"] 
  [Text] 
  Agricultural production makes up 33.6 percent of the 
domestic gross product and that puts agriculture clearly in the 
first place in our economy, Jaan Leetsaar, minister of 
agriculture, said at the ministry's press conference. "However, 
such an economic indicator is not normal in a state where only a 
million hectares of land are used for agricultural production. 
Changes in the economic structure must take place in the near 
future, because an economic sector with such a small work force 
and meager monetary resources cannot maintain its leading 
position for long," the minister noted. 
  Leetsaar explained that, in other European countries, 
subsidies to agriculture are made from taxes proceeds on 
industrial profits, and same could be done in Estonia but, 
unfortunately, right now we do not have economic sectors strong 
enough to support agriculture. 
<H5>  Ownership Reform Has Been Carried Out </H5>
  Leetsaar said that reorganization of state farms and 
collectives has been completed successfully. As a result of 
ownership reform, 360 large collectives have been replaced by 
7,000 new agricultural production units. As of last October, 
there are more than 4,300 farms, roughly 1,200 joint stock 
companies, close to 800 associations, and 500 cooperatives in 
Estonia, Leetsaar said. 
  Negative results of ownership reform, according to Leetsaar, 
include unemployment for 75,000 rural residents. In 1992, 37,000 
persons were left unemployed, followed by roughly the same 
number in 1993. A portion of these people make a living off odd 
jobs. There are people in rural areas, who draw an income from 
business ownership and work for wages at the same time. The 
ministry has no overview of how the different ways of making a 
living are distributed in the country, the minister admitted. He 
said that business ventures should be encouraged in rural areas 
to make full use of the under-employed. 
  Employment problems are indeed of primary concern to the 
ministry for the year now starting, Leetsaar remarked. He added 
though that it is the rural residents themselves who are 
reluctant to try out new formats of entrepreneurship. 
<H5>  Land Reform Is Snagged </H5>
  The minister admitted that land reform is stuck pretty much 
at where it was a year ago. Among the main reasons holding up 
reform, the minister cited the lack of laws on land regulation 
and assessment, and the lack of a system for land replacement. 
Developing a system for land regulation and assessment has been 
snagged because of poor performance on the part of the Land 
Office. 
  Leetsar said that his ministry cannot speed up the process 
because Land Office now reports to the environmental ministry, 
instead of the agriculture ministry. 
<H5>  Unfair Competition </H5>
  Unfair competition, the minister claims, comes from the 
unrestricted import of heavily subsidized products to Estonia. 
To stop that, an anti-dumping bill has been submitted to 
Riigikogu [Estonia's parliament]. A bill on assessing customs 
has also been held up in the finance ministry for some time now, 
Leetsaar said. That, too, should be submitted to Riigikogu, and 
implemented as soon as possible, because food items are often 
brought into Estonia that are declared in customs at below 
producers' prices. At the same time, customs statistics do not 
reflect the actual imports of food items, Leetsaar said. 
  For the year now starting, the ministry is planning to pay 
more attention to the regional politics of rural life, speeding 
up agricultural reform and `privatizing economic activity' the 
minister said. He emphasized the last phrase saying that, in the 
country, one can often find enterprises whose assets and 
production facilities cannot match the economic significance of 
well-developed production and trade relations. 
<H3>  Prime Minister Is Sticking to Agreement Made With 
Agricultural Producers </H3>
  The agreement on the pricing of agricultural products that 
was reached between the government and representatives of 
agricultural producers is still waiting, ever since last 
September, to be put on the agenda of a government session by 
the prime minister, Jaan Leetsaar said. 
  The signed agreement resulting from negotiations based on 
the 
income law was concluded at the end of September last year. 
Representing the government at these negotiations were the 
ministries of economics, agriculture and finance, and the head 
and signator of the government delegation was Margus Leivo, 
chancellor of the economics ministry. He also promptly submitted 
the agreement to the prime minister, requesting that it be 
discussed at a session of the government, Leetsaar said. 
  According to that agreement, it would take grants and 
credits 
for up to 748 million kroons just to maintain domestic 
agricultural production at its present level. At that time, more 
than 200 million kroons had been allocated to agriculture in the 
1994 budget bill. To come up with the rest of the money, the 
ministry had promised to start negotiations and take the matter 
up at a government session. 
  "Chancellor Leivo submitted the agreement to the head of 
government at the end of September but, unfortunately, it has 
gotten stuck in one of Laar's drawers," minister Leetsaar said. 
  He added that, by now, these estimated amounts have changed, 
and the ministry is kept busy with calculating actual prices for 
agricultural products. Calculations show that price increases 
are likely for milk and dairy products in the near future. 
Current production expenses, the minister said, exceed even the 
production costs specified in the agreement. 

