Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Ivanov, with information supplied by </F>
POSTFAKTUM, under the rubric "Details": "Power Loves To Be 
Alone"] 
  [Text] In a recent issue NOVAYA YEZHEDNEVNAYA GAZETA 
reported the strange situation that now exists in Maritime Kray 
in connection with criminal proceedings initiated on bribery 
charges against Vladivostok Mayor Viktor Cherepkov. Our 
newspaper has learned some details related to the case. 
  According to information from the investigative organs, on 
10 
February citizen Volkov, who represents the movement for the 
support of Afghan veterans, informed the Vladivostok procurator 
that he had bribed some city administration officials, including 
the mayor, for allowing him to acquire a plot of land. 
  Several cars stopped by the mayor's office at about 2200 on 
Friday; they unloaded the city procurator and some 15 militiamen 
armed with automatic rifles. After the entrance was surrounded, 
the procurator and some of the militiamen went up to the 10th 
floor, to the office of Viktor Cherepkov, mayor of Vladivostok. 
They presented Cherepkov with a warrant and started their 
search, which went on until 0300. In the office of the city 
administration head they discovered 6 million rubles and $3,000; 
almost 1.5 million (in 50,000 notes) were lying in a tight roll 
behind the safe. 
  Right after this, two carloads of militia escorted Cherepkov 
to the city procuracy where he was interrogated by investigator 
Aleksandr Vysotskiy. However, he was questioned as a witness and 
not as a defendant. The accusation of bribe extortion was 
brought against some Vladivostok administration officials whose 
names are not being made public because of the investigation; at 
the same time, there is no special secrecy about them. Among 
others, there is talk about seven employees of the city 
municipal property office and the construction and architecture 
office. Their offices were searched simultaneously with the 
mayor's. 
  During the same evening officers of the kray Internal 
Affairs 
Administration [UVD] searched the city mayor's home. The search 
was caused by the fact that the night before, two people 
suspected of burglarizing Vladivostok school 74 (the crime was 
committed in May of last year) confessed and also testified that 
the mayor's son, Vladimir Cherepkov, had also taken part in the 
crime. The search of the mayor's apartment produced one of the 
computers stolen during the school burglary. The computer was 
confiscated. Vladimir Cherepkov, 19, a cadet at the Pacific 
Higher Naval School, was put in a temporary detention cell. 
  From one hour to the next the events increasingly acquired 
the character of a mystery novel. On Saturday night the militia 
received a report that six strangers had kidnapped the 
4-year-old son of the UVD female officer investigating the case 
of Cherepkov junior. The deputy commander of the kray UVD, Yuriy 
Orlenko, said that according to militia information, "a certain 
mafia group is behind the Cherepkovs." Orlenko added also that 
the office of Yevgeniy Nazdratenko, the kray governor, had 
received a telephone threat to his son; after that, instructions 
were issued to strengthen the security unit guarding his family, 
in spite of the governor's objections. 
  However, the child was returned home on Sunday. It 
transpired 
that the kidnapping had been organized by the investigator's 
live-in partner who, under the influence of alcohol, had asked 
some people he was drinking with to do him this small favor. The 
kidnappers are being sought. 
  After the nightly events, a press conference took place in 
the office of Cherepkov senior in which he denied all the 
accusations directed at him and said that the actions of the law 
enforcement organs were designed to discredit him as a city 
official. He also qualified the event as a "coup d'etat" 
initiated by the top kray administrators. However, Primorye 
Governor Ye. Nazdratenko viewed the mayor's description of 
events as an attempt to justify himself before the public and 
gain political capital. 
  The origin of the money found in the mayor's office during 
the search remains unclear. In his Saturday interview to the 
local TV and radio company, Cherepkov said that the money found 
behind the safe had been planted. 
  Local commentators view the Vladivostok scandal as a major 
achievement of the opposition represented by the mayor and his 
supporters as they anticipate the elections to the kray duma. 
Cherepkov is a former officer, an instructor at a military 
school, a deputy to the kray soviet who was the first to inform 
the world about the mayhem reigning in the military units 
deployed on the island of Russkiy; he rode the crest of his 
public success to victory in the first democratic elections to 
the Vladivostok mayor's office in the summer of 1993. But at 
this point he was losing popularity--slowly but surely--because 
of his not very successful experiments in the areas of city 
management and staffing policy. 
  Besides, the new leaders of the kray center failed to 
established good relations, to put it mildly, with the kray 
power concentrated in the hands of a team of administrators 
headed by Governor Ye. Nazdratenko, who formed his cabinet just 
a little earlier than the summer mayoral elections. 
  Today, however, with the polarization of public opinion 
growing stronger, Cherepkov's rating has jumped up and the 
chances of the "pro-Cherepkov" opposition winning at the coming 
elections to the kray duma have sharply improved; its victory 
would initiate changes in the political lineup. 

