BFN 

  [Text] A Myanmar [Burmese] delegation led by Lieutenant 
General Myint Aung, minister of agriculture, returned to Yangon 
[Rangoon] by air at 1235 this afternoon after visiting the Arab 
Republic of Egypt [ARE] from 5 to 11 May at the invitation of 
Dr. Yusuf Wali, deputy prime minister, minister for agriculture 
and fisheries and land reclamation of the ARE. 
  On the return journey from Egypt, the Myanmar delegation 
also 
visited Israel and Malaysia, holding discussions on the 
upgrading of trade and agriculture and observing the 
agricultural and trade activities. 
  While in Egypt, the agriculture minister, accompanied by 
Myanmar Ambassador U Aung Gyi, called on Mr. Husni Mubarak, 
president of the ARE, at the Presidential Office on the morning 
of 10 May. During the meeting, the agriculture minister 
conveyed the congratulatory message of Senior General Than Shwe, 
chairman of the State Law and Order Restoration Council of the 
Government of the Union of Myanmar and commander in chief of the 
Defense Services, on the signing of an agreement following the 
successful historical Palestine-Israel peace talks held under 
the leadership of President Mubarak in Cairo, Egypt on 4 May. 
Frank and cordial discussions on mutual visits by high-ranking 
leaders from both countries, expertise and technology, improving 
trade, and strengthening Myanmar-Egypt friendship were also held 
at the meeting. 
  The Myanmar delegation led by the agriculture minister 
called 
on Dr. Wali, deputy prime minister, minister for agriculture and 
fisheries and land reclamation of the Government of ARE, at his 
office on the afternoon of 5 May. Frank and cordial discussions 
on mutually beneficial cooperation in the agricultural sector 
and the upgrading of bilateral economic cooperation were held at 
the meeting. Based on these discussions, Lt. Gen. Myint Aung, 
minister of agriculture and leader of the Myanmar delegation, 
and Egyptian Deputy Prime Minister Dr. Wali signed a memorandum 
of understanding on systematic technological cooperation in the 
agricultural sector, which is a basic source of income for both 
Myanmar and Egypt, and economic cooperation in Cairo on 10 May. 
The memorandum of understanding stipulates the exchange of good 
quality crops and cereals, the exchange of experts and training, 
and the drawing up a detailed plan for upgrading the economy and 
trade. The Myanmar delegation made detailed observations on the 
cultivation of cotton, sugar cane, and date-palm, and the 
production of sugar in Egypt. The delegation also went to see 
the (Islam) Dam in the south of Egypt and observed the supply of 
water through irrigation, and the use of water from the Nile 
River for cultivation. The delegation also observed and held 
discussions on the cultivation and production of paddy rice, 
wheat, millet, corn, fruits, and vegetables, and the exchange of 
good quality seeds and crops. The delegation also observed the 
work to preserve the archaeological sites and tourism promotion 
in Egypt. The Myanmar delegation left Cairo, Egypt for Tel 
Aviv, Israel on 11 May and stayed there until 14 May. 
  In Israel, the Myanmar delegation observed the cultivation 
of 
fruits and the planting of trees for greenery in the tropical 
region, the effective use of irrigation water employing the 
latest techniques for cultivation, and modern and developed ways 
of cultivation and the production of fruits. 
  Lt. Gen. Myint Aung and members of the delegation, 
accompanied by Myanmar Ambassador U Win Mra, called on Mr. 
Ya'aqov Tzur, minister of agriculture of Israel, on the 
afternoon of 12 May. The Israeli agriculture minister and 
responsible personnel accompanied the Myanmar delegation to the 
(Najit Halam Hatai) collective farm. At the farm, the Myanmar 
delegation observed the cultivation and production of crops and 
cereals and the production of water purification equipment. 
Frank and cordial discussions on mutual beneficial 
technological and economic cooperation were also held in Israel. 
  While in Israel, the Myanmar delegation met with (Mr. David 
Blach), chairman of the Chamber of Commerce, and executive 
members and described the political and administrative progress 
and transformation taking place in Myanmar, the economic 
development in Myanmar due to the practice of a market-oriented 
economy, and the investment situation in various business 
sectors, including the agricultural sector, in Myanmar. They 
also held discussions and coordinated on upgrading the bilateral 
economic and trade. The Myanmar delegation also suggested that 
Myanmar, due to its suitable land and conditions, is very much 
interested in going into mutually beneficial joint ventures with 
Israeli entrepreneurs who have modern technology, expertise, and 
investment. The Myanmar delegation also suggested that they 
send industrial and business missions to Myanmar. Concerning 
the agricultural sector, the Myanmar delegation also made 
arrangements for joint cooperation in cultivating and producing 
good quality Israeli crops and cereals by using irrigation water 
in Myanmar. 
  The Myanmar delegation led by Lt. Gen. Myint Aung left 
Thailand on 14 May and proceeded to Malaysia. In Malaysia, the 
Myanmar delegation observed the cultivation of sugar cane and 
sugar production, plantations of oil-palm and rubber trees, and 
the processing of rubber. The delegation also met with 
Malaysian sugar factory owners and held discussions and 
coordinated on the mutual investment and joint ventures in the 
sugar factories in Myanmar. 

