Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Philippines will push for the implementation of 
the agreement to set up an arms registry within the Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations to monitor conventional arms buildup 
in the region at a special ASEAN senior officials' meeting on 7 
March in Bangkok, Thailand. 
  The 7 to 9 March meeting will take up solutions to "dampen 
friction" within the region by coming up with methods to contain 
potential flashpoints in East Asia, Foreign Affairs 
Undersecretary Rodolfo Severino said. The meeting will be 
attended by high-level foreign affairs, defense and security 
officials in the region. Severino said that instead of tackling 
specific issues, such as the territorial disputes in the South 
China Sea involving the Spratly and Paracel Islands, the 
conference will discuss "general means" to sustain the political 
stability in Southeast Asia. 
  For instance, instead of talking about North Korea's nuclear 
sites, ASEAN senior officials would focus on making the region 
nuclear-free, Severino said. 
  The "operationalization" of a previous agreement to monitor 
conventional arms buildup within the ASEAN is also one of the 
items to be discussed during the meeting. 
  An arms registry has already been set up in Singapore but 
the 
agreement has yet to be implemented. The program is patterned 
after the United Nations, in which conventional arms purchases 
and development are monitored and inventoried, and transparency 
in weapons buildup is ensured, Severino said. 
  The meeting will also discuss the implementation of a 
separate agreement among ASEAN members on disaster-relief 
operations. The agreement calls ASEAN countries to coordinate 
efforts in helping member-states in disaster-relief operations 
through technical and financial assistance. 
  Severino said there have also been proposals to set up a 
security body within the ASEAN to settle disputes among member 
nations, although the group has been approaching the issue 
cautiously due to possible misperceptions that it might be a 
prelude to setting up a military alliance within the region. 
  Meanwhile, Severino said that the territorial dispute in the 
South China Sea involving the Spratly Islands will be one of the 
talking points during the 11 March bilateral consultations 
between the Philippines and Vietnam scheduled in Manila. The 
Philippines, Vietnam, China, Malaysia, and Brunei have asserted 
claims either in whole or in part on the oils-rich Spratlys. The 
Philippines will reiterate its desire for the peaceful 
resolution of the territorial dispute during the RP [Republic of 
the Philippines]-Vietnam talks. China and Vietnam have the 
potential to use force in settling their claims. 
  The Philippines will also bring up during the discussions 
the 
situation of some 200 "boat people" or refugees in Bataan who 
have been ensured of resettlement but were later abandoned by 
the United States. 

