Policy (White Paper on Science and Technology, No. 5) 
<DATE1>  8 April 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Guide to China's Science and Technology Policy (White Paper </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Guide to China's Science and Technology Policy (White Paper </PHRASE></F></HT>
  on Science and Technology, No. 5) 

<F P=102> 93FE0870E Beijing ZHONGGUO KEXUE JISHU ZHENGCE ZHINAN [GUIDE 
TO CHINA'S SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY] in Chinese No 5, Jun </F>

92 pp 1-134 
<F P=103> 93FE0870E </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing ZHONGGUO KEXUE JISHU ZHENGCE ZHINAN [GUIDE 
TO CHINA'S SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY] </F>

<F P=105>  Chinese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Book by the State Science and Technology Commission: ``A </F>
Guide to China's Science and Technology Policy (White Paper on 
Science and Technology, No. 5)''] 
<H5>  New Materials </H5>
  New materials refer to materials that have been recently 
developed or which are now being developed that have superior 
properties or special functions. Information, energy resources, 
and materials are considered the three big pillars of modern 
civilization. The generation and development of a new technology 
are often determined by new materials, and new technical 
breakthroughs may arise after the birth of several new materials 
and have a major impact on industrial structures and social 
life. New materials are a field of extremely vigorous 
development at present and for the materials that create 
entirely new concepts such as superlattices, metastable state 
non-crystalline materials, and so on, besides their own applied 
value, they also open up new realms for scientific development. 
Thus, new materials are an important part of high and new 
technology and all of the world's industrially developed nations 
have treated new materials as an important realm for 
preferential development. 
  The primary characteristics of new materials and their 
generation are a high degree of technology intensity, rapid 
renewal and replacement, high R&amp;D inputs, powerful secrecy, 
high 
product added value, intensely international properties in 
production and the market, and a decisive role of product 
quality and special properties in the market. Their overall 
development directions are toward compound structures and 
integrated functions. The requirements for materials include 
light weight, thinness, fineness, high purity, and so on. 
  Accelerate China's development of new materials, reducing 
our 
lag behind advanced international levels, and further meeting 
China's economic development and national defense construction 
requirements is an extremely important task that we face. 
<H5>  I. Development Strategies and Objectives </H5>
<H5>  A. Development strategies. </H5>
  From the important status and international development 
trends of new materials and in integration with China's concrete 
conditions, we should adopt the principle of ``limited 
objectives, key breakthroughs, combining tracking with 
innovation''. The guiding ideology is: First, on a foundation of 
adhering primarily to reliance our own efforts and relying 
primarily on our own strengths and resource characteristics, do 
R&amp;D concerning new materials, establish and develop China's 
new 
materials system, and engage in international cooperation 
through a variety of routes to absorb advanced technology and 
information and accelerate the course of development. Second, 
new materials development must emphasize integration of 
materials science with materials engineering and must have clear 
applications objectives, and development must be closely 
integrated with applied development and applications. Third, the 
development of new materials must both guarantee military 
industry requirements as well as make major efforts to develop 
new materials that are urgently needed by key state projects and 
that have significant technical economics benefits. Fourth, we 
must focus on deployment in depth in R&amp;D work, which means 
doing 
intensive R&amp;D on new materials that we already have or that 
we 
urgently need while at the same time focusing on making 
arrangements in a focused and step-by-step manner for new 
materials with long-term significance that are required by high 
and new technology. Fifth, reinforce basic research and applied 
basic research on new materials, open up new product varieties, 
and expand the scope of their utilization. 
  The goal in developing new materials is to make a 
contribution to the development of China's economy toward a 
benefits type, S&amp;T vanguard type, and intensification during 
the 
last part of this century and the early part of the next century 
while at the same time satisfying the requirements associated 
with military industry. Thus, we must give preference to R&amp;D 
on 
electronic and optoelectronic materials, high-performance 
composites, high-performance ceramics, new types of metallic 
materials, new types of polymer materials, non-crystalline 
materials, superconducting materials, functionally gradient 
materials, and artificial intelligence materials, and to 
automated production technology, intelligent processing 
technology, and other modern materials science and technology 
for new materials. 
<H5>  B. Strategic objectives. </H5>
  Year 2000 
  1. Supply the metallic, inorganic non-metallic, organic 
polymer, composite materials, and other key and matching new 
materials in a timely manner for the development of China's 
strategic and tactical weapons to guarantee the requirements of 
national defense modernization. 
  2. Provide all types of key new materials required for the 
development of the state's key project construction, especially 
in the energy resources, communication, electronics industry, 
and other areas and base the primary basic materials for nuclear 
power plants, microelectronics technology, electronic computers, 
etc. on domestic sources. 
  3. For several new types of materials with broad development 
prospects such as optoelectronic materials, composites, fine 
ceramics, new metallic materials, separation membrane materials, 
non-crystalline materials, superconducting materials, optical 
fibers, and other areas, make breakthroughs with key 
technologies, develop new product varieties, and achieve the 
applications stage. 
  4. For those new materials where we already have a 
substantial foundation and that also have important technical 
economics benefits, use the development of industrialized 
technology and applied research to expand product varieties, 
stabilize quality, reduce costs, and for several industries. 
Strive to attain a direct value of output of more than 27 
billion yuan from new materials by the year 2000. 
  5. Strengthen basic research applications for materials, 
develop materials designs at different levels with 
microstructure theory guidance, develop materials science 
technology related to techniques and technology to guide the 
development of new materials, reduce our lag behind advanced 
world levels, and sustain and develop China's advantages in 
certain areas and strive to make breakthroughs. 
  6. During the process of completing new materials S&amp;T 
tasks 
during the Eighth 5-Year Plan and Ninth 5-Year Plan, perfect and 
establish several new materials R&amp;D centers and base areas, 
train and create a group of key middle-aged and young new 
materials S&amp;T personnel, for a specialized staff with a 
rational 
structure, and lay a good foundation and create the conditions 
for the continual development of China's new materials industry. 
  Year 2020 
  Further satisfy the new materials required for national 
economic construction and national defense construction, make 
important contributions to raising China's overall industrial 
levels and spurring the development of high and new technology. 
In certain important materials vanguard realms, make important 
technological breakthroughs and move China into advanced 
international ranks. Reduce our lag behind foreign countries in 
mode materials realms and strive to attain or approximate levels 
of foreign countries of the period. Make major efforts to 
promote the course of industrialization of new materials in 
China and, besides satisfying domestic demand, move some 
products into the international market. 
<H5>  II. Focal Tasks and Key Technologies </H5>
<H5>  A. Military industry matching materials. </H5>
  During the Eighth 5-Year Plan, concentrate forces to make 
breakthroughs in several key materials and technologies to meat 
the development requirements of key weapons models during the 
Eighth 5-Year Plan. Focus on developing the key materials and 
technologies requiring breakthroughs to move into model 
development during the Ninth 5-Year Plan, lay an excellent 
foundation for developing several relatively advanced and 
precision weapons and equipment during the last part of this 
century and the early part of the next century, and reduce our 
lag behind advanced levels in foreign countries in certain 
technical realms. In addition, actively induce the development 
and application of military new materials and their technologies 
in our national economy, extend some military materials into 
civilian uses, and achieve their commercialization. 
<H5>  B. Electronic, optoelectronic, and information materials. </H5>
  1. Silicon, gallium arsenide, indium phosphide, and other 
semiconductor materials, multilayer epitaxy, non-crystalline, 
heterojunction, superlattice, and other membrane materials. 
  2. Ultrapure materials, pulps, and reagents used in 
microelectronics and optoelectronics and materials used in 
gaseous cohesive sealing. 
  3. All types of sensing materials. 
  4. Organic and inorganic nonlinear materials used in 
optoelectronics, photorefractive materials scintillation 
crystals, and so on. 
  5. Optical memory and display materials and 
magnetooptical-type, phase change-type, and erasable-writeable 
optical disk materials. Photon selective passing materials, 
organic photochromic materials, and all types of liquid crystal 
and optical materials. 
  6. Explore molecular electronics materials and 
bioelectronics 
materials. 
<H5>  C. High-performance composite materials. </H5>
  1. High-performance composite materials. 
  --Develop high-performance resin base, metallic base, 
ceramic 
base, and carbon base composites, actively develop new product 
varieties, make breakthroughs in the industrialized production 
technologies for finished composite products with market 
prospects; 
  --We must form a production capability for the 
high-performance reinforcing agents used in carbon fiber, 
aromatic fiber, silicon carbide, and other composites. Based on 
China's high-tech developments and market demand, continually 
develop new product varieties and raise product grades; 
  --Develop high-performance modified epoxy, polyimide, and 
other thermosetting and thermoplastic matrix resins to meet 
composite finished product scientific research and production 
requirements; 
  --All types of supplements and assistants used in 
high-performance composite matching. 
  2. Functional composites. 
  --Functionally gradient composites; 
  --Multifunctional composites; 
  --Elastic bodies that have irradiation-resistant, 
media-tolerant, high temperature resistant, and other special 
properties; 
  --While further perfecting and improving fluorosilicon 
organic materials production technology, also actively develop 
new product varieties, meet the utilization requirements of 
nuclear power, automobile, military industry, and other areas. 
<H5>  D. New metallic materials. </H5>
  1. Do research to improve the purity and fineness of low 
alloy steel and alloy steel. Focus on developing steel for use 
in energy resources, communication, the petrochemical industry, 
and engineering machinery. 
  2. Non-ferrous metal materials. Do R&amp;D on all types of 
target 
materials for new types of aluminum-lithium alloys, 
magnesium-lithium alloys, high-strength high-ductility aluminum 
alloys, corrosion-resistant alloys, high-temperature resistant 
titanium alloys, and on copper, nickel, beryllium, zirconium, 
hafnium, and other special alloy materials. 
  3. Non-crystalline materials and technology. Develop new 
types of non-crystalline materials and place them into use; 
attain an industrial scale for soft magnetic alloys and 
components; develop fast-hardening microcrystalline materials 
with special properties and develop the corresponding splat 
cooling technical equipment and techniques. Develop 
non-crystalline silicon and other materials and apply them in 
the area of solar energy utilization and attain an industrial 
scale. 
  4. Functional materials. We must achieve systemization and 
several types of technical production of Nd-Fe-B permanent 
magnet materials and control a portion of the international 
market for rare earth permanent magnet materials; undertake 
development of a new generation of rare earth permanent magnet, 
supermagnetostriction and magnetic recording materials, and so 
on. Undertake research on hydrogen storage and energy storage 
materials and their applications and form an industry; do 
research on magnetic cooling materials and devices, damping 
materials, shape-memory alloys, and magnetic fluid materials. 
Develop precious metal materials, metallic membrane materials, 
and surface characteristics technology used in high-performance 
precision instruments. 
  5. Structural materials. Do research on ultrapure and ultra 
micropowdered materials preparation technology and the material 
structure of materials; develop new types of high-temperature 
alloys. Do research on surface metallurgy and surface 
modification technology for metallic materials. 
<H5>  E. New types of organic polymer materials. </H5>
  1. High-performance engineering plastics and their alloys. 
  --In high-performance engineering plastics production 
technology development, the focus is: polyimides, polyphenyl 
ether, polysuphones, liquid crystal polymers and polyketones; 
  --Engineering plastic alloys and their mixtures; 
  --Manufacturing technology for special-purpose organic raw 
materials and their matching assistants; 
  --Reactive processing, high-temperature resistant plastics 
processing, and other new types of processing technology and 
equipment. 
  2. Membrane separation technology and separation membrane 
manufacturing. This includes: high gas permeability oxygen-rich 
membranes, gas separation membranes, complete fluorine ion 
exchange membranes, high-performance permeable membranes and 
permeable gasification membranes, and so on. 
  3. Functional polymer materials. The focus is on the 
development of polymer materials with electromagnetic functions, 
optical functions, separation functions, catalysis functions, 
and other functions. In the short term, we must form a 
production capability for conductive polymer materials, actively 
develop plastic optical fibers, optical disks, and their 
associated materials. 
  4. Provide other organic polymer materials for special uses. 
<H5>  F. Functional ceramics. </H5>
  1. Development of ultrapure and ultrafine powder raw 
material 
preparation technology and batch output or industrialized 
production equipment. 
  2. High-performance ceramic special molding, sintering, 
precision processing, coated fiber-reinforce composite 
technology and technical equipment development. 
  3. Brittle materials evaluation technology, non-destructive 
testing, breakage standards, and sintering and composition 
mechanisms; 
  4. High-temperature engineering ceramics. These include 
development of ceramic non-coolers, gas-burning wheels, 
high-temperature sealing valves, bearings, pumps, blowers, steel 
smelting machinery, rollers, and so on. 
  5. Sensitive ceramics and electronic ceramics. Examples 
include all types of gas-sensitive, heat-sensitive, 
light-sensitive, sound-sensitive, pressure-sensitive, and other 
types of sensitive components, high heat conductivity and high 
insulating baseplates and magnetic recording materials, and so 
on. 
  6. Development of ceramics with optical functions (such as 
light transmission, light polarization, light gathering, 
fluorescent, etc.) and photoelectric, photomagnetic, nonlinear 
optical ceramics. 
  7. Development of ceramics with chemical functions (such as 
corrosion resistance, catalysts and their carriers, fuel cells, 
ion exchange, adsorbents, etc.). 
  8. Research on ceramics with organic functions (such as 
bioactivated and affinitive artificial bones, teeth, heart 
valves, etc.) and solid enzyme carriers, with trial manufacture 
and systematic production as well as in medical clinical 
practice and industrial applications. 
<H5>  G. Superconducting materials. </H5>
  1. Improve the performance of existing high-temperature 
superconducting materials, develop the associated technology, 
and develop wire material, band material, and membranes with 
practical value. 
  2. Explore high-temperature superconducting materials to 
make 
them more effective for producing materials and applications. 
  3. Do R&amp;D on low-temperature superconducting materials 
and 
corner the international market. 
  4. Strengthen basic research to gain an understanding of the 
mechanisms of high-temperature superconduction. 
<H5>  H. Organic functional materials. </H5>
  1. New materials for biomedical engineering uses. 
  --Do R&amp;D on artificial organs, polymer drugs, and new 
materials used in family planning and new types of therapeutic 
instruments and new product varieties for their manufactured 
products, achieve systematization of type determination, and 
further develop batch production technology, solve problems with 
medical-grade raw materials and assistants matching, and design 
and manufacturing of the specialized technical equipment; 
  --Focus on development of anticoagulant and antithrombotic 
materials, synthetic polymer membranes used in biomedicine, 
medical adhesives, fatigue-resistant and wear-resistant 
materials, hydrophilic gel and microcapsule materials, 
oxygen-carrying artificial blood, and so on. 
  2. New materials used in biotechnology. The focus is on 
development of new materials used in solidified enzymes (or 
cells), bioreactors, large biomolecule separation and 
purification, and so on. 
  3. Biosimulation materials. Create ``intelligent materials'' 
capable of sensing and detecting environmental changes and 
immediately changing their structure and properties and that 
have self-restoration, self-breeding, self-decomposition, and 
other characteristics. 
  4. Do research on technologies for analyzing and evaluating 
the functions and structural properties of biofunctional 
materials. 
<H5>  I. Modern Materials S&amp;T. </H5>
  1. Carry out research on the relationships of the structure 
and composition of materials with their performance and 
applications, develop materials science. 
  2. Use computers for R&amp;D on microstructural design and 
performance forecasting systems for materials to guide new 
materials creation and application. 
  3. Do research on measures for optimization and modification 
of materials including ion injection, laser processing, all 
types of coating technologies, and so on. 
  4. Develop new materials characterization, testing, and 
price 
marking methods and technologies. 
  5. New materials automated production and intelligent 
processing technology. 
  6. New materials databases and knowledge bases. 
  Consumer Products Industry 
  The consumer products industry is an important part of our 
national economy and a processing industry composed of many 
categories, many disciplines, and many techniques and 
technologies (skills). Its products concern people's clothing, 
food, housing, activities, uses, recreation, sports, and other 
areas. Besides satisfying the fundamental living needs of urban 
and rural people and their material and spiritual consumption, 
it also bears the heavy burden of accumulating capital for the 
state and exporting to earn foreign exchange along with 
producing materials and products associated with agriculture, 
industry, national defense, medicine, and other sectors. This it 
has major significance for our nation's economic development and 
improvement of the people's quality of life. 
<H5>  I. Development Strategies and Objectives </H5>
<H5>  A. Industry development objectives. </H5>
  Development of the consumer products industry must begin 
with 
our national conditions, use domestic and international market 
demand as a guide, fully estimate China's political and economic 
situations and the international environment, be established on 
our existing foundation, use exports to earn foreign exchange as 
a breakthrough point, rely on S&amp;T progress, strive to 
readjust 
the industrial structure, product mix, and technology structure, 
and comprehensively invigorate the consumer products industry. 
By the year 2000, the gross value of output of the consumer 
products industry is estimated at 840 to 870 billion yuan, 4 to 
5 times the amount in 1980 and an average yearly increment of 7 
to 8 percent. Its export foreign exchange earnings will be $56.5 
billion, 8 times the amount in 1980, and an average yearly 
increment of about 11 percent. 
  From 2000 to 2020, the gross value of output of the consumer 
products industry will grow at an average annual rate of 6 to 8 
percent; export foreign exchange earnings will grow at a rate of 
15 percent; and product varieties, quality, and quantity will 
meet the requirements of the people's relatively prosperous 
levels and appropriate consumption and have a relatively 
powerful competitive ability in foreign markets. It will form a 
renowned and top-quality new product production and marketing 
system with Chinese characteristics. 
<H5>  B. S&amp;T development strategies and objectives. </H5>
  S&amp;T development in the consumer products industry must 
closely surround economic development goals, give comprehensive 
consideration to the coordinated development of S&amp;T, the 
economy, and society, adhere to close integration of S&amp;T and 
the 
economy, adopt advanced domestic technology and advanced and 
appropriate imported technology to upgrade old enterprises, 
accelerate attacks on key S&amp;T problems, and shorted the 
cycle of 
commercializing S&amp;T achievements. With improvement of 
economic 
results as the center, strive to improve product quality and 
grades, development new products, produce more inexpensive 
top-quality products, meet demand in the domestic market, 
actively develop a generation of products adapted to 
international market demand, raise product grades, and increase 
our export foreign exchange earnings capabilities. Begin by 
developing new resources, new materials, new technical equipment 
and components and technology and management software, 
comprehensively spur development of consumer products industry 
production and construction. 
  --Actively apply modern S&amp;T, strengthen industrial 
design, 
develop superior quality new colors, new product varieties, new 
products, and new realms that have appropriate market avenues 
and gradually form an emerging industry. Do research on 
improving product quality, grades, and added value, satisfy 
domestic consumption demand at different levels, adapt to 
changes in the international market. 
  --Coordinate with the relevant departments in adopting a 
variety of arrangements and multiple channels to do active 
R&amp;D 
and construction of raw materials and components production and 
supply base areas. Do research on reducing energy consumption in 
the raw materials used in production, strengthen R&amp;D on 
resource 
comprehensive utilization and renewable materials recovery and 
utilization. 
  --Rely on the military industry, heavy industry, 
institutions 
of higher education, and other social S&amp;T forces to undertake 
technical cooperation to digest and absorb advanced domestic and 
foreign technology, do R&amp;D on common technologies and key 
matching technologies in the industry. Actively adopt S&amp;T 
achievements, advanced appropriate technology, and patents to 
improve the technical equipment and production technology levels 
of enterprises. In addition, do research on improving the export 
foreign exchange earnings levels of consumer products industry 
technical equipment. 
  --Establish and perfect technology development organizations 
to promote close integration of S&amp;T with production, 
establish 
scientific research and enterprise groups and technology 
development organizations at many levels in large and 
medium-sized enterprises. 
  --Strengthen skilled personnel training, improve the quality 
of personnel, pay attention to information and publishing work, 
transmit knowledge, exchange experiences, provide better 
services to scientific research, production, and education. 
  Based on the S&amp;T development strategies outlined above, 
S&amp;T 
work in the consumer products industry must strengthen industry 
management, systematically integrate attacks on key S&amp;T 
problems, technology development, technology importing, and 
technical upgrading, link together scientific research, design, 
and production, and accelerate the extension and application of 
S&amp;T achievements. Reliance on technical progress as a 
proportion 
of the gross value of output in the consumer products industry 
should increase from 20 percent in 1980 to 30 to 40 percent by 
the year 2000 and achieve the following objectives: 
  --Establish raw materials R&amp;D supply base areas. On a 
foundation of basically satisfying the consumer products 
industry's production and development requirements for the 
primary raw materials product varieties, specifications, 
quality, and quantity, gradually move toward base areas for the 
production of raw materials, product quality optimization, and 
standardization and systemization of specifications. We must 
reinforce comprehensive utilization of resources and recovery 
and utilization of renewable materials. We must find proper uses 
for all useable waste gases, liquids, dregs, waste and old 
fiber, and discarded materials, which means we must broaden 
sources of income and reduce expenditures as well as reduce and 
eliminate pollution from the three wastes. 
  --Raise technical equipment levels. Some key industries and 
emerging industries and those traditional industries with have 
relatively good basic conditions must lead the way in 
approaching or attaining levels of the internationally developed 
nations of the 1980's and a few of them should advanced 
international levels of the period. Strive to improve the 
matching set manufacturing capabilities and comprehensive 
matching up capabilities of the specialized equipment in key 
products. Moreover, do innovation on the basis of digestion and 
absorption and increase the proportion of electromechanical 
products in exports and levels of electromechanical integration 
in consumer goods. 
  --Increase product varieties, improve quality. Do R&amp;D 
on new 
products and new product varieties, increase them from the 
present 100,000 types to 300,000 types, stabilize and improve 
product quality, actively adopt international standards or 
advanced foreign standards for primary products, strive to 
attain levels of the 1980's in the developed nations in the 
quality and performance of about 60 percent of primary products. 
There should be substantial developments in the colors, 
varieties, quality, and styles of textiles and clothing and 
greater variety in the domestic market. Primary export 
commodities should attain international levels of the period. 
There should be substantial developments in new-tech and 
high-tech products and high added value products and they should 
enter the international market. 
  --Establish a scientific research and development system at 
different levels and a cooperative division of labor. Strengthen 
close cooperation between specialized scientific research 
organizations in the consumer products industry with enterprises 
and institutions of higher education inside and outside of the 
system and form a vigorous modernized and multilevel S&amp;T 
system 
(including scientific research, development, and production) for 
scientific research, technology development, and economic 
information as well as S&amp;T information, testing, standards, 
environmental protection, and so on with clear levels and a 
clear division of labor that is mutually intersecting. The 
proportion of the total number of employees that S&amp;T 
personnel 
account for the consumer products industry should rise from 1-2 
percent to 3-6 percent. 
  Between 2000 and 2020, supplies of raw materials in primary 
sectors should basically satisfy production and development 
requirements. The technical equipment in primary sectors should 
attain international levels of the 1980's in the year 2000. By 
2020 we must innovate so that key sectors approach and catch up 
with international levels of the period, gradually form a 
consumer products industry technology system with Chinese 
characteristics, a new-tech and high-tech industry basically 
takes shape, modern products and electromechanical products in 
the consumer products industry occupy a significant status in 
the international market, high-tech products and high added 
value products account for a substantial proportion, and an 
S&amp;T 
development system at different levels is more rational and 
perfect. 
<H5>  II. Focal Tasks and Key Technologies </H5>
  The focal tasks of S&amp;T work in the consumer products 
industry 
are to develop common technologies that have a broad coverage 
area in production, solve problems with key matching 
technologies in primary sectors, and open and expand 
applications of high and new-tech in the consumer products 
industry. 
<H5>  A. Make major efforts to develop common technologies for </H5>
production in the consumer products industry. 
  1. Mold design and processing technology. 
  Improve design levels of molds and the matchup with 
processing technology, focus on developing plastic products 
molds (mainly large and precision molds), multiple work position 
progressive molds, precision stamped molds and metallic cold 
compression and pressure injection molds, household odd-shaped 
glass bottle molds and household utensil multilobe molds and 
decoration pressing rollers, and so on. Do research on mold 
shape hollow surface processing technology, strengthen research 
into mold applications theory and design, improve mold 
processing and manufacturing technology. By 2000, strive to make 
breakthroughs in the areas of mold design and manufacturing 
technology, establish the design and manufacture of primary 
molds in the consumer products industry on domestic sources, 
basically transform the situation of reliance on imports for 
molds, and gradually form a three-way integrated mold industry 
composed of mold research, design, and processing. 
  2. Surface processing and decoration technology. 
  Focus on develop electroplating production automation 
technology and on all types of electroplating additive and 
powdered coating technology, metallic surface hardening and 
coloring technology, and artificial leather and plastics 
products surface decoration technology. In addition, strengthen 
research, extension, and applications of a shift to domestic 
production of raw materials. By 2000, strive to make surface 
processing technology approach international levels and achieve 
rather substantial improvements in the exterior quality and 
grades of household appliances, common machinery, the five 
metals, furniture, kitchen implements, artistic products, lamps, 
artificial leather and plastic products, and so on. Do R&amp;D on 
surface processing technology for textile implements and special 
components and improve their useful lifespans and technical 
quality. 
  3. Packaging technology. 
  Focus on developing canning technology suitable for use with 
liquids, solid packaging technology suitable for use in 
block-shaped and powdered products, shrink-wrap packaging 
technology suitable for use in toys, glass bottles, batteries, 
artistic products, and other products; sterile packaging 
technology suitable for fresh packaging of food products and 
high-grade health and beauty products; and textile product 
folding and stacking, rolled tube heat shrinking, hanging, and 
vacuum packaging technology. Do R&amp;D on various types of 
packaging equipment and the associated packaging materials, 
undertake research on standardization of small packages, 
medium-sized packages, and centralized container loading, 
gradually achieve standardization of packaging to improve 
transportation capacity. 
  4. Energy-saving and water-saving technology. 
  Make improving the efficiency and surplus heat recovery in 
ovens and kilns, boilers, evaporators, dryers, and other 
equipment the center, focus on developing energy-saving 
technology for the ceramic, glass, papermaking, and food product 
(including the sugar-making and salt chemical industries) 
industries and cold storage, do research on and extend 
oil-saving, coal-saving, and electricity-saving technology and 
low heat value steam recovery technology, do research on 
technology for producing methane from highly-concentrated 
organic waste water and on waste residues and waste liquid 
renewable energy resource technology, do research on and extend 
high efficiency low pollution coal gasification technology, 
develop top-quality fire-resistant materials and insulating 
materials. For textiles, energy conservation in the dyeing, 
sizing, and chemical fiber industries should be the center for 
research on heat recovery, waste steam utilization, and 
coal-conserving boiler technology, developing energy-saving 
drive belts, special components and devices, and so on. Energy 
consumption in the main energy-consuming sectors of the consumer 
products industry should basically attain levels of the 
developed nations in the early 1980's by the year 2000 and 
approach or attain advanced international levels of the period 
by the year 2020. Focus on R&amp;D on water-saving technology in 
the 
papermaking, food product, leather, dyeing, chemical fiber, and 
other large water-consuming industries. 
  5. Environmental protection technology. 
  Focus on development of ``three wastes'' recovery, 
utilization, and control technology for the papermaking, food 
product, leather, dyeing, chemical fiber, and electroplating 
industries. In papermaking, control of waste water pollution in 
medium-sized paper mills should be the center, do research to 
improve papermill waste liquid recovery and comprehensive 
utilization technology, actively undertake R&amp;D on 
non-polluting 
and low-polluting pulp making and new bleaching technologies. In 
edible oils, the center should be on controlling dust, oil 
refining, and waste water explosions. For food products, the 
center should be on controlling highly-concentrated organic 
waste liquids and reinforcing comprehensive utilization of oil 
(soap) residues, skins and hulls, distillers' grains, and food 
product residues. For leather and electroplating, controlling 
waste water that contains chromium is the center for research on 
waste chromium liquid recovery and utilization technology and 
active development and extension of electroplating no-treatment 
zero-discharge technology, research on improving low-temperature 
chrome-plating technology and waste water ion exchange and 
evaporation treatment technology. Do research to reduce the dust 
content of air in workshops and noise in the textile and edible 
oils industries. Do research on waste water control and waste 
steam purification technology in the chemical fiber and dyeing 
industries. Basically control the pollution sources listed above 
in the consumer products industry by the year 2000. Attain state 
standards for water discharges and achieve effective control of 
waste gas, residues, and dust pollution. 
  6. Testing technology. 
  Study on-line testing for production processes and on 
testing 
methods and measures for semi-finished products, finished 
products, and technical parameters, reinforce public health 
testing of food products, beauty products, and toys and safety 
checking of household appliances, inspection of cotton maturity 
and the homogeneity and defects of textiles, and inspection of 
the overall quality of export products. Strengthen research on 
standardization technology, actively adopt international 
standards. 
  7. Storage and preservation technology. 
  Focus on research to resolve problems in the matching 
technologies involved in the commodity circulation process. Do 
research on air conditioning, low temperatures, cold storage, 
spoilage prevention, mold prevention, anti-oxidation, and 
various other storage and preservation technologies and on new 
technologies for monitoring, control, and prevention of disease 
and insect pests. Do R&amp;D on high-efficiency, low-toxicity, 
low 
residual pesticides, herbicides, and spoilage prevention agents 
and do research on countermeasures on insect resistance to 
pesticides. Do research on the laws of aging and degradation for 
commodities during periods of storage, explore the use of 
microelectronics technology in preservation and mathematical 
modeling and control technology. Do research on advanced 
freezing technical equipment and thawing technology. Strengthen 
research on warehouse (including cold storage) stacking and 
transport mechanization and automation. Do research on 
monitoring technology for storage and preservation periods and 
their associated instruments and equipment. Do research to 
formulate storage quality standards. 
  8. Soft science research. 
  Strengthen research on consumer products industry S&amp;T 
development strategies, principles and policies, outline 
programs, information forecasting, reform management, project 
evaluation, strategies and decisions for participation in large 
international cycles, and so on, provide a scientific 
theoretical foundation for making decision making more 
scientific and democratic strengthening macro regulation and 
control. 
<H5>  B. Actively open up applications of high and new technology </H5>
in the consumer products industry. 
  1. Microelectronics technology. 
  Do research on extension and application of microcomputers 
in 
consumer products industry production parameter inspecting, 
display, monitoring and control, automatic regulation systems, 
and commodity circulation information communications and 
management systems, improve production and management autonomous 
region and network levels, actively apply microelectronics 
technology to upgrade traditional industry in the consumer 
products industry, strengthen development and applications of 
CAD, CAM, and CAT technology design, processing, and mold-making 
for chemical fibers, textiles, clothing, mold, shoe making, 
leather, plastics products, furniture, household appliance, 
industrial sewing machines, common machinery, toys, and artistic 
products, do R&amp;D concerning matching application-specific 
integrated circuits for household appliances, common machinery, 
toys, household products, and other products and office 
automation products, actively development mechanical hands and 
robots application technology and use them in hazardous product 
production and toxic work procedures. Develop 
electromechanically integrated equipment and products. 
  2. Biotechnology. 
  Do research on applications of biotechnology in nurturing 
improved varieties of raw materials for the consumer products 
industry. Do research on applications of genetic and cellular 
engineering for selective breeding of high-output microorganism 
bacteria varieties and the matching technical equipment. Do 
R&amp;D 
on new technologies and new products and on separation and 
purification technology in enzyme engineering and fermentation 
engineering and on technology for their application in the 
consumer products industry, and on cell and enzyme fixing 
technology and carrier development and applications. Do research 
on using modern biotechnology to upgrade the traditional 
fermentation industry. 
  3. New materials applications. 
  Actively develop all types of functional textile fibers, 
optical waveguide fiber and conductive plastics, engineering 
plastics, new types of ceramic materials, rare earth and PTC 
components, paper used in static electricity and heat-sensitive 
computers, fluorescent powder used in high optical efficiency 
lamps, and other new types of materials, and pay attention to 
applications of new materials in the consumer products industry 
realm. 
<H5>  C. Conscientiously solve problems with the key matching </H5>
technologies for primary sectors. 
  1. Food products industry. 
  Rationally readjust the industrial structure and product mix 
in the food products industry so that diets develop toward 
nutrition, convenience, and socialization. 
  Strengthen improvement and selective breeding and of the 
grains, oils, fruits and vegetables, livestock and poultry, 
aquaculture products, edible fungi, tea leaves, and other 
product varieties used in food product processing, domestication 
of famous and valuable wild animals and plants, and establish an 
improved variety breeding system. Pay attention to increased 
varieties and systematic development of basic raw materials for 
food products (including all types of food additives) and to 
R&amp;D 
on new types of processing technology and equipment. 
  Do R&amp;D on reinforced nutritional rice, plumule rice, 
special-purpose flours, granular flours, fine processing of 
coarse grains, and other new rice products and to processing 
technology and equipment. Develop comprehensive utilization of 
corn, legumes, tubers, and so on and multilevel processing 
technology and equipment. Do research on eliminating harmful 
factors in the raw materials for legumes and other food 
products, reinforce nutritional technology for primary grains. 
Do research on intensive processing development and applications 
technology for plant proteins, gradually establish an edible 
plant protein industrial production system. 
  Do R&amp;D on new types of special purpose oils for food 
products, do research on selective hydrogenization, enzyme-ester 
exchange, and physical fine refining technology for fats and on 
low-temperature detoxification and extraction technology. 
Strengthen research on comprehensive utilization of fat sideline 
products, actively develop polyamides, alcohols, phospholipids, 
sterols, waxes, vitamins, and other products. Develop new 
exfiltration, low-temperature desolving, and continuous refining 
equipment, raise equipment levels in the fats industry. 
  Focus on research on hog carcass continuous slaughtering and 
dissection technology and equipment. Actively develop new small 
packaged meat products. Do research to improve the flavor, 
color, and other physiochemical functions on meat products. Do 
research to improve comprehensive utilization technology for 
blood, bones, and internal organs. 
  Actively develop convenience foods, infant and childrens' 
series products, nutritional and health foods, traditional food 
products and beverages, and other new products and new product 
varieties. Do research on industrialized production of 
traditional food products, edible fungi, tea leaves, dried fruit 
and vegetable products, and other new technologies, new 
techniques, and new equipment. Do research on intensive 
processing and comprehensive utilization technology for food 
product leftovers. 
  Actively develop low-proof liquors (including lower proof 
rice liquor), amino acids, organic acids, yeasts, fermented 
spices, microorganic polysaccharides, and other fermented food 
products as well as new series of products and product varieties 
for beverages. Do research on rapid and continuous fermentation 
technology and new technical equipment to improve acid 
production rates, conversion rates, and extraction rates. Do 
R&amp;D 
on traditional fermented food product industrial production 
technology and equipment. 
  Do research on applications of ultrafiltering, reverse 
osmosis, far infrared, microwave, enzyme preparation, 
irradiation, and other new technologies in the food products 
industry, digest and absorb automated can and beverage 
production lines and key technology and equipment for beer and 
malt production and fermented products, develop high efficiency 
continuous production technology and equipment. Do research on 
advanced can-making technology and superior quality coatings for 
cans and on can and beverage sterilization technologies. Do 
research on new mixtures and processing technology for bean 
products, candy, and cakes (including cookies). Do research on 
low-temperature air conditioned storage and preservation 
technology and on food organization technology. Strengthen 
R&amp;D 
on food product packaging and inspection technology. Focus on 
basic scientific research for food products. 
  On a foundation of making rational readjustments in the food 
structure by the year 2000, basically achieve a shift to 
production base areas, optimization of product quality, 
systemization of product varieties, and standardization of 
quality for the raw materials used in the food products industry 
so that the quality and colors of product varieties for primary 
food products basically meet the requirements for socialization 
of the people's lives and gradually form an industrialized 
staple and non-staple food products and mixed food products 
production system. 
  2. Sugarmaking industry. 
  Focus on doing good development of sugar, make increasing 
unit yields and sugar content the direction of the primary 
attack, breed improved sugar varieties that have high sugar 
contents, high yields, and powerful resistance to reversion with 
good technical properties, breed and extend early maturing 
sugarcane varieties and beet polyploid and genetic single-seed 
improved varieties, strengthen importing of all types of sugar 
variety resources, strive to improve breeding technology, do 
research on improved high sugar content comprehensive and 
matching tillage and cultivation technology and disease and 
insect pest forecasting and prevention technology. 
  Actively adopt new types of high-efficiency large-capacity 
advanced equipment, do research on ion exchange purification 
technology, do research on energy conservation technology for 
large sugar mills, import, digest, and absorb key large 
equipment for making sugar from beets and key technology and 
equipment for sugarcane exfiltrators and bagasse grinding 
boards, actively adopt microcomputers to gradually achieve 
single-machine automatic control for all working procedures in 
sugarmaking, actively develop beet sugar intensive processing, 
and further develop comprehensive utilization technology for 
sugar mill wastes and molasses. 
  By the year 2000, strive to make significant improvements in 
unit yields for sugar by increasing sugarcane by about 50 
percent and beets by 100 percent, and increase the sugar content 
by 1.5 to 2 percent compared to the present. The unit yields and 
sugar content of sugar should attain advanced world levels by 
2020. 
  3. Saltmaking industry. 
  Fully utilize beach resources, actively develop and expand 
the area of salt fields, do research on highly concentrated 
seawater extraction technology, do research on comprehensive 
utilization of seawater and brine, strive to improve overall 
results in salt fields, fully develop underground brine 
resources, strengthen salt resource distribution surveys in 
mines, do research on new extraction technology, raise 
extraction rates, do research on technology to prevent ``sand 
hazards'' and comprehensive protection technology in salt lake 
regions. 
  The focus for marine salt should be on improving unit area 
yields in salt fields and mechanization of production in the 
salt industry, while making major efforts to develop specialized 
machinery for the salt industry, reduce physical labor, and 
improve labor productivity, do research on salt field leak 
prevention technology and salt field integrated protection 
technology, actively do research to improve production 
technology levels and unit area yields in the salt field 
breeding industry. Further develop multilayer salt extraction 
technology for mines, strengthen comprehensive utilization of 
rock salt resources, actively develop the salt chemical 
industry, do research on saltmaking corrosion prevention 
technology, and actively utilize wind energy in salt regions 
having the proper conditions. 
  Make major efforts to develop purified salt and all types of 
health and nutritional salts, and gradually form systems. 
  By the year 2000, production technology levels in the salt 
industry should attain the levels of the developed nations of 
the late 1970's and early 1980's. 
  4. Tobacco industry. 
  Breed superior quality new disease-resistant tobacco 
varieties, develop Burley tobacco, perfumed tobacco, and 
sun-cured tobacco with high industrial use value, do research on 
improved breeding, insect pest and disease prevention, soil 
surveys and fertilizer application, and other technologies. 
Gradually achieve regionalization of cropping, improvement of 
varieties, standardization of technology, and leaf stripping and 
redrying in producing areas. Actively extend tobacco film 
production, move quickly to achieve comprehensive utilization of 
tobacco wastes and low-grade tobacco. Do selective breeding of 
low-tar tobacco varieties. 
  For cigarette products, gradually develop toward multiple 
categories in which mixed types are the primary factor, actively 
develop new mixed variety cigarettes containing Chinese herbal 
medicines and low-tar cigarettes, imprve the quality and grades 
of finished products, increase product varieties, change the 
product mix, abandon grades D and E tobacco. Use multiple 
product varieties and multiple categories of finished tobacco 
products to satisfy consumer demand. 
  With the objectives of improving the mix of cigarette 
products, improving quality, reducing consumption, and 
increasing economic benefits, make major efforts to develop 
advanced cigarette production and processing equipment, 
accelerate the pace of digestion and absorption of imported 
technology. Move quickly to achieve standardization, 
systemization, and general use. Do research on tobacco flavoring 
components, actively develop essences and perfumes, improve 
flavor regulation technology, and strengthen research on 
cigarette rolling and mixing technology. Do R&amp;D and new 
cigarette filter materials and all types of packaging materials, 
develop high-penetration cigarette papers and compound filters. 
  By the year 2000, technical levels in cigarette production 
should attain the levels of the economically developed nations 
in the early 1980's. The quality of export cigarettes should 
attain international levels. Consumption per crate of tobacco 
should be less than 45 kg, filtered cigarettes should exceed 50 
percent, and the average tar content of cigarettes should be 
less than 20 mg/cigarette. 
  5. Feed industry. 
  Do R&amp;D on protein feed resources, energy feed 
resources, and 
additive feed resources, especially on processing technology for 
leftover feeds from the agricultural sideline product processing 
industry, food products industry, fermentation industry, and 
others. Do resource on processing technology for oil cakes and 
sterilization of raw materials for making feeds. Do research on 
industrial production technology for the utilization of 
industrial waste water, residues, and so on as raw materials for 
producing monocellular proteins. Do research on algal protein 
development and utilization technology. Do research on 
development and utilization technology for livestock and poultry 
blood, bones, and feathers, aquacultural production leftovers, 
and other animal proteins. Do R&amp;D on new routes for energy 
feeds. 
  Do research on production technology required for amino 
acids, vitamins, mineral elements, antibiotics, growth 
promoters, antioxidants, antitoxics, vermifuges, adhesives, 
colorants, spices, and other types of additives used for feed 
grading. 
  Do research on granular, powdered, suspended, liquid, and 
other different state feed processing techniques and their 
systematic complete sets of processing equipment. Do research on 
processing technologies for premixed feeds, concentrated feeds, 
and other types of feeds. Do research for formulation of feed 
quality standards, regulations, and monitoring technology. 
  Do research on the effects of all types of nutrients on 
animal growth mechanisms, improve their organic efficacy for 
livestock and poultry. Do research on all types of livestock, 
poultry, and aquaculture feed optimum mixing, shorten feeding 
schedules, reduce costs, and increase feed conversion rates. 
  6. Cotton and hemp processing industry. 
  Do research on cotton processing technologies and on 
energy-saving, high efficiency, ventilation, dust removal, 
hydraulic transmission, and other advanced technical equipment. 
Import, digest, absorb, and develop drying, boll cleaning, boll 
rolling, fiber cutting, ginned cotton cleaning, and packing 
continuous production lines. Make major efforts to develop 
machine-processed cotton compaction and cotton padding, do 
research to improve combed cotton padding production lines. Do 
R&amp;D on comprehensive utilization technology for cotton seed. 
  Improve cotton inspection technology levels, develop several 
fast, accurate, operationally convenient, low-cost, practical, 
and effective testing instruments such as cotton length, 
maturity, strength, coloring, cotton cloth grading, and other 
types of inspection instruments and gauges. 
  Do research to improve peeling machinery and gum removal 
technology for jute, bluish dogbane, and ramie and jute and 
bluish dogbane retting processing technology. 
  7. Chemical fiber industry. 
  Develop polyester devices and rapid-growing artificial fiber 
pulping technology. Do research on dacron filament high-speed 
spinning technology, dacron short fiber short-course high-speed 
spinning and new acrylic spinning technology. Develop functional 
and differentiated chemical fibers and industrial chemical 
fibers, focus on research to resolve problems with artificial 
fiber in pure chemical fiber artificial woolen fabric and 
artificial silk and on key technologies for resistance to strand 
loosening and balling, static electricity resistance, flame 
retardance, high shrinkage, high curling, ultrafine fiber, and 
so on, increase the proportion of functional and differentiated 
chemical fibers among chemical fibers from the present 10 
percent to 20 percent by 2000, and actively extend and apply 
them in textile processing. Do research on high-tech fibers and 
special fibers, focus on developing liquid crystal, 
antibacterial, highly elastic, high strength, high modulus, high 
temperature resistant, irradiation resistant, separation, and 
other functional fibers and on new types of polyester fibers, 
high density spun fibers, and so on. 
  8. Textile printing and dyeing industry. 
  Do R&amp;D on new types of spinning and new types of weaving 
technology. For revolving cup spinning, the primary attack is on 
key components, raising domestic production rates, adding 
series, developing from the present nearly 300,000 nozzles to 
1.0 to 1.3 million nozzles, basically covering coarse cotton 
yarn production, and doing research on applications in 
medium-count yearn. Develop high-speed, fully-automatic 
revolving cup spinning machines. Expand applications of air-jet 
spinning, friction spinning, wrapped winding spinning, and other 
new types of spinning in all self-adapting spinning product 
varieties. Do R&amp;D on automatic winders and new types of 
automatic filatures. Do R&amp;D on rapier looms, air-jet looms, 
water-jet looms, and gripper looms, increase series, increase 
from the present nearly 20,000 units to about 100,000 to 120,000 
units by 2000 and account for about 9 percent of the total 
number of all types of looms at that time. The focus in knitting 
should be placed on making breakthroughs in making cloth 
directly using spinning bonding and new high-speed new making 
technology, and on research on non-woven cloth making printing, 
rolling, coating, and other treatment technologies. Along with 
developing clothing textiles, actively develop new decoration 
and industrial textile products. Actively utilize and foster 
China's silkworm, cashmere, rabbit fur, ramie, flax, and bluish 
dogbane raw material resource advantages, do research on 
processing techniques and technologies, develop new intensively 
processed products, raise grades and foreign exchange earning 
levels. 
  Do R&amp;D on high-speed high-efficiency preprocessing 
equipment, 
do research on technical equipment suitable for dyeing small 
batches of a wide variety of products, further develop circular 
net printing, flat net printing, and effusion spray dyeing, form 
small batch multiple product variety printing and processing 
technical systems in coastal and in interior export base areas 
prior to 2000, increase the competitiveness of our export 
products on the international market. Do R&amp;D on mechanical 
treatment and chemical treatment, focus on developing dry 
method, wet method, and transfer coating technology and on 
liquid ammonia, permanent setting, and multifunction organic 
silicon treatment technology. Do R&amp;D on textile dye treatment 
and coating treatment technology. Do research on cotton, silk, 
hemp, and other permanent crease-resistant and shrinkage 
prevention treatment technology. Do R&amp;D on real silk 
low-temperature dyeing technology, high-speed woolen goods 
washing and shrinkage, continuous kettle evaporation, and 
continuous moist heat setting treatment technology. Do research 
to improve ramie and flax textiles dyeing and post-processing 
technology, strengthen development and applied research on 
dyeing assistants, improve product quality and added value. 
  9. Clothing industry. 
  Focus on R&amp;D on new techniques for processing all types 
of 
clothing, reform traditional old techniques. Develop clothing 
computer-aided design systems for clothing patterns, colors, 
textile quality sensing, and so on. Employ automatic material 
arrangement, automatic cutting, high-efficiency special-purpose 
sewing equipment, and automatic hanger systems, 
three-dimensional ironing and three-dimensional packaging and 
transportation, make clothing processing equipment develop from 
high plane technology to three-dimensional processing 
technology. Reinforce clothing compatibility and arrangement, do 
R&amp;D on mid and high-grade lining materials and auxiliary 
materials. Strengthen research on clothing consumption 
structures, fashion trends, and market consumption predictions 
and forecasts. 
  10. Leather industry. 
  Take full advantage of China's abundant pig skin, focus on 
developing pig skin, actively and rationally utilize leather, 
sheepskin, and other types of hides, rationally develop wild 
resources, do research to improve preservation technologies for 
raw hides, strengthen comprehensive utilization of leather 
leftovers, undertake R&amp;D on the leather chemical industry and 
shoe materials. 
  Do research on new technologies for leather coating and 
decoration treatments, do research on new tanning techniques, do 
research on fur dyeing treatment and post-treatment decoration 
technology, develop high precision leather sheeting machines and 
evening machines, low energy consumption drying equipment and 
all types of new integrated decorative treatment machinery 
units, do research to improve fur post-treatment equipment, do 
research on computer design, piece standardization, and 
systematic production technology for shoes and on shoe making 
technique and assembly technology. 
  Actively develop exports of finished fur and leather goods 
and the associated decorative metal components, improve product 
quality and grades. 
  By 2000, put together in a preliminary fashion a stable raw 
materials supply system based on hogs, cattle, and sheep in 
which pig skin is the main factor, basically achieve superior 
quality, high efficiency, and matching up of leather chemical 
industry materials. Basically achieve a shift from exporting raw 
hides to exporting finished leather goods. 
  11. Papermaking industry. 
  Do research on comprehensive development technology for 
timber, paper, and chemical fiber pulp, actively develop 
superior quality fast growing abundant yield forests for 
papermaking, strengthen cultivation of fast-growing forests and 
their applications in pulp making and papermaking, do 
comprehensive research on nurturing cutting in forest regions 
and papermaking technology for processing leftover materials, 
actively study protection technology and improve variety 
selective breeding for reed resources, further expand the depth 
and breadth of development and applications for bluish dogbane, 
bamboo, bagasse, cotton stalks, and other non-woody raw 
materials, strengthen recovery and utilization of waste paper. 
  Do research on storage, preparation, and purification and 
bleaching technology and equipment for grass resources; do 
research on high gathering rate, how energy consumption, and 
limited polluting and non-polluting new pulp making and 
bleaching technology for poplar and other broadleaf materials; 
actively develop chemical mechanical pulp and high recovery rate 
pulp, strengthen importing, digestion, and absorption of key 
technical equipment, actively do R&amp;D on special-purpose 
equipment for pulp making and papermaking that conform to 
China's characteristics. Do research on long and short fiber 
mixture utilization technology and neutral sizing papermaking 
technology, develop special-purpose chemical assistants and 
applications technology for use in papermaking, do research to 
improve matching technology for grass pulp alkali recovery and 
comprehensive utilization technology for treatment of the 
``three wastes'', focus on basic theoretical research. Strive to 
move up to an advanced international status in non-woody fiber 
pulp making and papermaking technology. 
  Strive to improve the quality of offset printed newsprint, 
stretched paperbag paper, low ration paper, high fill paper, 
high lustre coated paper and cardboard, paper series used in 
industrial, national defense, and daily life, and other new 
products. Actively develop bagasse and bluish dogbane newsprint 
making; poplar wood mechanical hot grinding pulp; cardboard 
making from bamboo, cotton stalks, and bluish dogbane, and other 
products. 
  By 2000, strive for continual increases in the proportion of 
woody material used in papermaking fiber raw materials, 
continually improve waste paper recovery rates, basically 
achieve a shift to domestic production of primary large 
papermaking machinery, basically satisfy domestic demand for the 
quality and variety of paper and cardboard, make new 
breakthroughs in waste liquid treatment, substantially improve 
technology and equipment levels in the papermaking industry, 
achieve new increases in the proportion of woody material by 
2020, achieve more rational utilization of waste paper, form a 
series of matching manufacturing systems for papermaking 
equipment and try to export them, basically treat ``three 
wastes'', adapt the quality and variety of paper and cardboard 
to the requirements of our economic development and people's 
lives. 
  12. Plastic processing industry. 
  Actively develop plastic resin and matching assistant 
product 
varieties. Develop comixing, modification, filling, 
strengthening, and anti-aging technology. Develop degradable 
plastic film, plastic alloys, and engineering plastics. Do 
R&amp;D 
on waste and old plastic recovery and utilization technology and 
equipment. 
  Do research on new plastic finished product molding 
technology, do R&amp;D on advanced machine heads, molds, mold 
control, and other advanced technologies, do R&amp;D on 
applications 
of printing, bagmaking, welding, hot molding, spraying, hot 
press printing, color impressing, combination, and other new 
secondary processing technologies, strengthen development of 
special-purpose plastic equipment, focus on developing sets of 
special-purpose machinery units. Actively develop plastic series 
products, strengthen development of agricultural film and 
research on its applications technology. 
  13. Common chemical industry. 
  Fully utilize domestic resources, develop natural animal and 
plant oil preparation surface activators, increase the number of 
varieties of resin and alcohol products, readjust raw materials 
structures, develop washing products and new surface activator 
products and their applications in the industrial area. 
  Digest, absorb, and develop already-imported alkyl benzene 
and carbonyl synthetic fatty alcohol manufacturing technology, 
develop advanced carbonization, neutralization, mixing, 
spraying, and post-mixing technical equipment and procedure 
automatic control technology. Develop perfumed soap molding 
technology, fat hydrolysis technology, and glycerin recovery 
technology. Digest and absorb makeup emulsification devices and 
packaging equipment, develop series of makeup principles, do 
research on the mechanisms of pharmaceutical makeup action and 
their safety. Along with focusing on the development of 
synthetic perfumes, make major efforts to develop natural 
perfumes, do research on natural perfume blending, processing, 
storage, and precision refining technology, develop high-quality 
perfume product series, do research to improve perfume blending 
technology. Do further research on photosensitive materials 
silver-conserving and silver recovery technology, increase 
silver recovery rates, accelerate the digestion and absorption 
of color photosensitive materials production technology and the 
shift to domestic production of the primary raw materials, make 
major efforts to develop non-silver photosensitive materials. Do 
R&amp;D on new types of high-capacity high-power batteries. 
  14. Household appliance industry. 
  Strive to improve the safety performance and the quality and 
grades of existing products, increase added value, actively 
develop low energy consumption, safe, and high added value 
appliance products, increase designs and product varieties, 
accelerate the raising of product grades. Do R&amp;D on solar 
energy 
and multiple types of energy resource (coal gas, biogas, wind 
energy, geothermal, etc.) household appliance products. Actively 
develop small appliance products. Do R&amp;D on new types of 
electric light source materials and energy-saving electric light 
source products. Gradually reduce the proportion of incandescent 
lightbulbs in the electro-optical source product mix. 
  Raise product design levels, do R&amp;D on the use of 
electronics 
in products and automated production control technology. 
  Develop program controllers, compressors, temperature 
controllers, heating components, high-speed micromotors, 
transducers, and other key assembly manufacturing technology, 
accelerate the pace of a shift to domestic production of key 
assemblies and components, strengthen digestion, absorption, and 
innovation of imported technology and equipment, develop 
stamping, welding, large mold, and automatic monitoring function 
specialized high-efficiency precision processing technology and 
equipment. Do on new types of coolants that do not contain CFCs, 
new types of high-efficiency compressors and semiconductor 
cooling technology, do R&amp;D on flexible production components 
and 
production lines for household appliance products, strengthen 
thermodynamics, acoustics, materials science, fluid dynamics, 
and other related basic research. 
  By 2000, base supplies of key assemblies and components used 
in appliance production on domestic sources, develop several new 
appliance products, basically attain advanced international 
levels in quality. For a rational and modernized large-scale 
production household appliance production system with 
coordinated development and more rational deployments on a 
national scale. 
  15. Common machinery industry. 
  Focus on watches, bicycles, and sewing machines, strive to 
increase products designs and varieties, improve product 
quality, raise export foreign exchange earning levels, actively 
study and adopt new materials, do research on improving 
electroplating, gold plating, oil paint, and other surface 
decoration technologies, do R&amp;D on external watch components 
cold forging and precision forging processing technology and on 
domestically produced quartz watch assembly component 
(integrated circuit small quartz vibrators, stepping electric 
motors, etc.) and external component production technology. Do 
R&amp;D on bicycle welding and heat treatment technologies, and 
on 
automated assembly lines and automated packaging lines. Develop 
key component precision processing technology. Strengthen on 
product design and mold making. Do research in ergonomics. 
  Make major efforts to develop new quartz electronic watch 
(focusing on those with hands in the near term) products, 
actively develop all types of watches and timers used in 
industry, the military (including aviation and marine 
navigation), urban government construction, sports, and other 
areas. Develop electric-powered and internal combustion 
engine-powered bicycles, actively develop lightweight cars, 
multispeed cars, health cars, and racing cars. Develop household 
multifunction sewing machines, industrial sewing machines, 
computer embroidering machines, and other new products. 
  By 2000, form a multi-grade high, mid, and low structure for 
watch, bicycle, and sewing machine products, move toward or 
basically attain advanced international levels in product 
quality. Attain levels of the economically develop countries of 
the 1980's in techniques and technologies. 
  16. Common silicates industry. 
  Do research on mineral raw material resource protection, 
rational exploitation, comprehensive utilization, and precision 
processing technology, implement unified extraction and grading, 
comprehensively utilize natural resources, do research on the 
adoption of advanced superior quality energy-saving ceramic and 
enamelware kilns and glass ovens, do R&amp;D on molding, surface 
processing, and other advanced technologies, improve existing 
tunnel kiln and combustion technology, develop advanced molding 
machine units and key decoration equipment. Do research on 
mixing and preparation automated technical equipment, develop 
series of matching superior-quality fire-resistant materials, do 
research on glass product high-efficiency energy-saving 
annealing technology. Do research on lightweight bottle 
manufacturing technology and mold development technology, pay 
attention to exploring and improving traditional civilian 
techniques and technologies, accelerate research on copying 
ancient techniques. 
  Strive to raise product design levels, actively develop new 
products, focus on developing high-level sets of ceramics and 
technique display ceramics for export. For glass articles, focus 
on lead crystalline glass, handicraft products, and 
heat-resistant kitchen utensil series, tempered glass articles 
and assemblies and product series. For enamelware, the focus 
should be place on products that sell well in the international 
market. 
  By 2000, attain international standards in the quality of 
export products and basically attain international levels of the 
1980's for technical equipment. 

