Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Anna Bakina] </F>
  [Text] Moscow January 14 TASS -- The Russo-American 
contract on the sale of enriched uranium was signed at the 
Russian Ministry of Atomic Power on Friday. Russian President 
Yeltsin welcomed the agreement at a news conference in Moscow on 
the same day. "I am very satisfied that an agreement on uranium 
was signed," he said. 
  Under the contract to operate for 20 years, Russia plans to 
turn over to the United States 500 metric tonnes of weapon-grade 
uranium worth around 12 billion dollars. It will be extracted 
from 20 thousand units of nuclear ammunition during its 
elimination. 
  The uranium will be reprocessed to serve as fuel for nuclear 
power plants. 
  Russian Minister of Atomic Power Viktor Mikhaylov said on 
Friday that this agreement means a step to real nuclear 
disarmament. He said the contract was concluded under an 
intergovernmental agreement between Russia and the United States 
signed in February last. 
  The need for joint work with the United States in this area 
stems from the fact that the United States controls 50 per cent 
of the world market of uranium, while Russia's share in this 
market is only five to six per cent. "The contract will bring to 
Russia a source of foreign cerrency, while the industry of the 
U.S. can draw on Russian technologies," the minister believes. 
  There was a separate discussion during the preparation for 
the signing of the contract on the sharing of profits from the 
contract between Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan. The 
minister said it is for experts to establish if there is profit 
from the elimination of tactical nuclear weapons. Vast funds 
are so far spent on the dismantling of nuclear weapons and 
utilisation of nuclear charges. 
  Experts believe the document signed on Friday has a 
commercial chararter in addition to political. William Timbers, 
the head of the U.S. side at the signing, acting manager of the 
U.S. enrichment corporation, said it is the first time in 
history that disarmament can bring profit to states. 

