BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Marc Deger: "For Paris, Social Clause Not Worth a </F>
Crisis"] 
  [Text] Faced with the growing reticence of developing 
countries toward the introduction of a social clause in the 
future World Trade Organization (WTO)'s remit, Paris will not 
take the risk of provoking a North-South crisis during the GATT 
ministerial session at Marrakesh from 12 to 15 April. Gerard 
Longuet [foreign trade and industry minister], who will be 
making the journey to Morocco to sign the final Uruguay Round 
agreement on behalf of France, made this clear yesterday to the 
general meeting of the International Committee of the CNPF 
[National Council of French Employers], pointing out that what 
was essential for the French Government was first of all to 
"open the door to a debate and hold it open, so that the door 
cannot be shut on this problem." 
<H5>  U.S. Threat To Boycott Marrakesh Ministerial Declaration </H5>
  In fact, French diplomacy has been taking a position visibly 
different from Washington, which has suddenly adopted a "to the 
bitter end" attitude. Until the recent G-7 summit on employment 
in Detroit, however, the United States had been remarkably 
absent in the debate on the social clause, while France had made 
this a major issue for a long time. 
  Today the Americans are threatening to boycott the 
ministerial declaration at Marrakesh if it fails to make 
reference to "social standards" in defining the work program of 
the future WTO, which will take over from GATT in the first half 
of 1995. This week, the U.S. delegation presented an amendment 
aimed in this direction to the draft ministerial declaration, 
which provoked a categoric "no" from developing countries. 
  Developing countries who have only their low salaries as a 
comparative advantage see this desire to include a social clause 
in international trade rules as a fresh maneuver by 
industrialized countries to dominate them. Aware of the dangers 
of politicizing the debate between imperialism and a pro-third 
world stance, France explained that there was no question of 
requesting developing countries to adopt the same level of 
social protection and salaries as rich ones. 
  For Gerard Longuet, it is a matter of making people realize 
that "the globalization of the economy must be counterbalanced 
by the respect for minimum standards, such as a ban on child 
labor and forced labor." Alluding in particular to the newly 
industrialized countries, he pointed out that "countries which 
have achieved a certain level of development should have a 
certain obligation toward social convergence in the long term." 
  On Tuesday 2 April, [Prime Minister] Eduard Balladur will be 
calling together the ministers concerned by GATT to define 
France's position toward the Marrakesh meeting. "The objective 
is to come up with a proposal which can still create a link 
between trade and social issues," it was being said at the prime 
minister's office. 
  The fact remains that the Marrakech conference has been 
called in particular to cross the final "t's" on seven years of 
Uruguay Round negotiations. A ministerial declaration is not 
formally required by 15 April and could be made at a later date. 

