BFN 

  [Text] Ulaanbaatar June 23 (MONTSAME-OANA) -- The newspaper 
ARDIYN ERH informs that at the spring session of the State Great 
Hural (SGH) discussion of the draft law on land continues. The 
newspaper publishes a report on the theoretical-practical 
conference on the theme "External Policy of Mongolia for 1990's" 
which was held in June 20-21 at the Ministry for External 
Relations. At the openning of the conference which was organized 
by the Ministry for External Relations jointly with the 
Institute of International Relations of the Mongolian State 
National University present was the President P. Ochirbat. The 
participants to the conference in their speeches have pointed 
out to an importance of pursuing an active far-sighted external 
policy of Mongolia taking into consideration the country's 
interests, the present state and perspectives for development of 
international relations. 
  The newspaper ARDIYN ERH carries the greetings of the 
President of the USA Bill Clinton to the collective of the 
Ulaanbaatar Economic College, which is celebrating now its 70th 
jubilee. 
  The newspaper publishes some information about the events 
taking place in the country. It informs, in particular, that the 
editorial board of the newspaper TONG-A ILBO of the Republic of 
Korea has sent as a gift a printing machine to the editorial 
board of the newspaper ARDIYN ERH, about opening in the 
northwest of the Mongolian capital of a new market [words 
indistinct] of the trade-production concern Hangamj. 
  The state central organ publishes an interview of its 
correspondent with the chief of the chancellery of the President 
of Mongolia M. Enhsaihan, who has been to Germany at the 
invitation of the chief of the chancellery of the president of 
the FRG A.M. Landrut. 
  During the visit M. Enhsaihan has got acquainted with 
experiece of political education in Germany on the line of the 
Konrad Adenauer Fund. ARDIYN ERH publishes a big article of the 
State Great Hural member, well-known Mongolian poet, state prize 
laureate Bavuugiin Khagvasuren. In his article the poet points 
out to the absence of close ties of the people wih president, 
parliament and government. 
  The newspaper acquaints the readers with the soloist of the 
State Academic Theatre of Opera and Ballet, who played the main 
role of Chinggis Khaan in the feature film. [Words indistinct] 
ARDIYN ERH publishes advertisement of the Shiluustei Soum of 
Dzabhan Aymag and the Myangad Soum of Hobd Aymag, which will 
celebrate this year their 70th jubilee. 
  The newspaper informs in particular about arrival in 
Brussels of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian 
Federation A. Kozyrev, about visit to the USA of the head of the 
Government of Russia V. Chernomyrdin. 
  The trade union newspaper HODLOMOR publishes on its pages 
the draft law on indexation of incomes of the population and the 
minimum volume of wages. 

