BFN 

  [Text] The issue of North Korea's suspected nuclear arms 
development became a focal point of discussions at the ruling 
coalition parties' policy meeting. In this regard, the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs [MOFA] and Defense Agency [DA] authorities 
were carefully watching the outcome of the discussions at the 
meeting. A MOFA source said: "If the issue is going to be 
discussed at the Diet sooner or later, we should be thankful to 
the coalition parties for their effort to clarify the problem 
points and to draw up policies before forming a new 
administration." 
  On the other hand, some people are already talking about the 
possibility of Japan, the United States and the ROK imposing 
economic sanctions against North Korea without waiting for a UN 
Security Council resolution. They are also pointing out a 
negative aspect, saying that tasks which "should be studied 
internally" (according to a top Foreign Ministry official) are 
being brought to public notice. For the time being, it seems 
the authorities are on "tenterhooks" as far as the possibility 
of having detailed discussions at the policy meeting is 
concerned. 
  Regarding the ruling parties' policy meeting, most Foreign 
Ministry officials have assessed it positively. While citing 
the case of the United States, where presidential candidates 
always announce their policy platform before the actual 
election, as an example, a senior Foreign Ministry official 
said: "This is something we never did before in Japan. I am 
carefully observing the discussions at the meeting with a sense 
of excitement." A top MOFA official said: "I am very interested 
in them." (Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] Chief) Tsutomu Hata, 
deputy prime minister and concurrently foreign minister who is 
likely to become the next prime minister, stated: "In terms of 
managing politics, it is good for us to find out the course of 
the new administration at this stage." 
  The DA also shares the same view. A senior DA official said: 
"(Shinseito representative secretary general) Ozawa's concept of 
emergency defense legislation, designed to place the focus on 
the North Korean issue, and the emergency legislation which we 
have been studying from broad viewpoints, are not necessarily 
the same thing. However, we welcome the discussions at the 
meeting." 
  However, their views are different when it comes to the 
concrete issue of whether to include China in cooperation with 
Japan, the United States, and the ROK in the event of an 
emergency involving the North Korean issue. A senior Foreign 
Ministry official pointed out: "This is an issue we should talk 
about in case China exercises its veto power against the UNSC's 
resolution for imposing sanctions against North Korea, but it is 
still too early to talk about it." 
  MOFA officials are saying that it is not good policy, at 
this 
stage, to aimlessly excite North Korea, which reportedly 
informed the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of its 
policy to conditionally accept nuclear inspections, and China, 
which has "the most influential power," to persuade North Korea. 

