Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] President of the Interprivatization Fund Vladimir 
Shcherbakov has denied media reports alleging that he is one of 
the candidates to the post of Russian Finance Minister. 
  "I have nothing to do with the current publicity over my 
name. Any information about my claims for the post is false," he 
said in a statement to Interfax on Tuesday. 
  Shcherbakov said his plans did not provide for a political 
comeback. "For the past two and a half years," he said, "I have 
been trying to distance myself from any political or public 
activity and any contacts with parties or movements." 
  Nor did he accept proposals from various alliances to join 
them or stand as their candidate in general elections. 
  "This does not mean I do not care for Russia's interests," 
Shcherbakov said, pledging commitment to the country's cause. 
  He says his job with the Fund, which is among Russia's 
leading investment companies, is no less useful than his 
previous government post. He spoke of being quite satisfied 
with his social standing and having no ambitions to return to 
politics. 
  However, he accused some mass media of grossly 
misinterpreting his meeting with government officials, including 
a recent meeting with Boris Fedorov. 
  "We have known each other for a number of years. That is why 
I thought it possible to try to persuade him to lift some of his 
demands which are clearly unacceptable both to the President and 
Prime Minister," Shcherbakov said. He spoke of undue agitation 
being caused by the minister's demands and of having tried to 
persuade Fedorov to remain as Finance Minister. 
  However, he went along with Fedorov's demand to be given the 
job of First Deputy Prime Minister as well. This will help 
raise his responsibility for the country's finances and budget 
and vest him with appropriate powers without which the concept 
of personal responsibility is hollow, Shcherbakov said. "My view 
on this does not depend on who exactly will take up the post," 
he said. 
  In conclusion, Shcherbakov appealed to the public not to try 
to make his name the subject of political controversy, pledging 
all possible help to the government, but on a voluntary basis. 

