BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Chancellor Kohl Sees Clear Signs of </F>
Improvement"] 
  [Text] Hannover -- On Tuesday [19 April] evening, 
Chancellor Helmut Kohl opened the 1994 Hannover Industrial Fair, 
at which 6,848 exhibitors from 60 countries are displaying 
investment goods. This year's partner country is Hungary. 
  Kohl expressed optimism on the subject of economic 
development. Adhering to the text of a speech that had been 
distributed previously, he said that things are improving again. 
The spring of an economic boom is visible, he said. Industry 
spokesman Hans Peter Stihl also voiced optimism. Both speakers 
pointed out that the economic upturn does not mean that the 
problems with the labor market can be solved. 
  Kohl said that his certainty about an economic improvement 
was not just based on increased foreign orders. German industry 
itself has picked up again, he said. For the first time, west 
German industrial production has exceeded last year's level. In 
eastern Germany, a double-digit rate of growth has even been 
recorded. The benefits received by the laender have made 
eastern Germany the most attractive industrial location in all 
Europe, according to Kohl. That is why he is so fond of the 
expression "flourishing landscapes," even though he has been 
criticized for using it. He said that he was not wrong to use 
this expression as such; he had merely applied it to the wrong 
period. But flourishing landscapes will soon fill the picture, 
he said. 
  Kohl admitted that the economic improvement would not 
relieve 
the labor market immediately. The problem of the 4 million 
unemployed is still the biggest economic challenge, he said. 
The problem can only be solved through a joint effort. The 
conclusion of labor agreements would help, but it is also 
necessary to alter the various working time patterns. According 
to Kohl, the reason for the continuing high unemployment is not 
just the recession, but also a structural crisis. Therefore new 
ideas are required, and not new spending programs. The 
chancellor said that despite the forthcoming elections, no empty 
promises are going to be made, for financial-political 
credibility is more important than everything else. Kohl 
pointed out that according to the Bundesbank, inflation could 
drop to slightly more than 2 percent this year. He also 
indicated German industry's dependence on exports. Therefore it 
is important to encourage European integration. During 
Germany's turn as EU Council chairman in the second half of 
1994, Bonn wants to launch a new European deregulation 
initiative in the European Union to create extra maneuvering 
space for free trade. 
  Hans Peter Stihl, chairman of the German Chamber of Trade 
and 
Industry, also spoke about order books slowly filling up. The 
utilization of industrial capacity is increasing and the 
prospects of exports are improving thanks to, among other 
things, the lively economic situation in the United States. The 
economic recovery in the new laender is conspicuous, said Stihl. 
Stihl expects an 8-percent economic growth in the new laender 
in 1994, but admits that this rosy prospect will continue to be 
dimmed by the high level of unemployment. Even so, there is no 
reason to panic, said Stihl. We can do without state employment 
programs just as we can do without horror scenes from the days 
of the Weimar Republic, he said. 
  Stihl denied that German industry had overlooked scientific 
progress, but admitted that cooperation between science and 
industry could be improved. He also indicated the decreasing 
percentage of exports out of the GNP. In 1989, exports took up 
32 percent of the GNP, but today they take up a mere 22 percent. 
Therefore it is important to boost exports, said Stihl. 

