Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Deja Vu Over Talks"] </F>
  [Text] There was a sense of deja vu yesterday when UN envoy 
Joe Clark, announced after meeting [Turkish Cypriot leader] Rauf 
Denktas that, "I do not have the kind of agreement I require 
from the Turkish Cypriot side". It will be very difficult to 
find anyone on the island who would be in the least bit 
surprised by the news. But Clark, like his predecessors, refused 
to give up hope. "An option was raised at this morning's 
meeting that may make it possible for us to find an agreement 
and we are going to pursue that," he said, ignoring the fact 
that the latest effort was running out of time. The UN 
Secretary-General had set an end of March deadline, at which 
time he is expected to submit his report on Cyprus to the UN 
Security Council. 
  What happens in the more than likely event that the "option 
raised" yesterday comes to nothing? According to Clark, the 
Secretary-General's report would "indicate why we have not 
achieved progress". President Glavkos Kliridhis will get a pat 
on the back for his constructive contribution and acceptance of 
the UN package, while Denktas could be held responsible for the 
lack of progress. It is doubtful that Denktas would suffer any 
negative consequences for his stance; countries like Britain and 
the United States would argue, as they have always done after a 
deadlock round of negotiations, that punitive measures would 
only make the Turkish Cypriots less cooperative in future peace 
efforts. The absurdity of the argument is self-explanatory. 
  As we have always maintained, the United States, which more 
or less runs the UN Security Council, is not willing to 
jeopardise its good relations with Turkey for the sake of 
Cyprus. The same can be said of the British Government which 
has always had an active part to play in the peace process. 
This is why the UN has pandered to Denktas' whims ever since 
the Confidence Building Measures (CBM) were put on the table. 
Last May, Butrus Butrus-Ghali gave Denktas time to consult 
Ankara on the measures before giving his reply. The issue 
dragged on and no answer was given. We had to wait until after 
the elections in the north and then we had to wait for the new 
"government" to make up its mind. All this waiting, for Denktas 
to finally reject the UN proposals. Ironically it was the Greek 
Cypriots who had been repeatedly reminded, by every foreign 
official who visited the island, that the CBM was the last 
chance to achieve a settlement; as if it was the Greek Cypriot 
side which had stood in the way of progress. 
  Diplomats had this time pinned their hopes on pressure being 
put on Denktas by Turkish Prime Minister Tansu Ciller who was, 
reportedly, genuinely interested in the implementation of the 
measures. Some pressure was put on Denktas to make him discuss 
the measures, but alas, this glimmer of hope has already 
disappeared. Ciller, beset by domestic problems, is expected to 
emerge much weaker from Sunday's municipal elections in Turkey 
and will be in no position to apply pressure on anyone; 
political uncertainty in Ankara has always suited Denktas. 
  What happens now? Negotiations on the substance of the 
Cyprus 
problem are inconceivable after the CBM deadlock. If the 
Turkish Cypriot side is unable to show a modicum of goodwill 
that would allow the CBM to be implemented, it is impossible 
that a substantive dialogue could even get off the ground. It 
will be very interesting to see what Butrus-Ghali will make of 
all this in his report, and what new course of action, if any, 
he will take. Nothing drastic should be expected, especially 
now that Turkey has been invited to provide peacekeepers for 
Bosnia. 

