Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 19 Feb (AFP) -- The daily EL 
TIEMPO, published in Santa Fe de Bogota, reported today that the 
Cali and Medellin cartels, Colombia's two largest cocaine 
trafficking organizations, are negotiating a peace agreement 
after seven years of bloody war. According to EL TIEMPO, 
negotiations began two months ago, just 15 days after an elite 
Army squad killed Medellin cartel's top leader Pablo Escobar on 
2 December. 
  The majority of Escobar's most well-known and violent 
lieutenants are already in prison after voluntarily surrendering 
to justice to obtain the legal benefits granted by a special law 
offered by the government to drug traffickers who turn 
themselves in. Cali cartel leaders, through their lawyers, have 
contacted Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff to coordinate 
their surrender to justice. 
  According to EL TIEMPO, representatives from the two 
criminal 
organizations met clandestinely on 11 February somewhere in 
southwestern Valle del Cauca Department, where the Cali cartel 
is based, to negotiate a peace agreement. EL TIEMPO reported a 
pregnant woman was also present at the meeting, representing 
Escobar's widow. 
  After Escobar's death, his eldest son, Juan Pablo Escobar, 
issued a public call for peace to his father's enemies, asking 
them to put an end to the confrontation and offering to talk. EL 
TIEMPO says the Cali cartel practically imposed its conditions 
on the Medellin cartel to end the confrontation because, 
according to a source cited by the daily, "the winner imposes 
the conditions." 
  According to EL TIEMPO, Cali cartel leaders demanded the 
withdrawal of charges against brothers Fidel and Carlos Castano, 
who were accused of perpetrating an attack on a commercial plane 
that exploded on the air with 111 persons on board in December 
1989, from Escobar's men. In their confessions to obtain a 
reduction of their sentences, Medellin cartel leaders reportedly 
accused the Castano brothers, well-known paramilitary chiefs, of 
perpetrating the terrorist attack on the plane. 
  Cali cartel members also demanded that their traditional 
enemies turn over to them a man identified as Julio Mamey, who 
is accused of murdering Antioquia Department Governor Antonio 
Roldan Betancur in July 1989 when a car bomb exploded as his car 
was passing by. Authorities blamed the Cali cartel for Roldan 
Betancur's murder; therefore, the Cali cartel wants Mamey to 
tell the Prosecutor General's office that he received the order 
to kill the governor directly from Pablo Escobar, the Medellin 
cartel's slain chief. 
  The Cali cartel drug traffickers also demanded that the rest 
of Pablo Escobar's men who are still at large surrender to 
justice and serve the sentences issued by the Prosecutor 
General's Office. In addition, they demanded that Escobar's 
fortune be used to help the victims of the terrorism he 
unleashed during the past few years in Colombia. 
  Finally, EL TIEMPO reported that four of Escobar's top men, 
who are currently in prison, have already signed the peace 
agreement. 

