Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Montevideo, 11 Mar (EFE) -- Official sources 
reported today that higher Uruguayan courts have confirmed the 
extradition request on Miguel Ibanez Oteiza, an alleged member 
of the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty] Basque terrorist 
organization. 
  The Spanish courts submitted two requests for the 
extradition 
of Ibanez Oteiza. The lower and higher courts approved the 
first. 
  This approval corresponds to the second Spanish request, 
which mentions charges of involvement in an attack, while the 
first request -- which was also granted -- mentions murder 
charges. 
  Oteiza and 12 other Spanish citizens were arrested by the 
Uruguayan police, at the request of Spain, in May 1992 in 
Montevideo. The Spanish citizens, who had forged documents, 
were running a Basque restaurant known as "La Trainera." 
  Of the 13 detainees, the courts rapidly released five, 
against whom Spain did not submit extradition requests. 
  Of the eight whose extradition was requested, local courts 
released three in 1993, after rejecting the extradition request. 
They are Rosario Delgado Iriondo, Jesus Maria Iriondo, and Pedro 
Maria Lizarralde Izaguirre. 
  Uruguayan lower and higher courts granted the extradition of 
two: Jose Maria Goitia Unzurrunzaga and Miguel Ibanez Oteiza. 
  As for the three remaining Spaniards, Uruguayan lower courts 
rejected the extradition request on Juan Jose Urrutia Pia and 
Amaya Araquistain Unamuno. The decision was appealed before a 
higher court. 
  Uruguayan lower courts granted the extradition of the last 
Spaniard, Luis Maria Lizarralde Izaguirre, but his lawyer, 
Gustavo Puig, appealed the decision. 
  Consequently, the five Spaniards whose extradition had been 
either granted or which are awaiting an appellate court decision 
remain in Montevideo's central prison. 
  The case of the alleged ETA members has been well covered by 
the Uruguayan press, which today dedicated broad coverage to the 
matter because it coincides with the acceptance by the Spanish 
King and Queen of an official invitation to visit Uruguay. 
  The date for the visit, which follows an invitation by 
Uruguayan President Luis Alberto Lacalle, is unspecified despite 
announcements in Uruguay that it will be made in the third week 
of April. 
  According to various sources, the visit's indefinite 
postponement followed displeasure expressed by Spanish 
authorities on two occasions over the delay in the extradition 
of the two alleged ETA members -- Oteiza and Goitia -- who 
cannot further appeal their extradition. 
  Uruguayan executive branch sources consulted by EFE suggest 
that the problem is that the two have trials pending in Uruguay 
for using forged documents, which they were carrying when 
arrested. 
  Lawyer Puig has said the trials for these minor crimes have 
not begun, even though almost two years have passed since their 
arrest, and the delay can last another year. 
  Presidential spokesman Roberto Etcheverry told EFE: "The 
Uruguayan Constitution guarantees the independence of the 
branches of government. This regulation is fully respected, for 
which reason the executive branch cannot and should not 
intervene in the court decisions." 

