Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Kobe Steel, Ltd. (Kobe Steel), has successfully 
developed a high-strength, low-alloy steel powder 
``Planetalloy'' (trade name). The new alloy steel powder, found 
to have the world's strongest tensile strength, was produced by 
blending other alloy components to iron powder and sintering the 
mixture. Although an increasing number of sintered components 
has been used in automobiles, there is a limit to the amount of 
additive components for existing sintered materials, not to 
mention the fact that these materials require heat treatment. In 
response to user demand, Kobe Steel developed the powder and 
began test marketing with sintered compact makers. Today, Kobe 
Steel is evaluating verification test results and soon plans to 
start full-scale market development. 
  Planetalloy developed by Kobe Steel is low-alloy steel 
powder 
with an average particle size of 10 , and it contains 3.4 
percent nickel, 0.4 percent molybdenum, 0.9 percent manganese, 
0.9 percent chrome and 0.4 percent silicon, in addition to its 
iron powder base. When this powder is added at a rate of four to 
five percent to pure iron powder whose particle sizes range from 
45 to 250  with an average of 100 , the mixture is 
sintered to obtain the sintered compact with the world's 
strongest tensile strength of 150 kg/mm[.sup]2[/]. 
  The automotive industry is now using approximately 65,000 
tons per year of iron powder, primarily in sintered compact 
components, and the recent trend of the use of sintered 
components employing high-strength, low-alloy steel powder has 
been on the rise. However, the existing low-alloy steel powder 
tends to react with the atmospheric gas during the sintering 
process to alter the composition. Thus, there have been 
restrictions as to what and how much can be added. In addition, 
the entire process of producing high-strength steel powder 
needed to be improved by adding a heat treatment process after 
the sintering process. 
  On the other hand, it has been confirmed that Planetalloy, 
which has been micronized to a 10-micron size by a water 
atomizer, has its alloy components diffused throughout the 
micro-structure during the sintering process, and the formation 
of bainite and martensite acts to reinforce the interstices of 
iron powder to greatly improve tensile and mechanical strengths. 
It is also possible to produce sintered compacts with various 
characteristics of choice by changing the composition through 
the adjustment of pre-alloying quantities of micropowders and 
the carbon amount. Kobe Steel already has developed free-cutting 
steel powder. 
  Kobe Steel has set up a production facility at the PM Center 
within its Takasago Plant and has begun to ship samples to 
sintered compact makers to have them evaluate product 
performances. As soon as the results of the evaluation are in, 
Kobe Steel plans to embark on full-scale commercialization. 

