Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [First installment of a two-part interview with ANC </F>
Secretary General Cyril Ramaphosa by CITY PRESS Editor Khulu 
Sibiya and Assistant Editor Sekola Sello; place and date not 
given] 
  [Text] CITY PRESS [CP]. Why do you and Nelson Mandela 
think April 27 is sacrosanct, that this date cannot be changed 
to accommodate Inkatha and other rightwing parties that may be 
persuaded to take part in the elections? 
  Ramaphosa: There is so much expectation among our people, 
and among the international community, that this is the one date 
that the people of South Africa have with destiny. The 27th has 
been so deeply ingrained in the minds of our people that if you 
were to postpone the elections the consequences would be, to use 
a phrase that has been used before, too ghastly to contemplate. 
  Our people have stretched their patience over the years of 
apartheid so much that there is no further elasticity left 
beyond the 27th. There would be an eruption, an upheaval like 
we have never seen before. 
  The second thing is the international community would turn 
their backs on us. The investing community, the business 
confidence that we have started building up would just be a 
downward spiral. I don't think the economy could sustain a 
postponement of that date. 
  It would make a mockery of the whole process of 
negotiations. 
If you were to tamper with that date, then you would have to 
start saying, "When must the election be held?" -- and then we 
are involved in a huge, lengthy wrangle. 
  We think we have done enough -- virtually everything -- to 
try to bring them on board. But we are prepared to walk the 
extra mile. Mediation to us is the solution and when they 
(Inkatha) proposed it, we grasped it because we believe it would 
not delay negotiations or the elections. 
  CP: Your party's strongest point has been the ability to 
carry your constituency with you even when taking unpopular 
decisions. You demonstrated this when you suspended armed action 
but more graphically following the assassination of SACP [South 
African Communist Party] leader Chris Hani. We contend that if 
you endorsed a postponement there would not be any upheaval. 
  Ramaphosa: One of the central demands we made following 
Chris Hani's death was that an election date must be set -- and 
it was that which calmed the people. It was around that that we 
were able to contain the anger bursting out. It would be a 
betrayal to the memory of Hani if we were to change the election 
date. 
  CP: We further argue that the investing community's 
confidence would be restored and not diminished if an 
all-inclusive settlement, one that involves Inkatha and the 
white right, was reached even if at the expense of a 
postponement. 
  Ramaphosa: We have been talking to the investing community, 
ambassadors and so forth -- and they agree that there should be 
no change. 
  CP: Are you not taking a serious risk with this route? What 
if these heavily armed rightwingers then claim "peaceful avenues 
were closed to them" and the only recourse left was armed 
resistance? 
  Ramaphosa: The risks are far greater for us if the election 
date was changed. Looking at the rightwingers, some of them 
don't want an elections -- let's be realistic on this issue. 
They are afraid of democracy and it is one of their stalling 
strategies. We would be making the biggest mistake if we were 
to change the election date. We would be playing into their 
hands. 
  CP: There are divisions within the rightwing. Wouldn't a 
postponement show your reasonableness and further drive a wedge 
among these factions? You would call the bluff of those against 
elections. 
  Ramaphosa: We have called their bluff. It is already known 
who is serious about elections and who is not. Buthelezi 
(Inkatha leader Mangosuthu) says he needs more time to campaign 
for elections. That is the flimsiest and weakest excuse that 
you can think of. To use such an excuse when it is the future 
of the country that we are looking at does not display 
responsibility. 
  CP: Are you saying Chief Buthelezi is not interested in 
taking part in the elections of all? 
  Ramaphosa: He is afraid of democracy. He is afraid of 
facing the people. His support has been dwindling and he knows 
that. What he is afraid of is losing the elections. If he is 
not afraid, let him go and face the country. 
  CP: There are widespread claims, rumours if you will, that 
the ANC offered him something in order to take part in the 
elections. 
  Ramaphosa: He was not offered anything. Basically we just 
put forward what is possible if the IFP runs for elections. 
There is no reason why, if they have a good showing at the 
polls, they cannot be part of government of national unity. 
They could be in the Cabinet as well, that is in black and 
white in the constitution. 
  CP: Come, come Mr Secretary General. It is rumoured that 
you offered him the deputy presidency. 
  Ramaphosa: If you look at the constitution it is not a 
question of having promised anybody the deputy presidency. The 
first deputy president will come from the majority party -- 
which the ANC is going to be. The second deputy president will 
come from the second largest party. So if Inkatha becomes the 
largest party they have the presidency and the second presidency 
[as published]. But if they become second largest party they 
have the second deputy presidency. It is guaranteed in the 
constitution. No promises could ever have been made of the 
deputy presidency. We can't bend the constitution. 
  CP: How serious and realistic are you about providing one 
million houses within five years? Given the huge amounts and 
the sheer logistics needed, is this not an electioneering 
gimmick? 
  Ramaphosa: We believe it is possible to build up to a 
million houses in five years. It is possible if we harness all 
the resources we have as a nation and direct them towards giving 
our people a better life. The economy can start booming if 
features of our plans can be implemented. 
  May I give an example of how the Israelis have just gone 
about it. They got two or three billion dollars from the U.S. 
and the money was largely used as a guarantee for the loans that 
the people will get. At the same time government obtained loans 
from international banks and other sources. 
  We will be able to get loan guaranteed funds coming in to 
give guarantees to the private sector that their money is not 
going to be lost. The government will be able to back up those 
guarantees. The government will be able to unlock a number of 
resources. A bit of money has been voted in this parliament 
over the years for housing and they have not utilised it. 
  By unlocking and redirecting resources we will be able to do 
it and because we have identified it as a priority we are not 
the type of government who will sit on money. Let me give you 
an example. They (government) voted R4-million [rand] to 
upgrade hostels. But up to today nothing has happened, nothing 
has been spent. 
  Why? Because they have no plan. I think they voted 
R2-billion for housing. What happened? They built 15,000 
houses. 
  The House of Delegates, the House of Representatives have 
been building, yes -- for the Indians and Coloureds because of 
the favoured status that they were given. But have we seen a 
major housing project underway in black areas? Never. What did 
they do in the end? They gave R2-billion to the Independent 
Development Trust [IDT]. And what did the IDT do with the 
money? They built toilet cities all over. 

