Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Dispatch" by reporter Yu Qingchu (0151 3237 5710): "Over </F>
1,900 Party Members and Cadres in Jiangxi Have Been Punished for 
Corruption"] 
  [Text] Jiangxi Province has made breakthroughs in 
promoting the building of a clean and honest administration and 
its economic construction through the handling of major and 
important cases of corruption by relying on the broad ranks of 
cadres and the broad masses. So far, the discipline inspection, 
supervision, and procuratorial organs throughout the province 
have filed 2,648 cases, have punished 1,962 party members and 
cadres, and have handled a whole series of major and important 
cases. Direct financial losses to the state of over 20 million 
yuan were prevented. 
  Since last August, the authorities in Jiangxi Province have 
continuously strengthened the anticorruption operation; have 
reinforced the organization and system for enforcing discipline, 
enforcing the law, and handling cases; have reannounced a batch 
of complaint hotlines; and have set up complaint boxes in 
downtown areas and at major communication hubs. These measures 
have aroused the masses' enthusiasm for reporting offenses. The 
provincial discipline inspection, supervision, and procuratorial 
organs alone have received approximately 10,000 petition letters 
and verbal complaints. 
  The authorities in Jiangxi Province have consistently 
conducted the anticorruption campaign by focusing on the conduct 
of leading cadres first and giving priority to precautionary 
education and prevention. A group of party members and cadres 
have been educated and redeemed through self-examination and 
self-correction. The phenomenon of leaders attending to the 
anticorruption operation in person, leaders becoming the object 
of the anticorruption operation, and leaders taking the lead in 
self-examination, self-correction, and showing self-discipline 
and honesty in performing official duties prevailed throughout 
the province. Leading cadres ranking at and above the level of 
county head or provincial department head all checked their own 
conduct and strictly disciplined themselves by attending 
criticism and self-criticism meetings and filling out checklists 
in accordance with the five stipulations laid down by the 
Central Committee and the seven requirements raised by the 
provincial party committee. So far, 1,223 cadres have returned 
or handed in gift money and valuable securities which they 
received through official activities and 534 have resigned from 
their part- time positions in various kinds of economic entities. 
  Seeking breakthroughs in promoting the building of a clean 
and honest administration by handling major and important cases 
of corruption is a distinctive hallmark of Jiangxi's 
anticorruption operation. The provincial discipline inspection 
and supervision organs have handled 17 cadres ranking at and 
above the level of county head, and the provincial procuratorial 
organs have handled 488 major cases and 42 important ones. 

