BFN 

<F P=106> [By Noel Lorthiois] </F>
  [Text] Mexico City, 20 Jun (AFP) -- Just two months before 
the 21 August Mexican presidential elections, and for the first 
time in 65 years, the Institutional Revolutionary Party [PRI] 
appears seriously threatened, while the popularity of the 
conservative opposition candidate continues to rise. 
  By offering sound alternatives, Catholic attorney Diego 
Fernandez de Ceballos, 53, candidate of the National Action 
Party (PAN, conservative), continues to gain more ground with 
each passing day, according to opinion polls published in the 
Mexican capital in recent weeks. 
  Moreover, according to a government official who asked to 
remain anonymous, as of two weeks ago, unpublished polls showed 
that "one day, the PRI candidate was leading Diego Fernandez 36 
to 34 percent, and the next day, the opposite was true." In 
Mexico, the president is elected by a simple majority and 
universal suffrage in a single-round election. 
  Fernandez's popularity rose markedly after the 12 May 
televised debate between the three main presidential candidates. 
All commentators agreed that the PAN candidate, an excellent 
speaker who is graced with undeniable charisma, was the 
hands-down winner of the debate. This was the first such debate 
organized in Mexico, and it was seen by nearly 50 million 
viewers. 
  Meanwhile, the PRI, which is bogged down in a true crisis 
that reflects the end of its era and shows it is being ripped 
apart by internal quarrels, is losing more sympathizers each and 
every day, and it is obvious that its candidate Ernesto Zedillo, 
43, does not convince the people. 
  Zedillo has the disadvantage of having been hastily 
appointed 
barely three months ago in the wake of the murder of Luis 
Donaldo Colosio, the previous PRI candidate. Zedillo's entire 
career has taken place within ministries (specifically the 
Budget and Education Ministries) and he has never held an 
elected post. He is considered a brilliant technocrat. 
  According to analysts, Zedillo is a victim of the erosion of 
his party, which was created in 1929 by Plutarco Elias Calles. 
The party no longer responds to its initial vocation of being a 
"party of the state" designed to ensure the nation's stability. 
  In fact, within the past six months, the Mexicans have 
watched with consternation a guerrilla rebellion in Chiapas 
State (south), where the conflict still has not been resolved, 
despite the cease-fire; Colosio's murder; a rise in violence and 
kidnappings; and a unsettling increase in drug trafficking. 
Meanwhile, the PRI candidate himself recognizes it is necessary 
to "urgently and deeply" reform justice and the police. 
  After 65 years of PRI rule and in the wake of true 
modernization undertaken by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, 
the Mexicans undoubtedly expect a political change. 
Furthermore, the slogan of "democratic transition" is recalled 
daily as an unavoidable fact, not only by the opposition 
parties, but also by PRI dissidents, the Catholic Church, 
countless intellectuals, and the main political editorial 
writers. 
  The question is who will be able to assure this transition 
and how it will be achieved. As of now, it is believed that the 
PRI probably will not be able to continue ruling alone. 
Nevertheless, it appears unlikely that any elected opposition 
candidate would be able to rule without the PRI, taking into 
account the current alignment of forces. 
  Salinas, who has always maintained that he will turn over 
power to whoever wins the election, will have to face this 
challenge, guarantee transparent elections, and oversee a 
transition without upheavals; otherwise, the nation could sink 
into serious political turmoil. 

