Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] At the Eighth Meeting of the Board of Directors of 
the Andean Development Corporation (CAF), two loans to the 
Venezuelan energy sector totaling $62 million were approved. 
  Enrique Garcia, the president of this regional financial 
body, explained that one of the loans, in the amount of $50 
million, will be used for the construction of the Caruachi 
Hydroelectric Plant. It will have an installed capacity of 2,160 
megawatts and will produce an average energy volume of 13,300 
gigawatt/hours annually for incorporation in the interconnected 
national system. 
  The second loan, in the amount of $12 million, will be used 
for the cofinancing of the construction and commissioning of 
another plant, Macagua II, a project begun in 1987, Garcia said. 
  "The corporation allocated $33 million for this plant in 
1992. It is planned as a continuation of Macagua I, and includes 
projects for the control of the Caroni River, for creating a 
reservoir, and for increasing the generating capacity by 
regulating the flow reaching the final stretch of the Guri. With 
a nominal capacity of 2,548 megawatts, it is expected that the 
first generating units at this plant will be commissioned next 
year, and the last ones in 1997." These projects fall within the 
areas designated as priorities by the CAF, Garcia said, since 
they will contribute to meeting the increasing demand of the 
nation and the Venezuelan industrial export sector for 
electrical energy. Currently, the EDELCA [Caroni River 
Electrification Project] owns and operates two hydroelectric 
plants on the Caroni. They are Macagua I and the Raul Leoni 
Power Plant (Guri), the second largest in the world. 
  These power plants have made it possible to develop heavy 
industry in the Guayana region of Venezuela, in addition to 
meeting more than 70 percent of the domestic demand for 
electrical energy. 
  The recent meeting of the CAF Board of Directors also 
approved the grant of a loan of $70 million to the Republic of 
Venezuela to cofinance a program designed to manage and preserve 
the primary highway network. The execution of the program will 
be the responsibility of the Ministry of Transport and 
Communications (MTC). 
  Enrique Garcia explained that this project (Highway III) is 
of vital importance to the country because the 36,000 kilometers 
in the principal highway network in Venezuela have deteriorated, 
in terms of both the surfaces (pavement layers, drainage 
facilities, bridges, and tunnels) and the signaling and safety 
aspects. 
  "This project, the total cost of which will come to $852 
million, involves a multiple-investment plan to be implemented 
between 1994 and 1998, with three principal 
components--institutional strengthening, maintenance, and 
investments--as its basis." 
  Garcia noted that the financing will be provided by the 
Inter-American Development Bank ($200 million), the World Bank 
($150 million), the MTC ($432 million), and the CAF. On this 
basis, the plans call for the rehabilitation of more than 2,000 
kilometers of roads, 730 bridges, and some 150 kilometers of 
tunnels; for major maintenance work on some 3,200 kilometers of 
roadway; and for the purchase of equipment to be used in the 
supervision of the work and the signaling system. 
  The program will be implemented by the MTC through the 
General Sectorial Highway System Office, the president of the 
corporation stated. However, some projects may be handled by the 
state administrations, since it is they who bear the 
responsibility for road maintenance. A decentralization 
agreement is being signed by the central government and the 
states. 
  Another loan of $20 million approved by the CAF will go to a 
private business, Manufacturas de Papel, C.A. [Paper 
Manufacturing, Inc.] (MANPA) for the design and production of a 
machine (Machine Project 8) to produce various types of toilet 
paper. 
  "This project is being executed on the premises of the 
Maracay Paper Factory, located in the State of Aragua. This is a 
business belonging to the Delfino Group, which has been a leader 
in paper manufacturing since 1912. It has the capacity to 
produce 50,000 tons of tissue paper annually, which satisfies 
about 40 percent of the domestic market demand. The surplus 
production is exported." 
  Garcia emphasized that with the launching of this project, 
the hope is to increase production by about 27,000 metric tons 
per year, enabling MANPA to satisfy the increase in demand on 
both the national and the international levels, particularly in 
the Latin American and Caribbean areas. 

