CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ghania Oukazi: "Consequences of Dinar's </F>
Devaluation"] 
  [Text] The recent devaluation of the dinar has had a mixed 
reception from public-sector employers, some believing it will 
stimulate domestic economic activity... 
  This view was expressed by Mr. Mustapha Mekkideche, 
president 
of the Exporters Club, who believes the currency devaluation 
will stimulate exports dramatically and trigger a wave of new 
investment. 
  Also, he believes it would be wise to draw up an action 
program to stabilize economic conditions and thus curb 
inflationary trends. In addition, Mr. Mekkideche believes it 
important to implement companion measures to keep key 
macroeconomic variables in balance. 
  However, he concedes exporters will have to pay more for raw 
materials--which means, in his opinion, there will be 
substantial foreign exchange losses, which the state is not 
prepared to offset. The export spokesman noted that enterprises 
in the sector will have difficulty obtaining credit. All 
evidence to date suggests this will slow down many of their 
activities. 
  Mr. Mekkideche also thinks that to derive full benefit from 
the devaluation, it is important not to raise workers' wage 
scales. Moreover, exporters hope to see rapid implementation of 
a scheme to insure them against foreign exchange losses. 
  The president of the exporters' group emphasized that the 
accord between Algeria and the IMF is broadly satisfactory, in 
that hydrocarbon losses will be offset. That being the case, Mr. 
Mekkideche concludes by voicing the hope that the financial 
infusions will not be used to finance nonproductive activity or 
reestablish an economy based on state investment. 
  Meanwhile, the UNEP [National Union of Public Entrepreneurs] 
said through spokesperson Ahmed Benyounes that the recent 
devaluation of the dinar came as no surprise, although it seemed 
somewhat larger than necessary. 
  According to Mr. Benyounes, devaluation will only aggravate 
the state's already serious liquidity problems. For example, he 
says the attendant increase in cost of raw materials will block 
further progress in many initiatives. 
  Even so, Mr. Benyounes remains optimistic and noted the 
positive effects of the devaluation. He believes, for instance, 
that it will facilitate Algeria's integration into the 
international marketplace. 
  However, he maintains that rigorous management of resources 
is essential for national economic recovery. 
  UNEP also appealed for broader consultations between the 
social partners to increase administrative efficiency at the 
local level and fully implement the increasingly vital 
industrial restructuring. 
  ADEM [The National Employment Agency] for its part believes 
that to avoid loss of valuable time--since freeing up prices 
charged by monopolies that have not yet been restructured could 
lead to a social explosion--the government needs to demonstrate 
its commitment to change by moving quickly from a statist system 
based on investment in public-sector monopolies to a competitive 
market economy that will stimulate creativity by recognizing 
labor's real value in our society. 
  During the standby or observation period, Algeria must 
implement a stabilization policy to resorb the excess money in 
the economy by putting an end to excessive public-sector 
outlays, a courageous solution to the stupendous deficits of 
public-sector enterprises. 
  While at the same time implementing far-reaching structural 
reforms in every domain: administration, customs, tax policy, 
and banking, to name only a few. 
  The state, during this transition period, has an important 
stabilizing role to play, harmonizing economic efficiency with 
social cohesion and working to make the social safety net more 
effective in the fight against exclusion and poverty. 
  But the most effective social protection is renewed 
investment. This in turn will require establishing a national 
clearinghouse to prevent the combination of an activist monetary 
policy and a selective budgetary policy from leading to 
blockages in the economy. The clearinghouse should be part of a 
strategy that is clearly defined over time, adapting tactics to 
the strategic objective of increasing collective prosperity. 

