Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ankara -- Behcet Canturk, one of the prominent 
figures of the Turkish drug and arms smuggling world, was killed 
on Saturday [15 January]. Canturk who was also the sponsor of 
the pro-Kurdish paper ``Ozgur Gundem'' was found dead, along 
with his driver, near the Sapanca district of Sakarya. 
  The examination of the two unidentified bodies, which were 
found on the TEM highway near Kirkpinar, Sapanca, has revealed 
that one of the bodies belonged to Canturk. The other body next 
to Canturk, who was shot once in the mouth, was identified as 
belonging to his driver Recep Kuzucu. There were no identity 
cards on the bodies, which were taken to the mortuary of the 
Sakarya State Hospital where they were identified by their 
relatives. 
  Security officials, who stated that there were many empty 
cartridges in the area where the bodies were found, said that 
investigations were underway. Drawing attention to the fact 
that the conflict among drug smugglers has recently become 
tense, the officials said that the smugglers were settling 
accounts among themselves for reasons which were as yet unknown. 
``The men may have been killed as a result of this power 
struggle,'' the officials added. 
  Born in Lice, Diyarbakir in 1950, Canturk committed his 
first 
murder at the age of 15 when he was a student at a junior high 
school. After serving a prison term of one year, Canturk was 
released under an amnesty of the time. In 1969, during an 
inter- tribe struggle, he murdered another person. Security 
forces were unable to catch him and he committed two more 
murders while at large. 
  When he turned himself in to the police in 1971, he was set 
free again in 1974 in accordance with a further amnesty. 
  Canturk, who was the leader of the Canturk tribe in the town 
of Lice in the province of Diyarbakir, settled in Istanbul in 
1979. He started to deal with arms and drug smuggling from that 
time. Canturk, whose mother and whose second wife were both of 
Armenian origin, was taken into custody following the coup of 
Sept. 12, 1980 and tried in the case publicly referred to as the 
``The Case of the Godfathers.'' The charges were of providing 
financial support to the Armenian terrorist organization, ASALA 
[Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia], and to the 
outlawed Kurdish organization Progressive Eastern Cultural Clubs 
(DDKD). The prosecutor demanded capital punishment for Canturk, 
but he was acquitted after a series of hearings. 
  Canturk was also tried at the Diyarbakir Military Court on 
charges of smuggling heroin to European countries by sea. He 
was acquitted due to lack of evidence. 
  In 1991, he started to publish the pro-Kurdish daily Ozgur 
Gundem with Yasar Kaya. Although he was financing the paper, he 
had left the auditing of the paper's accounts to another person 
in line with the company's statutes. 

