BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 13 KYODO -- Japan should actively 
campaign to become a permanent member of the U.N. Security 
Council rather than wait for other nations to push Japan for the 
seat, former Japanese Ambassador to the United Nations Yoshio 
Hatano said Friday [13 May]. Hatano, who just completed his 
four-year term in New York, referred to the need to become a 
permanent member in a speech sponsored by the Asian Affairs 
Research Council at a Tokyo hotel. 
  Views in Japan that it would seek the permanent membership 
only if pushed by others or that it should seek the bid modestly 
without looking too eager, are based on a very Japanese way of 
thinking, Hatano said. 
  Because permanent members are elected, Japan must first make 
clear its candidacy and lobby to win votes to gain other 
nations' support, he said. 
  Unless it takes such initiative, Hatano said, no country 
would strongly push for Japan's permanent seat since the 
discussion on whether to include Japan and Germany in the 
Security Council is just one of the agendas to reform the 
council. 
  Hatano also said Japan should not just offer large financial 
contributions to the world body but should speak out and offer 
ideas. 
  Japan currently shoulders 12.45 percent of the two-year U.N. 
budget, ranking second after the United States which provides 25 
percent. From the 1995-1997 U.N. budget, however, its share is 
to rise to 15 percent following a routine rate revision. 
  Despite having limitations in cooperating in U.N. 
activities, 
such as constitutional limits to join U.N. peacekeeping 
operations, Japan does not have to be too timid, Hatano said, 
because the U.N. expects Japan to do what it can within its 
limits. 
  U.N. expectations toward Japan concerning the peacekeeping 
activities are in the field of logistical support and 
engineering, he said. 
  Hatano, however, said Japan, which successfully participated 
in U.N.-led peacekeeping operations in Cambodia, is often 
criticized for being reluctant to join peacekeeping operations 
in other parts of the world except Asia, such as those in Africa. 
  Japan has great shackles on itself regarding participation 
in 
peacekeeping operations because it cannot accept the idea of 
sending Self-Defense Forces troops to dangerous areas, he said. 
  Hatano also said Japan can take initiatives in solving 
environmental problems because "such problems can be solved by 
money." 
  "Japan can take initiatives in things that could be solved 
by 
money. But not in other areas," he said. 

