BFN 

<F P=106> [By Serge Arnold] </F>
  [Excerpts] Nairobi, May 21 (AFP) -- Rwandan rebels pushed 
on Saturday [21 May] with a violent offensive against government 
forces in the capital Kigali where shelling was particularly 
fierce around the airport, a spokesman for the UN Assistance 
Mission in Rwanda (UNAMIR) said. 
  Abdul Kabia, contacted by telephone, said the rebels from 
the 
Tutsi-dominaed Rwandan Patriotic Front held the advantage in the 
latest fighting. But he was reluctant to say if this "major 
offensive" was the final push the rebels have vowed to make 
against the Hutu-dominated government forces to take Kigali. 
"We are uncertain exactly what their strategy is," said Kabia. 
  Though fighting died down somewhat during the morning, it 
forced the United Nations to cancel a flight from Nairobi that 
was to try to get into Kigali Saturday. The fighting has kept 
the airport closed for three days running, blocking UN attempts 
to fly in desperately needed food and medicine. 
  The airport is Kigali's only lifeline, but for the RPF it is 
a military target because one of the army's biggest military 
camps, Camp Kanombe, runs alongside the runways. 
  Kabia said shells fell on the airport's arrival terminal and 
near the control tower Saturday. Though they caused no injuries 
among UNAMIR forces deployed at the facility, six UN vehicles 
were destroyed. 
  Shells also fell inside the Rwandan capital, some near the 
Hotel Diplomate and Kigali's hospital, where 30 patients were 
killed in their beds in shelling on Thursday. 
  There were no immediate reports of new casualties on 
Saturday. 
  Special UN envoy Iqbal Riza of Pakistan was expected in 
Kigali this weekend to seek the cooperation of both sides with 
the Security Council's decision to send 5,500 peacekeepers to 
Rwanda. 
  Kabia said government forces had set up camp in "defensive 
positions" near Gitarama, 40 kilometers (25 miles) southwest of 
the capital, where the rebels are thought to be preparing a vast 
offensive. Gitarama is where the interim government opposed by 
the rebels holed up after fleeing the capital when the country 
slipped back into civil war last month, ending an 
eight-month-old truce that had brought UN troops into the 
country to help prepare for elections. [passage omitted] 
  In Geneva, an International Committee of the Red Cross said 
Friday that "hundreds of thousands" of people were fleeing 
central Rwanda amid the upsurge of fighting in Kigali and 
elsewhere, many milling around the Gitarama region. 
  At least two million of the country's seven million 
population have been made homeless and are threatened by 
epidemics, according to the World Health Organisation. 

