Language: <F P=105>Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Li Peng and Others Attend Reception for Chinese and </F>
Foreign Journalists" -- Screen caption -- at the Great Hall of 
the People in Beijing on 22 March; from the "Special News 
Program on the Second Session of the Eighth NPC"] 
  [Text] [Moderator Zhou Jue] Friends, comrades: The 
Second Session of the Eighth National People's Congress [NPC] 
came to a successful conclusion this afternoon. Thank you for 
your positive reports on the session. Today we are very happy 
to invite Premier Li Peng to meet and answer questions from you 
at this reception. Present here are also Vice Premiers Zhu 
Rongji, Zou Jiahua, Qian Qichen, and Li Lanqing. Now I give the 
floor to Premier Li Peng. [camera shows Li Peng in a close-up 
shot, speaking in a relaxed manner, occasionally glancing at the 
script placed on the table; Li is seen seated at the middle of 
the table, flanked by Zhu Rongji, Qian Qichen, Zhou Chengkui and 
Wu Jianmin on his right, and by an unidentified male 
interpreter, Zou Jiahua, Li Lanqing, and Zhou Jue on his left] 
  [Li Peng] The four vice premiers and I are very delighted to 
have the opportunity to attend the reception and to meet 
journalists at the invitation of Comrade Zhou Jue, spokesman for 
the session. Some 1,500 Chinese and foreign journalists have 
covered the two sessions with great enthusiasm. Their reports 
are generally fair and objective, and can help the Chinese 
people as well as the people of the world understand the two 
sessions. Therefore, I want to thank all journalists and media 
personnel who exerted great efforts to cover the sessions. The 
news spokesman for the session has forwarded to me a number of 
questions of general interest to journalists. To save time, I 
would first like to answer a few questions of general interest. 
The first question raised by journalists was whether I was 
satisfied with the results of the session and what I regard as 
the most important achievement of the session. The 
just-concluded NPC session approved a report on the work of the 
government and other reports, as well as a budget law. It 
affirmed the work of the government last year and approved the 
principles and tasks proposed by the government for this year's 
work. At the session, all deputies unanimously approved the 20- 
character principle -- that is, the principle of seizing the 
opportunity, deepening reform, opening up wider, promoting 
development, and maintaining stability -- as the guiding 
principle for this year's work. In my opinion, the most 
important achievement of the latest NPC session is the consensus 
reached by deputies on the need to correctly handle the 
relations between reform, development, and stability. We had 
previously discussed the issue of correctly handling relations 
among these three factors. But this is the first time we have 
reached such a consensus. Therefore, I am especially satisfied 
with this unprecedented consensus. The session also gave full 
expression to democracy. Leading comrades of the CPC Central 
Committee and the State Council as well as State Council 
ministers joined many delegations in discussions, exchanged 
views on state affairs with deputies, and heard criticisms and 
suggestions from them. Both the number of meetings and contacts 
have set an all-time record. Therefore, we may as well say that 
this is a session marked by democracy, pragmatism, unity, and 
courageous advance. 
  Second, commodity prices have increased by a comparatively 
big margin since early this year; some deputies doubted whether 
the rate of price hikes can be kept under 10 percent. I have 
been asked what measures the government will take on this issue. 
  It should be said the government attaches great importance 
to 
maintaining the basic stability of commodity prices. The 
government work report, indeed, proposed to keep the magnitude 
of price hikes under a prescribed range. Now that the report 
has been approved, the governments at all levels must make 
efforts to fulfill the task. It is necessary not only for 
governments but for enterprises and all circles in society as 
well to make joint efforts. It is a common task for everyone 
concerned. There are many reasons for the price hikes. China 
is now in a transition period from a planned economy to a 
socialist market economy. Since the prices set in the past were 
irrational, it is necessary for us to take the initiative to 
readjust prices, to enable a rational price mechanism to take 
shape, and to carry out some readjustments, which will cause 
prices to rise. In addition, the fact that the scale of our 
capital construction is too large and that consumption funding 
is growing too fast constitutes another factor leading to price 
hikes. However, it should be pointed out that we adopted a 
method of progressive price readjustments in more than a decade 
of implementing the policy of reform and opening up. Whenever 
we implemented a price measure, we took into account the ability 
of the state, enterprises, and individuals to withstand the 
impact so that drastic social upheavals would not result. 
Experience has shown that it was correct to adopt such a 
method. We are prepared to adopt the following three important 
measures to maintain basic stability of commodity prices. 
  1. We shall maintain a general balance between the supply of 
and demand for commodities. In particular, efforts will be made 
to maintain a steady increase in the production of grain, 
cotton, and other agricultural products. This is a basis for 
stabilizing prices. Meanwhile, we shall successfully carry out 
the vegetable basket project by implementing a responsibility 
system for city mayors. Besides, judging from the level of 
consumption of urban and rural residents in China, we can see 
that the supply of non-staple food is an issue of greatest 
concern to the vast numbers of residents and a factor that has 
the greatest bearing on the price index. 
  2. Though China decontrolled prices on the overwhelming 
majority of commodities and let the market determine prices, it 
is still necessary to implement macroeconomic regulation and 
control over important commodities that have a bearing on the 
national economy and on the people's livelihood. Macroeconomic 
regulation and control by the government is indispensable to the 
endeavor to establish a socialist market economy. If we were 
unable to reach consensus on the issue in the past, we should 
have reached one through the current session by now. The state 
has decided to list the prices of 20 categories of daily 
necessities and services as the targets for supervision and 
inspection by the state. 
  3. We shall adopt a series of measures to resolutely bring 
the expansion of investments in fixed assets and excessive 
monetary issue under control. 
  Third, I have been asked to assess the outcome of U.S. 
Secretary of State Christopher's recent visit to China and to 
express my views on the prospects for Sino-U.S. relations. 
China has always attached importance to its relations with the 
United States, and hopes to resume and expand normal relations 
with the latter. This will not only benefit China and the 
United States, but will also be conducive to world peace and 
development. As to how to improve Sino-U.S. relations, I 
expounded the Chinese Government's views extensively in the 
Government Work Report. Regarding the assessment of Secretary 
of State Christopher's recent visit to China, I think his visit 
was nonetheless fruitful [hai shi you cheng guo di] although we 
had perhaps expected to achieve more results. On top of the 
results that were reflected in the understandings reached on 
some specific issues, I think a very important achievement [hen 
zhong yao di cheng guo] is the enhancement of understanding of 
each other's views through Christopher's talks and meetings with 
President Jiang Zemin, myself, and Vice Premier Qian. We 
exchanged views on a broad range of issues on Sino-U.S. 
relations, as well as international issues. We held frank and 
in-depth discussions [tan shuai di shen ru di tao lun] on human 
rights, the most-favored-nation trading status, MTCR [preceding 
four letters in English -- Missile Technology Control Regime], 
and other issues. It can be said that Christopher obtained 
first-hand information from such meetings and talks, having 
heard directly from the Chinese leaders about the issues he was 
concerned about, and about the stand and views held by the 
Chinese side on such issues. This may help the U.S. side make 
decisions, through careful consideration, over the next couple 
of months that are consistent with the interests of both the 
United States and China. We have noticed what President Clinton 
said on 16 March, and we regard it as a positive sign [ji ji di 
ji xiang]. Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to 
reiterate that China is willing to improve Sino-U.S. relations. 
We have made great efforts in this regard and will continue to 
do so. However, there is one matter that I would like to 
clarify. China is a sovereign country, and we certainly will 
not make a deal by sacrificing our principles. In short, we do 
not feel pessimistic about the prospects for Sino-U.S. 
relations. I am finished with the issues that I wanted to 
address on my own. You may now raise some questions and we will 
answer them. 
  [CNN correspondent, in English fading into Mandarin 
translation] China has consistently pressed for solving North 
Korea's nuclear issue through discussions and negotiations. 
Over the past few days, however, the International Atomic 
Energy Agency [IAEA] has accused North Korea of not allowing its 
inspectors to conduct a wide-ranging inspection of its nuclear 
facilities. The matter has now been submitted to the UN 
Security Council. Japan, South Korea, the United States, and 
other countries have expressed concern about North Korea's 
refusal to permit a wide-ranging inspection of its nuclear 
installations. Has China also expressed concern about this 
issue? Under what circumstances will China consider supporting 
the United Nations in imposing sanctions against North Korea? 
  [Li] China is a signatory to the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty. We do not support or encourage nuclear proliferation; 
this has been a consistent position. China has always favored 
solving Korea's nuclear inspection issue through negotiations. 
We do not favor the method of applying pressure, because this 
will not help solve the issue. Facts have proven that agreement 
can reached gradually through negotiations after a long period 
during which Korea agreed to inspections after disagreeing to 
them initially. If this matter is submitted to the UN Security 
Council, China will maintain its consistent position -- properly 
solving the issue through dialogue and negotiation -- and will 
not favor applying pressure. Our UN representative will provide 
a full explanation on China's position. We hope other member 
countries of the UN Security Council will accept China's views. 
Adopting the method of applying pressure will only make the 
situation on the Korean peninsula more complicated and tense; 
this will not be conducive to peace and security in the region. 
  [Hong Kong Television Broadcasts correspondent] After the 
breakdown of the Sino-British talks, the Chinese side said that 
it would continue its cooperation with the British side in non- 
political matters. Why was this not mentioned in this year's 
government work report? In the past one or two years, the 
Chinese side has not been cooperative with the British side on 
many issues, making it is difficult for the British Government 
in Hong Kong to govern. Does this mean that the chances for 
cooperation between the two governments in the next three years 
are remote? 
  [Li] As everyone knows, the uncooperative attitude of the 
British side led to the breakdown of the talks on election 
matters between the governments of the two countries. This is a 
development that we, and many far-sighted people and businessmen 
in Britain as well, did not want to see. This correspondent's 
question, as I understand, is whether the current status of 
Sino-British relations will affect Sino-British relations in 
other sectors -- the economic sector, for example. I can tell 
you that China will not adopt any discriminative policy against 
British businesses. We welcome them to come to China to 
participate in fair competition and to cooperate on an equal and 
mutually-beneficial footing. There has been a tradition of 
cooperation between Chinese and British businesses, and such 
cooperation has not been interrupted because of the current 
state of bilateral relations. It should certainly be pointed 
out that sound political and diplomatic relations between the 
two countries will surely help promote economic cooperation and, 
if the two countries do not have good political and diplomatic 
relations, it is impossible for bilateral economic ties not to 
suffer to some extent. The Chinese side is willing to make 
efforts to minimize any negative impact on British businesses 
when they compete in the Chinese market and make investments in 
the country. 
  [DPA correspondent, in English fading into Mandarin 
translation] We know that one of the issues the current NPC 
session has greatly emphasized is social stability. Some 
deputies brought up the subject of threats to stability in their 
discussions. Will this lead China to change its policy of 
reform or slow it down? 
  [Li] I do not fully understand this question. As we said, 
we must correctly handle the relations between reform, 
development, and stability in order to ensure our development 
will be sustained, sound, and fast. Stability is not our goal; 
development is. To develop, we must have stability. Reform 
will serve as a motivating force for development. For this 
reason, we have adopted a series of measures aimed at 
stabilizing society. Such measures will only help with the 
development and advancement of reform. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] The GATT working party on China 
just concluded its 16th meeting in Geneva. I would like to ask 
Premier Li Peng: What are your views on the progress of China's 
re- entry into GATT? What are the problems and obstructions? 
In your opinion, what are the advantages and disadvantages of 
the resumption of GATT membership regarding China's future 
economic development? 
  [Li] Vice Premier Li Lanqing is in charge of economic and 
trade work, and he is also in charge of the work related to 
China's resumption of GATT membership. I would like to ask 
Comrade Lanqing to answer this question. 
  [Li Lanqing] Generally speaking, major progress was made 
during the 16th round of negotiations on China's resumption of 
its contracting party status in GATT. The overwhelming majority 
of GATT contracting parties -- except for one contracting member 
-- have supported, not just in words but in action, an early 
resumption of China's GATT membership. 
  China's re-entry into GATT would be good for China's reform, 
opening up, and economic development. China has become the 
world's 11th largest trader. China's re-entry into GATT will 
make significant contributions toward a healthy development of 
global trade. China will, as always, continue further 
negotiations with other contracting parties with a positive 
approach and in accordance with the principle of balance between 
rights and obligations. It should be pointed out that the 
European Community and other contracting parties have already 
put forward a draft protocol on China's re-entry into GATT, and 
other contracting parties have also had discussions with China. 
  Regrettably, there is one contracting party obstructing 
China's re-entry into GATT. I would especially like to point 
out that this contracting party is exactly the one that has, in 
a bilateral agreement with us, specifically pledged firm support 
for China's resumption of its contracting party status in GATT. 
We hope that the contracting party will implement its solemn 
commitment so as to change the obstructionist impression it left 
at the meeting, and to advance China's re-entry into GATT. 
Thank you. 

