BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Fawwaz Abu-Tayih, Jordan's ambassador to </F>
Romania, by Yehudit Budek in Bucharest, date not given; from the 
"With the Midday Events" program -- recorded] 
  [Budek] A meeting was expected to take place here between 
[Israeli] Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres and the Jordanian prime 
minister. Why has the Jordanian prime minister not attended 
this international economic conference? 
  [Abu-Tayih] I do not think a special meeting was scheduled 
to 
take place between the Jordanian prime minister and the Israeli 
prime minister. The two sides are attending an international 
conference that deals, in particular, with economic cooperation 
between West, Central, and East Europe on the one hand and the 
Middle East countries. There are aspects of economic 
cooperation in the post-peace era that concern the countries of 
this region in general. If a bilateral meeting is needed to 
achieve a political purpose there will be other occasions. I 
really do not believe that postponing or canceling the Jordanian 
prime minister's visit has anything to do with this subject. 
There may be other reasons for not attending the conference. 
  [Budek] Do you not think the time is right for such a 
high-level meeting? 
  [Abu-Tayih] I believe that the peace process has been 
launched and there is no going back on it. We have confidence 
in the future. But, everything will take place in due course. 
Accelerating matters might be as detrimental as intentional 
postponment. Everything will take place in due course. The 
peace process was launched, is proceeding, and is based on firm 
principles. We were among the first countries in the region to 
call for peace and work toward it, especially His Majesty King 
Husayn, who is the man of peace in the region. He was among the 
first to make efforts to achieve peace in the region. 
  [Budek] Despite what you are saying we have not noticed any 
progress in relations between Israel and Jordan even in the 
economic field? 
  [Abu-Tayih] It is too early to speak about the economic 
field. However, progress was achieved in the political field. 
We signed a working plan with the Israeli side in Washington 
and a meeting took place between the Jordanian crown prince and 
the Israeli prime minister. Work is being done to achieve 
peace. The economic aspect follows the achievement of a 
peaceful settlement. 

