BFN 

<F P=106> [Station editorial: "Why Are the Communist Vietnamese </F>
Puppets Arrogantly Voicing Their Opposition to the King's 
National Reconciliation Plan?"] 
  [Text] One-eyed Hun Sen, Vietnam's favorite puppet, has 
just returned to Phnom Penh, where he told people left and right 
that the 27 May roundtable in Pyongyang had produced only a 0.01 
percent result, meaning that it was a total failure. This 
remark clearly shows that the communist Vietnamese, their 
puppets, and the alliance remain opposed to national 
reconciliation, their opposition to it having been ordered by 
their communist Vietnamese bosses. 
  The announcement of failure by the communist Vietnamese 
puppet above is a most arrogant and insolent declaration of 
opposition to the king's national reconciliation plan. Why did 
one-eyed Hun Sen dare to so arrogantly voice his opposition to 
the king's national reconciliation plan? It is because: 
  1. Hun Sen and the other communist Vietnamese puppets are 
out- and-out servants of the communists and rely totally on the 
4 million communist Vietnamese and Vietnamese nationals already 
inside Cambodia. 
  2. The communist Vietnamese have sent fresh troops from 
Vietnam into Cambodian battlefields, particularly the Route 
10-Battambang battlefield, which is a hot spot from where the 
troops of the communist Vietnamese puppets are being routed and 
fleeing by the dozen and by the hundred. 
  3. The Americans are sending their deputy assistant state 
and defense secretaries to Phnom Penh to prepare the ground for 
arms and ammunition shipments for the communist Vietnamese 
puppets to enable them to carry on their war against the 
Cambodian nation and people. 
  For these reasons, puppet Hun Sen did not hesitate to make 
repeated arrogant announcements against the king's national 
reconciliation plan. The puppets believe that, because they are 
getting arms and ammunition from the United States and receiving 
the support and assistance of Vietnamese troops, they can crush 
and suppress the Cambodian people's resistance movement. 
However, they are badly mistaken. From 1979 to 1990, that is, 
after more than 10 years of all-out war, the more than 250,000 
Vietnamese troops, with tanks, arms, and ammunition from the 
former Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact pouring freely into 
Cambodia, still failed to crush the national liberation forces 
of the Cambodian people. Vietnam's aggressive military strategy 
was instead completely and ignominiously defeated in 1989-90. 
As for the Americans, they too experienced the same fate. In 
1970 following the coup d'etat that deposed Prince Norodom 
Sihanouk, the Americans sent millions of tonnes of arms and 
ammunition to help the Lon Nol administration suppress the 
Cambodian people's resistance movement at that time. Ammunition 
was heaped like mountains in each of Lon Nol's army barracks. 
In addition, the United States used its modern aircraft such as 
the B-52's and F-105's to conduct bombing sorties around the 
clock against the resistance movement of the Cambodian nation 
and people. Nevertheless, they could not do anything to shake 
us. On the contrary, both the Americans and their puppets were 
completely and ignominiously defeated by the Cambodian nation 
and people. 
  The two historic examples just mentioned clearly show that 
arms and equipment are not the factors that determine the 
outcome of a war. It is the people, a sense of patriotism, and 
the national defense morale which constitute the factors 
determining military success. The winning party is the party 
that enjoys the support of the people. In Cambodia at present, 
the entire Cambodian people, both at home and abroad, have the 
common desire to put the earliest possible end to the 
devastating war in Cambodia. All of us want national 
reconciliation and peace. None of us want war and we oppose 
anyone who wants to continue it. We oppose corrupt practices 
and acts of selling out the nation, betraying the nation, 
killing the people, and setting illegal checkpoints to rob the 
people day and night. This movement is very powerful. It is 
raging like an erupting volcano. Therefore, even if the 
communist Vietnamese, the American alliance, and their puppets 
stubbornly insist on carrying on the war, they will never 
overcome the powerful aspiration of the Cambodian nation and 
people. They will surely be ignominiously defeated as in the 
past. 
  The road leading to extinguishing the flames of war is the 
best one for both the Cambodian people and the countries in the 
region and the world. 

