CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pang Daofeng (1690 6670 1496) and Zhang Li (1728 </F>
5461): "Shandong Patent Applications Fourth in Nation"] 
  [Text] According to information given reporters the other 
day by the Shandong Patent Bureau, there were 4,691 patent 
applications in the province last year, of which 4,019 were 
approved. In both the volume of applications and the approval 
rate, Shandong ranked fourth in the nation, making it a major 
patent province. 
  Of all patent applications, there were 812 inventions, 3,262 
new practical designs, and 617 industrial designs. Achievements 
that stood out at home or abroad accounted for a major share of 
patent applications, such as the light flour processing 
equipment, which filled a void within China and has been 
designated by the state for dissemination on a priority basis, 
and Type B silica gel, which reaches the most advanced level in 
the world. Also gratifying is the fact that patent applications 
in Jinan, Weihai, Weifang, Zibo, Jining, Rizhao, Dezhou, 
Liaocheng, and Binzhou were all up significantly compared with a 
year ago. 
  To convert patented technology into productive forces as 
soon 
as possible, the provincial patent bureau has always tackled 
patent implementation and protection as a priority with 
outstanding success. According to incomplete data, 2,108 
patented items were developed province-wide with combined sales 
of 5,823,000,000 yuan, generating 877 million yuan in profits 
and taxes and earning $421 million in foreign exchange. After 
their transformation into productive forces, some patented 
products have released enormous energy. The light flour 
processing equipment had over 200 million yuan in output last 
year, generating 60 million yuan in profits and taxes. Type B 
silica gel too generates over 1 million yuan in profits each 
year. As part of its patent work, the patent bureau tackles 
patent protection aggressively. It handled over 50 patent 
disputes last year and closed 90 percent of the cases. 
  Meanwhile, to encourage innovation and promote patent 
application by enterprises, the bureau has conducted patent 
selection activities the third time, giving out 15 golden awards 
and 51 outstanding awards, a powerful boost to the development 
of patenting. 

