BFN 

  [Text] Panama City, 4 May (ACAN-EFE) -- The Panamanian 
police confiscated from the "Cali Cartel" 900 kg of cocaine 
worth $36 million. The cocaine was going to be sent by land to 
Guatemala for shipment to the United States. 
  Idelfonso Suira, head of criminal investigations of the 
Judicial Technical Police (PTJ), confirmed today in a news 
conference the arrest of six Panamanians, four Colombians, and 
one Peruvian linked to the drug shipment, one of the country's 
largest. Authorities did not release the names of the persons 
arrested and who were placed in the custody of the Attorney 
General's Office. The authorities did say that the drugs 
belonged to the international gang known as the "Cali Cartel," 
because it is based in that Colombian city. 
  Suira said that the drugs, wrapped in red, yellow, and green 
1-kg packages, were seized in an auto repair shop in Panama 
City. The repair shop was preparing a false bottom in a vehicle 
to be used to take the cocaine to Guatemala. 
  The General Customs Directorate (DGA) reported that during 
the four years of President Guillermo Endara's mandate, the DGA 
alone seized more than 4.5 tons of drugs worth $230.7 million 
and 312 persons of various nationalities were arrested, 98 of 
them women. Some of the largest cocaine shipments, amounting to 
several hundred kg, have been seized in the Colon Free Zone, one 
of Latin America's largest free zones. Panama's security 
organizations publicly pledged not to allow the Colombian mafia 
or guerrillas to plant coca leaves in Panamanian territory, 
which, together with drug trafficking to U.S. markets, has 
become another threat to the country. 
  Last month brought to a close a long joint operation in 
Panama with the assistance of Colombia and the United States, in 
which several plantations in the Darien jungle in southern 
Panama were destroyed. The United States has warned of drug 
traffickers' interest in Panama due to its free zone, 
international banking center, and permissive corporate laws. 
Nevertheless, U.S. Government drug "Czar" Lee Brown, 
responsible for fighting drugs, said that the current Panamanian 
civilian government in 18 months has seized more drugs than 
during the 20 years of military dictatorship. In 1993, nearly 4 
tons of drugs were seized in Panama, mostly cocaine from 
Colombia, while in the two preceding years a total of only 3 
tons were seized. 
  Major Jose Rosas, director of the National Maritime Service 
(SMN), told ACAN-EFE that drug trafficking activity in Panama 
has dropped since 1993, at least with regards to maritime 
surveillance. In 1992, he said, packets of cocaine that were 
dropped into the sea from night flights fell like rain on 
Panamanian coasts. The increase in drug trafficking led the 
government to authorize the construction of several naval bases 
to resupply SMN patrol boats, both in the Gulf of Panama as well 
as in the western area bordering Costa Rica. 

