Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Santiago de Chile, 14 Mar (EFE) -- Costa Rican 
Foreign Minister Bernd Niehaus, a candidate for the OAS General 
Secretariat, has stressed that his most serious contender, 
Colombian President Cesar Gaviria, has been "ill advised." 
Niehaus believes Gaviria will probably withdraw his candidacy 
in the next few days. 
  In an interview published today in the newspaper LA NACION, 
Niehaus says: "He has eight votes and I do not know how he can 
allow himself, as an incumbent president, to be the subject of a 
fiasco." 
  Niehaus added: "Knowing him as a very serious and respected 
person, it would be logical for him to withdraw in favor of the 
majority candidacy." 
  Niehaus was asked about alleged U.S. pressure in favor of 
the 
Colombian president's candidacy. He stressed that these rumors 
persist, adding that the U.S. has exercised pressure, "which 
will increase." 
  He noted: "I did not even want to ask for evidence on this. 
I went to the United States to ask them not to apply pressure, 
for the sake of the OAS." 
  The OAS member countries will elect the new OAS secretary 
general on 27 March from among the current candidates: Bernd 
Niehaus, Cesar Gaviria, and Venezuelan Foreign Minister Miguel 
Angel Burelli. 
  Niehaus told the journalists who attended President Eduardo 
Frei's inauguration in Chile that for 40 years the OAS has been 
controlled by large countries and the time has come for small 
countries to run it. 
  Niehaus said: "We strongly asked to be allowed to 
participate 
because there should be no first- or second-rate states in the 
Inter-American system." He added that his candidacy is not just 
Costa Rican, it is regional. 
  Niehaus confirmed that he has 22 well-documented votes from 
Central America, the Caribbean, and three South American 
countries, including Chile, a country that has confirmed its 
support for him. 
  In the Chilean morning newspaper interview, the Costa Rican 
foreign minister confirmed his confidence that he will be 
victorious and announced that he would politically revitalize 
the OAS. 

