Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Willy Melgar; from the "Telepress" newscast] </F>
  [Text] [Words indistinct] repeated reports on an attack 
perpetrated in the country's interior during the past days, the 
[words indistinct] announcement in Puebla, Mexico on agreements 
reached by the government and the guerrillas within the 
framework of the dialogue started in 1991. 
  Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and Guatemalan 
President Ramiro de Leon Carpio might attend the signing of the 
human rights agreement reached by the Guatemalan Government and 
the URNG [Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity], according to 
sources in Mexico's Foreign Relations Secretariat. 
  The parties reached preagreement points in the overall human 
rights accord. Among them are promises to: 

  -  Guarantee and protect the basic rules [preceptos]; 
  -  Fight impunity, and for this purpose, promote the necessary 
modifications of the Penal Code; 
  -  Strengthen democratic institutions; 
  -  Attain immediate international verification; 
  -  Institute voluntary military recruitment; 
  -  Fight against any evidence of illegal corps in the country; 
and 
  -  Compensate the victims of human rights violations. 

    It was reported that the URNG invited Monsignor Rodolfo 
Quezada, conciliator for life of the process, Teresa de [word 
indistinct], and other personalities of Guatemalan civilian 
society to attend this ceremony. It was also reported that in 
this round of talks there was consensus on the establishment of 
a timetable for the agreements reached in Mexico on 26 April 
1991. 
  The Mutual Support Group [GAM] today issued a statement on 
the establishment of a Truth Commission in reaction to the news 
of the agreements reached in Puebla, Mexico, during the last 
round of talks between the government and the guerrillas. The 
GAM document states: Guatemalans are experiencing times of hope 
by knowing that the government, Army, and URNG decided to hold 
talks and find political solutions to the internal armed 
conflict that was produced by the profound inequalities that 
exist in the country. It is evident that we have talked about 
two Guatemalans historically: one of Spanish-Indian descent 
[ladina] and the other Indian. We must definitely learn to 
integrate into a single nation with a [word indistinct] sense, 
while respecting diversity, but working in the same direction 
and with the same objective -- to turn Guatemala into a homeland 
for all. 
  The document adds: [Words indistinct] to the extent that we 
seriously correct the mistakes of the past, which we all 
committed by action or omission. (?This is no time) to analyze 
who is to blame for the systematic and repeated problems that 
led to their accumulation. The truth is that there was a wall 
of silence and this nourished all those who had thoughts that 
went against the state of things. What has been established is 
not necessarily the rule to follow; there are options. 
  It further states: History (?zealously) teaches us, who 
remember it, that those who acted with impunity in the years of 
the repression will continue to do so. They (?built) a strong 
structure, which will be difficult to dismantle, and today are 
deciding the fate of the country at all levels through different 
methods but with the same results. 
  Thus, the document adds, it is imperative and indispensable 
to create conditions for the Truth or Investigative Commission. 
This, however, must not be a pantomime to get out of trouble. 
A document specifying that there will finally be a cease-fire 
should be signed. The Truth or Investigative Commission should 
be precisely that: a commission to deal with the truth 
regardless of the influence that a civilian, soldier, or 
insurgent, who killed defenseless and unarmed citizens with 
impunity, might have. We are therefore not referring to those 
from one party or the other who have fallen in the crossfire. 
  It states: We clearly specify that we are talking about the 
Guatemalans who were kidnapped, murdered, or massacred by 
uniformed paramilitary groups while at home or walking on the 
streets. 

