Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 11 (AFP)--Three Chinese dissidents, 
including the leading pro-democracy campaigner Wang Dan, left 
Beijing early Friday [11 March] at police behest, just hours 
before the scheduled arrival of U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher, a relative of Wang said. "Wang Dan left at 9:00 
a.m. (0100 GMT) and headed for southern China," the relative 
said by phone, adding that the dissident would "probably be away 
for a week." 
  Wang, a former leader of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, 
was accompanied by fellow dissidents Zhou Duo, 46, and Min Qi, 
41, who also took an active role in those demonstrations, the 
source said. 
  Police had interrogated Wang several times in recent days, 
in 
the runup to the Christopher visit but also a meeting of the 
National People's Congress (NPC), China's rubber-stamp 
parliament, which began Thursday. Wang on Thursday had said he 
had no intention of leaving Beijing, and issued a statement 
calling on the parliament to debate human rights. 
  Christopher, who was winding up a visit in Tokyo Friday 
before heading for Beijing, said human rights would be given top 
priority in his talks with Chinese leaders. He said on Thursday 
he did not have "any plans...at the present time" to meet 
pro-democracy activists. 
  The United States has told China it needs substantial 
progress in the field of human rights before it can renew 
most-favoured-nation trading status, which enables many Chinese 
exports to escape customs duty to the U.S. market. The decision 
is due in around three months. Wang was jailed for four years 
after the Tiananmen Square crackdown, and released in February 
last year. His family did not give any details Friday about his 
hurried departure from Beijing. 
  In another development, the Chinese authorities threw a 
police cordon around the U.S. embassy in Beijing, deploying 
dozens of police in uniform and plain clothes, an AFP reporter 
saw. 
  The exceptional move appeared to be part of efforts aimed at 
preventing all demonstrations during the high-profile NPC 
session and Christopher's visit. Besides Wang, at least seven 
other dissidents have been detained for interrogation, three of 
whom have been jailed. In addition, a Taiwanese journalist, 
working for the United Daily News [LIEN HO PAO] of Taipei, was 
detained and interrogated for three hours late Thursday after he 
met with teachers from the People's University of Beijing. 
  The journalist, Lai Chin-hung, who is in Beijing to cover 
the 
NPC, said he had no intention of leaving the city Friday. 

