Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondent Sergey Ostanin] </F>
  [Text] Moscow, 6 Mar -- The first train loaded with the 
nuclear warheads of missiles situated on Ukrainian territory 
crossed the Russian-Ukrainian border early this morning. It is 
on its way to enterprises in Russia where this dangerous cargo 
will be dismantled and subsequently reprocessed and destroyed. 
An ITAR-TASS correspondent was informed of this by a 
top-ranking expert who wished to remain anonymous. 
  The expert believes that the movement of the trains carrying 
these nuclear warheads is being linked in a number of Russian 
ministries with the start of the practical implementation of the 
trilateral Russo-American-Ukrainian agreements on the 
liquidation of nuclear weapons in the Ukraine, which were signed 
in Moscow in January of this year. 
  Under the agreement, Russia has undertaken to deliver to 
Ukraine fuel for its nuclear power stations in exchange for the 
nuclear warheads, but not in the form of reprocessed nuclear 
material from the missiles that have been removed. According to 
the expert, it will take a long time to reprocess it, from 
several months to a year. Fuel for the Ukrainian nuclear power 
plants will be exchanged for fuel from Russia's reserves. 
  In reply to a question by the ITAR-TASS correspondent about 
help to Ukraine from Japan in eliminating nuclear weapons, the 
expert noted that international practice shows that nuclear 
weapons should be dismantled by whoever stockpiled them. The 
Russian side is capable of removing all nuclear warheads on the 
territory of Ukraine in the course of a year for dismantling 
subsequently at the enterprises where they were produced. The 
expert said that what may be at issue is help from Japanese 
specialists in secondary work, in particular, on dismantling 
silos. 
  Acording to reports from ITAR-TASS correspondents from 
Yekaterinburg, Cherlyabinsk, and Tomsk, a number of specialist 
enterprises in these cities do not rule out the possibility that 
they may get the Ukrainian consignment. They are ready to 
receive it there. Russian nuclear experts also guarantee the 
Ukrainian side that all work in the process of removing and 
recovering strategic weapons will be carried out safely. 
  An ITAR-TASS correspondent has been told by a duty officer 
at 
one of the main directorates of the Russian Ministry of Railways 
that, under the conditions of the tripartite agreement between 
Russia, the United States, and Ukraine, the route of the trains 
carrying the Ukrainian nuclear warheads is not to be disclosed. 
According to him, special strict security measures are observed 
on Russian railways when cargoes of this kind are transported. 
  According to the Russian Defense Ministry, there are about 
1300 warheads for intercontinental ballistic missiles (IBM), 
more than 600 warheads for air-launched cruise missiles and 176 
IBM missile launchers, including 130 SS-19 and 46 SS-24 
launchers, on Ukrainian territory. The state of nuclear safety 
in Ukraine causes particular concern to specialists and delays 
in withdrawing and dismantling them are fraught with 
unpredictable consequences. In particular, the guarantee period 
has expired for most warheads, and no maintenance is being 
carried out. Some weapons are on the point of posing a danger. 
The situation is being aggravated by the fact that there are 
not enough specialists in Ukraine to monitor the safety of 
nuclear weapons. 

