Language: <F P=105> Indonesian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The smooth faces of spokespersons at a press 
conference held Saturday afternoon of last week suddenly put on 
a sour smile when a reporter asked, "Do the founders of the 
Indonesian AIDS Foundation have any close friends or relatives 
who are HIV positive and is that why they were really interested 
in establishing a foundation which has the difficult task of 
encouraging social self-help in the battle against AIDS, 
providing public information about AIDS and battling the 
consequences of the spread of AIDS which has already taken place 
in Indonesia?" 
  The reporters who were present on the eighteenth floor of a 
tall building on Sudirman Street in Jakarta that evening were 
introduced to a recently- established foundation set up by a 
notarial instrument dated 17 August 1993: the Indonesian AIDS 
Foundation. Speaking as spokespersons and as the founders of the 
foundation were former Minister of Health Adhyatma, 
businesswoman Martina Widjaja and notary public Kartini Muljadi. 
  The question was posed because there is something that 
bothers people: Why is it so hard to connect the battle against 
AIDS with the professions of some of the people who are listed 
as directors of the foundation. They are former State Minister 
for Population and the Environment Emil Salim, former Chairman 
of the Money Market Supervisory Board Marzuki Usman, notary 
public Kartini Muljadi, businesswoman Martina Widjaja, who is 
chairman of the foundation, Juniarti Alatas, and Darwina Pontjo 
Sutowo. Fortunately, Martina, the chairman, answered the 
question with a friendly smile, "AIDS is now a problem for all 
of us, a national problem, a world problem, so it's only natural 
that everyone is concerned." 
  Those words were also echoed by Adhyatma's statement. As the 
former Minister of Health supervising the Chairman of the 
Indonesian AIDS Committee, which has its headquarters in the 
Department of Health, Adhyatma said that AIDS can be viewed as a 
problem for us all because the AIDS pandemic is causing an 
extraordinary decrease in productivity in Indonesia. Pandemic? 
"Yes, because it is estimated that there are now 20,000 people 
in Indonesia who have been infected by the HIV virus," said 
Adhyatma, adding that official government figures are 150 people 
as of July 1993. With an economic cost of 33 million Rupiah per 
year per AIDS case -- 20,000 cases means a national cost of 660 
billion Rupiah per year -- it is clear that the AIDS pandemic is 
a national problem. 
<H5>  Half a Billion </H5>
  All right, this foundation has been established with an 
initial funding of 500 million Rupiah. According to the 
foundation's statutes, future funding for the foundation's 
routine programs will come from public contributions and from 
efforts to provide additional funding. "You don't have to worry 
about our ability to raise funds. Many people in the foundation 
are quite experienced at this," Martina told reporters. 
  It was not explained how the funds would be used for the 
foundation's four main programs: Intensive public information on 
the battle against AIDS will be given to employees of 
corporations and to young peoples' groups; training for 
information management; establishing an AIDS Communication 
Center to receive and channel relevant and accurate information 
about AIDS to the public; and organizing a Policy Study to make 
a success of the recommendations for the battle against AIDS. At 
Saturday's press conference there was no explanation, for 
example, of whether the Indonesian AIDS Foundation would take 
financial responsibility for training or whether the trainees 
would pay the foundation. What was clear was that according to 
the foundation's statutes this is a non-profit foundation. 
<H5>  Open to the Public </H5>
  With the creation of the Indonesian AIDS Foundation, Jakarta 
now has an additonal way of giving information about AIDS since 
Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital and the University of Indonesia 
Medical School last February dedicated an AIDS Information 
Center, which has 24-hour automated telephone service at (021) 
3903838 (twelve lines) and which provides information about AIDS 
in Indonesian, English and Japanese. 
  The Indonesian AIDS Foundation can be reached at Gedung PS 
1, 
Third Floor, Let. Gen. S. Parman St., Lot 78, Slipi, Jakarta 
11410, telephone (021) 5495313. 
  The Foundation's Development Committee consists of Chairman 
Kartini Muljadi, Deputy Chairman Martina Widjaja and members Dr. 
Ibnu Sutowo, Emil Salim, Dr. Adhyatma, Juniarti Alatas, Jakob 
Oetama, Marzuki Usman, Sarlito Wirawan, Kartono Mohamad, Dr. 
Lukas Hendrata, Hartati Tjakra Murdaya, Mawarwati Djamaloeddin 
and Darwina Pontjo Sutowo. From 1993 to 1995 the Indonesian AIDS 
Foundation will be directed by Chairman Martina Widjaja, First 
Deputy Chairman Dr. Kartono Mohamad, Second Deputy Chairman 
Darwina Pontjo Utomo, Executive Director Pooroe Utomo and the 
following members: Mawarwati Djamaloeddin and Sarlito Wirawan. 

