BFN 

  [Text] By 30 May, U.S. strategic and ballistic missiles 
will no longer be targeted at Ukraine. As a reminder, this 
decision was reached at the Ukrainian-U.S. negotiations in 
Washington on 11-14 May 1994. In those days, the Ukrainian 
Government delegation headed by Deputy Prime Minister Valeriy 
Shmarov discussed with the American side a wide range of issues 
related to nonproliferation of missile systems carrying mass 
destruction weapons, development of the trilateral process in 
the sphere of nuclear disarmament, and mutual cooperation in 
rocket and space industry, etc. Our correspondent, Viktor Bak, 
interviewed Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Valeriy Shmarov. 
  [Begin recording] [Bak] During your visit to the United 
States, the delegation that you headed also discussed the issue 
of cooperation in the sphere of conversion. 
  [Shmarov] You know that the Ukrainian Government and the 
U.S. 
Administration set up a joint conversion commission. On the 
American side, it is headed by U.S. Secretary of Defense William 
Perry, and on the Ukrainian side, by Machine Building Minister 
Chernenko. This commission has been quite busy (?since last 
fall). The commission has pinpointed about 30 projects. We 
examined those projects together with the United States. At 
present, interested partners are being sought. What are these 
partners for? First, the United States does not have sufficient 
funds to finance this program -- a small amount was earmarked 
for the conversion. We seek to attract the private capital of 
American entrepreneurs and companies. In practical terms, 
selection of partners and signing of projects will probably be 
carried out in July. We have determined the terms for one pilot 
project, which is a joint venture of the well-known U.S. company 
Westinghouse and Ukraine's Hartron. Hartron is an enterprise 
that was oriented toward developing rocket industry products, 
currently subject to the conversion plan. So, we envision that 
it would be engaged in developing safety and control systems for 
nuclear power plants. As you know, this is a major problem for 
us today. This project has been signed. The U.S. Government 
allocated $5 million for this project, while Westinghouse 
designated $20 million [words indistinct], and we offer our 
production and scientific resources. I think that this project 
will assume realistic [word indistinct]. [end recording] 

