Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Stefan Patrik Kovac: "Czech Specter Haunts </F>
Slovak Army"] 
  [Text] In this article, I would like to offer readers an 
"inside" look at the so-called Czech problem in the Slovak Army 
(by someone who is directly involved); I would like to share 
with the readers my observations from within the barracks walls. 
I believe that the barracks where I reported for military 
service in October 1993 following my college graduation are not 
basically different from other barracks in Slovakia, and that I 
can in good conscience consider them to be a true picture of 
barracks in the entire Slovak Republic (with some smaller or 
bigger differences), and I therefore think that my observations 
can be in a certain sense generalized. But to start at the 
beginning. 
  Already upon hearing the first words of the welcoming speech 
by the commander of the school for reserve officers (which, by 
the way, consists of only one training battalion in the whole 
barracks), I was very surprised because I thought that the 
commander must have made a mistake, that his was a slip of the 
tongue. For he introduced the barracks as the "Barracks of the 
Xth Czechoslovak(!) Brigade" (I am not mentioning the exact 
number for understandable reasons). But I was shocked a few days 
later when I was able to leave the barracks and see on the 
outside the actual official name, which, although rather 
inconspicuous, was nevertheless clearly and unambiguously marked 
on the nameplate by the gate--and so, to my unpleasant surprise, 
I found that they really are named "Barracks of the Xth 
Czechoslovak Brigade." And this in the ninth month of the 
existence of the independent Slovak Republic! (And these 
barracks still bear that name.) I found that absolutely 
unbelievable! But inside the barrack walls, many more surprises 
awaited me.... 
  As far as the officer instructors and the entire officer 
corps of the barracks are concerned, I dare say that Czech or 
"Czech-speaking" officers (since quite a few consider themselves 
"Moravians") make up a good fifth of them. Many of them (I do 
not claim that all--I also met one or two decent Czechs) behave 
in a very arrogant manner; their behavior does not indicate any 
gratitude toward the Slovak Republic and the Slovak Army for 
keeping them in its ranks, by which it showed the highest degree 
of tolerance. On the contrary, they often behave in a superior 
and haughty manner, as if they "owned the world." We have 
here, for example, the case of a lower-ranking Czech officer who 
finds it "difficult" to announce himself with the Slovak 
Tu [here] and always uses downright provocatively the 
Czech Zde, although it would not really give him too 
much trouble to learn this simple Slovak word (many others do 
the same thing). Can it be that they do not think the Slovak 
language is equal to the Czech language? That they consider 
Slovak to be something inferior? I know only one Czech in the 
entire barracks who makes an effort to speak in Slovak (and he 
claims to be a Moravian or a Slovak born in Moravia). Others 
stubbornly cling to Czech; they conduct lessons in Czech, 
dictate notes in Czech, give commands in Czech. (I am not even 
mentioning the problems this causes.) At the same time, we know 
that a Slovak officer in the Czech Republic soon talks in 
Czech--there, in the almost chauvinistic Czech environment, he 
would not get very far with his Slovak. 
  From various indications and frequent comments, I know that 
these Czechs who serve in the Slovak Army greatly miss the 
former federation; although, of course, they do not speak out 
openly against the Slovak Republic, and I never actually heard 
them say anything against the Slovak Republic and in favor of 
the CSFR. They are certainly very well aware that it would cost 
them their jobs. But if push comes to shove, who knows? Who 
could say with certainty what their reaction would be? Or who 
could guarantee which side they would join? 
  As far as printed material is concerned, you will not find 
any in Slovak! Practically all of the printed matter I came 
across, from the draft orders to the military identity card to 
instructions on using and operating military equipment, is in 
Czech--and this a year after the independent Slovak state came 
into existence. Graphic diagrams, instructional descriptions of 
weapons and technology on posters and charts--apart from a few 
Slovak ones (which they made here as a do-it-yourself, amateur 
project)--everything in Czech, everything in Czech! And even 
those makeshift charts and posters with instructions are 
written, as I and my friend who is a Slovak-language expert 
agreed, in unbelievably bad Slovak. It is merely a kind of 
literal translation from Czech, with Czechisms or actual Czech 
words with Slovak endings--and I am not even mentioning the 
grammatical errors. Everyone for whom the Slovak language is 
more than just a means of communication (and maybe even to them) 
must throw up their hands over such a creation (a downright 
defilement of our native language). But that is not all. Even 
instructional videos and other films on using weapons or 
repairing military equipment--all are Czech and in Czech! Not a 
single one with a text narrated in Slovak exists! But that then 
causes big problems--for instance, in translating very 
specialized military terms from Czech into Slovak; many 
instructors "capitulate" when searching for a Slovak equivalent 
(after all, "we all know what it means;" or it happens to be 
simpler and more comfortable) and merrily go on using the Czech 
terms! Indeed, even now, after a year of the independent Slovak 
Republic, we can form a good picture of the conditions that 
existed in the Army during CSFR and CSSR (in fact, even during 
the pre-Munich CSR)--before 1 January 1992. The Army was one of 
the efficient instruments for the Czechization of the Slovaks. 
  A very good and graphic--even though sad--example is 
presented by the Slovak officers themselves in the military 
garrisons. There are practically no officers who do not use in 
their oral instructions Czechisms or actual Czech expressions 
(one even gives his commands in Czech--could it be that they 
seem more "forceful" to him?), and, in fact, all of them have 
some smaller, some bigger problems with the Slovak language. 
There are even enough of those whose Slovak is downright 
catastrophic in this respect. No wonder--after all, many of them 
studied in military colleges in the Czech lands, they were 
taught by Czech professors in Slovakia, or they learned from 
Czech textbooks. Until 1 January 1993, Slovaks used to go the 
Czech lands, and Czechs (in lesser numbers) to Slovakia; but 
those who adapted were always the Slovaks. 
  Another shock and a great surprise awaited me when I visited 
our military library. What can you expect? Everything was in 
Czech! The entire index and catalogue of books in the library 
(which one would expect to have been made by a Slovak in 
Slovakia; does this not apply even here?)--in Czech! And to this 
day slogans and quotations from famous people are written in 
Czech on wall posters. Does nobody mind? The library "naturally" 
also has shelves marked with the letter "R" accented with the 
diacritic "hacek" [which exists in the Czech language but not in 
Slovak], something I never saw (not during the time of the 
federation or CSSR) anywhere in Slovakia in civilian libraries! 
Another "matter-of-course" is the great number of Czech books 
(is there an analogous situation in Czech libraries?!--permit me 
to express great doubts about that). It even appears (I did not 
count them exactly) that here--in Slovakia!--there are more 
Czech books than Slovak ones (and we have books beginning with 
fiction all the way to scientific subjects of all kinds). When 
it came to culture and the written word, the Czechs gave it 
particularly careful attention. Even a library was a very useful 
instrument for the Czechization of the Slovak environment. 
  The interior decoration in the barracks and the recreation 
rooms: On the walls hang photographs of the countryside, 
castles, chateaux. Which ones do you think predominate? Slovak? 
Wrong! Again only Czech ones--Czech castles, Czech countryside. 
If Czech, why then not German, British, French?! Don't we have 
enough interesting Slovak subjects? That is also another vestige 
of the legacy of the common--but in fact only Czech--Army. 
  Before I conclude my article, I will mention one more 
example 
to make it clear to the readers how the Czechs acted during the 
division of the federal army, when it was already obvious to 
everyone that the Slovaks would establish their second 
independent state on 1 January 1993. This was told to us with a 
touch of bitterness in his voice by a lieutenant colonel. Before 
coming to teach at the school for reserve officers, he worked in 
a certain Slovak town in a modern tank training facility (for 
training tank drivers and others). Some of the staff and the 
service and repair personnel were Czechs. After the division of 
the federation, these people literally fled to the Czech 
Republic and stole! all of the manuals! Naturally, it was as if 
they had vanished into thin air, and there was no way to find 
out where they were; they simply disappeared. They were gone 
and, with them, all of the complicated, detailed manuals that 
are so essential for making repairs as well as for other 
purposes. Our Czech "brothers" vividly demonstrated their idea 
of brotherhood! Slovak officers and the service personnel then 
had to work nights dismantling and drawing up new wiring 
diagrams and gradually put together a makeshift manual--without 
any help; everything was made much more difficult and 
complicated, especially locating defects and making repairs. In 
spite of that, they managed to somehow keep the trainer in 
operation. It was an unheard of and brazen dirty trick by the 
Czechs, something that is not done among civilized and decent 
people! 
  What to do then? We must literally have a program for a 
planned "de-Czechization" of the Slovak Army. Of course, it is 
complicated as far as the Czech officers are concerned; they 
have Slovak wives, children, apartments.... (On the other hand, 
many Slovak officers are waiting in the Czech Republic because 
there is no housing for them in Slovakia.) However, they could, 
to begin with, learn at least a few expressions (commands) in 
Slovak (many even know them, but it is probably "beneath their 
dignity" to use the Slovak language). We must begin (it should 
have been done a long time ago--a year ago!) with "small steps." 
Also things like a Czech catalogue, Czech rules for borrowing 
books and Czech slogans on library walls a year after the Slovak 
Republic came into existence--those should not be seen any more. 
Czech training films will probably be shown for a long time to 
come--there is no money for making new ones in Slovak--but maybe 
they could be dubbed in Slovak. We must gradually begin (it 
should have been done a long time ago!) changing not only the 
Czech wall-mounted instructions, charts, and posters, but also 
those written in "Czech Slovak" (should at least one Slovak 
language expert be employed in each of the barracks?--he would 
certainly have his hands full!); because this way, with Czech 
professional soldiers and officer instructors, the Czechization 
of the Slovak Army would continue, although at a much slower 
rate--even a year after Slovak independence.... 

