CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Victor Gomez: "Leftist Fever Unlikely To Jump </F>
Czech Border"] 
  [Text] As voters across the former East bloc turn away from 
market-oriented "shock therapists" and back toward socially 
oriented parties stocked with former communists, the Czech 
Republic has become a lonely island of European liberalism. 
  The recent election victories of socialist parties in Poland 
and Hungary have made the right-leaning government of Prime 
Minister Vaclav Klaus a unique feature in Central and Eastern 
Europe. 
  And unlike its neighbors, the current Czech coalition 
government shows no sign of losing ground in popularity polls; 
month after month, it continues to garner approval ratings of 
more than 60 percent. 
  By contrast, the Czechs don't seem interested enough in 
their 
own socialists to give them real power. The Czech Social 
Democratic Party (CSSD) surged in the polls last year but has 
since remained stagnant at about 15 percent, while the communist 
Left Bloc coalition still hovers at less than 10 percent in the 
polls. 
  This phenomenon has created a stir among academicians and 
political students of the post-communist region. In the first 
few years after the dramatic collapse of the Soviet bloc in 
1989, many analysts predicted it would not be long before voters 
in the region turned away from radical market reformers. 
  In his book Democracy and the Market, Adam 
Przeworski mapped out a start-stop-start cycle for free-market 
reforms in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe. 
  Voters, he predicted, would tend to protect themselves from 
disruptive market reforms and would turn back toward social 
democratic parties in order to hold onto some level of social 
security. Later, when the reforms have been slowed to a 
standstill, Przeworski wrote, the voters might give the liberal 
market-oriented parties another chance. 
  In Hungary and Poland, where inflation raged and 
unemployment 
jumped to more than 10 percent after 1989, the theory seems to 
fit so far. 
  But the Czech Republic has confounded most predictions. The 
economy is progressing smoothly and enjoys low inflation, the 
lowest level of unemployment in Europe and a zero-deficit state 
budget. And in contrast to its neighbors, the transformation 
process has occurred in relative tranquillity, undisturbed by 
strikes or social unrest. 
  Mitchell Orenstein of the Institute for EastWest Studies 
credits the first post-communist Czechoslovak government, as 
well as Klaus' government, for maintaining a controlled reform 
process between rapid market transformation and government 
intervention in the economy. 
  Although he couches his policies in rhetoric about rigorous 
pro-market reforms, Klaus has actually instigated a far more 
controlled version of reform than other post-communist 
governments. 
  "Basically, he is dismantling the control of the state in a 
controlled way," said Orenstein. "It's a state-controlled 
development of the private sector." 
  This style of governance is so different from the typical 
liberal governments of the West that Orenstein has given it its 
own--ism: "statist liberalism." 
  Evidence of this different approach lies everywhere in the 
Czech government's policies. The government has encouraged a 
rapid transfer of property from state to private hands, but 
still maintains an interventionist policy in other areas. 

  -  A policy of wage restraint has kept companies from raising 
their employees' salaries too high--a move that most observers 
say would cause a rise in inflation and unemployment. 
  -  Rent 
controls, which allow people to keep apartments for just 
hundreds of crowns per month, have been maintained. 
  -  Billions of 
crowns have been invested in district labor offices, helping to 
find work for more than 100,000 people in 1992-93. 
  -  Large 
state-owned enterprises have been subsidized with privatization 
receipts and bank loans to prevent early bankruptcies. 

  The central aim of these policies have been to prevent a 
jump 
in unemployment and inflation rates, which can kill any 
democratic government anywhere. 
  So far, these policies have worked remarkably well to 
maintain the government's popularity in the polls. But many 
observers warn that the Czechs may simply be delaying the 
inevitable pain of a full transition to market economics. 
  Ferdinand Kinsky, director of the European Studies 
department 
at the Central European University in Prague, said the policy 
may backfire on Klaus just prior to the next general elections 
in 1996. 
  "This may all mean that the big problems are still ahead of 
us. The bankruptcies, the rationalization of companies," he 
said. "Will these potential problems come before or after the 
next general election?" 
  While there are strong economic reasons for the Czech 
Republic's uniqueness, part of the difference also lies in the 
history of communism in Central and Eastern Europe. 
  Unlike most of the countries in the region, the Czechs were 
remarkably supportive of the Communist Party in the years 
following World War II--even more than their fellow citizens in 
Slovakia at the time. 
  In the 1946 elections, a greater percentage of Czechs than 
the minority Slovaks supported the communists, giving the 
national party a solid victory at the polls with 38 percent of 
the popular vote. 
  This popularity continued largely unabated until the 1968 
Soviet-led invasion of the country squashed the Prague Spring 
reforms. 
  From that time, the Czechoslovak communists ossified into 
isolated cadres of privileged apparatchiks. 
  "The cadres here were isolated [and] just incredibly 
clueless. ... They didn't even understand Gorbachev," said 
Orenstein. 
  Meanwhile, the Hungarian communists were introducing market 
reforms throughout the 1980s, and the Polish government entered 
into power-sharing negotiations with the Solidarity labor union 
in mid-1989. Even today, the Communist Party of Bohemia and 
Moravia (KSCM) continues to cling to its title when virtually 
every other communist party in the region has changed its name. 
  The result is that most people in Hungary and Poland don't 
remember the pre-1989 communists with the same bitterness as 
most Czechs. 
  On the other hand, Orenstein predicted the huge 
organizational apparatus that left-wing Czech parties inherited 
from the previous regime will serve them well in local elections 
this fall. 
  In contrast, Klaus' Civic Democratic Party (ODS) is having 
relative difficulties recruiting members and candidates in the 
country's remoter regions. 
  "All the intelligent people in the villages are in the 
[Communist] Party," said Orenstein. 
  The local elections scheduled for this fall, which could be 
accompanied by the republic's first Senate elections, will be 
the first indication of whether the Czech people will follow the 
regional trend back toward social democracy or continue to 
follow their own government's version of neo-liberalism. 

