Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prime Minister 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali today met 
with foreign journalists at the Prime Ministry, and took 
questions about latest regional and local developments. 
  The prime minister announced that His Majesty King Husayn is 
to meet with President Bill Clinton after 20 January. Dr. 
al-Majali said the session will help the peace talks and ties 
between Jordan and the United States, particularly in the 
economic area. Movement on the other tracks, especially on the 
Syrian-Israeli track, will reflect positively on the other 
fronts, the prime minister said. 
  Asked about the upcoming meeting between the Syrian and U.S. 
Presidents in Geneva, al-Majali stated that Jordan and all the 
partners to the Middle East peace process are hopeful it will 
yield positive results. In its contacts, he added, Jordan has 
underlined the comprehensiveness of the peace process and that 
any headway made in one of the tracks is bound to extend to 
other tracks. 
  The prime minister was asked how happy Jordan was with the 
agreement reached with the Palestinians on 7 January. We are 
quite happy with it, al-Majli said. The points on which 
agreement was reached, he added, meet realistic expectations and 
directly benefit the Palestinians as they now truly feel that 
they have a partner and support in us. We are brothers bound by 
distinguished ties, and as partners, the talks of the 
Palestinians with the Israelis are bound to rub off on us. As 
for the sense of urgency the Jordanians had shown in regard to 
the agreement with the Palestinians, al-Majali said: I'll turn 
the question around and ask why such an agreement with our 
Palestinian brothers should wait. Right from the beginning of 
the economic talks, the Palestinians were visibly anxious to get 
an economic agreement with us. Two lengthy meetings of the 
joint committee with the Palestinians produced a draft 
agreement, but the Palestinian side, the prime minister noted, 
slowed up and chose to wait. Jordan impressed on them the 
importance of signing it in the interest of a clearly defined 
bilateral relationship and so that they talk with the Israelis 
against the background of a clear picture. Jordan, noted 
al-Majali, has numerous institutions and the kind of 
multi-faceted experience that the brother Palestinians may draw 
on. 
  On inter-Arab ties, the prime minister stressed that Jordan 
is working in good faith to have the best of relations with all 
Arab states, especially with brothers in the Arabian Gulf 
states. Jordan, he pointed out, has met with some success in 
this regard, noting the receptiveness of Qatar and the United 
Arab Emirates, as well as Oman, with which Jordan already had 
close relations. The prime minister wished these relations 
would grow ever stronger and extend to the rest of the brotherly 
Arab states, noting that Egypt is working in that direction. 

