BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Judith Stalpers: "West Does Not Know What </F>
Game North Korea Is Playing"] 
  [Text] Does the West actually know what game Kim Il- Song 
is playing? Is it one-on-one, or is he playing simultaneous 
chess against the United States, South Korea, Japan, and China? 
Or is he not playing chess at all, but poker? The West is 
guessing and that is what Kim Il-Song's power is based on: 
Keeping the West and his own people in the dark. 
  The West does not know if North Korea has plutonium. The 
West does not know if North Korean engineers have the knowledge 
to produce an atomic bomb. The West does not know if China is a 
friend or foe of North Korea. The West does not know how much 
support the North Korean leader has in his own country. The 
West does not know what the economic situation of that Communist 
state is actually like. 
  The West suspects all this, and more, and the suspicions 
contradict each other. That plays into North Korea's hands. 
According to the hawks in the United States, North Korea already 
has at least two bombs. The Russian foreign minister asserted 
once again on Saturday [18 June] that North Korea does not have 
a bomb now, nor will it have one in the near future. CIA 
reports talk of a possible coup and a starving population. 
Journalists and diplomats have failed to uncover any trace of 
unrest and talk of flourishing trade between North Korea and 
China. 
  The United States, South Korea, and Japan are making great 
efforts to maintain the illusion that they are carrying out a 
policy. "The crisis is over. America has stopped lobbying for 
sanctions," former President Carter exulted triumphantly after 
returning from Pyongyang. Clinton's staff had to do everything 
they could to play down Carter's words without putting too much 
emphasis on the difference of opinion. 
  The United States is aiming to have North Korea henceforth 
place all developments in its nuclear program under the control 
of the IAEA [International Atomic Energy Agency]. That could 
prevent the possible sale of nuclear material to, say, Iran or 
Libya. However, it does not guarantee that North Korea does not 
have a bomb. South Korea and Japan want a nuclear-free 
peninsula, so that the dictator cannot exert any pressure on 
them with his atomic weapons. The two countries want more, 
namely that the IAEA be given access to those installations 
which could provide information on North Korean obscure 
activities. 
  The situation is calm in Korea for the time being. The 
threat of sanctions has been put on the back burner, and there 
is no war-like rhetoric coming out of Pyongyang. If, however, 
everything goes ahead just like Carter cooked up with the 
"well-meaning" Kim, then Kim will be the big winner, no matter 
what the game is called. He will have a dialogue with the 
United States, economic support, diplomatic recognition, safer 
nuclear plants, and perhaps an atomic bomb. What will the rest 
of the world get in return? 
  A second Korean war has indeed been prevented, but now there 
is nuclear proliferation. If there continues to be strong 
suspicions that North Korea has at least two atomic bombs, then 
who can prohibit South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan from also having 
an atomic bomb? And if the world condones the fact that North 
Korea has two nuclear warheads in its backyard, then who will 
guarantee that Iraq and Libya will not tinker around with things 
themselves and ignore any threat from the IAEA or the Security 
Council? 
  Only Kim knows what game he is playing. If the West does not 
play along with his "overtures," then he will still have won a 
few months before the fire is stoked on the Korean peninsula. 
And what will he do in that time? Will he extract plutonium 
from the recently exchanged fuel rods which he can use to add 
four atomic bombs to his arsenal? 

