Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Emily R. Pena] </F>
  [Text] The Batangas Coastal Resources Management Foundation 
(BCRMF) signed recently a memorandum of understanding to 
preserve the Batangas environment. 
  Batangas Governor Vicente A. Mayo, BCRMF chairman, said the 
agreement seeks to make the province an environmental-friendly 
zone by organizing a movement that will reorient the values and 
practices of the community for the sustainable development of 
the area. 
  The movement, called "Kilos Kabayan para sa Kalikasan 
[Citizens Movement for the Environment]," brings together 
government and the private sector in a cooperative effort. 
  To encourage the development of comprehensive environment 
preservation and management plans, the movement, with the help 
of Lifewatch Communication Services, has lined up various 
environmental activities in which the community can participate 
to bring about an eventual practice in waste management. 
  "We realize that Batangas is faced with immense challenges 
stemming from accelerated socio-economic progress envisioned in 
the Calabarzon [Cavite-Laguna-Batangas-Rizal-Quezon] national 
development program," Mayo said. The Batangas governor urged 
his constituents to act together in preserving the future of 
Batangas. 
  "Rising population in the coastal area has increased 
expectations of improved livelihood, health, education 
communication, and other social services making us realize that 
we must act as one if we are to preserve our future," he said. 
  The foundation members are Pilipinas Shell, Caltex 
Philippines, Chemphil-LMG, Keppel Philippines, Engineering 
Equipment, General Milling Corp., Purefoods Corp., Union Carbide 
Philippines, United Coconut Chemicals, AG &amp; P, and Mabuhay 
Vinyl 
Corp., which hope to enhance and promote sustainable development 
of the Batangas coastal resources. 
  Signatories to the memo of understanding include 
representatives of the governments of Batangas City, Bauan, San 
Pascual, and Mabini, the Department of Environment and Natural 
Resources (DENR), Department of Education, Culture, and Sports 
(DECS), Philippine Coast Guard (PCG), Philippine Ports Authority 
(PPA), and the Philippine National Police (PNP). 

