BFN 

  [Text] Foreign Minister Faris Buwayz has described the 
inauguration of Nelson Mandela as president of South Africa as 
an international event, nay, even historic. As he was leaving 
for South Africa to take part in the inauguration ceremony, 
Buwayz clarified that Lebanon's relations with this country have 
been normal and natural since it eliminated racism. However, 
the application of this decision requires some time. We have 
this report from our colleague Darwish 'Ammar from Beirut 
airport: 
  [Begin recording] ['Ammar] Mr. Buwayz, you leave today for 
South Africa to take part in President Nelson Mandela's 
inauguration ceremony. What would you like to say on this 
occasion with regard to Lebanon's participation in this ceremony? 
  [Buwayz] Of course, the election and inauguration of 
President Mandela after the historic reforms in South Africa are 
considered an international, nay, even historic event. This is 
so because of the developments that have taken place there and 
also because of the effects of this development on the political 
and humanitarian level. By this I mean the cancellation of 
racial discrimination and openness toward democracy and freedom. 
There is no doubt that Lebanon should not stay away from this 
event. It should not be kept away from the significance of this 
event, both from the aspect of democracy, freedom, and 
coexistence, and from the aspect of the extensive historic and 
ancient Lebanese presence in South Africa, where there is a 
large Lebanese community. 
  Proceeding from this, the visit on this occasion acquires a 
special character. Therefore, Lebanon had to attend this 
international celebration. 
  ['Ammar] When will the Arab League's resolution on ending 
the boycott of South Africa come into effect in Lebanon? 
  [Buwayz] The resolution to cancel the boycott is a decision 
that was made in the Arab League during the last session over a 
month ago. The Lebanese Council of Ministers applied this 
resolution in the session before last by canceling all aspects 
of the political, economic, and trade boycott. Thus, relations 
now between Lebanon and South Africa are natural and very normal. 
  ['Ammar] Will there be diplomatic representation between the 
two countries? 
  [Buwayz] We now have a general consulate there. We have 
made the decision to normalize diplomatic relations. Of course, 
the implementation of this decision requires some material and 
financial support which might not be available immediately. 
  ['Ammar] On the sidelines of the visit to South Africa, will 
you hold meetings with the participants in the inauguration 
ceremony such as representatives of various countries taking 
part in the ceremony? 
  [Buwayz] As with every international meeting of this 
caliber, the celebration will include a large number of heads of 
state, prime ministers, and foreign ministers. This event might 
provide the opportunity for side meetings with some officials. 
  ['Ammar] During your stopover in Paris, will you hold talks 
and meetings in the French capital? 
  [Buwayz] No. Our stopover in Paris is purely mechanical. 
  ['Ammar] Mr. Minister, there are some rumors about a 
possibility of your visiting the United States. Will you be 
going to the United States? 
  [Buwayz] I was supposed to visit Florida in response to an 
invitation from the University of Florida to deliver a lecture 
on Lebanon and the peace process here. However, some events 
have made me change my plans. It has been postponed to an as 
yet unspecified date. [end recording] 

