Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Jens Schneider commentary: "The Pleasing Race Between the </F>
Superpowers"] 
  [Text] In the past, when people talked about the race 
between the superpowers they had nothing good in mind. It 
expressed fear: The Russians and Americans could force each 
other deeper and deeper into a spiraling arms race and destroy 
the world -- the race was an arms race. American-Soviet rivalry 
over more and more new zones of influence in the world often 
caused the countries concerned more harm than good. 
  Perhaps that old logic has been exhausted. Washington and 
Moscow are currently pursuing the peace process in Bosnia so 
eagerly that what they are doing is very reminiscent of a race, 
and the results so far have been thoroughly positive. First, 
Washington abandoned its restraint following the massacre at the 
marketplace in Sarajevo, and brought about the NATO ultimatum to 
the Serbs. Then, it was thanks to the Russians that the aerial 
bombardment was not necessary: The Kremlin achieved a 
diplomatic coup that resulted in the Serbian withdrawal. At the 
beginning of the week, when NATO finally did shoot, Moscow 
persuaded the Bosnian Serb Radovan Karadzic to open the Tuzla 
Airport and made it clear to him that he could not consider 
Moscow to be an ally. 
  After that, it was once again Washington's turn. The U.S. 
Administration did indeed respond with a success, which -- 
despite all the skepticism -- amounts to being a sensation. 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher mediated in the 
conclusion of a preliminary agreement between the Bosnian Croats 
and Muslims on a confederation, which at least offers prospects 
of peace in western Bosnia and could be an excellent instrument 
for putting pressure on the Serbs in the future. 
  Irrespective of how things develop further, there are two 
questions that beg an answer. Why could that not have happened 
immediately? That is a question that many, not only Bosnians, 
will be asking themselves. Second, we must ask ourselves why 
the Americans and Russians must return to the European stage for 
progress to be made in Bosnia. Bonn was unable to use its 
supposed great influence on Zagreb, nor was Paris able to make 
appropriate use of its good contacts in Belgrade. Washington 
and Moscow are in the process of assuming an extremely difficult 
guardianship in Bosnia-Herzegovina: In any event, they will be 
able to apply some slight pressure to their ward, because they 
only love him within certain limits and do not want to protect 
him at any price. Their first goal is an end to the conflict in 
Bosnia. 
  With respect to that goal, we are still at the very 
beginning, and that also applies to the rapprochement between 
the Croats and the Muslims. Over the past few months, the war 
has been shaped by their conflict and not by Serbian conquests. 
Their armies have been involved in brutal fighting and have 
expelled and massacred civilians. For months, the Croats sought 
to starve the Muslims in the western part of Mostar: The Muslim 
army, on the other hand, kept Croatian civilians trapped in 
central Bosnia. In view of this burden, the Americans -- and 
the Europeans too -- will have to apply much pressure and use 
positive stimuli to further the rapprochement. 

