BFN 

  [Text] Greece is risking a war with Turkey by preparing to 
extend its territorial waters to 12 miles on 16 November. In 
accordance with a secret military plan Athens has drawn up, that 
country has already deployed 60 percent of its military forces 
against Turkey. 
  Greece's plan was finalized after aging Andreas Papandreou, 
who is known for his harsh statements against Turkey, came to 
power. Consequently, the Greek Armed Forces have completely 
changed their defense strategy. The Greek Government decided 
that Greece is confronted with a threat not from the former 
Soviet Union in the north, but from Turkey on the eastern side 
of the Aegean Sea. As such, many of the military units in 
northern Greece have been transferred to Western Thrace. The 
Greek defense line was also reestablished beginning on the 
western side of the Maritsa River and extending to the Greek 
islands in the Aegean Sea, which are very close to Turkey. Two 
infantry divisions on Bulgaria's border and two armored brigades 
and an infantry brigade have taken up positions along Turkey's 
border. 
  Furthermore, support units have been organized for the 
border 
between Turkey and Greece. Thessaloniki has been selected as 
their headquarters. According to the information we have 
received, they are made up of one infantry brigade, one armored 
brigade, one commando regiment, and one paratroop regiment. The 
units that will move into action in the Aegean Sea in the event 
of a war have been reinforced with a naval infantry brigade, a 
commando regiment, and a paratroop regiment. 
  Meanwhile, Prime Minister Andreas Papandrou and his son, 
Yeoryios Papandreou, have been secretly working on a plan in the 
diplomatic field to involve the European Union in a possible war 
between Turkey and Greece. 
<H5>  Ataman: "No Concession on 12 Miles" </H5>
  One of YENI GUNAYDIN's correspondents has asked Turkish 
Foreign Ministry spokesman Ferhat Ataman to comment on a report 
we published a few days ago on Greece's warmongering 
initiatives. He said: "It seems that Greece has finalized its 
plan to extend its territorial waters to 12 miles." 
<H5>  Kilercioglu: "Greece is Making an Effort" </H5>
  Ahmet Dokulmez, one of the Prosperity Party members on the 
National Assembly Foreign Relations Committee, has warned that 
an effort is being made to place Turkey in a difficult position 
in international forums. Calling for measures to counter that 
eventuality, he said: "We are economically weak and in need of 
funds. Nevertheless, we have to adopt a hardline policy because 
that is the approach the Western countries understand." 
  Former Minister of State Orhan Kilercioglu reacted as 
follows: "That would be regarded as a cause for war. I do not 
believe that the Greeks will do anything so crazy. 
Nevertheless, preparations have to be made; we have to be 
prepared. Greece is making an effort in that direction." 

