BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary: "Do the Communist Vietnamese </F>
Puppets and the Communist Vietnamese, Who Want To Swallow 
Cambodian Territory, Want Cambodians To Achieve National 
Reconciliation and Peace?"] 
  [Text] Before leaving for Pyongyang to attend the 
roundtable meeting, puppet Hun Sen said he did not want to 
negotiate with the Khmer Rouge, adding that he, however, would 
attend the meeting although he had little hope of success. 
  This remark proves that the communist Vietnamese, their 
puppets, and their allies have not changed their stand and 
continue to oppose the king's national reconciliation plan. 
Meanwhile, the stand of the Party of Democratic Kampuchea [PDK] 
is clearly known to our nation and people, that is, the PDK 
upholds peace and national reconciliation and supports the 
king's national reconciliation plan. However, the Vietnamese 
puppets, following orders from their communist Vietnamese boss, 
have continued demanding that the PDK return liberated zones to 
them and assemble our Armed Forces for the communist Vietnamese 
and their allies to control and manage Cambodia at will. 
Frankly speaking, they want to smash the resistance movement 
for national liberation so that Vietnam can annex Cambodia into 
its Indochinese Federation. This is the same obsolete, 
unchanging strategy and goal pursued by the communist Vietnamese 
since time immemorial. In such a case, can one rely on the 
communist Vietnamese and their puppets to achieve national 
reconciliation and peace? Definitely not. 
  The communist Vietnamese want to eliminate the Cambodians to 
facilitate its plan to annex Cambodia. As for Vietnamese 
puppets Chea Sim, Hun Sen, Sar Kheng, and so forth, they have 
been installed by the Vietnamese for serving the Vietnamese war 
of aggression since (?1979). They are out-and-out lackeys who 
have been serving Vietnamese interests only, and have never 
thought of serving the interests of the Cambodian nation and 
people. Their nation is Vietnam, thus they want to eliminate 
Cambodia just as their Vietnamese bosses do. 
  The true nature of the Vietnamese and their puppets is well 
known to our nation and people. We have never expected them to 
deliver peace and national reconciliation to our Cambodia. 
Puppet Hun Sen's disgusting remark noted above is clear proof 
of this. 
  Lessons from the past, present, and even in the future in 
Cambodia and the world are clear proof that nobody can beg for 
peace and national independence from the aggressors. Peace, 
national independence, and the survival of each nation are 
always achieved through struggle waged by that nation and its 
people who are victims of the aggression. The same principle 
applies to Cambodia. If we want to achieve peace and national 
reconciliation, our entire nation and people both in the cities 
and countryside must jointly wage all forms of struggle until 
achieving genuine peace, national reconciliation, and national 
unity. 

