BFN 

  [Text] Yulin Prefecture was hit by the No. 3 tropical 
storm between 8 and 11 June, resulting in economic losses 
totalling 76.27 million yuan. The people and troops stationed 
in Yulin have wasted no time in rushing to deal with the 
emergency and provide disaster relief. 
  The regional party committee and people's government have 
been concerned about the disaster situation. On the morning of 
13 June, regional party committee Secretary Zhao Fulin made a 
personal telephone call to principal leaders in charge of the 
Yulin Prefectural CPC Committee to inquire about the disaster 
situation. He also gave them the following three specific 
instructions with regard to disaster relief work: 
  1. The party and government leaders in each and every 
disaster-stricken city, county, township, and town should go 
deep into the disaster-stricken areas at once to learn about the 
disaster situation; organize cadres and masses to combat the 
disaster and provide disaster relief; take measures to tackle 
problems cropping up in the course of combating the disaster and 
providing disaster relief; resolve problems in a timely manner; 
and to reduce the losses caused by the disaster to a minimum; 
  2. The leaders at all levels in Yulin should take practical 
measures to help the broad masses of people tackle 
livelihood-related problems; organize the broad masses of people 
to provide for and help themselves by engaging in production; 
express sympathy and solicitude for the disaster-stricken 
households and collectives; mobilize the broad masses of people 
to help those in the disaster areas overcome difficulties 
relating to livelihood and production; and should take measures 
to save farm crops and reduce losses to a minimum; 
  3. The leaders and broad masses of cadres and people at all 
levels in Yulin should cultivate a strong sense of combating the 
disaster and reaping a good harvest. As the flood season has 
just started, Zhao said, we should be on the alert, never 
slacken vigilance, take measures to prevent and combat 
disasters, and strive to reap a good agricultural harvest this 
year. 

