Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Vicenza, Italy, Feb 7 (AFP) -- A NATO air wing has 
taken the "necessary steps" to carry out air raids in Bosnia 
should they be decided on, a spokesman for NATO's Southern 
Command, squadron-leader John Jeffery said Monday [7 February]. 
  Jeffery said that the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
(NATO) "has been ready since July 22" and that the Southern 
Command had been "conducting the plannings required by the NATO 
council in respect of air strikes." 
  However, he could make "no comment at this stage" on reports 
that the number of sorties by NATO aircraft over Sarajevo had 
increased in recent days in response to the latest massacres 
there. 
  NATO's Southern Command has been responsible for 
implementing 
Operation Deny Flight since April 12 last. The aim of this 
operation is to prevent all flights over Bosnian airspace in 
accordance with UN Resolution 816. 
  According to a statement from NATO, its aircraft carried out 
11,114 missions over Bosnia in the period between April 12 and 
February 6,935 of them involving combat aircraft. 
  The Atlantic alliance has 170 aircraft at its disposal to 
implement Deny Flight. These include 80 warplanes, many of them 
designed for ground attack work, belonging to the Air Forces of 
the United States, Turkey and the Netherlands. These are 
stationed in nine different airbases around Italy. 
  Among these combat aircraft are 10 French Mirage 2000's 
based 
in Cervia on Italy's Adriatic coast, eight French Jaguars in 
Rivolto, 12 F-16 and eight F-18's belonging to the U.S. Air 
Force stationed in Aviana, near Venice, eight Tornados and eight 
Jaguars of the Royal Air Force based in Gioia del Colle, 
opposite the coast of Montenegro, and ten Turkish F-16's, also 
based in Italy. 
  In addition, NATO can call on other warplanes based in their 
home countries, or on aircraft carriers. The USS Saratoga, for 
example, can supply 18 F-18's or F-14's, and the French carrier 
Clemenceau six super-Etendard bombers. 
  NATO said that the exclusion zone over Bosnia had been 
violated 250 times by helicopters between last April and 
October, but that airplane flights had practically ceased. 
  In the six months before Deny Flight had come into effect, 
Bosnian airspace had been violated over 500 times. 

