Uttarkhand   State Analyzed 

<F P=102> 94AS0281B New Delhi JANSATTA in Hindi 27 Apr 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0281B </F>
<F P=104>  New Delhi JANSATTA </F>
<F P=105>  Hindi </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Niraj Joshi: "A Round of Movements in </F>
Uttarkhand"] 
  [Text] The people in Uttarkhand are vigorously campaigning 
for various districts, counties, and blocks. Dozens of such 
movements to organize such small units are raging in Garhwal and 
Kumaon. The "save block, county, and district movement" in 
Kumaon has become so strong these days that it outshines even 
the movement for a separate Uttarkhand. In Kumaon's Pithoragarh 
region alone, they have such movements as "Establish Champavat 
district," and "Establish Didihat district, county, precinct, 
block" in addition to marches, hunger strikes, fasts-unto-death, 
and sit ins. 
  Using traditional drums and dances, the enthusiasm of the 
villagers from remote rural areas gathered in district and 
country seats and camping there for as long as five days has 
been brought to its peak. Even the Nainital valley is rumbling 
with the noise raised for making Champavat district. The 
movement for Bageshwar district is comparatively old. 
  The political groups are viewing the emerging flood of 
movements in the inner Uttarkhand from various perspectives. The 
left-wing parties consider this to be the result of infiltration 
of Naxalite groups in the hills such as MPF [Maoist People's 
Front] into politics. The BJP [Bharatiya Janata Party] family 
believe this to be the product of the "growth of the idea of 
balanced progress through their small units." The Congress Party 
and other moderate groups considers it to be the result of their 
absence. These scattered movements for new counties, blocks, 
districts, and even a separate state have made it clear that in 
the difficult terrain of Uttarkhand the central and state 
development projects cannot have much effect. Instead, colonial 
types of luxury projects such as tourism have widened he chasm 
between cities and villages in Uttarkhand. 
  The movement for Champavat district in Pithoragarh has 
crossed the state to the Center. The political circles have 
become alert at this bustle about these various movements. The 
political parties are trying to snatch these movements for 
separate Uttarkhand and districts from the people. The letter 
from Harish Rawat, head of the Rashtariya Sewa Dal, to Mulayam 
Singh asking him to declare Champavat a separate district is 
proof of such efforts. 
  Why are efforts to organize small unit when the 
cabinet-level 
Kaushik Commission established by Mulayam Singh is already 
holding its meetings? The answer to this question was clear in 
the Kaushik Commission's meeting in the Circuit House in Almora. 
It is not necessary to say that R.S. Toling, chief of Uttarkhand 
Development Department, and six members of Mulayam Singh's 
Kaushik Commission met with the representatives of the people. 
Many questions were raised in this meeting over Kaushik 
Commission's overlooking the intellectual, political, and 
self-employed groups in Uttarkhand. Later in the Commission's 
meetings in Pauri and Terai, the people demanded from the state 
government to provide constitutional recognition to the 
geographical boundaries and the capital of the proposed state. 
They asked the state to first reorganize districts and counties 
before starting the process of forming a separate state. The 
Kaushik Commission and the U.P. [Uttar Pradesh] government 
rejected this demand right then and there. This has resulted in 
fasts-unto-death and hunger strikes for small units of 
administration in various places. 
  Still, the present reasons cannot account for this prevalent 
dissatisfaction. Villagers living 50 or 100 miles away from any 
major road do not come out with their drums to hold 
demonstrations year round and start hunger strikes. It is clear 
that the turmoil in the few cities of Uttarkhand has spread to 
rural areas. The process that did not affect them at all from 
distance or up close is now materializing with the time. The 
wave of movements is also rising with the emergence of this 
awareness. 
  If we take a broader look, we will find that the present 
movement in the backwoods of Uttarkhand is the movement of rural 
awareness. Why is the rural hill population which is more than 
80 percent of the total population of 600,000 so angry? There 
are several reasons for it. The first is the neglect of hill 
regions by the state and central governments since independence. 
The second reason is the imposition of urban development model 
here despite the different geographic situation of Uttarkhand 
because of its hilly terrain, and the prejudice shown by the 
messiahs of separate Uttarkhand in their narrow and regional 
mentality. The third reason is the weakened political situation 
of the Uttarkhand representatives at the state and central 
government levels. The fourth, and most important, reason is the 
lack of basic facilities in the hills because of wrong planning 
or wrong priorities during the last 45 years. 
  The Congress Party had political supremacy here until 1990. 
In each election, the Congress raised the slogan for 
development. The December 1993 vidhan sabha election could be an 
exception because the Congress had added the issue of a separate 
and autonomous federation. Other parties that came to power here 
also recognized the Uttarkhand people's belief that the only 
route to progress was having a separate state. After recognizing 
this belief, the BJP and the Samajwadi Party started to wrangle 
over the Uttarkhand issue. 
  The issue of basic facilities that should have been given 
top 
priority but was ignored is still being ignored. The situation 
now is that an average village groups does not have any basic 
facility. Because of the curse of local geography, villages are 
usually located more than five kilometers apart. A gramsabha 
[village council] is established for each of such six or seven 
villages. According to government standards for providing 
primary education if a village has 300 people living in it and 
is more than 1.5 kilometers from another village, then the first 
number does not meet one criteria and the second is much more 
than needed. However, this results in having only one school in 
the gramsabha [of six or seven villages]. Because of the Forest 
directive of 1980 and the increasing watchfulness of the forest 
department, villages lying 50 kilometers away have not been 
joined by roads. Even when connecting roads are built, 
landslides during the first rains wipe those roads out. It is 
natural for a group to start a movement if it is deprived of 
such basic amenities as education, health care, electricity, 
water, roads and inns. 
  Still, we cannot say that money is not being spent on 
development work in Uttarkhand. They are spending money here 
over priority projects under annual and 5-year plans. How much 
money was spent on the governments former priority projects and 
which group benefitted from them is a separate issue. The 
central and state governments have given priority to development 
of tourism in Uttarkhand. Crores of rupees are being spent on 
tourism. Why, then, are the people agitated? The answer to this 
question is the attack of the modern tourism on the religious 
and traditional concept of travel. This has worried the rural 
population. The desire to visit famous holy places in Haridwar, 
Badrinath, Kedarnath, Bageshwar, Jageshwar, and Patal 
Bhuvneshwar is decreasing among the outsiders. On the other 
hand, developments for recreation and luxury living in cities 
like Nainital, Mussoorie, Kaushani, Pithoragarh, and Almora are 
on the rise. What do the villagers living 50 kilometers from the 
nearest road and 150 kilometers from the district headquarter 
have to do with hang gliding, para gliding, mountain climbing, 
skiing, swimming pools, and other such flashy things? The rural 
population of Uttarkhand understands this question very well and 
even women are holding demonstrations in many places. The 
meaning of the movements for districts, counties, and blocks is 
simple awareness which is a good sign for the future of rural 
population. Will the U.P. and central governments and the 
representatives of the hill region try to understand the wrath 
of the people by rising above their biases? Only the future will 
tell us. 

