CSO 

<F P=106> ["Luggage for Explosives"] </F>
  [Text] Luggage loaded into aircraft holds at Britain's main 
airports will be automatically screened for explosives from 1996. 
  BAA, the private company which operates the airports, is to 
spend &pound;150 million installing the screening system, which 
has 
been developed as the latest technology has become available. 
  It will be installed initially at Heathrow and Gatwick 
airports to check bags being transferred between international 
flights, but will eventually be in operation at BAA's seven 
airports. 
  The screening process is aimed at averting a repeat of the 
Lockerbie disaster of 1988, when explosives were smuggled aboard 
a Pan-Am jet. 
  Forty-five million bags a year go into the holds of 
international flights at BAA airports. The system being 
installed is capable of screening up to 20 bags a minute, so 
will not slow down normal check-in procedures. The bags go 
through an X-ray machine which analyses the atomic weight and 
density of materials, pinpoints anything which is a potential 
explosive and uses a computer to analyse the results. 
  Any suspect bag is pulled from the conveyor belt and 
subjected to further automatic examination, which is checked by 
an operator. If the bag still appears suspect it is sent for a 
"sniffer" test for the distinctive vapours given off by 
explosives. 
  The technology has been developed over the last 2 1/2 years, 
during which time repeated tests gradually ironed out the 
problems with false alarms. 
  Richard Everitt, director of safety and security for BAA, 
said the new system was "a significant breakthrough in our fight 
to beat the terrorist." 
  "No other airport in the world is currently using this 
technology, which can be integrated into existing baggage 
systems, but we hope that others will follow our lead." 
  "One of the great benefits of this technology is that it 
increases the protection for passengers without disrupting their 
journeys and allows the airport to continue operating 
effectively." 

