Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrey Bayduzhiy: ``Live Merchandise Leaving </F>
Russia. If Barriers Are Not Placed on Its Path, the Red Book 
Could Turn Into Many Volumes''] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Sore Spot </H5>
  It seems that among the largest items of Russian 
exports--petroleum, gas, and metals--in the near future it will 
also be necessary to include trade in living merchandise. No, so 
far things have not reached the point where Russia, like Africa 
in the 18th century, has turned into a supplier of human beings 
for the slave market. It is much simpler: As in other states of 
the former USSR, illegal purchase and sale of rare kinds of 
flora and fauna has been developing more and more actively here. 
  According to information from international experts, during 
1991 in Europe alone contraband trade turnover in unique species 
of animals and plants exceeded $1 billion. Two-thirds of its 
volume was in former USSR republics. Things have certainly not 
improved on the territory of one-sixth of the earth's surface, 
but as the boundaries of the collapsing Union become 
increasingly penetrable, they leave no doubt that the scale of 
this trade has increased even more. For example, not so long ago 
a scandal broke out in the West over press reports to the effect 
that certain Russian firms had offered to let wealthy foreigners 
entertain themselves by hunting the Ussuriysk tiger, which is in 
the Red Book. A number of international organizations have 
officially expressed their concern about the increased scale of 
uncontrolled hunting in Russia. 
  It is not even that killing animals is a bad thing in 
general, and rare ones in particular. As early as 1973 Russia 
along with 120 other countries signed in Washington a Convention 
on International Trade in Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 
Threatened by Extinction. According to this document, 
international trade in all representatives of the animal and 
vegetable kingdoms included in the international Red Book shall 
be prohibited. Moreover, each country has a list of local 
species of flora and fauna whose sale abroad, although 
permitted, must be clearly restricted and controlled with the 
help of licenses. Among the domestic animals on this list, 
otters, wolves, lynx, and, of course, the symbol of Russia, the 
brown bear, are especially popular among foreigners. During 1993 
the Main Administration of Biological Resources of the Ministry 
of Environmental Protection and Natural Resources issued 1,000 
permits to various organizations for exporting, re-exporting, 
and importing 30,000 ``objects of animal and vegetable origin.'' 
However, in the opinion of specialists, this is only the tip of 
the iceberg. In reality the scale of trade in living merchandise 
and its contraband turnover is at least 10 times greater. 
  Both individual unwitting citizens and completely 
respectable 
organizations engage in this business. Quite recently in Seattle 
(United States) they confiscated a batch of lynx hides shipped 
by the Irkutsk Fur-Hide Base without any license. Domestic and 
foreign environmental protection departments are becoming more 
and more concerned about cases of commercial hunting where 
animals that are not to be used for game shooting are being 
offered as future hunting trophies to people from distant 
foreign countries who wish them. It is extremely difficult to 
control this business: Workers in the majority of customs 
offices have no idea which species of animals are banned from 
shipment out of the country. But even if each crossover point 
were provided with a detailed list of them, this would not solve 
the problem. A customs official is not a biologist, and it is an 
impossible problem for him to distinguish the horn of a Siberian 
stag, the musk of a musk deer, or a bear's gall bladder from 
other parts and preparations whose shipment is no crime at all. 
  On the other hand, even if customs were to manage to prevent 
the shipment of one rare species or another out of the country, 
there arises the problem of what to do with them after that. 
There are no customs points with especially equipped points for 
keeping confiscated animals, and if they are confiscated they 
are very frequently doomed to death. The situation is 
complicated by the fact that after the elimination of the USSR 
the majority of its former republics simply have no time for 
controlling their fauna and flora. Under these conditions, 
Russia, as successor to the Union, with the agreement of other 
republics, was forced to take charge of issuing permits for 
shipping out representatives of disappearing species of the 
animal and vegetable kingdoms from Belarus, Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Ukraine as 
well. But it will not be possible to arrange any kind of strict 
control of the situation in these countries in the near future. 
  The concern of the international community about the growing 
scale of illegal business in the former USSR developed into 
holding an international seminar on problems of illegal trade in 
representatives of wild flora and fauna at the end of last year 
in Moscow. Hot on its tracks, the Ministry of Environmental 
Protection and Natural Resources held a meeting of the collegium 
at which they prepared a draft governmental resolution calling 
for support for Russia's fulfillment of its international 
commitments. One of the main measures of the proposed government 
decree is to instruct the Customs Committee, the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs, the Russian Federation Procuracy, and other 
departments to take a number of effective measures to step up 
control over gathering rare plants and animals, trading in them, 
and allowing them to cross the border. But it is not likely that 
it will be possible to carry out what has been earmarked sooner 
than in a couple of years. For now it would be better for the 
disappearing animals in Russia to rely on their own legs and 
natural instincts in their fight with domestic businessmen and 
foreign poachers. 

