Language: <F P=105> Lao </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial from 22 March PASASON: "Pay Attention to </F>
Building the Party as Political Task in the New Stage"] 
  [Text] Beloved listeners: Today, 22 March 1994, marks the 
39th founding anniversary of the noble, glorious Lao People's 
Revolutionary Party [LPRP]. We celebrate this occasion at a 
time when our entire party, army, and people have won new 
achievements in many fields and translated into reality the 
resolution of the fifth party congress in the cause of national 
defense and construction. Cadres, party members, and multiethnic 
people of Laos wholeheartedly welcome the founding anniversary 
of the party. On this occasion, we also would like to express 
our grief and mourning for the late Comrade Kaysone Phomvihan, 
former chairman of the party Central Committee, and other 
comrade leaders as well as other outstanding party members who 
have left us forever. 
  The LPRP was founded 39 years ago. Its founding marked a 
milestone of development in the significant turning point of the 
Lao revolution. The important responsibility of the party was 
to lead the entire Lao people to struggle for the independence, 
prosperity, and strength of the nation and for the freedom and 
happiness of our multiethnic Lao people. Throughout the past, 
the LPRP has shouldered the great responsibility and 
successfully led the entire people to fulfill the 
national-democratic revolution, defend the country, and build 
the new system. 
  Since its fourth and the fifth congresses, our party has 
pursued a new, comprehensive, and profound restructuring line. 
The line pursues restructuring in viewpoints to restructuring 
in the economic field, thus doing away with the state-financing 
administrative system and switching to the accountability 
mechanism, implementing the policy of multifaceted economic 
structure, broadening the relations with foreign countries, and 
turning the natural economy into the goods-oriented economy. 
The aforesaid restructuring line has reflected our party's 
talented, clear-sighted leadership and quickness. It has 
conformed to the overall trend and situation of the world. It 
has also benefited our country's revolutionary development. The 
restructuring line has, therefore, brought about an improvement 
of the general situation in our country. Following the 
implementation of the line, our economy has been increasingly 
developed while our people's material and cultural life has been 
significantly improved, the political stability has become 
secure and firm and it will serve as a strong basis for the 
national development in the subsequent years, and the people's 
democratic rights and rights to being owners of the country have 
been further promoted and expanded, as a result of which our 
country has worthily contributed to establishing world peace and 
maintaining friendship and cooperation with various countries. 
Our country has then gained sympathy, support, and assistance 
from various countries and international organizations for our 
cause of national construction and development. 
  Our party has achieved success in fulfilling heavy 
responsibilities as entrusted to us by the nation and people 
because it has consistently adhered to the class and 
revolutionary attitudes and has struggled for the independence, 
prosperity, and strength of the country and for freedom and 
happiness of the people. Our party has always paid attention to 
improving itself on the basis of its strategic principle and 
objective. It has adjusted and perfected its direction to be in 
conformity with the situation in each stage. Our party has 
always maintained unique solidarity and strictly implemented 
democratic centralization while opposing privatism and 
opportunism. It has always followed the path of masses, closely 
associated with the masses, and worked in coordination with the 
people for the interests of the people. It has always combined 
genuine patriotism with pure internationalism. 
  The fruitful success of the party's leadership has been 
related to the achievements won in carrying out the party 
building work and ideological training work, the training and 
tempering of cadres and party members, the party's restructuring 
line, and the profound patriotic spirit and spirit of cherishing 
the new system of the multiethnic Lao people. The cadres and 
party members, as well as the multiethnic people, are very 
elated and proud over the success of the party's leadership. On 
this occasion, we, cadres and party members, would like to 
express our gratitude to the party and our confidence in the 
party's leadership. We also express our support for the new, 
restructuring policy, rules, and regulations of the party. We 
pledge to positively contribute to the party's cause of 
defending and building the country. 
  On the occasion of the party's 39th anniversary, let all our 
cadres and party members continue to study and learn the said 
fine traditions of the party and be determined to adhere to the 
party's lofty ideals through actual acts of enhancing the 
solidarity to ensure the unified and leading characteristics. 
In the immediate future, let us speed up consolidating, 
building, and strengthening foundations for party units and 
fulfill the leadership role in all respects in order to realize 
the party's objective in each stage. Let us also implement the 
party's restructuring line in an appropriate manner in order to 
achieve success in implementing our country's socioeconomic 
development plan for the period from now to year 20000. 

