BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Bernd Wagner: "Many Splinter Groups"] </F>
  [Text] The nonmilitant, right-wing extremist parties in 
the FRG -- in particular, the Republikaner (Rep), the National 
Democratic Party of Germany (NPD), the German People's Union, 
and, since 1991, the German League for People and Homeland (DL) 
-- have been trying to develop organizational structures since 
they became masterminded by the West in the wake of the fall of 
the wall. Although they encountered a lot of support from all 
generations, it took them some time to establish working 
structures at the land level. The situation was even worse at 
the local level. Despite the recognizable major right-leaning 
protest potential among the population, they did not achieve any 
success in the elections. The most sizable gains were achieved 
from among workers and employees who had been affected by 
unemployment and social decline. 
  The most active partisans of right-wing extremism in eastern 
Germany are young people. Young workers, people employed in the 
industrial service sector, and pupils and apprentices make up 
the bulk. Approximately one-third can be counted as 
marginalized milieus. People with higher education are rather 
rare. 
  The right-wing extremist protest milieu is structured in 
local, regional, and supraregional scenes, which are linked 
together and communicate and consciously identify themselves 
through militant actions, slogans, and accessories. The central 
unit is the small group, which safeguards the various values of 
the right-wing extremist movement as "central points." Then 
there is a number of right-wing extremist bands and "zines," 
most of which are anchored in the skinhead milieu and which 
strengthen right-wing extremist orientation emotionally. 
Ideology is being conveyed via music and lyrics that catch on. 
On the one hand, these are verbal slogans and on the other, 
ideologically pepped-up images and similes. The "zines," which 
are very popular among young right-wing extremists, work on the 
basis of cartoons. There is a distinct language of images and 
symbols, which is not immediately accessible to those not in the 
know. 
  The "young," right-wing extremists' interest focuses on 
"neo-Nazi" and "national-revolutionary" ideas. They use 
familiar formulas of a "true" socialism, social equality, and 
justice. At the same time, they take over the aversion against 
"bigwig structures." Socialist Unity Party of Germany and FRG 
leaders are presented as interchangeable. Like "real socialism" 
in the past, capitalism is being looked at extremely critically 
and is considered outdated. It is seen as bringing mass 
unemployment and a housing shortage to the Germans and as 
ruining the ecological substance. The state should be "national." 
  Mystical Teutomania, racism, and Social Darwinism are 
further 
ideological elements that may develop into distinct, local 
mixtures. Foreigners constitute a central "potential of threat" 
for the "purity of the race and German culture," for jobs and 
apartments of "Germans." The theoretical substance of the 
ideology and its elements is not very marked. Yet, this does 
not speak against its effect, which is based on unreal 
connections and myths: Ideology becomes a virtual substitute 
for religion. 
  Within the militant right-wing extremist protest milieu, 
various small organizations have emerged in the new laender 
bearing unambiguous names, such as the Social Revolutionary 
Workers Front (SrA) as a legal branch of the banned Nationalist 
Front (NF), the Central German Youth Promotion Organization 
(FM), which recently also became known as Direct Action Central 
Germany. 
  Apart from that, there are "groups of comrades," which are 
active as autonomous local groups -- for example the Greifswald 
National Socialists (GNS), the Hitler Youth Schoenfeld in 
Leipzig -- or other groups, which are partly affiliated to other 
organizations or are autonomous, such as the Nationalist Youth 
Schwedt (NJS). The "groups of comrades," which also include 
themselves with organizations such as German Alternative, 
National Offensive, and National List, see themselves as 
elements of the "ideological community of the New Front" (GdNF), 
an ideological community linked to the name of Michael Kuehnen 
and the NSDAP (AO) [National Socialist German Workers Party, 
Nazi Party (Foreign Branch)], which acts from its base in the 
United States. 
  These groupings are cadre organizations with strict criteria 
regarding membership and discipline. The cadre keeps a cover 
toward the security authorities. This includes that even 
members of the same group are treated under the intelligence 
service principle of restricted access to information. The 
planning of activities and strategic and tactical discussions 
take place at "leader meetings" at a local, regional, and 
supraregional level. Branched out widely in the direct 
neighborhood of cadre groups, there are numerous autonomous 
groupings with differing social features. The spectrum ranges 
from loose children's groups, youth club scenes, and criminal 
gangs to disciplined organizations that stand up for their 
ideological convictions. Their common denominator is right-wing 
extremist ideology and the readiness to use violence that is 
based on enemy images and the idea of natural inequality of 
people. 
  In recent times, the classic militant concept that was 
developed by former neo-Nazi "fuehrer" Michael Kuehnen has been 
changed. After the pogrom of August 1992 in Rostock, the scene 
began to understand that it was not useful to make a permanently 
militant appearance. After all, this was giving the state a 
chance to bust groups. The new concept is: creating autonomous 
groups of comrades that are not linked to official political 
structures and that are, at the same time, an element of 
"normal" social structures, such as the regulars of a club. 
  The loose, unorganized "skinhead" scene in the new laender 
is 
particularly dangerous. It was predominantly neo-Nazi-oriented 
up until 1989-90. As of 1991, the scene began to split into 
various groups. Despite their differing orientations, it 
remains an important factor for the threat to internal security. 
It is there where the readiness to use violence and terror 
meet, leading again and again to manslaughter, severe cases of 
bodily injury, and breach of public peace. 

