BFN 

<F P=106> [Portions recorded] </F>
  [Summary] After 25 days of work, the Ninth National 
Assembly's fifth session closed this afternoon. 
  Attending the closing session were "Do Muoi, general 
secretary of the party Central Committee; Le Duc Anh, president 
of state; Vo Van Kiet, prime minister; Vo Chi Cong, adviser to 
the party Central Committee; and many veteran cadres of our 
party and state." 
  Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet delivered the opening speech. He 
said: 
  [Begin Vo Van Kiet recording] "The tasks to be carried out 
in 
the last six months of the year are very great. The report 
presented by the deputy prime minister at the opening session of 
the National Assembly pointed out six sorts of difficult 
problems that need concentrated efforts to resolve. I would 
like to further emphasize that, apart from the aim of attaining 
the various requirements for 1994, the implementation of various 
tasks in the last six months of 1994 will also have a great 
effect on the following year. The implementation of these tasks 
requires a great concentration of effort by the various sectors 
and echelons from the central down to grass-roots levels. In 
the period ahead, the government will hold meetings with various 
provincial and city people's committees of all the three regions 
-- namely, the south, the central highlands, and the north -- to 
review the problems encountered by various regions. This is to 
determine more substantive measures with which to resolve the 
difficult issues now encountered by each region. We will hold 
these meetings with various southern and northern regions by 
mid-July. The government will strive to promptly promulgate 
various bylaws to provide guidance for the enforcement of the 
laws already passed by the National Assembly at this session. 
At the same time, we will also reexamine and continue to 
supplement and perfect the current policy system. This will 
involve a large amount of difficult work." [end recording] 
  Next, Comrade Vu Mao, on behalf of the session secretariat, 
read the full text of the draft resolution of the fifth session 
which ratifies the United Nations' 1982 Convention on the Law of 
the Sea. He said: 
  [Begin Vu Mao recording] The National Assembly of the 
Socialist Republic of Vietnam [SRV] hereby decides : 
  "1. To ratify the United Nations' 1982 Convention on the Law 
of the Sea. 
  "2. Through the ratification of the United Nations's 1982 
Convention on the Law of the Sea, the SRV has demonstrated its 
determination to join with the world community in building a 
just legal order so as to encourage development and cooperation 
at sea. 
  "3. The National Assembly affirms SRV sovereignty over 
various areas of internal water [nooij thuyr] and territorial 
seas as well as its sovereignty and jurisdiction over areas of 
water adjoining the territorial seas, the exclusive economic 
zones, and the continental shelf of Vietnam on the basis of the 
stipulations of the convention and other principles of 
international law. Other countries are required to respect the 
above rights of Vietnam. 
  "4. The National Assembly once again affirms Vietnamese 
sovereignty over the Paracel and Spratly archipelagoes, and its 
policy of settling all disputes over territorial sovereignty as 
well as other differences related to the Eastern Sea through 
peaceful negotiations in the spirit of equality, understanding, 
and mutual respect; and on the basis of respect for 
international law, particularly for the United Nations' 1982 
Convention on the Law of the Sea, and respect for the 
sovereignty and jurisdiction of coastal countries over their 
exclusive economic zones and continental shelves. 
  "After striving to negotiate a fundamental and long-term 
approach, all the parties concerned must maintain stability on 
the basis of maintaining the status quo without taking any 
actions that may further complicate the situation and must 
refrain from using force or threatening to use force. 
  "The National Assembly emphasizes that it is necessary to 
distinguish the issue of settling disputes over the Paracel and 
Spratly archipelagoes from the issue of defending various 
territorial seas and continental shelves under Vietnamese 
sovereignty and jurisdiction based on the principles and 
standards of the United Nations' 1982 Convention on the Law of 
the Sea. 
  "5. The National Assembly assigns the National Assembly 
Standing Committee and the government with the duty of studying 
those relevant stipulations of the state law so as to make 
necessary corrections in such a way as to suit the United 
Nations's 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea and to guarantee 
the interests of Vietnam. 
  "The National Assembly assigns the government with the duty 
of adopting effective measures to intensify the safeguarding and 
management of the various territorial seas and continental 
shelves belonging to Vietnam." [end recording] 
  Following this, the National Assembly passed the resolution 
by a show of hands. 
  At 1430 today, National Assembly Chairman Nong Duc Manh 
delivered a closing speech. After reviewing the socioeconomic 
situation over the past six months, he said: 
  [Begin Nong Duc Manh recording] Apart from the improvements 
made, we still display many weaknesses that need to be overcome. 
There remain many great difficulties and ordeals to be 
surmounted. He pointed out: 
  "We must continue to ameliorate the financial and monetary 
system and increase the collection of the budget revenue to meet 
the demands of the budget expenditure. We must increase revenue 
collection along with economizing on spending. We must guard 
against wasteful spending while taking necessary measures to 
contain inflation at a single-digit level. We must concentrate 
on mobilizing and effectively using the sources of foreign and 
domestic capital to serve key construction projects and other 
projects already approved. We must create more conditions for 
the promotion of capital investment from various economic 
components in society as a whole and must encourage various 
business firms and families to use their own capital for the 
production business." 
  He went on: "We must pay great attention to minimizing the 
negative aspects of the market system in building a civilized 
and wholesome lifestyle and in taking up and developing the fine 
character of the folk culture and revolutionary ethical 
traditions. We must concern ourselves with the issue of creating 
employment for the working people, especially youths, and with 
the issue of eliminating social ills, especially in large cities 
and urban areas. 
  "The National Assembly urges the government and various 
sectors and echelons to vigorously carry out the economic 
renovation in conjunction with administrative reform. It is 
necessary to renovate the state apparatus in the direction of 
compactness and excellence, to improve the results and the 
effectiveness of the state and social management, to build a 
socialist democracy, to enhance legislation, and to create a 
mechanism capable of minimizing and eliminating negative 
phenomena in state management as well as in social life." 
  He concluded by saying: "Our country is facing great 
opportunities and great challenges. To successfully implement 
the resolution of the Seventh Party Congress and the resolution 
of the midterm national party conference, the National Assembly 
calls on compatriots and combatants nationwide as well as 
compatriots living abroad to be of the same heart and mind, to 
make full use of opportunities, repel danger, overcome all 
difficulties and obstacles, strive to consolidate and broaden 
the all-people unity bloc, uphold a sense of independence and 
sovereignty, be creative in developing the fine tradition of the 
nation, and have a determination to follow the forefathers' 
example of performing great deeds and advancing the country with 
the motto: All for a prosperous people, a powerful country, and 
an equitable and civilized society." 
  I hereby declare the fifth session of the Ninth National 
Assembly closed. [end recording] 

