Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yevgeniy Vasilchuk, FINANSOVYYE IZVESTIYA: "For </F>
the Time Being the Fantasies of New Programs Are Far From 
Reality"] 
  [Text] The report by the Department of Economics of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences and of the "Reforma" [Reform] Fund 
(the Abalkin-Petrakov-Shatalin report) was received very coolly 
in Russian "upper circles." Economics Minister A. Shokhin called 
the proposals by the three academicians too general. 
Presidential expert analysts noted their conservatism. 
  Indeed, such provisions of the academic program as the 
rejection of voucher privatization and the strengthening of 
state regulation of price formation simply do not correspond to 
the real economic relations presently existing in Russia. The 
"sweepingness" of the measures proposed in the area of 
structural policy, essentially, requires the restoration of 
administrative-command levers of economic management. 
  The report-program of "real economic reforms" by a group of 
specialists of the Central Economic and Mathematical Institute, 
which was submitted to the government by S. Glazyev, chairman of 
the Committee on Economic Policy of the State Duma, was received 
much more favorably. A. Shokhin even said that the proposals in 
Glazyev's report were in the channel of the economic concept 
ripening within the government itself. 
  As compared with the program by the "three academicians," 
the 
approaches in Glazyev's report seem more progressive. The 
achievement of the structure of world prices with a moderately 
liberal utilization of the classic tools of state regulation of 
the market economy, that is, tax, customs, antimonopoly policy, 
and so forth, is anticipated. In the opinion of the authors of 
this report, together with an active organizational and 
industrial policy and the creation of powerful financial and 
industrial groups this will make it possible to optimize costs 
on the scale of the entire national economic complex and to 
concentrate investment resources at promising technological 
growth points. The document acknowledges the importance of 
social transfers and of psychological support for the spirit of 
entrepreneurship and innovation, as well as the need to create 
an equality of information opportunities. 
  In the final analysis, the program of the Lvov-Glazyev group 
represents a certain intricate methodological hybrid. On the one 
hand, ideas close to competitive equilibrium trends in economic 
theory prevail in macroeconomic sections. On the other hand, the 
mechanism of recovery from the crisis is based on dynamic models 
of "transformation growth," that is, with an emphasis on 
technological innovations and entrepreneurial enthusiasm. 
  Conceptually, the mixture of the Central Economic and 
Mathematical Institute seems not bad. In the end a moderate dose 
of theoretical eclecticism is inevitable and even necessary in 
economic program research and development. The vector of 
historical optimism in Glazyev's report is also directed 
forward, which distinguishes it advantageously from traditional 
academic conservatism "looking back at yesterday." The formation 
of powerful financial and industrial groups has the right to 
life both in theory and in practical policy, provided it occurs 
as an objectively necessary process--regulated within the 
framework of antimonopoly legislation--of concentration and 
centralization of national financial capital and does not force 
its way from above as an end-in-itself project of the currently 
fashionable economic doctrine. 
  However, neither the report itself nor the numerous alarmist 
statements by its principal elaborators contain the chief 
thing--a set of strictly practical recommendations, the 
implementation of which would enable the government, in the next 
one and a half to two years, to keep the economy under control 
and "to hold out" until the mechanism of investment resource 
conservation and of the "technological" multiplicator begins to 
operate. 
  Under the slogan of advancement toward world price 
proportions, in fact, the report evades the most acute problem 
of a current--immediate--efficient integration of Russia's 
disproportional economy and of the world economy. The inflation 
of sellers and the noncompetitiveness of the domestic industry, 
alas, are not a myth. Otherwise, the government's protectionist 
lobbying would not be so strong. 
  In contrast to the Abalkin-Petrakov-Shatalin program, which 
expects to actuate a state-controlled price mechanism of 
redistribution of income from competitive export sectors in 
favor of the inefficient area of the economy, the research and 
development of the Central Economic and Mathematical Institute 
propose that tax levers be used and that the rent from natural 
resources be made the determining basis for the tax system. 
Thus, in the opinion of the authors of this report, from one oil 
and gas complex it is possible "to extract" 30 billion dollars 
of income annually! At the same time, how and from what 
investment sources the latter should develop large-scale 
production involving the initial processing of fuel-power and 
raw material resources before 1995 remains only a guess. 
  Both reports allot a special place to the credit and 
monetary 
system, the banking sector, and currency regulation. In many 
cases reproaches directed against the credit and financial 
sphere must be considered justified. Almost all sectors of the 
economy and society at large have a tremendous grudge against 
the banking sector and the country's credit and financial system 
(including state finances). 
  Therefore, the recommendations to toughen bank control and 
currency regulation are politically explicable. Economically, 
however, they are poorly justified and their obvious 
"overdosage" and the new government's passion for administrative 
prescriptions can lead to opposite results. 

