CSO 

  [Text] The selection of an Indian leader as Antonio 
Navarro's running mate, the emergence of a parliamentary bloc 
made up of the independent sectors that won Sunday's contest, 
and the desertion of at least one of the visible leaders of M-19 
are three of the immediate consequences of AD/M-19's 
catastrophic electoral defeat. 
  Yesterday, Navarro decided to officially register his 
presidential candidacy and to bet on the electoral potential of 
ethnic minorities by choosing Jesus Enrique Pinacue as his 
political "buddy." 
  Several days ago, crushed by the organization's election 
results (the M-19 delegation was reduced to a single seat in the 
Chamber of Representatives), Navarro himself sent a letter to 
the independent aspirants who were assured of seats in the 
Senate for the next four years. He did not win their support, 
while on the other hand, the winners (among them Senator Samuel 
Moreno, who this time decided to run for reelection outside the 
Democratic Alliance; Jaime Dussan, Jorge Santos, Jairo 
Clopatofsky, and Manuel Cepeda) met to forge a bloc for 
legislative work. 
  It was a debacle for the organization. Representative 
Gustavo 
Petro resigned from the group; Senator Anibal Palacio, 
representing the Hope, Peace, and Liberty sector, is not sure 
whether he will support Navarro; and Angelino Garzon is in the 
same boat. 
  AD/M-19 has coldly examined its recent electoral failure and 
attributed it to four factors: the lack of solid regional and 
social bases, the institutional difficulties it faced, the very 
leadership of the movement, and its campaign tactics. 
  First, because it says the movement was built in just the 
opposite way as the Revolutionary Workers Party (PRT) of Mexico 
or the Farabundo Marti Front of El Salvador, that is, "from the 
top rather than from the bottom." Second, because it says it is 
at a disadvantage compared to the electoral machinery that uses 
key government posts to garner votes (offering jobs and spoils); 
because it has no money to wage a costly campaign against 
opponents who spend billions of pesos; because the Law on 
Parties that helped it came too late; and because the national 
Constitution is still developing in a timid way, and "in real 
life" no turn-around has been seen. 
  Third, because it gave star treatment to certain 
individuals, 
since the people who were commanders of the demobilized 
organizations at the time were automatically made political 
leaders, and some of them had no abilities in that direction. 
Other leaders were shut out; everyone wanted to be a colonel, 
and no one would obey either Navarro or the collective 
presidency. The AD delegation did not behave like a collegiate 
body, and took only sporadic, individual actions; work done 
outside of parliament was squandered; its power was centralized; 
and when it withdrew from the government, it did not know how to 
act like an opposition party. 
  Fourth, because people were allowed to run for office and 
then did not meet expectations; because of the number of lists; 
and because of the abysmal organization on election day. 
  This newspaper interviewed four parliamentarians, Senators 
Anibal Palacio and Everth Bustamante and Representatives Gustavo 
Petro and Gloria Quiceno, to learn what they thought of the 
mistakes that were made in the elections and of M-19's future 
prospects. 
<H5>  Senator Anibal Palacio </H5>

  -  We have deputies, council members, and leadership 
positions in some regions of the country, and based on those 
calculations, we thought we would have enough votes to come out 
ahead. Since politics is unpredictable, we were wrong. We were 
competing on unequal terms; the campaign cost a lot of money. It 
is more difficult to be in the opposition in democratic life 
because you have to win people's support and compete on unequal 
terms. The worst thing that can happen to the country is for the 
peace talks between the government and the insurgent groups to 
go up in smoke. They must be turned around. 
  -  We have not made a 
decision on the presidential candidacies. By October we will be 
working on the council and assembly seats that are feasible. We 
have laid some groundwork, and we are willing to enter into 
agreements. 

<H5>    Representative Gustavo Petro </H5>

  -  There was a false premise in the entire AD/M-19 for the 
last two years: failing to recognize that we were wrong in 
adopting all the traditional forms of engaging in politics in 
Colombia. 
  -  The dissolution of AD can be a way to build a movement 
that will emerge from the citizens themselves, to confront 
Congress regarding its attempt to destroy the Constitution, and 
to confront the friends of war as well. 
  -  AD/M-19 has to go 
through a process of self-criticism and radical revision, and it 
must understand that the electoral defeat dealt us by the 
Colombian people is our punishment for being confused with the 
traditional parties. We must show the country a new way of doing 
politics from the bottom, from the people. 

<H5>    Representative Gloria Quiceno </H5>

  -  Internally, the political differences that have plagued us 
for the last two and a half years took their toll. Another 
problem was the electoral strategy of "Operation Wasp," which 
was not the best thing for a new, young organization without 
much experience in politics. Furthermore, we do not have 
clients, or posts, or markets, or machinery to offer, and that 
was what won the election in the vast majority of cases. My 
personal mistake, I think, was that I went along with that 
strategy. 
  -  The first thing we have to do is accept the blame for 
the electoral failure, make corrections, explore the depth of 
feelings, and begin building from the plaza, the barrio, the 
municipality. We have to roll up our sleeves and get involved in 
community projects. And we must support the candidates in 
council and mayoral elections, and Navarro as well. 

<H5>    Senator Everth Bustamante </H5>

  -  We were all wrong. We projected an image of division, and 
we paid the price for not yielding to that situation. We gave an 
impression of weakness, of scatteredness, and now the electoral 
defeat is forcing us to rethink our ideas. 
  -  For now, AD/M-19 is 
backing the candidacy of Antonio Navarro, and later on, it will 
strive to establish a presence in the municipalities and 
departments in October. It will have to be an organized and 
systematic effort to field the largest number of candidates. In 
this way, the movement will begin to put down roots at the local 
level, abandoning that great activism in national debates that 
isolated us from the people. 


