BFN 

  [Text] Following the completion of the work of the Main 
Committee of the Party of Democratic Action [SDA], Party 
Chairman Alija Izetbegovic made the following statement for 
public information media: 
  [Begin Izetbegovic recording] A session of the SDA Main 
Committee has just ended. There were 124 people in attendance, 
who were not only members of the Main Committee; there were a 
number of deputies to the Bosnia-Herzegovina Assembly, a session 
of which will be held on 30 May. There was also a number 
of...[pauses] They are [word indistinct] members of the 
proclamation (?of the 40); that is the proclamation that was 
issued on 27 March 1990 in the same room where today's session 
was held. 
  The Main Committee was convened at this time for two 
reasons: 
First, to mark four years of work of the party whose founding 
assembly was held precisely four years ago, on 26 May 1990. 
Second, to prepare our stances for the upcoming session of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Assembly which is to begin on Monday. 
Regarding the first issue--marking the anniversary--as you can 
see, there have been no celebrations. We do not believe it is 
appropriate to have celebrations at this time. Everything ended 
in [words indistinct] to put it in that way, and [word 
indistinct] for those missing and killed. Killed soldiers and 
[words indistinct]. Regarding the other issue, preparations for 
the assembly, I can say that our attention was focused on three 
topics: First, the Vienna negotiations that have just concluded, 
then talks in the south of France, in Talloires, and finally our 
candidates for the post in the future federation of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. This coincides with the agenda for the 
Assembly session. 
  Speaking about the Vienna Agreement, support was given to 
the 
conclusions reached in Vienna. [Words indistinct] pessimists 
who thought that it would be impossible to implement the 
(?Washington) and Vienna Agreements have been proved wrong. A 
big step has been made toward solving some of the delicate 
issues, primarily the maps of the cantons that were the main 
problem, and the problem of sharing the positions in the 
federation. Hence, congratulations to the delegation, the three 
people who went to Vienna--Silajdzic, Ganic, and Bicakcic--on 
the work they did in Vienna and in the French town of Talloires. 
  As is known, this second meeting in France dealt with 
relations with the Serbs in Bosnia-Herzegovina, practically with 
the external borders of the future federation (?within a 
unitary) Bosnia-Herzegovina. We can say, this is the conclusion 
of the Main Committee, that the meeting achieved what was 
expected. The meeting was not part of the negotiations, 
but--let me say--it was a mutual testing ground. Our people 
went there without [words indistinct], and I think that they 
came back better informed [words indistinct]. 
  Finally, speaking about candidates, I put forward a 
proposal, 
which was accepted, that our candidates for the two key 
positions in the future federation--vice president and prime 
minister--be Ejup Ganic for the position of vice president and 
Haris Silajdzic for the position of prime minister. 
  Finally, I can say that today [words indistinct] my personal 
impression is that is was very useful. That was an open (?point 
of the agenda) during which members of the Main Committee who 
came from Germany, Croatia, and all parts of Bosnia-Herzegovina 
could put forward their impressions about the situation among 
our people in Germany, which some people call 
Bosnia-Herzegovina's big canton because there are about 200,000 
to 300,000 of our people there. We heard very interesting 
comments about our [word indistinct] there and about the work of 
the party. Many topics were addressed and discussed in that 
context. This is all I can tell you for the time being. [end 
recording] 

