Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Natalya Pachegina, under the rubric "Republic of </F>
Khakassiya": "The Region of Untouched Monuments Lives Without a 
President or a Constitution"] 
  [Text] Perhaps the unevenness of the landscape along the 
4,218 kilometers which separate the republic's capital of Abakan 
from the center of the Federation is an insurmountable obstacle 
to the democratic "impulses" coming from Moscow, or perhaps the 
600,000 people of Khakassiya, located peacefully at the foot of 
the Sayans, are simply not inclined to abrupt movements; but the 
uniqueness of the life of Khakassiya is so marked that it forces 
one to think of the price the country paid for the right to be 
called democratic. The external differences with Moscow are 
manifested not only in the excellent quality of the roads (and, 
as Viktor Bryuzgin, press secretary of the chairman of the 
Supreme Soviet of Khakassiya, assures us, there is not a rayon 
center in the republic where asphalt has not been laid) and in 
the yardkeepers who wake people in the morning with the scraping 
of their shovels, and not only in the lack of paupers and 
beggars on streets with the intact names of Lenin, Sverdlov, and 
Kirov, but even, to judge by municipal transport, in the 
citizens' solid custom of going "into work." It is striking here 
that they are not "doing battle" with their monuments: monuments 
to Lenin and Kirov and young heroes and other Soviet monumental 
sculpture continue to stand on prospects of the same name, only 
it is difficult to tell because there is so much snow. Only a 
two-sided sign on a building indicating the selection in the 
chic store of a local entrepreneur, which was apparently made 
for Anglo-Saxons and those Khakass who do not read Russian 
("vegetables" in English), plus the Intim Store (100 rubles [R] 
to look around), where the population which is not having sex is 
offered various "appliances," illustrate the difficulty of the 
"path of democratic transformations in the Russian expanses." 
  But the most pleasant feelings are aroused by those citizens 
whose faces develop such deep creases on their foreheads when 
asked to give the names of the republic's leaders (I had to 
distract them from the television where Prostomariya was on); 
one begins to understand that despite all the seeming 
"moderation" of the rhythm of its life, it is closer than all 
the other subjects of the Federation to the ideal of a 
democratic society in which, it seems, an inhabitant is so free 
that he does not burden himself with the need to follow 
political life. Here, following their chairman of the Supreme 
Soviet, Vladimir Shtygashev, active rejection of the "moral 
principles of capitalism" is underway among the population: only 
in one place in Abakan, on Prospect Lenin, has a "street market" 
so familiar to a Muscovite developed, but the dealing is being 
done by visitors. When one of Khakassiya's mines was being 
privatized, Shtygashev related, one of the former warehouse 
chiefs tried to make himself its boss; they explained to him 
with Siberian conviction that "it would be difficult." But 
overall the formation of joint stock companies from state 
enterprises oriented for the most part to producing finished 
output is perhaps going more slowly than Moscow would like, but 
then, as V. Shtygashev believes, more reliably. In terms of 
privatization of the republic's housing fund, in that same 
Shtygashev's opinion, it is almost the leader in the Federation. 
The 61,900 square kilometer area of Khakassiya makes it possible 
to fully satisfy the people's attraction to the land--the 
population has been allocated 120,000 plots, and the citizens' 
"whims" in this regard are for the most part related to the 
impossibility of reaching the personal plots by bus (!). 
  The population's steady political sympathies and antipathies 
also strikingly distinguish Khakassiya from the other regions of 
Russia. The residents of the republic do not regard the reformer 
of contemporary times Gaydar with favor, for the most part 
because he has a direct relationship with the "writer and 
fighter" Golikov. Here even the ringing literary pseudonym of 
the author of the "Blue Cup" is explained like this: translated 
from the Mongolian into the Khakass language, the "horseman 
galloping forward" sounds like "khay dar?"--"where is he?" This 
question was used as an exchange among the peasants who hid the 
"gang" of a certain local enemy of Soviet power, Solovyev, for 
whom the young and ambitious Golikov conducted a long and bloody 
hunt. The Khakass villages which were slaughtered at the time by 
the grandfather in this way have a damaging effect on the 
grandson's reputation. Regarding feelings about the president of 
the country, whom they do know, of course, there is a directly 
proportional relationship with the place of work and the wages 
of the local voter. Thus, the 1,200 associates of the gigantic 
Sayano-Shushenskiy Hydroelectric Plant, who upon receiving their 
wages sign a promise not to divulge them, unanimously supported 
Yeltsin in the April referendum, while another part of the 
republic's electorate refrained from expressing its delight. The 
vote on the draft of the new Russian Constitution in December 
had a similar effect, which, it is true, has not yet resulted in 
any legal sanctions against Khakassiya. The republic, which has 
unhurriedly responded to Moscow's political and economic 
innovations, still does not have its own constitution or 
president. Khakassiya was in no hurry with the former, the 
chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Khakassiya 
said, because it was intending to coordinate it with the 
all-Russian one. But the present draft of the Russian one fails 
to suit not only the population which boycotted it on 12 
December, but even the legislators of Khakassiya, to whom it 
seems that the country's Fundamental Law lacks obligations to 
the peoples of Russia. Their own constitution, Shtygashev 
believes, must look like a declaration of rights, powers, and 
certainly obligations of the Republic of Khakassiya to the 
Federation and its own people. 
  The idea of electing the president of the republic, which, 
incidentally, the Supreme Soviet of Khakassiya regards without 
any special enthusiasm, nonetheless occupies the minds of the 
masters of this land. The Khakass, who make up only 11.8 percent 
(about 63,000 people) of the entire population, passionately 
want this, although there is a very slim probability that no 
worthy candidates for this post will be found among the 80 
percent of the population that is Russian. The present chairman 
of the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Khakassiya, Vladimir 
Shtygashev, in contrast, is certain that his prestige is quite 
high. And, it seems, he has reason to think so. The politics of 
active opposition by the republic's leaders to the tradition of 
the center's "colonial" attitude toward Southern Siberia finds 
support here among the Khakass and Russian population. Other 
ethnic groups who became Siberians against their 
will--Ukrainians, Germans, Poles, and Finns--also adhere to the 
Siberian way of life. There are virtually no compact 
mononational settlements in the republic; only in Shirinskiy 
Rayon in Khakassiya are there several streets where German 
families live in an orderly fashion. The nationality policy of 
the republic's leadership is simple and uncomplicated--those 
very wartime-labor Germans receive pensions from the republic. 
Every veteran received a medal for labor during the war, noted 
Andrey Vagner, founder of the republic Russian-German Society 
"Vidergeburt" (who completely repudiated any kinship with 
Hitler's beloved composer, the creator of "Die Nibelungen"). 
German youth, it is true, are leaving, said Vagner, and because 
they do not live close together, the Germans of Khakassiya are 
unable to teach their children the language. 
  The religious diversity of the population is also to a 
considerable degree the result of the migration of the followers 
of certain doctrines--Old Believers, Evangelical Baptists, 
Seventh Day Adventists, and Jehovah's Witnesses--to Southern 
Siberia, to get away from the official Russian Orthodox church. 
Muslims, Catholics, and Lutherans are few in number. 
Christianity, introduced by missionaries from Russian 200-300 
years ago parallel to the development of the Siberian lands, 
even now maintains a large body of believers, including among 
the Khakass. 
  Social instability in Khakassiya comes for the most part 
from 
a "special" category of citizens who were brought to the 
republic 20-30 years ago as a result of the "cleansing" of the 
large cities of Russia and the USSR. As people say here, they 
are the ones who differ from the locals with some of their 
absurd demands, for example to raise wages, or they try to blow 
up monuments, as happened in the only coal town where Lenin did 
not withstand the might of the enraged proletariat. 

