BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Montenegrin Foreign Minister Miodrag Lekic </F>
by Milovan Nedeljkov; place and date not given: "We Are Not a 
Part of Small or Greater Serbia"] 
  [Text] One of the "most difficult" politicians for extreme 
Serb nationalists in Belgrade, and very often also for the Serb 
authorities, is the "naughty boy" of Montenegrin politics, 
Miodrag Lekic, foreign minister of Montenegro. Although 
official Belgrade has never publicly complained about the work 
of the Montenegrin foreign minister, they have long been trying 
to force Podgorica to relinquish that ministry and Lekic's 
ministerial function. Most serious accusations come from 
Seselj's radical, who say the young minister (born in 1947) 
intends to separate Montenegro from Serbia and lead it into the 
protection of Italy and the Vatican. He is being reproached for 
having indirectly caused the flogging of Serb tourists in 
Montenegro with his statement that "Montenegro is not a Serb 
state." 
  [Nedeljkov] Belgrade announces the "revitalization" of Yugo- 
diplomacy. Has that anything to do with the abolition of your 
ministry, i.e. your appointment as Belgrade's ambassador to 
Rome? 
  [Lekic] The revitalization, as you called it, of Yugo- 
diplomacy is not connected to the abolition of the Montenegrin 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Things are quite clear -- that 
ministry is based in history and in the Constitution, which is 
more important than occasional attempts to abolish it. This 
important element of Montenegrin sovereignty, realized in 
history in 1878, cannot depend on one man alone. I am going 
nowhere, but even if I were, it could only happen after my 
successor is chosen at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. If I 
were to go to Rome, I would not be the ambassador of Belgrade, 
but of both Podgorica and Belgrade. 
  [Nedeljkov] As the foreign minister of Montenegro, during 
diplomatic missions, have you ever met diplomats from former 
Yugoslav republics? What were those meetings like, if there 
were any? 
  [Lekic] Unfortunately, I met none. I am not avoiding such 
meetings. I believe there will be more such meetings with 
gradual normalization of relations between the republics of 
former Yugoslavia. 
  [Nedeljkov] You once said that Montenegro has "objective 
needs to communicate with the world," and that that is the 
reason for not abolishing the Montenegrin Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs. Does that mean that "your" ministry, contrary to the 
general belief in the West and other former Yugo-republics, is 
not just following orders coming from Belgrade? 
  [Lekic] It is obvious that the Montenegrin Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs is not obeying orders from Belgrade. As a 
departmental organ, the ministry is working on the basis of 
program politics of the Government of Montenegro. 
  [Nedeljkov] How do you feel about the national problem. 
Some people from Belgrade accuse you of betraying the Serb 
national interest. 
  [Lekic] I am a Montenegrin. I am working to help Montenegro 
overcome this difficult and tragic crisis of the collapse of 
former Yugoslavia as painlessly as possible. Since I returned 
from Mozambique, where I was ambassador of former Yugoslavia, 
two years ago, I have been working to preserve the interest and 
reputation of our republic, at the expense of no one. 
  [Nedeljkov] You have recently stated that "Montenegro is not 
a Serb state" and that provoked powerful reaction in Belgrade. 
  [Lekic] Montenegro belongs to its citizens, for its 
Constitution defines it as a civic state, not as a national 
state. If we apply national criteria, then it is a Montenegrin 
state, for the Montenegrins are the most numerous nation in 
Montenegro. However, it is primarily characterized, politically 
speaking, as a civic and democratic state community. 
  [Nedeljkov] Can Montenegro become a member of the union of 
Serb states, which many political forces in Belgrade have been 
announcing? 
  [Lekic] The Montenegrins are a sovereign and politically 
mature nation, so it will be the only factor deciding about 
historic road of the oldest Slavic state in the Balkans. 
  [Nedeljkov] Should Montenegro be a part of a greater 
Serbia? 
  [Lekic] Montenegro cannot be a part of small or greater 
Serbia; it is a state that can join a broader community on an 
equal level. 
  [Nedeljkov] Is the FRY [Federal Republic of Yugoslavia] a 
democratic, peace-loving federation of two equal states? 
  [Lekic] Being surrounded by war, suffering under economic 
sanctions, it is difficult to achieve the ideals of democracy, 
federalism, and other societal values to the full. There are 
tendencies, certain results, and for true political, economic, 
and cultural emancipation, we must have more favorable general 
conditions, primarily lifting the economic sanctions imposed by 
the international community. 
  [Nedeljkov] The statement by the advisor to the Office of 
Croatia in Belgrade, Mr. Bilandzic, that Croatia could open a 
consulate in Podgorica, was interpreted as a direct attack on 
the sovereignty of the FRY. What do you say about that? 
  [Lekic] I do not consider that statement an attack on the 
sovereignty of the FRY. That is not a new idea and it is worthy 
of being considered and discussed. 
  [Nedeljkov] Does Montenegro have a dual foreign politics 
with regard to the so called "western Serbian countries" and 
Prevlaka? 
  [Lekic] I do not see a connection between the problem of 
Prevlaka and, as you said, western Serbian countries. The 
uninhabited peninsula of Prevlaka, with several hundreds of 
meters of rocky ground, makes a logical whole of the Bay of Boka 
Kotorska. Always in history, ever since the time of the 
Venetians, these areas were governed by the rule that those who 
had Boka Kotorska also controlled Prevlaka. In case of the 
opposite, the narrow bay becomes a joint property, waters in 
that part of the bay are territorial and international, and that 
may lead to incidents which, I believe, are neither in the 
interest of Croatia or our side. I, therefore, expect that a 
just solution will be found in the final peace agreement. 
  [Nedeljkov] Prevlaka, Montenegro, the Republic of Croatia. 
What is the role of Belgrade and Serbia in that? 
  [Lekic] Our institutional connections with the other federal 
unit show that the entire federation is interested in solving 
the problem of Prevlaka. We must point out that Prevlaka is a 
favorite subject of the extremists, who, though they do not 
quite know where it is exactly, think it should be turned into 
casus belli. Potential instrumentalization of Prevlaka for 
military purposes is another reason to join forces to solve this 
problem in a rational manner. 
  [Nedeljkov] Do you believe in future close links between 
former Yugo-republics? 
  [Lekic] All republics of former Yugoslavia are logically 
connected to a point. Montenegro with a strong, sometimes even 
illusionist Yugoslav feeling, has real and potential connections 
with former Yugoslav republics. No republic of former 
Yugoslavia has gone to the moon; rather, we are still neighbors. 
We all have two choices: to take the road of constant conflict 
or that of cooperation. There is no third way. We think that, 
in spite of great differences that were created, we must try to 
establish, first bearable relations and then, as much as 
possible, restore road, economic, and other connections which 
were decades in the making, while we were living together. Of 
course, the beginning of the process requires respect for new 
state entities created on the territory of former Yugoslavia. 

