BFN 

  [Text] Bonn -- Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel (Free 
Democratic Party of Germany) believes that, even after a 
positive decision by the Constitutional Court, the participation 
of the Bundeswehr in peacekeeping missions should be "an 
absolute exception." In an interview with Hesse radio, Kinkel 
stated this morning: "This culture of reservation that we have 
displayed in our foreign and security policy after the defeat in 
World War II must be preserved." He wants to continue the 
practice "to say no more often than yes in decisions after the 
ruling by the Constitutional Court." 
  The dispatch of German soldiers to territories in the former 
Yugoslavia is no issue, Kinkel told DPA. The participation of 
Bundeswehr soldiers must be approved in every individual case by 
the Bundestag. An approval by the Bundestag for an armed or 
even unarmed German mission in the former Yugoslavia is 
certainly not to be expected. Thus, this problem is not topical. 
  Kinkel stated in the radio interview that he has the 
impression that he shares Chancellor Kohl's (Christian 
Democratic Union) view on this issue. Asked about statements by 
Wolfgang Schaeuble, chairman of the Bundestag groups of the 
Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union, who basically 
advocated German participation in military operations in Bosnia, 
Kinkel mentioned Schaeuble's modification that all those 
affected must agree. "It is practically inconceivable that the 
Serbian side would do so in the former Yugoslavia," the foreign 
minister stressed. 
  The Federal Press Office announced today during the weekend 
that the Federal Government considered using paratroopers of the 
Bundeswehr to rescue 11 German citizens from the civil war in 
Rwanda. The Defense Ministry was given the order to examine the 
technical details of air transportation and deployment after it 
became know that 11 Germans were in danger of their lives at the 
relay station of Deutsche Welle near Kigali. "The 
considerations were stopped when it was announced that Belgian 
paratroopers had saved the Germans." 
  Guenther Nolting from the Free Democratic Party of Germany 
[FDP] criticized in BILD AM SONNTAG that "it was a matter of 
course for the Germans to rely on the alliance partners in an 
international crisis." Soldiers from the United States, France, 
and Belgium rescued their citizens from the embattled region. 
Nolting asked: "What will we do if our partners should decide 
not take along the Germans any more in passing but call for the 
participation of German soldiers in the rescue operations on the 
spot or for initiatives on the part of the Germans?" The FDP 
official spoke in favor of raising this issue at the Bundestag 
during the discussion of the Bundeswehr White Paper. 

