BFN 

  [Text] Bulawayo June 5 SAPA -- Zimbabwe Vice-President 
Joshua Nkomo on Sunday [5 June] warned what he described as 
"undesirable elements" in the white community to leave Zimbabwe 
"now before it is too late", the news agency ZIANA reports. 
  He was reacting to reports that a group of whites in 
Bulawayo 
was apparently planning to march into the city in ox-drawn 
wagons in August to mark the defeat of the Ndebele kingdom by 
white colonial settlers 100 years ago. "Whites have continued 
shunning us and they undermine our ability to deal with some 
undesirable elements among them. I warn them (the undesirable 
elements) to move out of our country now before it is too late," 
he said. 
  He warned that Zimbabwe could be plunged into civil war if 
some divisive elements among its people were allowed to 
perpetuate racial friction. 
  Deputy Industry and Commerce Minister Simon Moyo said that 
while most Bulawayo residents were commemorating 100 years of 
the city's existence, some white "vigilantes" in the marula 
commercial farming area, a few kilometres south of Bulawayo, 
were preparing to commemorate the occupation of Lobengula's 
Kingdom, now modern-day Matabeleland. Mr Moyo said the group 
planned to march in a column of "horse-riding rangers and 
ox-drawn wagons" like their fore- fathers did when they took 
over the Ndebele kingdom a century ago. 
  "I wish to warn them (the white settlers) in no uncertain 
terms that such anticipated celebrations will be viewed as a 
declaration of war on the peace-loving people of Zimbabwe," he 
said. 
  "Should they proceed with such rehearsals and attempt to 
carry out the so-called occupation celebrations using what is 
commonly known as the Mangwe Pass Route in my constituency, they 
will profusely regret their racist appetite and misguided 
action," warned Mr Moyo. 
  He did not reveal the identity of the men, but sources said 
they were among a group of white marula farmers who were caught 
with an arms cache in the 1980s. Some were prosecuted and 
served jail terms. 
  Bulawayo Mayor Joshua Malinga said his city had enjoyed the 
best race relations in the country... "We won't allow anybody to 
spoil that atmosphere. We have the capacity and means to make 
sure that this won't happen," he said. 

