Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["G.H."-initialed report: "Domestic Stability, Incalculable </F>
Factors in Foreign Policy"] 
  [Text] Bonn, 2 March -- In reply to a question about 
whether he will still be head of the government after the May 
parliamentary elections, Hungarian Prime Minister Boross said 
that he looked ahead to June with "moderate or cheerful 
optimism." "These will be the second free elections, it will be 
possible to make more accurate predictions when the fourth 
elections take place. However, the latest data indicates that 
an important part of the population understands our efforts and 
recognizes what we have done within the country and in bringing 
Hungary closer to Europe," said Boross, the Hungarian Democratic 
Forum's leading candidate, confidently. He ruled out coalitions 
with the Socialist Party, the Alliance of Free Democrats under 
its present leadership, the "Hungarian Life and Justice Party," 
and the "Independent Smallholders Party. Boross has thus made 
it clear that he does not want to have anything to do 
politically with the right-wing extremists Csurka and Torgyan, 
who lead the last two of the above parties and were formerly 
politicians in the current coalition government: "Their 
rhetoric and mentality is not compatible with the center-right 
direction that we consider acceptable, also acceptable from the 
viewpoint of the interests of our European efforts." 
  Speaking to this newspaper, the Hungarian prime minister 
also 
noted that Hungary was "potentially in a very dangerous 
geopolitical position." Five new states had been created on its 
borders, war is being waged in Hungary's vicinity, and there is 
a possibility that there might be another wave of refugees. 
That makes the domestic stability that the government has 
achieved all the more noteworthy. So, what is the significance 
of the skinheads, who have also created much commotion in 
Hungary? "In the past, skinheads were a relatively infrequent 
phenomenon in our country, and now there are only isolated 
incidents. However, we must implement one or two measures to 
dissolve these childish gangs. In Hungary, the phenomenon plays 
a smaller role than in most Europe states." 
  Regarding the emergence of extreme right-wing groupings that 
draw on the legacy of Arrow Cross leader Szalasi, who formed a 
Quisling regime in 1944 during the German occupation, the prime 
minister said: "If the supporters are very old people, then I 
feel sorry for them, if they are young people, then I cannot 
understand them. Szalasi was a traitor to the fatherland and has 
no place in Hungarian history." Recently, a man returned to 
Hungary from abroad and formed a group with a good 30 members. 
"Currently, the prosecution service is dealing with them; they 
are more of an irritation than a danger. There is nothing to 
indicate that they are spreading to the provinces." This kind 
of extremism has no support in Hungary and there is also no real 
left-wing danger. 
  Is Hungary, disappointed about the distance that the West is 
maintaining -- the "Partnership for Peace" instead of membership 
of MATO, associate membership of the European Union rather than 
full membership? "Hungary has really been regularly 
disappointed by the West since 1526. This stems from its 
difficult position and in part from its realistic and in part 
unrealistic expectations," conceded Boross. In 1989, in view of 
the opening up of borders and the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact 
(which Hungary initiated), Hungary had great expectations, but 
two years later, one had to recognize reality "especially, that 
moving closer to the economic and security alliances, to that 
which offers real security, requires time." 
  The Hungarian head of government attracted international 
attention when, shortly after the announcement of the NATO 
ultimatum to end the siege of Sarajevo, he said that should the 
sanction be applied, then Hungarian airspace would not be 
available for AWACs flights. The background to that statement, 
which could be viewed as a political mistake and as indicating a 
new direction in Hungarian security in view of NATO's 
disappointing overall conduct and Russia's involvement in the 
former Yugoslavia, was explained by Boross as follows: "Hungary 
is a neighbor of Yugoslavia (he constantly used that term for 
the Belgrade republic) and one can expect to remain so for 
hundreds of years. There are 500,000 Hungarians living on the 
territory of Yugoslavia and they live in a region where there is 
no international control. In addition, Hungary is interested in 
the Danube shipping route, the 'Adria' oil pipeline, and, not 
least, in putting at ease the Hungarians in Vojvodina, of whom 
100,000 have already left their homes." He added that Hungary 
was not a member of NATO "and thus had no clear guarantees for 
its security, even if it were to receive such guarantees under 
certain circumstances in a conflict situation." The government 
is seeking to ensure its security and the interests of the 
Hungarian minority by maintaining good-neighborly relations, 
including contacts between military leaderships. This has led 
to the Hungarian stance of strictly adhering to the UN and UN 
Security Council resolutions and participating in the 
implementation of the embargo and the ban on flights. "However, 
the direct bombardment of ground targets does worry us." In 
connection with Boross' 1-day visit to Bonn, Hungarian diplomats 
said that the Hungarian Government was bound by a parliamentary 
resolution that only permits the use of Hungarian airspace for 
overseeing airspace and nothing else. 
  Russia's involvement in a region that it was forced out of 
by 
Tito in 1948 has also affected Hungary. There is power vacuum 
in the region and that whets appetites. The head of the 
Hungarian Government stated that Hungary, which is smaller than 
Bavaria, wants to convince Russia that dynamic relations and 
extensive commerce are advantageous (Hungary exports goods worth 
over $3 billion to Russia) and that Moscow can have no interests 
that are directed against Hungary. It is not the first time in 
Hungary's history that the country has clearly oriented itself 
to the West, while, at the same time, negotiating with all 
influential powers. In a speech delivered at the headquarters 
of the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, Boross said: "We want 
security as quickly as possible, at the present time we, miss 
it." 

