BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by ANC President Nelson Mandela at the Carlton </F>
Hotel, Johannesburg -- live] 
  [Text] I must apologise. I have contracted a cold, and I 
hope my voice will be able to stand up to the pressures this 
evening. My doctor, who examined me very early this morning, 
asked me to rest for today and tomorrow, and to do as little 
talking as possible. He said if I do that, this cold will clear 
in two days' time. I hope you will not disclose to him that I 
did not obey his instruction. 
  Fellow South Africans, the people of South Africa, this is 
indeed a joyous night. Although not yet final, we have received 
the provisional results of the election. My friends, I can tell 
you that we are delighted by the overwhelming support for the 
African National Congress. [applause] 
  Within the last few hours I have received telephone calls 
from State President de Klerk, General Constand Viljoen, Dr. 
Zach de Beer, and Mr. Johnson Mlambo, the first deputy president 
of the PAC [Pan-Africanist Congress], who pledged their full 
cooperation and offered their sincere congratulations. [applause] 
  I thank them all for their support, and look forward to 
working together for our beloved country. [applause] I would 
also like to congratulate President de Klerk for the strong 
showing the National Party has displayed in this election. I 
also want to congratulate him for the many days, weeks, and 
months, and the four years that we have worked together, 
quarrelled, addressed sensitive problems, and at the end of our 
heated exchanges were able to shake hands and to drink coffee. 
  My congratulations also goes to Dr. Zach de Beer, as well 
as to General Constand Viljoen, with whom I have had numerous 
discussions and whom I regard as worthy South Africans who are 
going to make a contribution in the government of national 
unity. I also look forward to having discussions with the 
leaders of the liberation movements who have not been able to 
make the threshold. I will go to my organization because I have 
got certain ideas. They have suffered together with us. I was 
in jail with many of them. We suffered together in the 
battlefield and it has hurt me a great deal that they should not 
be able to have made the threshold which other parties have made. 
  To all those in the African National Congress and the 
democratic movements, who worked so hard these last few days, 
and through these many decades, I thank you and honor you. 
[applause] 
  To the people of South Africa and the world who are watching 
-- this is indeed a joyous night for the human spirit. This is 
your victory too. You helped end apartheid. You stood with us 
through the transition. I watched along with you all as the 
tens of thousands of our people stood patiently in long queues 
for many hours, some sleeping on the open ground, overnight, 
waiting to cast this momentous vote. South Africa's heroes are 
legends (?across) the generations, but it is you, the people who 
are our true heroes. This is one of the most important moments 
in the life of our country. I stand before you filled with deep 
pride and joy -- pride in the ordinary, humble, people of this 
country. You have shown such a calm, patient, determination to 
reclaim the country as your own and joy that we can loudly 
proclaim from the rooftops -- free at last. [applause] 
  I am your servant. I don't come to you as a leader, as one 
above others. We are a great team, leaders come and go, but the 
organization and the collective leadership that has looked after 
the fortunes of the organization will always be there, and the 
ideas I expressed are not the ideas invented in my own mind. 
They stem from our fundamental policy document, the Freedom 
Charter; from the decisions, resolutions of the National 
Conference; and from the decisions of the National Executive 
Committee. That is the nature of our organization. It is not 
individuals that matter. It is the collective leadership which 
has led this organization so skillfully. And I stand therefore 
before you humbled by your courage with a heart full of love for 
all of you. I regard it as the highest honor to lead the ANC at 
this moment in our history, and that we have been chosen to lead 
our country into the new century. 
  I pledge to use all my strength and ability to live up to 
your expectations of me, as well as the ANC. I am personally 
indebted and pay tribute to some of South Africa's greatest 
leaders, including John Dube, Josiah Gumede, J.M. Naicker, Dr. 
Abduraman, Chief Luthuli, Lillian Ngoye, Braam Fischer, Helen 
Suzman, Yusuf Dadoo, Moses Skotane, Chris Hani, and Oliver Tambo. 
  They should have been here to celebrate with us, for this is 
their achievement too. Tomorrow the entire ANC leadership and I 
will be back at our desks. We are rolling up our sleeves to 
begin tackling the problems our country faces. We ask you all 
to join us. Go back to your jobs in the morning. 
  Let's get South Africa working, for we must together and 
without delay begin to build a better life for all South 
Africans. This means creating jobs, building houses, providing 
education, and bringing peace and security for all. This is 
going to be the acid test of the government of national unity. 
We have emerged as the majority party on the basis of the 
program which is contained in the Reconstruction and Development 
Program. There we have outlined the steps that we are going to 
take in order to ensure a better life for all South Africans. 
  Almost all the organizations that are going to take part in 
the government of national unity have undertaken in the course 
of the campaign to contribute to the better life of our people. 
That is going to be the cornerstone, the foundation on which 
the government of national unity is going to be based. And I 
appeal to all the leaders who are going to serve in this 
government to honor that program, and to go there determined to 
contribute toward its immediate implementation. If there are 
attempts on the part of anybody to undermine that program, there 
will be serious tensions in the government of national unity. 
  We are here to honor our promises. If we fail to implement 
this program, that will be a betrayal of the trust which the 
people of South Africa have vested in us. It is a program which 
was developed by the masses of the people themselves in people's 
forums. It has been accepted by state corporations, by 
government departments, by business, by academics, by religious 
leaders, youth movements, women's organizations, and nobody will 
be entitled to participate in that government of national unity 
to oppose that plan. But I must add: We are not going to make 
the government of national unity an empty shell. 
  We want every political organization that participates in 
that government to feel that they are part and parcel of a 
government machine which is capable of accommodating their views 
within the context of the Reconstruction and Development 
Program. We do not want to reduce them into mere rubber stamps 
to rubber stamp the decision of any organization, except to say 
that that program has to be carried out without reservation. 
  The calm and tolerant atmosphere that prevailed during the 
election depicts the type of South Africa we can build. It set 
the tone for the future. We might have our differences, but we 
are one people with a common destiny in our rich variety of 
cultures and traditions. 
  We also commend the security forces for the sterling work 
done. This has laid a solid foundation for a truly professional 
security force, committed to the service of the people and 
loyalty to the new constitution. 
  People have voted for the party of their choice, and we 
respect that. This is democracy. I hold out a hand of 
friendship to the leaders of all parties and their members, and 
ask all of them to join us in working together to tackle the 
problems we face as a nation. An ANC government will serve all 
the people of South Africa, not just ANC members. We are 
looking forward to working together in a government of national 
unity. 
  It is a clear mandate for action to implement a plan to 
create jobs, promote peace and reconciliation, and guarantee 
freedom for all South Africans. Now is the time for 
celebration, for South Africans to join together to celebrate 
the birth of democracy. [applause] 
  Let our celebrations be in keeping with the mood set in the 
elections -- peaceful, respectful, and disciplined, showing we 
are a people ready to assume the responsibilities of government. 
I promise that I will do my best to be worthy of the faith and 
confidence you have placed in me and my organization, the 
African National Congress. Let us build the future together and 
toast a better life for all South Africans. 
  Lastly, I just want to say that in some areas we may not 
have 
done as well as we hoped. But that is how demcaracy functions. 
There should be no tensions in any region in which we have not 
emerged as the majority party. Let us stretch out our hands to 
those who have beaten us, and to say to them: We are all South 
Africans; we have had a good fight, but now this is the time to 
heal the old wounds and to build a new South Africa. [applause] 
  I also want to say that there are sports teams that were 
supposed to come to South Africa. They have not done so because 
of the state of emergency. I invite all of them to come to 
South Africa, irrespective of the state of emergency. I and the 
people of South Africa will welcome them with open hands. I 
thank you. [applause] 

