Colombian   Cartel 

<F P=102> PA0104131994 Panama City ACAN in Spanish 1125 GMT 24 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> PA0104131994 </F>
<F P=104>  Panama City ACAN </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>
BFN 

  [Text] San Jose, 24 Mar (ACAN-EFE) -- The Judicial 
Investigation Agency reports that Costa Rican police dealt two 
harsh blows to international drug trafficking in two separate 
operations this weekend. Initial investigations indicate that 
the drug operations were linked to one of Colombia's most 
violent cartels--the Pereira Cartel. 
  Police attribute the trafficking of 720 kg of cocaine from 
Colombia to Europe to one gang and report that another is 
responsible for illegally introducing 180 kg of heroin into the 
United States this year. 
  The authorities claim that with the capture of five 
Colombians, one Costa Rican, one Dominican, and one U.S. 
citizen, they have broken a connection to the Pereira Cartel--an 
organization that grew after the fall of Pablo Escobar and which 
police consider to be one of the most violent of its kind. 
  The cocaine traffickers--Colombian citizens Luis Diez Diez 
and Moises Nader Vargas and Costa Rican citizen Carlos 
Alvarado--were arrested on charges of possessing 10 kg of 
cocaine following months of investigation and 24-hour 
surveillance that began the day the entry register of foreigners 
into Costa Rica through Juan Santamaria Airport was scrutinized, 
eight days before their arrest. 
  Alvarado was under surveillance for two years under 
suspicion 
of being the Costa Rican contact for an international drug 
trafficking ring. 
  Elsewhere, 2.5 kg of heroin destined for the United States 
was seized in Costa Rica after evading Colombian, Panamanian, 
and Costa Rican customs agents when one of the "mules" 
(carriers) had a drug-filled packet rupture in his stomach. 
This was the lead that led narcotics agents to the other 
members of an international gang that was using Costa Rica as a 
transshipment bridge. 
  Juan Tribino, a Colombian citizen, was hospitalized in a 
state of shock Sunday night in Alajuela--a city 25 miles north 
of the capital--where it was determined he was suffering from a 
heroin overdose. Although in a coma, Tribaldo defecated five 
packets containing drugs, which prompted doctors to notify 
narcotics police. 
  The other members of the gang were identified as Fernando 
Ramirez and Claudia Cardoze, both from Colombia; Geovanny Ferrer 
of the Dominican Republic; and U.S. citizen Felix Lopez. 
  Tribino remains in critical condition in Alajuela hospital, 
while the rest of the drug traffickers are under arrest and 
charged with international drug trafficking. 
  Costa Rican Security Minister Luis Fishman said drug 
traffickers recruit young men in his country to transport the 
drug to different parts of Europe. He added that 16 Costa 
Ricans currently imprisoned in Europe could be contacts for this 
gang. Ten of them are in Spain, three in the Netherlands, and 
the rest are either serving terms or waiting to be sentenced in 
Germany, Belgium, France, and Italy. None of them had previous 
criminal records. 
  Although unconfirmed by authorities, judicial sources have 
confirmed to ACAN-EFE that the interrogations and investigations 
show the Pereira Cartel is very active in Costa Rica and has a 
number of connections. According to these sources each 
connection only has only enough information to work within a 
specific organization. In case they are arrested, they cannot 
be linked to other drug traffickers or the rest of the network. 

