Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade </F>
`Explanation' of `Circular on Adding Share Transfer Clauses to 
Contracts on U.S. Investment in China'"--(Promulgated by the 
Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation on 5 October 
1993)"] 
  [Text] This ministry has already issued the "Circular on 
Adding 'Share Transfer' Clauses to Contracts on U.S. Investment 
in China." The answers to some questions are as follows: 
  1. The standard clauses on "share transfer" (in Chinese and 
English) issued together with the circular were formulated, 
after negotiations, by the Treaty and Law Department of the 
Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade and the U.S. 
Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) on the basis of 
the Sino-U.S. Investment and Guarantee Agreement signed in 1980. 
Such standard clauses can be included into contracts for 
Sino-U.S. joint ventures or cooperative enterprises. 
  2. According to the agreement, if a U.S. investor has 
insured a certain investment project in China with OPIC, and if 
OPIC has paid indemnity to the investor in case a political risk 
occurs, the Chinese Government will acknowledge the rights and 
obligations included in the investment contract of the U.S. 
investor will be automatically transferred to OPIC; that is, 
OPIC will have the right to demand indemnity instead of the 
investor. However, it is not necessary to write this in 
contracts for Sino-U.S. joint ventures or cooperative 
enterprises. 
  3. These "share transfer clauses" are only applicable to 
investment projects insured with OPIC. Such a transfer need not 
have the agreement of the Chinese side in a joint venture. Nor 
is it necessary for examination and approval organs to approve. 
This seems to be contradictory to Article 23 of "Provisions for 
the Implementation of the Sino-Foreign Joint Venture Law," but 
it conforms with the legal principles of China; that is, if an 
international treaty (including bilateral and multilateral) 
involving a contract is concluded or joined in China, but it 
contains stipulations different from those of the laws in China, 
the provisions of the treaty are applicable. 
  4. If any other problem emerges in the course of 
implementation, please report in good time to the (Treaty and 
Law Department) of the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations 
and Trade. [Signed] Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and 
Trade [Dated] 2 November 1989 

