BFN 

  [Excerpts] The Rwandan Patriotic Front [RPF] chairman, 
Colonel Alexis Kanyarengwe, has just addressed a message to the 
Rwandan people, to the friends of Rwanda and the entire 
international community, to brief them about the situation 
currently prevailing in our country, particularly the 
interference of France, which has decided to send an occupation 
force to our country. Please listen to the message of the RPF 
chairman, Col. Alexis Kanyarengwe on the matter. 
  [Begin Kanyarengwe recording] Rwandan ladies and gentlemen, 
since 6 April 1994 Rwanda has been living in an unprecedented 
tragic situation. Unbelievable criminals from the Republican 
National Movement for Democracy and Development [MRND] and the 
Coalition for the Defense of the Republic, and their respective 
militias the Interahamwe and Impuzamugambi, with a faction of 
the government forces, including the Presidential Guard, 
inflicted on the Rwandan people unimaginable atrocities. 
[passage omitted] 
  The RPF would like to stress that it is not against the UN 
efforts for humanitarian assistance to Rwanda. We, however, 
make it clear that the RPF must be associated in the choice of 
countries participating in the UN mission. No country can 
participate in the said mission without prior acceptance by the 
RPF, otherwise it would be considered as an enemy. It is also 
important to note that the humanitarian mandate of the UN 
mission as provided for by Resolution 912 of the Security 
Council must be clearly defined and strictly respected as such. 
  Concerning the recent statement of the French minister of 
foreign affairs on the French intervention in Rwanda, we are 
surprised that France has decided on military intervention in 
our country, while knowing very well that the RPF has always 
opposed the presence of French troops under whatever pretext. 
After the general outcry and indignation caused by the 
statement, the French government (?is busy) seeking the approval 
of the Security Council and of the various partners, by 
disguising its project as so-called humanitarian intervention in 
Rwanda. But this can fool nobody. The French president wants 
at all costs to save those responsible for the crime of genocide 
under the guise of a humanitarian action. [passage omitted] 
  Once more, the RPF strongly protests this French initiative, 
which it considers as a provocation. And in the event of such 
an intervention, we reiterate our firm determination to defend 
ourselves against what we consider as an enemy aggression. 
[passage omitted] [end recording] 

