BFN 

  [Text] Wen Shizhen, executive vice governor of Liaoning 
Province, received the friendly delegation headed by (Elson 
Towpair), governor of Baden-Wurttemberg Lander of Germany, at 
the Youyi Hotel on the afternoon of 23 April. 
  During the reception Wen Shizhen extended a warm welcome on 
behalf of the province's 40 million people to the visit paid by 
the German friendship delegation. He said: The eight-year 
cooperative course traversed by the province and the lander has 
enabled us to realize that the potential of developing 
cooperation between the two sides and supplement each other with 
our strong points is tremendous and the prospects in this regard 
are broad. It is hoped that the governments of the province and 
the lander, as well as personages in various social circles, 
treasure the achievements scored in the cooperation and 
coordinate with each other in developing economic and technical 
cooperation so as to promote the development of friendly and 
economic relations between the province and the lander. 
  During the reception, Governor (Towpair) expressed thanks 
for 
the invitation extended and the enthusiastic hospitality shown 
by the Liaoning Provincial People's Government. After reviewing 
the several-year contacts made by both sides, he said: The 
visit paid by the 110-member friendship and economic delegation 
to Liaoning is aimed at strengthening the friendly relationship 
between the lander and the province and probing into the 
cooperation with Liaoning in the fields of economy, trade, 
culture, and education. 
  After the reception, Vice Governor Wen Shizhen held a 
working 
meeting with Governor (Towpair) on the matters regarding 
developing friendly relationship between the two sides in the 
future and promoting economic and technical cooperation. During 
the meeting, both sides exchanged opinions based on obtaining 
common understanding and probed into the plans. 
  In the morning of that day Quan Shuren, chairman of the 
Liaoning Provincial People's Congress Standing Committee, 
received in Shenyang the friendship delegation headed by (Elson 
Towpair), governor of Baden-Wurttemberg Lander of Germany. 
During the reception, Quan Shuren warmly welcomed the visit 
paid by the German delegation. He said: Since 1979, the 
province and the German lander have established the cooperative 
relationship and over the past 15 years the province and the 
lander have scored certain achievements in the exchanges and 
cooperation of the economy, education, and culture. Governor 
(Towpair) expressed appreciation for the enthusiastic reception 
given by Chairman Quan Shuren. After reviewing the several-year 
contacts made by both sides, he said: We are fully confident in 
the economic development of Liaoning after having witnessed the 
changes scored by Liaoning over the past few years. Therefore, 
we organized a large friendship and economic delegation composed 
of 110 members and came to Liaoning to pay a visit. We are very 
interested in having economic cooperation with Liaoning. Quan 
Shuren also told Governor (Towpair) that the contact and 
cooperation between the Liaoning Provincial People's Congress 
Standing Committee and the lander parliament should be enhanced 
in the future. 
  Attending the reception were Qi Zheng, Hu Jiyan, (Zhang 
Wenzhu), and Tao Jingyan. 

