BFN 

  [Text] Santiago, 17 May (EFE) -- Chilean Foreign Minister 
Carlos Figueroa noted today that Chile agrees with the 
establishment of a sanctuary for the protection of whales in the 
southern hemisphere, but located south of latitude 60 degrees, 
at the so-called Antarctic convergence. 
  Minister Figueroa explained that the Chilean stance is 
slightly different from the French position, which establishes a 
whale sanctuary from 40 degrees latitude south to Antarctica, 
including Chilean waters from the city of Valdivia, 835 km south 
of Santiago, to Cape Horn, at 56 degrees latitude south. 
  The foreign minister emphasized that Chile wants to explain 
at the next International Whale Commission (IWC) meeting, 
scheduled in Puerto Vallarta (Mexico) from 23 to 27 May, a 
"consistent" position with respect to the four sea treaties or 
conventions that it has signed. 
  Chile has signed conventions on the sea, on the sea bed, and 
on high seas fishing, as well as a treaty on territorial seas. 
  The foreign minister noted that Chile has banned whale 
hunting within its 200-mile territorial waters. He therefore 
indicated that our country "has already initiated unilateral 
protection of this resource." 
  The foreign minister confirmed that Chile is willing to sign 
a broad multilateral agreement to protect whale species. He 
noted that there are fairly advanced studies on the situation of 
the ecosystem at the abovementioned Antarctic convergence. 
  Representatives of the "Greenpeace" ecological organization 
in Chile delivered on 11 May to the president of the Republic, 
Eduardo Frei, a petition with more than 300,000 signatures 
supporting the establishment of a sanctuary for the last whale 
populations in the South Pacific. 
  According to data supplied by this ecological organization, 
more than 1 million whales have been hunted down over the past 
80 years, and the "blue whale," the largest whale species on our 
planet at 32 meters long and 100 metric tons in weight, has been 
particularly affected. 

