Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Soumya K. Ghosh] </F>
  [Text] New Delhi, Jan. 23 -- After a gap of a few years, 
Delhi is again becoming the hub of India's flourishing narcotics 
industry. It is also back on the world map as a major 
originating centre for heroin export. 
  Estimates suggest that of the 40 tonnes of heroin produced 
in 
this country annually, as much as 25 tonnes of this illicitly 
produced commodity passes through the Capital. 
  Anti-drug agencies say that nearly 50 kg of heroin, which is 
55 to 60 per cent pure, enters Delhi every day from the 
neighbouring States of Rajasthan, UP [Uttar Pradesh], and Madhya 
Pradesh. 
  It is clear that their tall claims notwithstanding, 
organisations like the NCB [Narcotics Control Board], DRI 
[Directorate of Revenue Intelligence], Customs and Directorate 
of Enforcement have been quite ineffective in restricting the 
trafficking in drugs. 
  Adding to the problem is a corrupt and inefficient police 
system. Together, these factors have combined to make the scale 
of drug trafficking in Delhi comparable to the other major 
narcotics capitals of the world, such as, New York, Rome, and 
Athens. 
  Delhi first witnessed a narcotics boom in the mid-198Os, 
when 
large quantities of heroin were smuggled into the Capital for 
re-export to the West. The drug was produced in the Golden 
Crescent countries to India's north-west or the Golden Triangle 
countries to the east. 
  But due to stringent enforcement of the draconian Narcotics 
and Psychotropic Substances Act, which prescribed the death 
penalty for drug trafficking in the case of second-time 
offenders, there was a marked decline in smuggling to and from 
Delhi. 
  But now India itself has become a major producer of heroin, 
although the bulk is still exported to Western countries. An 
independent survey conducted recently in Delhi and neighbouring 
States reveals that the major source of heroin production here 
is a by-product of legitimate opium cultivation. 
  The Government allows a certain quantity of opium to be 
grown 
legitimately, mainly for medicinal purposes. Clearly, some of 
this is being misused. 
  Though the bulk is smuggled out by the farmers growing the 
opium, there is evidence suggesting pilferage from Central 
Government godowns. The areas earmarked for clandestine growth 
of poppy include Mandsaur and Ratlam in Madhya Pradesh; 
Chittorgarh, Jhalawar, Bhawani Mandi, and Kota is Rajasthan; and 
Bareilly, Badaun, and Bara Banki in Uttar Pradesh. 
  The survey includes interaction with and interviews of 
several small-time traffickers, revenue officers, policemen of 
various States, private highway bus-drivers and operators, 
headmen of JJ [slum areas] clusters of north-east Delhi and a 
large number of addicts who also function as traffickers. 
  However, the most interesting "pattern" of such dope 
trafficking is the fact that the white heroin is of high grade 
of purity. Earlier, i.e., during the mid-80s, the dope used to 
come from across the border for reexport to U.S. or Europe 
through mainly foreign couriers. It was generally found that 
except the heroin coming from Burma and Thailand, the rest 
contained a lot of impurity. It was for this reason that 
international dope markets, mainly western Europe, the Pak 
variety of brown sugar [variety of heroin] was either left 
unsold or fetched a low price. 
  The drugs coming from Rajasthan, UP [Uttar Pradesh], and MP 
[Madhya Pradesh] are indigenously produced. This means that 
after smuggling out the opium from the cultivation points, it is 
converted into heroin in small makeshift laboratories. 
Explaining the system, a senior Revenue official said that the 
process of conversion, though slightly long-drawn and crude, is 
very interesting. 
  Conversions always take place in the night, mainly through 
making of a morphine base from raw opium, and then processing it 
to heroin with the help of some precursor chemicals. After 
smuggling out raw opium, it is generally stored in cool places, 
mainly near wells or sugarcane fields. Precursor chemicals 
required for the process include acetic anhydride and lime and 
potassium permanganate. The make-shift labs where the 
conversion takes place usually have a stove, filtering apparatus 
and charcoal (for purification). 
  However, the sudden rise in the price of heroin and brown 
sugar in the streets of Delhi is due to the Government's 
decision to impose a restriction on the sale and purchase of 
acetic anhydride, which is one of the most basic chemicals 
required in the textile industry. 
  The entire process of conversion takes about four to five 
hours. The manufacturers, who are mainly poor farmers working 
for some cartel, keep shifting the make-shift labs and have 
specific code words as warning signals. It generally needs two 
persons to prepare the chemicals, while a handful stands guard. 
  According to available statistics, Delhi has over 2 lakh 
addicts mainly spread out in north, north-east, and central 
districts. If 0.25 gm of heroin (that is the minimum for a 
moderate addict) is required by an addict, as a `fix' per day, 
the trafficking of dope is over 50 kg daily. In addition, 
another 10 percent, i.e., 5 kg, goes for re-export, mainly to 
the U.S. and Europe. 
  The costing of heroin depends largely on the purity and 
quantum of delivery. The standard white heroin, available in 
the streets of the Walled City or the JJ slums of northeast 
Delhi, is about 55 to 60 per cent pure. The costing also 
depends on the conversion ratio of opium. High-grade heroin 
ratio involves 1 kg heroin from 10 kg opium. 
  The cost of high-grade heroin in Delhi is around Rs. 
[rupees] 
1 lakh a kg, though there are places in Rajasthan and interior 
Madhya Pradesh where the same grade can be obtained at Rs. 
80,000 per kilo. It is known that the price can vary if the 
delivery quantity is big. For example, the Chittorgarh and Kota 
variety has a high demand not only in Delhi but also abroad. 
  The distribution network of the dope flowing into Delhi is 
unique. The Muslim cartels, operating from within the Walled 
City have a different mode of functioning compared to the east 
UP gangs of north-east Delhi and the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled 
Tribe ganglords spread out in the Nizamuddin-Jalvayu Vihar area. 
  The dope always travels into Delhi by carriers comprising 
invalids, old women, minor children, lepers and poor people. 
They generally travel by bus or train. ISBT [interstate bus 
terminal] and the railway stations are always avoided for 
security reasons. Anything from Rs. 500 to Rs. 5,000 depending 
on the quantity the person is carrying, is the commission. In 
fact, a small advance is made initially. The final payment is 
made after delivery is made in Delhi. It was also been noticed 
that such carriers bring in other types of drugs and 
psychotropic substances. 
  The trafficking pattern is organised in such a way that each 
carrier will never carry more than 500 to 750 gm. Each of the 
traffickers has definite points to "offload the take". In the 
Walled City, such offload points are innocuous tea shanty, pan 
[betel leaf] stalls, dispensaries of "hakims" [physicians] or 
even shops selling "ittar" [perfume], "surma" [cosmetic for 
eyebrow] etc. The movement of the dope from one destination to 
the other is almost instant. 
  The JJ colonies of north-east Delhi, mainly Seemapuri, 
Yamuna 
Pushta, Yamuna Nagar, and Kalyanpuri, are notorious for storing 
dope consignments. Like the Walled City, here also the cartels 
work on a community basis. The gang members are generally 
"poorvis" from eastern Uttar Pradesh and, in several cases, 
women are noticed actively operating in transporting the 
consignment from one safe- house to another. The areas which 
are notorious for storing dope in the Walled City are 
Ballimaran, Chitli Kabar, the Jama Masjid area and Turkman Gate. 
  In addition to the regular supply there are at times 
"specific supplies" to a number of small and cheap hotels in 
Paharganj, Ram Bagh, Daryaganj, and Ara Kasha Road. These 
supplies are mostly to foreigners. 

