BFN 

<F P=106> ["Idea" column by Mustafa Amin] </F>
  [Text] If I were a member of a national dialogue committee 
I would call for the president to be elected directly by the 
entire nation, not by the People's Assembly acting on behalf of 
the people. And, I would demand that presidential elections be 
contested by many candidates, not one. 
  I would also call for a new constitution. The current 
Constitution is a vestige of a totalitarian regime that amassed 
power in the hands of one man. I would demand that the people 
become the source of all power. The parliament should have the 
right to pass a vote of no-confidence against the cabinet or any 
minister, as was the case in parliaments before the revolution. 
The parliament should also be able to amend the budget and 
overrule allocations that it judges to be inappropriate, a 
privilege that all parliaments, except ours, have. 
  I would demand that the Consultative Council be promoted 
from 
a Parent-Teacher-Association-style forum into a full-fledged 
senate with the power to bring down the cabinet. 
  Above all, I would demand the abolition of the disreputable 
[emergency] laws and the post of the socialist prosecutor 
[created by late President Anwar al-Sadat to investigate and try 
fraud and corruption cases. Detractors of this post believe 
such cases should be handled by ordinary law courts]. Civilian 
defendants should be tried at civilian courts, not at emergency 
or state security courts. Ordinary, not extraordinary, laws 
should be the law of the land. 
  I would call for the Shaykh al-Azhar to be elected by senior 
ulema. The posts of governor, town mayor, and village head 
should be filled through direct elections. 
  I would call for the abolition of the press authority 
[sultat] law, dubbed the press salad [salatat] law. Every 
citizen should have the right to issue a paper, even if only one 
reader were to read it. 
  Ministers and their wives and children should not be allowed 
to run their own businesses or accept gifts valued at more than 
100 pounds [$30]. Ministers should hand over the gifts they 
receive to a state-owned museum. 
  Parliamentary deputies should not combine their 
parliamentary 
duties with a government job. How can a deputy criticize a 
minister if the latter is his boss and as such has the power to 
promote or demote him? 
  We want a constitution for the 21st century. Despotic 
constitutions do not suit free people. 

