CSO 

<F P=106> [Two-part article by Jum'ah Suhayl and Ziyad Tariq: "Opening </F>
of Symposium on Truth and Deception in Arab and Foreign Writings 
on Ultimate Battle (Mother of Battles)] 
<H5>  [3 Feb p 4] </H5>
  [Text] The first annual symposium by the Ultimate Battle 
Research Center, held under the slogan of "Truth and Deception 
in Arab and Foreign Writings on the Ultimate Battle," was opened 
yesterday. 
<H5>  Center Director's Address </H5>
  Center Director Dr. Muhammad Muzaffar al-Adhami delivered an 
address in which he reviewed the importance of holding this 
symposium to the exchange of scientific opinions, analyses, and 
conclusions directly and far from the evil and tyrannical forces 
which have not been able, despite all the military, economic, 
and propaganda means they possess, to bend the Iraqi people's 
determination to march on the sound national and pan-Arab path. 
  Al-Adhami expressed the hope that the symposium will 
contribute, by offering the international thinking, something 
new to be added to what the world's authors and writers have 
written and published on the blockade and the deception. 
  He also reviewed the efforts made by the Ultimate Battle 
Research Center since it was founded six months ago to conduct 
and publish research and studies on the major historical 
confrontation, i.e., the Ultimate Battle. 
  In its first session, headed by Arab intellectual Muta' 
al-Safadi, the symposium discussed the issue of political 
domination. 
<H5>  Address by the First Session's Chairman </H5>
  Muta' al-Safadi, chairman of the first session, delivered an 
address in which he emphasized that many writers and authors who 
have written about the Ultimate Battle have not had the 
opportunity to communicate with each other and that this 
intellectual symposium is their opportunity to meet and 
strengthen their research and scientific relations and ties in 
order to expose the true dimensions of the aggression against 
Iraq. 
<H5>  Dr. 'Awdah Butrus' Address </H5>
  Dr. 'Awdah Butrus 'Awdah, the session's main speaker who is 
from the fraternal Jordan, stressed that the aggression against 
Iraq is just one part of the conspiracy. The blockade was 
imposed more than 40 months ago and the aggression scheme had 
been in place much earlier. If the Gulf crisis had not 
developed, they [imperialists] would have fabricated another 
crisis to attack the proud Iraq. 
  'Awdah added that the aggression targetted what no other war 
in history has ever targetted, noting that it started by 
destroying the infrastructure that had been built with the 
sacrifices of the great Iraqi people and their unique 
leadership, which had accomplished what no other world 
leadership had been able to accomplish. 
  Dr. 'Awdah wondered: Why did they disregard Security Council 
Resolution 660, which entrusted the Arab League with solving the 
Gulf crisis? Why did they reject everything urged by Iraq that 
had called for a peaceful settlement in accordance with the said 
resolution? 
  Concluding, 'Awdah said that Leader President Saddam Husayn 
is a historical necessity and that without his leadership, this 
steadfastness would not have existed, and "I greet this leader 
and symbol. I greet whoever has stood with him and I greet the 
great Iraqi people whose roots date back to more than 6,000 
years ago." 
  When the floor was opened for comments and debate, the first 
to speak was Ahmad Qamar, who said that there is currently Arab 
[official] domination of the Arab liberation movements and that 
the current struggle is a struggle between the Arab citizen and 
the Arab regime. 
<H5>  Dr. 'Abd-al-Ilah Maqziz </H5>
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Ilah Maqziz from Morocco said that the United 
States is not reluctant to threaten, even attack, any country 
that aspires to exercise independence in its territories. 
  Maqziz urged that the Arab liberation movement be revived 
and 
that meetings be sponsored to establish coordination between 
Arab political, labor, student, youth, and women's organizations 
so they will chart new strategies for Arab relations and will 
spell out the political movements' role in charting these 
policies. 
  Dr. Maqziz also stressed that it is necessary to launch a 
north-south dialogue through world liberation movements. 
<H5>  Dr. Muhammad Mahfuz </H5>
  Dr. Muhammad Mahfuz from Tunisia said that the new world 
order is still developing and has not been completed yet and 
that this order is nothing but some modifications and touches 
applied to the old system, which entrenched domination of the 
countries that triumphed in World War II, with some alterations 
introduced in light of the developments in the Soviet camp. 
  Mahfuz stressed that it is necessary to draft a new world 
order that is based on mutual respect and equal relations 
between countries and on democracy. 
<H5>  Dr. Sa'd Abu-Dayyah </H5>
  Dr. Sa'd Abu-Dayyah, from Jordan, wondered about the Arab 
regional order that was strong and influential in the 1950s 
because of the strength of the core countries. He said that the 
flaw is currently in the weak influence of the core countries. 
<H5>  Mrs. Hayah 'Atiyah </H5>
  Mrs. Hayah 'Atiyah, from Lebanon, urged that the Arab 
national liberation movement be revived on new bases, because 
the old basis has proved to be a failure. 
  Mrs. 'Atiyah stressed that it is essential to steer clear of 
emotional political rhetoric, to sponsor concerted meetings 
between Arab political organizations, and to devote attention to 
the citizen, because confronting domination begins with 
developing the citizen from within. 
<H5>  Writer Nawal 'Abbasi </H5>
  Mrs. Nawal 'Abbasi, from Jordan, said that what the United 
States has accomplished is to impose a peaceful solution for 
Palestine in the wake of the aggression that tried to weaken and 
contain Iraq. 
<H5>  Address by Writer Ahmad Muhammad al-Muslih </H5>
  Ahmad Muhammad al-Muslih, from Jordan, said that the current 
struggle is between the Arab citizen and some Arab regimes that 
fight this citizen under the canopy of various allegations and 
under the cover of pan-Arabism one time and of fundamentalist 
allegations another time. 
  Al-Muslih urged writers to pay attention to this important 
point, to exert efforts to deal with it in their writings, and 
to stress that the Ultimate Battle is an Iraqi act within a 
pan-Arabist framework--an act that has produced numerous 
positives for the Arab citizen. 
  Al-Muslih also urged that the pan-Arab plan be reinforced 
and 
that it be tackled with a new rhetoric. He urged that this 
underline the priorities in the pan-Arab struggle and point out 
the dangers that threaten the Arab nation, especially those 
dangers that are created by some Arab regimes. Al-Muslih pointed 
out that the United States is a well-known enemy of the Arabs. 
<H5>  Comment by Dr. Ayyub 'Abd-al-'Aziz </H5>
  In comment, Dr. Ayyub 'Abd-al-'Aziz said that political 
domination is based on economic domination and that what 
strengthens this political domination is the fact that Arab 
countries open their markets to foreign goods. 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-'Aziz urged that U.S. goods be boycotted and 
that 
efforts be made to break the unjust blockade imposed on Iraq and 
to achieve self-sufficiency with what is produced at the Arab 
level. He stressed that such achievements would make the United 
States realize the importance of unity of the Arab nation. 
<H5>  Dr. 'Abd-al-Razzaq al-Hashimi </H5>
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Razzaq al-Hashimi, from Iraq, spoke about the 
roots of the U.S. domination, of the rise of this domination 
since disappearance of the Soviet Union, and of the emergence of 
the signs of a new world order which features a West-West 
struggle in place of the old East-West struggle. He also spoke 
of U.S. efforts to create a new order that features a 
North-South struggle. 
  Dr. al-Hashimi added that what goes on in the international 
arena is not a new world order, as Bush has depicted it to the 
world, but a labor that reflects how the future international 
conditions will be. 
  He noted that the United Nations has no credibility and is 
used against peoples' interests. He said that instead of being 
used for peoples' interests, UN law is being used against 
peoples' interests, adding that human rights have become a means 
to dominate peoples and strike their interests. 
  Dr. al-Hashimi stressed that a system that exploits man, 
fights peoples, and misleads the innocent is a system that has 
no right to speak of legitimacy and international laws. 
<H5>  Writer Sultan Hattab </H5>
  Sultan Hattab, a Jordanian who has written the book, 
Iraq, a Period on the First Line, called for 
abandoning the rhetoric of emotional political propaganda and 
for conveying the true conditions under which the Iraqi people 
live as a consequence of the unjust blockade. He also called for 
pointing out the main motives behind the U.S. aggression against 
Iraq, led by by the motive to dominate peoples' fates and to 
plunder their resources. 
  Hattab also called for embracing the truth with all its 
particulars and for familiarizing the world with the true nature 
of the hardship, injustice, tyranny, and death caused by this 
blockade, which is imposed by the United States and its allies 
to spread their control and domination over the region. 
<H5>  Professor Singh </H5>
  Professor Behemen Singh greeted President Saddam Husayn and 
the Iraqi people who, by confronting the imperialist-Zionist 
domination, have become a symbol of pride for the Third World 
countries. 
  Singh noted that 800 million Indians harbor love for leader 
Saddam Husayn and for the Iraqi people and that they are proud 
of Iraq, the land of love and peace and the Third World 
countries' front trench in confronting the imperialist onslaught. 
  He added that those who claim to be defending human rights 
are the ones who violate human rights with their continued 
economic sanctions against the Iraqi people--sanctions that lead 
to the death of children and that deny them milk and drugs. 
  Singh warned that future generations will learn the truth 
about submission to imperialism and will not forgive the present 
generations if they fail to take serious steps to confront 
imperialism and to support Iraq's position and its resistance to 
aggression. 
  He noted that the United States, through its past and 
present 
policies and through its presence in the Gulf Emirates, seeks to 
control the region and all Asian countries, including India and 
Pakistan. 
<H5>  Dr. 'Abdallah </H5>
  Dr. 'Abdallah, a Moroccan author who has written the book, 
Papers from the Gulf War, stressed the importance of 
the Iraqi experience in confronting and challenging the Arab 
nation's enemies. 
  He said that no international situation has demonstrated the 
ability to stand fast and confront the way Iraq has demonstrated 
this ability. Dr. 'Abdallah added that political domination 
vacillates, thus making it easy for new concepts to develop in 
the Western inclinations and tendencies and for controversy to 
develop within the West over the domination issue. 
<H5>  Muhammad Sharif al-Jayyusi </H5>
  Muhammad Sharif al-Jayyusi, from Jordan, noted that Iraq's 
accomplishments have been made not just in record time but in a 
unique and rarely equaled manner. 
  Al-Jayyusi stressed that we need a new intellectual and 
information rhetoric that sees the picture with all its 
particulars and that works for whatever serves the nation. 
  He noted that the objective of the aggression against Iraq 
is 
to contain the Arab revival plan emerging in Iraq. 
<H5>  Writer 'Abd-al-Ra'uf al-'Ayyadi </H5>
  Writer 'Abd-al-Ra'uf al-'Ayyadi, from Morocco, said that the 
imperialist United States seeks to depict itself as a system 
that has its principled and legal bases and that this is its 
attempt to entrench the so-called new world order which has not 
gained legitimacy in the minds of peoples. Therefore, it is an 
order faced with the threat of elimination. 
  Al-'Ayyadi reviewed the most significant allegations 
promoted 
by some information and propaganda media and some intellectuals 
who revolve within the imperialist orbit. All of these parties 
promote the world order in the areas of human rights, 
civilization, tolerance of the Zionist entity, and the slogan of 
internationalism so as to obliterate our Arab identity. 
<H5>  Major Diwati </H5>
  Major Diwati, a Pakistani military writer and analyst, said 
that President Saddam Husayn and the Iraqi people have triumphed 
and won the battle against the imperialist enemy, led by the 
United States. 
  He said the allegation by the United States and its allies 
that they won the battle is false and untrue. 
  Major Diwati said that the Pakistani people are proud of and 
harbor utter love for the valiant Iraqi people who have been 
able to confront barbaric domination by the United States and by 
its Western allies. He noted that Iraq, the land of sanctities 
and faith, represents now a symbol of not just Arab 
steadfastness but also of the steadfastness of all Third World 
countries. 
  Major Diwati asserted that the Iraqi victory was actually 
achieved under the leadership of President Saddam Husayn when 
his excellency and his brave army were able to protect the Iraqi 
people and their humane principles and to defend the principles 
of Islam and peoples' rights to independence and 
self-determination. 
<H5>  Writer Mustafa al-'Utum </H5>
  Writer Mustafa al-'Utum, a Jordanian who wrote the book, 
The Gulf War, Why? pointed out that the main mission 
with which we must emerge is to eliminate the division that the 
Arab nation is experiencing and that was left behind by 
colonialism. A cure must be found for this division so the 
nation will rise and confront the major threats that seek to 
eliminate and obliterate it and to seize its rights. 
<H5>  Talal Rashid </H5>
  Talal Rashid, from [Yemen's] AL-YAMAN AL-SA'ID, said that 
the 
plots that target Yemen's unity are the same plots that target 
the brave Iraq. 
  Rashid noted that numerous Arab forces, such as Saudi Arabia 
and Kuwait, are nurturing secession anew. This is in addition to 
Saudi pressures to delineate the border and to devour the Yemeni 
territories of Najran and 'Asir. 
<H5>  Sayyid Nassar </H5>
  Sayyid Nassar, from Egypt, asserted that the allegations 
used 
by the United States to attack Iraq are false and that the true 
motives behind the aggression were to stem Iraq's development 
and to end its pan-Arabist tendency, because Iraq had become the 
nation's center of luminescence, having managed to establish 
military balance in the region. 
  Nassar noted that the Iraqi people's struggle represents an 
extension of the Arab people's struggle against colonialist 
domination and against the division imposed by the alliance 
countries after World War II. 
<H5>  Mohamed Hafez </H5>
  Mohamed Hafez Ould Mohamed Lemine, from Mauritania, stressed 
that the U.S. anti-Arab schemes are not new because the Arab 
nation represents a threat to the aggressive objectives of the 
United States and the colonialist countries. Iraq in particular 
is the main threat because of the revivalist tendencies embraced 
by the Iraqi leadership, most significant of which are the 
tendencies to embrace scientific technology, to revive the 
pan-Arabist fleeing, and to liberate Palestine. These are 
mainstays that lead to the Arab nation's revival and that, 
consequently, represent a major threat to the U.S. and 
colonialist interests. 
<H5>  Sharifah Bint 'Amarah </H5>
  Mrs. Sharifah Bint 'Amarah, from Tunisia, asserted that the 
Ultimate Battle is the biggest cultural and social challenge 
confronted by Iraq and that this battle continues to be the 
greatest and most magnificent symphony for the persecuted in the 
world. 
  Bint 'Amarah appealed to all organizations, governments, and 
capable people in the world to advertise the inhumane hardship 
experienced by the Iraqi people as a result of the tyrannical 
blockade imposed on Iraq. 
<H5>  Mrs. Nasirah al-Sa'dun </H5>
  The final speaker at the first session was Mrs. Nasirah 
al-Sa'dun, the symposium rapporteur. She reviewed the focal 
points with which the speakers dealt in their addresses, 
analyses, scientific conclusions, and their proposals on how to 
foil U.S. plans to dominate the area; to develop the best forms 
of Arab struggle; and to create serious formulas of support that 
contribute to breaking the blockade imposed on the Iraqi people. 
  The symposium was attended by Hamid Yusuf Hammadi, the 
minister of culture and information; Humam 'Abd-al-Khaliq, the 
minister of higher education and scientific research, and a 
number of culture, information, and research officials. 
<H5>  [4 Feb p 4] </H5>
  [Text] The symposium on truth and deception in Arab and 
foreign writings about the Ultimate Battle, sponsored by the 
Ultimate Battle Research Center at the Ministry of Culture and 
Information, resumed its activities for the second day yesterday. 
  The session, chaired by Muhammad Tahir Mahfuz, discussed the 
focal point of economic domination. The main speaker was Dr. 
'Abd-al-Ilah Balqaziz from Tunisia. In his study, Balqaziz said 
that the objectives charted by the United States for its 
aggression against Iraq are well-studied and well-known, and 
they seek to dominate and control all raw material resources. 
They have also targeted Iraq because it is a regional power. 
  Balqaziz called for further discussion of the proposals on 
fighting the U.S.-Western onslaught and on exploiting the 
contradictions within the Western camp in Europe intelligently 
and wisely. 
  He stressed that Iraq represents a central objective within 
the U.S. economic program because Iraq has aspired to accomplish 
a developmental economic program that seeks to build economic 
support bases under difficult conditions. He noted that the 
military intervention signifies nothing other than a response to 
the slogan of "Arab oil belongs to Arabs," which Iraq embraces. 
It also signifies an effort to disengage oil from Arabism to 
ensure the flow of oil to the United States. 
  Balqaziz added that the United States and its Western allies 
work to break up the Arab region anew on the basis of a Middle 
East principle; to eliminate the bond of Arabism from the 
region's fabric; to rearrange the region on a new basis; and to 
open gaps that have been blocked to date, especially with the 
Zionist entity. 
  When the floor was opened for comment and debate, the first 
to speak was Haroun Mohamed Said from Algeria. He stressed that 
the struggle that is expected to rage in the future is an 
economic and technological struggle. Whoever possesses wealth 
and strength will have to enter the struggle. Accordingly, the 
objectives of the aggression against Iraq were to destroy the 
country's infrastructure and to eliminate Iraq as an influential 
country in the world. 
  Said added that it is impossible for the United States to 
embody the concept of the new order unless it destroys the 
independent regimes that stand in its way, led by Iraq, Algeria, 
Libya, Sudan, and Yemen. This is why we find that all these 
regimes are besieged. All this is done in accordance with a 
precise strategy. 
  Said emphasized that the aggression was motivated mainly by 
the fact that the United States and its allies were aware of 
Iraq's cultural and technological revival. Thus, Iraq had to be 
destroyed before it could reach the safety shore, like Japan and 
Russia. It also had to be destroyed to force the advanced 
countries to stop dealing with Iraq. 
  Said urged that the recommendations expose the true nature 
of 
the U.S. strategic ambitions. He also urged that efforts be 
exerted to draft a counter-strategy to be adopted by the 
well-meaning people of the world. 
<H5>  Mr. Loc Van </H5>
  Mr. Loc Van, from the Netherlands, carried a message of love 
and sympathy for the struggling Iraqi people and pointed out the 
contradiction in the interests of the decision-making 
powers--interests that flow to the same end. 
  Loc Van asserted that the imperialists seek to exploit the 
principle of self-determination in order to break up some 
independent countries. This is what the United States is trying 
to do against Iraq's Central Government. 
<H5>  Dr. Muta' al-Safadi </H5>
  Dr. Muta' al-Safadi, from Lebanon, warned that political and 
economic domination have begun to emanate from media domination 
and from confiscating the citizen's vigilance and controlling 
this citizen in all kinds of ways. 
  Dr. al-Safadi added that every colonialist phase has been 
tied to an objective befitting the form of colonialism in that 
phase, and we have now reached the phase of the latest form of 
colonialism. This phase can be called the emerging form of 
colonization of the human mind. 
  He stressed that with the collapse of the rival polarizing 
power, the United States had to think of drafting a new formula 
and creating a new justification for economic domination. Even 
human rights have had to be mobilized to serve this objective of 
domination; to prevent any crossing of the red lines; and to 
continue to monopolize technology. 
  Dr. al-Safadi said that "Israel," Turkey, and Iran represent 
the firm belts that are (to take charge) of the new Middle East 
plan. As for Arab culture, it has been kept out of the plan. 
<H5>  Juan Carlos </H5>
  Juan Carlos, from Spain, said, "We have to convey the truth 
to the outside world now." He added that the economic problems 
experienced by the world are tantamount to a struggle between 
the North and the South. Carlos expressed the hope that the 
world will witness a new kind of relations that are founded on 
justice and equality. 
<H5>  Husayn 'Abd-al-Qadir Ballah </H5>
  Speakers included Husayn 'Abd-al-Qadir Ballah, from Sudan, 
who said that the motives behind the aggression against Iraq are 
economic colonialist motives that have been promoted in the Arab 
world to plant despair in the Arab citizen's soul and to force 
him to tie himself to colonialism. 
  Ballah added that colonists alleged that the lack of raw 
materials for industry in the Arab homeland made it unnecessary 
for Arabs to have industries, including a conversion industry. 
Meanwhile, we find that Japan has come to rival the advanced 
countries in various industries, even though Japan possesses no 
raw materials. Ballah stressed the need to exert efforts to 
break the accursed blockade imposed on Iraq and to establish a 
common Arab market. 
<H5>  Malik Mahmud </H5>
  Malik Mahmud said, "Our meeting here as authors, writers, 
and 
journalists is to study the war that was launched by the United 
States and its allies and the effects of that war on the 
post-war Iraq and Arab world." 
  Mahmud added, "This podium is very convenient and permits us 
to present our viewpoints to the west, especially to the U.S. 
people, and enables us to tell them what they have lost." 
  He stressed that this war was imposed for numerous reasons, 
some political and some economic. After the destruction and 
disintegration of the Soviet Union--a process that occurred 
gradually and led to destroying the foundations on which the 
world was based--the United States launched its endeavor to 
impose its control on the world, and it has actually begun to 
impose its control on countries rich with natural resources. The 
first stop has been Iraq, and the goal is to undermine the 
country and to control its oil resources. 
<H5>  Dr. Salih Mas'ud </H5>
  Dr. Salih Mas'ud, from Algeria, said that the United States 
began to plan for this situation before the military aggression 
against Iraq in order to subjugate Iraq to its will. But the 
opposite is what has happened. The U.S. aspirations were 
frustrated by Iraq's stance against the most ferocious military 
aggression. 
  Mas'ud added that the blow dealt Iraq by the United States 
and its lackeys and the blockade that continues to this day have 
not undermined the Iraqi people's defiant spirit. We have heard 
and seen the revival and the defiance in the restoration of what 
was destroyed by the aggression. The Iraqi people have 
accomplished this restoration in record time, even though they 
lack numerous raw materials as a result of the blockade. In this 
accomplishment, the Iraqi people rely on their intrinsic 
capabilities and their domestic resources. 
  Hyde Stevens, from Britain, said that there is similarity 
between the Iraqi people's issue and the issue of the Irish 
people who have been divided so their resources can be 
controlled. On the same basis, the West, led by Britain, has 
sought to partition the Arab homeland and to impose rulers who 
are tied to the West so they will ensure the continued flow of 
the Arab homeland's revenues to the West. 
  Stevens said the scenario applied in Ireland in the past is 
being applied to the letter in Iraq, considering that Iraq has 
been prohibited from exporting its oil and that there is an 
endeavor to divide it into three parts. 
  He added that the past path of hope and struggle cannot be 
separated from the future path of hope and struggle and that the 
struggle to foil the imperialist schemes must continue. Stevens 
called for confronting the unjust economic blockade imposed on 
Iraq and for foiling its malicious objectives of starving the 
Iraqi people. 
<H5>  Dr. Hayah 'Atiyah </H5>
  Dr. Hayah 'Atiyah said that when the "Gulf war" started, a 
French paper said, "Now, the war of secret agencies and the 
economic war have started." 
  In her address, Dr. 'Atiyah drew attention to the importance 
of water in the region and to the Zionist entity's endeavor to 
control the sources of Arab water in coordination with the West 
by drafting proposals and policies in this regard. 
  She noted that the Western media has even rejected Egypt's 
management of the Nile River basin states so as to deprive the 
nation of its capabilities in the area of water. 
  Dr. 'Atiyah called for laying down the foundations for a 
water research plan to counter the "Israeli" research plan 
concerning the region's water strategy. 
  She also urged a special type of Arab economic ideology be 
developed and that we proceed from this ideology to develop the 
Arab economy. 
  Mr. Orak, from Brazil, said, "We are very concerned about 
the 
imperialist domination exercised by the United States. We are 
also interested in putting an end to this domination, because we 
believe that the world lives nowadays under the dangers of this 
political and economic domination whose price is paid by 
mankind." 
  He added that the imperialists are responsible for the 
tragedies of World War I and that they were the cause for the 
rise of the fascism that led to the eruption of World War II. 
Yet, the imperialists displayed no great concern until socialism 
emerged and struggled to break the yoke of slavery. But despite 
all the socialist efforts, imperialism persisted in its efforts 
and plundered the natural resources of some countries, thus 
victimizing thousands of people and depriving numerous others of 
education. 
  Orak stressed that attention was focused on Iraq this time, 
especially after the Soviet Union had disappeared, and that the 
imperialists launched a campaign of terror against peoples, 
utilizing the disintegration of the socialist camp to implement 
their criminal scheme and to try to destroy numerous other 
peoples and states by sowing sedition within these peoples and 
states. 
  He noted that, with the end of the socialist camp, the 
United 
States tried to assume exclusive control of the world. The 
United States reflected its capabilities in an ugly manner in 
the war it launched against Iraq in order to exploit the oil 
resources. 
  Orak noted that no country other than Iraq could have stood 
fast in this armed confrontation and this war. He said that this 
steadfastness represented a unique model and that, at the same 
time, it was an indication of the advanced position Iraq had 
attained in military technology, which was the best among the 
region's countries. 
  He also said that the United States persists in its moves 
against Third World countries and that this dictates that these 
countries move promptly to destroy the monopolist companies that 
have been used by the United States to loot and plunder their 
wealth. Crushing crises are experienced by many of these 
countries where youth suffer from unemployment and 
disintegration. 
  Concluding his address, Orak said that the Ultimate Battle 
has made clear the peoples' rejection of Bush's policy and that 
they have resisted this policy, as they resisted the World War 
II policy. The age when weapons were the only language has gone, 
and the age of the economic weapon has arrived, and the United 
States has begun to use this weapon to stifle peoples. 
  In a comment he made at the end of the session, Dr. 
'Abd-al-Ilah Balqaziz called for exerting greater and more 
profound efforts to draft a new strategy. 
  He said that we need a long-term policy to confront the 
consequences and results of this domination of our resources and 
of our pan-Arab future. He added that this policy should be a 
phased three-part policy, with each part devoted exclusively to 
a policy befitting the nature of the tasks dictated by this 
phase of history, namely the tasks of positive adaptation, 
mutual reliance, and self-reliance. 
  Balqaziz also urged that we read the international 
developments bulletin and that we take the position we need to 
take, i.e., open up to the world powers and exploit the 
contradictions existing among them. He especially urged that we 
open up to Japan and Germany, because they are the two strong 
candidates that are likely to play an important role in coming 
years, particularly since there are no bloody precedents in the 
relations the two sides. 
  He added that an economic relationship between the Arab 
homeland on the one hand and Japan and Germany and the other is 
likely to weaken the United States and its octopus-like grip on 
the Arab economy. 
  Balqaziz stressed that this strategy should not stop us from 
proposing a new and alternate strategy that makes us turn our 
eyes southward and maintain our ability to survive through new 
regional cooperation--a strategy that enables us to restore 
relations with the neighboring Islamic countries and with major 
economic forces, such as China and India and their major 
economic capabilities, so we can achieve minimal 
self-sufficiency. 
<H5>  Dr. 'Isam Rashid Huwaysh </H5>
  Dr. 'Isam Rashid Huwaysh, from Iraq, then talked about the 
forms of economic domination imposed by the United States 
through UN resolutions, which are used as an instrument to 
attain this domination and to then extend it over the southern 
countries and the developing countries. 
  Salah al-Mukhtar, from Iraq, stressed in his address that 
the 
Ultimate Battle succeeded in excluding Iraq's oil resources from 
U.S. control and, consequently, in preserving Iraq's oil 
independence and preventing Europe and Japan's economies from 
being subjected to U.S. pressures. 
  He noted that since the Ultimate Battle, the Iraqi model of 
restoring what was destroyed by the aggressors is different from 
the world's models after World War II, because the Iraqi model 
has not relied on any other experience. Unlike the ban imposed 
on Germany and Japan after World War II, which was a 
technological ban only, the ban imposed on Iraq covers all areas. 
  At the conclusion of the session, Mrs. Nasirah al-Sa'dun 
reviewed briefly all the points raised by the speakers about the 
focal issue of economic domination. Among other things, the 
speakers stressed the need to develop a strategy to counter the 
U.S. strategy and to achieve independent development which 
brings about self-sufficiency. They also discussed the link 
between economic domination and media domination--a link whose 
presence one concluded from the Ultimate battle--and about the 
effects of the war on Iraq and the world. The speakers also 
stressed that Iraq represents a model of the new defiance. They 
called, moreover, for conducting a study on water in the Arab 
homeland. 
  The session was attended by Culture and Information Minister 
Hamid Yusuf Hammadi. 
[Box p 4] 
  Yesterday, the delegations participating in the activities 
of 
the symposium on truth and deception in the Ultimate Battle 
visited the Steadfastness and Defiance Museum in al-Qishlah, 
Baghdad. 
  The delegations saw photographs of the comprehensive 
devastation caused by the tyrannical 30-country aggression--an 
aggression which touched the infrastructure and all economic 
facilities, places of worship, and residential buildings. 
  The delegations also saw photographs and miniatures of the 
various phases of rebuilding that was destroyed by the evil 
aggressors and of the efforts made by the reconstruction 
strugglers in Iraq's counter-attack and great response to the 
aggression. 

