BFN 

<F P=106> [By David Chazan] </F>
  [Excerpt] Nairobi, 26 May (AFP) -- Rwandan rebels pressed 
their offensive to capture the capital Kigali Thursday [26 May] 
as a UN special envoy sought to persuade them to accept a 
ceasefire already agreed by government forces, relief officials 
and diplomats said. The rebels pounded Kigali with artillery and 
mortar fire shortly after the UN envoy, Iqbal Riza, left the 
embattled capital Thursday to meet rebel leaders in their 
northern stronghold of Mulindi, relief officials said. 
  The rebels reportedly advanced further against battered and 
demoralised government forces to capture another key eastern 
district near Kigali's airport, which they took from the army 
Sunday, the officials said. 
  Riza is trying to negotiate a ceasefire to allow the United 
Nations to deploy 5,500 peacekeepers in Rwanda, where 200,000 to 
500,000 people have been slaughtered in relentless attacks by 
pro-government militiamen against minority Tutsis and Hutu 
opposition supporters. 
  Diplomats in the region said the government had agreed to a 
ceasefire but the mainly Tutsi rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front 
(RPF) was unlikely to do so because a military victory was 
within sight. 
  The rebels have said they want to seize control of as much 
of 
Rwanda as possible to staunch the bloodbath, and seem anxious 
that UN peacekeepers might arrive before they have had time to 
rout the army, the diplomats said. "The success of Riza's 
mission hangs on the RPF's acceptance of a ceasefire," a senior 
Western diplomat told AFP. "It will be difficult for the UN to 
achieve much here unless both sides stop fighting," said the 
diplomat, who requested anonymity. 
  Riza met rebel leader Paul Kagame in Mulindi on Monday, but 
failed to persuade him to drop his demand for the United Nations 
to cut the size of its planned force from 5,500 to 2,500. 
  On Tuesday Riza went to Kigali for talks with Army chief of 
staff Augustin Bizimungu, followed by talks with members of the 
self- proclaimed all-Hutu interim government at its refuge in 
Gitarama, 40 kilometres (25 miles) southwest of the capital. 
The government and Army accepted his proposals for a ceasefire, 
according to the diplomats. 
  But even if the RPF also goes along, the future of the 
proposed UN peacekeeping mission is still uncertain. Western 
countries, shaken by the world body's failure to end anarchy in 
Somalia despite heavy losses among foreign peacekeepers there, 
are reluctant to commit troops to another perilous African 
venture, diplomats said. 
  UN Secretary-general Butrus Butrus-Ghali on Wednesday 
complained that the world had turned its back on the "genocide" 
in Rwanda. "Let's recognise that it is a failure not only for 
the UN but also for the international community," he told a news 
conference at UN headquarters in New York. "All of us are 
responsible for this failure." "Unless we have the support of 
the member-states, we will not be able to obtain the troops 
which we need on the ground," he said. 
  The UN Human Rights Commission has appointed a lawyer from 
Ivory Coast to investigate the bloodletting, in which civilians 
have been systematically hacked, clubbed, burned and shot to 
death, according to witnesses. [passage omitted] 

