Language: <F P=105> Greek </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou condemned the 
UN's decision to send Turkish troops to Bosnia, as the Greek 
political leadership appears to agree that our country should 
not send military forces there. 
  "I am amazed that an army that invaded the northern part of 
Cyprus may be used for peacekeeping purposes. It is amazing," 
Papandreou said after yesterday's military parade in Athens. 
  Government Spokesman Evangelos Venizelos also expressed the 
Greek Government's regret because, "The UN's firm and tested 
criteria regarding the formation of its military forces was not 
implemented." The spokesman implied that neighboring countries 
should not be included in UN forces. "Greece remains faithful 
to these principles and will continue making all the necessary 
representations regarding the specific rules for the 
implementation of the UN decision," the spokesman added. 
  The UN decision was also condemned by the KKE [Greek 
Communist Party], which stressed that it "deepens the crisis in 
the region to a dangerous degree." The KKE called on the 
government "not to yield to pressure, to respect the unanimous 
decision of the last meeting of the political party leaders 
under the president, and not to send Greek troops to Bosnia 
under any circumstances." 
  Former Prime Minister Konstandinos Mitsotakis described the 
development as unfortunate. Although he said, "It is not time 
for criticism," he added: "Those who are responsible should 
think why Greece' position has diminished so tragically in 
general and in the Balkans in particular." Mitsotakis expressed 
satisfaction because "all Greeks agree that Greek troops should 
not be sent." He added that Greece should now try to see to it 
that the smallest possible number of Turkish troops are sent to 
Bosnia and that they be deployed between Croats and Muslims, 
without coming into contact with the Serbs. He concluded: "I 
think this is also the view supported by [UN Secretary General] 
Butrus-Ghali." 
  Following the 25th of March parade in Thessaloniki, 
Government Spokesman Venizelos said: "The Greek Government will 
approach the UN Security Council on its decision to dispatch 
Turkish blue berets in Bosnia." He made it clear that these 
contacts may achieve some results, but it will be on the rules 
that will govern the presence of Turkish soldiers in Bosnia. 
Asked to comment on the number of Turkish troops that will be 
send to Bosnia, the spokesman said: "Greece remains committed to 
the criteria that is normally used in the formation of UN 
forces, that is, countries that are historically or 
geographically involved should not participate. However, we 
cannot disregard the criteria for the implementation of this 
decision because of any violation." 
  Political Spring Chairman Andonios Samaras described the UN 
decision to send Turkish troops to Bosnia as foolish. Shortly 
before his departure for the United States, Samaras said that 
before making its final decision on the issue, the Greek 
Government should see what it will do with our Serb friends. 
[passage omitted] 

