Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Trifonov, chief specialist of the </F>
Ministry of Finance, and Yaroslav Tolstikov, journalist: 
"Investment in the Economies of Estonia and Russia: What Is 
Behind the Numbers?"] 
  [Text] We continue the publication of a series of 
articles on the comparative economic situation in Estonia and 
Russia prepared by Sergey Trifonov, chief specialist of the 
Ministry of Finance, and Yaroslav Tolstikov, journalist. For the 
previous publications, see the issues of our newspaper for 22 
and 29 December 1993. 
  Investment in the economy of the country, that is, making 
outlays for its development, means laying a foundation for the 
future prosperity of society. The growth of investment means 
drawing closer to a such a future; slowing investment down means 
eating away at our own potential, eating away at our own selves. 
  What is the investment situation in the economy of Estonia 
today? We must note, first, that we lack any kind of clear-cut 
statistical base with regard to all sectors. Why do we lack it? 
It is impossible to gather the necessary data all at once for 
the tens of thousands of enterprises, mostly small and 
medium-size ones, and analyze all of them to see what kinds of 
processes are developing there. However, we can discuss 
estimates. 
  So, the total volume of investment in the economy of Estonia 
in nine months of 1993 came to about 2 billion kroons and, in 
comparable prices, remained at the level of the corresponding 
period of 1992. Under our circumstances, this is a positive 
note. Investment on the whole did not decrease, although it did 
not grow either, while we know how difficult the period is our 
society is now going through. The enterprises themselves have a 
bare minimum of funds for investment, and this is well known. 
  It is no accident that under the circumstances we are 
placing 
our bets on foreign investment, on luring foreign investors to 
Estonia. We clearly lack our own capital. 
  However, in this instance the numbers are quite 
contradictory. There are statistical data, but they take into 
account only foreign investment as of the moment of the 
establishment of a given joint venture or foreign enterprise. 
This is their original contribution, and it is reflected by 
statistics. However, current contributions to already operating 
joint ventures or foreign enterprises, or the same enterprises 
established earlier, do not show up in the statistics. 
  According to statistical data, the following quite 
approximate picture emerges. As of the end of the first quarter 
of 1993, the volume of foreign investment came to just 2.2 
billion kroons, and by the end of the third quarter, had 
increased to 2.5 billion kroons. That is to say, the total 
volume of investment during the year, as has already been noted, 
remained at the same level--2.2 billion kroons during the year, 
but the share of foreign investors increased. How are these 
numbers to be evaluated? 
  There is a council of experts at the Institute for the Study 
of Trends. This council believes that the course of the 
investment process is unsatisfactory; there is little 
investment, more is necessary. 
  However, this is after all a maximalist approach. We wish 
well, but realistic potential must be taken into account, too. 
It is good in and of itself that we are registering a continuous 
growth of foreign investment, although of course more can be 
desired. 
  It is also necessary to note that at present only one-fourth 
of all investment goes to industry, and the rest goes to other 
sectors. In other words, a process of structural changes in the 
economy is underway. Indeed, industry used to be the sector that 
got investment first. Foreign investors now understand that this 
is not the best investment there is, and are investing in the 
service and trade sectors. Therefore, structural changes in the 
economy occur in our country under the influence of foreign 
capital, among other things. 
  Statistical data indicate that during the nine months of 
1993 
foreign investment came to 625 million kroons, of which 208 
million kroons were in the third quarter. In turn, according to 
the balance of payments, that is, data from the Bank of Estonia, 
it turns out that in the nine months of 1993 foreign investment 
came to 1.5 billion kroons. We have already said which data show 
up in the statistics and which do not. The discrepancy results 
precisely from this. Therefore, the data of the Bank of Estonia 
should be considered closer to the truth. 
  Who precisely are the largest foreign investors? They are 
companies from Sweden and Finland. The volume of investment by 
Russia keeps decreasing. In the third quarter of 1993 Russia 
merely ranked seventh, with a volume of investment of 8 million 
kroons. 
  Data on investment in its own economy are published in 
Russia 
accurately, quarter after quarter. Naturally, the high rate of 
inflation hampers foreign investors, and a drop in the volume is 
being registered. Nonetheless, the level of investment remains 
quite high. Thus in the first quarter of 1993 the volume of 
investment came to 97 percent compared to the corresponding 
period of 1992, and in the third quarter--93 percent. 
  The total volume of foreign investment in Russia came to $7 
billion as of the end of the second quarter of 1993. Germany and 
the United States are the main investors. 
  If we compare the per capita volumes of foreign investment 
in 
Russia and in our country (based on statistical data), we will 
obtain $46 for Russia and $115 for Estonia in the first half of 
1993. 
  Here are a few more numbers. In Russia the number of joint 
ventures comes to 7,000, and in Estonia--4,000. These are 
absolute numbers, and they speak volumes. At present Estonia 
amounts to a more attractive bridgehead for foreign investors 
than Russia. 

