CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Valeriy Yarynich, candidate of military </F>
sciences: ``Nuclear Strategies and the Control Factor''] 
  [Text] It is gratifying when from time to time our press 
publishes articles like that of V. Belous on the nuclear 
strategy of Russia (SEGODNYA, 9 February 1994). It is not even a 
matter of the content of the article, with some of the positions 
of which I do not totally agree. It is something else that is 
gratifying--our public is getting a greater opportunity to know 
and consequently, perhaps, to influence the resolution of 
vitally important and costly tasks. The time is receding into 
the past when fundamental decisions on questions of nuclear 
strategy and national security were the responsibility only of a 
closed military-political elite. 
  There is no need to fear that the involvement of independent 
experts and simply interested persons in this process will 
accidentally open up something that is truly forbidden--this can 
always be avoided. Moreover, in this connection the area of 
nuclear arms has a unique nature dictated by the absurdity of 
the unleashing of a nuclear war. In my view, this permits and 
even demands much greater openness than in the area of 
conventional arms. 
  In the mentioned article, V. Belous covered the strategies 
for the use of nuclear forces rather broadly and showed their 
dependence on the structure of the triad and the basic technical 
parameters of the weapons. But such an important factor as 
control plays an extremely important role precisely in the 
question of strategies for use. The possibility of 
implementation in the event of the necessity of a launch on 
warning [otvetno-vstrechnyy udar] or launch under attack 
[otvetnyy udar] (OVU and OU, respectively) depends to a decisive 
degree on the structure and characteristics of the control 
system. The author is correct when he speaks of significant 
inertia in the process of the development of strategic nuclear 
forces. This also applies fully to the control system--grouping 
of command posts of all levels, communications network, and 
complex with the corresponding computer facilities. The 
expenditures for them are commensurate with the outlays for the 
weapons themselves, and hence there must be close coordination 
of questions involving control, the combat capabilities of the 
weapons, and the means of using them as a unified whole. 
  If one analyzes the strategy for the use of the strategic 
nuclear forces from the position of control, then the following 
may be noted: It is obvious that there are no and in the future 
will not be any particular difficulties with the command and 
control of a first nuclear strike if, of course, we are forced 
into it. I share the point of view of V. Belous about the 
theoretical admissibility of such actions on our part under 
extraordinary circumstances, although the determination of the 
conditions under which the use of nuclear weapons may somehow be 
justified is a very complex and delicate problem. In any event, 
in this point the new Russian military doctrine (with all of its 
other shortcomings in a number of other questions) appears more 
logical than the previous declaration that we would not be the 
first to use nuclear weapons. In my view, that declaration did 
not have any practical value for one simple reason: Any 
``right-thinking'' potential aggressor cannot in his plans for 
attack bet on such promises by the potential victim; he is 
obliged to count on the worst for himself. My only objection to 
the author in this matter from the position of command and 
control is that submarines and mobile ground complexes are no 
less suitable for a first strike than are missiles in silos. 
  As for the concept of a launch on warning, here everything 
appears substantially more complex. Yes, today and in the 
foreseeable future the United States may rely on it along with 
other versions of the use of its nuclear forces. For Russia, 
such a strategy appears quite doubtful even now and all the more 
so in the future. The reasons are well known: The disintegration 
of the unified network of the missile attack warning system 
(half of the ground radar is now in the near abroad); our 
leadership has less time than does that of the Americans to make 
a decision (actually no more than 2-3 minutes) in the event of a 
strike from submarines in the Norwegian or Mediterranean Seas; 
the obligation of the president of Russia to coordinate his 
actions in an extreme situation with the leadership of Ukraine, 
Kazakhstan, and Belorussia, etc. But besides the ``perforated'' 
missile attack warning system and the rigid time limits, there 
are several other reasons that put into doubt the correctness of 
nuclear strategy relying on the concept of a launch on warning. 
  In the first place, the tendency in the reorganization of 
the 
Russian strategic nuclear forces in accordance with the START II 
Treaty is such that by the beginning of the next millenium the 
predominant role (in terms of the number of warheads) in their 
structure will begin to be played by the most survivable 
components--submarines and mobile land-based missiles. Such a 
structure of forces will be less able than today's structure to 
justify the need for haste in retaliatory actions. In other 
words, the calculated capacities of launch on warning and launch 
under attack will tend to converge. 
  Secondly, as V. Belous justifiably notes, the realization of 
the agreement on the mutual nonaiming of missiles leads in 
practically any version to abandonment of the strategy of launch 
on warning. The deeper is the reciprocal lowering of the 
readiness of the nuclear forces of the sides, the more time will 
be required for its prompt restoration in a crisis situation. It 
is difficult to expect the participants in such a sprint to 
reach the finish line simultaneously. And since the time limit 
for reflection is already used up today, delay by one side of 
even a few minutes will automatically put it in the category of 
a launch under attack. To be specific, as a result of all that 
has been said, today Russia essentially already finds itself in 
this framework and the concept of launch on warning is becoming 
more and more theoretical, although it does maintain its 
previous deterrent influence. 
  Such an objectively existing reorientation of the axes of 
nuclear strategy does not appear to be accidental. It is 
possible that in our time the general change in strategic 
thinking, the agreement with respect to a common scale of human 
values, and the development of ties dictate a renunciation of 
equilibrium on the razor's edge. In principle, the very idea of 
an immediate and impulsive nuclear reaction to the information 
from technical means of warning (even if they are ``absolutely'' 
reliable) seems absurd. What is needed is a second, insuring 
basis that in a hypothetical crisis situation would give the 
right to make a mistake to those people who are responsible for 
the decision. The strategy of launch under attack is such an 
insuring support. 
  But here is what is interesting. Following simple logic, we 
will immediately come to this question: If the grouping of 
nuclear forces and the system for its control, being oriented 
toward the concept of launch under attack, guarantee reliable 
deterrence, then why does one need enormous expenditures to 
support even the possibility of a launch on warning? Of course 
it is impossible to separate these things completely, and it is 
not necessary. Even under the concept of a launch under attack, 
for example, the role of the missile attack warning system will 
remain important, in particular, for the issue of warning 
information and identification of the aggressor country. Nor 
does the task of making decisions and sanctioning disappear. But 
there is a question, as they say, and one must seek to answer 
it. In any case, the problem of the changeover to a strategy of 
launch under attack as the primary basis for deterrence appears 
pressing today. This change cannot be accomplished immediately. 
Ideological and technical studies will be required on a national 
scale as well as at the international level, because by its very 
essence nuclear deterrence has a bilateral (multilateral) 
nature. Let us briefly examine the main difficulties and tasks 
on this path. 
  The concept of launch under attack was always criticized and 
is being criticized now under two main criteria: The low 
retaliatory power (especially later on with deep cuts in 
strategic offensive weapons) and the large probability of the 
complete failure of retaliation because of the preventive 
decapitation of the command and control sytem. The scope of a 
newspaper article does not allow a full illumination of this 
aspect and therefore we will limit ourselves to a conclusion. 
The whole essence of the question is how in the case at hand to 
deal with the notions of ``little'' and ``much.'' Formerly, each 
side made such an assessment independently, although from a 
mathematical point of view it is a matter of the risk of the 
partner and it would not be a bad thing to consider what he 
thinks about this. I personally assume that if the American 
``partner'' were suddenly to plan a surprise nuclear strike 
against Russia, he would be deterred by the possibility of the 
retaliation, let us say, of 10-15 warheads with a probability of 
0.1-0.2. Of course, these figures are taken as an example, but 
they make one think. Just recently, closed as well as open 
scientific investigations demonstrated the necessity of a launch 
under attack using several hundred warheads with a 
``guaranteed'' probability. (One must assume 100 percent!?) 
  Such considerations could appear scholastic if behind all of 
this were not specific structures and levels of nuclear forces, 
groupings of command posts, and automated systems for control 
and communications, that is, a great deal of public money. I 
think that it is practically impossible to achieve a calculated 
probability of retaliation at a level higher than 90 percent: We 
lack the means to create such a system of command and control. 
Fortunately, it is not necessary to do this. Magnitudes of 
0.6-0.7 will be more than adequate for deterrence, which appears 
more realistic even under the possibilities that we have today 
and gives a certain amount of confidence in the reasonableness 
of the switch to the concept of launch under attack. 
  Besides the indicated general assessment, a change to the 
concept of launch under attack will also require an analysis of 
the controllability of each component of the prospective 
structure of the Russian nuclear forces. And here a very 
voluminous and complex task comes on the agenda. By 2003 half of 
all nuclear warheads will be on board submarines. But the naval 
component of the Russian strategic nuclear forces is 
significantly harder to control than the Strategic Missile 
Forces. It turns out that we are undertaking a drastic reduction 
of those forces that have the most survivable and operative 
commmand and control system, and at the same time we are 
increasing our reliance on submarines, although it is well known 
what a complicated technical problem it is today reliably to 
deliver an order to a great depth under combat conditions. Our 
unprotected transmitting radio communications centers in the 
superlong-wave band are essentially the only means that we have 
to resolve this task but they substantially more vulnerable to 
conventional weapons than are analogous systems in the United 
States. All of this means that after the realization of the 
START II Treaty, with apparent external parity of forces, 
actually the power of our strategic nuclear forces will be 
substantially less. 
  There can be only two ways out: Either do not reduce the 
Strategic Missiles Forces or resolve the problem of dependable 
control of the naval component. Since it is impossible to stop 
the process of nuclear disarmament, the second choice remains. 
The fact of the existence of the problem of the control of 
submarines is the result of many years of underestimating this 
component, whereas primary attention was always given to the 
development of the missile forces. For this reason, as of today 
the Strategic Missile Forces have been most successful in 
resolving questions in the guaranteeing of control under the 
conditions of launch under attack. The technical work that the 
missile forces have done in several projects could also be 
utilized to resolve the problem of getting commands to deep 
submarines. This would make it possible to accelerate the 
establishment of a unified command of the Russian strategic 
nuclear forces, which appears expedient to ensure more nearly 
optimum use of nuclear weapons under the conditions of deep cuts 
in them. 
  The changeover to the concept of launch under attack is not 
limited to military-technical and economic aspects. Also 
required will be the continuous joint work of the ``potential 
enemies'' to support mutual confidence in the preservation of 
the deterrence factor from both sides. The deep cuts in arms 
will dictate such unusual cooperation. And here it is 
insufficient merely to demonstrate the weapons themselves, but 
it is also necessary to show the possibility of their use in the 
event of the need to do so. This applies in particular to the 
version in which both sides consider the strategy of launch 
under attack to be the main support of deterrence. 
  Showing our deterrent capability to the opposing side 
presupposes a certain degree of openness not only in nuclear 
arms themselves (which to a considerable degree has already been 
achieved today) but also in systems for their command and 
control. It is obvious that two extremes are unacceptable in 
this process: On the one hand, one cannot totally reveal the 
structure and characteristics of the control system, for this 
can increase the provoking aspect and threaten national 
security; but, on the other hand, it is also inadmissible to 
close this area completely, because lack of knowledge can 
gradually give other countries the illusion of Russian nuclear 
impotence, which is fraught with unpredictable consequences in a 
crisis. Apparently, the optimum solution is somewhere in the 
middle. 
  It appears that in the interest of supporting strategic 
stability it would be reasonable, along with the exchange of 
information on nuclear missiles between the sides, to begin a 
dialogue in the area of their command and control. The objective 
of such a conversation is to support confidence in the mutual 
capability of providing for nuclear deterrence under the 
conditions of sharp cuts in arms and taking into account the 
other big changes taking place in the world. This will be 
particularly pressing in the transition to the strategy of 
launch under attack. In the final analysis, such an exchange 
must lead to the development of a methodology for a joint 
quantitative assessment of the minimum necessary level of 
reciprocal deterrence. This would make it possible to reach an 
agreement on deeper reductions of nuclear arsenals and to save 
substantial resources. 
  In the light of everything that has been said above, it 
appears logical for both nuclear superpowers to put their main 
emphasis on the concept of launch under attack as the most 
``humane'' concept that corresponds to today's way of thinking 
and to simple logic. It is possible that launch on warning and 
launch under attack could even exchange places in the combat 
documentation at the command posts of the strategic nuclear 
forces. That is, launch under attack would become the basic 
concept and launch on warning an insuring concept. 
  In conclusion, I would like to say that the singularity of 
the problem of nuclear strategies lies in the fact that all of 
their variants will continue to coexist, and this connection I 
agree with the arguments of my respected colleague Vladimir 
Belous. 

