CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Minister of Social Protection of the </F>
Population Zaura Kadyrova, by KAZAKHSTANSKAYA PRAVDA 
correspondent Tamara Fomina; place and date not given: "We Can 
Sacrifice a Lot for the Sake of Economic Reform. But Not Our 
Elderly. The Minister Has Resigned. The Problems Will Not"] 
  [Text] As our newspaper reported yesterday, Minister of 
Social Protection of the Population Zaura Kadyrova has submitted 
her letter of resignation (as the reader can see, it has been 
accepted), explaining this action by the fact that decisions 
affecting pensioners are being made without her ministry's 
participation. 
  Someone snapped at Zaura Zhusupovna: Suffering from the 
Russian syndrome? Meaning the resignation of E. Pamfilova, the 
Russian minister of social protection of the population. How 
quick we are, however, to judge and gossip. What is it that 
compelled a person who had headed this difficult segment of work 
to make this decision? KAZAKHSTANSKAYA PRAVDA asked Z. Kadyrova 
to tell us in more detail about the motives for her decision. 
  [Kadyrova] You know, this mental stereotype had been 
building 
for years--that the Minsobes [Ministry of Social Security] is a 
second-class agency. It had always taken a back seat, quietly 
and unquestioningly carried out directives, and listened to 
reprimands. 
  Today, however, we cannot live outside our turbulent time, 
which also forces us to be more active, to look for ways to 
survive, to bring issues into sharper focus, be more demanding. 
  Life is becoming increasingly difficult; prices keep rising. 
The 3 million pensioners, of course, need state support. I 
cannot say that the state does nothing, but in my opinion this 
is being done in a way that is not adequate for the current 
situation. Of course, the state must get on its feet, solve its 
problems. But I cannot imagine any state doing it at the expense 
of the least protected category of the population. 
  Many would prefer the old Minsobes. That is probably why the 
current one causes inconvenience. We submit proposals. Then 
behind our back, unilaterally, completely different decisions 
are made, which, in my view, worsens the situation. 
  Take, for instance, pension delivery. Seventy-five percent 
of 
pensions are delivered by mail. But in large cities, where there 
is a large concentration of pensioners, we have set up on an 
experimental basis our own delivery. Life has shown that this is 
precisely the form that can reach a pensioner quickly. This is 
all in the same system; one can make a request, track it on the 
spot. No, we are told, the Minsvyaz [Ministry of Communications] 
will be delivering pensions. 
  We ask why we should spend pensioners' money to support the 
postal service. We have to pay the postal service on average 2 
percent of the total amount of pension money. 
  The government changed its position on this issue several 
times behind our agency's back. The Antitrust Committee spoke 
against the decision to leave the delivery with the postal 
service. We must give a person the right to choose. The prime 
minister received me and the minister of communications, invited 
jurists. The jurists supported our position. I assured the 
collegium that the prime minister was on our side. But a 
different decision was made. The Constitutional Court had to 
interfere. 
  [Fomina] This is in the past, but tell me, did your ministry 
have anything to do with the certain presidential edict on 
stripping the disabled and war veterans of special preferences? 
  [Kadyrova] I was categorically against it when this question 
was being considered in the government. I said that by such 
actions we would put the president on the spot. And that is 
exactly what it turned out later. As the 50-year anniversary of 
Victory Day was approaching, all the CIS countries were looking 
for a way to somehow make the veterans' lives easier. How many 
of them are there left now? Today there are 150,000. When I was 
making report to the previous parliament, there were 206,000.... 
  Besides, the law and the social program on social protection 
of the disabled were for all practical purposes deactivated. 
  We bring our ideas and proposals for the consideration of 
the 
government. And then, when they come out in the final version, 
we do not recognize them. There is practically nothing left of 
them. 
  Or take the poverty line--40 tenge or 100 tenge. On what 
norms is this figure based? The poverty line can be determined 
only on the basis of the minimum food basket. And then you tell 
people honestly: "The consumer basket today costs this much, but 
the government is able to put up only 60 or 50 percent of it." 
Then people would know that the government thinks of them, that 
they count, that they are being asked to wait, to be patient, to 
make it through a difficult time. 
  Sometimes people say about me that a non-economist does not 
understand a lot of things. Yes, I am not an economist; I am a 
teacher, and I am the head of the Ministry of Social Protection. 
But then you, the economists, explain to me how a person can 
live on this 100 tenge a month. Do you think a pensioner does 
not understand it when he allocates his little pension per day: 
This much for bread, this much for increased municipal services, 
this much for medicines. 
  You tell me. If you convince me, I will be on your side. But 
there is no answer. 
  [Fomina] We in the newspaper get a lot of letters asking 
about the pension fund. What is this fund? Whom does it serve? 
  [Kadyrova] This is a difficult question. I absolutely do not 
agree with the situation where the pension fund is put on an 
equal status with all other funds. They just "stuck" it into the 
budget. What is the budget? What is the Minfin [Ministry of 
Finance]? They have thousands of problems! This one wants money, 
or that one. There are things that can wait a month, two, three. 
Pensions, on the other hand, have to be paid every day--from the 
first to the first of every month. While there is not enough 
money. In May and June, for instance, we needed 2.1 billion 
tenge, but only 398 million were made available. The situation 
is very difficult. 
  I ask the National Bank: Would you please tell me what is 
currently the amount in the pension bank accounts by oblast? And 
get an official letter--we do not have the right to disclose 
this information to you. To the Minfin--gladly! How do you think 
a minister feels when he cannot even get this information? How 
can he work? 
  I saw the pension fund in its different incarnations--when 
it 
was completely independent and autonomous. But now it has become 
essentially the second Ministry of Finance. When they started 
hiding from us what money is in the pension fund's accounts. 
When it gave R2.2 billion to commercial structures at a low 
interest rate. 
  I hope that the parliament will again remove the pension 
fund 
from the budget. It should not engage in commerce in a direct 
sense of this word. The banks should pay us interest on 
pensioners' money kept in the banks. Currently, not a single 
percentage point of interest is paid. 
  When the national currency was introduced, we proposed to 
index at least pensioners' deposits at a special conversion 
rate, so that their value would not drop sharply. But this was 
not done. 
  How many times did the Minfin end up with the egg on its 
face, "pushing" some decision behind our back. It slips all the 
time. And will many times again, I think. Together with the 
government's department of labor finances and social protection. 
It is called "department of social protection," but all it is 
concerned with is how to cut it, to save money on pensioners. 
  [Fomina] People sense this. You have to have really strong 
nerves to read numerous letters from our pensioners to the 
editors. They write not only that they have not had enough to 
eat for a long time--they are also not sure that they will be 
buried decently, properly. 
  [Kadyrova] I also read such letters. And draw conclusions. 
Last year I raised the question and apparently got the go-ahead 
to tell of our problems at the Council of the Republic. I wanted 
to have these problems considered comprehensively, with the 
participation of administration heads. Especially considering 
that we have done our own research and development work: the 
concept and the draft of a national program of social 
protection. They promised, but did not do it. 
  Then I went again to the leadership and asked once again to 
come back to this issue. Let us put our heads together and 
think--after all, to care for our veterans and pensioners is not 
just the job of our ministry. Those who are pensioners today had 
worked in all sectors of the national economy; they created 
everything that today is being privatized and distributed. This 
all has been created so far by the labor of the older 
generation. Therefore, I wrote a memorandum to the government: 
Give us even 10 percent of privatization revenue, so that we 
could direct it into enterprises employing the disabled--the 
blind and deaf-mute, to support them somewhat. The state budget 
does not have any money--then let us take it from here, from 
this additional source. Not a word. 
  I am tired. When the leadership talks about social 
protection 
while doing so little for it, one loses confidence that anything 
will change. 
  When I begin to talk, I hear remarks--the minister is a 
populist and oppositioner, they say. She goes against the 
government line. I do not understand why government members must 
unanimously nod their heads; why a member of the government is 
being deprived of the right to openly express his point of view 
in the Cabinet of Ministers, which is what I have always done. 
  I would rather not dramatize the situation. A minister's 
resignation in our time is a normal thing. I have no personal 
gripes. On the contrary, I am grateful to fate that it gave me, 
a person who grew up without parents, the opportunity to go 
through all stages of growth. My conscience is clear both with 
respect to our veterans and my colleagues. 
<H5>  FROM THE EDITORS </H5>
  One can feel differently about the motives of the "tired" 
Minister Zaura Kadyrova; about the decisions of councils in a 
number of northern oblasts who basically on their own--or just 
about against the law--reshuffle oblast budgets for the sake of 
their pensioners; to the fact of injudicious, to put it mildly, 
utilization of the pension fund; and other reports on the same 
subject. One thing is clear: We need somehow to pull our elderly 
out of the quagmire of despair and want. The guidance in this 
should be provided by the president's directives and thoughts 
presented in his recent message to the republic Supreme Council. 
  Let us remind them: "The priority goal of the social policy 
now and in the intermediate term is not to allow further decline 
of the standard of living of low-income population strata and 
persons living on fixed income..." In development of this 
premise, the message provides a detailed elaboration directly 
related to pensioners: "On the basis of a comprehensive analysis 
of the current social security system, the government should 
streamline pension benefits and implement a system of compulsory 
and voluntary pension insurance. We need to move towards 
creating a three-level system of pension security. At the first 
level--minimum pensions guaranteed by the state; at the 
second--pensions provided through compulsory pension insurance; 
and the third--pensions provided by nonstate pension funds." 
  What is amazing is the long patience of our 
all-understanding 
elderly. What they do need more of is honest information, 
timeliness in the administration of pension funds, and repentant 
authoritative explanations of the existing situation. There is 
nothing worse than to lose faith and hope. 
  The government's task is to search for an optimum way to 
resolve this problem in the environment of the crisis state of 
the economy, which results in cutting overall financing for the 
social sphere. 
  Which means, it is up to the government. But is it only the 
government? Of course not--it is also up to all societal strata, 
all of us. The elderly are our parents, relatives, neighbors, 
acquaintances.... 

