BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 28 Jun (XINHUA) -- Ding Guangen, member of 
the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau and Secretariat, 
recently chaired a discussion meeting of propaganda department 
directors of some provincial, municipal, and autonomous regional 
party committees. Ding Guangen said: Since the party's 14th 
national congress and this year's national propaganda and 
ideological work conference, our major policy for propaganda and 
ideological work has been laid down. The most important thing 
to do now is to work under the leadership of the party Central 
Committee with Comrade Jiang Zemin at its core, seriously 
implement the guidelines of the national propaganda and 
ideological work conference, persistently take Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building a socialism with Chinese 
characteristics as our basic guidance, uphold the party's basic 
line, and do a solid work. 
  Ding Guangen pointed out: The excellent situation of China's 
reform and construction has provided a favorable condition for 
us to do good propaganda and ideological work. At the same 
time, doing active work on the propaganda and ideological front 
can create a good environment for reform, development, and 
stability. Since the national propaganda and ideological work 
conference this year, party committees at all levels have 
strengthened their leadership over propaganda and ideological 
work. Remarkable progress has been made in studying and 
publicizing Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building a 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. In journalism, we have 
emphasized promoting unity, stability, enthusiasm, positive 
propaganda, and the general task of the party, and we have 
achieved comparatively good results. We have made great efforts 
to publicize and promote the main melody [zhu xuan lu 0031 2467 
1774], have introduced advanced persons with distinct features 
of the times such as Xu Honggang, Bao Qifan, and Zhao Xuefang; 
have carried out rich and varied mass cultural activities, and 
have promoted the building of socialist spiritual civilization. 
  On journalism, Ding Guangen said: Journalism is a very 
important type of work on the propaganda and ideological front. 
Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, China has accomplished the tremendous development of 
journalism. The number of newspapers has increased from 186 to 
2,039; radio broadcasting stations from 99 to 983; television 
stations from 38 to 683; and the daily volume of XINHUA 
transmissions from some 100,000 characters to more than 1 
million characters. An important task of our socialist 
journalism during the new period is to guide people with a 
correct media opinion. Such a task meets the need for deepening 
reform, opening up wider, promoting development, and maintaining 
stability, as well as the need for winning the people's support, 
promoting unity, making the country prosperous, and revitalizing 
China. It also meets the need for cultivating a new generation 
of socialist-minded people who have lofty ideals, moral 
integrity, education, and a sense of discipline. Journalism 
should serve the general task of the party and the state, work 
for the interests of the party, the state, and the people; 
actively develop a correct and healthy public opinion, arouse 
the people's enthusiasm for building a socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, and promote the sustained, rapid, and healthy 
development of national economy and all-around social progress. 
  On how to actively promote the thriving and healthy 
development of the cultural market, Ding Guangen said: The 
cultural market is a component part of the socialist market 
system, and it is an important field in the building of 
socialist spiritual civilization. If we are to attain the 
second-step development objectives and make the people become 
comparatively well-off by the end of the century, we should also 
strive to accomplish the corresponding development of our 
cultural undertakings and our cultural market by then. In 
recent years, the cultural market has flourished in our country, 
yielding a positive impact on promoting the reform of the 
cultural system and the development of cultural undertakings, 
and on invigorating the people's cultural life. However, there 
also exist some unhealthy phenomena which affect the building of 
socialist spiritual civilization and which cause complaints 
among the people. Those phenomena must be dealt with properly. 
  Ding Guangen said: To promote the thriving and healthy 
development of the cultural market, it is necessary to make 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics the fundamental guide in our guiding 
ideology; uphold the party's basic line, adhere to the direction 
of "serving the people and socialism" and the principle of "let 
a hundred flowers blossom and a hundred schools of thought 
contend"; make sure that social benefit is the priority, 
integrate economic efficiency with social benefit, make the 
spreading of the main melody our main theme for revitalizing the 
cultural market; and serve reform, opening up, economic 
construction, the construction of socialist spiritual 
civilization, the popularization of national culture, the 
promotion of external cultural exchanges, and the needs of the 
people's spiritual and cultural life. As far as the work 
principles are concerned, it is necessary to equally emphasize 
revitalization as well as management, to promote thriving as 
well as healthy development, and to meet the needs of the people 
as well as to guide them cautiously. In approaching the 
existing problems of the cultural market, we should take both 
stopgap and radical measures, integrate centralized 
administration with regular management, form a full-time 
managing team while depending on social supervision, and make 
relevant departments share responsibility and coordinate with 
each other. Ding Guangen demanded that propaganda and culture 
departments at all levels vigorously organize the production of 
cultural products that publicize the main melody, and that they 
publish one group of fine literary and art works after another 
that reflects the spirit of the times, radiates the charm of 
art, and caters to the masses, so as to lift the spirits of the 
masses, to arouse their fighting will, to amass national 
strength, to inspire social vitality, and to promote the 
flourishing and thriving of our cultural undertakings. He 
expressed his hope that the broad masses of literary and art 
workers would go deep into the masses and their lives and 
dedicate the best spiritual nourishment to our times and our 
people. 
  Deng Guangen said: There is a great deal of work on the 
propaganda and ideological front. We must closely adhere to the 
four tasks proposed by Comrade Jiang Zemin: arm the people with 
science and technology, guide them with correct public opinions, 
form their character with a noble spirit, and inspire them with 
excellent works. We should enhance the sense of responsibility, 
work in a down-to-earth manner, and strive for actual results. 

