BFN 

<F P=106> [By correspondents Li Zhurun and Li Jun] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, May 27 (XINHUA) -- Trade unions, together 
with the government, are busy drafting laws on social insurance 
and labor safety that concern the "vital interests and rights of 
the 150 million Chinese workers," a union leader said today. 
  Li Qisheng, vice-chairman of the All-China Federation of 
Trade Unions (ACFTU), told XINHUA that the ACFTU and the 
Ministry of Labor have finished drafting China's first labor 
law, which will be published this year after examination and 
approval by the National People's Congress [NPC]. 
  Li is leaving soon for Geneva to attend the 81st 
International Labor Conference, in his capacity as the 
representative of the Chinese workers. 
  "We safeguard workers' interests and rights by helping 
formulate legislation and reform programs, especially those 
concerning wages, employment, social insurance, medical care, 
housing and fringe benefits," he said. 
  "We see to it that laws, government decrees, policies and 
reform measures promote the welfare of the working masses as a 
whole, and that those affected are ensured of a livelihood," he 
said. 
  Li noted that since 1978 actual wages had seen an annual 
average increase of 5.9 percent. "The majority of the workers 
have benefited from the reforms and China's economic growth, and 
that's why they support the reforms and the ACFTU as the unified 
union organization in China," he said. 
  Beginning March 1, wage earners had their work hours cut 
from 
44 hours per week to 40, meaning that they now work five and a 
half days a week instead of six. Moreover, they are entitled to 
an annual vacation of about two weeks with full pay. 
  "The ACFTU was a key party in urging the government to 
institute such practices," he said. 
  Three union leaders are on the NPC Standing Committee, the 
supreme legislative body, and unionists are also leaders or 
members of groups charged by the State Council to formulate 
plans of reform measures that concern workers' everyday lives 
and benefits. 
  Moreover, the NPC and the State Council, as a rule, consult 
unions before publishing other laws or decrees. "In recent 
years, the ACFTU has contributed 2,000 proposals and ideas when 
laws and decrees were formulated or revised, and most of these 
were accepted," he said. 
  At a given enterprise, Li said, the employee is, for the 
first time, enjoying the right to collective bargaining or 
negotiation with the employer on matters ranging from wages and 
fringe benefits to labor safety. 
  "By law, the union, as the representative of the workers, 
discusses and signs the collective labor contract with the 
employer," he said. "Meanwhile, it co-operates with the 
employer in seeking development of the enterprise." 
  The union leader showed XINHUA several sample contracts, 
including one from the Beijing Jeep Company, a Sino-U.S. joint 
venture. 
  Under that contract the union chairman or his representative 
attend board meetings. The union must be consulted before the 
employer imposes new rules concerning employment, work hours, 
wages, fringe benefits, etc. 
  Workers may sign labor contracts individually, but the union 
sees to it that the terms must not be worse than those of the 
collective contract. Moreover, the unions supervise the 
implementation of individual labor contracts. 

