BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "jo, jc": "Are We Under the Control of the </F>
Russian Mafia?"] 
  [Text] Bratislava--The day before yesterday, we published 
a report on the deliberations of a U.S. Senate subcommission 
that dealt with the expansion of Russian organized crime on the 
territory of the United States and the whole of Europe. As 
reported by the U.S. press, at the meeting, Federal Bureau of 
Investigations (FBI) Director Louis Freeh expressed, among other 
things, the view that the Russian mafia has already seized 
control over the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic. In 
view of the steadily growing number of signals about the import 
of international organized crime to our territory, we asked 
Interior Minister Ladislav Pittner and Nikolay Trutsuk, 
councillor at the Russian Federation Embassy in Slovakia, to 
comment. 
  L. Pittner: The Slovak Ministry of Interior 
recently signed an agreement on cooperation with the Russian 
Ministry of Internal Affairs. It did so for the very reasons 
that have prompted the FBI to seek the signing of an analogous 
agreement. Indeed, there exist serious indications that the 
Russian mafia (or mafia from the republics of the former USSR) 
operates also in Slovakia. This finds its expression in 
activities such as drug-trafficking and the theft of automobiles 
and their transfer to the eastern parts of Europe and other 
areas, about which we have only signals from intelligence 
sources thus far, which makes it difficult to be more specific. 
The findings of the interior ministries of a number of 
countries show that the operation of these mafias is becoming a 
problem, with which not only the United States but also the 
whole world, in fact, will have to deal with all due 
seriousness. As for the formulation that the Russian mafia has 
seized control over Slovakia, it is, I think, too strong a term, 
which is perhaps also due to a certain "journalistic 
inventiveness." The situation cannot be characterized in that 
way. However, the existence of certain indiciations about the 
mafia's operation is a fact. 
  N. Trutsuk: First of all, I would like to object 
to the term "Russian mafia," which is being used in the local 
press more and more frequently even if the authors of the 
relevant articles usually have in mind criminal elements from 
all of the Commonwealth of Independent States republics. I am 
able to state with all responsibility that, according to our 
statistics and findings, citizens of the Russian Federation or 
of Russian nationality represent a negligible fraction of the 
foreign nationals who commit criminal activity on the territory 
of Slovakia. As regards the alleged statements by the FBI 
director, I dare claim that it is probably another journalistic 
hoax, similar to the one fabricated recently by the 
correspondent of a certain news agency about the alleged 
statement by a World Bank representative regarding the situation 
in four Slovak banks. Had some international mafia really 
seized control of Slovakia, your authorities responsible for the 
security situation in the country would have sounded the alarm a 
long time ago. If they have not, it apparently means that they 
have no reason to do so. 

