CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Martina Fietz: "Luckless Liberal"] </F>
  [Text] To expect the state to guarantee both freedom and 
security is frequently described as a contradiction. It is 
generally assumed that the one can only be realized at the 
expense of the other. Given this contradiction of values, Josef 
Isensee, a professor of constitutional law in Bonn, declared in 
1982, a "liberal" is someone who favors freedom and a 
"conservative" is someone who opts for security. 
  This analysis can also be applied to political parties. Many 
liberals still view it as their primary task to protect the 
individual citizen against the supposedly almighty state. But 
they ignore the fact that a paradigm shift has long since taken 
place. Today, it is not intrusion by the state into the privacy 
of the individual which poses a threat. The threat comes from 
the increasingly solidified criminal countersociety, 
internationally organized and driven by the quest for power and 
profit, which exposes everyone at all times to the possibility 
of becoming a victim of robbery, fraud or violence. Not to have 
taken note of this state of affairs or at the very least to have 
neglected to take the necessary consequences is the most serious 
accusation to be lodged against Minister of Justice, Sabine 
Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger, at this time. 
  Her outdated concept of liberality is reflected in her 
obstinate refusal to agree to bugging private homes. "The 
government has no business in people's bedrooms," she says, 
thereby contributing to the fact that the debate is conducted in 
an unprofessional manner. She has even labeled members of her 
own party as "esoterics" and reproached them for coming out in 
favor of such investigative methods, saying that if their demand 
were met one might just as well reintroduce physical torture 
(although she later withdrew the charge). 
  Thus far, the liberals have been unable to come up with 
anything new to keep the debate moving. The interim model of 
excluding backrooms of amusement arcades and bordellos from 
protection under the constitution while continuing to declare 
private homes off limits has since been shelved by reason of its 
unpracticability. 
  The justice minister also places obstacles in the way of the 
debate on the deportation of Kurds who commit acts of violence. 
Her reluctance to talk about plans to conclude an agreement with 
Turkey guaranteeing that deported Kurds are not tortured or 
sentenced to death is quite incomprehensible. Such an assurance 
coupled with international human rights covenants and control 
mechanisms would provide a great deal of security for the 
deportees. The justice minister's critique of the Bavarian order 
to deport the Kurds who participated in the March riots looks 
very much like a campaign ploy to exploit the "liberal" versus 
"conservative" cliches. When Lower Saxony, governed by a 
red-and-green coalition, deported 31 Kurds in January and 
February no objections were raised. However serious the concern 
for the protection of human rights may be, there is one thing a 
state governed by the rule of law must keep from happening if it 
is not to lose its credibility--and that is that the right to 
hospitality it has granted is not grossly abused. 
  Frau Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger is also not having much 
luck 
in dealing with domestic terrorism. It was unwise of her 
recently to reiterate that the political establishment should 
seek to reach a reconciliation with the Red Army Faction. If a 
"dialogue" were at all possible or, for that matter, promising 
of success, then it should take place outside the glare of 
public opinion. Otherwise, hopes might be raised which could not 
be fulfillied and it might give the impression of special 
treatment and two-tier justice. And that would not help 
strengthen already dwindling confidence in law and justice. 
  Nor did the minister demonstrate expertise or good sense on 
another issue: she violently opposed the 
witness-for-the-prosecution arrangement, saying that she thought 
it was useless. But then she agreed to introduce it in cases 
involving organized crime. The explanations she gave for 
changing her mind were vague. Did she only do so at the behest 
of Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel, her party's chairman who 
preceded her in office, who wished to demonstrate the FDP's 
ability to deal with internal security? Members of all the 
political parties represented on the committee which met to deal 
with the asylum compromise had already complained about 
Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger's lack of sound legal judgment. 
  Crime is on the rise. The country is faced by the threat of 
right-wing and left-wing extremism as well as foreign extremist 
groups. Awareness of right and, above all, of wrong is ebbing 
away. In such a situation, the justice minister's position in a 
state governed by the rule of law must be occupied by a sound 
legal mind determined to make responsible and even-handed use of 
the governmental powers. The present officeholder does not meet 
these demands. 

