BFN 

  [Text] Exactly at 0800 on 14 April 1994, about 20 
high-ranking active-duty and retired generals arrived at the 
Major Andres de Santa Cruz Command and General Staff School in 
La Paz to begin an important meeting. The officers arrived with 
grim faces, impeccable uniforms, cordial greetings, and an air 
of general concern. They then began a heated debate on the 
issue that causes most concern among Bolivian military officers: 
The existence of an international strategy against them. The 
main issues that create concern among Bolivian military officers 
are the alleged U.S. intention to create a transnational Armed 
Forces under the command of the United Nations and a 
"suggestion" by international financial organizations to cut 
defense budgets in developing countries. 
  The delegates discussed the extreme concern which has 
overtaken Bolivian military officers in the last few months over 
the imminent reduction of the Armed Forces as part of a U.S. 
plan to establish a hemispheric security organization. 
  More than 20 active-duty and retired officers were summoned 
from different parts of the country to study this issue on 14 
and 15 April in a seminar entitled "Military Affair: The Plot to 
Destroy the Armed Forces and the Ibero-American Countries," the 
conclusions of which have been obtained by this daily. 
  The 70-page document reflects the concern of high-ranking 
Bolivian military officers and identifies the U.S. Government as 
the brains behind the idea of cutting the Armed Forces in Latin 
America, while the World Bank and the IMF are behind the alleged 
imposition of cuts in military spending. 
  The seminar, which was also attended by Argentine and 
Peruvian military chiefs, was held just a month and a half 
before the UNDP [United Nations Development Program] director 
officially announced a proposal to reduce military spending 
around the world as of 1995. 
  In a bulletin released by the U.S. Embassy on 4 June in La 
Paz, UNDP Director James Gustave Speth said: "Spending on human 
needs must take priority over military spending in the post cold 
war era." 
  Apparently Speth's proposal has the support of Washington, 
whose spokesmen in La Paz announced that the proposal will be 
evaluated and probably enforced during the "UN Social Summit in 
1995 through the creation of the World Demilitarization Fund." 
  Speth said countries attending the summit must promise to 
reduce by 3 percent per annum their military budget as of next 
year. 
  Furthermore, the U.S. Embassy announced through its 
information service that in its 1994 report, the UNDP asked the 
United States and other powers to gradually eliminate all 
military aid programs to developing countries within three years 
and to relate their economic cooperation to the defense budgets 
of those countries. 
  Within this context, participants of the seminar confirmed 
to 
this daily the "undeniable" concern of the Armed Forces as seen 
in the conclusions of the seminar. 
  The military meeting opened with a speech by the most 
outstanding retired military officer who, without much protocol, 
became fully involved in studying eight essential points: 
  The history of the anti-military project, with a special 
annex; the current war fronts; the Bush manual on abolishing the 
Armed Forces; restricted sovereignty: objectives of 
Inter-American dialogue; "corrupt" democracies: the weapon of 
the Trilateral Commission; depopulation: the official U.S. 
policy; "technological apartheid:" the new economic colonialism; 
supranational government: and the reorganization of the United 
Nations in its new role. 
  Nine proposals were submitted for evaluation: 
  a. The plot 
  b. The demilitarization project 
  c. Historic background of the Latin American Armed Forces 
and their mission 
  d. Democracy 
  e. The technological apartheid: new economic colonialism 
  f. Supranational government: UN reorganization for its new 
role 
  g. Democracy 
  h. Economic background 
  i. The positive contribution of the Armed Forces for the 
consolidation and affirmation of democracy in Bolivia. 
  Based on this broad agenda, a two-day heated debate came to 
the conclusion that there are undeniable signs of foreign 
policies that seek to destroy, or at least reduce, the Bolivian 
and Latin American Armed Forces. 
  The military commanders agree that the danger lies basically 
in the gradual reduction of national defense budgets and the 
subsequent creation of a supra-national military force 
subordinated to the United Nations that will replace national 
military institutions. 
  One officer who attended the meeting said: "The United 
States 
believes the only purpose of Latin American Armed Forces is to 
safeguard internal order from communism which, following changes 
in the world political order, is no longer justified." 
  The officers believe that as the antagonism between the 
United States and the Soviet Union no longer exists, "Washington 
believes Latin American countries should acknowledge U.S. 
structures in the political, social, economic, and military 
fields as the only legitimate ones." 
  He warned that as a result of this, some powers will try to 
create supranational forces to replace the Armed Forces of the 
so-called poor countries. 
  The same officer said: "The creation of supranational forces 
-- which involves only two or three countries -- would mean 
other countries would be subordinated to those who form the 
supranational forces because they would hold the military power." 
  An active-duty general who attended the meeting said: "The 
process to eliminate the Armed Forces is a rehash of the plan 
proposed by the United States in 1992 during the conference 
entitled `Inter-American Dialogue.'" 
  He reiterated that the initiative seeks to create a 
supranational force in charge of safeguarding regional security. 
  He added that the "Democracy Project," promoted by the U.S. 
Government foresees the elimination of the Armed Forces "as the 
Bush Plan did," and reveals two other plans, one secret and one 
public, sponsored by the "National Fund for Democracy." 
  The secret plan allegedly refers to the struggle against 
drug 
trafficking, and the public one to the fact that the Latin 
American countries must accept decisions of the IMF, World Bank, 
and others. 
  He said: "These projects must be accepted by Latin American 
governments because refusing to do so would result in 
authoritarian governments." 
  The officers are suspicious of the so-called U.S. 
cooperation, doubting the unclear intention of this type of 
initiative. 
  A colonel with a degree in higher military studies noted the 
existence of direct foreign intervention "under the pretext of 
giving advice," especially in the struggle against trafficking. 
  He asserted: "Intervention is by no means justified, not 
even 
from the economic viewpoint because the contribution is minimal." 
  He referred to the low level of morale in the Armed Forces 
which basically follows the lack of prospects within the 
profession, the economic situation, and the lack of incentives. 
  Another retired general summarized how the United States 
will -- or hopes to -- control South American countries through 
the possession of islands and countries like Chile "which has 
growing economic influence over other countries of the Pacific." 
  He added that in the Caribbean the control could be carried 
out through Venezuela and/or Brazil, thus influencing the 
northernmost point of the continent, the Caribbean, and the 
Atlantic. 
  He also expressed his concern that "Chile would control the 
South American Antarctic region." 
  The general added: "There could be an invasion like that in 
Panama, but this time against Bolivia and Peru using as a 
pretext trafficking and the large coca plantations that could be 
linked to terrorism." 
  He added: "Latin American countries did not bleed in the 
great wars, therefore this type of action may be deemed 
necessary. As an example one could consider what happens to 
street children in Brazil and Colombia." 
  The conclusions reached by the seminar are the following: 
  "1. The creation of supranational forces is one of the 
greatest threats to the Latin American countries and their Armed 
Forces because, if such forces exist, we could be intervened in 
militarily in accordance with the interests and policies of the 
countries that make up this force. 
  "2. Although restricted sovereignty is a fact that cannot be 
denied, it should be controlled in such a way to find limits 
that would allow us freedom to solve our internal problems. 
  "3. International economic organizations like the IMF, the 
World Bank, and other organizations currently direct the Latin 
American economic system and set the guidelines for the budgets 
of the Armed Forces of the different countries. 
  "4. The book "El Complot" ["The Plot," not further 
identified] should be considered, but it is necessary to 
remember it is somewhat subjective and should only be treated as 
the opinion of people with their own criteria. 
  "5. Because of different circumstances, like the policies of 
the regimes before the new order was established and the current 
conditions by which the military power is subordinated to the 
political power, military commands are believed to be isolated 
from the general activities of the nation. The Armed Forces 
have thus lost the influence they should have. 
  "6. As a means of self-protection, Latin American countries 
must reach a political agreement considering the interests of 
countries of the continent. 
  "7. Private business have, at certain times during the 
national policy, supported the actions of the Armed Forces as 
the only way to solve economic problems, but now under the 
influence of a new international order that is against the Armed 
Forces, private businesses reject and are even against them. 
  "8. The Armed Forces should urgently develop a real policy 
to 
increase their budget and to implement feasible self-financing 
projects in accordance with the real situation of the country. 
It is also necessary to carry out an economic reorganization to 
redistribute the budget in accordance with current priority 
needs. 
  "9. It cannot be denied there is a policy to destroy the 
Latin American Armed Forces, initially by transferring their 
mission to other institutions which later in accordance with the 
needs of the great powers will also disappear to allow 
supranational forces to take over internal and external 
security." 

