Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Reports by David Sharrock in Belfast and Patrick Wintour: </F>
"Adams Seeks Links With Unionists"] 
  [Text] Irish republicans have a duty to develop their 
contacts with Unionists to build peace, the Sinn Fein president 
Gerry Adams told supporters yesterday. 
  "I remain convinced that the IRA is willing to deal 
positively with any new eventuality. It is clear that the IRA 
is interested in developing the search for peace," he told a St 
Patrick's Day gathering in west Belfast. 
  What was required was a change in government policy. 
"Building peace may be messy and continually tragic and 
confused. It may be slow and circuitous," he said in an 
apparent reference to IRA mortar attacks on Heathrow and the 
murder of a RUC (Royal Ulster Constabulary) officer last week. 
  Identifying the source of all the violence as the continuing 
Anglo-Irish conflict, Mr Adams said it was the Government which 
held the key to progress. It was time for the realism displayed 
during the negotiations over Britain's disengagement from 
Zimbabwe "to be shown again in relation to their longterm 
intentions in Ireland." 
  He had no doubt that the opportunity for peace remained. 
"For 
all of us the prospect is at the same time exciting and 
frightening. It's a very dangerous time in our history." Making 
peace with one's enemies and opponents was a very difficult 
business. "We must expect set-backs, disappointments and 
diversions, but we are determined that when and if these arise 
we will overcome them." 
  Mr Adams struck a significantly softer tone than in his 
keynote speech at Sinn Fein's annual conference last month, when 
he called Northern Ireland's Unionist majority an Irish national 
minority. Partition had no longer failed, but had retarded, the 
development of democracy in Ireland. 
  "It is my firm conviction that Unionists can be persuaded to 
recognise that they share a common peaceful destiny with their 
fellow countrymen and women in the common territory of Ireland," 
he said. It was obvious that the Government's role as persuader 
was key to this. But, "we in Sinn Fein, who profess to be 
anti-sectarian and secular, have a duty to develop our contacts 
with the Unionist community. We must reconise, be sympathetic 
and sensitive to what Unionists are being asked to consider and 
commit themselves to, if a peace dialogue is to develop. 
  ``I am calling on nationalists and republicans to be aware 
of 
what it means to be a Unionist as this century draws to a 
close.'' There was also a need for Unionists to seek 
clariflcation of the Government's longterm intentions in 
Ireland. It was ironic that Unionists and nationalists shared a 
common distrust of the Government. 
  The remarks may have been directed at U.S. opinion, which 
appears to be hardening against the IRA as Albert Reynolds, the 
Irish leader, visits Washington seeking support for the Downing 
Street Declaration. 
  House of Representatives Speaker Tom Foley, a leading 
Irish-American politician, conceded that the United States had 
been wrong to grant Mr Adams a visa this year. 
  In the Commons Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Ulster Secretary 
said: 
"The best hope for peace is that Sinn Fein realise that violence 
is going to get them nowhere." 
  Sir Patrick, during Northern Ireland questions, came under 
pressure from his own backbenchers for a security crackdown, and 
from the Ulster Unionist leader James Molyneaux to shelve 
discussions on possible cross-border institutions during the 
present round of bilateral talks with the constitutional 
parties. Mr Molyneaux said the parties should instead 
concentrate on agreeing a devolved assembly in Northern Ireland. 
  David Trimble, Ulster Unionist MP for Upper Bann, told Sir 
Patrick to stop using the Downing Street Declaration as an 
excuse for failing to press ahead with talks on devolved 
government for Northern Ireland. 
  Although Sir Patrick said he would not uncouple the socalled 
Strand One talks on devolution from the other two Strands 
(cross-border institutions and relations between the two 
governments) Ulster Unionists are privately hopeful that in 
practice the current round of talks will be restricted to Strand 
One. 
  Members of the Northern Ireland backbench committee are to 
visit the RUC shortly to study the problem of co-operation with 
the Garda over border security. 

