Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Ostpolitik: `Go Ahead, Boris'"] </F>
  [Text] Russian President Boris Yeltsin is personally 
trying hard to give the Germans preferential treatment. The 
Kremlin head sent his election manager Nikolai Ryabov to Bonn on 
a special mission: To explain the Russian December election. 
  The messenger from the Moskva River brought attenuating 
news. 
Russia intends to "end for good the legend of the evil bear," 
Ryabov stressed at the Rhine last week, adding that there would 
be no return to violent, imperial policy. 
  It is true that several ministers in the Cabinet in Moscow 
would be exchanged, and that "a change of course" in economic 
policy "was on the agenda." However, Ryabov ruled out the 
failure of the entire reform process: "We cannot go back any 
more." 
  Such soothing words are necessary. There are mounting fears 
among Germans regarding the future of Russia. 
  The success of the nationalists and old communists in the 
December election had worried the Germans. The anti-Western 
tirades of hatred of nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovskiy nourished 
old fears that Russia might return to the imperialist foreign 
policy of Czarist and communist origin. 
  Last week even those on whom the West had pinned all its 
hopes seemed to have opted for reorientation. First, Russian 
Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev, who has so far been appreciated 
as a fierce advocate of a foreign policy guided by Western 
principles, caused some irritation by uttering old national 
tones. The foreign minister was understood as saying that, 
after all, Russia was not intending to release the Baltic 
Republics from its sphere of influence, and might even send in 
troops, if in doubt. 
  After that, the West's friend, Yeltsin, failed to oppose a 
Cabinet that was deprived of almost all its radical reformers. 
Deputy Prime Minister Yegor Gaydar and Finance Minister Boris 
Fedorov also stayed out. 
  German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel, of the Free Democratic 
Party of Germany [FDP], only shortly before stressed that it was 
a signal for the future of reform policy and the West's Russia 
policy if the two men remained in the Cabinet. They stand for 
reform based on the market economy and close ties with the West, 
Kinkel said. If both were to go, it would result in a 
"considerable loss of confidence for Moscow." 
  And now it has happened. One high-ranking Foreign Ministry 
official stated that the government reshuffle has had "a very, 
very great sobering effect" on Foreign Ministry officials. 
  Now that the opponents to rapid privatization are gaining 
the 
upper hand in Moscow, the major German enterprises are also 
"worried," Karl-Hermann Fink, of the German Economy's East 
Committee said. Last year German companies sold to and bought 
from Russia goods worth some 22 billion German marks [DM]. 
  Yet, according to the result of a survey carried out among 
business people by the East Committee, the shortage in foreign 
currency of the Russian trading partners, legal uncertainty, 
unclear responsibilities and property conditions, and "the 
general political and economic instability" are making business 
"more and more difficult." 
  Hardly any German enterprise dares to invest in Russia, 
anyway. If anything, they accept barter deals -- goods in 
exchange for goods. 
  Among Russian experts of the German business community there 
is an intensifying debate on how much longer Yeltsin would be 
able to resist the pressure -- physically and politically. The 
crisis scenario of the managers: If Yeltsin were to step down, 
fascist Zhirinovskiy would seize power, push the armament 
industry, and sell the nuclear bomb to the Third World. 
  The confusion in Moscow has aroused the conservatives. 
Christian Democratic Union [CDU] Secretary General Peter Hintze 
is already speculating to score for Helmut Kohl in the 1994 
election campaigns with the "massive insecurity emanating from 
Russia." 
  "The situation is still too confusing" for a profound 
judgment, Wolfgang Schaeuble, chairman of the CDU/Christian 
Social Union [CSU] Bundestag group, said. Yet, circumspect 
foreign-policy experts of the CDU/CSU, such as Karl-Heinz 
Hornhues, have unemotionally emphasized that the changes are 
"not as dramatic as some like to present them." 
  And the chancellor is trying to signal optimism, even in 
Moscow: "Boris, go ahead with your reform course," Kohl 
encouraged his friend on the telephone last Friday [21 January]. 
"The entire world is looking at you." Yeltsin stressed that he 
would be able to cope with the new government. 
  Kohl's Russia experts regard Yeltsin's optimism as 
well-founded. Even after the departure of Gaydar and Fedorov, 
the president would be able to implement his reform course -- 
albeit at a lower pace. Moreover, abandoning the radical 
market-economy course might even help to settle things there and 
stabilize Yeltsin. 
  In Western government headquarters, the professional 
observers had noted with concern for some time that, with his 
capitalist recipes, Gaydar was producing great social tension in 
Russia -- which he himself denies. 
  "The pace was too stiff," as one leading official in Bonn 
argued, and it is obviously a "false belief that the market is 
regulating everything in the finest way." New U.S. Deputy 
Secretary of State Strobe Talbott has also recommended "less 
shock, more therapy." One can only hope that the change in the 
government improves the disastrous mood in the country and thus, 
takes the "wind out of the sails" of Zhirinovskiy (Hornhues). 
  Just prevent things from hardening -- that is the motto of 
Bonn's Russia policy. Carefully, but consistently Russia should 
be guided into the market economy with Western aid. 
  At the same time, this dual strategy says, the security 
needs 
of the countries between the NATO area and Russia should be 
contented and their move toward European integration be speeded 
up. A tricky balancing act. 
  Any shift of interest in favor of Moscow upsets Germany's 
neighbors in the immediate East. The Central European countries 
-- from Latvia to the Czech Republic and Croatia -- feel left in 
the lurch by the entire West, anyway. 
  Their drive to get under NATO's military protective umbrella 
quickly is being slowed down by the Western powers. The Eastern 
countries have the impression that the World Bank and the IMF 
are applying double standards: While Warsaw and Prague have to 
fulfill strict conditions, the Russians get what they want. 
  Disappointment about Bonn is greatest among the Poles and 
the 
Balts. Politicians and publishers in Warsaw already see the 
effects of an "appeasement ideology," which might lead to new 
brotherhood between Germans and Russians. 
  Diplomats from Warsaw have noticed with great attention that 
Klaus Kinkel did not contradict his Russian counterpart, 
Kozyrev, who, in late December, enthusiastically spoke of the 
"German-Russian axis." They were also shocked when Kinkel spoke 
out against a Kohl visit to Poland at the moment on the grounds 
that Russia was more important. 
  After the Balts also stepped up their criticism of Bonn's 
allegedly over-friendly attitude toward Moscow, Foreign Minister 
Kinkel invited his counterparts from Latvia, Lithuania, and 
Estonia to Bonn for "consultations." 
  According to staffers of Kohl, the chancellor is "still 
optimistic." Based on the trust in his sauna-companion Yeltsin, 
Kohl ordered in the Cabinet last week that the defense budget be 
cut from the planned DM48.6 billion to DM47.3 billion in "a 
haggle as in an Oriental bazaar" (Defense Minister Volker 
Ruehe). Helmut Kohl stressed in public: "I want Boris Yeltsin 
to succeed." 
  Yet, the Federal Government is pursuing an austerity course 
in foreign policy, too. It no longer wants to issue blank 
checks for huge programs. Bonn's purse "is empty," as Kinkel 
put it: "Now it is the others' turn." 

