Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Baghdad, Jan 31 (INA)--Another chapter of U.S.-led 
conspiracy has opened with the allegations that German and Saudi 
inspectors have found two containers loaded with hundreds of 
tons of chemicals on board a freighter at Jeddah Port in Saudi 
Arabia. The inspectors claim that the freighter was heading to 
Beirut where the chemicals were to be unloaded and transported 
to Iraq which will use the stuff in making missiles, says THE 
BAGHDAD OBSERVER editorial. 
  The news spread as quickly as possible and the Western as 
well as the American media flexed their muscles in manipulating 
the allegations to serve their masters' interests. The 
above-mentioned media quoted a German official as saying that 
German intelligence has obtained the information of the 
freighter from their Saudi counterpart. 
  Those who have fabricated this story are themselves the same 
enemy of Iraq. They themselves were behind the imposition of 
sanctions against the Iraqis and they themselves were parties to 
the U.S.-led aggression which destroyed Iraq's infrastructure 
and killed thousands of innocent Iraqi people. Hence what they 
claim comes as no surprise to the Iraqis who are well-aware of 
the tactics of their enemy, the editorial added. 
  When Iraq announced that it was ready to abide by all UN 
resolutions these dubious circles began to launch campaigns with 
the aim of putting a spoke in the wheel of Iraq [words 
indistinct] states to even recommend the lifting of the more 
than three years sanctions against a nation of 18 million people. 
  The daily maintained that the human rights issues was on top 
of U.S. agenda of conspiracy against Iraq. The U.S. and its 
allies Britain and France in particular released their 
accusation against Iraq and said that Iraq was abusing human 
rights in the south of the country and denying the people in the 
north food rations. What these circles alleged is definitely 
false because those people, the Iraqis, who live in the south of 
the country are suffering from the same sanctions imposed on 
Iraq by the UN under U.S. pressures. As to the people of the 
north, the Iraqi Government sends them their food ration 
regularly. But the outlawed elements there, supported by the 
U.S. and its allies, steal the food ration of their people and 
sell it in the black market. 
  Today the U.S. and its allies have created another way to 
distort Iraq's reputation before the international community 
which is calling for an end to the blockade imposed on the 
Iraqis. Furthermore, the Saudi regime for its part has been 
showering money upon their puppets in the Western and American 
media to publicize such a lie, the motive of which is well-known 
for the Iraqis. The Saudi regime only wants to keep the embargo 
on Iraq to serve the interests of its allies. 
  Nevertheless it has become crystal clear that the U.S. and 
their agents including the Saudi puppets can never succeed in 
either undermining the morale of the Iraqis, nor can they 
deceive the world public opinion because the truth will soon 
come up and those who fabricated the allegations will be exposed 
by their own people, THE BAGHDAD OBSERVER concluded. 

