Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From "News Bulletin" No. 43/94] </F>
  [Text] President Lennart Meri addressed the Farmers 
Congress opened in Tartu yesterday. Over 500 delegates and a 
number of visitors and journalists had convened in the 
"Vanemuine" Theatre. Director of the Farmers' Central Union Karl 
Nurm opened the congress, expressing his hope that it will find 
answers to the current problems of the farmers. 
  President Meri stressed the role of agriculture in Estonia's 
economy and the current problems. He compared the present 
situation with the War of Independence and pointed out that the 
rear of the country is weak for three reasons: the land is 
still owned by the state, there is no definite idea of future 
development and a mistaken idea of Estonia as a poor state is 
spreading. Estonia is a wealthy country thanks to its farmers, 
Meri stressed, criticising the development experts who offer 
expensive and impractical solutions: "itinerant preachers who 
sell banalities rather than bananas." 
  He called the farmers to seek for solutions instead of 
culprits and stressed the need for unity and cooperation. "I 
hope that the return of the 140,000 prewar farms to their lawful 
owners will not result in 140,000 lawsuits," the president said. 
  Prime Minister Mart Laar also addressed the congress, 
explaining that the restoration of the agriculture will take 
time. He stressed that the present government has done all it 
can to accelerate the changes and announced that 30 million 
kroons are available for long-term credit to farmers. He also 
asked a number of questions that the congress was expected to 
answer so that the government could decide on further moves. 
The government cannot accept a single rich city surrounded by 
poor rural areas, Laar stressed. 
  Chairman of the Agricultural Producers Central Union Andres 
Varik recommended to turn the congress into a permanent body. 
The congress also discussed the land, ownership and 
administrative reforms and the social problems. 
  The congress will continue today. 

