BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ondrej Dostal: "According to the Results of a </F>
Public Opinion Survey, Most of Slovak Society Welcomed the 
Change of Governments"] 
  [Text] At the beginning of April, the Statistical Office 
of the Slovak Republic conducted a opinion survey that confirmed 
the conclusions arrived at by some other research institutions 
regarding the increase in the popularity of the Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia [HZDS] following its transfer to opposition. 
The survey did, however, provide other interesting data 
concerning the public opinion on the vote of no confidence in 
Meciar's government, early elections, and party preferences. 
  On the whole, it can be said that the opinion of the Slovak 
public regarding the change of governments is genuinely mixed, 
yet approval ultimately prevails. The entire parliamentary 
address by President Kovac that launched the process of 
recalling the government was endorsed by 24 percent of the 
respondents, parts of it were endorsed by 27 percent, while 16 
percent of respondents completely disagreed with the president. 
In comparison, Meciar's parliamentary address immediately prior 
to the no-confidence vote was approved of completely by 19 
percent, partially approved of by 29 percent, while 19 percent 
of respondents completely disagreed. The no-confidence vote in 
the government met with approval by 44 percent of those asked, 
while 39 percent disapproved of it. Those, who agreed with the 
president mostly disagreed with the then prime minister, and 
vice versa. The large representation of supporters of the Party 
of the Democratic Left [SDL] among those who partially agreed 
with Kovac but also among those who partially agreed with Meciar 
is of particular interest. 
  Trust in the president declined between March and April from 
73 to 56 percent, while trust in parliament increased during 
that time from 29 to 40 percent. Trust in the president is 
dominant among the supporters of all political entities with the 
exception of the HZDS and the Slovak National Party [SNS] (this 
explains the decline in the trust in the president). In the 
instances of the National Council of the Slovak Republic and the 
government, doubting HZDS and SNS supporters are joined by 
supporters of the Green Party in Slovakia (SZS). While the 
Meciar government was trusted in March by 34 percent and not 
trusted by 55 percent of respondents, the Moravcik government 
was trusted in April by 54 percent and not trusted by 39 percent 
of those asked. The increase in the trust in the government is 
quite obvious, and it can be safely assumed that those who 
trusted the Meciar government do not trust the Moravcik one, and 
vice versa. 
<H5>  Early Elections </H5>
  The survey indicates that 39 percent of respondents consider 
the date of early elections appropriate, while 24 percent would 
prefer an earlier date, and 15 percent a later one. As many as 
45 percent of respondents in April expected that the HZDS would 
win the elections, 15 percent expected a victory for the SDL, 5 
percent a victory for the Alternative of Political Realism 
(APR), and 4 percent a victory for the Christian Democratic 
Movement [KDH]. It is the supporters of the SDL, KDH, and APR, 
who believe more in a victory for their party than in a victory 
for the HZDS. 
  Who will get the largest number of votes was also linked to 
April party preferences: HZDS -- 32 percent (32 percent of the 
76 percent who intend to participate in the elections, i.e., 24 
percent of all voters); SDL -- 13 percent, KDH -- 8 percent, 
Egyutteles and the Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement 
[MKDH] -- 7 percent, APR -- 7 percent, SNS -- 4 percent, 
Democratic Party [DS] -- 3 percent, SDSS [Social Democratic 
Party of Slovakia] -- 3 percent, SZS [Green Party of Slovakia] 
-- 2 percent, ZRS [Association of Workers of Slovakia] -- 2 
percent, AD SR [Alliance of Democrats of the Slovak Republic] -- 
2 percent, NDS-NA [National Democratic Party-New Alternative] -- 
2 percent. 
  The survey makes it possible to determine certain 
characteristics of the voters of individual parties. Thus, for 
instance, HZDS voters are predominantly among people over 60 
years of age (35 percent) and those with only elementary 
education (34 percent), and supported less by people aged 18-24 
(26 percent) and those with university education (25 percent). 
With respect to age, the support for the KDH is similar -- in 
the 18-24 age group only 2 percent would vote for the KDH, while 
in the over-60 group as many as 13 percent would. With the APR, 
on the other hand, the trend regarding education is the reverse 
of that of the HZDS. The APR is preferred by 15 percent of 
university educated respondents, and only by 4 percent of those 
with elementary education. The APR and the SDL are the only 
Slovak parties that also address to a significant degree people 
of Hungarian nationality. From the point of view of sex, the 
SDL deviates from the average (majority of men) and the KDH 
(mostly women). 
  The survey also determined the so-called negative 
preferences, i.e. whom the respondent would not vote for "under 
any circumstances." The most negative preferences went to the 
HZDS and the KDH (22 percent each), followed by the 
Egyutteles-MKDH coalition with 18 percent. The negative 
preferences of the other parties remain under 10 percent. The 
HZDS is clearly in the lead in negative preferences by the 
voters of the KDH, APR, and the Hungarian coalition -- among the 
HZDS voters, it is the KDH, and the SNS voters named the 
Hungarian coalition. As usual, the answers from the voters of 
the SDL are not as clear cut. The first three ranks belong 
without a substantial difference to the KDH and MKDH-Egytteles 
(25 percent each) and the HZDS (24 percent). 
<H5>  Trust in Politicians </H5>
  The three most trustworthy personalities for the citizens of 
the Slovak Republic are -- Meciar (26 percent), and Moravcik and 
M. Kovac (25 percent each). Moravcik's supporters dominate (are 
more numerous than supporters of anyone else) in Bratislava, in 
western Slovakia, among the supporters of the APR, those who do 
not support any party, white collar workers, university and high 
school graduates, citizens of Hungarian ethnic origin, and also 
quite substantially among the SDL and KDH supporters. Meciar's 
supporters dominate in central and eastern Slovakia, among the 
HZDS and SNS voters in the over-60 age group, blue collar 
workers, unemployed, and people with elementary education. 
Kovac's supporters dominate in the 18-24 age group, KDH 
supporters (43 percent as compared with 41 percent for 
Carnogursky), and he also enjoys substantial trust of the SDL 
and APR supporters, citizens of Hungarian ethnic origin, and 
university graduates. 
<H5>  Parliament Estimates </H5>
  In conclusion, one can ask what the structure of the 
parliament would be like assuming that the outcome of the 
elections is the same as that of the survey. To simplify 
matters, let us ignore the undecided voters. The SDL, SDSS, and 
SZS already announced their intention to create a 
social-democratic bloc (SDB), and therefore we will analyze them 
jointly. The APR and AD SR merged into the DEUS [Democratic 
Union of Slovakia]. The composition of the parliament, 
according to the outcome of the survey and without any other 
coalition being formed, would then be as follows: HZDS (65 
deputies), SDB (37 deputies), DEUS (18 deputies), KDH (16 
deputies), MKDH+Egyutteles (14 deputies). The Hungarian 
coalition and the DEUS would have as many deputies as today, the 
KDH almost as many as now, the SNS and NDS would leave the 
parliament, the HZDS would have about as many as it has now 
together with the SNS, and the SDB would improve its position 
from the present state of the SDL. If the parties did not 
change their coalition attitudes, the present government 
coalition would be supported in such a parliament by 85 
deputies, the opposition formed of the HZDS alone would have 65 
deputies. 
  The results of the survey allow for one more conceivable 
alternative -- if the SNS, DS, and NDS went in the parliament 
thanks to some coalition mergers by a ratio corresponding to 
their preferences. In such an event, the HZDS would have 58 
deputies, SDS 33, APR 16, KDH 14, MKDH-Egytteles 13, the SNS 7, 
the DS 5, and the NDS 4 deputies. With the exception of the 
SDB, the number of deputies of all present parliamentary parties 
would slightly decline from the status quo, while the DS, SDSS, 
and the SZS of the non- parliamentary parties would get in. The 
overall ratio between the present coalition and its potential 
allies on the one side, and the opposition (HZDS, SNS) on the 
other side would be in such an instance again 85 to 65. 
  All the aforementioned data indicate that Slovak society 
welcomed in April the change of governments -- albeit moderately 
-- and, with approximately equal strength, refused the return of 
the former set to power and wished for a continuing government 
of the broad coalition also after the elections. Will that also 
be the case in September? 

