BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Juliette Saunders] </F>
  [Text] Port Elizabeth April 9 SAPA--The United Nations and 
the constitutional court will be asked to underwrite any 
agreement on the Zulu monarchy to hold the African National 
Congress to a firm guarantee, Cyril Ramaphosa said on Saturday 
[9 April] night. 
  The ANC's chief negotiator said proposals agreed to by the 
king, the Inkatha Freedom Party [IFP], government and his party 
could also be placed before the multi-party negotiations 
council. Mr Ramaphosa said the measures were necessary because 
it was impossible to call for a new session of parliament in the 
coming weeks. 
  "We want to show this is not a gimmick, we are in earnest. 
Any agreement we reach we will take to the international 
community which is represented at the UN and we will ask them to 
acknowledge it, so that the IFP and the king can have the same 
certainty (as if parliament had endorsed the deal). This 
agreement or solemn pact can be forwarded to the constitutional 
court as another form of guarantee." 
  The multi-party forum could also be asked to reconvene to 
discuss the agreement to make the agreement as inclusive as 
possible, Mr Ramaphosa told 100-plus guests in an address to 
business people in Port Elizabeth. "The ANC is determined to 
walk the extra mile for an all-inclusive settlement." 
  Mr Ramaphosa said IFP President Mangosuthu Buthelezi had 
again suggested a postponement of the election at Friday's 
leaders summit in the Kruger National Park. "We had to say no. 
That would plunge the country into an upheaval which is far 
greater than anything we have ever seen." 
  The ANC was disappointed that its proposals to accommodate 
the Zulu monarch's ceremonial powers were not accepted at the 
summit. "We had a feeling of disappointment in our hearts," Mr 
Ramaphosa said. 
  But during side meetings and private discussions, the Zulu 
monarch's delegation indicated they were pleased with several 
positive aspects in the ANC's proposals. And in fairness, he 
said, the ANC also recognised positive aspects in the 
suggestions by the king and Mr Buthelezi. 
  Earlier on Saturday Mr Ramaphosa said he was hopeful that a 
compromise settlement could be reached by Thursday to 
accommodate the position of King Zwelithini in a new 
dispensation. 

