Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] (Main theses were presented and distributed 
04-09-93 at a meeting of the Interbranch Commission on Problems 
of Continuing Operation of the ChAES [Chernobyl AES]; the 
Commission had been organized on assignment of the Cabinet of 
Ukraine No. 15083/64 of 11-16-92). 
  The ChAES administration substantiates the possibility and 
feasibility of continuing the operation of the ChAES based 
mainly on the following three factors: 
  1.Economic inexpediency of decommissioning the ChAES; 
  2.A sufficient safety level 
  3.The human factor. 
  Therefore one must evaluate all pro and contra factors 
within 
the context of these three categories. 
  I. Economic Considerations. 
  In regards to economic arguments for continuing the 
operation 
of ChAES one should note that when providing economic 
justification of continuing the operation the principle aspect 
is determining potential economic losses caused by possible 
heavy accidents at the ChAES. 
  Taking into account the current economic conditions, 
liquidation of potential accident effects of an even 
substantially lower scale compared to the 1986 accident will 
result in disproportionately large direct economic losses. Under 
these circumstances it is hard even to estimate the blow to the 
national economy. 
  It is worth noting that the absence of established in 
advance 
criteria of economic, organizational and technological 
acceptability and the risk of continuing the ChAES operation, 
which would provide an appropriate gauge for a skilled analysis 
of the factors under consideration, does not make possible an 
unambiguous assessment of continuing the ChAES operation. 
  II. Safety Level 
  The ChAEs administration justifies sufficiency of the safety 
level mainly by the large number of safety improving measures 
taken after 1986. But in doing so the basic deficiencies of RBMK 
[the type of ChAES reactors] have not been eliminated, namely: 
  - the absence of a localization system for the 
upper (steam-water) section of reactor pipelines; as a result, 
in the case of a certain accident (rupture of the PVK [expansion 
not given], separator drum and/or steam lines to the GZZ 
[expansion not given]) an indeterminate amount of radioactive 
heat- transfer agent can be released into the environment. In 
addition, such accident leads to a loss of the heat-transfer 
agent and can result in dewatering the fuel core with all 
accompanying consequences; 
  - the reactor vulnerability to ruptures of 
technological channels (according to calculations performed by 
the Chief Designer the localization system was designed for 
rupture of not more than two to three channels, and independent 
experts surmise the possibility of the mechanism of a chain-like 
increase of the number of TK [expansion not given] ruptures 
after a rupture of one channel); such accident is analogous to 
the 1986 accident; 
  - vulnerability of the steel-zirconium joints in 
technological channels to temperature fluctuations and their 
uncertain behavior in the case of thermal shocks (for instance, 
a false or prearranged operation of the SAOR [expansion not 
given] system); 
  - low quality and reliability of the equipment, 
especially of shutoff and control valves and the ``SKALA'' 
computing control system (the service life of the latter had 
been used up long ago); 
  - the absence of protection of safety-important 
equipment from negative environmental factors (temperature, 
humidity and impact loads), which makes this equipment 
vulnerable in accident situations; 
  - the absence of physical separation of power 
supply cables for standby equipment of safety and 
safety-important systems and separation of power and control 
cable flows; 
  - inefficiency of the generator room fire-fighting 
system and vulnerability of design solutions related to 
placement of safety-important systems in the generator room; 
  - a large number if welded joints in the first 
loop (KMPTs [expansion not given]) and the absence of 
state-of-the-art diagnostic systems. 
  In addition, the insufficient current safety level is 
substantially affected by the following factors: 
  - unsatisfactory level of the safety culture, 
which is indicated by a large number of additional failures and 
defects detected during scheduled simulated accident situations; 
  - miscalculations of the existing system of 
providing corrective actions based on results of investigation 
of incidents and accident situations; this was noted by the IAEA 
expert ASSET mission based on results of investigating the 
circumstances of the 1991 fire of the second unit. 
  As far as the measures aimed at improving neutron-physical 
parameters of RBMK that were implemented in operating ChAES 
units are concerned, one should also note the presence of 
essentially negative consequences of modernization of the 
control and protection system (CPS), the most serious of which 
are: 
increased positive effect of dewatering of the CPS 
coolant circuit, which under certain situations of compensation 
with rods during reaching a critical state (the most vulnerable 
moment) can get as high as 5-6 eff; and it should be noted that 
this positive reactivity is released when draining water just 
within approximately two meters of the middle section of the 
fuel core (which is indicated by results of 1987 physical 
experiments in the third unit); 
when operating at nominal capacity the operational 
reactivity margin is mostly comprised of rods submerged into the 
core, so the actual operating reactivity margin is much lower 
than computed by ``SKALA'' (43-48 RR [expansion not given]); the 
remaining rods are mainly located in the VK [expansion not 
given] (except local automatic regulators). These factors are 
playing the principle role in reducing AZ-5 [expansion not 
given] effectiveness during the first second of its operation: 
  - reduced subcriticality margin of the reactor 
when stopping it and impossibility of repair modes without 
introducing additional absorbers into the core. 
  Concentrating one's attention on using up the 
channel-graphite clearance as the main and only factor that 
determines the possibility or impossibility of continuing 
operation of RBMK is artificial. The RBMK has a lot of other 
drawbacks, and a large number of those have not yet been 
detected and analyzed. The most significant is the regularity 
and sequence of dangerous RBMK accidents after 1986 (the most 
striking examples are an LAES [Leningrad AES] accident in March 
of 1992 and a complicated fire in the generator room of the 
second unit in October of 1991). 
  Thus, the problem of increasing the safety level after the 
modernizations leaves open the main problem: is the current RBMK 
safety level acceptable? From the standpoint of requirements of 
international safety rules and even the former Soviet Union 
rules the safety level of this type of reactors is unacceptable. 
  - III. Human Factor 
  From the standpoint of social factors and the problem of 
employment of highly skilled personnel, continuing the operation 
to 1997 will not eliminate the problem in principle - it will 
only postpone it for some time. 
  Under these conditions and taking into account predominant 
safety considerations when considering the problem of stopping 
the CHAES operation, one should consider the availability of a 
large number of skilled personnel within a different context, 
namely, as a positive factor which can solve the problem of 
manning new units of AES with VVER-1000 [reactor type] if a 
substantiated decision is made to stop the moratorium on their 
commissioning. 
  Based on the above arguments, Minpryrody considers the 
substantiation of the possibility of continuing the operation of 
the Chernobyl AES insufficient and the Supreme Soviet decision 
regarding decommissioning of the Chernobyl AES inexpedient. 
  ``UKRAYINSKA GAZETA''. By publishing a selection of 
documents related to continuing operation of the Chernobyl AES 
we are hoping to inform our readers about the Acting Prime 
Minister's response as to the position of both sides, as well as 
to receive a clear Minpryrody answer as to what to do with our 
AES and how to do it. 


