Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By a JORDAN TIMES staff reporter] </F>
  [Text] Amman--Senior officials Wednesday [5 January] 
dismissed as baseless an Israel Radio report that Jordan has 
banned the flow of agricultural produce from the Gaza Strip 
through the Kingdom. 
  "The report is totally baseless and unfounded," said Wahib 
Husayn, head of the agriculture section of the Department of 
Palestinian Affairs. 
  The flow of Palestinian agricultural produce through Jordan 
for exports continues unimpeded and "no such ban reported by the 
Israeli media has been adopted by Jordan," Mr. Husayn told the 
JORDAN TIMES. 
  Mr. Husayn as well as other officials described the report 
as 
Israeli propaganda aimed at creating trouble between Jordan and 
the Palestinians. 
  According to the Israeli report, the purported ban was 
imposed because Jordan was upset with the Palestine Liberation 
Organisation (PLO) for its lack of political coordination with 
the Kingdom. 
  Officials laughed off the report. 
  "It is another link in the chain of the Israeli-orchestrated 
campaign to poison the atmosphere between Jordan and the PLO and 
the Palestinians in the occupied territories," said a senior 
official, who preferred anonymity. 
  "There is a political decision to support the Palestinians 
living in the occupied territories to the best of Jordan's 
abilities, and there is no logic in suggesting that we are 
adopting moves contrary to that decision," added the official. 
  Ministry of Agriculture officials said routine permissions 
had already been issued, allowing fruits and vegetables from the 
Gaza Strip to enter Jordan in transit for export purposes 
between Jan. 1 and April 30, 1994, and that West Bank produce 
could enter Jordan without restraints except those in place to 
protect local produce. 
  As a rule, West Bank produce is allowed into Jordan for 
exports as well as to make up for the shortfalls in local 
production depending on season, the officials said. 
  There have been a few occasions when Jordan had no choice 
but 
to block the entry of certain products because Israelis tried to 
"sneak in" their products disguised as Palestinian products, the 
officials said, noting that allowing such items to enter Jordan 
would be in violation of the Arab boycott of Israel. 
  Jordan imports around $30 million worth of Palestinian 
products every year, including fruits and vegetables, meat 
products and olive oil as well as building stones, and does not 
impose any customs on them, considering the imports as internal 
trade. 
  Nearly 12,000 tonnes of fruits and vegetables from the West 
Bank and nearly 3,000 tonnes from the Gaza Strip entered Jordan 
during 1993, according to official figures. The bulk of the 
produce was destined for the Gulf states. 
  Israel does not allow the export of Jordanian products to 
the 
occupied territories. 
  Trade between Jordan and the occupied territories has been 
an 
issue under discussion at varying forums and stages among three 
main parties involved--Jordan, the Palestinians and Israel--in 
the 26- month-old Middle East peace process. 
  But to definite agreement has been reached since Israel has 
been trying to maintain the occupied territories as a protected 
market for its own products while seeking to impose ceilings, 
tariffs and levies on non-Israeli products, officials say. 

