Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Maria Helena Tachinardi] </F>
  [Text] The government is waiting for Congress to approve a 
bill to establish controls on the export and import of 
dual-purpose military goods (for civilian and military purposes 
and directly linked services) prior to negotiating our entry 
into the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), an 
organization created by a group of countries in 1987 to control 
the export of technologies and systems that can contribute to 
the proliferation of missiles capable of carrying nuclear 
warheads. 
  Draft bill 2530/92, which is included in the executive 
branch 
message 36/92, has already been approved by the Chamber of 
Deputies Economy Committee and has a preliminary favorable 
opinion of coordinator Fabio Feldmann, of the Consumer Defense, 
Environment, and Minorities Committee. His advisers state that 
the report will be finished by the end of the month and will be 
included the amendments proposed by the Navy Ministry last week. 
The draft was also sent to the National Defense, Science and 
Technology, and Constitution and Justice Committees. 
  Having been approved by two committees -- because the 
Foreign 
Ministry already has the approval of the Environment Committee 
-- the government will now ask for very urgent discussion of the 
bill using a procedure that sends the bill directly to the 
plenum without passing through other committees. 
  Diplomatic sources have stated that the government wants to 
increase Brazilian credibility before the international 
community. To become a member of the MTCR, Congress must first 
approve the bill controlling the export of dual-purpose 
materiel. Congress must also ratify the quadripartite nuclear 
safeguards agreement among Brazil, Argentina, the 
Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control (ABACC), 
and the amendments to the Tlatelolco Treaty that ban nuclear 
weapons in Latin America. The Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee postponed voting on both items last week. 
  A diplomatic source commented: "Brazil's participation in 
the 
MTCR comes under the nonproliferation policy." By approving the 
bill, Brazil will be prohibited from passing technologies 
received from industrialized countries to countries considered 
untrustworthy, such as Iraq, North Korea, and Libya. 
  The bill sent to the Chamber of Deputies in August 1992 
provides for the creation of an international importation 
certificate by which importers commit themselves to refrain from 
exporting certain goods without previous authorization of the 
appropriate Brazilian authorities. The bill also creates a 
delivery verification certificate to confirm the entry of the 
product into the importing country. The bill anticipates -- 
under the jurisdiction of the president of the Republic -- the 
creation of a permanent interministerial commission comprising 
representatives of various ministries. 
  The position of executive secretary will be filled by the 
Strategic Affairs Secretariat (SAE). 
  In his preliminary report, Fabio Feldmann (PSDB-SP) 
[Brazilian Social Democracy Party-Sao Paulo] says: "Military 
materiels, such as ammunition and explosives in any of their 
diverse forms, require strict controls on their handling, 
transport, and storage. [no closing quotation marks as published] 

