Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Buenos Aires, 2 Mar (NA) -- The 100th retirees' 
demonstration ended on 2 March with violent clashes between 
leftist group members and police who responded violently after 
being stoned for about 30 minutes, with an initial toll of about 
50 people injured, including more than 20 police officers. 
  The demonstration, which started outside Congress and ended 
outside Government House, was carried out during President 
Carlos Menem's official visit to Spain. 
  About 30 people were detained during the violent incidents 
and taken to various police precincts, especially Buenos Aires' 
2d Police Precinct. 
  While more than 20 police officers, including seven women, 
were treated at Churruca Hospital, UCR [Radical Civic Union] 
legislators reported that UCR members had been carried to the 
Ramos Mejia Hospital where they are convalescing from the 
injuries they suffered "during the repression." 
  The situation became very unclear and dramatic when a group 
of demonstrators reported that a 15-year-old suffered serious 
injuries in a clash with the forces of order. 
  Miguel Zarate, a Permanent Plenary of Retirees Organizations 
[Plenario Permanente de Organizaciones de Jubilados] leader and 
the only speaker at the demonstration, pointed out that there 
would be "thousands of Wednesdays more until this program that 
intends to ruin workers and retirees is defeated." 
  After championing the apportioned social security system 
"that was established more than 90 years ago," Zarate asked the 
political parties and the trade unions that supported the 
demonstration "to join the retirees in their struggle to defeat 
this economic program and abolish the private retirement system 
until the people's final victory is achieved." [passage omitted] 
  Earlier, a group of demonstrators had burned a U.S. flag at 
the intersection of Hipolito Yrigoyen and Balcarce Streets. 
  Afterward, a large number of blunt objects were hurled at 
police cordons deployed outside Government House. The cordons 
comprised about 200 police, including men and women. 
  During these violent and unclear incidents, Plaza Lavalle 
Retirees [Jubilados de Plaza Lavalle] leader Norma Pla threw a 
burning placard that had been lying on the ground near a 
barricade at police. 
  Burning placards, pieces of floor tiles, sticks, stones, and 
all kinds of blunt objects were hurled at the security forces, 
who tried to protect themselves from the attack. 
  For about 30 minutes, police deployed outside Government 
House resisted the attack while about 50 police officers ran to 
equip themselves with plastic shields. 
  Meanwhile, a group of police, wielding teargas launchers, 
was 
deployed against the demonstrators. 
  Journalists, some of whom were hit by the blunt objects 
hurled by the members of leftist parties, were caught in the 
middle of the clashes and sought shelter behind a Channel 13 
mobile unit. 
  In the middle of the incidents, U.S. Ambassador James Cheek 
entered Government House through the esplanade on Rivadavia 
Street. He was quickly surrounded by police to protect him from 
the blunt objects. 
  During the attack, five police officers, including a woman, 
were hit by the blunt objects hurled by the demonstrators and 
collapsed. 
  Meanwhile, people were running all over the square, trying 
to 
escape from the incidents and from the effect of the tear gas 
that began to fall on the troublemakers. 
  With their eyes covered with handkerchiefs, sweaters, and 
T-shirts, those who caused the incidents constantly charged 
police to hurl the blunt objects with more violence. 
  When the group that caused the disturbances began to leave 
Government House, the police forces unleashed a violent 
repression, charging with nightsticks and tear gas against the 
demonstrators who were dispersed in every direction. 
  Under intense teargas fire, police pursued the demonstrators 
on Defensa Street until reaching Hipolito Yrigoyen Street, where 
several demonstrators were detained. [passage omitted] 

