BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Trade With Eastern Europe Continues </F>
To Boom"] 
  [Text] Vienna -- The first quarter of 1994 saw a further 
boom in Austria's trade with Eastern Europe. This was due to 
the economic upswing in Austria and in several other Western 
countries, as well as the economic recovery in some of Austria's 
major trading partners in the East, statistics by the Austrian 
East and South East Europe Institute indicate. 
  For the first time since the mid-1980s, imports from Eastern 
Europe showed a bigger increase than exports, the study says. 
Over the first quarter of 1993, imports rose by 18.5 percent, 
to 11.2 billion Austrian schillings, while exports increased by 
14.3 percent, to 15.2 billion schillings. This also reflects 
the results of the EFTA [European Free Trade Association] 
agreements with Hungary and Poland that came into force in 
autumn last year. These agreements are "asymmetrical," which 
means that the EFTA countries reduce their trade barriers more 
quickly than the Eastern neighbors. In spite of imports picking 
up, the quarterly figures show a new 4 billion schilling record 
surplus in exports. 
  Bilateral trade with Slovakia saw the biggest growth rates. 
Slovakia imported 41 percent more in Austrian products while 
increasing its exports to Austria by 79.5 percent. This also 
means a shift in Austrian trade with the successor states of 
former Czechoslovakia: While in the first quarter of 1993, 
Slovakia accounted for only 22.3 percent of Austrian exports to 
former Czechoslovakia, the figure rose to 25.8 percent this year. 
  Trade with Hungary, Austria's most important trading partner 
in the East, indicates enormous growth rates, following a slight 
decrease in 1993 (exports plus 15.1 percent, imports plus 12.4 
percent). Trade with the Czech Republic continued to expand. 
  The increase in trade with Slovenia was smaller than last 
year (exports plus 8.1 percent, imports plus 10 percent), but 
trade with Croatia, especially exports, continued to increase 
significantly (plus 41.2 percent). Imports from Croatia went up 
by only 16.5 percent. 
  For the first time since the late 1980s, Austrian trade with 
the successor states of the former Soviet Union saw a 
stimulation. Exports to Russia grew by 27.8 percent, exports to 
the CIS went up by 19.7 percent. Total imports from Russia and 
the CIS increased by 22.7 percent. 

