Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Viktor Guskov, general director of the </F>
Krasnoyarskugol Coal Company, by Vitaliy Pyrkh, RABOCHAYA 
TRIBUNA correspondent: "We Are Not Heroes: Who Will Keep Russia 
Warm, When It Loses Its Coal Industry?"; Krasnoyarsk, date not 
given] 
  [Text] At one time, KATEK [Kansk-Achinsk Fuel-Energy 
Complex] was included among the five most prestigious new 
construction projects in the era of developed socialism. In the 
bulky monograph, "Energeticheskiye resursy SSSR" [USSR Energy 
Resources], published in 1968, a group of the country's eminent 
coal specialists state, for example, that at the mighty coal 
beds of the Kansk-Achinsk basin in Krasnoyarsk Kray and Kemerovo 
Oblast (Itagskiy Rayon), from the facilities of the first 
section alone, one could build eight to ten unique open-pit coal 
mines, with a total yearly fuel extraction of 330-350 million 
tonnes. 
  Alas, the future became the present, and KATEK, which 
had staggered the imagination with its scale, is today a 
disaster area. The miners of the Borodino Open Pit Coal Mine, 
reduced to despair, have stopped shipping fuel to consumers 
located outside the boundaries of Krasnoyarsk Kray who cannot 
settle with them for the supplies already made, although they 
are so far restraining from the strikes to which all their 
neighbors -- the miners of the Kuzbass -- are persistently 
urging them. 
  Our correspondent interviews Viktor Guskov, general 
director of the Krasnoyarskugol Coal Company, about the problems 
that have formed in KATEK's work collectives. 
  [Pyrkh] Viktor Aleksandrovich, our newspaper reported the 
results of the recent meeting of the minister of the Coal 
Industry and Russian power engineer, Yuriy Shefranik, with the 
Kuzbass coal miners in Kemerovo. Did the talk that took place 
satisfy you? 
  [Guskov] Yes and no. It is a good thing that we are 
beginning 
to realize that, as they say, there is no longer anywhere to go, 
that the next thing is a final, complete breakdown. Practical 
experience shows, though: another month or two, and they will 
forget about the miners. Until next fall. What is put off until 
tomorrow, however, will cost much more. 
  [Pyrkh] Including at KATEK? 
  [Guskov] Well, in general, there is special talk about 
KATEK. 
For several years, we have been trying to convince the 
government of the need to pass a special decree on it. Does 
Russia need it or not? If only Krasnoyarsk Kray needs KATEK, 
then just the coal mine in Borodino will be enough for all our 
power engineers, together with the rank-and-file consumers. If 
not.... They tell us: we do not know how to sort things out with 
the budget workers, and you and your KATEK.... After all, 
though, industry has not yet started an upswing, and one cannot 
"sort things out" with any budget workers. This is an axiom. 
  [Pyrkh] But perhaps this is not really the time, Viktor 
Aleksandrovich? There is this situation in the country, and here 
-- a whole decree, just as in the old days.... Where will the 
money and the material resources come from? 
  [Guskov] We are not insisting on the decree which might have 
been discussed three or four years ago. Let us "dig out" of it 
the urgent problems which must be solved this year, or at the 
most, next year, for our very minimum needs. So that we can buy 
the necessary equipment and spare parts. Otherwise, a terrible 
sobering up awaits us tomorrow: whisk away the "sneakers" from 
today's shop shelves -- and what remains on them? We must, 
finally, solve the main problem: how much and what kind of coal 
must be extracted in the country? That is, we need an 
all-Russian fuel-energy program. 
  [Pyrkh] To put it another way -- Gosplan [State Planning 
Committee]? Is this what you have in mind? 
  [Guskov] Give me the name of just one country in the world 
where the state would give up solving its energy problems? Last 
year, for example, we reduced the volumes of fuel extracted in 
the region by one-third, and they are dropping in Russia too. Is 
this good or bad? 
  Only recently, 420 million tonnes were extracted in Russia, 
and now they are saying that 315 million is enough. According to 
these calculations, the gradual closure of unprofitable mines 
and those operating at a loss is planned. The country's 
production volumes are falling, however, and this means that the 
need for coal is lessening as well. Some people have already 
begun to say that 240 million tonnes of fuel is quite enough for 
Russia! Whether this is so or not, I don't know, but I do know 
something else. If it is so, then that means that the number of 
mines being closed (which ones?) should be much greater. Can we 
stand such social shocks? Where will we get fuel when Russian 
industry calls for it? 
  [Pyrkh] After all, though, the reformers have left the 
solutions to these problems to those watching the market. They 
say, it will arrange everything by locations.... 
  [Guskov] If only it were like that. A coal mine is not a 
bicycle: if you feel like going faster -- you work the pedals 
faster.... Our reformers did the stupidest thing when they 
"froze" prices for coal and other power resources. The prices 
for everything jumped sky-high, and as far back as last summer 
we sold our coal at 350 rubles [R] per tonne. Only now is this 
money coming back to us, but what can you buy for it? A loaf of 
bread, or the poorest sort of flour.... 
  The question is, who needed to wreck the sector on which the 
well-being of any economy is based? Today KATEK is like a fairy 
tale prince sitting on the richest coal deposit in the world 
with his hand outstretched. We are owed R110 billion, and of 
them, R70 billion for the Borodino coal mine alone. But while 
the Borodino workers have R50 billion -- these are the debts of 
the power engineers -- the rest of KATEK will have less than R2 
billion for their share. They tell us: you cannot pay for fuel, 
draw up a promissory note and take the property as security. 
Whose property? The settlement school's? The rayon hospital's? 
  [Pyrkh] Really, it is a closed circle -- coal mining drops, 
and there is nothing with which to pay for it.... 
  [Guskov] In general, the government has created conditions 
for us in which the one who does the best work finds itself with 
the biggest hitch. Having divided the enterprises of the coal 
industry up into four groups -- those who do not need state 
support, those who need it to a negligible degree, etc., it has 
designed a peculiar mortar shell, particularly for those who 
just recently looked at tomorrow with confidence. 
  Well, for instance, the basin near Moscow, the Tulaugol 
Association -- the production cost of fuel there is R10,000. Our 
cost is of a lower order.... This is understandable. KATEK is a 
highly productive mine, equipped with the most modern equipment, 
the old mines are far below it.... Look how things turn out, 
though: you sell the Tulaks your coal, at the production cost 
that has formed -- their basin would be paralyzed tomorrow. They 
sell it for R4,000, or R3,200 a tonne. The question is: whose 
coal will the consumer buy? 
  [Pyrkh] Surely from us? 
  [Guskov] Of course not! By using the railroad tariffs as a 
slip knot, you can drive any competitor into a corner. Already, 
foreign fuel --from Poland, from Germany -- is cheaper than ours 
in the central regions of the country. Be it KATEK's or coal 
from the Kuzbass. The railroad tariffs reach 90 percent of the 
price, and a 10-percent share is left for the coal. It will soon 
be cheaper to transport coal to eastern Russia from Australia or 
Indonesia.... 
  [Pyrkh] As far as I know, it is already close to this in the 
Maritime area, although just recently they were using Siberian 
coal.... 
  [Guskov] Market estimates came up with this: it is a little 
cheaper to buy. Until just recently, the miners of the Maritime 
area sold their fuel at R500 a tonne, a ridiculous price, and 
the consumer, even if he did not have the physical possibility 
of buying it, sat and waited for his turn. Why should he overpay 
for our coal, bearing in mind the fantastic expense of railroad 
transport, when his own was so cheap? We said: you raise the 
prices, you'll get nothing for your pains.... That's what 
happened. 
  The market in general is a cruel instrument, you have to use 
it, like a scalpel, with great care. Here is just one example: 
If you "throw away" one million tonnes of fuel at the mines, you 
have to find jobs for a minimum of 2,000 persons. A complicated 
and expensive pursuit, isn't it? A million tonnes of extraction 
at an open pit coal mine -- that is "only" a few dozen workers. 
Tempting? 
  There is also a temptation here to shift coal extraction 
where it is most profitable for the state. I said as much to the 
minister at a recent conference: it is more profitable for us to 
pay the Tulaks a wage, if only to keep them from extracting 
coal. Who needs anything this expansive? Indeed, the best thing 
is to stop now -- why "drive off" KATEK? We are now spending 
R3,500 for every tonne of coal, and these rubles won't come 
back. Can one work like this? 
  [Pyrkh] After all, though, closing the mines causes a 
tremendous social problem, and conflicts, shocks and storms are 
inevitable. Remember Margaret Thatcher, when, one-and-a-half 
decades ago, she thought up the idea of closing 20 unprofitable 
mines in the British Isles -- what a fuss was made over that! I 
myself transferred over some money in support of the striking 
miners.... 
  [Guskov] And how did it end? The mines were shut down all 
the 
same, although the people, of course were not made to "walk the 
plank." This is what state support, its help constitutes -- not 
chasing into a corner enterprises that do good work, chasing 
them for the sake of having everyone identically good or 
identically bad. 
  How is it, for example, in America? An enterprise was 
closed, 
people were out of work, moved from their areas and went to a 
different state, to a different region of the country. In our 
country? People will die from hunger, but are afraid to make a 
move, even to a neighboring area, 20 or 30 kilometers from their 
own home. Why? Probably because no one is waiting for them 
there. Not because they will have a falling-down, even a 
thatched roof over their head. 
  This is what has to be dealt with, what funds have to 
directed to, not supporting production facilities that are 
operating at a loss or unprofitable! Let the market decide: who 
is "closer" to it -- Vorkuta or KATEK.... 
  [Pyrkh] It is difficult to agree with this, Viktor 
Aleksandrovich. Of course, Vorkuta is not KATEK, but after all, 
the coal there is not like ours -- true black gold, with no 
quotation marks at all. One can mix up with earth, for example, 
the fuel extracted at the northernmost mine of the Vorkutaugol 
Association, Khalmer-Yu, and excellent coke will still be 
obtained. But then a report appeared that the mine is also 
getting ready to close.... It is a pity. Is Russia not leaving 
the North, the Far East? Who will go there? 
  [Guskov] Those same Vorkuta workers calculated: the state 
would have to spend much more capital to find work for the 
Khalmer-Yu miners than is needed to support the mines.... 
  I agree with you, though: The North is a special matter, 
there is no need to hurry with it. Moreover, Vorkuta has already 
spoken its weighty piece once, when the Germans occupied the 
Donbass. Leningrad could not have held out without Arctic fuel. 
  The problem lies in something else: the drop in fuel 
extraction during the year must not be renewed. I know from 
experience: when troubles arise at the mine, what is given up 
first of all? Preparatory work. Then it takes five to seven 
years to "gather our breath," and arrive at the position we had 
already achieved. Hence, the tremendous importance of our KATEK 
for the Russian economy. 
  Right now KATEK has production capacities for a yearly 
extraction of 60 million tonnes of coal, and indeed we can 
extract 70 million in all, and moreover, we don't ask the state 
for a single excavator. Just don't hinder our work! 
  This unique basin must be kept for Russia if we, of course, 
plan to live and not die. Well, this muddle lasts for another 
year, and then another, and then, when the plants start 
operating, where does the state count on getting coal? In about 
five years there will be no place to get it, except at KATEK, 
and the Kuzbass. 
  [Pyrkh] Even considering the geographic situation? 
  [Guskov] What situation? It is worth it for the railroad 
workers, without changing their income, to establish 
differentiated charges for transport -- one, let us say, for 
coal miners, another -- for alcohol producers, various 
manufactured goods, etc. -- and all of industry will breathe a 
sigh of relief. It will start working to the extent of the 
forces it has left. 
  For how could we not relate to our past, how could we not 
curse it, and to use a classic expression, there is nowhere to 
go. It is fuel, it is coal, that is the "bread of industry," 
without which the entire economy of the country will be on 
starvation rations. Without KATEK, Russia is no longer in a 
position to support itself. 

