Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Cairo, 17 Nov (MENA)--Ambassador Hajar 
al-Islambuli, director of the Foreign Ministry's Economic 
Affairs Department and head of Egypt's delegation to the 
Environment Committee of the Middle East multilateral 
negotiations, has affirmed that Egypt is determined to raise the 
issue of pollution sources at the environment talks, 
particularly the pollution caused by nuclear waste. 
  Ambassador al-Islambuli held a joint news conference late 
last night with the delegation heads of the two countries 
sponsoring the peace conference--the United States and 
Russia--and the head of the Japanese delegation. Japan is 
sponsoring the environment group's work. 
  She said Egypt has focused light on nuclear pollution and on 
the need for all the region's countries to cooperate. 
  Israel, the United States, and Russia objected to the 
Egyptian proposal to place pollution caused by nuclear waste on 
the agenda of the environment working group and requested that 
the issue be referred to the Arms Control Committee. 
  In light of Egypt's insistence on its position and the Arab 
countries' support for the Egyptian stance, the committee 
decided to refer the issue to the advisory committee that 
supervises the multilateral negotiations' five groups. [passage 
omitted] 
  The head of the U.S. delegation said the participating 
delegations have agreed to set up emergency centers at the Gulf 
of Aqaba to combat environment pollution and desertification in 
the region. He added that the World Bank and Japan showed a 
readiness to contribute to these projects. 
  The head of the Japanese delegation said his country 
allocated $530,000 for the purpose. [passage omitted] 
  The head of the Japanese delegation--Japan chairs the 
environment working group--added that the Palestinian and 
Israeli delegations agreed to set up administrative structures 
to deal with environmental affairs in the occupied territories. 
He noted that the formation of such structures is stipulated in 
the Palestinian-Israeli Declaration of Principles signed in 
Washington on 13 September. 
  He said the participating delegations discussed a proposal 
to 
hold another meeting in Cairo to address the aspects of what is 
called the constitution on dealing with environmental issues. 
He added that proposals were put forward to set up a data bank 
in the Gaza Strip to help exchange information with environment 
centers and other proposals to set up an emergency center to 
combat pollution in Aqaba. He noted that Italy proposed a 
seminar on solid waste in the region and means to combat 
pollution. [passage omitted] 
  Ambassador al-Islambuli said Egypt is committed to 
continuous 
work and cooperation with all the parties to the peace process 
and that this commitment is very clear on every track of the 
negotiations. 
  She said Egypt could raise the issue of dealing with marine 
pollution in the East Mediterranean, an issue supported by the 
EC, which proposed projects in this respect and showed a 
willingness to finance them. 
  On Syria and Lebanon's boycott of the multilateral talks, 
the 
head of the Russian delegation expressed the hope that the two 
countries would join the talks soon. 
  Commenting on this point, the head of the U.S. delegation 
said he believes that the multilateral talks complement what 
takes place on bilateral tracks and expressed the hope that 
Syria and Lebanon will soon join these negotiations. 

