BFN 
<F P=106> ["Rules for Implementation of the 'Mineral Resources Law of </F>
the People's Republic of China'(`Rules')"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 30 Mar (XINHUA) -- Chapter I. General 
Principles 
  Article 1. These Rules have been formulated in accordance 
with relevant provisions of the "Mineral Resources Law of the 
People's Republic of China." 
  Article 2. Mineral resources, formed by geological 
reactions, are natural solid, liquefied, or gas resources with 
utility value. 
  Various ores and categories of mineral resources have been 
listed under the "Rules" "Detailed Catalogue on Various Mineral 
Resources." Before announcing newly discovered minerals, 
relevant departments in charge of geology and mineral resources 
under the State Council shall obtain the State Council's 
approval. 
  Article 3. Mineral resources belong to the state. The 
state's ownership over mineral resource deposited underground or 
on land remains unchanged no matter who has the ownership or 
land-use rights of the land where the mineral resources are 
deposited. 
  The State Council shall execute ownership of mineral 
resources on the state's behalf. The State Council shall 
entrust relevant departments in charge of geology and mineral 
resources under the State Council to administer unified 
management in allocating mineral resources across China. 
  Article 4. People, who prospect or extract mineral resources 
within PRC territory and other waters under its jurisdiction, 
must abide by the "Mineral Resources Law of the People's 
Republic of China" (hereafter referred to as the "Mineral 
Resources Law") and these "Rules." 
  Article 5. The state shall implement a system whereby 
permits are required to prospect or extract mineral resources. 
To prospect mineral resources in accordance with the relevant 
provisions, people must apply for, register, and obtain a permit 
and the right to do so. To extract mineral resources in 
accordance with the relevant provisions, people must apply for, 
register, and obtain a permit and the right to do so. 
  Zones or plots demarcated along latitudinal and longitudinal 
lines shall be the basic units for prospecting or extracting 
mineral resources. Relevant departments in charge of geology 
and mineral resources under the State Council shall formulate 
the specific provisions. 
  Article 6. Meanings of the following terms listed in the 
"Mineral Resources Law" and these "Rules": 
  The right to prospect mineral resources means a permit and 
the right to prospect mineral resources has been obtained in 
accordance with the relevant provisions. Units or individuals 
acquiring a permit to prospect mineral resources are termed as 
people with prospecting rights. 
  The right to extract mineral resources means a permit and 
the 
right to extract mineral resources and mineral products has been 
obtained in accordance with the relevant provisions. Units or 
individuals acquiring a permit to extract them are termed people 
with mining rights. 
  Specific minerals that are extracted under protective state 
regulations are minerals that are specified by the State Council 
-- based on the requirements of facilitating national economic 
construction and developing high-technology, and on their 
scarcity and value, and that are extracted with the approval of 
relevant State Council departments in accordance with state 
plans. 
  State-designated mining zones are mineral 
resource-distribution zones demarcated by the state -- based on 
given construction plans and mineral resources programs -- in an 
effort to develop large and medium mines. 
  Mining zones that are of key importance to the national 
economy are mineral resource-preserve zones that are specified 
by the state in an effort to develop the national economy, that 
are not yet incorporated into national construction programs, 
and that have abundant and quality deposits and good prospects 
for development. 
  Article 7. The state allows foreign companies, enterprises, 
and other economic organizations and individuals to prospect or 
extract mineral resources within PRC territory and other waters 
under its jurisdiction in accordance with relevant PRC laws and 
administrative regulations. 
  Article 8. The authority in charge of geology and mineral 
resources under the State Council shall be responsible for 
overseeing and managing the exploration and extraction of 
mineral resources throughout the country. Relevant competent 
departments under the State Council shall share the work 
according to their functions delineated by the State Council, 
and assist the authority in charge of geology and mineral 
resources under the State Council in overseeing and managing the 
exploration and extraction of mineral resources. 
  Departments in charge of geology and mineral resources under 
provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal people's 
governments shall be responsible for overseeing and managing the 
exploration and extraction of mineral resources in their 
administrative divisions. Relevant departments under provincial, 
autonomous regional, and municipal people's governments shall 
assist the departments in charge of geology and mineral 
resources at corresponding levels in overseeing and managing the 
exploration and extraction of mineral resources. 
  The people's governments of cities which have been divided 
into districts, autonomous prefectural people's governments, and 
county- level people's governments, as well as their departments 
in charge of mineral resources, shall oversee and manage, in 
accordance with the law, state-owned mining enterprises set up 
with the approval of people's governments at corresponding 
levels, as well as collectively owned mining enterprises, 
privately run mining enterprises, individual miners, and units 
and individuals carrying out prospecting work in their 
administrative divisions. They shall protect the legitimate 
rights and interests of holders of prospecting and mining rights. 
  Departments in charge of geology and mineral resources at 
higher levels have the right to modify or nullify the illegal or 
inappropriate actions of their counterparts at lower levels in 
managing and administering the exploration and extraction of 
mineral resources. 
<H5>  Chapter II. Registration for the Exploration of Mineral </H5>
Resources, and Examination and Approval of Mining Applications 
  Article 9. In prospecting for mineral resources, matters 
relating to applications, examination and approval, and the 
registration of prospecting activities shall be handled in 
accordance with relevant State Council provisions on the 
registration and management of activities in prospecting for 
mineral resources. 
  In prospecting for specific types of minerals, matters 
relating to applications, examination and approval, and the 
registration of prospecting activities shall be handled in 
accordance with relevant State Council provisions. 
  Article 10. In extracting mineral resources, state-owned 
mining enterprises shall attend to matters pertaining to 
applications, examination and approval, and mining registration 
in accordance with State Council provisions on mining 
registration and management. In attending to these same matters 
with regard to the extraction of minerals in state-planned 
mining areas and in mining areas of great value to the national 
economy, as well as the extraction of specific types of minerals 
prescribed by the state for protective mining, ratification 
documents issued by relevant competent departments under the 
State Council shall be produced. 
  In extracting specific types of minerals, matters pertaining 
to application, examination and approval, and mining 
registration shall be handled in accordance with relevant State 
Council provisions. 
  Article 11. Aside from the terms specified by relevant laws 
and regulations, the following conditions shall exist for the 
establishment of state-owned mining enterprises: 
  (1) Mineral prospecting reports for use in mining 
construction; 
  (2) reports on feasibility studies on mining construction 
projects (including resource utilization schemes and mining 
environmental impact reports); 
  (3) specific limits of mining areas and mining operations; 
  (4) mining designs; and 
  (5) relevant production and technogical conditions. 
  The State Council and its relevant competent departments, as 
well as provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal people's 
governments, shall grant approval only after evaluating the 
applications for setting up state-owned mining enterprises 
against the conditions mentioned in the preceding paragraph, and 
after determining that those conditions have been met, in 
accordance with state provisions on fixed assets investment and 
management. 
  Article 12. Applications for setting up collectively owned 
mining enterprises, privately run mining enterprises, and 
individual mining operations shall be examined and approved, and 
the mining activities registered with the authorities, in 
accordance with relevant provincial, autonomous regional, and 
municipal provisions. 
  Article 13. Aside from the conditions specified by 
relevant laws and regulations, applications for setting up 
collectively owned mining enterprises or privately run mining 
enterprises shall meet the following conditions: 
  (1) Mineral prospecting data relevant to the operational 
scale of mines to be built; 
  (2) approved and undisputed limits of mining areas; 
  (3) capital, equipment, and technical personnel relevant to 
the scale of mines to be built; 
  (4) reports on feasible studies and mining design and 
operation plans relevant to the scale of mines to be built and 
in line with the state's industrial policy and technical 
standards; and 
  (5) mine directors' rudimentary knowledge on mining 
production, safety of production, and environmental protection. 
  Article 14. Applications for individual mining operations 
shall meet the following conditions: 
  (1) approved and undisputed limits of mining areas; 
  (2) capital, equipment, and technical personnel relevant to 
the scale of minds to be built; 
  (3) mineral prospecting data and approved operational plans; 
and 
  (4) necessary conditions for safe production and 
environmental protection measures. 
<H5>  Chapter III. Prospecting of Mineral Resources </H5>
  Article 15. The state shall work out unified plans for 
prospecting of mineral resources. Medium and long-range plans 
for prospecting mineral resources nationwide shall be mapped out 
under the guidance of the State Council department in charge of 
planning and by the department in charge of geology and mineral 
resources in accordance with the medium and long-range plans for 
national economic and social development. 
  National and provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal 
annual plans for prospecting mineral resources shall be mapped 
out respectively by the State Council's department and the 
provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal people's 
government departments in charge of geology and mineral 
resources in coordination with the relevant departments and in 
accordance with national medium and long-range mineral resources 
prospecting plans; and shall be implemented after approved by 
the planning department of the people's government at the 
corresponding level. 
  Where laws provide separate stipulations for the authority 
to 
review and approve prospecting plans, they shall be formulated 
according to the relevant laws. 
  Article 16. Holders of prospecting rights shall be entitled 
to the following rights: 
  (1) Carrying out prospecting work within the areas, time 
frame, and targets prescribed by prospecting licenses; 
  (2) erecting power and water supply and communications lines 
within prospecting areas and their peripheral areas which, 
however, shall not interfere with or cripple the existing power 
and water supply facilities and communications lines; 
  (3) free passage of prospecting areas and their peripheral 
areas; 
  (4) temporary use of land to meet operational needs; 
  (5) priority of prospecting rights to newly discovered 
mineral ores in prospecting areas; 
  (6) priority in mining rights to mineral resources in 
prospecting areas; and 
  (7) self-marketing of mineral products recycled from 
approved 
prospecting designs, except for those to be purchased uniformly 
by units designated by the State Council. 
  When holders of prospecting rights exercise the rights 
listed 
in the preceding paragraphs, they should observe stipulations of 
relevant laws and regulations requiring approval or completion 
of other formalities to do so. 
  Article 17. Holders of prospecting rights shall perform 
the following obligations: 
  (1) carrying out work within the prescribed time frame, and 
completing prospecting work within the time frame prescribed by 
prospecting licenses; 
  (2) reporting to organs in charge of prospecting 
registration 
and management on progress in carrying out prospecting work; 
  (3) carrying out work according to the designs of 
prospecting 
projects and not engaging in unauthorized mining activities; 
  (4) prospecting for and evaluating paragenetic and 
associated 
mineral resources in an all-around manner while ascertaining the 
major types of minerals; 
  (5) preparing reports on prospecting for mineral resources 
and submitting them to relevant departments for examination and 
approval; 
  (6) collecting and forwarding archival material on 
achievements in prospecting for mineral resources pursuant to 
relevant State Council provisions; 
  (7) abiding by the provisions on labor safety, land 
reclamation, and environmental protection in relevant laws and 
regulations; and 
  (8) promptly sealing off or filling in pits and shafts left 
over from mining operations, or taking other measures to 
eliminate latent hazards, upon completing prospecting operations. 
  Article 18. Holders of prospecting rights may extract 
complex mineral deposits which meet the state requirements for 
simultaneous exploration and extraction; however, they shall 
submit feasibility studies to the departments that issued the 
prospecting licenses in the first place, departments in charge 
of examining and approving mineral reserves, and departments in 
charge of prospecting projects. Upon examination and approval by 
those departments, they shall register their mining operations 
in accordance with the provisions in State Council regulations 
on mining registration and management. 
  Article 19. Reports on prospecting for mineral resources 
shall be examined and approved as follows: 
  (1) The State Council organ in charge of examining and 
approving mineral reserves shall examine and approve prospecting 
reports on important, large mineral deposits for use in mining 
construction, as well as prospecting reports on underground 
water for use in large-scale construction projects on land 
around water sources. 
  (2) Provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal organs in 
charge of examining and approving mineral reserves shall examine 
and approve prospecting reports on large, medium, and small 
common mineral deposits for use in mining construction, as well 
as prospecting reports on underground water for use in medium 
and small-scale construction projects on land around water 
sources. 
  Organs in charge of examining and approving mineral reserves 
and departments in charge of prospecting units shall issue 
written official replies within six months of receiving reports 
on prospecting for mineral resources. 
  Article 20. Reports on prospecting for mineral resources, as 
well as other valuable prospecting data, may be used in return 
for compensation in accordance with relevant State Council 
provisions. 
  Article 21. Where holders of prospecting rights damage the 
property of other people during the process of prospecting after 
securing temporary land-use rights, they shall make reparations 
as follows: 
  (1) Where arable land is damaged, they shall make 
reparations 
each year, to be calculated according to average local market 
prices at the time of compensation based on the average annual 
output of the damaged areas during the first three years; they 
shall also be responsible for restoring the land's productive 
conditions and shall return the land without delay. 
  (2) Where pastures in pastoral areas are damaged, they shall 
make reparations each year in accordance with the provisions in 
the preceding paragraph, shall be responsible for restoring 
vegetation on the pastures, and shall return the pastures 
without delay. 
  (3) Where farm and cash crops on arable land are damaged, 
they shall make reparations, to be calculated according to 
average local market prices at the time of compensation based on 
the average annual output of the damaged areas during the first 
three years. 
  (4) Where bamboo groves are damaged, they shall make 
reparations on a shoot-by-shoot basis, to be calculated 
according to average local market prices at the time of 
compensation based on the number of bamboo shoots actually 
damaged. 
  (5) Where land attachments are damaged, they shall make due 
reparations according to local market prices at the time of 
compensation based on the degree of actual damage. 
  Article 22. In the event prospecting is carried out on a 
barren mountain, uncultivated slope, wasteland, desert, beach, 
floodland, lakeside, or seaside without any crops or other 
attached objects, the holder of prospecting rights need not pay 
any compensation. Nevertheless, the prospecting operations 
shall not obstruct such activities as shipping, irrigation, and 
flood prevention, or damage facilities for such activities. 
Measures shall be taken after the completion of prospecting 
operations to prevent soil erosion and protect the ecological 
environment. 
  Article 23. Any disputes between holders of prospecting 
rights over prospecting boundaries shall be settled by the 
parties involved through consultation; in the absence of a 
settlement through consultation, a ruling shall be given by the 
department in charge of geology and mineral resources of the 
provincial, autonomous regional, or municipal government having 
jurisdiction over the area of prospecting operations. In the 
absence of a settlement through consultation between the 
prospecting parties involved, a dispute over a prospecting area 
extending across provincial, autonomous regional, or municipal 
borders shall be settled through consultations between the 
provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal governments 
concerned; and shall be subject to a ruling by the State Council 
department in charge of geology and mineral resources if the 
provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal governments 
should also fail to settle the dispute through consultations. 
Any boundary disputes involving specially designated minerals 
shall be subject to a ruling by a relevant competent department 
authorized by the State Council in the absence of a settlement 
through consultations between the parties concerned. 
<H5>  Chapter IV. Exploitation of Mineral Resources </H5>
  Article 24. In distributing, exploiting, and utilizing 
mineral resources across the country, both immediate and 
long-term and both central and local interests shall be taken 
into consideration, with unified planning, effective 
preservation, rational extraction, and comprehensive utilization 
being carried out. 
  Article 25. The State Council department in charge of 
geology and mineral resources shall, under the guidance of the 
State Council department in charge of planning and 
administration and in accordance with the medium- and long-term 
programs for national economic and social development, organize 
relevant competent departments of the State Council as well as 
the provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal people's 
governments to draw up a national mineral resources program to 
be implemented upon approval by the State Council. 
  The national mineral resources program shall provide a 
unified plan for distributing mineral resources across the 
country and a rational delimitation of the jurisdiction with 
which the central authorities and the provincial, autonomous 
regional, and municipal people's governments can examine and 
approve, or carry out the exploitation of mineral resources. 
  Article 26. The mineral resources exploitation program means 
a program that provides unified planning for the layout of 
exploitation and development of mining areas. 
  The mineral resources exploitation program shall be divided 
into the sectoral exploitation program and the regional 
exploitation program. 
  The sectoral mineral resources exploitation program shall be 
drawn up and implemented by relevant competent departments of 
the State Council based on the mineral resources assigned to the 
respective departments under the national mineral resources 
program. 
  The regional mineral resources exploitation program shall be 
drawn up and implemented by the provincial, autonomous regional, 
and municipal people's governments based on the mineral 
resources assigned to the respective provinces, autonomous 
regions, or municipalities under the national mineral resources 
program. These governments shall also make unified plans to 
rationally delimit the jurisdiction with which the people's 
governments at the provincial, city, and county levels can 
examine and approve, or carry out the exploitation of mineral 
resources. 
  The sectoral and regional mineral resources exploitation 
programs shall be reported and submitted to the State Council 
departments in charge of planning and administration and of 
geology and mineral resources for the record. 
  The State Council departments in charge of planning and 
administration and of geology and mineral resources shall 
correct any sectoral exploitation programs or regional 
exploitation programs that are inconsistent with the national 
mineral resources program. 
  Article 27. To establish, change, or revoke the status of 
a state-designated mining zone or a mining zone of key 
importance to the national economy, relevant State Council 
departments shall make a proposal with detailed reports on its 
mineral resources and verifying data and information. After 
examining and approving the proposal, departments in charge of 
planning administration and mineral resources under the State 
Council shall jointly inform, in writing, the relevant 
county-level people's government. Within 30 days of receipt of 
the notice, the county-level people's government shall make a 
public announcement and file a report with the departments in 
charge of planning administration and mineral resources under 
the State Council. 
  Article 28. To certify or revoke the status of a specific 
types of minerals that are extracted under protective state 
regulations, relevant State Council departments shall make a 
proposal with verifying data and information. After examining 
and accepting the proposal, departments in charge of planning 
administration and mineral resources under the State Council 
shall make recommendations to the State Council for approval. 
  Article 29. Before extracting mineral resources, mining 
units or individuals should entrust units that have relevant 
mining designs to make reports on feasibility studies and 
designs. When extracting fragmentary and scattered mineral 
resources and sand, stones, and clay as construction materials, 
extracting units need not make reports on feasibility studies 
and designs. However, they should have extracting plans and 
environmental protection measures. 
  Mining designs must be formulated in accordance with 
design-tasks manuals, and should adopt rational mining 
procedures and methods and mineral-selection technology. 
  Mining designs must be examined and approved in accordance 
with relevant state regulations. Mining operations shall not 
begin, unless the mining designs are approved. 
  Article 30. People with mining rights have the following 
rights: 
  1. They may conduct mining activities during the period and 
within the mining area stipulated in the mining permit. 
  2. Unless otherwise stipulated in State Council provisions 
that the mineral products are under specific units' planned 
purchasing schemes, they may sell the mineral products on their 
own. 
  3. They may construct production and living facilities 
within the mining area that are required for mining operations. 
  4. Based on their production needs, they may obtain land-use 
rights in accordance with the law. 
  5. They may enjoy other rights as stipulated in relevant 
laws and regulations. 
  If relevant laws and regulations stipulate that before 
exercising their rights listed in Section 5 of Article 29, 
people with mining rights should obtain prior approval or carry 
out other procedures, they should proceed according to the 
provisions of relevant laws and regulations. 
  Article 31. People with mining rights have the following 
obligations: 
  1. They should develop the mines or conduct mining 
activities during the stipulated period. 
  2. They should effectively protect, rationally extract, and 
comprehensively utilize mineral resources. 
  3. They should pay resource tax and mineral rights fees 
according to the law. 
  4. They should uphold relevant state laws and regulations on 
workers' safety, water and soil conservation, reclamation of 
mining land under cultivation, and environmental protection. 
  5. They should accept the supervision and administration of 
departments in charge of geology and mineral resources and other 
relevant departments, and should submit reports, according to 
relevant provisions, on their stored mineral products and on 
developing and utilizing mineral resources. 
  Article 32. Where holders of mining rights discontinue 
mining operations without completing the extraction of mineral 
resources upon the expiration of or within the periods of 
validity stipulated in mining licenses, they must take measures 
to keep the resources in exploitable conditions, and complete 
the following tasks before stopping the operations: 
  (1) preparing reports on the current status of mining, as 
well as field prospecting drawings; 
  (2) reporting depleted reserves to the authorities for 
deletion from official records in accordance with relevant 
provisions; and 
  (3) actually completing work on labor safety, water and soil 
conservation, land reclamation, and environmental protection in 
accordance with the original designs, or paying off all fees 
regarding land reclamation and environmental protection. 
  In applying for a termination of their mining operations, 
holders of mining rights are allowed to attend to procedures for 
nullifying their permits and licenses only after obtaining the 
approval of the competent departments which approved the mining 
operations in the first place, and after the organs which issued 
the mining licenses in the first place have reviewed the 
applications and found them acceptable. 
  Article 33. When shutting down mines, mining enterprises 
shall attend to examination and approval procedures as follows: 
  (1) filing applications on mine closure with the competent 
departments which approved the mining operations in the first 
place, one year before the termination of mining activities, and 
submitting geological reports on pit closure; 
  (2) submitting geological reports on pit closure to 
departments in charge of geology and mineral resources for 
approval in conjunction with organs in charge of examining and 
approving mineral reserves, after the competent departments 
which approved the mining operations in the first place have 
reviewed and concurred with them; and 
  (3) having the holders of mining rights prepare reports on 
mine closure after the geological reports on pit closure have 
been approved, and submitting such reports to the competent 
departments which approved the mining operations in the first 
place for approval in conjunction with departments in charge of 
geology and mineral resources at corresponding levels, as well 
as relevant competent departments, in accordance with pertinent 
industry rules. 
  Article 34. Upon approval of their reports on mine closure, 
mining enterprises shall complete the following tasks: 
  (1) sorting out and filing geological, prospecting, and 
mining data in accordance with relevant state provisions, and 
collecting and forwarding to relevant departments geological 
reports on pit closure, reports on mine closure, and other 
pertinent data; and 
  (2) completing work on labor safety, water and soil 
conservation, land reclamation, and environmental protection 
according to the approved reports on mine closure, or paying off 
all fees relating to land reclamation and environmental 
protection. 
  On the strength of documents ratifying the reports on mine 
closure, as well as evidence produced by relevant departments 
corroborating the completion of the aforementioned tasks, mining 
enterprises shall apply to the organs that issued the mining 
licenses in the first place for nullifying their mining licenses. 
  Article 35. Before building railways, highways, factories, 
reservoirs, oil pipelines, power transmission lines, and other 
huge structures, construction units must gather information 
about the distribution of mineral resources in the areas of 
planned construction projects from the departments in charge of 
geology and mineral resources of local provincial, autonomous 
regional, and municipal people's governments. They shall 
present evidence produced by those departments when submitting 
their project design reports to the authorities for examination 
and approval. Should the aforementioned construction projects 
conflict with the mining of major mineral deposits, relevant 
competent departments under the State Council, or provincial, 
autonomous regional, and municipal people's governments, shall 
put forward plans, on which the departments in charge of 
planning and administration under the State Council shall make a 
decision based on the suggestions made by the authority in 
charge of geology and mineral resources under the State Council. 
  Article 36. Where disputes over the limits of mining areas 
arise between holders of mining rights, the parties concerned 
shall solve the disputes through negotiations. Should the 
negotiations fail, local people's governments above the county 
level in the areas where the mineral resources are located shall 
settle the disputes based on the legally approved limits of 
mining areas. In the event of failed negotiations among the 
parties to disputes over the limits of mining areas that 
straddle provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal borders, 
the relevant provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal 
people's governments shall settle the disputes through 
negotiations. Should such negotiations fail, the authority in 
charge of geology and mineral resources under the State Council 
shall forward its suggestions for settling the disputes to the 
State Council, which shall make a decision. 
  Chapter V. Mining Enterprises Under Collective 
Ownership, Privately Operated Mining Enterprises, and Individual 
Miners 
  Article 37. The state shall protect the legitimate rights 
and interests of, supervise, and manage mining enterprises under 
collective ownership, privately operated mining enterprises, and 
individual miners in accordance with the law. 
  Article 38. Mining enterprises under collective ownership 
may exploit the following mineral resources: 
  (1) Mineral deposits or sites that are not suitable for 
constructing large- and medium-sized mines by the state; 
  (2) fragmentary mineral products which are found in the 
peripheries of mining areas belonging to state-owned mining 
enterprises and which are designated as such with the consent of 
state-owned mining enterprises and with the approval of higher 
levels of departments responsible for these enterprises; 
  (3) remains of ore bodies in mining pits that have been 
closed down and which departments responsible for the original 
mining enterprises confirm can be safely exploited without 
producing serious environmental consequences; and 
  (4) other mineral resources which the state allows mining 
enterprises under collective ownership to exploit. 
  When exploiting mineral resources listed in item (2) of the 
aforementioned clause, mining enterprises under collective 
ownership must sign agreements on rational exploitation and 
utilization of mineral resources and on mining safety with 
state-owned mining enterprises. They shall not waste and 
destroy mineral resources, nor shall they affect production 
safety in state-owned mining enterprises. 
  Article 39. Stipulations in Article 38 of these rules shall 
be referred to when enforcing the scope of mineral resources 
which privately operated mining enterprises may exploit. 
  Article 40. Individual miners may exploit the following 
mineral resources: 
  (1) Fragmented or scattered small ore bodies or mineral 
sites; and 
  (2) sand, stone, and clay which can only be used as regular 
building materials. 
  Article 41. When the state sets up state-designated mining 
zones or mining zones which are of important value to the 
national economy, it shall act in accordance with relevant 
provisions to rationally compensate the original mining-rights 
holders who will withdraw from relevant sites. 
<H5>  Chapter VI. Legal Responsibility </H5>
  Article 42. The following stipulations shall be used to levy 
fines in accordance with Articles 39, 40, 42, 43, and 44 of the 
"Mineral Resources Law": 
  (1) A maximum fine of 50 percent of what has been illegally 
obtained shall be levied on those who conduct unauthorized 
mining without mining permits; on those who conduct mining by 
making unauthorized entry into state-designated mining zones, 
mining zones which are of important value to the national 
economy, and other people's mining areas; and on those who 
conduct unauthorized mining of special mineral types whose 
mining is guaranteed by the state; 
  (2) a maximum fine of 30 percent of what has been illegally 
obtained shall be levied on those who conduct mining in areas 
beyond the approved mining zones; 
  (3) a maximum fine of twice the amount of what has been 
illegally obtained shall be levied on the selling parties, 
lessors, and parties which transfer their mining rights if such 
means as buying, selling, or leasing have been employed to 
transfer mineral resources, or if mining rights have been 
bought, sold, or leased; 
  (4) a maximum fine of 5,000 yuan will be levied on those who 
illegally use mining rights as pledges; 
  (5) a maximum fine of twice the amount of what has been 
illegally obtained shall be levied on those who violate 
provisions to procure and sell mineral products which the state 
have placed under unified procurement; and 
  (6) a maximum fine of 50 percent of the equivalent of the 
value of losses from mineral resources shall be levied on those 
who use destructive mining methods to exploit and thus seriously 
damage mineral resources. 
  Article 43. Persons in charge or have direct responsibility 
shall be subject to disciplinary sanction when any one of the 
following acts is committed in violation of stipulations in 
these rules; where such acts constitute a crime, investigations 
shall be conducted to affix responsibility for the crime 
according to law: 
  (1) Giving approval to run mining operations to unqualified 
units or individuals; and 
  (2) giving mining permits to mining enterprises or 
individuals who have yet to obtain approval according to law. 
  Chapter VII. Supplementary Articles 
  Article 44. Underground water resources have both the 
properties of water resources and mineral resources. The 
"Mineral Resources Law" and these rules shall apply to the 
exploration of underground water resources, and the "Water Law" 
and relevant administrative rules and regulations shall apply to 
the development, use, protection, and management of underground 
water resources. 
  Article 45. The Ministry of Geology and Mineral Resources 
shall provide explanations on these rules. 
  Article 46. These rules shall take effect on the day of 
promulgation. 
<H5>  Appendix: </H5>


Detailed List of Mineral Resources Classification 

(1) Energy-Generating Minerals         Coal, coal gas, stone coal, oil shale, 
                                       petroleum, natural gas, oil sand, 
                                       natural bitumen, uranium, thorium, and 
                                       geothermal energy. 

(2) Metallic Minerals                  Iron, manganese, chromium, vanadium, 
                                       and titanium; copper, lead, zinc, 
                                       bauxite, nickel, cobalt, tungsten, tin, 
                                       bismuth, molybdenum, mercury, antimony, 
                                       and magnesium; platinum, palladium, 
                                       ruthenium, osmium, iridium, and 
                                       rhodium; gold and silver; niobium, 
                                       tantalum, beryllium, lithium, 
                                       zirconium, strontium, rubidium, and 
                                       cesium; lanthanum, cerium, 
                                       praseodymium, neodymium, samarium, 
                                       europium, yttrium, gadolinium, terbium, 
                                       dysprosium, holmium, erbium, thulium, 
                                       ytterbium, and lutetium; and scandium, 
                                       germanium, gallium, indium, thallium, 
                                       hafnium, rhenium, cadmium, selenium, 
                                       and tellurium. 

(3) Nonmetalic Minerals                Diamonds, graphite, phosphorus, natural 
                                       sulfur, iron pyrite, sylvite, boron, 
                                       rock crystals (piezocrystal, crystal 
                                       for the smelting process, optic cystal, 
                                       and handicraft crystal), corundum, 
                                       kyanite, silica [gui xian shi 8944 4848 
                                       4258], andalusite, silicon limestone, 
                                       sodium niter, talcum, asbestos, blue 
                                       asbestos, mica, feldspar, garnet, 
                                       pyrophylite, mussite, tremolite, 
                                       vermiculite, zeolite, alumite, 
                                       mirabilite (calsium-containing 
                                       mirabilite), gypsum (including hard 
                                       gypsum), barite, poison heavy stone [du 
                                       zhong shi 3021 6850 4258], natural 
                                       alkali, calcite, Iceland spar, 
                                       magnesite, fluorite (common fluorite 
                                       and optic fluorite), precious stone, 
                                       topaz, jade, tourmaline, agate, pigment 
                                       minerals (ochre and pigment yellow 
                                       clay), limestone (limestones for use in 
                                       connection with calcium carbide, in 
                                       making soda, in making chemical 
                                       fertilizer, as flux, in making glass, 
                                       in cement mixture, as building 
                                       material, in lime, and as surface 
                                       decorations), marl, chalk, 
                                       potassium-containing rock, dolomite 
                                       (dolomite for use in metallurgy, in 
                                       making chemical fertilizer, in 
                                       glass-making, and in construction), 
                                       quartz (quartz for use in metallurgy, 
                                       in glass-making, and in making chemical 
                                       fertilizer), sandstone (sandstone for 
                                       use in metallurgy, making glass, making 
                                       cement, making bricks and tiles, making 
                                       chemical fertilizer, making molds, and 
                                       making ceramics), natural quartz sand 
                                       (sand for use in making glass, in 
                                       making molds, in construction, in 
                                       making cement; standard sand for making 
                                       cement, and sand for use in making 
                                       bricks and tiles), vein quartz (quartz 
                                       for use in metallurgy and 
                                       glass-making), powdered quartz, natural 
                                       oilstone, potassium- containing sand 
                                       shale, diatomite, shale (ceramsite 
                                       shale and shale for making bricks, 
                                       tiles, and cement), kaolin, potter's 
                                       clay, refractory clay, concave-convex 
                                       rod stone clay [ao tu bang shi niantu 
                                       0425 0424 2761 4258 4724 0960], 
                                       sea-foam clay, illite clay, accumulated 
                                       stone [lei tuo shi 4797 2094 4258] 
                                       clay, expanded clay, iron alum clay, 
                                       other types of clay (clay for use in 
                                       making molds, in making bricks and 
                                       tiles, in ceramsite concrete, and in 
                                       making cement; red clay for use in 
                                       making cement; yellow clay for use in 
                                       making cement; mudstone for use in 
                                       making cement; and clay for making 
                                       refractory materials), olivine (olivine 
                                       for use in fertilizer and in 
                                       construction), serpentine (serpentine 
                                       for use in fertilizer, as flux, and as 
                                       surface decorations), basalt (basalt 
                                       form use in stone casting and in making 
                                       asbestos), diabase (diabase for use in 
                                       making cement, in stone casting, in 
                                       surface decorations, and in 
                                       construction), andesite (andesite for 
                                       use in surface decorations, in 
                                       construction, and as cement-mixing 
                                       material), diorite (diorite for use as 
                                       cement-mixing material and in 
                                       construction), granite (granite for use 
                                       in construction and in surface 
                                       decorations), wheat-rice stone [mai fan 
                                       shi 7796 7391 4258], pearlite, 
                                       obsidian, pitch stone, pumice stone, 
                                       quarry-faced stone (stone for use in 
                                       making cement and in stone casting), 
                                       nepheline syenite, tuff (tuff for use 
                                       in glass-making, in making cement, and 
                                       in construction), pozzolan, volcanic 
                                       cinders, marble (marble for use as 
                                       surface decorations, in construction, 
                                       in connection with cement, and in 
                                       glass-making), slate (slate for use as 
                                       surface decorations and in making 
                                       cement), gneiss, hornblende, lime mud, 
                                       mineral salt (lake salt, rock salt, and 
                                       natural brine), magnesium salt, iodine, 
                                       bromine, and arsenic. 

(4) Water Vapor-Containing Minerals    Subterranean water, mineral water, 
                                       carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, 
                                       helium, and radon. 



