BFN 

<F P=106> ["eli"-attributed report: "Separation of Office and Mandate </F>
Annoys Party Leadership; Kinkel: Not Surrendered to the Union 
Unconditionally"] 
  [Text] Rostock -- The delegates of the Free Democratic 
Party of Germany [FDP] congress have agreed -- even though with 
a few contortions -- to the course of their Chairman Klaus 
Kinkel and, following the coalition statement, they have 
approved the election program of the liberals. Some resistance 
against the party leadership emerged, however, when the majority 
voted for a separation of office and mandate and demanded the 
abolition of church tax. Kinkel once again justified the course 
set down in his speech on Friday [3 June] and stressed that the 
FDP has not surrendered unconditionally to the Christian 
Democratic Union/Christian Social Union [CDU/CSU] with the 
coalition statement. He was supported by Bundestag Group 
Chairman Hermann Otto Solms, while the left wing refrained from 
commenting. 
  On Saturday, Kinkel reacted to the criticism of his speech 
at 
the party congress and stressed that, despite the coalition 
statement, the liberals want to pursue an independent election 
campaign. The party has its own profile, he said. The chairman 
avoided answering the question of whether the FDP would also 
form a coalition with the Social Democratic Party of Germany 
[SPD] after the Bundestag elections if there were no other 
possibility. However, a coalition with any democratic party 
cannot be ruled out, he added. Bundestag Group Chairman Solms 
supported Kinkel's statements and warned against a red-green 
coalition and the SPD economic program. However, it was striking 
that former Chairman Hans-Dietrich Genscher and North 
Rhine-Westphalian Land Chairman Juergen Moellemann did not 
comment on the statements made by the party leaders. During the 
discussion, some delegates objected: Elke Wollenschlaeger from 
Regensburg said that the FDP is not the "reserve group for 
Oggersheim." Schleswig-Holstein Land Chairman Juergen Koppelin 
admonished that the FDP is a liberal party first and a coalition 
partner only afterwards. Executive Committee Member Guido 
Westerwelle stressed that it must not be considered high treason 
if the FDP criticizes the CDU/CSU. 
  Above all, the delegates assessed the decision about 
separating office and mandate as a decision aimed against the 
party leadership. The majority of the congress decided that, as 
of the next legislative period, no Bundestag deputy may hold a 
government office. Thus, the work of the group could be 
strengthened. Genscher, who did not make any other statement, 
pleaded with the delegates to reject the motion. During his 
term as foreign minister he urgently needed the mandate to 
strengthen his position and also to take the floor outside his 
government office. Kinkel did not comment on the motion before 
the plenum, which was primarily supported by his 
Baden-Wuerttemberg Land association. However, he used harsh 
words against the separation in a working group and subsequently 
advised moving the decision to "a lower level." 
  On the weekend, the party congress deliberated primarily the 
election program with the focal issues of domestic and legal 
policy as well as economics. In a "Rostock Statement" the 
liberals condemned "with determination the xenophobia and 
violence against foreigners and Jewish institutions." The 
attacks must finally come to an end. It is the liberals' very 
own task to struggle against xenophobia. In foreigners' policy 
the FDP clearly distanced itself from the line of the coalition 
partner. Thus, foreigners, who have lived in the FRG for eight 
years are to be allowed to vote in local elections, and an 
immigration law with fixed quotas is to be established. In 
addition, the FDP demands dual citizenship and the possibility 
of acquiring citizenship by being born in Germany. In social 
policy the great number of social services are to be replaced 
with a so-called citizens' money. 
  The so-called Great Bugging Campaign, that is, permission to 
monitor conversations in apartments, was not supported in 
Rostock. A corresponding motion was already rejected by the 
working group and was not discussed in the plenum at all. In 
its drug policy, the FDP comes out against legalizing the 
possession of small amounts of drugs for a person's own 
consumption. Nevertheless, the drug policy so far has failed, 
it was said. Therefore, drugs for treatment or for withdrawal 
must be handed out under controlled conditions. Great excitement 
was caused by the decision to abolish the church tax. The 
majority of the delegates suggested replacing it with a system 
of contributions organized by the churches themselves. Regarding 
the duration of military service, the FDP is in favor of a 
reduction to clearly under 12 months. 

