CSO 

    [Editorial Report] Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa, a former member 
of Social Democratic Party (PSD) governments and former deputy, 
who is currently a journalist, writer, political analyst, and 
university professor, was interviewed in the 12 May Lisbon 
weekly VISAO by Lurdes Feio. Among other questions, he was asked 
whether he thought Prime Minister Anibal Cavaco Silva will run 
for the presidency when President Mario Soares' term ends. 
Rebelo de Sousa answered that he believes the prime minister 
will seek another absolute majority in the 1995 legislative 
elections instead. He thinks so, he said, because of the prime 
minister's efforts to mend fences with Soares and his 
involvement in mobilizing the party. Rebelo de Sousa noted that 
it would be possible for Cavaco Silva to run in the year 2001 if 
in 1999 he thought that conditions were ripe, and if a 
constitutional revision that he as prime minister would launch 
gave more powers to the presidency. When asked who the PSD's 
presidential candidate would be, Rebelo de Sousa named longtime 
PSD luminary Eurico de Melo, but also former Prime Minister 
Francisco Pinto Balsemao, who has "reappeared" on the political 
scene after a long eclipse. Rebelo de Sousa also commented on 
potential candidates such as former Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Joao de Deus Pinheiro -- now an EU commissioner -- who, however, 
is "far away" and ought to support Balsemao, PSD official Alvaro 
Barreto, who seems to have "dropped out," and former Center 
Social Democratic (CDS) party leader Diogo Ferreira do Amaral, 
who would "fit the position of prime minister better" as an 
eventual successor of Cavaco Silva. Rebelo de Sousa also said 
that both Madeira regional President Alberto Joao Jardim and 
Azores regional President Mota Amaral, who are considered 
potential candidates, have been "weakened" in national terms 
because of their present positions. Referring to a candidate 
outside the PSD, Rebelo de Sousa said that the best known is 
former President Ramalho Eanes, despite his affirmation that he 
does not envisage an immediate candidacy. According to Rebelo de 
Sousa, "it is always a mistake to return to positions occupied 
in different historic contexts." When Lurdes Feio pointed out 
that General Eanes's popularity scores are higher than the prime 
minister's, Rebelo de Sousa said that people already perceive 
that Cavaco Silva will not run. On the opposition side, Rebelo 
de Sousa opined that Socialist Party (PS) leader Antonio 
Guterres "will do everything in his power" to prevent the 
candidady of Lisbon Mayor Jorge Sampaio because of poor personal 
relations and the fear that Sampaio would not be "propitious" 
for him. Asked whether PS official Joao Soares could become 
party leader, Rebelo de Sousa thought not, arguing that Porto 
Mayor Fernando Gomes carries "more political weight." Turning to 
Cavaco Silva's succession, he said Minister of Defense Fernando 
Nogueira is the most frequently mentioned candidate, despite the 
fact "he lacks strong charisma as a leader." Others could be 
Ferreira do Amaral, who has more of a populist profile and 
Miguel Cadilhe, who was a "great" minister of finance. Rebelo de 
Sousa concluded by saying that even if he "does not feel great 
affection" for the prime minister, they maintain a relationship 
of "mutual respect." 

