BFN 

<F P=106> ["Readers' Forum" by Zhou Jianye (0719 1696 2814): </F>
"Maintain High Alert Against Leakage of Economic Secrets"] 
  [Text] Often recently, we have heard reports on leaks of 
economic secrets. For instance, Zhejiang's Shaoxing discovered 
at least 20 foreign economic spies who intended to steal the 
recipe for brewing Shaoxing liquor. A highly paid "garbage 
collector" in Guangzhou was employed by a certain company, which 
asked him to collect the industrial waste of another three 
companies in the same trade. As the company knew perfectly well 
the scientific research, production, and sales of those three 
companies, it maintained the upper hand in market competition. 
  Incidents of internal or external leakage of economic 
secrets 
are by no means accidental. There are many loopholes around us 
which are ignored and which can easily lead to leaks. Some 
regard documents labeled confidential as rubbish and throw them 
in the trashcan. Some people take secrets of the unit home and 
keep them anywhere they like. During trade talks with foreign 
businessmen, some staff of foreign trade units leak the state's 
import plans, giving the foreign party a chance to raise the 
prices. In order to strive for foreign investment and 
cooperation, some enterprises unreservedly allow the foreign 
party to visit, take photographs, and videotape, thus openly 
letting them steal production techniques. Some newspapers fail 
to ask for instructions or to undergo censorship before 
publishing a report. As a result, a number of reports involving 
economic secrets are made public. Moreover, some people, out of 
ulterior motives, present their outstanding products and recipes 
to the foreign party gratis. All these leaks have brought 
tremendous, irredeemable losses to the state. 
  With the gradual establishment of the socialist market 
economy system, our enterprises should enter into competition 
with their counterparts at home and abroad. In the world today, 
where the economy is developing by leaps and bounds, all 
countries have attached great and increasing importance to the 
mastery and obtaining of economic information. The smokeless 
war of internal and external economic information has never 
ceased. Unless we enhance the Chinese people's sense of 
maintaining internal and external economic secrets and avoid the 
occurrence of leaks, it will be impossible for us to have a 
foothold in domestic and international competition and to win 
victories on the battlefield of commerce. 
  For this reason, all enterprises should vigorously publicize 
the importance of maintaining internal and external economic 
secrets, heighten their vigilance, and earnestly implement the 
relevant regulations. It is necessary to establish and perfect 
the measures and system for keeping secrets; pay close attention 
to supervision, inspection, and implementation work; never give 
agents at home or abroad any chance to steal secrets; and close 
all the loopholes that might lead to the leaking of internal and 
external secrets. 

