Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Feb. 7 KYODO -- The governing coalition 
apparently made no progress in a Monday [7 February] afternoon 
meeting aimed at crafting a tax reform package, a senior Finance 
Ministry official said. "There is no change in the situation," 
the official, who declined to be identified, said on returning 
to his office after meeting coalition leaders. 
  The official said the ministry is sticking to its policy 
that 
any tax cut be linked explicitly with the timing and rate of 
other measures that would fund the loss of revenue. He declined 
further comment. 
  "The administrative side is united with the (finance) 
minister who insists that the issue be dealt with in one go," 
said Vice Finance Minister Jiro Saito. "In that sense, we 
haven't changed our stance." 
  Saito confirmed that Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa 
ordered 
Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii to help the coalition parties in 
"technical aspects" to make a final decision on the tax issue. 
He would not comment further, saying it would be inappropriate 
when the coalition parties are still holding negotiations. 
  After Fujii was summoned to the prime minister's residence, 
the senior ministry official told reporters that the ministry 
had been ordered to draft a new plan. But he later amended his 
remarks, saying the prime minister's office contacted Fujii 
again to say that Hosokawa told the coalition leaders he would 
have the finance and home affairs ministries "help" the 
coalition form a tax plan. 
  With that support, Hosokawa told Sakigake [Harbinger] 
representative Hiroyuki Sonoda to decide on the coalition's plan 
at the meeting, the official said. 
  The coalition has been in turmoil over the tax issue, a key 
component of the government's promised economic stimulus 
package, which was to have been issued Friday. 
  Hosokawa announced a package early Thursday of 6 trillion 
yen 
in tax cuts to be offset in 1997 by raising the 3 percent 
consumption tax to a 7 percent "national welfare tax." 
  But the plan was sent back to the drawing board because of 
stiff opposition led by socialists in the coalition. They 
demanded that the tax increase be delayed and any new taxes be 
earmarked for programs to address the country's aging society. 
  The socialists, who form the biggest bloc in the seven-party 
coalition, threatened to quit -- leaving Hosokawa with a weak, 
minority government. Hosokawa told Fujii to draft a new plan 
"as soon as possible," the official said. 

