Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The National Economic and Development Authority 
(NEDA) yesterday approved P16.5 billion [Philippine pesos] worth 
of new power projects even as it gave assurance that brownouts 
will no longer not happen this year. [sentence as published] 
These projects, the NEDA said in a statement, are intended to 
stabilize the long term energy supply of the country. Among 
those approved are the Northern Negros and Mount Labo Geothermal 
Power Projects whose combined costs total P10 billion. 
  Socioeconomic Planning Secretary and NEDA director-general 
Cielito F. Habito said these projects involve the development of 
geothermal steam fields and the construction of baseload power 
plants in Mambucal, Northern Negros, and in Mount Labo, 
Camarines Sur. The baseload power plant in Mambucal will have a 
capacity of 40 megawatts (MW) while the one in Mount Labo will 
generate 120 MW of power. Habito said these projects will 
augment the power supply in the Luzon and Visayas grids. 
  The second power project approved is the Northwestern Luzon 
Extra High Voltage Transmission Line Project which will cost 
around P5 billion. It involves the installation of 500-kilovolt 
(KV) transmission lines from Labrador to San Manuel, and from 
San Manuel to San Jose. The line from Labrador to San Manuel 
will be 60 kilometers long while the one from San Manuel to San 
Jose will be 145 kilometers long. 
  The third project is the Masinloc-Labrador Transmission Line 
Project. It involves the installation of a 65 kilometer (km), 
230 kilovolt (kv) steel tower double circuit line from the 600 
MW Masinloc Coal Fired Power Plant to Labrador, Pangasinan. It 
will also expand the Labrador substation. Total cost of this 
project is estimated at P697 million. 
  The fourth project is the Cluster A Substation Expansion 
Project which involves the provision of additional power 
facilities and accessories in the following substations: Laoag; 
Dasmarinas; and San Manuel. It will cost P365 million. Habito 
said the project is expected to accommodate future increases in 
power demand, provide adequate reactive power support to avoid 
system collapse, and improve voltage regulation. 
  A similar project is the Cluster B Substation Expansion 
Project which the NEDA board also approved. The substations to 
be expanded are the following: La Trinidad Substation; 
Concepcion Substation; Dasmarinas Substation; and San Manuel 
Substation. With an estimated cost of P345 million, the project 
aims to complement generating capacity additions programmed for 
the Luzon grid. 
  The last project approved was the Permanent Bypass Damper 
and 
Stack System Project for the Bataan Combined-Cycle Power Plants. 
It will cost P395 million and will be implemented within eight 
months. 
  The other projects are the Environmental Equipment for 
National Power Corporation (Napocor) Power Plants Project and 
the conduct of Detailed Engineering for the Kanan Hydroelectric 
power plant. The two will have a combined cost of P274 million. 
Detailed engineering for the Kanan Hydroelectric Power Plant 
will involve the review and updating of the feasibility study of 
the Kanan B1 Hydroelectric Power. It will also carry out the 
detailed design of structures and facilitate technology transfer 
for Napocor engineers. This project will cost P145 million. 

