Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The government has decided to set up a state 
commission of inquiry on the massacre at the Cave of the 
Patriarchs in Hebron. The government has also decided to adopt 
firm measures against Kakh's radical activists. Among other 
things, orders restricting the movement of such activists as 
well as detention orders will be issued, and some of the 
activists will be disarmed. Justice Minister David Liba'i told 
our correspondent Hayim Hecht that the measures are in effect as 
of now, and will be applied according to the discretion of the 
IDF [Israel Defense Forces] commanders in the area. All the 
government decisions were adopted unanimously. The attorney 
general was asked to check, within a few days, the possibility 
of outlawing radical organizations, specifically Kakh and Kahana 
Hay. Minister Sarid said that the possibility of issuing exile 
orders was examined, but it turned out that they would not be 
sufficiently effective. He hoped that the measures determined 
by the government would lead to the resumption of the political 
process. 
  As for the detention centers, the security forces are 
preparing for the release of 800 to 1,000 security prisoners. 
Our correspondent Moti Amir reports that the release of the 
prisoners is in accordance with the government's decision. The 
Cave of the Patriarchs itself will be reopened only after new 
security and prayer arrangements are arranged. 
  [Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Hebrew at 1315 GMT on 27 February 
elaborates on the cabinet decisions, saying that "the foreign 
minister, the justice minister, and Minister Amnon Rubinstein 
were authorized to formulate the powers of the commission of 
inquiry, in consultation with the attorney general and the 
cabinet secretary. The government decides on the establishment 
of the commission, but it is the Supreme Court that appoints its 
members." The decision on the commission was made unanimously, 
after Rabin withdrew his reservations about its establishment, 
accepting Justice Minister Liba'i's position and expressing the 
hope that "the establishment of such a commission would not be a 
precedent for other incidents."] 
  Knesset Member [MK] Binyanmin Netanyahu demands that a state 
commission of inquiry also investigate the responsibility of the 
political echelon for the deterioration in the security 
situation, and not settle for the responsibility of the military 
level only. According to Netanyahu, it should be determined how 
it is possible that 33 Israelis and dozens of Arabs have been 
murdered since the signing of the Oslo accord. This has been 
reported by our correspondent Shmu'el Tal. 
  The appeal submitted to the High Court of Justice on the 
state commission of inquiry was withdrawn. Our correspondent 
Mira Amsalem reports that MK Darawshah and Attorney 'Imad Dakkur 
informed the High Court of Justice that they are withdrawing 
their appeal in the wake of the government's decisions. At the 
same time, the appellants announced they reserve the right to 
appeal to the court again if developments so warrant. 

