BFN 

  [Text] Prague, June 14 (CTK) -- Tomas Jezek, the former 
National Property Fund (FNM) chairman, issued a statement today 
on the May 25 government decision concerning the fund's closing 
balance and annual report for 1993. In the statement, Jezek 
cast doubt on some of the arguments the fund's presidium used to 
speed up his deposition from the post. 
  The government did approve the closing balance, and with 
some 
objections also the annual report, but at the same time voiced 
dissatisfaction with the slow pace of putting privatization 
projects into effect, the fund's behavior on capital markets and 
its exercise of ownership rights in companies where it owns part 
of the property. The fund's presidium raised the same objections 
on Friday [10 June] and recommended Jezek resign immediately. 
  The statement CTK obtained from Jezek says that the slow 
pace 
of implementation of privatization projects is not caused by the 
fund, but much more by institutions processing privatization 
projects. "Only around 25 percent of the projects can be 
accepted and implemented as they are," Jezek wrote. 
  He also pointed out that the fund had turned to the 
Privatization Ministry with 1,875 applications for corrections 
and changes in privatization projects. "Of this number, 91 
applications for corrections and 209 for changes missed the 
agreed-on 30-day deadline. Some applications have been lying at 
the Privatization Ministry for more than a year," Jezek said. 
  The government also complained of laziness in taking steps 
against those who acquire privatized property but fail to pay 
for it. "This is really the only problem pointed out in the 
government's statement worth its attention," Jezek admitted. 
However, the fund is practically helpless against non-payers 
due to its "critical dependence on cooperation with the police, 
courts and the land- registry office." 
  Jezek also denied the charge that the fund was destabilizing 
the stock exchange and RM-system in sales of shares held by it. 
"The overall value of sales that the fund effected on both 
markets is very small (0.42 percent on the stock exchange's 
central market and 2.25 percent in the RM-system). There was 
not a single case where the fund negatively influenced the 
admissible price bracket for the following round in the 
RM-system, and as for the stock exchange, it was rather pushing 
the prices up," Jezek claimed. 

