BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 2 May (MENA)--The Palestinian and Israeli 
delegations resumed their final round of negotiations today to 
put the final touches on the agreement on self-rule in Gaza and 
Jericho before signing it in Cairo on Wednesday [4 May]. 
  In a statement to MENA, Palestinian delegation member Khalid 
al-Qidrah affirmed that Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat will 
enter the self-rule area in Jericho and Gaza a month after the 
agreement has been signed. He added that all the Palestinian 
police force personnel will have entered the area and taken up 
their positions before 'Arafat arrives. 
  The force is made up of 9,000 men, 6,000 of whom are from 
outside the occupied territories and 3,000 from inside. 
  Al-Qidrah said that as soon as the agreement is signed, 
1,500 
members of the Palestinian police force will enter the self-rule 
areas and their families will join them later. 
  MENA has learned that the Palestinian-Israeli Coordination 
Committee formed under the Cairo Accord will be chaired on the 
Palestinian side by Ziyad al-Atrash and on the Israeli side by 
Yantof Sameh [name as transliterated], who was the Gaza ruler a 
few months ago. 
  Sources at the negotiations said Muhammad Dahlan, official 
in 
charge in security in the Gaza Strip, and Nasr Yusuf, official 
in charge of police there who is due in Cairo later today, will 
arrive in the Gaza Strip on Thursday. 
  The sources noted that the agreement to implement self-rule 
in Gaza and Jericho to be signed by Palestinian President Yasir 
'Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin is about 200 
pages. In addition to the general agreement, the sources added, 
the accord contains four appendixes; the first concerns the 
economic agreement signed in Paris last Friday, the second deals 
with security arrangements, the third with legal jurisdiction, 
and the fourth with civil authority. 
  Al-Qidrah affirmed that the work of the Legal Affairs 
Committee is in the final stages because it is now drafting 
clauses concerning criminal jurisdiction. 
  He explained that the issue of al-Mawasi, areas on the 
Mediterranean coast extending into the Gaza waters, has been 
settled as nature reserves are under Palestinian jurisdiction. 
He said the question of territorial waters on the Mediterranean 
opposite the strip will be decided during today's talks. 
  Sources close to the negotiations have said that a report on 
the hand over of Palestinian collaborators with the occupation 
authorities to the self-rule authority is untrue. The sources 
affirmed that the collaborator issue was settled during the 
talks in Taba within the context of the Confidence-Building 
Committee and that the collaborators will obtain Israeli 
nationality and the Palestinian self-rule authority will issue 
them pardons. 

