Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "NTC Newscast"] </F>
  [Text] Cali Cartel men, who appeared at the Prosecutor 
General's Office, have an extensive criminal record. Even though 
the prosecutor general said they do not have any outstanding 
debts with the justice system, their criminal record is 
extensive. 
  This is Elmer Herrera Buitrago. [video shows still 
photograph of man] The DEA, in one of its reports, calls him the 
drug king. He has been arrested five times in the United States 
for the possession of cocaine, conspiracy to distribute drugs, 
and conspiracy to escape. He served one sentence at the Oxford 
penitentiary. The DEA considers him to be the other big Cali 
Cartel associate in charge of distributing drugs in New York and 
money laundering operations. When he appeared before the 
prosecutor general he said he was in fact captured, prosecuted, 
sentenced, and released for these crimes in the United States. 
  Jose Olmedo Campo Duque, another one of the three 
individuals 
who appeared before the prosecutor general's office, owns 
properties raided by authorities in several narcotics 
operations. His farm, called Miralindo, was raided during the 
Green Ice and Robledo III Operations. San Francisco de Portugal, 
another one of his properties, was also raided during the 
Robledo II and III operations following the assassination of 
Carlos Galan and the Green Ice Operation. This property is 
currently in the hands of the National Narcotics Council. The 
cars that were confiscated were turned over to the Civil 
Aeronautics authorities. At this same farm, authorities found 
Russian-made weapons, six passports with the same name, and 
savings accounts from banks in Panama, Guatemala, and Miami. He 
was investigated for the killing of an Administrative Department 
of Security agent in 1990 and is still under investigation for 
vehicle theft and robbery. 
  On 2 May 1992, authorities raided his apartment on the 12th 
floor of the (Marley) Building in Cartagena. There they found 
weapons, various caliber ammunition, jewels, and a safe-conduct 
pass for Beatriz Elena Cuervo Londono. This raid was part of 
file No. 95-13 of a Santa Fe de Bogota public court order. The 
strange thing is that this file is under the name of Ivan 
Urdinola Grajales. In the Prosecutor General's Office files, 
this raid appears under another number, 15-156, a file which is 
still in the preliminary stages and which no one is responsible 
for yet. NTC News was able to determine that Jose Olmedo Campo 
Duque is still living on the 12th floor of this building. 
  Today, Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff said he knows 
about the criminal records of the Cali Cartel men who went to 
his office, and he added that he does not believe the Cali 
Cartel men will surrender in the next few hours. 
  The Prosecutor General's Office confirmed it knows about the 
raids and arrests made abroad against Jose Olmedo Campo Duque 
and Elmer Herrera Buitrago, alleged Cali drug traffickers. For 
the Prosecutor General's Office, however, these actions do not 
constitute enough evidence to link them to criminal drug 
trafficking activities. 
  [Begin De Greiff recording] Up until now we have not seen 
any 
evidence against him as a result of those raids. [end recording] 
  Herrera Buitrago said he testified before De Greiff that he 
had been in prison for drug trafficking in the United States. 
  [Begin De Greiff recording] If he served a sentence in the 
past, then naturally it is in the past. [end recording] 
  Gustavo de Greiff said Cali Cartel drug traffickers will not 
surrender in the next few hours. 
  [Begin De Greiff recording] We cannot say it is something 
imminent. [end recording] 
  Gustavo de Greiff said he will meet with the lawyers of the 
Cali drug traffickers and government officials the first week of 
March. 

