BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by CIS heads of state following CIS summit </F>
in Moscow on 15 April; from the Mir TV and Radio Company "On the 
Air" Program -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Russian President Boris Yeltsin] Esteemed 
journalists, ladies and gentlemen, we are starting the news 
conference with the CIS heads of state after the meeting of the 
Council of Heads of Government and the Council of Heads of State. 
  The latest meeting has just ended. I would like to express 
satisfaction with its results. The meeting took place in a 
businesslike and constructive atmosphere. It was characterized 
by a high level of mutual understanding. The participants in 
the meeting congratulated Moldova whose parliament has ratified 
the Commonwealth's constituent documents. I am pleased that 
Moldova has become a full member of the Commonwealth. 
  The meetings which have taken place over the past few days 
in 
Moscow have shown that our Commonwealth is to a very high degree 
a reality, that, in spite of the difficulties of establishing 
the Commonwealth, we are moving forward along the path of 
developing and deepening processes of integration based on new 
democratic principles and that the Commonwealth is vitally 
necessary to our peoples and states. And, finally, it is 
becoming more clear than ever before that the CIS is not simply 
one area of policy but its natural priority, including the 
natural priority of Russia's policy, dictated by the interests 
and requirements of the member countries and also by our common 
interests as we face the world. 
  The meeting of the heads of state examined 26 important 
issues, concerning cooperation in the military, foreign policy 
and economic spheres and in protecting the CIS's external 
borders. It decided to continue collective measures within the 
framework of the CIS to stabilize the situation along the 
Tajikistan-Afghanistan border. In particular, the presence of 
collective peacekeeping forces in Tajikistan has been extended 
up to the end of the year. 
  The heads of state decided to render urgent and additional 
aid to Kirgizia [Kyrgyzstan] following the natural disasters 
suffered by that country. The heads of state were unanimous on 
the issue of CIS flashpoints, in that they must be extinguished. 
They adopted statements intended to expedite a settlement to 
the Karabakh and Georgia-Abkhazia conflicts. 
  At today's meeting, a memorandum on cooperation to protect 
the state borders of the Republic of Belarus, the Russian 
Federation, and Ukraine was agreed and signed. 
  Our states now have a basis for a constant interaction in 
this most important sphere. We would also welcome Moldova's 
signing of this memorandum. One of the significant results of 
this meeting is that decisions on launching the machinery of our 
economic union have been taken. I would like to note that 
Ukraine joined it as an associate member at this meeting. The 
decisions envisage a free trade zone being set up in the CIS; a 
commission of the economic union is being formed as a standing 
structure of the economic union. 
  Several agreements on economic cooperation were signed by 
the 
heads state. The agreement on the setting up of a free trade 
zone involves a gradual lifting of custom duties and taxes and 
tariff restrictions in the trade between the member countries. I 
think at the present stage we shall concentrate our main efforts 
on this aspect. This will ensure a closer interconnection of our 
economic systems on the market foundation. 
  On the whole, we look with considerable optimism at the CIS 
development prospects. The citizens of Russia are thankful to 
the heads of state for their decision that Russia should hold 
the chairmanship not for six months as was agreed before but 
until the end of 1994. It was decided that the next sitting of 
the Council of Heads of State should be held on 9 September. 
  Now I give the floor to Executive Secretary, Ivan 
Mikhaylovich Korotchenya. 
  [Korotchenya] Boris Nikolayevich, you have so adequately, 
so broadly covered the progress of our work that there is no 
need for me to add to your account, and I should think that we 
might switch over to answering questions. Go ahead. 
  [Yeltsin] Maybe we ought to list what we've signed. 
  [Korotchenya] Yes, let's list them. 
  [Yeltsin] Shall we? 
  [Korotchenya] Yes. 
  [Yeltsin] Let's list them. After all, it's very important, 
you understand, not only to Russia and the CIS countries, but 
also to the whole world. Go ahead. 
  [Korotchenya, reading from paper] Questions relating to the 
implementation of the treaty creating an economic union. There 
were three of them: on Ukraine's joining the economic union as 
an associate member -- which has been mentioned; on the creation 
of a permanent body under the Commonwealth's coordinating 
consultative committee; and on the creation of free-trade areas. 
  On the constituent treaty creating a relief fund for the 
Republic of Tajikistan. These are questions which stem from 
instructions from the Council of Heads of State. On measures to 
ensure the relations of the Commonwealth of Independent States 
and its statutory bodies with international organizations and 
forums. Six -- a statute on the CIS states' Defense Ministers' 
Council. On additional measures to stabilize the situation on 
the Tajik-Afghan border. 
  The third group of questions -- questions of relations at 
the 
initiative of the Commonwealth's state statutory bodies: on 
cooperation in the field of the [word indistinct] preparation of 
the economy; on the duration of the presence of the collective 
peacekeeping forces in the Republic of Tajikistan; on the 
commander of the collective peacekeeping forces. 
  Information on the progress of talks was received by the 
Russian Federation from the Central Asian and Transcaucasian 
states on cooperation to protect the borders by third countries, 
and on the implementation of the memorandum of the heads of the 
Commonwealth states, dated 24 December 1993, on cooperation over 
protecting the external state borders. A declaration on 
observing the sovereignty and territorial integrity and 
inviolability of the borders of the CIS states. 
  There were several questions in the category of other 
business: on providing additional urgent assistance to the 
Kyrgyz Republic. On the flag and emblem of the Commonwealth of 
Independent States. 
  [Yeltsin] Show it to them. 
  [Korotchenya] I'll show it to you. [Unfolds flag and 
displays 
it] 
  On the chairmanship of the Commonwealth's statutory bodies. 
On the conclusion of agreements on the conditions for the stay 
of the executive secretariat of the Commonwealth of Independent 
States on the territory of the Republic of Belarus; and on the 
preparation of proposals for amendments to the basic document of 
the Commonwealth of Independent States. The question is 
somewhat broader, bearing in mind a proposal from Boris 
Nikolayevich. 
  This is a package of issues which was discussed by the 
heads of state. The heads of government discussed 22 issues. Is 
it necessary to announce them? No? Therefore, the third 
microphone. 
  [Grishchenko] Thank you. Grishchenko, INTERFAX. They say 
that 
in the framework of this summit Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin was 
going to have meetings with presidents of some CIS states. Have 
such meetings taken place, Boris Nikolayevich? If so, what was 
under discussion there? Thank you. 
  [Yeltsin] Yes, meetings did take place with those who asked 
for them. With a delegation and, accordingly, with the president 
of the Republic of Moldova, Mircea Ionovich Snegur. Then with 
the president of Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyevich Aliyev. With 
Armenian president Levon Akopovich Ter-Petrosyan. And after the 
interval there will be a meeting between two delegations from 
Russia and Ukraine. 
  [Korotchenya] Microphone number four, please. 
  [Lenskiy] Lenskiy of the newspaper PRAVDA. Esteemed Boris 
Nikolayevich, what is your attitude in principle to Nursultan 
Nazarbayev's idea of setting up a Eurasian Union? Was this 
question discussed at the meeting of heads of state? 
  [Yeltsin] As Nursultan Abishevich Nazarbayev was, 
unfortunately, taken ill and as, therefore, we were unable to 
receive from him exhaustive information on this question, this 
question was not discussed. 
  [Korotchenya] Microphone number two. 
  [Semenov] Yuliy Semenov of Mayak Radio. You know that 
journalists are no more than intermediaries between you and the 
readers, listeners and viewers. People listen to you and watch 
you and many people will wonder: What will ordinary people, the 
inhabitants of any state of the Commonwealth, gain from your 
meeting today. Which of the presidents would like to answer 
this question? I beg your pardon. 
  [Yeltsin] I would be happy to reply but perhaps there are 
various opinions. Would you like to say something, Mircea? 
  [Snegur] I think that any of us could reply. Well, first of 
all, the signing of the agreement on the creation of a free 
economic zone shows the intentions and the ways to restore a 
single economic space which we so lack at the moment, that is, 
the removal of barriers obstructing the movement of output from 
East to West, West to East, North to South and so on. This 
obstructs everyone; it obstructs state enterprises, it obstructs 
the privatized enterprises, it obstructs private traders who 
also produce products one way or another. And at present a very 
great amount of output has piled up, seemingly, in all 
countries, in all enterprises which, because of these barriers 
practically have no outlet. I think that this is a matter of 
some importance for ordinary people. Because it provides the 
opportunity to earn some money. It provides the opportunity to 
have funds, to have money for the labor people have already put 
in. And I think that this is the most important, perhaps the 
most important thing in the economic documents which were signed 
today. That is how I see it. 
  [Yeltsin] Does anyone want to add anything? 
  [Kyrgyz President Askar Akayev] Can I add a few words? 
  [Yeltsin] Please, do. 
  [Akayev] I would like to say that ordinary people are 
particularly concerned that over the past years we might have 
lost our feeling of solidarity. A shining example is being set 
to the people, the ordinary people of Kyrgyzstan, who this 
spring suffered such catastrophe due to unprecedented natural 
disasters, landslips and spring flooding. And the decision by 
the heads of state, the special decision to show solidarity and 
help all the ordinary people of Kyrgyzstan who have lost their 
houses and homes, whom we've been forced to resettle, I think, 
shows that our commonwealth is becoming stronger and continuing 
its good traditions of solidarity of jointly solving such issues 
which arise in emergency situations. Thank you. 
  [Korotchenya] First microphone. 
  [Terekhov] Good afternoon. Terekhov, INTERFAX. Could you 
please say, every time you, esteemed presidents, adopt extremely 
important, almost historical, documents. But they are not being 
implemented because there has not been and there is not a rigid 
mechanism of responsibility for nonfulfillment. Do you intend to 
set up such a rigid mechanism now which will make a country 
responsible for not fulfilling its obligations? 
  And another thing, if I may. A paradoxical situation has 
arisen when two countries, members of the Commonwealth, in fact 
are in a state of war. Do you intend to help the two presidents 
who, although the names of their states begin with the same 
letter, are sitting at the oppositite sides of the room even 
here? Do you have any intention to help them to somewhow finally 
ensure that their peoples will not be fighting any more? 
  [Terekhov] Ivan Mikhaylovich, perhaps you can expand on this 
question? 
  [Korotchenya] Well, there is too much to say. First of all 
... 
  [Yeltsin, interrupting] Well, the same question, please. 
  [Terekhov] To ask the presidents of Russia and Ukraine to be 
more precise: today you are meeting to discuss the situation in 
the Black Sea Fleet. In essence, what happened there was some 
sort of guerrilla tactics or an act of piracy. Please, explain 
your views and positions to us - or rather, to your peoples. We 
would like to know your views on what is happening there. Thank 
you. 
  [Yeltsin] Let us not complicate things now, before the 
meeting, they are complex as they are. We can answer this 
question only after we have met and discussed things among 
ourselves. As regards to Nagornyy Karabakh and the 
Georgian-Abkhazian conflict, we adopted some concrete measures 
in order to make a breakthrough in this situation. 
  In regards to control, we decided to fully re-examine all 
the 
decisions taken by the CIS states from its very first sitting 
and after this the questions of procedure and control over 
implementation of these decisions will be subject to a special 
discussion by heads of the CIS states. And only after this the 
mechanism of, shall we say, enforcing the prompt implementation 
of the adopted decisions will be approved. 
  [Korotchenya] Do we need to add anything to this question? 
No? The fourth microphone, please. 
  [Chernukha] I have a question for the chairman of the 
Supreme Soviet of Tajikistan. Are you satisfied with the 
documents which have been signed today in connection with the 
protection of your state borders? My second question: I 
believe that you are opposed to the idea of creating a Eurasian 
Union; could you explain the reasons for your stance? Thank 
you. Marina Chernukha from Radio Rossii. 
  [Rakhmonov] In reply to the first question, yes. Today among 
the questions which were discussed by the heads of states four 
questions were discussed and signed on Tajikistan. In 
particular, there were questions about strengthening the 
Tajik-Afghan border. But we are going to call it the southern 
border of the CIS. It is not only the border of Tajikistan. 
  On the second question: I do not know where you got the 
information that I am an overt opponent of Nursultan 
Abishevich's [Nazarbayev] initiative. I, indeed, gave an 
interview in which I said that, yes, the idea is good but the 
CIS has not exhausted its possibilities and reserves. And we 
confirmed this today by putting our signatures to the documents 
which were adopted here today. 
  [Korotchenya] Thank you. Microphone number three, please. 
  [Uzbek President Islam Karimov] I would like to say 
something 
on this question. 
  [Korotchenya] Islam Abdughaniyevich, go ahead, please. 
  [Karimov] When the impression is created that one person 
puts 
forward an idea and then it is discussed at all forums and 
people are divided into opponents and supporters, I consider 
that this is not quite correct. Because, although the idea of a 
Eurasian Union has been put forward, it does not have any 
serious foundation. And, therefore, if you ask who is against 
it, we shall reply that we are all in favour. But serious 
thought needs to be given to the question of what lies behind 
it. It needs to be examined and good grounds need to be found 
because, as the experience of the existence of the CIS shows, 
and even the latest initiative, the creation of an economic 
union, which we are all in agreement with and which we are all 
moving towards, in step with one another, we are making great 
efforts and undertaking measures and we have discussed this 
question frequently at meetings of the heads of the states, even 
here, unfortunately, not everything is being resolved and not 
everything is so easy to resolve. 
  Therefore, I consider that it would be incorrect to throw 
aside the idea of strengthening the Commonwealth, primarily via 
economic structures, via economic union, when we have only got 
half-way -- although we all put our signatures to this -- and to 
put forward the new idea of a Eurasian Union. In general, it 
smacks of populism. 
  [Kazakh Vice President Yerik Asanbayev] Esteemed comrades, 
since the idea which Nursultan Abishevich [Nazarbayev] has put 
forward is arousing such great interest I consider it necessary 
to make a few comments. This idea was put forward in response 
to a question which was asked at a meeting held by the President 
of Kazakhstan at Moscow University. 
  We are now studying the reaction of politicians, not only at 
home but also abroad. The main newspapers and the mass media 
are reacting to this. This idea has been more clearly spelled 
out today in today's first edition of SNG-OBSHCHIY RYNOK ["CIS 
-- Common Market"]. We are now preparing its systemic, 
integrated structure and probably it will be presented in this 
form at a meeting of the heads of state. I am saying this 
because this intention was mentioned indirectly at today's 
meeting of the CIS heads of state. 
  Moreover, you know that today there was discussion of the 
question of preparing the concept and specific mechanisms for 
the long-term integrated development of the CIS. I believe that 
this idea, after it has been made more specific will fit into or 
could well fit into, the framework of the instruction which the 
conference of heads of states gave today to the Coordinating 
Committee, to the Foreign and Defense Ministries. 
  Therefore, I think that this an idea which is a logical 
continuation of the process of integrating the CIS countries and 
it has not been produced out of thin air. I agree that this is 
a problem which is far from simple. But it has been dictated by 
life. Thank you. 
  [Korotchenya] Thank you. Microphone number three, please. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] Thank you. NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA. 
I have two questions. The first is to Boris Nikolayevich 
Yeltsin and probably also to Eduard Amvrosyevich Shevardnadze. 
How should we understand today's agreement to strengthen the 
role of Russian peacekeeping forces in the Caucasus? Can you 
comment on this and these forces' role in Georgia? What is the 
opinion on this of the Georgian head of state? 
  And the second question is to Leonid Makarovich Kravchuk. 
Ukraine remains the sole member of the CIS that has joined the 
Economic Union as an associate member. Does this entail any 
particular status for Ukraine in the CIS and how do your 
colleagues, Leonid Makarovich, view this status? Thank you. 
  [Yeltsin] We adopted a head of states' declaration on the 
Georgia-Abkhazia conflict. In principle, Russia, in preliminary 
consultations with Eduard Amvrosyevich [Shevardnadze], agreed to 
provide peacekeeping forces which will also include forces or 
observers from the UN and CSCE. 
  [Georgian Head of State Eduard Shevardnadze] I agree with 
what Boris Nikolayevich [Yeltsin] said. Well, journalists have 
an idea of what this means. I'll quote literally two phrases 
from that declaration, which we signed today and which, I think, 
has very considerable significance. 
  It says here: Affirming our commitment to the earliest 
solution to the problem of refugees, observance of human and 
national minority rights, the principle of the territorial 
integrity of the Republic of Georgia and the securing of 
statehood for Abkhazia, the states of the Commonwealth of 
Independent States, signatories to the treaty on collective 
security, call on the Security Council of the United Nations 
Organization to resolve without delay the issue of whether to 
conduct peacekeeping operations in Abkhazia. That is an appeal 
to the Security Council. 
  Also, the Council for Collective Security expresses its 
willingness -- if for whatever reason a solution is not 
forthcoming in the near future, and time for us is a very 
important, the decisive, factor at the moment because hundreds 
of thousands of refugees are suffering, in accordance with the 
spirit and principle of the treaty, which is designed to ensure 
the peaceful and safe development of the signatory states, and 
with the consent of the parties to the conflict -- to introduce 
to the conflict zone peacekeeping forces consisting of military 
units of interested state signatories to the treaty. 
  I think that this is a very balanced and very serious 
approach to a problem that is highly acute not only for our 
republic but also for the entire region. 
  [Korotchenya] 
Thank you. Leonid Makarovich, please. 
  [Ukraine President Leonid Kravchuk] Everyone knows that the 
main trend of economic development within the framework of the 
CIS is integration, economic integration. This is not happening 
just within the framework of the CIS; it is a world-wide trend. 
The peoples and the states support this trend of economic 
integration. 
  The forms of integration could vary. The form adopted by the 
CIS is economic union. At the present stage Ukraine joined the 
economic union as an associated member, but it signs, as it did 
today, all the economic documents without exeption. The question 
is not of integration per se, but whether conditions and 
circumstances under which this integration is taking place are 
equal. 
  In connection with this I should like to return to the 
questions raised here today. You see, the processes taking place 
in the CIS are not all the same. Some countries are getting 
closer together, others prefer to keep at a certain distance 
within this union. For example, the question of merging the 
monetary systems - like Russia and Belarus. This is a deeper 
level of integration than that of the Eurasian Union. If such 
processes go further, the Eurasian Union and the CIS will become 
unnecessary as there will be no need for them, as this is 
already somewhat broader than economic integration. 
  Therefore, in this situation Ukraine is an active and 
enterprising participant in the economic union. 
  [Korotchenya] Thank you. Microphone number two, please. 
  [Melnikova] Anna Melnikova of ITAR-TASS. My first question 
is 
to Boris Nikolayevich. Today you put forward the concept of 
further integration within the framework of the CIS. Could you 
please explain what precisely this will be. Will it be just 
economic integration or will there be some elements of political 
integration? 
  My second question is to all the participants in the 
collective security treaty: Do you plan to discuss joining 
NATO's Partnership for Peace program? Do you have any particular 
views on this? Do you consider it expedient to have some sort of 
common approach on this? Thank you. 
  [Yeltsin] We heard information from the Russian foreign 
minister, who is the chairman of the Council of Ministers of the 
CIS countries. 
  He was instructed, or rather the Council of Ministers was 
instructed, to draw up a long-term plan for further integration 
of CIS states in the political, and economic, and 
military-technical arenas. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Three councils; the defense ministers 
as well. 
  [Yeltsin] They and the defense ministers, yes. The Council 
of 
Defense Ministers. They have so far presented a document that 
is, I would say, rather modest. It consists of 10 headings 
which are not satisfactory and do not reflect our entire 
perspective on integration of CIS countries. 
  Therefore the Council of Heads of State decided to instruct 
the Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the CIS and the 
Council of Ministers of Defense of the CIS to draw up a concept 
for further concentration of integration of the Commonwealth 
countries and, before the next meeting, submit it for broad 
discussion by the heads of state. 
  [Korotchenya] First microphone, please. 
  [Yakovlev] The Mir International Television and Radio 
Company, Yakovlev. We have not yet heard today from the 
presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan. Eduard Amvrosiyevich 
[Shevardnadze] touched only on the fact -- only read out what 
was adopted today in the documents concerning those calamities 
that have affected your peoples. The Mir television company has 
been showing what is taking place in these countries and has 
been showing not only actions connected with the fact that 
people are being killed. It has in addition been showing the 
refugees issue. 
  What can you say in respect of a peacekeeping mission and 
what specifically can you say today to those people and those 
ordinary families who are waiting first and foremost for your 
solution and not a solution by some or other foreign forces? 
  [Korotchenya] Geydar Aliyevich, please. 
  [Aliyev] First, I did not have a question. This is why I 
was not answering. In response to the comment by one of the 
correspondents that we are sitting in different places: I do 
not know why we have been put like this. I cannot see any 
particular procedure or principle about where we sit. We do not 
have a say in this. We sit where they tell us. 
  With regards to the conflict -- or war -- between Armenia 
and 
Azerbaijan, I have recently made an important address about 
which the journalists should know. I spoke about this issue 
today at the session of the heads of states. Therefore, I did 
not think it was necessary to talk about it here, especially now 
that a statement has been adopted on this question by the heads 
of states. However, because you are asking, I have to answer. 
Of course, it is not normal when Armenia and Azerbaijan -- two 
states within the CIS -- are at war with each other. This is an 
abnormal phenomenon that has no precedent in the world, I think. 
This does little for the reputation of the Commonwealth. I 
spoke about this at our meeting in Ashkhabad [Ashgabat] on 24 
December and I was speaking about this at the summit today. We 
have discussed it there and, as a result, a statement on this 
question was adopted, as suggested by the CIS chairman, Russian 
President Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin. 
  You have mentioned the problem of refugees. More than 1 
million Azerbaijan citizens are now refugees, living in tents. 
These are not just Azerbaijan refugees driven from 
Nagorno-Karabakh; there are also refugees from seven regions 
surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh -- the regions with a concentrated 
Azerbaijan population -- which are now occupied by Armenian 
armed formations. In these regions everything was destroyed or 
plundered and a million people have fled to other regions of 
Azerbaijan to save their lives. Because we do not have a place 
for them, they live in tents, which we receive as part of 
humanitarian aid from various countries. The Iranian Islamic 
Republic has undertaken to provide 100,000 refugees with tents, 
food, and clothing. The Turkish Government has also pledged 
some help. International Arab and other organizations also help 
us. Of course, all this cannot be normal. I have been saying 
it all the time: This war has no prospects. We should put an 
end to this war. Twenty percent of Azerbaijan territory is 
occupied by Armenian armed formations. One cannot agree with 
this. This is not a way of achieving the goals that certain 
circles are trying to achieve. I made appeals on this matter to 
various heads of state and to Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin. I 
hope that the statement adopted by the heads of state today -- 
which, incidentally, is the first one of its kind in CIS history 
-- might help because it demands that heads of Armenia and 
Azerbaijan declare a cease-fire and cessation of all military 
actions. We are ready to stop hostilities at any time. We are 
suffering from aggression. The war is being waged on the 
territory of Azerbaijan, not Armenia. People are being killed. 
Of course, people are now being killed in this war on the 
Azerbaijani side and on the Armenian side. Over the past five 
days Armenian armed formations have been waging an intensive 
attack. Azerbaijanis are dying and Armenians are dying. This 
cannot be allowed. 
  In any event, we are doing, and will continue to do, 
everything we can to achieve a cease-fire, but the condition for 
this is that Armenian armed formations must leave occupied 
Azerbaijani territory. 
  I hope that this declaration by the CIS heads of state will 
help us resolve the issue. 
  [Korotchenya] Thank you, Geydar Aliyevich. Levon Akopovich, 
do you have something to say? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] Naturally. Before replying to the specific 
question I must make one clarification because there is a 
mistake in the wording of the question and, by the way, even in 
the way the journalist's question has been worded. Things are 
presented as if there are two states within the CIS that are at 
war with each other. This is not the case. The war is taking 
place between Nagorno-Karabakh and Azerbaijan. 
  More than ten international documents have been adopted 
about 
the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict at the level of the UN Security 
Council, three resolutions, three statements, approximately a 
dozen CSCE documents, and statements by the EC. Not one of 
these documents names Armenia as a party to the conflict. I 
reject this categorically and with full responsibility. That is 
the first thing. 
  Second, specific plans exist for settling the 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict: the CSCE plan, which was accepted by 
Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh and which was rejected by 
Azerbaijan. There is Russia's plan, which has been accepted, 
again, by Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh and which is rejected by 
Azerbaijan. 
  The CIS today adopted a declaration on this conflict, which 
is a kind of mandate, a mandate, for the Russian plan to resolve 
the conflict. The essence of the plan is the deployment of CIS 
disengagement forces in the conflict zone between Azerbaijani 
and Karabakh forces. 
  The fate of peace, the fate of the refugees, the fate of war 
and peace is in the hands of Azerbaijan. Everything depends on 
the political will of Azerbaijan. Armenia and Karabakh are 
ready, literally before you, now, at this table, to sign the 
agreement that Russia has drawn up. 
  [Korotchenya] Thank you. 
  [Shevardnadze] With your permission, I will give a 
clarification to the question asked. It should be borne in mind 
that within a state there could be conflicts that can be solved 
without outside assistance, as it were. Unfortunately, things 
have taken such a turn that from the very start the Abkhaz 
conflict has acquired an international nature, so to speak. 
This has entailed the necessary steps taken by the Georgian and 
Russian leadership, numerous agreements and accords on 
cease-fire and settlement to the conflict. Regrettably, they 
have failed to succeed, and these agreements have been violated. 
The question has now taken a very fundamental importance. The 
United Nations and the Security Council are constantly working 
on the problem, and Russia's positive mediating role can be seen 
very clearly. In my view, the fundamental statement of our 
Council today to demand once again that peacekeeping forces be 
introduced...[pauses] and if the Security Council fails to take 
an appropriate decision on this issue, then we have to put 
things in order relying on our own forces. I see this as a way 
out of an impasse. This is what I can say. 
  [Korotchenya] Thank you. The news conference is over, but 
there is time for one last question, from microphone three. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] Ostankino TV. I would like, 
however, to hear once again from the presidents who took part at 
the roundtable talks today -- I do not know who will speak out. 
What guarantees do they see for today's accords precisely to be 
implemented, what guarantees? Are there any now? Not in some 
vague future but today, are there any guarantees today? Do you 
see them or not? 
  [Yeltsin] You see, the CIS Council of Heads of State is, 
after all, not the same as strict factory management. There are 
no factory director or his deputies where all instructions are 
complied with. Here we hold a council and discussion where a 
collective view is being developed, which is not 
straightforward. It is based on a compromise; it may suit some 
members and not suit others. So we cannot say that every 
decision will be rigorously complied with within strictly 
identified limits; this will not happen. Some decisions will 
be, of course, but other decisions will not. We have simply to 
outline this concord on some decisions, to agree on this 
concord, and then act jointly. 
  I believe that the majority of decisions -- there were 26 of 
them adopted by the Council of Heads of State -- are realistic. 
  But, what is the value of a decision alone about 
Nagorno-Karabakh? What is it worth? How many years has this 
war been going on? To think that the war will end and a 
settlement will be found immediately following our decision and 
discussions would be naive. There is a vast amount of work ahead 
for all of us to achieve a peaceful outcome there. 
  We are confident that we will achieve it jointly with 
Azerbaijan, jointly with Armenia, jointly with Russia, and other 
CIS states. The same is true about the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict. 
In other words, there are such issues that cannot be solved 
right away by simply signing a document. There are other 
issues, however, such as, for instance, the new provision on the 
Council of Defense Ministers, which we have approved. There are 
no problems or questions here at all. A decision has been made, 
and it will be complied with as well as a number of other 
decisions. 
  Thank you for the news conference, and good-bye. 

