BFN 

  [Text] The more than 100 countries attending the Nonaligned 
Movement [NAM] Ministerial Summit have called for effective, 
immediate implementation of the UN resolution on the need to end 
the economic, commercial, and financial blockade imposed by the 
U.S. Government against Cuba. The final document approved today 
by the foreign ministers during the closing session of the 
summit calls upon the United States to abstain from acting in 
bad faith against Cuba and calls for the return of the 
Guantanamo Naval Base to that country. It likewise demands 
stopping violations of Cuban air space and waters and the 
broadcasting of hostile radio and television programs in 
violation of international laws. The document also urges the 
United States to solve its differences with Cuba through 
negotiations grounded in equality and mutual respect. The 
document calls for the international community to adopt urgent, 
effective steps to end the implementation of unilateral coercive 
measures against developing countries for political reasons. 
  During the closing session, Colombian Vice Foreign Minister 
Vilma Safra announced that the City of Cartagena de Indias will 
host the 11th summit of NAM heads of state in September 1995. 
During her address, Safra stated that Colombia undertakes this 
responsibility fully aware that the success of the movement will 
depend on the strength of its convictions, its unity, and its 
negotiating power. 
  Among the documents approved during the closing session, 
there are two special resolutions on Rwanda and 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. In the case of Rwanda, the NAM Summit urges 
the UN Security Council to urgently take every measure necessary 
to put an end to massacres in that African nation. To this end, 
it called for arranging for all of the resources needed to 
organize and deploy UN peacekeepers in Rwanda and to summon a 
conference of all the sectors involved in the conflict. In the 
case of Bosnia-Hezergovina, the NAM summit demanded the 
immediate cessation of hostilities and the halting of all 
military operations, with the supervision of UN peacekeepers. 

