Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lhasa, January 17 (XINHUA) -- China's Tibet 
Autonomous Region experienced a robust economic upturn last 
year, according to Gyaincain Norbu, chairman of the regional 
people's government. 
  Speaking at a regional economic working conference Sunday 
[17 
January], the chairman said that initial statistics show the 
gross domestic output last year came to 3.65 billion yuan, up 
8.1 percent over the previous year. 
  With some 80 percent of its population living in the 
pastoral 
and agricultural areas, and the output value of farming and 
animal husbandry accounting for 80 percent of the total, a 
sustained and stable growth in farming and animal husbandry is 
of vital importance to the region's economy at large, the 
chairman said. 
  According to him, last year was the sixth consecutive year 
that the region reaped bumper harvests, with agricultural 
output value reaching 2.23 billion yuan, a rise of 5.3 percent 
over a year earlier. 
  Meanwhile, he said, the region's animal husbandry last year 
maintained a stable development momentum, while rural and 
township enterprises saw healthy progress, which helped farmers' 
income increase by 5.1 percent to 515 yuan a year. 
  To ensure an economic uplift, the construction of a series 
of 
capital projects in the fields of energy, transportation and 
telecommunications was kicked off last year. The region's total 
investment in fixed assets last year stood at 1.59 billion yuan, 
up 15 percent over the previous year. 
  The expansion of Lhasa's Gonggar airport, whose runway is 
the 
longest in China, has been completed and the building of another 
airport is in full swing. 
  The renovation and upgrading of three highways leading to 
neighboring Sichuan and Qinghai Provinces, and Nepal was 
launched last year in a bid to improve contacts between the 
region and the outside, the chairman said. 
  Tibet is also accelerating the building of two hydroelectric 
plants. It has introduced the latest high technology to its 
burgeoning telecommunications industry. To date, 58 of the 71 
counties in the region have set up satellite-communication 
receiving stations and 35 of them have gone into use. 
Meanwhile, automatic switchboards have been installed in wider 
areas of the region's vast territory of 1.2 million sq km, 
Gyaincain Norbu said. 
  Following the country's reform and opening drive, foreign 
trade and tourism have turned out to be economic mainstays of 
the region. The trade volume topped 100 million U.S. dollars 
last year, 55 percent more than in 1992. 
  In recent years more tourist routes have been developed to 
tap the region's unique natural features. As a result, more 
than 26,000 overseas tourists visited Tibet last year, spending 
117 million yuan and 9.49 million U.S. dollars in foreign 
exchange, the chairman said. 
  As one way to speed up the development of the region's 
economy, Tibet is attaching increasing importance to enhancing 
ties with overseas countries and regions. The region last year 
approved over 40 joint-venture projects, involving a total 
overseas investment of 67.11 million yuan and 9.63 million U.S. 
dollars. 
  Thanks to the overall development of the region's economy in 
the past year, Tibet's financial revenue for 1993 is expected to 
reach 150 million yuan, up 37 percent over 1992. 

