BFN 

<F P=106> [The "Views" column: "Will We Learn?"] </F>
  [Text] U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, being 
consistent with the always irreproachable U.S. behavior toward 
Turkey, said in Istanbul--on the sidelines of the NATO 
conference--that the Greek military aircraft, that are 
intercepting Turkish aircraft when they violate the Greek 
airspace, should be disarmed. 
  According to Mr. Christopher and the traditionally 
pro-Turkish U.S. policy, the continuous violations and 
infringements by Turkish military aircraft in the Aegean do not 
cause any problem but their interception by armed Greek aircraft 
does! Fortunately, he did not ask us not to intercept them 
either. 
  Of course--as the foreign news agencies reported--[Greek 
Foreign Minister] Mr. Karolos Papoulias told Mr. Christopher not 
to interfere in Greek affairs and said that "no such issue would 
be raised if the violations had not taken place." 
  As far as Mr. Christopher is concerned, it appears that the 
threats by [Turkish Prime Minister] Mrs. Tansu Ciller about a 
Turkish landing on the Greek islands do not cause any problem. 
According to U.S. policy, there is neither a problem with the 
Turkish occupation in Cyprus, nor is there any evidence of it 
regarding the oppression of the Greek minority in Albania, nor 
is there any actual problem with the Skopje [The Former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia--FYROM] issue. 
  Being aware of U.S. policy, which demands concessions from 
Greece, and being even more aware of Turkish provocative games, 
threats, and alleged retractions, we talk about "examples of 
detente" in the escalation, and the government spokesman says 
that "the government believes that the statements by Mr. Hikmet 
Cetin are expressed carefully and moderately." 
  However, the Turkish prime minister is neither careful nor 
moderate when MILLIYET confirms that 15 days ago she also 
reiterated the threats about landing on Greek islands. 
  After all, when will we learn that Turkey remains 
steadfastly 
intransigent and provocative toward Greece and, moreover, that 
this Turkish stance is encouraged by the U.S. policy? 
  We must learn this in order to stop believing in the 
so-called good offices of the American mediators and the other 
recommendations and "friendly" openings. Unless Mr. Andreas 
Papandreou is aware of other things that the other 
Greeks--people, parties, and press--do not know.... [ellipses as 
published] 

