BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Gabriela Hernandez] </F>
  [Text] Ciudad Victoria -- Tamaulipas Attorney General Raul 
Morales Cadena gave assurances yesterday that Juan Garcia 
Abrego's gang, known as the Matamoros Cartel, has shifted its 
center of operations to Monterrey. "In fact the Matamoros Cartel 
no longer exists in Tamaulipas; it has transferred to Nuevo 
Leon," the attorney general said. "In Matamoros the Garcia 
Abrego gang has been totally dismembered. Even the PGR 
[Attorney General's Office] is looking for them in Monterrey 
instead of Matamoros because it is known that they have 
transferred to that city." 
  Garcia Abrego, leader of the Matamoros Cartel, is one of the 
drug traffickers most wanted at present by Mexican and U.S. 
authorities. His gang has been accused of over 60 homicides and 
is known as one of the Cali Cartel's leading connections in the 
cocaine trade. 
  The attorney general said that only third-rate drug 
traffickers remain in Matamoros, where violent drug-related 
incidents are growing less frequent. "In Matamoros," he said 
"all that is left are memories of the Oliverio Chavez Araujo 
gang; what we have now are third-rate drug traffickers who are 
struggling for territory." 
  He pointed out that the special operations initiated last 
year by the PGR forced the gangs to flee to other cities where 
it would be more difficult to identify them. "The PGR has 
continued its operations and investigations in Matamoros," he 
said, "but we presume that Garcia Abrego's center of operations 
is now in Monterrey." 
  Morales Cadena believes that the Matamoros Cartel 
transferred 
to Monterrey and is operating in that city because several of 
Garcia Abrego's top lieutenants have been spotted there. Jose 
Carlos Resendez was arrested in Monterrey last week; he is 
considered one of the Matamoros Cartel capo's money launderers. 
  The attorney general also said that last week a residence in 
the Del Salle neighborhood in Monterrey was seized from Raul 
Valladares del Angel, who is believed to be one of Garcia 
Abrego's partners. Valladares del Angel has been a fugitive ever 
since he escaped from jail in Cameron County, Texas, last year. 
  The attorney general explained that the transfer of cartel 
operations is evident in the Matamoros homicide rate, which 
dropped 50 percent during the first quarter as compared to the 
same period in 1993. "Most significantly, 60 percent of the 
homicides perpetrated on the border used to be drug-related, but 
thus far this year we have only discovered drug connections in 
four murders," he said. 

