Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dmitriy Reznikov. First paragraph is NOVAYA </F>
YEZHEDNEVNAYA GAZETA introduction.] 
  [Text] Computer piracy in Russia is a widespread 
phenomenon. The world average ratio of stolen (that is, 
illegally copied) to purchased software is about 1:3; in Russia 
it is 999:1. 
  Russia is computerizing rapidly. No self-respecting firm can 
do without a computer, and frequently blue monitor screens glow 
even in the windows of private residences. But virtually every 
common citizen, knowing how expensive the computer itself is, 
perceives computer programs as some sort of free supplement to 
the machine itself, as if they were empty diskettes. There are 
few who realize that computer programs frequently cost much more 
than the computers themselves. 
  All Russians, whom fate has somehow granted a computer, are 
in one way or another connected with the main global computer 
problem of piracy (or, scientifically speaking, bootlegging). 
Almost all software products used today in Russia are stolen, 
that is, not purchased from an official dealer of the producer, 
or copied without the producer's knowledge and consent. Every 
year, computer firms suffer multimillion, even billion dollar 
losses from illegal copying. The majority of Russians who are 
associated in one way or another with computer equipment engage 
continuously in piracy. Don't put on a concerned face...it's you 
too. Turn on your computer and look at the hard disk directory: 
did you buy many of the programs there officially? Or for 
example, yesterday you presented your friend with a diskette 
with the latest Aidstest; did you pay for it, or did you copy 
it yourself? It's not even important that you didn't profit from 
this. Piracy is any use of one copy of purchased software by 
more than one user simultaneously. In civilized countries this 
is a crime with a rather severe punishment. We have these laws 
too, but they are universally ignored, because the process is 
uncontrollable. 
  You must understand that I'm not complaining a lot about 
this 
yet. World prices for software are intended for the world, and 
not for us. Although prices are still somewhat lower here, not 
everyone can bring himself to pay the equivalent of 400 dollars 
for the latest version of Corel Draw when he can simply get it 
from his friends. Thus, the real prohibition of computer piracy 
will be equivalent to prohibiting computers in general, and this 
means our hopelessly lagging country will again have to go back 
to the drawing board. 
  Despite the fact that Russia is firmly in first place in the 
world in the number of illegal copies and the ratio of stolen to 
purchased software, we are still far from understanding what 
true piracy is. We are as far from it as the pirates of the 
eighteenth century are from today's pirates. Today there are 
entire pirate companies with the same scope as computer 
companies, but which do not advertise. They fill the market with 
their products, which have a quality approaching the quality of 
the true product. The bootlegs (illegal copies) are sold in 
large software stores, in packaging with documentation, in a 
completely official-looking form. These companies are mainly in 
the former socialist countries of Eastern Europe, which now seem 
to specialize in the production of illegal goods, from imitation 
``German'' liquors to, as you can see, computer programs. 
However, these firms also exist in the West. For example, 
recently, illegal copies of a remarkable game, Formula One Grand 
Prix, and Oxford Chess by MicroProse were demonstrated to me. 
They had been brought from England and everything was in order, 
from the ``official'' diskettes to the documentation... 
  These programs are mainly bought by our countrymen because, 
first, they are cheaper than the r eal thing, and second, 
because few Russians have seen the original packaging of the 
computer game. To those people who want to know how to 
differentiate bootlegs from originals, I advise them to take a 
look: 1. originals always have a colorful box; copies are sold 
in cellophane packets. 2. In the documentation usually the 
illegal books have colorful covers, but inside the text is a 
xerox. Virtually all true books with program documentation are 
printed in at least two colors and if the book has 
illustrations, especially photographs, they are usually color 
illustrations. 3. All diskettes should have the company logo. If 
you still decide to buy the illegal copy, I advise you to check 
it before you leave the store, because usually pirates use bad 
diskettes and half of them don't work. 
  Games comprise the majority of bootlegs. This is not 
surprising because they are the only type of software which is 
constantly updated, and for which the demand is never satiated. 
Of the serious general-purpose programs, the average person only 
needs a couple programming language compilers, one text editor, 
a couple gr aphic editors, DOS, Aidstest, and Norton. He can 
have an unlimited number of games, according to his temperament 
(I, for example, have 350.). Thus, all firms who produce games 
try to protect themselves from piracy. 
  They do this in different ways. Some simply cite the 
copyright law with the fine (in the U.S. up to a million 
dollars) and the imprisonment (up to five years) which one 
incurs for illegal copying and distribution of the product. 
Others use more effective forms of protection, for example, Doc 
check, when the program, either at the very beginning or at the 
most interesting part (if it is a game) suddenly asks one to 
open the accompanying book to some page and enter some word on 
some line of some paragraph, or some password, or a serial 
number, or to find a picture in the documentation and say what 
number it corresponds to, etc. 
  Another more cunning verification method is a disk method. 
The most primitive variety is the presence of information on the 
original diskette which is ``invisible'' to the operating system 
(and consequently to the user) which the program needs, but 
which is not copied from disk to disk. Sometimes the 
verification of placement of files on a disk is used, sometimes 
it is the presence of marked sectors on the disk. Some firms 
format their diskettes so that they are completely unsuitable 
for DOS, but the program itself can be read from it. Sometimes 
they make special key diskettes which cannot be copied and must 
be placed in the disk drive upon the request of the booted 
program. This method of protection is gradually becoming 
obsolete as it is inconvenient for users and virtually all games 
and programs today are so big that one must use a hard disk. 
  Gradually, all software producers are using a new 
information 
carrier, laser disks (CD-ROM) like those used to record music 
and films. They cannot be rewritten, large volumes of 
information can be stored on them (300-600 megabytes, more than 
the average hard disk, for example), and in general they require 
no protection. For this same reason they are not very widespread 
here. By the way, firms are actively working on the ability to 
record on laser disks. This ``problem'' will obviously be solved 
soon, so one will soon be able to copy them as easily as 
diskettes. 
  Small, relatively unknown firms have a tendency to be mean 
to 
pirates. They make their programs so that if illegal copying is 
detected, they either infect the machine with some virus or 
damage all accessible information. It's understandable: Who 
wants to lose several million dollars on pirate copies? But they 
inspire neither respect nor sympathy, but rather malice in 
return. In essence, they are not much better than virus writers 
who do great damage. By the way, these firms usually go bankrupt 
because of their malice. First, people are simply afraid of 
programs which may infect their computer (by accident, for 
example), and second, pirate copies are usually provided with 
programs with a good reputation, and everyone prefers to buy 
what he knows. 
  However, any copy protection is usually little comfort to 
the 
producer because there are always people who know how to get 
around it. They are called crackers (not to be confused with the 
food; rather, safe crackers). These people are good programmers 
who understand the workings of their computer and who have a 
good knowledge of assembler. They crack games and programs so 
that they are incapable of recognizing their illegal status, 
that is, they remove from the program the part which is 
responsible for protection. This is also an entire industry. 
There are large cracking operations involved in the commercial 
distribution of the results of their work (as a rule through 
computer networks) with branches all over the world and a large 
number of members and couriers. There are few computer people 
among us who have not heard of such organizations as the United 
Group or The Dream Team. These two pirate groups, who appeared 
in the U.S., gradually expanded to the entire globe, and now 
even have branches in Russia (and not only in Moscow and St. 
Petersburg). 
  Russia has the largest number of cracker offices and 
individual crackers, but it must be said that cracking programs 
is hack-work here. Frequently games leave the hands of our 
``experts'' in an unusable form, but one usually finds this out 
only in the middle of the game, not at the beginning. The 
crackers need only to sell the ``cracked'' program; you don't 
notice the hack-work at first glance, after which you bang your 
head against the wall. They are filling the Russian underground 
market for games with completely inoperable illegal copies. 
That's how most of the adventure games from Delphine, and the 
Formula 1 games of MicroProse, were cracked; five minutes after 
the machine starts up one loses control, and much else. Western 
crackers periodically send us petitions with a request to take 
this seriously, but they don't accomplish much. 
  The best crackers in the world also live in Russia and 
worked 
in the former KGB. Earlier, their job was to ``crack'' enemy 
information, but since there are no enemies left and they need 
money, they are not squeamish about illegal work. They crack 
only serious programs which offer a great deal of protection for 
a lot of money and by individual order. Good cracker 
organizations are mainly found in the Scandinavian countries. 
  The third branch of the unofficial computer business is 
hint-writing. Here people write hints for adventure computer 
games. Mainly, these are hints which explain what one must do to 
reach the end. Tactics are written for strategic games, and sets 
of control key combinations are written for arcade games and 
simulators. There are fewer hints for logic games. In general, 
this is not completely official and not entirely a business: 
First, firms write their own hints to their games, and hint 
writers do not recopy them, but find their own hints, which are 
not always within their jurisdiction; second, as a rule, hints 
are written without any commercial interest by people who simply 
really like the game and by writing hints can play it anew (I 
know, I have written them myself.). This process is followed by 
pirates, who resell the hints. This is the truly illegal side: 
Some people write hints using passwords (instead of how to 
``break'' the game). A somewhat gray branch of this ``document 
piracy'' is the writing of programming books. These books are 
needed only by those who stole the language they need (the 
software). Registered users have free support. 
  Finally, the fourth and most dangerous branch of the 
underground computer business is hacking-entry into all kinds of 
computer systems and cracking them ``in person.'' There are 
greater profits, greater risks, greater punishments, and 
significantly greater damage done to the victim. I hope to speak 
about this next time. 
  Overall, the illegal computer business is no less complex 
and 
no smaller than the official business. All Russians have been 
drawn to it for a long time. Even if we correct the economic 
situation, which I strongly doubt, and if every citizen has the 
opportunity to buy not only a computer, but also programs for 
it, the situation will not correct itself quickly (if it 
corrects itself at all). We have been taught materialism for so 
many years that we cannot conceive of information, a product of 
intellectual activity which should not be touched, as something 
valuable. Thus, we copy all varieties of information, from music 
to computer programs, from books to films, without thinking that 
their creation involved efforts no less than those expended in 
creating, for example, a microwave oven. 

