Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] National Social Defense Secretary Mario Soliz 
yesterday warned that the government of President Gonzalo 
Sanchez de Lozada has undertaken an all-out offensive against 
drug trafficking by increasing antidrug operations in Chapare, 
by seizing substances that are considered precursors, and by 
eliminating all excessive or "illegal" coca farms in that area. 
Soliz said: "We want to make it clear that we are not 
fomenting a clash with peasants, but we will not hesitate to 
enforce the law." 
  He said that under the terms of Law 1008, legal coca farms 
destined for traditional consumption can cover an area of only 
12,000 hectares in the Yungas of La Paz. He reiterated that 
35,200 hectares must be eliminated in the next few years, 
regardless of whether peasants agree or disagree with this. 
"Illegal coca plantations are concentrated in Chapare. There 
are people who went to that area for the sole purpose of growing 
illegal coca plantations and causing problems for the 
government. We have reports that those people cut down many 
trees to prevent the government from enforcing the law," Soliz 
said. 
<H5>  Pits and Coca </H5>
  He explained that recent antidrug operations in Chapare have 
disclosed that coca has been planted for the exclusive purpose 
of producing cocaine. Maceration pits, which are the first 
stage for preparation of the drug, were detected a few meters 
from the plantations. 
  After showing to reporters several pictures of presumably 
new 
plantations, Soliz said that this type of activity cannot and 
must not be tolerated, for the sake of the country's image and 
of the commitments that Bolivian authorities have assumed with 
foreign governments. 
  He reported that in this regard, his secretariat has ordered 
the immediate destruction of illegal farms, adding that--in his 
opinion--this position is endorsed by the peasants who want to 
engage in the alternative development programs and plans. 
  He said that under the terms of the law, almost seven 
hectares were eradicated in the past two days, and that this 
task will continue in the following days. 
<H5>  Eradication </H5>
  Asked about fulfillment of the target of eradicating 5,000 
hectares of coca farms, which has been agreed upon with the U.S. 
Government, Soliz admitted that this target will hardly be 
fulfilled. "We doubt that the total number of agreed upon 
hectares will be eradicated, but the government will make all 
efforts to comply with its international commitment beyond 31 
March, which was the previously established deadline," he said. 
  Bilateral agreements are annually signed with the U.S. 
Government. The Bolivian side has to eradicate a specific 
number of "illegal" hectares in return for U.S. Government 
promises to provide economic aid to Bolivia for its balance of 
payments. 
  During fiscal year 1994, which is about to end in the United 
States, an agreement was reached providing for the eradication 
of 5,000 hectares in return for $40 million. This target, 
however, will not be fulfilled. 
  Fewer than 3,000 hectares of illegal farms have so far been 
eradicated. Meanwhile, disbursement of a third $10 million 
installment remains uncertain. Asked about the subject, Soliz 
said that the fourth installment will not be received because of 
the nonfulfillment of the target. 
<H5>  Less Money, More Hectares </H5>
  According to the explanation given by Soliz, for the 1995 
U.S. fiscal year--which has just begun--Bolivia will have to 
promise to eradicate a larger area of illegal coca farms. "When 
the next agreement is signed, the idea is to eradicate the 
largest possible area of `illegal' farms which do no good to the 
country," Soliz said. 
  However, he declined to refer to an increase in U.S. 
economic aid, which for the past two years has dropped 
considerably from $66 million in fiscal year 1993 to almost $40 
million in fiscal year 1994. If this downward trend continues, 
Bolivian obligations will grow as U.S. aid drops, Chapare coca 
growers' leaders have said. 

