BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondents Vladimir Korochantsev </F>
and Yuriy Pichugin] 
  [Text] Pretoria, 8 May -- A Russian Federation delegation 
led by Vladimir Shumeyko, chairman of the Federation Council of 
the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, arrived in the 
Republic of South Africa [RSA] today. It will attend the 
inauguration ceremony of Nelson Mandela, the new president of 
South Africa, which will take place on 10 May. 
  At Jan Smuts airport near Johannesburg, Shumeyko made the 
following statement: 
  "A solemn and joyful event in the life of South Africa -- 
the 
inauguration of the first democratically elected president of 
the country -- has brought this Russian delegation to South 
Africa. 
  "As is known, Russia has made a weighty contribution to the 
cause of dismantling apartheid and ensuring a political 
settlement in the RSA. In the fight against the system of 
apartheid and in the process of establishing a negotiating 
process, we developed close friendly relations with the 
constructive forces in South Africa, which are now widely 
represented in the leadership of South Africa. We intend to 
maintain and strengthen these relations. 
  "The RSA and Russia are experiencing a similar period of 
renewal, a period of seeking the ways of future development 
while overcoming the old mentality and difficulties of adapting 
to the new realities. Who, therefore, is better qualified than 
we are to better understand each other's problems and mutually 
make use of the accumulated positive experience of social 
reformation." 
  The similarity of approach to many aspects of world politics 
paves the way to partnership in international relations. Russia 
maintains that the new South Africa must enter the world 
community and its international bodies as an equal participant, 
and that all remaining sanctions against it should be lifted 
without delay. We are prepared to help South Africa in this 
matter. 
  The delegation also brought a personal message from 
President 
Boris Yeltsin to President Nelson Mandela, congratulating him 
and stating that the Russian leadership and all Russia's 
citizens are ready to further promote bilateral cooperation with 
the RSA in all areas, which would benefit both democratic Russia 
and South Africa in the name of peace and prosperity." 
  In an ITAR-TASS interview, Vladimir Shumeyko stressed that 
the RSA used to be associated mainly with apartheid. Now when 
the democratic processes have begun in that country, just as 
they have been in Russia, the whole world wishes it success on 
this path. 
  Speaking of bilateral relations, the head of the Russian 
Federation delegation said they are not beginning from scratch. 
Since the sanctions against the RSA were lifted, many 
cooperation opportunities in various fields have opened up 
between the two countries that are building democracy. 
Interparliamentary relations are of considerable importance. 
Our countries have similar legislature in the economic sphere, 
and this makes our contacts much easier. We hope that from the 
outset we will start moving toward legislation that will take 
into account the interests of each partner. 

