Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Xie Yicheng: "Airlines Make Vow To Be </F>
More Punctual"] 
  [Text] Chinese airlines will be more punctual this year 
and airport security will be tightened, the Civil Aviation 
Administration of China (CAAC) said yesterday. 
  Chen Guangyi, the new director of CAAC, made the 
announcement 
at an ongoing aviation conference that opened on Monday. 
  Improvements in the national airlines will focus on rigid 
and 
modernized management. 
  "Serious flying accidents and air piracy must be put to an 
end," Chen said. The sector must stick to scientific management 
with high standards." Chen said last year was one of the worst 
in Chinese aviation history, with five crashes that killed 76 
people. 
  Several planes were hijacked to Taiwan as well. 
  Chen said most accidents were a result of lax security 
checks 
or flying code violations. 
  To combat this, flying teams are to reinforce technical 
instruction and train 600 personnel a year to ease the pilot 
shortage. 
  CAAC punished more than 120 people last year for flying 
accidents. Three pilots were discharged and 68 had their 
licenses suspended or downgraded. 
  Chen said CAAC also seriously disciplined Hainan Airlines 
for 
hiring pilots from other airlines and letting unlicensed 
personnel fly passenger jets. 
  Furthermore, domestic airports this year will intensify 
ground security and install more devices to detect illegal 
weapons. 
  Last year, CAAC punished 31 people, including 6 safety 
checkpoint chiefs, for poor security. 
  As part of the airline's dedication to service, it aims to 
raise flight punctuality to 86-88 percent this year, up from 85 
percent last year. 
  "Flight delays and cancellations are the biggest complaint 
of 
our travellers," Chen said. 
  In a push to improve service of carriers, CAAC will 
regularly 
publish the percentage of their flights arriving on time. 
  Official inspection and opinions from passengers last year 
listed China Eastern Airlines and Hangzhou Jianqiao Airport as 
the best in terms of service among the 12 major airlines and 12 
airports. 
  Chen also said passengers should get flight information and 
other queries answered promptly. In particular, he said, food 
and lodging must be arranged for travellers that are delayed. 
  Last year 33.7 million passengers and 696,000 tons of goods 
and mail were transported by air, up 16.8 and 21 percent from 
1992. 

