Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by David Romero Murillo] </F>
  [Text] San Pedro Sula -- Representatives of the assembly 
plant industry suspect that the U.S. Embassy is behind the 
organization of unions within the industrial parks. 
  Robert Larios Silva, president of "San Miguel" industrial 
park indicated that he had received information "from the mouths 
of union leaders themselves, that U.S. Ambassador in Honduras 
(William Pryce) has been supporting these movements and that he 
is sympathetic toward them because of his prior participation in 
union movements in the United States." 
  In addition, Larios Silva charged that the AFL-CIO movement 
is also interfering since it has paid for advertisement in the 
newspapers in order to express its support for the unions that 
are organizing within the assembly plant industry. 
  In evaluating the latest management-worker conflicts that 
are 
taking place within the industrial parks, Larios Silva said they 
have not been able yet to pinpoint the real origins of the 
problems. He indicated that by claiming ill-treatment by Korean 
firms' foremen and supervisors, workers have resorted to certain 
type of actions that have started to undermine other firms that 
are not facing similar types of problems. 
  The industrial park president emphasized that the protest 
activities organized by workers which has weakened the assembly 
plant industry as well as the rest of the country are a result 
of poor legal and administrative advice the Koreans have been 
receiving. He added that within the union federations there are 
also leaders who are taking advantage of the opportunity to 
improve their image. 
  Larios Silva pointed out that every day it becomes more 
difficult to convince foreign investors that unions are 
positive, especially when these same unions decide to take over 
factories and highways which causes serious repercussions to 
investors. "Assembly plants work under international contracts 
and compete against similar companies located in several 
countries. If they do not meet requirements, contracts are 
simply terminated and other companies that will honor contracts 
are sought," Larios Silva stated. 
  The industrial park president is asking President Carlos 
Roberto Reina's administration and unions federations if they 
have a solution in hand for when the foreign assembly plants 
decide to withdraw from Honduras and resolve to eliminate 42,000 
jobs and the country ceases to receive $350 million in revenues? 
  He indicated that there is much concern within the assembly 
plant industry. Currently, domestic investment in the 
industrial park totals 1 billion lempiras in infrastructure and 
buildings. 
  Finally, he called for a moment of reflection taking into 
account the difficult situation Honduras is experiencing at this 
time. 

