Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Liu Hong (0491 4767): "Liu Zhongli Stresses </F>
Once Again the Need To Handle Correctly Relations Between 
Macroeconomic Control and Market Economy in Order To Push 
Forward Financial, Taxation Reform"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 24 Dec (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE) -- Chinese 
Finance Minister Liu Zhongli pointed out today that correct 
handling of relations between strengthening macroeconomic 
control and giving play to market roles is proving to be a major 
issue, which already has cropped up or probably will emerge in 
our financial and taxation work and in the related reform. 
  This was the second time within a single month that Liu 
Zhongli had touched this subject at national meetings on 
financial affairs. 
  At the annual meeting of the China Institute for Financial 
Studies and the 11th session of the national symposium on 
financial theory, as well as at the national work meeting on 
financial and scientific research -- both of which are in 
session in Beijing -- Liu Zhongli indicated: To carry out 
financial and taxation work and the related reform, we should 
not set the efforts to strengthen macroeconomic control against 
the efforts to bring the role of market mechanism into full 
play; instead, we should seek unity between the two. 
  He said: On the one hand, while pushing forward reforms in 
the fields of finance, taxation, accounting, and the management 
of state assets, we should give full play to the role of the 
market mechanism and should create conditions for facilitating 
fair competition among main market bodies -- selecting the 
superior and eliminating the inferior, while optimizing the 
disposition of resources. On the other hand, we still need to 
make use of financial policies, and of such means as budgeting 
and taxation to step up our control, management, and supervision 
over the market. Following the transformation of government 
functions, in particular, financial and monetary sectors will 
become two major pillars for the state in its effort to exercise 
macroeconomic regulation and control. By then, financial 
departments should focus their work on regulating the economic 
structure and social distribution through budgeting and 
taxation, and on bringing about a basic balance in the total 
social supply and demand, straightening out the mistakes of the 
market and making up for its insufficiencies through the 
well-coordinated use of both currency and financial policies. 
  Liu Zhongli added: Of course, the focus of work varies at 
different work stages. To adapt ourselves to different 
realities, we sometimes need to place more stress on the role of 
the market, and sometimes on macroeconomic control and 
regulation by the state. What we should not do, however, is to 
stress the importance of one to the neglect of the other. 

