BFN 

  [Text] Nairobi, June 16 (AFP) -- Rwandan refugees rioted in 
a camp in Tanzania and threatened to kill foreign relief workers 
in anger at a ban on suspected mass killers entering the camp, 
aid officials said Thursday [16 June]. 
  About 50 foreign aid workers left the camp after angry 
refugees hurled stones and shouted threats at them on Wednesday, 
a spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR) said. 
  The rioters dispersed after Tanzanian police went into the 
Benaco Camp near the northern border with Rwanda and fired in 
the air, the spokesman, Panos Moumtzis, said in Nairobi. 
  The trouble started when a well-known Hutu suspected of 
committing atrocities during Rwanda's 10-week ethnic and 
political bloodbath returned to the camp. 
  The man, who was not named, had been arrested by Tanzanian 
police in April with about 15 other Rwandans suspected of 
massacres when they crossed the border into Tanzania along with 
hundreds of thousands of refugees. 
  They were freed a week ago on condition that they stayed out 
of the refugee camp, but one man returned on what he said was a 
visit to his wife and children. 
  A riot erupted when UNHCR representatives went to the camp 
to 
protest against his presence which they feared could spark 
trouble, Moumtzis said. 
  "There were about three thousand people shouting, screaming 
and throwing stones," he said. "They wanted him to stay at the 
camp. They dispersed when Tanzanian policemen went in and 
started shooting in the air." 
  Relief officials say many suspected mass murderers have 
crossed into Tanzania, mingling with civilian refugees from 
fighting. About 300,000 Rwandans including Hutus and minority 
Tutsis are encamped at Benaco. 
  Up to half a million Rwandans, mostly Tutsis and Hutu 
opposition supporters, have been butchered since the April 6 
death of president Juvenal Habyarimana, a Hutu, rekindled the 
civil war between mainly Tutsi rebels and the government, and 
sparked massacres committed mainly by extremist Hutu militias. 

