BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jan Gunnar Furuly: "`We Had To Act'"] </F>
  [Text] Foreign Minister Bjorn Tore Godal says that Norway 
had to take steps in the Barents Sea to avoid "invasion" by 
foreign trawlers. 
  "The increase in illicit fishing by foreign vessels in the 
Spitsbergen zone was most unfortunate from the resource 
management viewpoint and appeared to be an attempt to test the 
extent to which there should be free fishing in the area. The 
consequences of not intervening could have been that other 
countries would see their chance to move into the fishing zone," 
Godal said. 
  Eidur Gudnason, Iceland's ambassador in Oslo, was yesterday 
summoned to the Foreign Ministry to give an explanation of the 
activities of Icelandic trawlers in the protection zone that 
Norway declared unilaterally. 
  "We have been taken by surprise by Norway's tough reaction. 
Many Icelanders are interpreting it to mean that the Norwegian 
authorities have acted so brutally because their position in law 
is so weak. The normal thing would have been to bring the boats 
into Norwegian ports, in order to have the situation clarified 
in court," Gudnason told AFTENPOSTEN after the 50-minute meeting 
with Godal. 
  Gudnason, who until last fall was Iceland's minister for the 
environment and for Nordic cooperation, added that the 
skirmishes between the Coast Guard and the trawlers represent 
the most serious crisis between Iceland and Norway in modern 
times. As far as AFTENPOSTEN is able to judge, it is likely 
that things have not been this bad between the brother countries 
since the Norwegians took Christianity to the island nation to 
the west. 
  After the meeting Foreign Minister Godal stressed that the 
distance between Norway and Iceland in the disagreement over 
fishing rights is smaller than might be feared. 
  "The ambassador gave assurances that the Icelandic 
Government 
has in no way urged the boats to sail to the protection zone, 
but that on the contrary it has strongly requested that fishing 
should cease out of respect for Iceland's long-term fishing 
interests," Godal said. He rejected the suggestion that Norway 
is now fearful that Iceland will bring the matter before the 
International Court in The Hague. 
  "Our position in international law is very strong. We have 
nothing to lose in a possible court case in The Hague. Even if 
only Finland has formally recognized the protection zone, the 
European Union [EU] and other fisheries nations in the North 
Atlantic, apart from Iceland, have recognized Norwegian 
competence and authority in the area," Godal said. 
  Yesterday evening Icelandic Foreign Minister Jon Baldvin 
Hannibalsson criticized the reaction of the Norwegian Coast 
Guard at a news conference in Reykjavik, but he also stressed 
that Iceland in no way wants to escalate the conflict. 
  Hannibalsson is now proposing that Norway and Iceland should 
agree to settle the conflict over the protection zone through 
arbitration, or by bringing the matter before an international 
court. 
  "It is the view of the Icelandic authorities that the 
Norwegian action is completely out of step with inspection 
procedures for international fisheries. In Iceland's view 
cutting trawls in international waters has no support in law," 
Hannibalsson said. Earlier the foreign minister had had meetings 
on the cod war with Norway with Prime Minister David Oddsson, 
the Althing Foreign Affairs Committee, and representatives of 
fishing boat owners. 

