BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by U.S. Vice President Albert Gore, </F>
Honduran President Carlos Roberto Reina, Costa Rican President 
Jose Maria Figueres, and Guatemalan President Ramiro De Leon 
Carpio with unidentified reporters following Gore's meeting with 
Central American presidents at the Government Palace in 
Tegucigalpa; Gore speaks in English with passage by passage 
translation into Spanish; transcribed from the English -- live] 
  [Excerpts] [Reina] It is a great pleasure and honor to be 
here today in the presence of the Central American presidents 
and U.S. Vice President Albert Gore. This is happening in 
Tegucigalpa a few hours before we mark Journalists Day. Thus, I 
think that this is a symbolic act. I wish to congratulate you 
for this celebration that speaks highly of communications in our 
homeland. 
  We had a very interesting meeting which was enriched by the 
opinions of the U.S. Vice President, who has had a very 
brilliant career in his country, in the House of 
Representatives, the Senate, and in politics. The vice 
president wanted us to discuss very important issues, including 
sustainable development and good government [previous two words 
in English], which I call social revolution in Honduras; in 
other words, a government that makes scrupulous efforts to 
become not only efficient but absolutely honest in the handling 
of funds and in its social policies; a government that 
strengthens the principles of democracy and consolidates those 
values to achieve development with a humanistic consideration, 
which is what we have talked about in the past. 
  Vice President Gore will address you, and afterward, you may 
pose appropriate questions, and the vice president, I, or the 
presidents of Central America will answer them. We are honored 
to have here the presidents of Central America, which has grown 
because we now include Panama and Belize as countries of the 
region. Thank you very much for being here. Mr. Vice 
President, welcome to Honduras; this is the press from my 
country. [previous sentence in English] [passage omitted] 
  [Reporter] Is there a possibility that the U.S. Government 
could get international organizations to be more flexible toward 
the Central American countries? Have you made a commitment in 
this summit to talk to these international organizations to be 
more flexible and to decrease their pressures against these 
countries when it comes to the negotiation of loans? 
  [Gore] [words indistinct] intensive discussion of the need 
for development on a sustainable basis in the region with 
assistance from multilateral development banks and other 
international financial institutions and increased investment 
flows and trade flows to improve standards of living throughout 
Central America, and in the bilateral meetings I had with 
President Reina prior to the meeting with all of the Central 
American presidents, we talked in specific detail about the 
relationship between Honduras and the IMF and ways in which the 
United States can offer constructive help in that dialogue. 
  [Reporter] Mr. U.S. Vice President, President Endara 
announced today that the first withdrawal of U.S. troops from 
the Canal Zone will take place next week. Our question is: Will 
your country seek to negotiate with Honduras or any other 
Central America country the relocation of the bases, which the 
Panamanians say they want vacated by 1999? 
  [Gore] Perhaps, that is the reason why it was not part of 
the agenda for a discussion. 
  [Reporter] Is the United States willing to accept 
responsibility for its conduct during the past decade? What 
specific commitments will the United States assume in light of 
appalling poverty in Central America so that economic 
readjustment programs can be made more flexible and sustainable 
development can be achieved from a humane viewpoint in the short 
run. Also, what commitments will it make to give the area, 
currently represented as a bloc, the same conditions offered to 
other countries, for instance, within the frameworks of NAFTA 
and the Summit of the Americas to be held in Miami? 
  [Gore] We want to be a good partner with the countries of 
Central America. We believe that what we have stood for, not 
only during the last 10 years but the last 200 years, is in the 
best interest of all people. We believe in democracy and free 
markets and social justice, sustainable development, human 
rights, and the other values that are now shared and are almost 
universal in this hemisphere. The Summit of the Americas in 
December promises to be an unparalleled opportunity for the 
democracies of this hemisphere, having reached this plateau of 
development and shared values, to now set our sights together on 
even higher peaks and to find more effective ways to work 
together to improve standards of living for all of our people in 
the areas of education, health care, environmental protection, 
and sustainable economic development throughout the hemisphere. 
My country wants to be a good partner in all these endeavors. 
I was really impressed by the depth of the dialogue that we 
shared during this consultative meeting in Tegucigalpa. I think 
this was an important milestone. 
  [Reporter] The fight to protect the environment begins to 
emerge in the Central American countries. As the governments say 
they are willing to protect the environment, they are often 
cornered by a lack of resources and resort to foreign 
investment. For instance, in Honduras, the government is 
preparing to approve a considerable amount to install a refinery 
in a protected area. Would the U.S. Government be willing to 
help Hondurans protect the environment and, to what extent, will 
it be willing to help? 
  [Reina] No decision has been made regarding that refinery 
yet. There is a proposal, which must be studied with the 
environmentalist groups. No commitment exists yet to establish 
that refinery. This is why we cannot ask for help because a 
decision has not been made. Hondurans will be the ones to decide 
whether this is convenient or not. I have said this in order to 
clarify the situation for Vice President Gore. 
  [Gore] I do not know any region in the world where seven 
heads of state have come together to propose that an entire 
region, across international boundaries, be considered a model 
area for sustainable development with careful attention to 
protecting the environment and the natural resources, the 
bio-diversity, and the harmonious relationship between people 
and the environment. We have agreed to enter into an intensive 
consultative process, to put flesh on those bones, so to speak, 
to spell out the specifics of what such a commitment would mean. 
As for resources necessary to support an approach like this, 
the Inter-American Development Bank has now set aside a rather 
large sum that will help efforts to protect the environment and 
to promote sustainable development. Other international 
financial institutions are also setting environmental criteria 
for providing support for sustainable development, institutions 
like the World Bank, for example. I believe Central America has 
an opportunity to be a showcase at the December Summit of the 
Americas as a success-story in how nations can cooperate and 
improve the lives of their peoples by pursuing sustainable 
development. Now, one final comment: It is essential also to 
focus on stabilizing population. There are 30 million people in 
Central America today, within 25 years, there will be 50 million 
people. In September, the entire world will gather in Cairo for 
a global conference on stabilizing population. Part of 
sustainable development is finding ways to take the steps 
necessary to stabilize population: increasing child-survival 
rates, providing education for all people and [break in 
reception] women. 
  In some areas of the world that is one of the, [pauses] the 
lack of education is part of the problem. Providing access to 
birth control and information about birth control. These are 
measures which will be discussed in Cairo in September. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Reporter] Let us now listen to President Jose Maria 
Figueres. 
  [Figueres] We are trying to set up a new axis around which 
to 
create a new relationship between the United States and the 
Central American countries. The truth of the matter is that 
relations between our countries and the United States during the 
1980s had a lot to do with the armed conflicts that were going 
on in the region. Today, we are seeking a new basis upon which 
to build a good and beneficial long lasting relationship. 
  [Reporter] Could you tell us why the meeting was extended? 
Did any of you ask the United States to intercede with 
international financial organizations to try to make conditions 
on our foreign debt payment a little more flexible? 
  [Figueres] I understand that President Reina discussed the 
matter with Vice President Gore during a meeting prior to the 
meeting with all the presidents. We did not discuss this issue 
during our meeting, however. It is very related to the issue of 
sustainable development. We discussed the Central American Bank 
and agreed this financial institution of ours could become a 
source of financial assistance to facilitate the transition to 
sustainable development. To do that, we would have to attract 
capital to the Central American Bank from countries outside the 
region. 
  [Reporter] We also have statements by Guatemalan President 
Ramiro de Leon Carpio. 
  [De Leon] We need resources. Although he did announce that 
local and international nongovernmental organizations are going 
to talk with him and us, we made our request for cooperation 
quite clear. We highlighted the fact that the international 
community tends not to help us as much in Latin America, Central 
America in particular, as we emerge from under development or as 
we overcome our institutional and democratic problems and look 
toward improving development and fighting poverty. There are 
several examples of this. We were clear to state that we must 
continue receiving the same degree of cooperation if we want to 
reach sustainable development levels. 
  Regarding the issue of trade and investment within an 
environment of sustainable development, we pointed out three 
specific areas: 1) the need to accelerate and support the 
process of prior negotiations directed at signing agreements 
under an alliance for a program of sustainable development, 2) 
the need to designate a technical liaison for Central America 
and for the U.S. Government to coordinate and prepare the 
process, and 3) to direct our foreign ministries to set a date 
for the next follow-up meeting in Washington. As you may 
remember, we presented a pilot plan for Central America when we 
were in Washington, which will now be a central issue for this 
meeting. The Central American countries will present this plan 
together, with the intention of receiving technology and 
resources. 
  [Reporter] Mr. President, specifically now, what kind of 
action can the U.S. Vice President carry out, or what degree of 
influence could he have to channel funds toward Central American 
countries? 
  [De Leon] One issue we discussed has to do with trade. 
Today, the vice president himself announced what we were going 
to request of him: trade equality. He announced today that the 
Clinton administration has responded and has proposed, or is 
about to propose, trade parity for our countries before 
Congress. This equality would grant preferential treatment for 
certain products, such as textiles and others. This is, in 
itself, a preliminary step toward entering NAFTA, whose final 
objective is to become a hemispheric trade agreement. We also 
asked him to invite the U.S. Government to become an external 
partner of the Central American Bank of Economic Integration 
[BCIE] 
  [Reporter] What did he say? 
  [De Leon] He gave us a very specific answer; he will examine 
this request under the light of the Clinton administration's 
economic position. We hope they will answer us at the next 
meeting in the United States. This is, as you can see, a very 
specific answer to the request for funds you mentioned. With 
the United States and the vice president integrated as external 
partners of the BCIE, we would obviously have better access to 
funds from the United States. Hence, their commitment goes 
further than meetings and conferences to become an effective 
contribution. 
  [Reporter] Mr. President, we would like to know if the vice 
president made any commitment about preventing what is known as 
Central American forum flu [trancazo de los foros 
centroamericanos] and if it is in fact avoidable? I mean unfair 
economic packages. 
  [De Leon] That was not something we discussed directly. It 
is, however, a situation that affects all Latin American 
economies. We hope the human aspect, the social aspect... [6 
second break in reception] ...certain areas could see 
significant development levels, but with a social and human 
outlook. That will not only mean growth for a chosen few, but 
the effective fight against poverty. 
  [Reporter] Mr. President, you have shown your willingness 
to accept all that he has promised here, but, what chances do we 
have that this will be complied with? 
  [There is no answer; a voice is heard saying: Over here, 
please] 
  [Reporter] Security agents have intervened and did not 
permit 
any further questions. The men did not even allow the 
Guatemalan president to answer the question. 
  [Announcer] The news conference is over. In addition to U.S. 
Vice President Gore and the Honduran president, the presidents 
of Costa Rica and Guatemala participated and spoke in detail on 
the subjects discussed during this joint meeting of the Central 
American presidents and the U.S. Vice President. 

