BFN 

<F P=106> [By Laurence Peter] </F>
  [Text] Sanaa, June 3 (AFP) -- Troops loyal to Yemeni 
President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih are in a position to capture the 
southern bastion of Aden but are awaiting the political go-ahead 
from Sanaa, a northern minister said Friday [3 June]. 
  Information Minister Hasan al-Lawzi said the "legitimate" 
forces advancing on the port city from the north and east were 
now "able to enter the city, but they are awaiting a political 
decision." 
  "We don't want to go into Aden for many reasons," he added. 
  The north has said it wanted to avoid civilian casualties in 
the city of more than 500,000 people. 
  The government in Sanaa is also waiting for a UN 
fact-finding 
mission to visit the country before entering formal negotiations 
to end the month-long civil war, al-Lawzi told reporters. 
  "We are waiting for the fact-finding mission, then we'll 
decide who we can talk to," the minister said. 
  The government has said it was ready to respond positively 
to 
a UN Security Council resolution adopted Wednesday calling for 
an immediate ceasefire and the sending of a fact-finding mission 
to Yemen. 
  The president's northern forces have been fighting those of 
southern leader 'Ali Salim al-Bid since May 5. 
  The north charged on Friday as artillery duels raged near 
Aden that al-Bid's followers had violated the UN resolution by 
announcing a separate government the previous day. 
  Al-Lawzi said Sanaa did not need to hold negotiations with 
al- Bid's Yemen Socialist Party (YSP) before implementing a 
ceasefire. 
  The government has been holding informal contacts with 
pro-unity members of the YSP, but has ruled out dialogue with 
al-Bid and his followers. 
  "The problem is on the other side, as they believe they will 
achieve their goals by fighting. They think continued fighting 
will lead to recognition" of their declaration of a separate 
state in the south, al-Lawzi said. 
  "The separatists insist on violating the UN resolution 
because they are hoping for outside help." 
  But a ceasefire was "possible" because Salih's forces 
controlled most governorates, apart from Aden, he said. 
  The minister denied southern allegations that Iraqi troops 
were fighting alongside the northern forces. 
  "The army is still able to do whatever the government wants. 
The other side makes such accusations in the hope of getting 
foreign support," he countered. 

