BFN 

  [Text] Davao City -- Senior economic ministers from Brunei, 
Indonesia and the Philippines [no mention of Malaysia as 
published] signed yesterday an agreement creating the East Asean 
Growth Area (EAGA). 
  The agreement calls for the formation of a regional economic 
market of some 40 million people living in Mindanao and border 
areas of East Asean countries . 
  Signing the agreement for Brunei are Pehin Dato Haji Abdul 
Rahman Haji Taib, Minister of Industry and Primary Resources; 
Indonesia's Ir. [academic title] Hartarto, Coordinating Minister 
for Industry and Trade; Malaysia's Tun Daim Bin Zainuddin, 
Minister Coordinating Growth Triangle Projects and the 
Philippines' Rizalino Navarro, Secretary of Trade and Industry. 
  Conference chairman and Philippine head delegate Paul G. 
Dominguez said the document contains strong recommendation for 
expanded air links and sea transport services, expanded 
fisheries cooperation, improved telecommunications, and joint 
tourism promotions. 
  The document was forged following two days of talks among 73 
delegates of the four countries at the Davao Insular Hotel. 
  "It is a dream come true," Syvelyn Tan, project director of 
Private Investments and Trade Opportunities -- Philippines 
(PITO-P) said at the end of the talks. 
  Tan, chief organizer of "Mindanao Worldbound" conferences 
over the past two years, who is also organizing the East Asean 
Business Conferences this May, said it took 20 years to realize 
the dream, first seen by Mindanao planners in the 1970's. 
  Local businessmen said they were "thrilled" at the prospect 
of engaging in power, transport, skills training projects in 
Mindanao's neighbors. 
  Philippine delegate and former senator Vicente Paterno, 
meanwhile, said "the progress of the talks had been very fast" 
since the state visit of President Ramos to Malaysia in January 
1993. 
  He hailed the document as less legalistic than a Memorandum 
of Understanding and more business-like. 
  The signing rites marked the climax of President Ramos' 
economic diplomacy to increase cooperation in the East Asean 
subregion, Dominguez said. 
  He said the desire of the four countries of Brunei, 
Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines to establish EAGA was 
confirmed bilaterally over the next one and half years. 
[sentence as published] 

