USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94FE0306A </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo PRIME MINISTER'S COUNCIL FOR SCIENCE &amp; 
TECHNOLOGY </F>

 Language: <F P=105>Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
<H3>  Current Approach to Consolidating Japan's Research 
Information Network </H3>
  28 October 1994 Research Information Network Forum Policy 
Committee, Council for Science &amp; Technology 
  1. The necessity for consolidating the foundations for 
R&amp;D 
such as networks, databases, etc., to promote the dissemination 
of research data, which has become increasingly important in 
recent years, has been repeatedly noted in Science &amp; 
Technology 
Council Report No. 18 (January 1992), Fundamental Principles of 
Science &amp; Technology Policy (revised April 1992), 
Administrative 
Inspection of Science &amp; Technology by the Management and 
Coordination Agency (June 1992) and the Main Guidelines for 
Promoting Science &amp; Technology in 1994 (June 1993). In 
response 
to this need, we have begun to take concrete measures for a 
far-ranging consolidation of the foundations of information 
dissemination such as computers, LANs, etc., in universities, 
national testing and research institutes, etc., through the 1993 
supplementary budget. 
  2. The Policy Committee, Council for Science &amp; 
Technology, 
decided to begin a Research Information Network Forum in July of 
this year because of this situation. Since that time this forum 
has studied present and future approaches to Japan's research 
information network with the goal of promoting the dissemination 
of research information and the shared utilization of computer 
resources among research organizations both at home and abroad. 
  3. Based on its studies up to the present, the forum has 
arrived at the following conclusions concerning the present 
situation. 
  (1) In recent years the use of electronic media in addition 
to printed material as a means of disseminating research 
information has rapidly increased with the development of data 
processing and telecommunications technology. 
  (2) In Japan networks are already used extensively in some 
research organizations that have actively promoted international 
research or have invited many researchers in from abroad, but 
their general utilization is insufficient. This is probably 
because past government policy did not focus sufficiently on 
this problem. 
  (3) Currently in Japan there are many research information 
networks run independently by researchers in addition to those 
affiliated with some government ministries and agencies (MOE, 
MAFF, MITI, etc.) However, the circuit speed is 0.5 Mbps 
maximum, which is about one-hundredth that in the U.S., and 
because the structure of the research information network that 
interconnects the research organizations of various ministries 
and agencies is grossly insufficient, the dissemination of many 
kinds of information between research organizations is so poor 
that Japan is currently lagging about 5-10 years behind the U.S. 
Moreover, there is a lack of technicians to operate the network, 
which places an excess burden on the researchers. 
  (4) This kind of delay in consolidating the research 
information network in Japan hinders the smooth and high-level 
dissemination of research information both in and out of Japan. 
Researchers and research-related persons recognize the lack of 
this foundation, which should naturally be available in an 
industrially advanced nation, and they strongly want the 
government to proceed with a comprehensive consolidation. As a 
nation, we must respond quickly. Moreover, there are strong 
demands from abroad for access to Japanese research data and 
research results via networks, and we must respond as well from 
an international perspective. 
  4. Based on the above situation, this forum believes it is 
appropriate for the time being to promote the consolidation of 
Japan's research information network from now on through the 
policies noted below. Moreover, this forum will continue to 
review various problems concerning mid- and long-term approaches 
to research information consolidation in the future. 
<H5>  Description </H5>
  1. It is necessary to strive for the rapid completion of a 
research information network that will link research 
organizations beyond boundaries separating various fields of 
research and ministries, agencies and nations. At the same time 
it is necessary to strive for consolidating, expanding and 
speeding up the various research information networks in each 
organization, ministry and agency. In so doing, it is essential 
that the types of information equipment be provided that will 
enable harmonious affiliations and cooperation among the various 
organizations, ministries and agencies. 
  2. In consolidating and operating the research information 
network, it is important to proceed even-handedly, neutrally, 
flexibly, and in a stable manner with the cooperation of the 
ministries and agencies and related individuals based on the 
purposes and actual situations of each existing research 
information network. Moreover, it is necessary to respond in a 
timely manner to user needs and rapid technological innovations 
while also making an attempt to minimize differences between 
various regions in terms of information dissemination. 
  3. It is necessary to promote research concerning basic 
utilization technology such as improving convenience, security 
control, etc., to achieve sophistication and promote use of the 
research information network, and it is necessary to promote 
research concerning network use in various fields. Moreover, it 
is necessary to conduct surveys and studies concerning ways that 
users can contribute, etc. It is also necessary to incorporate 
in good order into the research information network from now on 
the results of technical developments in hardware and software 
relevant to future ultra-high-speed networks. 
  4. In addition to consolidating the research information 
network, it is necessary to strive for active transmission and 
overall utilization of research information held at each 
research organization by promoting databases for research data 
and articles that can be disseminated via the network. 
  5. It is essential that we establish and maintain the 
individual morality of each researcher for the proper and 
positive use of the research information network. From the 
standpoint of maintaining security, it will be necessary to hold 
training sessions that will include those who provide the 
operating manuals and manage the network. It is also essential 
to acquire a professional staff and train personnel to operate 
the network. 
  6. As a nation it is essential that we fulfill our 
responsibility to the world in terms of information 
dissemination by linking our research information network to 
foreign countries and cooperating with foreign nations in 
information dissemination and cooperative research via this 
network. 
  7. In consolidating the research information network it is 
necessary that we proceed with followup policies with the goal 
of freely providing the research resources we have without 
monetary profit not only to Japanese researchers but to 
researchers around the world regardless of their affiliation. 
<H3>  Outline of Information Network Forum, Policy Committee, 
Council for Science &amp; Technology </H3>
  1. Members of Forum 
  Wataru Mori, Permanent Member, Council for Science &amp; 
Technology Hiroyuki Osawa, Permanent Member, Council for 
Science &amp; Technology Hiroshi Inose, Director, MOE Science 
Information Center Takeo Miura, Vice President, Hitachi, 
Ltd. Junichiro Miyazu, Vice President, NTT 
  2. Sessions 
  No. 1 Date: 30 Jul 1993 (Fri) 15:00-16:30 Place: Council 
for Science &amp; Technology Conference Room Topics: (1) Research 
information network forum sessions (2) Current status of 
research information network (3) Method of proceeding 
  No. 2 Date: 8 Sep 1993 (Wed) 10:00-12:00 Place: 
STA Conference Room No. 8 Topic: Current status and problems 
of Japan's research information network (reports and exchange of 
views) Reporters: Shoichiro Asano, Professor, MOE Science 
Information Center Susumu Sato, Planning and Investigation 
Director, AFF Research Council Office, MAFF Yoshikuni Okada, 
Director, AIST Information and Computing Center, MITI Mizuho 
Mori, Director, Data Processing Center, Science University of 
Tokyo Tsuneyoshi Kamae, Professor, Faculty of Science, Tokyo 
University Hideo Aiso, Chair, Faculty of Environmental 
Information, Keio University Atsunobu Ichikawa, Director, 
National Environmental Research Institute Hironori Terada, 
Director, Large Computer Center, Osaka University Yoji 
Furuhama, Planning Director, Communications Research Laboratory, 
MPT Hiromichi Uetsubo, Director, RIKEN 
  No. 3 
  Date: 22 Sep 1993 (Fri) 10:00-12:00 Place: STA Conference 
Room No. 8 Topics: (1) Policies of ministries and agencies 
concerning research information foundation (2) Current status 
and future image of network-related fields (data processing, 
telecommunications) by committee members Miura and Miyazu 
Panelists: Planning Specialist, Hokkaido Development Agency 
Director, Science and Technology Information Division, Science 
and Technology Promotion Bureau, STA Director, Environmental 
Research and Technology Division, Planning and Coordination 
Bureau, Environmental Agency Director, Science Information 
Division, Science and International Affairs Bureau, MOE 
Specialist, Health Sciences Division, Minister's Secretariat, 
MHW Director, Planning and Investigation Director, AFF 
Research Council Office, MAFF Director, Information Policy 
Planning Office, Machinery and Information Industries Bureau, 
MITI Director, Technology and Safety Division, Transport 
Policy Bureau, MOT Deputy Director, Policy Division, 
Communication Policy Bureau, MPT Technology Survey Councilor, 
Technology Survey Office, Minister's Secretariat, MOC 
  No.4 
  Date: 4 October 1993 (Mon) 15:00-17:00 Place: STA 
Conference Room Topics: (1) Status of investigation by 
Research Information Network Forum (2) Compilation of interim 
report 
  [omission] 
<H3>  Establishing Interministry Research Information Network: 
Particulars </H3>
  1. In modern research and development, the need is 
increasing 
for research that cuts across the arbitrary lines between 
ministries and agencies, fields of research, and nations. We can 
expect a dramatic jump in R&amp;D sophistication by setting up a 
network among research organizations and promoting the 
transmission of graphics data and files in real time and the 
shared use of computers. In Europe and the U.S. there are 
already networks shared by research organizations. In the U.S. 
in particular there is already a high-speed (45 Mbps) network 
available. Furthermore, an ultra-high-speed network (several 
hundred Mbps or Gbps) coordination project (NREN) has already 
begun as part of the HPCC (High Performance Computing and 
Communications) Plan for developing an information foundation 
with the goal of increasing international competitive strength. 
  2. On the other hand, the foundations for information use 
between research organizations (intra-organization networks 
(LAN), computer equipment, etc.) are insufficient in Japan, and 
only low-speed networks (64-512 Kbps; a speed less than 1/100 of 
those in the U.S.) link various research organizations. 
Therefore, the dissemination of information and shared computer 
use not only among Japanese organizations but with those 
overseas as well has lagged behind, and discontent is growing 
both at home and abroad. 
  3. Moreover, it is necessary to manage data distributed via 
networks, but the various types of data reflecting research 
results from different organizations are not sufficiently 
organized nor unified. Because standardization has not 
proceeded, the data is not available for general, productive 
utilization and this hinders efficient R&amp;D. The advisory 
report 
(June 1992) based on the results of the Administrative 
Inspection of Science and Technology by the Management and 
Coordination Agency, recommends the consolidation of the 
information dissemination system as a corrective measure by 
putting data from national research institutes and national 
universities online. 
  4. The majority of researchers are strongly interested in 
setting up a trunk network (data, graphics, database searches, 
research condition guides, etc.) to be shared by ministries and 
agencies (from survey concerning research information network 
conducted November 1992 at 160 research organizations, national 
research institutes, etc.) 
  5. Various ministries and agencies are installing 
supercomputers and LANs with their 1993 supplementary budgets, 
and in the future we can expect the topic of an interministry 
network among organizations to come up. Moreover, the Main 
Guidelines for Promoting Science &amp; Technology in 1994 include 
``Consolidating the foundations for dissemination of research 
information'' as a major item. 
  6. As far as this network is concerned, has been approached 
in the following manner with the affiliation of the various 
ministries and agencies. 
  1. To conduct a study concerning a research information 
network in Japan in the future, we implemented a survey in June 
this year jointly with relevant ministries and agencies (STA, 
MOE, MITI, MPT) about how far the U.S. has progressed. 
  2. To review this issue in the Policy Committee of the 
Council for Science &amp; Technology, we are holding Research 
Information Network Forums (decision made on 22 July) and are 
proceeding with the cooperation of each ministry and agency. 
  7. Because of this situation, we will establish a ``System 
to 
Consolidate Research Information and Promote an Interministry 
Network'' beginning in 1994 with Adjustment Funds to Promote 
Science and Technology, and with the cooperation of each 
ministry and agency, we will strive to promote the setup and 
operation of an interministry research information network that 
will link national research organizations, etc., and to create 
databases of basic, fundamental data to be disseminated via this 
network. 



  Status of Domestic and Foreign Research Information Networks 

Nation      U.S.                Europe                                                        Asia 

                                France                 Holland                Pan-European    ROK              Taiwan 

Network     NSF Net             RENATER                SURFnet                EBOND           KREONET          TANet           SINET           TISN              WIDE              BITNET 

Operator    Government (NSF)    Government             Public corporation     Council of      Government       Government      Science         Administrative    Administrative    Japan BITNET 
                                                       (funded by             national                                         Information     council           council           Assoc. 
                                                       government             network                                          Center, MOE 
                                                       organizations)         operators 

Funding     ``                  ``                     ``                     National        ``               ``              Government      User              User              User 
                                                                              network                                                          organizations     organizations     organizations 
                                                                              operators 

Users       Universities,       Universities,          Universities,          Ten plus        Universities,    Universities    Universities    Universities,     Universities,     Universities 
            national            Industry/government    Industry/government    countries       national                                         national          national 
            laboratories,       research               research               including UK,   laboratories                                     research          research 
            etc.                organizations          organizations          France                                                           institutes        institutes 

Trunk       45 Mbps (155 Mbps   2 Mbps (34 Mbps in     1.5 Mbps               0.5 Mbps (1.5   1.5 Mbps         1.5 Mbps        0.5 Mbps        0.2 Mbps          0.2 Mbps          0.1 Mbps 
line        in 1994, 620 Mbps   1993)                                         Mbps soon) 
capacity    in 1996) 

Capacity                        via EBON               via EBON               two 1.5 Mbps    0.1 Mbps         0.3 Mbps        0.5 Mbps        0.5 Mbps          0.2 Mbps          0.1 Mbps 
of link                                                                       lines, two 1 
to U.S.                                                                       Mbps lines; 
circuits                                                                      total 5 Mbps 

Comments    NSF Net is a                                                      Major hookups                                                    Run by            Run by            BITNET is 
            research network                                                  are in six                                                       university        university        mainly 
            for more                                                          locations:                                                       volunteers.       volunteers.       configured 
            convenience and                                                   UK, France,                                                      Used for joint    Purpose of        around the 
            better hookup                                                     Germany,                                                         research among    research is       U.S., with 
            with future                                                       Sweden and                                                       users.            operation of      Japan and 
            ultra-high-speed                                                  Holland                                                                            network itself.   Europe 
            networks. It                                                                                                                                                           comprising 
            functions as a                                                                                                                                                         only parts. 
            backbone 
            connecting NASA, 
            Dept. of Energy 
            and regional 
            networks.* 

* Backbone circuit is a circuit linking major regions such as Tokyo and Osaka in Japan 


<H3>  Selected Results from Survey Concerning Research Information 
Network </H3>
  1. Purpose 
  The STA requested the Japan Science and Technology 
Information Center to conduct the ``Survey Concerning Research 
Information Network'' with the goal of understanding the true 
current situation of information systems and networks as well as 
the compilation, storage, and use of scientific and 
technological information at national research organizations. 
  2. Outline of Survey 
  (1) Approach--study by filling in survey 
  (2) Time period--November 1992 
  (3) Organizations surveyed--Surveys were distributed to 159 
organizations. Among these 117 organizations responded (119 
surveys) for a return rate of 73.6%. The breakdown of 
organizations and responding organizations is as follows: 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |No. of Recipient Organiz-|No. of Responding Organi-| 
|                         |ations                   |zations                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|National research instit-|90*                      |65 (72.2%                | 
|utes                     |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Public, non-profit &amp; |19                       |15 (78.9%)               | 
|special corporations     |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Public research organiza-|50                       |37 (74.0%)               | 
|tions                    |                         |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total                    |159                      |117 (73.6%)              | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|*Excludes branch offices and locations                                       | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  3. Responses (Selected) 
  (1) Concerning organizations showing interest in the 
construction of a nationwide network for mutual dissemination 
and public disclosure of research results, 97.5% showed 
interest. 
  a. Strong interest--74 (62.3%) 
  b. Moderate interest--42 (35.3%) 
  c. Little interest--3 (2.5%) 
  (2) Concerning the status of internal networks at national 
research institutes, 68% of the organizations either have 
them 
now or are planning to build them. 
  a. Have already--53 (44.5%) 
  b. Planning--28 (23.5%) 
  c. Not building--38 (32.0%) 
  (3) Concerning links between internal and external networks, 
60.2% either have links or are studying and planning them. 
  a. Already have--52 (42.3%) 
  b. Studying and planning--22 (17.9%) 
  c. Not linked--34 (27.6%) 
  d. No response--15 (12.2%) 
  (4) Concerning the construction of an internet backbone 
(trunk) network that will link other networks together, 
67.3% 
had interest. 
  a. Strong interest--51 (42.9%) 
  b. Moderate interest--29 (24.9%) 
  c. Little interest--33 (27.7%) 
  d. No interest--2 (1.7%) 
  e. No response--4 (3.3%) 
  (5) Concerning the transmission rate desired for the 
internet 
backbone, 34.3% are interested in 1 Mbps or more. 
  a. 48-64 Kbps--7 (5.9%) 
  b. 128-256 Kbps--5 (4.2%) 
  c. 384-768 Kbps--1 (0.9%) 
  d. 1-1.5 Mbps--11 (9.2%) 
  e. 3 Mbps--7 (5.9%) 
  f. 45 Mbps--6 (5.0%) 
  g. 100 Mbps or more--17 (14.3%) 
  h. Unsure--55 (46.2%) 
  i. No response--10 (8.4%) 
  (6) Concerning network use if a nationwide network should be 
built to link national research institutes and their networks, 
76.5% say they will use it. 
  a. Will use--91 (76.4%) 
  b. Unsure--24 (20.2%) 
  c. Will not use or no response--4 (3.4%) 
  (7) Concerning the services desired from those wishing to 
use 
this nationwide network, the following types of services are 
most important. 
  a. Database searching--107 (89.9%) 
  b. Guides to various types of data--90 (75.6%) 
  c. Electronic mail--85 (71.4%) 
  d. Guide to conferences and applications--85 (71.4%) 
  e. File transmission--83 (69.7%) 
  f. Shared program library--77 (64.7%) 
  g. Numerical computation--51 (42.9%) 
  (8) Among the types of information potential users wish to 
exchange on the network, data exchange and E-mail were most 
preferred. 
  a. Exchange data--104 (87.4%) 
  b. E-mail--88 (73.9%) 
  c. Exchange graphics--41 (34.5%) 
<H3>  Main Guidelines for Promoting Science &amp; Technology in 
1994 </H3>
  24 June 1993 Policy Committee, Council for Science &amp; 
Technology 
  1. The Council for Science &amp; Technology made a report in 
January last year on the overall basic policy toward science and 
technology that should be taken as we approach a new century. 
The government received this report and in April last year 
revised the Fundamental Principles of Science &amp; Technology 
Policy. 
  Based on this report and the Fundamental Principles, Japan 
must develop a positive, comprehensive policy with the following 
three goals while continuing to emphasize the importance of its 
contribution to international society and the human race. 
  1. Mankind living in harmony with the earth. 
  2. Expansion of our stock of knowledge. 
  3. Construction of a safe, abundant society to live in. 
  2. In order to attain this goal it will be necessary for the 
government to play a greater role of central leadership than in 
the past. It will be particularly important for the government 
to strengthen its activities dramatically through the diverse 
and important roles performed by universities, national research 
organizations and special corporations that conduct research. 
  3. In 1994 we must strive to promote R&amp;D in the major 
fields 
indicated in the Fundamental Principles of Science &amp; 
Technology 
Policy, support basic science, and pay attention to promoting 
regional science and technology as well as build an emphatic and 
effective policy for promoting science and technology based on 
the items noted below. 
  More specifically, we must keep in mind that setting up a 
foundation for the promotion of science and technology is a 
basic condition for the expansion Japan's economy and society 
while we strive to realize a society in which the citizenry 
truly feels abundance and leisure as we head toward the 21st 
Century. 
<H5>  Major Points </H5>

  - 
  -  By expanding research funds to promote basic research, 
raising the level of research, renewing facilities and equipment 
that have become outdated, and setting up sufficient facilities 
and equipment for consolidation of the foundations to 
disseminate research information, we will create a core research 
capability and strive to strengthen the foundations for R&amp;D 
conducted in universities and national research institutes and 
to improve the research environment. 
  -  We will strive to increase 
both the quality and quantity of the people who conduct science 
and technology activities by improving and expanding the 
personnel at universities and national research organizations. 
  -  We will strengthen international science and technology 
activities by actively promoting international joint R&amp;D, and 
improving and expanding our science and technology cooperation 
with developing nations. 
<H3>  Consolidation of Research Information Network and Basic, 
Fundamental Data </H3>
  It is important to raise the level of the R&amp;D 
environment at 
national research organizations and announce research results 
both domestically and abroad. 

  -  Promotion of consolidated, high-level interministry 
research information network to link Japan's research 
organizations beyond the boundaries of organizations, ministries 
and agencies, and nations. 
  Research Information Network 
  1. Communication by electronic mail, bulletin boards, etc. 
  2. High speed transfer of files and remote searching of 
databases. 
  3. Shared use of computers (super computers, etc.) 

  -  Promotion of creating databases of basic, fundamental data 
necessary for the advancement of research activities with the 
cooperation of many organizations. 
  DISSEMINATION OF RESEARCH INFORMATION, PROMOTION OF JOINT 
RESEARCH, CREATION OF RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS, ANNOUNCEMENT OF 
RESULTS AT HOME AND ABROAD 
  Letters, numbers, spreadsheets, graphics, audio, etc. 
  (Physics, chemistry, life sciences, materials science, 
global 
environment studies, etc.) 
  The Interministry Research Information Network will be 
comprised of intra-ministry and intra-agency national research 
organization networks, national research organizations, special 
corporations, etc., and domestic networks, and it will be linked 
to foreign networks. 
  Specific Measures 
  1. System To Consolidate Research Information and Promote 
Interministry Network: (Total of 1.1 billion yen from Science 
and Technology Promotion Coordination Expenditures) 
  System to consolidate research information and to promote of 
interministry network. 
  Promotion of Interministry Network--Studies of basic 
technology for utilization and applications to contribute to the 
genuine consolidation and operation of an interministry network 
  Consolidation of Research Information--Creation of unified 
databases of basic, fundamental data and dissemination of that 
data via the network. 
  2. Consolidation of STA Network: (Total of &yen;280,000,000) 
  Consolidation of network to link STA research organizations. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-010LC-70A>           Image of System Consolidate Research Information and </FIG>





