BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 14 (XINHUA) -- Qian Qichen, China's 
vice-premier and foreign minister, said here today that he is 
looking forward to his coming visit to Estonia. 
  Qian said this when he met with visiting Estonian President 
Lennart Meri here at the Diaoyutai State Guesthouse this morning. 
  According to an official of the Chinese Foreign Ministry, 
Qian and Meri discussed bilateral relations as well as the 
international situation during the meeting. 
  Qian said that China and Estonia share common points in many 
ways. 
  Meri said he will be delighted to receive Qian in Estonia, 
adding that it is good for both Estonia and China to further 
enhance bilateral political and economic cooperation. 
  Meri said that great changes have taken place in the world, 
and that the United Nations is playing a more and more important 
role. He said that Estonia holds that small nations in the U.N. 
should have the same right to speak, and hoped China would make 
efforts for this goal. 
  Qian said China has always maintained that all nations, big 
or small, should be equal. Small nations are the majority in 
the U.N., he said, and the functions of the U.N. General 
Assembly should be strengthened and resolutions approved by the 
Assembly should be respected by the international community, in 
which small nations can play roles. 
  Touching on bilateral economic relations, Meri said that 
Estonia enjoys a good investment environment and there is great 
potential for bilateral economic cooperation. 
  The president hoped that China would take positive action 
and 
encourage Chinese enterprises to do business in Estonia. 
  Meri said that China is rich in oil resources and that 
Estonia has strengths in oil shale exploration and utilization, 
hoping that the two countries may conduct cooperation in this 
regard. 
  Qian agreed that entrepreneurs in the oil industry of both 
countries should have contacts to discuss cooperation 
possibilities. 
  He said some small Chinese entrepreneurs are doing business 
with Estonia at present and that the two governments should give 
support to these enterprises. 
  After the meeting, Qian hosted a banquet in honor of Meri 
and 
his party. 

