Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Karmo Kaas: "Estonian Entrepreneurs Like </F>
Trading"] 
  [Text] 
  At the moment, trading is indisputably the most popular 
field of activity. Three quarters of the companies entered in 
the business registry show wholesale and retail sales as their 
principal activity. At the same time, state- and 
municipally-owned commercial enterprises account for only 14 
percent of the total business volume. 
  Leev Kuum, leading scientist at the Estonian Institute of 
Economic Forecasting said that, in the retail sector, the sales 
volume has been increasing significantly since March of this 
year, and that in August, the retail volume was up 33 percent, 
compared to January. Preliminary statistical data of the Bureau 
of Statistics shows that the volume of commerce for the first 
nine months of this year amounted to 4.89 billion kroons. Kuum 
attributed the increase in the retail volume to a 70 to 80 
percent increase in the purchasing power of consumers. 
  He added that despite the increase in the number of stores, 
resulting in increased competition, most of the commercial 
enterprises consider the market outlook to be satisfactory. Also 
increasing, for the second quarter now, is the number of stores 
planning to improve their finances, as sales gain momentum. This 
also indicates that the ability of the merchants to trade has 
been increasing right along with the growth of commerce. 
  Kuum said that the organizational development of Estonia's 
retail trade is still in its initial stages. By now, one is 
beginning to see the first signs of store mergers to form chains 
or consolidate ownership. Most mergers of stores into chains 
will probably be based on a common source of supply. 
<H5>  Wholesalers Offer a Limited Selection </H5>
  Raivo Kutt, commercial director of the Central 
Alliance 
of Estonian Consumer Unions (ETK), estimates that most of the 
wholesalers are dealing with food items, as food items also make 
up 90 percent of the retail market. 
  Data on the volume of retail sales within the ETK system 
shows, however, that the share of manufactured goods is 
increasing within that volume. Kutt said that, in January, 
manufactured goods made up 23 percent of the total volume, by 
now this share is up to 30 percent. In the future, the share of 
manufactured goods should remain below 35 percent of the total 
trade volume for Estonia as a whole. 
  Leev Kuum maintained that the share of manufactured goods in 
the total sales volume is increasing, especially in the case of 
garments. This is caused by the higher income level of residents 
enabling them to spend some of it on updating their wardrobes, 
something that was not happening immediately after the monetary 
reform. 
  Besides, most of the people had not made any wardrobe 
purchases since 1989 or 1990, and these expenditures became 
neccessary to replace the worn-out garments. 
  Referring to subjective reports, Raivo Kutt estimated 
that 80 percent of Estonian wholesalers have a limited selection 
of goods, and the number of articles offered does not exceed 
200. Traditional articles of trade are beverages and 
confectionery items. Besides, there are also a number of 
wholesalers specializing in alcohol. 
  Another observation made by Kutt was that many of the 
wholesalers deal in imported goods only, ignoring the fact that 
local products, because of their lower price, are very much in 
demand. 
  Leev Kuum added that in the area of increasing the selection 
of goods, Estonia has a long way to go. Compared to the stores 
in Poland, for example, Estonia's selection of goods is very 
conservative, even though Poland has not reached the level of 
the Western countries yet. Food stores in Estonia carry a 
selection of close to 1,000 articles, whereas 5,000 is 
considered to be the norm in the developed countries. 
  The selection of manufactured goods available in Estonia is 
even more limited than that of food items. Most of the 
manufactured goods are imported, mainly because of the price 
factor, making the purchases more of a chance affair. There are 
still big gaps in price ranges or shades of color for 
manufactured goods, and for different sizes in the case of 
garments. Right now, different items have different combinations 
of specifications that are not available to the consumer. 
  "Estonia has made rapid strides, to be sure, towards 
developing a better selection," Kuum said. "However, there is 
only so much the wholesalers can do with their limited operating 
capital." 
  Raivo Kutt said that many of our trade problems stem 
from 
the small size of our market, making it necessary to use 
middle-men. To deal directly with large producers, we would have 
to be able to buy goods in much larger quantities than our 
wholesalers can sell. 
<H5>  ETK Wholesale Volume Increased Five Times </H5>
  Raivo Kutt said that the monthly wholesale volume of 
ETK 
has gone from 7 million kroons in January of this year to 35 
million kroons today. Other major wholesalers have, in his 
estimation, reached a monthly volume of 10 million kroons. 
  Buying practice is based largely on direct contact with 
producers, with the use of middle-men kept to a minimum. 
Currently, ETK wholesalers are dealing directly with 250 major 
producers and providers in 18 countries. 
  Constant supplies available include 1,500 food items and 
5,000 manufactured articles. 
  Kutt said that ETK's direct involvement is limited to 
wholesale arrangements. The management of retail businesses 
within the ETK system is in the hands of local consumer unions, 
while ETK's role in the development of retail businesses 
consists of cooperation with the local consumer unions. 
  The wholesale portion of ETK consists of four enterprises: 
The ETK Purchasing Center, and the Tallinn, Tartu and Voru 
distribution facilities. During the first half of next year, 
wholesale companies should combine into one organization under 
the tentative name of ETK Hulgi [ETK Wholesale]. The entire 
wholesale business should be set up so that purchasing is based 
on selection, and distribution handled according to the regional 
principle. 
<H5>  Chain of Stores Coming to Estonia </H5>
  Up until now, there have been 27 different kinds of stores 
in 
the ETK system, according to Kutt. As the retail trade is 
reorganizing itself, six kinds of stores should be left, and 
planning calls for combining them into different retail chains. 
  The first to be launched is a chain of stores bearing the 
name of Edu [Success], the first two of which are scheduled to 
open before Christmas. Next year, 50 new stores will be added to 
the chain. 
  The formation of a chain of stores does not involve building 
new stores, but rather consolidating the existing ones. Stores 
belonging to a chain will have the same name, the same layout 
and selection, an integrated cashier's system, etc. 
  Edu stores will be located at parish centers, they will each 
have a 300 square meter sales area, a selection of up to 1,000 
items of food and manufactured goods, to cover the primary 
consumption needs of the people. The monthly sales volume of 
stores in the chain should be roughly half a million kroons. 
  Kutt noted that the stores of the Edu chain will 
remain 
in the possession of local consumer unions, but ETK will enter 
cooperation agreements with them. Supplying this chain of stores 
will be the task of ETK's wholesale division. 
  Currently, there are more than 1,000 retail enterprises 
within the ETK system, and their combined sales volume for this 
year should be 1.3 billion kroons. 
<H5>  Competition Does Not Reduce Markup </H5>
  Leev Kuum said that the commercial markup of stores has gone 
from the state-regulated 8 percent up to 25 percent, 10 percent 
of which is spent on the store's general expenses, and 5 percent 
for salaries, leaving a 10 percent profit for the store. Out of 
the earlier markup, roughly 2 percent went for salaries, leaving 
1 percent of the volume for profit. With the present markup, due 
to higher salaries and higher overall expenses, the stores can 
also offer better service to their clientele. 
  The Institute for Economic Forecasting has not done a 
special 
study on customer satisfaction with the level of service at the 
stores but, based on personal experience, Kuum thought that the 
level of service at the stores has gone up considerably. Legal 
problems relating to consumer protection still need to be 
resolved, but the commitment of the stores to sell and their 
willingness to act on it is becoming visible in our commercial 
enterprises. 
  Stronger competition, Kuum thinks, will not result in 
reduced 
markup or the dropping of price levels in the retail trade. 
Changes, however, will begin to take place in the internal 
structure of markup, with the profit portion going down, and the 
expense portion going up, which impacts directly on improving 
service to customers. In the Western countries, it is quite 
normal for the handling cost of goods to amount to half of their 
production cost. 
  Raivo Kutt added that advertising will be playing an 
increasing role in the development of commerce, which will run 
up the cost accordingly. Besides, the purchasing power of people 
will also be going up, and the merchants will try to take 
advantage of it. 
  Kutt also said that, in the future, markup will 
probably 
become more differentiated, varying for different types of 
merchandise. Perfume sales, for example, are very rare, but a 
large sales volume can be reached by markups up to 80 percent. 
  For the year of 1994, Kuum projects Estonia's trade volume 
in 
kroons to increase by 25 to 30 percent, and be in the range of 9 
to 10 billion kroons. 
  The fastest increase of sales volume will probably be noted 
for garments (30 percent), technical goods (except cars) 25 
percent, and food items 20 percent. 
  Raivo Kutt remarked that in Estonia's retail trade, 
most 
of the merchants will probably be operating on their own for 
some time to come. Establishing retail chains would require 
having one's own wholesale operation and, besides ETK, there are 
only two or three other wholesalers capable of starting their 
own chain. Creating retail chains through mergers of 
independently operating merchants is probably still a long way 
off for Estonia. 
  A few years from now, Kutt said, there will be two or 
three big wholesalers left on the Estonian market. The rest of 
the businesses will either leave the market or become local 
middle-men or importers of some particular item. 

