Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The head of the atomic energy authority issued a 
press release yesterday urging the public not to be alarmed over 
recent cases involving radioactive material. 
  Suchat Mongkhonphan, secretary-general of the Office of 
Atomic Energy for Peace (OAEP), said the quantities and types of 
uranium involved meant they were not dangerous to public health. 
  But the release also suggests that the eight barrels of 
hazardous waste imported last year by a Thai company may have 
contained small quantities of the uranium isotope -- Uranium-235 
-- considered most dangerous. 
  It was revealed last week that Thai Tantalum Co Ltd had 
imported from the United States nearly 3,000 kgs of toxic sludge 
contaminated by radioactivity. Officials from the Department of 
Industrial Works later announced that the company's import 
licence would be revoked. 
  Last June, the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission had sent a 
letter to Suchat's office via the Thai Embassy in Washington 
warning that the waste contained radioactive substances. But 
the OAEP has not been able to locate any records acknowledging 
the letter's receipt. 
  Thai Tantalum claimed that tests run on the sludge showed 
with a 90 percent certainty that it contains less than 0.2 
percent (or roughly 5.5 kgs) of thorium and uranium, two highly 
radioactive substances. 
  "The company has donated the sludge to the OAEP and we now 
have it in possession," Suchat announced. 
  "There is uranium contamination, but very little in quantity 
and most of it is Uranium-238. 
  "The level of radioactivity is not considered dangerous for 
anyone. Its concentration is below the standard set by the 
Atomic Energy for Peace Act of 1960." 
  The press release did not mention the exact amount of 
radioactive material in the sludge. According to an amendment 
to the law, those importing material containing 15 percent or 
more of uranium or thorium must obtain a licence from the Atomic 
Energy Commission. 
  The press release explained that 99.28 percent of uranium 
found in nature is Uranium-238. Uranium-235, which makes up 
only 0.71 percent of the isotopes found naturally, is the type 
that is used in nuclear reactors and to make bombs. The other 
uranium isotope found in nature is Uranium-234, it said. 
  It had not previously been known that isotopes other than 
Uranium-238 were present in the sludge. 
  "The office will use the material for research," the report 
explained. 
  Suchat also asserted that the uranium boxes reportedly being 
smuggled into Thailand from Cambodia are not dangerous. 
  "From our experience -- we have come across this kind of box 
twice before -- we have found they contain depleted uranium 
[Uranium-238] and have very low radioactivity," Suchat 
maintained. 
  He also explained that when Uranium-235 (or enriched 
uranium) 
is extracted for use from natural uranium, the remainder is 
called depleted uranium. It is considered very cheap, he said. 

