BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 16 Jun (XINHUA) -- The State Council 
General Office recently distributed the State Council Securities 
Commission's "Some Opinions on Resolutely Checking the 
Unregulated Development of the Futures Market," and it called on 
the parties concerned to carry out close coordination and to 
conscientiously implement them. 
  The "opinions" of the State Council Securities Commission 
pointed out that since the issuance of the "State Council's 
Circular on Resolutely Checking the Unregulated Development of 
the Futures Market" in 1993, localities and relevant departments 
have enhanced their supervision and management over the futures 
market and have taken some appropriate measures, which led to a 
certain degree of success. However, the problem of the 
unregulated operations of futures market has not been totally 
solved. The problems that are chiefly plaguing China's futures 
market are as follows: First, there are too many futures 
exchanges and brokerages, the futures markets are chaotic, and 
the operations of futures markets and brokerages lack 
standardization. Second, many exchanges engage in speculative 
cross-border futures transactions, which cause great losses to 
the state. Third, some futures trading brokerages' fraudulent 
practices against domestic clients lead to a great loss of 
foreign exchange. Fourth, despite its prohibition, illegal 
futures trading continues. Because China's futures market is 
still in the experimental stage, it is necessary to seek steady 
development based on the principle of "standardization, of 
enhancing legislation, and of subjecting everything to 
experimentation and to strict control." At present, emphasis 
should be placed on rectifying, consolidating, and enhancing 
management over existing futures exchanges and brokerages, 
particularly on exercising strict control over cross-border 
futures trading and on financial futures trading, and on 
resolutely cracking down on various types of illegal futures 
trading. 
  The "opinions" called on relevant departments and all levels 
of local governments to immediately stop examining and approving 
applications for setting up new futures trading exchanges and to 
carry out reexaminations and reapprovals of existing futures 
trading exchanges. Futures trading exchanges which were 
approved -- prior to the issuance of the State Council's 
"circular" -- by relevant departments or the people's 
governments of provinces, autonomous regions, municipalities, 
and of cities with provincial status, and which had already 
begun operating before the end of December 1993, will be handled 
according to the following two approaches. First, the majority 
of exchanges will cease to be named exchanges, and they will be 
treated as wholesale markets; they will be prohibited from 
carrying out futures trading transactions. Second, as for the 
small minority of exchanges which meet the operational 
requirements for futures trading, the China Securities 
Supervision and Management Commission (CSSMC for short) will 
assign experts to carry out a feasibility study on them. They 
will be selected to carry out a standardized experiment with 
futures trading only after undergoing a rigorous examination and 
approval process by the CSSMC and only after having been 
approved by the State Council. Those selected exchanges need to 
file again for registration with the State Administration for 
Industry and Commerce. The CSSMC and relevant departments will 
be responsible for their supervision and management. 
  The "opinions" call for strict control over the scope of 
futures transactions with exchanges confining their business to 
commodity futures. Business involving financial futures 
transactions will be permitted for the time being, while no 
other futures business involving share indexes and other 
categories of indexes in China will be allowed. No futures 
brokerage companies will be permitted to engage in foreign 
futures transactions. Those who have already started this type 
of business shall not accept new clients or new orders, while 
those who have already taken positions should settle their 
positions before the delivery date or should carry out an actual 
delivery on the delivery date. Deposits remitted overseas 
should be recalled upon the settling of the position. National 
corporations with subsidiary futures business organizations 
already in operation before the issuance of the "opinions" may, 
with renewed approval from the CSSMC, conduct hedge futures 
transactions in foreign futures markets for the purpose of 
preserving value within their own line of business, on the 
conditions that they deal with designated foreign futures 
companies and that they deal in items authorized by the CSSMC. 
Foreign futures brokerage firms to be appointed for business 
transactions must be members of exchange clearance houses 
verified by the CSSMC. Banks designated for foreign exchange 
transactions, and nonbanking financial institutes authorized by 
the State Administration of Exchange Control [SAEC] to engage in 
the foreign exchange business, may, upon joint SAEC-CSSMC 
approval, take advantage of their foreign exchange futures 
business to engage in hedge futures transactions for purposes of 
value preservation under joint SAEC-CSSMC supervision and 
management. Operators engaged in the foreign futures business 
must obtain a license issued by the CSSMC. 
  The "opinions" also call for the stricter examination of 
various categories of futures brokerage companies and the 
suspension of new applications. Futures brokerage companies 
meeting CSSMC requirements must register themselves with the 
State Administration for Industry and Commerce before opening 
for business. In principle, both foreign-funded and 
Sino-foreign joint-venture futures brokerage companies are not 
required to reregister. It is necessary to strictly prevent 
state-owned enterprises and institutions from engaging in 
futures transactions, to resolutely investigate and handle 
various illegal futures brokerage activities, and to strengthen 
supervision over the futures market. 

