BFN 

<F P=106> ["Regional Procuratorial Organs Make New Progress in </F>
Fighting Corruption in the New Year"] 
  [Text] Tibet's procuratorial organs have made new progress 
in safeguarding political and social stability as well as in 
protecting and removing obstacles to reform, opening up to the 
outside world, and economic construction in the new year. 
  Last year, Tibet's procuratorial organs earnestly 
implemented 
the central authorities' guidelines on fighting corruption and 
concentrated on handling economic crimes such as embezzlement 
and bribery. The chief procurator personally organized and 
directed his personnel. He also participated in handling major 
and important cases. Anticorruption departments introduced a 
system of responsibility for the handling of cases and adopted 
flexible means for investigating economic crimes. To find clues 
for use in cases, procuratorial organs held press conferences, 
established boxes or telephones for people to offer information 
about crimes, and adopted various means to publicize laws. The 
procuratorial organs focused on handling criminal cases 
involving the working personnel of party and government organs, 
judicial organs, law-enforcement administrative departments, and 
economic administrative departments. According to statistics, in 
1993 the region's procuratorial organs received 408 clues on 
economic crimes such as embezzlement and bribery and handled 77 
cases involving 83 people. Of these cases, 40 were major cases 
involving 42 people. Seven major criminal cases involved nine 
county and departmental-level cadres. The handling of these 
cases helped recover 4 million yuan for the state. In the 
process, a number offenders guilty of embezzlement and bribery 
were punished. This has heightened the prestige of the 
procuratorial organs in the minds of the people of all 
nationalities in Tibet. 
  The year 1994 is crucial for Tibet's reform, which has 
entered the period of package advancement and breakthroughs in 
key areas. To better serve reform, opening up to the outside 
world, and economic construction, the people's procuratorial 
organs, as always, will further concentrate on cracking down on 
economic crimes. A leader of the regional people's 
procuratorate said: This year, the region's procuratorial 
organs will continue to give priority to punishing people guilty 
of embezzlement and bribery, and will earnestly implement the 
principle of "handling cases strictly in accordance with law." 
Strictly enforcing laws is a precondition for cracking down on 
economic crimes. We must rectify the phenomenon characterized 
by failure to abide by the law and lax law enforcement, must 
deal accurate and relentless blows at criminals, and must ensure 
that procuratorial organs seriously carry out their functions. 
  At the same time, the leader stated: Efforts should be made 
in making new breakthroughs in handling major cases. All cases 
involving leading cadres at and above county and 
departmental-levels must be investigated and handled. Anyone 
who is involved in a crime must be thoroughly investigated. 
  He concluded: We must strengthen leadership over 
investigation and handling of major and important cases. The 
chief procurators must personally organize and direct his 
personnel, and personally participate in handling cases. We 
should learn from good experience in handling economic crimes, 
and supervise and provide better guidance to procuratorial 
organs at all levels. In 1994 we will achieve new victories in 
fighting corruption. 

