Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wu Cangping (6762 3318 5493), member of the </F>
Standing Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference and professor at the Chinese People's 
University: "Theoretical Population Research Must Answer New 
Questions as They Are Posed by the New Situation"] 
  [Excerpts] Since control of population growth was first 
proposed 20 years ago, the planned economy had all along been 
its objective foundation. It was the believed that as the 
economy was planned, population growth had also to be planned. 
In this way it had been a matter of course to make control of 
population growth part of all plans for the national economy and 
for social development. The report of the party given at its 
14th National Congress then declared: "Purpose of the reform of 
China's economic structure is achievement of a system of 
socialist market economy." This compelled people to make a new 
appraisal of the relationship between control of population 
growth and planned economy. Family planning has been one of 
China's fundamental policies, its main purpose being the control 
of population growth. What, then, should be its objective 
foundation? To this question, population theory must provide 
the answer. 
  According to the epistemology of Marxism, existence 
determines consciousness. China's national condition is 
objective existence; it is primary. Economic planning and 
population control policies as well as all other planning are 
things within the sphere of consciousness; they are secondary. 
It is understandable that planned economy demands planning of 
the labor force; however, planned economy per se cannot by 
itself put forward the demand for population control. Only on 
the foundation of a thorough knowledge of national conditions is 
it possible for a people to determine its population policy, 
and, furthermore, possible to set forth the specific population 
targets for a year (or five or 10 years). 
  National conditions are the result of the objective natural 
conditions and of the activities of our predecessors; our 
present generation has no other choice in this matter; we just 
have to take this state of affairs as starting point in our 
creation of new history. Decisions can only be accurate if they 
are based on the foundation of an accurate knowledge of the 
national conditions. Family planning and control of population 
growth, being major Chinese policies, must both start out from 
China's national conditions. National conditions are very broad 
in scope; they involve considerations of political, social, 
economic, cultural, and historical aspects. However, within the 
national conditions, the components that are most closely linked 
with the question whether China's population growth should be 
controlled are population, natural resources, environment, and 
the economy, and among these, again population is the most 
directly involved component. China is still in the initial stage 
of socialism, and people frequently quote Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's "large country, huge population, weak foundation" to 
express summarily this stage of China's national condition. The 
fact that China has a limited area of arable land, but a huge 
population, especially peasants, is a fact that is hard to 
change. It is a characteristic circumstance that must be taken 
into consideration in China's modernization efforts. The 
objective fact of China's large population determines the 
necessity to control China's population growth and the 
protracted and arduous nature of the endeavor. 
  In a letter written on 9 March 1991 to the leading comrades 
of the National Education Committee on the topic of education on 
national conditions, Comrade Jiang Zemin wrote: "Its huge 
population is a conspicuous characteristic of China's national 
condition." He thereby scientifically pointed out the basic fact 
for China's efforts at family planning and population control. 
However, for a long time nobody dared to directly express this 
very obvious fact. The reason was, one, the deep-rooted 
influence of the traditional "population determinism." This 
so-called "population determinism" is taking the total number of 
the population, population density, and population growth rate 
as the only factors that determine the overall features and 
development of a society. This is of course a one-sided and 
erroneous attitude. It is quite a different matter from our now 
taking the large population as the foundation for family 
planning. Second, it is the effect of the following argument. It 
assumes that the population problem is an economic question; if 
the economy prospers, there is no population problem. Some even 
go further, there are indeed people in China and abroad who 
believe that China is making the population problem the 
scapegoat for its inability to achieve an upswing in its 
economy. The essence of the second argument is that it will not 
recognize the negative effects its huge population for the 
survival and development of China. Its large population is a 
unique characteristic of China, and one in which the various 
countries of the world have no actual experience. Only by 
starting out from China's realities can we fully grasp the 
situation. 
  Many compare China with Japan, Holland, Belgium, and 
especially with the "four little dragons" of Asia. They state 
that population density in these countries and territories is 
much higher than in China, they also have few natural resources, 
and they are still capable of rapid development and have higher 
living standards than China. The purpose of this argument is to 
show that survival and development is unrelated to the 
population issue, that as soon as the economy flourishes, all 
problems are readily resolved. In their opinion China's problems 
are problems of politics, economy, and its managerial system. 
The point that these people do not understand is that China has 
a population of 1.1 billion, and that this makes it quite 
different from Japan, Holland, Belgium, and the "four little 
dragons." Survival and development in those countries depends on 
foreign resources and markets, but for China it is a matter of 
reconstructing the country through self-reliance, reliance 
primarily on domestic resources and markets, and regarding 
foreign resources and markets only as supplementary factors. 
Because China's population accounts for 22 percent of the world 
population, it can hardly rely on import and export trade, or on 
foreign resources and markets to solve the problem of its own 
survival and development. 
  Control of population growth has a bearing on such major 
issues as the right to independent existence and 
improvement-of-life quality for China's huge population. 
Speaking of the population's living conditions, China is a huge 
country with 9.6 million square kilometers of land, but because 
of its large population, the land available on a per capita 
basis is only one-third of the world's average. To be also 
considered are the high mountains, high plateaus, and many 
desert regions, such as the Gobi Desert, leaving only 10 percent 
as plains. This makes it unavoidable that a considerable portion 
of the population must live in areas with rather unfavorable 
living conditions, also in high altitudes and mountainous 
regions. In these areas temperatures are generally low, soil is 
poor, and most are arid or semi-arid regions, with scarcity of 
water and no transport facilities. According to the general 
census of 1982, 20.3 percent of China's population live in areas 
above 500 meters altitude, and half of these in areas of over 
1,000 meters, while throughout the world only one-tenth of the 
population live in areas of over 400 meters elevation. 
Obviously, the large population and the insufficiently developed 
economy leaves China's population little space for survival. 
Without population control, it will not only be impossible to 
improve the subsistence conditions for a large part of China's 
population, but these conditions will even further deteriorate. 
  Again, considering, for example, eating and providing 
foodstuffs. China has only 7 percent of the world's arable land 
available to feed 22 percent of the world's population. China's 
territory is about equal to that of the United States, but 20 
percent of land in the United States is arable, while it is only 
10 percent in China, and China's population is 4.5 times that of 
the United States. As a result, per capita arable land in China 
is only one-fourth of the world average and one-ninth that of 
the United States. China must under no circumstances depend on 
foreign supplies for its grain supply, because this would be 
unreliable and lead to foreign political control. It could 
threaten the nation's sovereignty and independence. For the 
survival of the Chinese nation and for the enhancement of the 
quality of life, China must highly cherish every inch of arable 
soil, must resort to intensive cultivation, to economizing in 
grain, and must promote its excellent tradition of building up 
the country through thrift and hard work; another imperative 
requirement for China is population control. 
  Control of population growth will also have a direct effect 
on China's continued development. Continued development is 
primarily economic development, social progress, raising the 
quality of the people, and the continued exploitation of natural 
resources. Effective population control has also a bearing on 
the right scale of available manpower and on the increase or 
decline of surplus manpower, on the raising of labor 
productivity, and on the appropriate resolution of 
contradictions in the social distribution. It has also a bearing 
on the appropriate resolution of such other contradictions as 
the contradiction between China's large population and the 
supply of and demand for commodities, between people's 
livelihood and state construction needs, and between the large 
number of its population and the need to raise population 
quality. In view of China's huge population, effective 
population control will therefore be beneficial for the 
resolution of all the above-mentioned contradictions and for the 
continued development of the country. 
  The possibility of building up China into a prosperous, 
strong, democratic, and culturally rich country, with 
accomplished socialist modernization, will depend to a very 
large extent on whether it will be possible to have the rural 
areas and the old liberated areas, the areas inhabited by 
national minorities, the border regions, and poverty regions 
extract themselves as quickly as possible from the state of 
poverty, gain prosperity, and achieve modernization of all the 
people living there. If population growth is controlled in the 
rural areas and in some backward regions, there will be hope to 
achieve a shift in the population toward nonagricultural 
pursuits and toward urbanization. However, if population is 
allowed to inflate in these regions, it would be idle to talk 
about achieving a state of modest prosperity and modernization 
for China. Family planning will therefore have to be a 
protracted endeavor. 
  Population growth is exercising pressure on the entire 
environment and on all environmental resources. Following 
economic development and rising living standards, per capita 
consumption of resources is bound to increase. The huge mass of 
population that there is already in China, combined with the 
many-times-over increase in per capita consumption of resources, 
will of necessity reduce the resources that will be available 
per person, and will even have some resources dry up. Population 
control and economic use of resources are by now constituting 
two indispensable preconditions for China's continued 
development. 
  The most convincing part in the argument that the large 
population has a bearing on the right to existence and 
development of the Chinese population, and that population has 
to be controlled, is the environmental capacity for China's 
population (also called life-sustaining capacity). The 
traditional theory does not acknowledge a set environmental 
capacity for a population: 
  1) It believes that human initiative can expand what volume 
of population the environment can absorb; 2) it believes the 
environmental resources comprise many indefinite factors; 3) it 
believes that because human living conditions differ in a 
thousand ways, environmental capacity is an indeterminable 
factor. 
  However, judging by the continuity in population development 
and considering the present state of science, a rough 
approximation of environmental capacity is possible. After 
prolonged on-the-spot investigations and research, the Center 
for Research on the National Condition and the Natural Resources 
Investigation Contingent of the Chinese Academy of Sciences came 
up with the figure of 1.5 to 1.6 billion people as the highest 
figure that China's entire natural environment could 
accommodate, and that the capacity would be below 1 billion, if 
there were shortage of some resources. China's population, which 
is now 1.1 billion people, will increase by sheer inertia to at 
least 1.5 to 1.6 billion at its peak in the next century, 
according to forecasts accepted by the majority of experts. This 
allows the assumption that the scope of China's population will 
in future reach the upper limits of what resources and 
environment can accommodate. The argument that its huge 
population justifies China's control of population growth is 
thus being supported by the intelligence of natural scientists. 
The proposition that scientific and technological progress can 
expand the life-supporting capacity is correct, but such 
expansion has its limits, the more so since at present it does 
not yet manifest that ability. 
  For the last 10-odd years, theoretical base for China's 
family planning and population control has all along been the 
Marxist theory on the two kinds of production. According to this 
theory, the ratio between the increase of human reproduction and 
the increase in the reproduction of material resources is the 
most fundamental proportion in human affairs, as both kinds of 
production must be in a state of mutual congruity. Prior to 
reform and opening up, China's average annual rate of economic 
growth was around 6 percent, while average annual population 
growth was 2 percent, so that the ratio between the two was 
about 3 to 1. In certain years, economic growth rates had slowed 
down, while population growth rate had risen to above 2.5 
percent, so that the ratio became one of 2 to 1, or even less. 
At that time, it was very convincing to say, based on these 
figures, that the two kinds of production were mutually 
incongruous, while family planning and control of population 
growth were yet very smoothly being carried out. After reform 
and opening up, China achieved a new and higher level of 
economic growth, maintaining annual averages of around 9 
percent. Family planning was also very successful. During the 
third period of peak births, the population's birth rate and 
fertility rate showed a declining tendency; the average annual 
rate of population growth was around 1.5 percent. At that time 
the ratio between the growth rates of the two kinds of 
production was about 6 to 1, or about double the former ratio of 
3 to 1. In 1992 the situation was particularly striking. The 
economic growth rate was 12.8 percent, while the rate of 
population growth declined to 1.28 percent, so that the ratio 
between the two kinds of production was 10 to 1. In the face of 
this new situation, people can't help asking whether congruity 
between the two kinds of production has already been achieved, 
and if not, when would such indeed be achieved? On the problem 
of how congruity is to be computed between the two kinds of 
production, there has never been a clear explanation since the 
start of the theory, and it should now be the time to answer 
this question. Actual practice and the many questions and 
perplexities in people's perception demand that theory provide 
the answer, and that a scientific and convincing exposition be 
produced. 
  It seems the only feasible way, and the one that is most 
commonly used, is to study the proportional relationship between 
human reproduction and material production and to subject the 
growth rates and the speed in both to a comparison. However, 
using this method to assess whether there is congruity between 
the two kinds of production also has its limitations: 
  1) It can only reflect the speed of growth, but will not 
reveal the original levels; 2) It cannot reflect the present 
levels attained by the two; 3) It will only reflect the ultimate 
production figures, but cannot reflect the relationship between 
population and the various key elements of production 
(especially the various natural resources) and environmental 
resources. 4) It is unsuitable for cross comparisons of domestic 
and foreign conditions. 
  In my opinion, the best yardstick to check whether the two 
kinds of production are mutually congruous is still the per 
capita index. 
  The per capita index is the link between human reproduction 
and material production. As a most direct and the simplest 
indicator, it equitably separates product volume, gross national 
product, and reflects the conditions of material production 
(such as fixed assets, infrastructure, motive power assembly, 
installed capacity, etc.) according to the total population 
figures for the various time periods. A larger population causes 
the per capita index to get smaller; this, then, is the 
population's "denominator effect." The reason for China's low 
per capita index is, first of all, the backwardness of its 
productive forces, or, one may say, the insufficiency of this 
numerator, while the excessively large population and the 
continuous population inflation in the denominator are elements 
that will undoubtedly prevent the per capita index from going up 
for a long time. Some believe, that population is insignificant 
as denominator, if only the volume of the numerator is 
increased, that this will possibly raise the per capita index. 
Of course, it is correct to pay great attention to the 
denominator (i.e. production volume). Developing production 
(increasing the denominator) by every possible means is a key 
demand in China's economic construction, as without such effort 
raising the per capita index would be like water without a 
source. However, disregarding population as effective in the 
denominator would disregard the eminent effect of the huge 
population volume on the per capita index. Many of China's 
products have been developed very rapidly, for instance, grain, 
meat, aquatic products, cotton, cotton cloth, coal, cement, 
steel, glass, etc. and their production ranks at the top or 
among the top levels of world production, but computed on a per 
capita basis production is low in world ranking, a fact that can 
only be attributed to the excessively large denominator 
(population). The per capita index reflects the relationship 
between the two kinds of production, and also shows that it is 
the huge population volume that is the fundamental cause for 
China's low per capita index. Fast economic development combined 
with slow population growth can bring about a rise in the 
originally backward per capita index. On the other hand, China's 
per capita resources index, which is so very far behind the 
average world levels (arable land, forestry land, sweet water 
resources are only one-third, one-ninth, and one-quarter, 
respectively, of average world levels) will steadily deteriorate 
further because of the increases in population. It is not 
difficult to foresee that the day will come before the middle of 
the next century when the per capita arable land in China will 
be below 1 mu. The huge population volume will lead to an 
incongruity between population and resource utilization, and 
this will be an even greater challenge for China's survival and 
development. 
  The party report at its 14th National Congress stated: 
"Assessing the right or wrong, the success or failure, in the 
performance of any sector must, in the final analysis, accept 
the criterion of whether it has contributed to the development 
of the productive forces of the socialist society, to the 
overall enhancement of the national strength of the socialist 
state, and to the improvement of the people's living standard." 
This criterion is also completely applicable when we examine the 
mutual congruity between China's human reproduction and material 
production. China's present gross national product, averaged 
out according to its population, is, for certain important 
products and for the infrastructure, for fixed assets, etc., at 
the bottom of world rankings, and some do not even attain the 
levels of the developing countries. This clearly indicates that 
there is still a large disparity to overcome, if China is to 
attain mutual congruity between the two productions. 
  When family planning was first started in China in the 
1970's, the most effective argument in its propaganda was that 
China already had a very large base population figure, its 
population growth was rapid, and the age structure of its 
population was a youthful one. At that time, women in the rural 
areas gave birth on the average to five children, and children 
below 15 years of age accounted for over 35 percent of the total 
population. When it comes to our present days, effective 
implementation of family planning has very effectively reduced 
the birth rate, and nationwide average is already approaching 
"replacement level" (i.e. maintaining the level of simple 
reproduction). In the cities, especially in the large cities, 
and in some provinces it is already well below the "replacement 
level." The rate of annual natural population growth has also 
declined from above 2 percent to 1.5 percent, which is a very 
favorable level in the Third World. In some provinces, cities, 
and counties there are already symptoms of a negative population 
growth. In some regions the population of below 15 years of age 
accounts for only one-quarter and even only one-fifth of the 
total population, figures which are among the lowest figures 
throughout the world. In the above-stated three terms used to 
characterize the situation in China, the statement about China's 
very large basic population figure is the only term that is not 
yet outdated, but the explanations given for the nature of 
China's family planning, its purpose and its task, are, we feel, 
somewhat oversimplified and require new supplementations and a 
systematic exposition. 
  China's family planning has Chinese characteristics, and 
must 
not be considered as identical with family planning in other 
countries, although in translation the same word is used; this 
is indeed a loss of "truthfulness" that occurs here in the 
translation. 
  First, in China, the scope of family planning is one that 
covers the entire society. It starts out from a macro-overview 
and from considerations of the interests of the entire society. 
Family planning in other countries starts out from a microscopic 
view and from the particular number of children and particular 
birth intervals in the planning of individual families and 
individual persons. 
  Second, in China, family planning is conducted as one of the 
functions of government, while abroad it is mostly undertaken by 
private organizations. 
  Third, in China, family planning starts out from the 
realities of China, always regarding control of population 
volume and raising the quality of the population (this mainly 
refers to eugenic excellence and excellence in child raising) as 
one uniform entity, which is different from family planning 
abroad, where restriction of births is the one and only 
objective. In China, eugenic excellence and excellence in child 
raising are indispensable preconditions for the consolidation of 
the low birth rate, and this is becoming more and more important 
following the actual achievement of low levels of births. 
  Fourth, in China's family planning, the overall total of all 
births is the result of macro-consideration, and is therefore, 
objectively, producing a cushioning effect in the distribution 
and sexes of the population and on the adjustment of the age 
structure at different times, between urban and rural regions, 
and between different districts. 
  Judging by its objectives, tasks, and methods, family 
planning with Chinese characteristics is an organic component of 
the construction of socialism with Chinese characteristics. It 
is an indispensable link in the efforts to build up China into a 
prosperous, strong, democratic, and culturally rich country, 
with accomplished socialist modernization. The deeper and more 
remote objective of China's family planning is to render service 
to the modernization of China's population. This demands that it 
make contributions toward modernization of the type of 
population reproduction, modernization of the population 
quality, modernization of the type of population structure, and 
toward a healthy ageing of the population. The burden of this 
work during the entire initial stage of socialism will be heavy 
and the endeavor will be a protracted one. Family planning is a 
basic project in the struggle of the Chinese people for their 
right to exist and develop. Under no circumstances must there be 
any relaxation because an extremely small group of foreigners 
obstinately lump it together with questions of human rights; the 
work must be resolutely continued and perfected. 
  In recent years, implementation of the Central Committee and 
the State Council resolution for a strengthening of family 
planning work and strict control of population growth has 
resulted in a remarkable reduction of the Chinese birth rate. To 
have achieved this success during periods of peak births is 
highly commendable, but must certainly not be a reason to relax 
further efforts. 
  First, one of the major reasons for the present decline in 
birth and fertility rates is the elevated marriageable age for 
women of childbearing age and the reduction of repeated births, 
but after some time there could be a relapse, and there are 
indeed still many areas of high childbirths, so that we must not 
lower our guard in this respect. 
  Second, China has a population of over 300 million women of 
childbearing age. The social, economic, and cultural situation 
has not yet reached the turning point when fewer childbirths 
would be demanded spontaneously. Consolidating the past 
achievements of family planning still requires much 
propagandistic work and work in service to society. One must not 
expect that the work has now been done once and for all. If a 
relapse would be allowed to occur, the task would require double 
the effort for only half the result. 
  Third, population growth develops in a wave pattern. After a 
peak occurs, there is bound to be another peak 20-odd years 
later. We are presently at the top of the third peak of 
childbirths, and in the next century there is bound to occur the 
fourth peak of childbirths, though of a somewhat more moderate 
dimension. We must under no circumstances be shortsighted about 
it. 
  Fourth, population growth possesses its own inertia. Even if 
the birth rate arrives at the "replacement level," population 
may still continue to grow. When the birth rate in the present 
developing countries reaches "replacement level," it will take 
another 30 to 50 years until zero population growth is achieved. 
  Since reform and opening up, some labor and talent markets 
have appeared in the urban and rural areas of China, and by 
having a direct meeting of supply and demand, it was possible to 
channel some manpower and some talents to places where they can 
be more effective. This is beneficial for the development of 
productive forces and is a start in breaking down the pattern of 
manpower distribution of the planned economy. China is in the 
process of establishing a system of socialist market economy. 
This new situation is also posing new challenges for our 
population theory: 
  1) Population reproduction is the natural foundation for 
reproduction of the work force population. If the work force is 
subject to market regulation, must population births also be 
regulated by the market economy? 
  2) All developed countries, without exception, are operating 
under the system of market economy. Without government 
interference in population reproduction, they all have low birth 
rates, and some have reached, or are about to reach zero 
population increases. Finally, opinions are voiced in China and 
abroad that after China has instituted market economy, it will 
only require the proper development of its economy to have its 
birth rate quite naturally go down, and population growth to be 
low or even zero. In 1984, at the Second International 
Population Conference in Mexico, the U.S. delegate openly 
declared that China will only be able to resolve its population 
problem by instituting a free economy. His purpose was 
obviously to have China abandon its present family planning 
policy and have China adopt a laissez-faire attitude in matters 
of birth control, but there is absolutely no way that we could 
be duped into doing that. 
  Under the new situation, there has to be a further 
emancipation of minds and renovation of concepts in our research 
of population theories. Judging by the actual conditions 
prevailing in China, regulation by the market of population 
reproduction is definitely not an objective or demand of the 
establishment of a system of socialist market economy. 
  First, in China family planning and population control is 
viewed from the angle of the society as a whole, while the 
market mechanism can regulate only a part of the work force, and 
cannot directly influence births of the entire population. There 
is, furthermore, a "time gap" of at least 15 to 20 years between 
the birth of a population and its having grown up into work 
force. In our fast changing times, it would be unrealistic to 
consider manpower needs 20 years hence on the basis of present 
manpower needs. Actually, what the market primarily influences 
is population movement and the demand for training a population 
of working ages, but not the problem of reproduction of the work 
force population. 
  Second, the labor market is presently not yet sufficiently 
developed in China at the present stage, and information is also 
not effectively spread. Some directives are false and erroneous. 
It is therefore not possible to guide family by family, 
household by household, toward spontaneously restricting births; 
there will always be a part of the people that will not exercise 
restraints in childbirths. In a macro-overview of the situation 
we see that China has already a huge contingent of surplus 
manpower. Relying only on market regulation to slow down the 
manpower increase, and as a consequence automatically reduce the 
birthrate, is unrealistic. 
  Third, population reproduction is not at all completely 
restrained by economic factors, but to a considerable extent 
influenced by social and cultural factors, and by the forces of 
ethnic customs and habits. This is so because market economy 
relies on such economic elements as the supply-demand relations, 
which frequently do not have a regulatory effect, the more so 
since many regions in China are economically not sufficiently 
developed. If the macro-guidance is lacking, and if there is 
also no propagandistic education for family planning and no 
coordinated social services, and if, furthermore, the said 
social and cultural factors and traditional customs are allowed 
free rein, the population inflation is bound to continue for a 
long time to come. 
  The practical experiences of the Western developed 
countries, 
where the population growth rate declined spontaneously, are of 
no reference value for today's China, because the national 
conditions are so different, and also because of the differences 
of the eras concerned and the stages of development. 

