BFN 

  [Text] United Nations, April 28, SPA -- Saudi Minister of 
State and cabinet member Muhammad Ibrahim Mas'ud told the United 
Nations Security Council Wednesday that the Kingdom has spared 
no efforts to support the cause of the Bosnian people and that 
the Saudi Government continues to extend political and moral 
support to the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina out of its 
religious and historic responsibilities. 
  In an address to the Security Council Wednesday, Mas'ud said 
the Kingdom has extended financial and in kind support and 
relief aid including food and medical supplies to Bosnia since 
the crisis started. 
  He added that the Kingdom has also formed popular fund 
raising committees for Bosnia which resulted in more than sr 
[saudi riyals] 500-million (dlrs [dollars] 134 million) 
collections. 
  He indicated that the Kingdom has also extended medical 
treatment to several wounded Bosnians in Saudi hospitals. 
  On the political level, the custodian of the two Holy 
Mosques 
King Fahd Bin-'Abd-al-Aziz exerted intensive efforts with 
brothers and friends on all levels and in regional and 
international fora to have the international community take 
swift and effective measures to preserve the entity of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, in line with a resolution by the OIC foreign 
ministers' sixth extraordinary session, which was held in Jeddah 
in December, 1993. 
  Mas'ud, who met yesterday with the Security Council 
president 
and U.N. secretary general as a member of the Organization of 
the Islamic Conference (OIC) liason team assigned to follow up 
the developments of the Bosnian crisis, said this meeting comes 
at a time when the plight of Bosnian brothers is worsening as 
they suffer from a war of liquidation and ethnic cleansing 
launched by the Serbs more than two years ago. 
  He said tens of thousands of Bosnians have been killed or 
wounded and hundreds of thousands have been rendered homeless 
because of this horrible war, not to mention rapes committed 
under the noses of "your civilized world and the Security 
Council". 
  He said if the Council had taken strict measures against 
aggressors, the destruction burning and inhuman atrocities in 
the Bosnian enclave of Gorazde would have been avoided. 
  He added that Gorazde is still on the verge of a human 
disaster and pointed out that more than 700 people were killed 
and 2,000 wounded in this Bosnian town. 
  He said despite these plights, the Bosnian people continue 
their legitimate struggle against Serb aggression in defence of 
their lives. 
  "We look upon this heroic struggle with respect and 
reverence, and we pray for mercy on the souls of martyrs among 
Bosnian Moslems who fell in the field of honour and sacrificed 
their lives for their homeland and nation where they set the 
greatest example of sacrifice to preserve the dignity of the 
homeland," he said. 
  He stressed that the Bosnian problem has become an 
international one despite its seemingly European nature, and 
European countries and the United States should cooperate with 
the United Nations and the Security Council to put an end to the 
strife in the former Yugoslav republic in a way that guarantees 
the safety, unity and independence of Bosnia-Herzegovina on its 
national soil. 
  He said the international community is required to cooperate 
in implementing sanctions against Serbs for breaching the 
ceasefire several times and preventing relief aid from reaching 
their destinations and for destroying all aspects of human life 
in Bosnia. 
  He pointed out that out of their belief in the necessity of 
realizing international peace and security and in view of the 
deteriorating situation in Bosnia, the OIC members have held 
extraordinary meetings to discuss this issue and always 
confirmed the independence and sovereignty of the Republci of 
Bosnia- Herzegovina and called on the United Nations and the 
Security Council to shoulder their responsibilities in this 
connection. 
  Security Council Resolution 913 coincided with this view 
when 
it reaffirmed the sovereignty and political independence of 
Bosnia- Herzegovina and strongly condemned Bosnian [as received] 
forces for their continued aggression against the "safe area" of 
Gorazde which led to a massacre of civilians and military 
personnel and caused a great deal of suufering. 
  As a result the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations called 
for lifting the arms embargo on Bosnia and the United States 
called on NATO to take necessary steps to enable Bosnian people 
to practice their legitimate right of self defence. 
  Mas'ud said despite numerous Serb pledges to halt military 
operation and remain committed to a truce and a political 
settlement of the problem, the Serbs always violate their 
international commitments and launch barbaric assaults on 
peaceful Bosnian people, which calls for a strict position by 
the international community to deter the aggressors and support 
the logic of force which is the only one that the Serbs 
understand. 
  The latter stage should be to hold a constructive dialogue 
to 
restore Bosnian rights. 
  "Therefore, we call on the Security Council to expedite 
playing its full part to restore things to normal in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina in a way that preserves its entity and 
sovereignty and restore stability to all Bosnian parts," he said. 
  He added that in case the Security Council fails to shoulder 
this responsibility, Bosnia should be exempted from the arms 
embargo imposed on the former Yugoslavia by Resolution 713. 
  Finally, Mas'ud expressed confidence that the Security 
Council would not be lax in endorsing the principle of 
international legitimacy and would seriously endeavour to 
shoulder its full responsibilities in accordance with the United 
Nations charter to support the credibility of the world body and 
realize international goals of security and stability. 
  The OIC liason team comprises OIC Secretary General Dr. 
Hamed 
Al-Ghabid, Mas'ud and representatives of OIC members: Egypt, 
Iran, Malaysia, Turkey, Tunisia, and Senegal. 

