Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of exclusive interview with German Foreign Minister </F>
Klaus Kinkel by MILLIYET correspondent Regaip Minareci in Bonn; 
date not given] 
  [Text] Bonn--[Minareci] Germany was the first country to 
describe the Kurdish Workers Party [PKK] as a terrorist 
organization and ban its activities. Meanwhile, it has 
encouraged several countries in Europe to close down the Kurdish 
organizations in them. A widespread view behind the political 
scenes in Turkey is that Germany expects Turkey to reciprocate. 
  [Kinkel] No, expecting something in return from Turkey is 
out 
of the question. I have always wanted to have the PKK 
activities banned. I am glad that that has been done now. The 
legal requirements for and the possible outcome of banning 
associations in Germany, which is governed on the basis of a 
liberal constitution, have to be debated in detail. That is 
essential. The significant wave of agitation throughout Germany 
on 4 November should have convinced everyone that remaining 
inactive against the militant Kurdish groups, which wanted to 
achieve their objective through violence, was no longer 
possible. They posed a threat to Germany's security and public 
order. They also posed a threat to peaceful coexistence in 
Germany. We cannot allow the internal disputes in Turkey to be 
transferred to our country. Nor do we wish to allow that to 
happen. We respect the rights of the Turkish citizens in 
Germany. However, we must not be expected to adopt an 
understanding approach on acts of violence. 
  [Minareci] The CSCE countries have agreed to ban terrorist 
activities in Europe. Turkey has tried during the past eight 
years to explain to the West that the PKK is a terrorist 
organization. However, terrorist activities have only been 
banned very recently. Can you explain the reason for that state 
of affairs? 
  [Kinkel] The CSCE countries condemned terrorism in the 
statement that was made at the end of the Helsinki summit in 
1992. They stressed that they were prepared to closely cooperate 
on the matter. The German Government fully supported that 
political undertaking. However, I reject the view that the 
German officials remained completely inactive before the PKK 
activities were banned. The police, judicial organs, and other 
official establishments always took action against illegal 
activities. They brought those who broke the law to account. 
It is common knowledge that several courts in Germany have been 
hearing penal cases against the PKK members for many years, 
regardless of the problem of insufficient evidence against them. 
Several defendants have been sentenced to relatively serious 
prison terms. 
  However, banning associations is a different matter. The ban 
on associations creates natural and legal problems. No one in 
Germany and Turkey would have gained from a rushed decision, the 
legality of which would be questioned by the people. 
  [Minareci] How does Germany plan to prevent the PKK from 
violating the ban and establishing new organizations under 
different names? Can you comment on how the PKK will behave in 
Germany in the future? What are the measures the German 
Government plans to put into effect against possible PKK attacks 
in the future? 
  [Kinkel] The Federal Internal Affairs Minister's decision 
not 
only bans the PKK and the 34 organizations affiliated with it 
but also prohibits any move to establish new organizations to 
replace them. Naturally, the police and the judicial organs 
will see to it that the ban is imposed within the framework of 
the laws. They will bring criminal charges against anyone who 
violates Germany's laws. 
  [Minareci] While the European Union [EU] members have moved 
to cooperate against the PKK, Greece has openly supported that 
terrorist organization. Will Germany hold talks with Greece on 
that matter? 
  [Kinkel] The PKK problem has not affected all the EU members 
as much as it has affected Germany. However, all the EU 
countries agree on the need to condemn terrorism and wage a 
determined struggle against it. In view of that, Germany is 
acting with all the other EU members in a coordinated way. We 
hope to establish closer cooperation on the matter. 
  [Minareci] In addition to the PKK, other terrorist groups 
and 
individuals have used Germany as their headquarters, such as 
Dev-Yol [Revolutionary Path Organization] and Cemalettin Kaplan 
[Islamic fundamentalist leader]. Will Germany take measures 
against them as well or will they find an opportunity to 
strengthen their ranks? 
  [Kinkel] The ban on associations is not the only effective 
measure that can be taken in the struggle against terrorist 
activities. Germany is a lawful state which can use various 
means to wage a struggle against anyone who resorts to acts of 
violence and disrupts law and order and peace. The Dev-Sol 
[Revolutionary Left Organization] was banned in Germany in 1983. 
The PKK has been banned recently. The pertinent federal state 
has taken measures against Cemalettin Kaplan within the 
framework of the law on foreigners. I suggest that matters 
concerning the two countries should not be viewed from the point 
of view of the adoption of forceful measures. Political 
arguments and debates have gained importance in our time, more 
so than before. They must be based on the friendship between 
Turkey and Germany, the concept of human and citizenship rights 
within the framework of the European and Atlantic organizations, 
and the concept of freedom and democracy. 

