CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chang Weimin: "ARCO Aims to Help China Develop </F>
Low-Cost Petrol"] 
  [Text] The American oil giant Atlantic Richfield Company 
(ARCO) aims to help China develop low-cost and reformulated 
petrol. 
  China, which expects to assemble 3 million motor vehicles 
annually within 10 years, badly needs new kinds of petrol that 
can improve vehicle efficiency and reduce air pollution. 
  ARCO President Mike R. Bowlin said yesterday in Beijing he 
is 
in the country to conduct negotiations with Chinese government 
officials. 
  "We'll discuss the possibilities for the cooperation and 
market of products to be manufactured," said Bowlin, who will be 
ARCO's chief executive officer later this year. 
  China now has 8.3 million vehicles, which consume 25 million 
tons of fuel a year. Most of the fuels contain lead. 
  ARCO, one of the major foreign oil cooperative partners of 
China, is the top developer of low-cost petrol in the United 
States. 
  Bowlin said the firm is also interested in coal mining and 
generating electricity with coal and natural gas in China. 
  During his trip, Bowlin is expected to talk with Vice 
Premier 
Zou Jiahua, high-ranking officials from the State Planning 
Commission, and senior executives from the China National 
Petroleum Corporation, the China National Offshore Oil 
Corporation (CNOOC), the China Petroleum Corporation and the 
China Huaneng Group, a central-supported energy conglomerate. 
  A CNOOC official and Bowlin both announced that the two 
corporations will join efforts to develop crude oil outside 
China. 
  Bowlin said ARCO, whose revenues last year stood at $20 
billion, will continue to target China as one of its key markets. 
  Although Bowlin came to China expecting only to conduct 
negotiations this time, agreements are expected to be clinched 
later in the United States. 
  ARCO began doing business with China in 1978 and has been 
one 
of the largest partners with Chinese oil firms so far. It has 
already sunk $300 million into oil exploration in China and 
expects its investment to increase by $1.2 billion by 1996. 
  ARCO has signed several contracts and agreements with 
Chinese 
for developing oil and natural gas in the South China Sea and 
exploring for petroleum in the East China Sea. 
  According to the contracts, ARCO, together with CNOOC and 
the 
Santa Fe Company, are to annually supply Hong Kong with 2.9 
billion cubic metres of gas beginning in 1996. 
  ARCO discovered the Yacheng 13-1 gas field, the largest 
offshore field in China, which contains 100 billion cubic metres 
of gas. 

