Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Raymond Burgos] </F>
  [Text] The Rebolusyonaryong Alyansang Makabansa [RAM - 
Nationalist Revolutionary Alliance], a group of rightist 
military rebels, had provided a cache of various explosives to 
the leftist hit squad Alex Boncayao Brigade (ABB), a RAM leader 
has disclosed. 
  The RAM leader, who requested anonymity, yesterday said the 
cache of explosives, mostly bombs used by the Armed Forces of 
the Philippines, was given to leaders of the ABB sometime in 
1990 after the RAM and the then Manila-Rizal committee of the 
Communist Party of the Philippines agreed to enter an "informal 
united front" to topple the administration of President Corazon 
Aquino. 
  The Manila-Rizal faction of the CPP [Communist Party of the 
Philippines] led by Felimon Lagman, broke off from self-exiled 
party founder Jose Maria last year, but kept the bombs given by 
the RAM. 
  "It's possible that the explosives used by the ABB team in 
bombing the head offices of three oil companies were part of the 
cache of explosives that were given to them," the military rebel 
said. 
  The ABB had claimed responsibility for the bombing of the 
offices of Shell and Petron in Makati and Caltex in Manila in 
protest over the 28 January decision of the Energy Regulatory 
Board to increase oil prices. 
  Two security guards of Petron were wounded during the 
bombings on 1 February. The ABB the next day said it would stop 
the bomb attacks to give way to street protests against the oil 
price increase. 
  President Ramos, on the eve of a planned general strike 9 
February agreed to roll back fuel prices, triggered off by a P1 
[Philippine pesos]-per-liter oil levy but on condition 
alternative sources of revenue were found. 
  The RAM leader's disclosure that bombs were given by the 
military rebels to the ABB supports the claim by communist 
factions loyal to Sison that the ABB is capable of "terroristic 
attacks" in Metro Manila. 
  Nova Salvacion, spokesman of a group in the Manila-Rizal 
communist committee which remained loyal to Sison, has said that 
a number of the bombs given by the RAM were planted by the ABB 
in "strategic areas" between 1990 and 1991 to promote chaos and 
provoke street fighting in Metro Manila. 
  According to Salvacion, some of the planted bombs are still 
intact and could still be detonated. 
  The planned bombings at that time were aimed at creating an 
insurrectionary situation" that will lead to the collapse of the 
Aquino administration. 
  At the height of protests calling for a permanent roll back 
in fuel prices last 9 February, police discovered several home 
made bombs and C-4 blasting caps inside the Motorola compound 
along the South Superhighway in Sucat, Paranaque. 
  Police investigators, however, failed to determine whether 
the bombs were part of a terror plot timed with the 9 February 
nationwide protest. 
  They also failed to identify the group responsible for 
planting the bombs inside the Motorola compound, owned by the 
family of businessmen Raul and Jose Concepcion, who supported 
the call for a general strike. Interior Secretary Rafael Alunan 
III claimed "extremist groups" planted the bombs found in 
Paranaque. Alunan, however, did not identify the group. 

