BFN 

<F P=106> [Pavel Felgengauer report under the "Visit" rubric: "Bill </F>
Perry Begins Talks in Moscow. U.S. Defense Secretary To 
Encounter Problems in the CIS"] 
  [Text] U.S. Defense Secretary Bill Perry arrives in Moscow 
today. At 1130 he will meet with General Pavel Grachev. The 
visit is purely working in nature, which is why "no agreements 
will be signed during the visit in Moscow," Pavel Grachev said 
to your SEGODNYA correspondent. 
  Bill Perry will stay in Moscow for two days. He is scheduled 
to meet not only with Defense Ministry chiefs, but also with 
Oleg Soskovets, Andrey Kozyrev, and Ivan Rybkin. Perry will 
then leave for Kazakhstan, Belarus, and Ukraine, where he will 
continue his "fact-finding mission," as such voyages are usually 
termed in America. 
  The visit's working status will enable Perry to discuss a 
wide range of problems: the situation in Russia and Bosnia, the 
"Partnership for Peace," nuclear and chemical disarmament, 
nuclear weapons in Ukraine and Kazakhstan, flank quotas under 
the CFE Treaty, and the ABM Treaty. 
  Currently Russia does not have global differences in 
principle with the United States, but there is a multitude of 
minor problems that are hard to resolve. At present it is quite 
clear that cash- poor Russia needs assistance in order to 
fulfill its obligations with regard to nuclear and chemical 
weapons. Washington is in principle ready to pay, but it would 
like to be able to supervise the way the U.S. taxpayers' money 
is being spent. 
  Yesterday, U.S. Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary and Russian 
Federation Nuclear Energy Minister Viktor Mikhaylov managed to 
agree in Washington on giving inspectors access to the storage 
sites of the two countries' "nuclear warhead plutonium 
components." The Americans would also like directly to observe 
the process of the warheads' dismantlement (for the same amount 
of money), but Russian nuclear specialists would rather keep the 
secrets of "operational" warheads' specific design. 
  An even more difficult problem concerns flank quotas for 
heavy armaments under the CFE Treaty. In Georgia, Armenia, and 
in the North Caucasus there is currently more armored equipment 
than what is allowed by the Paris Treaty of 1990 and the 
Tashkent Protocol of 1992. The CFE Treaty is scheduled to go 
into force from the beginning of 1995; Russia insists that the 
limitations be renegotiated, whereas Turkey demands that they be 
adhered to without fail. Ankara has also expressed its 
willingness to send its peacekeeping troops under a UN flag to 
Abkhazia (at Georgia's request), something which Moscow, in 
turn, opposes. 
  Representatives of the Clinton administration have so far 
expressed their "sympathy and understanding" with regard to all 
conflicting sides in the CIS and around it. After holding 
intensive consultations in Moscow and other capitals, Bill Perry 
will apparently find much extra food for thought. 

