BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Amid Instructions To Dismiss </F>
`al-Duris' Group, Iraqi Ba'th Party Fills Its Leading Vacancies 
Through Internal Elections, Excluding `Malcontents'"] 
  [Text] Amman, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- Iraqi President Saddam 
Husayn has ordered the ruling Ba'th Party's apparatus in Baghdad 
to conduct internal elections with a view to filling the party's 
leading vacancies resulting from last year's large-scale 
dismissals. 
  The elections have begun at the lower levels and will reach 
their peak in four weeks when the Ba'th Party holds an 
extraordinary conference to choose new leadership members, 
including four candidates to fill vacancies resulting from the 
dismissal from the regional command of Nuri Faysal Shahir, Fawzi 
Khalaf Zurayq, 'Abd-al-Rahman al-Duri, and Khadr al-Duri. 
  Well-informed Iraqi sources have said that the instructions 
issued to the party's organization stipulate that 160 leading 
members in various cities -- most of them from Mosul, al-Dur, 
and the al-Jubur tribe -- are not to be elected, under a 
large-scale plan to purge the party apparatus of the malcontents 
about whom the security services linked directly to the Iraqi 
president have reservations. 
  The sources pointed to a prevalent tendency to dismiss more 
elements from the "al-Duris" group in preparation for handing 
over the party leadership to a number of the Iraqi president's 
relatives, including his brother, Interior Minister Watban 
Ibrahim, and son, 'Udayy. 
  The last extraordinary conference the Ba'th party held was 
after the Gulf war. A number of party leaders were dismissed at 
that conference, among them former Prime Minister Sa'dun Hammadi. 
  Meanwhile the association for the defense of freedoms in 
Iraq 
has announced that Iraqi writer Jasim al-Rasif, head of the 
writers union in Mosul, has been arrested by the special 
security service and that his fate has been unknown since the 
beginning of the month. 
  The association said in a leaflet distributed from its 
office 
in Ankara that two journalists, namely Lutfi al-Khayyat and 
Ahmad Sabri, have been prevented from assuming their 
journalistic work since their release. They were detained for 
more than a month in the jails of the the Olympic Committee, of 
which the Iraqi president's son, 'Udayy, is in charge. 
  The association has repeated its demand for the release of 
35 
writers and journalists who have been detained since the Iraqi 
president's son assumed the chairmanship of the literary, 
journalistic, and cultural organizations in Iraq. 

