Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Shafiq al-Asadi:"A Move to Privatize Government </F>
Companies and Institutions. UAE Budget for 1994 Remains at Last 
Year's Levels Despite the Impact of Dropping Oil Prices"] 
  [Text] Abu Dhabi--Ahmad al-Tayir, UAE [United Arab 
Emirates] minister of state for finance and industry affairs, 
announced that the UAE federal budget for the current 1994 
fiscal year will be near last year's budget of about 17.6 
billion dirhams [UD] ($4.8 billion) despite the strong impact on 
the UAE of softening oil prices and declining oil revenues. He 
also disclosed that the government is moving to privatize 
government companies and institutions, beginning with the 
Emirates Petroleum Company, in order to shed the burden of 
administering them and to pave the way for the creation of a 
capital market in Abu Dhabi. 
  Said al-Tayir: "The revenues of Abu Dhabi and Dubai, both of 
which contribute to the budget, have declined to a large extent 
in 1993 because of softer oil prices, which are expected to 
remain low throughout the current year. However, the two 
emirates are committed to not reducing their 1994 budget 
contributions from their 1993 levels. Federal government 
revenues from levies and investment returns will also remain at 
their 1993 levels since no new levies were imposed and because 
returns on investment did not rise due to lower interest rates 
on deposits. 
  "Federal government revenues from levies and returns on 
investment amounted in 1993 to about UD2.751 billion." 
  In an interview with AL-HAYAH and a small number of newsmen 
in conjunction with yesterday's meeting in Abu Dhabi of the 
Federal National Assembly (parliament), al-Tayir said that he 
expected the UAE federal budget to be issued soon and that the 
draft budget would be submitted to the council of ministers in 
its final form before the end of this month. 
  He disclosed that the draft budget is currently being 
discussed with the various ministries in order to trim down the 
appropriations they requested. He pointed out that the 
ministries have put in for UD20 billion in requested 
appropriations, which is UD3 billion more than the UD17 billion 
earmarked for the 1994 budget. 
  The minister fielded questions in yesterday's meeting of the 
Federal National Council [FNC] on the reasons for the delay in 
issuing the 1994 budget and in submitting it to the FNC two 
months before year-end as stipulated by the UAE provisional 
constitution. The reason for the delay, al-Tayir asserted, was 
that the various ministries were late in submitting their draft 
budgets to the Ministry of Finance and Industry by the end of 
last September as required. 
  He stated: "Four ministries submitted their draft budgets in 
October. Seven other ministries and government institutions, 
including the FNC, submitted their draft budgets as late as last 
November." He added that most ministries did not calculate their 
requirements in the 1994 budget in accordance with the 
guidelines issued by the Finance Ministry to keep expenditures 
in line with the volume of revenues. 
  That, he explained, caused the Finance Ministry to reexamine 
the draft budget and the projects it entailed in order to keep 
them in tandem with the resources available to the government, 
especially since revenues have been impacted by declining oil 
prices and lower returns on government investments. He 
emphasized that the Finance Ministry does not wish to 
[arbitrarily] impose its estimates of what the various 
ministries require but rather wants the budget to respond to the 
needs of the ministries. 
  He emphasized that the delay in issuing the 1994 budget has 
been covered with the promulgation of a Federal Decree 
authorizing expenditures as of the beginning of January at the 
rate of one twelfth of the 1993 budget. 
  Al-Tayir also emphasized that the 1994 budget would be 
"balanced," in that the budgetary deficit in 1994 will not 
exceed the 1993 gap of UD1.720 billion. 
  He explained that balance would be achieved in 1994 because 
the government has completed a number of one-time major projects 
that no longer require allocations for the current year. He 
pointed out that the government's focus in the past two years 
was on implementing power projects in the northern emirates at a 
cost of UD500 million and on constructing 2,000 low-cost housing 
units for citizens at a cost of 1 billion dirhams. 
  The UAE minister of state for finance and industry affairs 
disclosed that the government is moving to privatize a number of 
government companies and institutions as part of its plan to 
shed the financial and administrative burdens of managing those 
enterprises. 
  He stated that his ministry has proposed privatizing the 
Emirates Petroleum Corporation in two stages, whereby 49 percent 
of ownership would go to citizens in the first stage with public 
ownership ultimately rising to 100 percent. 
  He added that the proposal is currently under study and that 
the relevant decree has been issued by the Supreme Federal 
Council. He emphasized that it was no longer logical for the 
federal government to own companies and institutions when it has 
adopted a market economy. 
  However, sources at the Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral 
Resources emphasized to AL-HAYAH that it is premature to offer 
the Petroleum Corporation for public subscription by UAE 
citizens since the Council of Ministers' approval must first be 
obtained due to the Emirates Petroleum Corporation's status as a 
federal enterprise. The Corporation's accounts receivable and 
payable must also be settled [before it is put on the market]. 
  The sources emphasized that the Corporation is in debt to 
the 
Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC) which supplies it with 
petroleum products for distribution in the various emirates with 
the exception of Abu Dhabi, and that it is owed large amounts by 
the federal government as well as by some local governments and 
factories. The Corporation, founded in 1981 with a capital of 
UD400 million, distributes petroleum products in the UAE. 
  The Federal National Council in yesterday's session also 
directed a query at Yusuf Bin-'Umayr, UAE minister of petroleum 
and president of the Corporation, as to why the prices of 
petroleum products were higher in the Emirates than in other 
neighboring Gulf states. The Council had to postpone discussion 
of the subject because the minister was not present. 
  However, Ahmad Humayyid al-Tayir asserted that the Emirates 
Petroleum Corporation has repaid all its debt and has realized 
substantial profits in recent years; therefore making it 
feasible to offer its shares for subscription. 
  He said that the Corporation's stock would be offered for 
sale at reasonable prices at approximate book value as part of 
the government's strategy to provide citizens with a good 
investment climate. [The government followed the same strategy] 
in previous public offerings of certain organizations and 
companies such as the Emirates Telecommunications Corporation, 
the Emirates Airlines, and the Emirates Hotels Company. 
  He emphasized that the stock offerings would boost the 
number 
of stock companies and lead to the "official" creation of a 
capital market in the UAE. 

