Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Democratic Alliance Chairman Neritan Ceka by </F>
Ernest Tushe; place and date not given: "Neritan Ceka Speaks 
Out"] 
  [Text] [Tushe] The last week has been fraught with a 
number of disturbing incidents in our country's politics. How 
would you assess the political situation on the basis of these 
events? 
  [Ceka] I consider the political situation to have been 
inflamed artificially. For you journalists, Albania is really 
an ideal country where you do not have to chase news, because 
the state drops in into your lap in the most incredible fashion. 
However, these incidents give rise to despair in Albanian 
readers wearied of both the past and their present lives, that 
might be summed up in the words: "This lot are the same as the 
old ones!" 
  I think that two factors have inflamed the situation. First, 
there is the factor of economic insecurity. Despite the 
euphoric figure of a 10 percent growth in production, the state 
exchequer is in the red and will remain so in 1994. This 
feeling of hunger is making the state nervous. 
  The second factor concerns the primitive level of political 
culture on which this state rests. In essence, it has much in 
common with communist collectivism, but differs from it in being 
based not on ideology but on nepotism, regional ties, and other 
primitive criteria. In both cases, the political result is 
hatred for free men and, in the constitutional sense, free 
citizens. As a result, those who wield power today, who found 
themselves at the head of the democratic movement accidentally, 
are always one step behind the prevailing mentality and are now 
in conflict with it. 
  [Tushe] Specifically, you also accuse the state of the 
assault on deputy Teodor Keko. Is it possible that his former 
friends could do such things? 
  [Ceka] I would not be surprised in the slightest if I were 
told that the criminal was sent by the ShIK [National 
Intelligence Service], ShIU [Military Intelligence Service] or 
ShIR [expansion unknown]. Representatives of these services 
were involved in the murder of Gjovalin Cekini in Shkoder and 
have not suffered any consequences. The fact that one week 
after the assault on Keko the president of the republic, the 
prime minister, the public order minister, and Mr. Arbnori have 
not said a single word in public, and have not sent a single 
official to learn about the incident or to enquire about deputy 
T. Keko's health, shows that his former friends are now on the 
side of the aggressor. I do not want to exaggerate by saying 
that the criminal was physically sent directly by them. 
However, morally, the brass knuckles in Keko's face were 
inspired by the aggressive speeches of those in power, the 
mistreatment of the opposition in parliament and politics, and 
the misinformation of radio and television. 
  As a human being, T. Keko stands much higher than those who 
were morally or physically behind his attacker. He is a 
first-rate writer and the sort of person who naturally finds it 
hard to make enemies. You have to nurse a powerful, primitive, 
and schizophrenic hatred of somebody to send against Keko, at a 
time when he has written such fine poems and stories, an 
unwashed, unshaven, long- haired individual to hit him with 
brass knuckles. These "sons of cunning fathers," as Lermontov 
once called those who order the murders of poets, should at 
least teach their hitmen how to wash, shave, and cut their hair 
and not to attack little Keko and his wife in such a hit-and-run 
fashion. 
  As far as the state is concerned, after the murderers of 
Shkoder, who fired with the president's name in their mouths, 
the state also has the hitman of Tirana on its side. This is a 
very serious matter, just like the Mateotti crime in Italy, and 
the state is obliged to speak out. Either it must publicly 
condemn the two crimes, or the president and the prime minister 
should admit that they are not in control of the situation. 
Otherwise, by their silence, they remain on the side of the 
crime. 
  I feel obliged here to point out the responsibility of the 
parliament and in particular that of the majority, on whose 
ballots political crime in Albania relies for its security. I 
cannot understand how a parliament can manage to remain silent 
when a criminal strikes one of its members in the middle of the 
street. A parliament that continually raises its voice over 
violations of Albanian rights in Kosova cannot discount as an 
Albanian the deputy Moikom Zeqo, who was maltreated in 
Montenegro, merely because he belongs to the Socialist Party 
[PS]. Before we are members of the Democratic Party, the PS, 
the Democratic Alliance [AD], or the Social Democratic Party, we 
are Albanian citizens and the parliament and the state have the 
same responsibilities to us all. But this is a parliament where 
the majority of deputies are struggling for their salaries and 
for two rooms and a kitchen in Tirana. In fact, all Albanian 
politics today is calculated on the basis of people wanting a 
job and an apartment in Tirana, or wanting to hide something in 
their past or present lives. 
  [Tushe] The public, before learning of any determination on 
the part of the state to arrest Gjovalin Cekini's murderers, was 
shocked by the suicide of his brother, Mehill Cekini. 
  [Ceka] Mehill Cekini did not kill himself. He was murdered 
by the state's silence. We are dealing with the tragedy of a 
citizen who felt himself isolated, surrounded by a state of 
cavemen. The Cekini family, knowing that the real murderers of 
their son were those who had sent the hitmen Bari, Kubazi, and 
Cela, did not ask for vengeance but justice. However, our 
state, whose filthiest agencies are now implicated in a common 
murder, is now trying to play with the traditions and honesty of 
a highland family like the Cekinis, leaving them to face the 
criminals of Shkoder. Sixty years after Migjeni, these 
highlanders remain the victims of what this writer called "a 
beauty that kills," victims of the silence of a state that 
appears on television with luxurious offices, take-offs and 
landings of aircraft, and the same twisted smiles at official 
receptions. As long as Gjovalin Cekini's murderers are not 
arrested, they are protected by this syrupy "beauty" of the 
state. 
  [Tushe] After being forbidden to hold a meeting at Elbasan, 
the AD was also prevented from holding its planned meetings in 
Reps an Fan of Mirdita on 14 March. Do you see in this an 
escalation of the state's political violence? 
  [Ceko] This action by the police, of course at the orders of 
politicians, shows that the constitution is being violated in 
two ways. First, the most basic political rights are being 
restricted, such as the right to assembly. According to a 
regulation introduced by either nincompoops or people hostile to 
democracy, police permissions must be sought even for meetings 
in indoor halls. This is a violation of the Constitution, for 
which somebody will answer one day. The police officers who 
sign such orders must therefore look for a legal basis for such 
instructions. Second, directors of the Public Order Ministry 
are making open attempts to politicize the police. I sincerely 
advise them to be wary of such steps that not only compromise 
the state but their own futures. 
  Such measures that seem to be sporadic, such as the 
imprisonment of journalists, prohibitions on political 
activities, and assaults on political personalities, indicate a 
strategy of political violence directed against pluralism and 
democracy. There is no evidence that today's rulers have 
neither the economic resources nor the courage to establish a 
dictatorship. At the moment, the evidence is for a restricted 
democracy within the limits accepted by Europe. However, these 
rulers are unable to realize that Europe, and still less a 
people that has just emerged from dictatorship, cannot be taken 
in by a facade. 
  [Tushe] Do you think the Nano trial is part of this 
strategy? 
  [Ceka] Nano's guilt has still not been proved from the 
course of the trial so far, and he therefore still remains a 
political figure. This is therefore an act of political 
violence. Even though Nano is the chairman of a party that the 
AD opposes in the political spectrum and over many basic issues 
in our programs, I cannot accept the savagery with which the 
judiciary has treated him. All this leaves little hope that 
Albanian justice will aquire a European face. This is the 
justice of Brozi's two-rooms-and-a- kitchen or of some filthy 
dossier from the time of the dictatorship. 
  What worries me most of all is that the present economically 
and politically compromised regime, by identifying democracy 
with itself, is playing the way for a prematire resurgence of 
the left. Nano's trial, alongside the blockade of the PS's 
activities with the mobilization of thousands of policemen, is 
giving as a free gift to the Socialists the role of martyrs to 
democracy. 
  I am not sure whether the Socialists will be grateful to the 
present rulers when they take power. 

