BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Current Affairs" program] </F>
  [Text] Although the world's first copyright law was 
published in Britain nearly 300 years ago, it was only 1991 that 
a copyright law came into force in China. However, as CRI's 
(Guang Juanjuan) found out, the legal steps China has taken to 
protect intellectual property rights, including copyrights, are 
gaining world recognition. A lawsuit brought by the famous 
U.S.-based Walt Disney company has once again put China's 
Copyright Law under the spotlight. (Yuan Fang) has the details: 
  [Begin recording] [(Yuan)] In January of this year, the 
U.S.-based Walt Disney company filed a lawsuit in Beijing 
Intermediate People's Court. It was against two local 
publishing houses and one distribution department for allegedly 
publishing, distribution, and selling the company's picture 
albums without its permission. The three defendants are Beijing 
Children's Publishing House, Beijing Publishing House, and the 
Beijing Distribution Department of Xinhua Bookstore. (Wang 
Yadong) from the (Jinghe) Law Office is one of the two defense 
counsels for the defendants. He explained why the lawsuit has 
aroused great attention both at home and abroad. 
  [(Wang), in Mandarin fading into English report by [(Yuan)] 
He says the most obvious point is in the past, U.S.-based 
companies seldom resorted to Chinese laws for legal protection 
if they found their copyright was violated. And the current 
lawsuit means foreign companies have now recognized the 
legislative procedures of China's copyright law are more in 
compliance with international norms and the law itself has been 
improved. 
  China began to draft its copyright law in March 1979. After 
10 years of hard work, the country's first copyright law came 
into effect on 1 June 1991. And at the same time, the Detailed 
Regulations for the Implementation of the Copyright Law and the 
Regulations on the Protection of Copyright of Computer Software 
were also passed. Therefore, China has completed the three 
principal lawmaking requirements in the field of copyright 
protection. (Wang Yadong) says as a lawyer, he regards business 
lawsuits as a good phenomenon, because it shows the country's 
law system is more complete and reliable than before. 
  (Wang Yadong) says as the international economic and 
cultural 
exchanges develop, disputes over copyrights have also increased. 
These disputes can be solved through legal means. And if the 
alleged violation is proved, the Walt Disney company's rights 
will be protected. He also mentioned the complaints made by 
some Chinese companies and publishing houses, saying their books 
and records have been pirated in places outside the mainland. 
  (Wang Yadong) says that the country has participated [in] 
the 
Bern Convention for Protection of Literary and Artistic Works 
and the International Copyright Act in October of 1992. Chinese 
companies can also look into legal means to protect their rights 
and recover losses. And at this point, he states, the Disney 
lawsuit has created a good opportunity for Chinese law 
departments and institutions to popularize the sense of 
copyright protection among ordinary citizens -- let them know 
how to protect their own copyrights and in the meantime, avoid 
violating others rights. 
  For China Radio International, I am (Yuan Fang). [end 
recording] 

