Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Roundtable "Discussion" program with Nobuo Matsunaga, </F>
government representative and former ambassador to the United 
States; Keio University Professors Masao Okonogi and Tomoyuki 
Kojima; Kan Indoku, chief of the ROK Far East Affairs Institute, 
in Seoul; Larry Nikshu, member of the U.S. Congress Research 
Bureau, in Washington; and William Taylor, deputy chief of the 
U.S. Strategic International Affairs Institute, in Seoul -- all 
identified by caption, moderated by NHK commentator Takashi 
Yamamoto and reporter Sato] 
  [Excerpts] [Yamamoto] Mr. Matsunaga, do you think the 
situation involving North Korea has returned to that of a year 
ago when it announced its withdrawal from the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty [NPT], or has the situation worsened? 
  [Matsunaga] As you know, tension in the world has now eased 
following the end of the Cold War. However, there are conflicts 
and disputes in various regions, and tension is now growing in 
certain places. I have the impression that tension on the 
Korean peninsula is mounting. While North Korea retracted its 
announcement on the withdrawal from the NPT, it took coercive 
actions. For this reason, I think the tension is now growing as 
compared with the situation a year ago. However, we should not 
lose our hope even under such circumstances. [passage omitted 
on remarks by other participants] 
  [Yamamoto] Mr. Taylor said that North Korea is just engaging 
in its conventional diplomatic policies as it has done before. 
Mr. Matsunaga, why do you think North Korea rejected inspection 
of its nuclear facilities by the International Atomic Energy 
Agency? 
  [Matsunaga] I think the country is trying to display its 
diplomatic power by hinting at the possibility of its developing 
nuclear weapons. We need to consider why North Korea is trying 
to do so. I think its top priority task is to secure its 
existence and development. I believe that, to that end, it 
intends to make utmost use of the suspicion of its nuclear 
development program. The international community probably 
thinks North Korea's nuclear capability itself -- when assumed 
that the nation possesses nuclear arms -- is not relatively 
large. However, even if a nuclear weapon is a single-shot one, 
it will produce an unfathomable impact if it is used. For this 
reason, North Korea's suspected nuclear development involves 
danger. What is most important is that a certain 
misunderstanding or other factors will not serve as an impetus 
to the outbreak of some incidents. To that end, I think Japan, 
South Korea, the United States, China, and Russia need to make 
additional efforts to persuade North Korea to dispel suspicion 
about it. [passage omitted on remarks by other participants] 
  [Yamamoto] We do not understand well why North Korea is 
trying to develop nuclear arms. What do you think of it? 
  [Matsunaga] Mr. Okonogi stated earlier that he had thought 
North Korea was playing for time. I still believe it is just 
playing for time in view of its serious economic situation. 
While the political situation in North Korea is not reportedly 
bad, its economic situation is very serious. I have no choice 
but to say North Korea's economic power is rapidly declining in 
the East Asian region. Its greatest concern probably is to 
secure its existence. In that sense, its leaders have a feeling 
of crisis now. They think it will take much time to overcome 
this sense of crisis. Moreover, it is said that a change of 
power will take place in North Korea from Kim Il-song to Kim 
Chong-il. In this sense, North Korea is in a transition period. 
I think this is one of the reasons why they feel a growing sense 
of crisis. Then, why do they have to prepare themselves for the 
change while feeling a sense of crisis? Well, Russia, China, 
the ROK, and Japan are North Korea's neighboring countries. Of 
them, Russia and China have nuclear weapons. Japan and the ROK, 
although they do not have nuclear weapons, are under the 
American nuclear umbrella. Therefore, I am of the opinion that 
the North Koreans think that there is great danger that this 
tension will continue to grow and eventually explode somewhere 
unless they do something about it. 
  [Yamamoto] What does the international society have to do to 
deal with North Korea if that is the case? 
  [Matsunaga] As Mr. Taylor has pointed out, I think that 
primarily, North Korea has to make its existence known to the 
international society and to seek development while cooperating 
with the international society. But, the North Korean leaders 
may be feeling that they do not have a chance to do that. I am 
sure they realize that the nuclear weapons development is not 
beneficial to North Korea at all. However, we can explain the 
current situation only from the viewpoint that they feel a sense 
of crisis. 
  [Sato] I think that the ROK, although the United States 
withdrew its nuclear arms from there, feels that it is still 
under the U.S. nuclear umbrella. The DPRK-USSR trade accord is 
actually invalid. It still has a trade agreement with China. 
Do you think North Korea feel unsafe in this situation? 
  [Matsunaga] I do not think it does. North Korea cannot 
count on Russia, former Soviet Union. Its reliance on Russia is 
rapidly decreasing. China is the only remaining partner. I 
think, however, the North Korean leaders do not want to be 
placed completely under China's protection. I think they want 
to have a free hand. 
  [Yamamoto] Now, I would like to move to the issue of how the 
issue of North Korean nuclear weapons will develop. Various 
negotiations are being held at the UN Security Council. 
Reporter Sato will explain how the things may develop. 
[passage omitted on Sato's explanations and remarks by other 
participants] 
  [Yamamoto] Mr. Matsunaga, Japan and the ROK agreed at the 
summit talks that Japan, the ROK, China, and the United States 
have to cooperate to break the current deadlock. What role can 
Japan play in such a situation? 
  [Matsunaga] As has been pointed out, I think it is correct 
for Japan, the ROK, and the United States to cooperate with each 
other to find out North Korea's true intentions. However, it is 
true also that China is the biggest influential power. This is 
very important in terms of two viewpoints. First, North Korea 
is in confrontational ties with Japan, the ROK, and the United 
States, although its ties with each of the three countries 
differ slightly. In this sense, Japan, the ROK, and the United 
States are not friendly countries to North Korea. However, 
China is different. It has ties of friendship and trust with 
North Korea. Therefore, China has the strongest persuasive 
power. 
  Second, North Korea is relying 100 percent on China for 
energy, which is indispensable to the North Korean economy. In 
this sense, China has a trump card. Therefore, I think it 
wields the strongest persuasive power. As Mr. Okonagi said, 
China's prestige will go up if it uses this trump card to change 
North Korea to act in a reasonable manner. The important thing 
is that we need to support China. I think Japan needs to think 
about cooperating with China. 
  As for the UN response to North Korea's suspected 
development 
of nuclear weapons, I think that discussions at the United 
Nations or the Security Council will have significant effect in 
terms of generating public opinion in the international 
community. Its policies are isolating North Korea in the 
international society. Its isolation is not beneficial at all to 
the international society as a whole. We need to bring it back 
to the international society. I think China has major 
influential power to do that, too. Therefore, Japan needs to 
assume the stand of supporting China. 
  [Yamamoto] You mean that Japan needs to work with China, 
right? 
  [Matsunaga] Yes, I mean to work with China. 
  [Yamamoto] As we discussed earlier, the UN Security Council 
will gradually introduce necessary measures to deal with North 
Korea. How do you think Japan should respond if the Security 
Council asks it to join in economic sanctions against North 
Korea? 
  [Matsunaga] Fundamentally speaking, Japan has to support 100 
percent and cooperate with the United Nations if it decides to 
impose sanctions against North Korea. However, the reality is 
that we have to go through many steps before that. I also think 
there is a limit to the effect of sanctions. Therefore, I am of 
the opinion that we should not rely on sanctions alone. It is 
important for us to make efficient use of peaceful approaches, 
such as discussions and the persuasive power. [passage omitted 
on remarks by other participants] 
  [Yamamoto] Mr. Matsunaga, it seems that Japan will be forced 
to make difficult decisions and be asked, depending on the 
situation in the future, to cooperate with the United Nations in 
military actions. What do you think of this issue? 
  [Matsunaga] Japan is a U.S. ally. It made it clear that it 
would fully support and cooperate with the United States. But, 
it has to avoid the possibility of sending wrong signals to 
North Korea. On the other hand, Japan also fully supports the 
ROK's stance. I think we should continue to do that. 
  On the other hand, we hope for true peace and stability on 
the Korean peninsula. To realize that, Japan and North Korea 
need to normalize their diplomatic ties first. We started 
negotiations for normalization of diplomatic ties between the 
two countries. But, the North Korean officials walked out of 
the negotiations two years ago. Needless to say, they have to 
take Japan's economic power into consideration. I think it is 
very important for North Korea to decide, on the basis of cool 
judgment, to return to the negotiation table for normalization 
of diplomatic ties. I think China hopes that, too. 
  [Yamamoto] The time is up for us. Thank you very much for 
joining in this program. 

