SUMMARY 
                               Although many government officials were elected to the parliament 
in the 12 December election, few will have to choose between 
keeping their executive branch posts and taking up their 
parliamentary seats.  While State Duma members are not supposed 
to hold other jobs, a temporary exemption allows cabinet members 
to combine government posts with parliamentary seats.  Other 
officials avoided the conflict because they lost in their bids 
for election.  Since the election there has been a rash of 
personnel changes in the government, but these evidently reflect 
primarily President Boris Yeltsin's decision to punish some 
government officials for their handling of the election or for 
splitting the reformist vote. 
                           END SUMMARY 
   To prevent a massive post-election shakeup in the cabinet, the 
original ban on combining parliamentary seats and government 
posts was softened before the election and a supplement to the 
new Constitution provided that cabinet members can also be 
members of the first State Duma.  Although the draft 
Constitution, as published in the 10 November Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 
declared that State Dumadeputies "work on a professional full- 
time basis'1 and "cannot be in state service, hold other paid 
work, except teaching, scientific, and other creative work" 
(Article 97), transitional provisions added to the very end of 
the draft made a temporary exemption for cabinet members, 
declaring that members of this first State Duma "can 
simultaneously be a member of the Government" (cabinet).  There 
was no ban on Federation Council members holding other jobs, 
presumably because the Federation Council was intended to be a 
body that heads of ethnic republics and oblasts could join while 
retaining their local leadership posts. 
   With at least a dozen deputy premiers and ministers (see box) 
elected to the State Duma, there otherwise might have been 
massive changes as cabinet members had to choose between taking 
their parliamentary seats or staying in the cabinet.  Premier 
Viktor Chernomyrdin, First Deputy Premier Oleg Soskovets, and 
Defense Minister Pavel Grachev were among the few prominent 
cabinet members not to run.  First Deputy Premier Vladimir 
Shumeyko was elected to the Federation Council, but membership in 
this body does not preclude holding other central or local posts. 
Box 1 
                   Cabinet Members Who Ran for Parliament 
First Deputy Premier Vladimir Shumeyko--elected to Federation 
  Council as unaffiliated (although he belongs to Russia's 
  Choice) from Kaliningrad. 
First Deputy Premier Yegor Gaydar--elected to State Duma on 
  party list of Russia's Choice. 
Deputy Premier Anatoliy Chubays--elected to State Duma on party 
  list of Russia's Choice. 
Deputy Premier Boris Fedorov--elected to State Duma as 
  unaffiliated from Moscow city.  (He was also on the party 
  list of Russia's Choice.) 
Deputy Premier Sergey Shakhray--elected to State Duma on party 
  list of Party of Russian Unity and Accord (PRES). 
Deputy Premier Aleksandr Shokhin--elected to State Duma on 
  party list of PRES. 
Deputy Premier Yuriy Yarov--lost in bid for State Duma running 
  on Russia's Choice party list from Chuvash district. 
Deputy Premier Aleksandr Zaveryukha--elected to State Duma on 
  Agrarian Party's party list.  (He lost to First Deputy 
  Agriculture Minister and fellow Agrarian Party candidate 
  Aleksey Chernyshev in an Orenburg district race.) 
Minister for Protection of Environment and Natural Resources 
  Viktor Danilov-Danilyan--elected to State Duma on Russia's 
  Choice party ticket.  (He was moved up on the ticket since he 
  had earlier been listed as No. 56 and from Nizhegorod, but in 
  the list of winners is listed No. 28 and from Moscow city.) 
Justice Minister Yuriy Kalmykov--elected to State Duma on PRES 
  party ticket. 
Agriculture Minister Viktor Khlystun--elected to Federation 
  Council as unaffiliated in the Ust-Orda Buryat district. 
Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev--elected to State Duma as a 
  Russia's Choice candidate from Murmansk. 
Labor Minister Gennadiy Melikyan--elected to State Duma on PRES 
  party ticket. 
Minister of Social Protection of the Public Ella Pamfilova 
  --elected to State Duma as unaffiliated in Kaluga district. 
  (She also ran as No. 3 on the Russia's Choice party list.) 
Science and Technical Policy Minister Boris Saltykov--elected to 
  State Duma on Russia's Choice ticket.  (He was moved up from 
  No.103, from Novosibirsk, in the list of candidates to No. 39 
  --next to the last available Russia's Choice seat--in the list 
  of winners.) 
Fuel and Power Minister Yuriy Shafranik--elected to Federation 
  Council as unaffiliated from Khanty-Mansi. 
Culture Minister Yevgeniy Sidorov--elected to the State Duma on 
  Russia's Choice list, identified as unaffiliated and a regional 
  candidate from Tula.  (He was moved up from No. 205 on the 
  list.) 
end box 
   The exemption for members of the cabinet apparently does not 
apply to deputy ministers, who unlike ministers, cannot combine 
jobs.  Thus, Deputy Foreign Minister Anatoliy Adamishin, who won 
a seat as No. 12 on the Yavlinskiy Bloc national ticket, 
reportedly decided to decline his seat (Interfax, 29 December), 
although he later was said to be reconsidering after he came 
under discussion as a candidate for speaker of the State Duma 
(Interfax, 30 December).  Others who apparently will have to 
choose include First Deputy Agriculture Minister Aleksey 
Chernyshev, who won in an Orenburg district on the Agrarian Party 
ticket running against his boss, Deputy Premier for agriculture 
Aleksandr Zaveryukha; Deputy Economics Minister Aleksandr 
Pochinok, who ran in a Chelyabinsk district as a Russia's Choice 
candidate and won; and Deputy Justice Minister Mikhail Mityukov, 
who won as a Russia's Choice candidate in Krasnoyarsk.  Two other 
deputy ministers who were running will not face this choice. 
First Deputy Agriculture Minister Vladimir Shcherbak ran as No. 6 
on the Agrarian Party ticket but must have dropped out at some 
point, since he is not included in the list of winners; and 
Deputy Economics Minister Valentin Fedorov ran in a Sakhalin 
district as unaffiliated and lost.  In addition, Ambassador to 
the United States Vladimir Lukin, who won a seat in a Moscow 
Oblast district running as unaffiliated (although he also ran as 
No. 2 on the Yavlinskiy Bloc national ticket), apparently will 
quit his post (Izvestiya, 30 December). 
   Other Officials 
   Non-cabinet officials will clearly have to choose between their 
posts and State Duma seats, but there appear to be few in this 
situation and most organs of government are largely unaffected. 
   President's Administration.  Although a 21 December Segodnya 
article asserted that many leading Administration officials won 
and will fill seats in parliament, in fact no top officials of 
the president's Administration will leave for this reason. 
Administration Leader Sergey Filatov, who ran for the State Duma 
as No. 8 on the Russia's Choice national ticket, was awarded a 
seat but quickly declined, saying he prefers to stay in his post 
(ITAR-TASS, 22 December).  The other Administration leaders ran 
for the Federation Council so they would not have been required 
to choose, but they all lost:  Administration First Deputy Leader 
Krasavchenko, affiliated with the Russian Movement for Democratic 
Reforms, ran from Moscow city; Administration Deputy Leader 
Vyacheslav Volkov ran from Murmansk; and Nikolay Medvedev, head 
of the Administration's Directorate for Work With Territories and 
Presidential Representatives, ran from Mordovia. 
   Security Council.  Security Council Secretary Oleg Lobov did not 
run for parliament.  The only Security Council official to run 
was Mikhail Maley, head of the council's new Interdepartmental 
Commission on Scientific and Technical Ouestions of the Defense 
Industry, who ran on the 'PRES national list in a Moscow city 
district and lost. 
   Federal Information Center.  FIC Chairman Mikhail Poltoranin and 
Deputy Chairman Sergey Yushenkov both ran for the State Duma and 
won.  Poltoranin on 21 December announced they would take up 
their seats and give up their posts (Radio Mayak, 21 December). 
They are not really giving up any post, however, since almost 
simultaneously First Deputy Premier Vladimir Shumeyko announced 
that the center was being abolished in a reorganization of media 
bodies (ITAR-TASS, 22 December). 
   State-Legal Directorate (GPU).  The GPU will suffer as a result 
of the election, but only indirectly, because of its leaders' 
ties to Sergey Shakhray's PRES, which ran in competition to 
Gaydar's Russia's Choice, thereby splitting the pro-Yeltsin vote. 
Directorate Chief Aleksandr Kotenkov did not run for parliament 
but lost his post anyway as Yeltsin removed him on 16 December 
(Russian TV, Ostankino TV).  Kotenkov, long close to Shakhray 
(Kotenkov served as Shakhray's deputy while Shakhray was GPU 
chief from late 1991 to mid-1992 and succeeded him as chief (see 
the Trends of 10 June 1992, pages 5-10).  He later also succeeded 
Shakhray as head of the administration for North Ossetia (ITAR- 
TASS, 17 December 1992), publicly claimed to ITAR-TASS (16 
December) that Yeltsin was acting to punish him for helping 
organize Shakhray's party.  After Shakhray set up his party, 
Kotenkov was elected one of its leaders at the party's 17 October 
congress (Interfax, 18 October).  Although he did not run for 
parliament, he led PRES's election campaign (Segodnya, 17 
December).  After being removed, Kotenkov quickly got a new post 
as deputy chairman of the State Committee for Federation and 
Nationality Affairs (ITAR-TASS, 21 December), a committee headed 
by Shakhray.  Kotenkov has been replaced as GPU head by GPU 
deputy head Ruslan Orekhov (ITAR-TASS, 18 December), who has been 
less involved in party politics (Kommersant-Daily, 21 December). 
Orekhov had previously seryed as GPU acting head for several 
months while Kotenkov was trying to bring peace in the north 
Caucasus as head of the administration for North Ossetia. 
   Another GPU leader who may leave his post because of the election 
is Deputy Chief of the GPU Anatoliy Sliva, who won a seat as No. 
8 on the PRES ticket. 
   Presidential Councillors.  Members of Yeltsin's Presidential 
Council are part-time advisers and presumably not affected by the 
limitation, but "councillors" (sovetniki) to the president hold 
full-time jobs and presumably cannot serve simultaneously in the 
State Duma.  Presidential councillors Yekaterina Lakhova (elected 
on the Women of Russia party ticket) and Dmitriy Volkogonov 
(elected on Russia's Choice party ticket) will have to choose and 
presumably will quit as councillors to become deputies, 
especially since the post of councillor seems to be in the 
process of being abolished (see below).  Another councillor- 
-Sergey Stankevich--ran on the PRES party ticket and was awarded 
a seat.  But he lost his councillor's post right after the 
election, even before it was clear whether he had won or lost his 
bid for a seat.  Stankevich said he was resigning, assuming some 
of the blame for the election results (Russian TV, 15 December; 
Ostankino TV, 17 December; Komsomolskaya Pravda, 18 December), 
while some reports said Yeltsin removed him and attributed this 
decision to Stankevich's prominent role in Shakhray's party, 
which competed with Gaydar's Russia's Choice for pro-Yeltsin 
voters (Russian TV, 16 December; Komsomolskaya Pravda, 18 
December).  Stankevich had long appeared to have little influence 
on Yeltsin and his departure will have little effect (Segodnya, 
17 December).  Three other presidential councillors--Aleksandr 
Granberg, Valeriy Burkov, and Eduard Dneprov--were dropped right 
after the election (Russian TV, Ostankino TV, 16 December; ITAR- 
TASS, 17 December), but they had not run for parliament. 
   The probable departure of Volkogonov and Lakhova to take up 
parliamentary seats and the removal of Stankevich and the other 
three councillors virtually eliminates the position of councillor 
to the president--a status which has been declining ever since 
the departure of State Secretary Gennadiy Burbulis (apparently 
the originator of the councillor posts and once supervisor of the 
councillors) in December 1992 and Sergey Filatov's early 1993 
reorganization of Yeltsin's staff.  Aleksey Yablokov, recently 
named head of a Security Council commission, was dropped as a 
councillor by Yeltsin on 30 December (Interfax), leaving only two 
councillors--Yuliy Vorontsov, appointed councillor for questions 
of foreign policy on 8 August 1992 (Vedomosti Syezda Narodnykh 
Deputatov Rossiyskoy Federatsii i Verkhovnogo Soveta Rossiyskoy 
Federatsii, 20 August 1992, page 2529) and sometimes mentioned as 
new ambassador to the United States (Moscow News, 24 September 
1993), and Shamil Tarpishchev, appointed councillor for questions 
of state policy for physical education and sport in September 
1992 (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 26 September 1992). 
   Ostankino TV.  Ostankino television was considerably affected by 
the election outcome, with Chairman Vyacheslav Bragin removed 
immediately after the election (0stankino TV, 17 December). 
Bragin had initially been a Russia's Choice candidate for the 
State Duma but withdrew after being criticized for remaining the 
head of television while running for parliament (Ostankino TV, 18 
November).  Nezavisimaya Gazeta on 19 November claimed that 
Bragin had issued instructions for Ostankino to ignore Shakhray's 
party.  He might have been better off staying in the election and 
giving up his television post since right after the election 
Yeltsin removed him as 0stankino chairman, apparently in 
dissatisfaction with television's handling of the election 
campaign (ITAR-TASS, 16 December).  Bragin's successor as 
Ostankino chairman, Aleksandr Yakovlev (Russian TV, 22 December), 
lost his bid for a State Duma seat on the Russian Movement for 
Democratic Reforms ticket and so faces no conflict of positions. 
   Implications 
   Few personnel changes were forced by the election and those that 
have taken place so far form no single pattern.  Kotenkov and 
Stankevich appear to have been removed at least in part because 
they lined up with Shakhray, thus helping split Yeltsin's team 
and contributing to the reformers' election setback, but Shakhray 
and his ally Shokhin themselves have not been removed as deputy 
premiers, at least not yet.  Bragin was apparently removed 
because of dissatisfaction with television's handling of the 
election, and Poltoranin and Yushenkov left their posts because 
the Federal Information Center was being abolished anyway.  More 
changes will surely come, partly because of maneuverings between 
Yeltsin's lieutenants and struggle over power and policy within 
the cabinet and his presidential team.  The organizing sessions 
of the new parliament also may yield changes as that body elects 
its officials.  If, for example, Shumeyko is elected chairman of 
the Federation Council he would presumably give up his cabinet 
post. 
Example:  (AUTHOR:  HAHN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR C0MMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, RUSSIA ANALYSIS BRANCH, (703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH cka 05/2120z jan 

