BFN 

  [Text] A military source at the Defense Ministry and the 
General Staff command has made the following statement to the 
Yemeni News Agency, SABA': 
  At 1400 yesterday, Wednesday, the same time the military 
committee and the U.S. and French military attaches were 
visiting the 1st Armored Brigade and the 3d Armored Brigade at 
the 'Imran Camp in Sanaa Governorate--as part of a tour of 
various military units and formations in the various Yemeni 
camps being made in an attempt to end the military repercussions 
and remove any form of tension and to pave the way for the 
implementation of the military section of the pledge and accord 
document--the tanks and armored vehicles of the 3d Armored 
Brigade suddenly and treacherously opened fire on the 
headquarters of the 1st Armored Brigade and the soldiers' 
barracks, as well as the dining hall in which the personnel of 
the 1st Armored Brigade were eating, in addition to the nearby 
central security camp and the citizens' residential areas in the 
city of 'Imran. This action resulted in a large number of human 
and material losses, including scores of martyrs and innocent 
victims. Their numbers have not yet been determined. 
  The source strongly regretted this deplorable criminal act 
which was planned and implemented at the orders of the forces of 
apostasy and secession in the Yemeni Socialist Party to exploit 
the situation militarily and implement their secessionist plan 
which seeks to fragment the country, foment sedition among the 
sons of the one homeland, and implicate the sons of the valiant 
Armed Forces in fratricide and a bloody, destructive conflict 
which benefits no one except warmongers and enemies of the 
Yemeni homeland, its unity, and its democratic course. 
  The source said it was no coincidence that this new military 
situation was triggered on 27 April, the same day our Yemeni 
people throughout Yemen were celebrating the day of democracy 
and legislative legitimacy, on this day marking the passage of 
one year of the people's free election of the first elected 
parliament under the banner of a unified Yemen. The renegade, 
secessionist forces saw on this day a setback for their failed 
dreams and aims for a comprehensive hegemony. This is what our 
Yemeni people rejected with great resolve when the Yemeni 
homeland restored its cherished unity on 22 May 1990. April 27, 
1993 was the historic day on which our Yemeni people triumphed 
through their own free will in electing their representatives at 
the House of Representatives and established their legitimate 
constitutional institutions, which the separatist forces are 
trying to attack and marginalize as part of their scheme to 
fragment the homeland and restore the pre-22 May 1990 situation. 
The source indicated that such a criminal act is part of a 
series of plots concocted by the forces or apostasy and 
secession, which began with exploding the situation in Abyan on 
the eve of signing the pledge and accord document in Amman, 
capital of the sisterly Hashemite Kingdon of Jordan, when they 
planned to transfer a military brigade from al-Mukalla in 
Hadramaut to the Abyan Governorate, send a tank battalion from 
Aden to Abyan, and move units from the 5th Brigade to Abyan. 
They also instructed the 30th Brigade to move from Shabwah in 
the direction of Abyan. The aim was to disavow commitment to 
the pledge and accord document under the pretext of a militarily 
explosive situation. This is a clear indication of the 
premeditated secessionist intentions of the forces of apostasy 
and secession in fragmenting the homeland. 
  The source said brother Lieutenant General 'Ali 'Abdallah 
Salih, chairman of the Presidential Council and supreme 
commander of the Armed Forces, has been following the situation 
closely. He issued his immediate instructions to the brother 
defense minister and the chief of staff to quickly contain the 
situation and stop any possible military repercussions in order 
to foil the plans of the secessionist forces and enemies of the 
homeland and its unity. He also instructed the military 
committee to quickly investigate the incident and its 
implications. The source voiced confidence that the sons of the 
valiant Yemeni Armed Forces, well known by our Yemeni people as 
protectors of the homeland and a shield for the revolution, 
unity, and democracy, will live up to the confidence our people 
have placed in them. They will foil such criminal schemes by 
the forces of apostasy and secession. They will also be lying 
in wait for anyone who dares to harm the homeland's gains, 
headed by unity and democracy. 
  The source also appealed to the military committee to 
continue its efforts to stop all clashes and military actions in 
'Imran Camp to spare Yemeni blood and foil the plans aimed at 
implicating the sons of the Yemeni homeland in fratricide, 
conflict, and the fragmentation of the homeland. He called on 
the military committee to quickly investigate the regrettable 
incident, expose those responsible for it, and inform the Yemeni 
people both inside and outside the country about what really 
happened. The source called on our Yemeni masses and military 
and security forces to show vigilance, awareness, and national 
cohesion in order to confront the schemes of the forces hostile 
to unity and democracy in our country, those which seek to 
fragment the homeland and foment sedition among its people. 

