CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Th.: "Growing Signs of an Upswing in Estonia; </F>
Privatization According to Trust Agency Model and With Trust 
Agency Assistance; Currency Reform Forces Change"] 
  [Text] Tallin, 22 Mar--An economic miracle is emerging in 
Estonia. After the low point of the decline had been passed in 
the spring of 1993 and a 6-percent growth rate of the GNP was 
achieved in the third quarter of that year, the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) expects the highest growth rate in Europe 
for this year. Yet the statistics are still incomplete. A large 
part of the economic dynamism takes place outside the 
enterprises ascertainable by the state, in the numerous newly 
founded small businesses, especially in the service sector, 
which mostly pay no taxes. It is estimated that at present up to 
50 percent of taxes are evaded. The economic dynamism, caused by 
the introduction of the fully convertible kroon (pegged to the 
German mark at a ratio of 8:1), and the export boom together 
with the reorientation to Western markets, have contributed to 
the situation where workers dismissed from the large state 
enterprises have found jobs. In Tallinn there is practically no 
unemployment, and it is surprisingly low in the entire country. 
  The conservative, strictly market-oriented government under 
Mart Laar is pursuing privatization of the large state 
enterprises at great speed in order to make the development 
irreversible. They want to make good use of the present 
optimistic mood, and fear that some day there might be a setback 
in Estonia as in Lithuania, or stagnation as in Latvia, where 
leftist as well as national parties thunder against the "too 
rapid" privatization and warn time and again against a "sellout 
to foreign countries." The Laar government trusts that a rapid 
conclusion of privatization will strengthen the economic 
upswing, thus overcoming the present low popular rating 
reflected in opinion polls, by the time of parliamentary 
elections in the coming spring. 
  The head of the Estonian privatization office, Vaino Sarnet, 
also emphasizes that privatization must even be accelerated and 
should be largely concluded by the end of this year. In 
principle, nearly all political forces declare themselves in 
favor of privatization. But behind the criticism of 
details--unclear legal situation, sellout to foreign countries, 
enrichment by the mafia, the possibility of 
money-laundering--often lie more fundamental reservations. 
Sarnet feels the criticism, that up to now privatization has 
been delayed, to be incorrect. In addition to the offering of 
agricultural enterprises, destined solely for Estonians, the 
first international offering of state enterprises was made in 
December 1992, the second in July 1993, and the third in 
November [1993]. Now the fourth is upcoming. By the end of 1993, 
when the third offering had not yet had an effect, 54 larger 
enterprises had been sold for 353 million kroon and for 
investment promises of 237 million kroon. Furthermore, 243 
smaller businesses had been sold, mostly through auctions, for 
125 million kroon. Herbert B. Schmidt, the consultant sent to 
Estonia by the Trust Agency, adds that of the 204 enterprises 
being offered now, 50 percent have been sold--that is two-thirds 
to three-fourths of the country's industrial capacity. 
  The larger enterprises sold last year included large-scale 
bakeries in Tallinn and Tartu as well as furniture and chemical 
factories. Schmidt considers it remarkable that even the 
"Russian enterprises," which had above all worked for Soviet 
armaments, had survived. They had been able to sell Estel, the 
computer chip producer, to U.S. and Swedish interests. Although 
highly specialized firms such as Baltijets and Dvigatel had to 
cut back part of their labor force, they had survived as 
subsuppliers for Finnish and Swedish enterprises. The currency 
reform and the need to suddenly pay the workers in kroon had 
decisively influenced the switch to new markets and the opening 
up to privatization. Schmidt also expects no great difficulties 
in privatizing the Kreenholmi enterprise. Kreenholmi, with 3,500 
weaving looms and 220,000 tons of cotton fabrics is probably 
still the world's largest cotton fabric manufacturer, and the 
largest employer in Narwa. Meanwhile, the number of their 
employees has been reduced from 10,000 to 6,000. 
  Schmidt is glad that Estonia decided early on in favor of 
the 
Trust Agency's system of public offerings, for this guarantees 
investments and jobs. Actually, says Schmidt, "we are not 
selling Estonian firms to foreign countries," but rather, we are 
procuring foreign investments for Estonia. 

