Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lev Kamanin, under the rubric "Opinion": "The </F>
Space Joint Enterprise `Alpha': Will It Happen or Not? Recent 
Rivals Are Interested in Collaboration in Orbit"; first two 
paragraphs are source introduction] 
  [Text] According to the predictions of futurologists, 
a cherished dream of mankind will be fulfilled in 2017 -- the 
flight of an international crew to Mars that will put 
researchers on the planet's surface. The choice of that year for 
the Mars mission was, of course, no accident: that's the year of 
the next occurrence of the closest approach of the blue and red 
planets, during which their orbits will closest to each other. 
But even with the most favorable conditions for the mission, the 
flight to Mars and back to Earth will take about two years. 
  The only way to prepare the cosmonauts for such a 
journey and to be make certain that the life-support systems are 
reliable under conditions of long-term weightlessness is aboard 
a long-duration orbital station. 
<H5>  Two Tactics </H5>
  After the successful completion in the summer of 1975 of the 
experiment in the Soyuz-Apollo program, the American astronauts 
didn't go into space for almost six years. Regular space 
missions were resumed in the United States in April 1981, aboard 
the Space Shuttle orbital airplane. 
  Without their own long-duration orbital station, the 
Americans were forced to be content with short-term "runs" into 
near-Earth space. The U.S. tactic for exploring near-space was 
the opposite of ours, which consisted of long-term missions (up 
to a year or more) aboard the Salyut and Mir stations. True 
enough, about 10 years ago, an ambitious program for the 
creation of the international Freedom orbital station under the 
aegis of the United States appeared, but it was not judged to be 
implementable because of, first, the considerably higher cost of 
the Shuttle flights (by comparison with the cost of the project 
itself) and, second, the amplification of the confrontation 
between two superpowers in a cold war. The latter factor played 
a decisive role in the fate of the Freedom station. 
  The fact is that at roughly that time, in response to the 
placement of Soviet missiles in countries of Eastern Europe, the 
U.S. government officially announced the adoption of the 
doctrine of SDI, the Strategic Defense Initiative, which aimed 
at developing protective laser armaments and placing them in 
space. Was the doctrine of "star wars" a flat-out bluff by the 
Pentagon? Military specialists still have to puzzle that out 
(reports have already appeared in the press about the 
falsification of results of supposedly successful tests 
involving the detection and interception of ballistic missiles 
by SDI systems). At any rate, even the powerful aerospace 
complex of the United States turned out to be incapable of 
simultaneously conducting work on the expensive SDI programs and 
Freedom -- and the preference was given to the former. 
<H5>  The Death of the `Star Wars' Doctrine </H5>
  The intention of the United States to carry out the SDI 
program was taken at face value by the Soviet leadership. 
Mikhail Gorbachev declared more than once at strategic arms 
limitations talks that the response to the placement of SDI 
systems in space would be an "unsymmetrical decision." And he 
kept his word. Hardly had the Americans managed to make sense of 
the results of the first tests in the SDI program, when, in 
something like two or three years, one of the contending 
superpowers collapsed. 
  After that turn of events, the doctrine of "star wars" 
entered a phase of rapid withering. It couldn't be saved even by 
the extravagant announcement of our postcommunist leader about 
the readiness of Russia to take part in the further development 
of SDI, aimed now at either protecting against an attack by some 
third country or averting alien invasions predicted by 
astrologers or collisions between the Earth and asteroids. 
<H5>  International Project </H5>
  Be that as it may, the Americans, after abandoning SDI, now 
had the opportunity to devote themselves to the Freedom station. 
As a result of the strict budget policy of Congress, which had 
cut back the annual appropriations for the Freedom program to 
$2.1 billion, NASA had to rework the design of the station 
substantially in order to reduce its size and cost. 
  But at that time, rumors were afoot that Russia, which had 
become the successor to the Soviet Union, was getting ready to 
sell the existing Mir orbital complex. When those rumors 
couldn't be confirmed (who, after all, needs a station with only 
two or three years of service life left?), the U.S. 
administration strengthened its idea of building a long-duration 
orbital facility with the help of a number of Western European 
countries, as well as Japan and Canada. Soon after that, Russia, 
too, came to be regarded as a potential partner, and by as early 
as the summer of 1993, a fundamental agreement was reached 
between NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RKA) on the use of 
units of the Mir-2 orbital complex designed at NPO Energiya and 
a modified Soyuz spacecraft. 
  As a result of subsequent talks, including talks at the 
governmental level, a version coordinated as of December 1993 
was adopted for the international station Alpha, half of which 
consisted of Mir-2 modules. The other half of the long-duration 
Alpha station was to be represented by the laboratory and living 
compartment of the United States, the European and Japanese 
laboratories, and the Canadian module of service systems. 
Construction of the station in three stages is called for, with 
completion of the full-scale assembly in 2003, with a service 
life of 10-15 years. 
<H5>  In Bed With the Russian Bear? </H5>
  It would seem that one could only welcome the agreement 
achieved as an important step on the path to expanding 
international cooperation in space research. In point of fact, 
however, the prospects for the practical realization of the 
Alpha project are far from rosy. 
  First, still unresolved in the very important question of 
the 
status of the joint enterprise created in orbit -- things like 
the composition of and replacement schedules for the crews and 
the procedures for the use of experimental results by the 
partners. The European participants in the international 
project, unhappy about the fact that, for some reason, they were 
not invited to the negotiating table, have already expressed 
their own fears about being second-string partners because of 
the "extraordinary activity of the Russians." The European Space 
Agency is concerned about the fate of the Columbus module (which 
costs $1.5 billion), which is being developed by Europe for the 
Freedom station and which may turn out to be superfluous in the 
event of a further transformation of the long-duration orbital 
facility project. Also showing dismay are the Japanese -- the 
developers of an experimental module whose cost is estimated at 
$662 million. 
  Second, in the United States itself, the reaction to the 
Alpha project is not at all unified. If the president's team is 
unconditionally in support of the new design, a number of 
senators and a large group of representatives are assuming the 
role of ardent opponents to it. The debates in the Senate are 
particularly pointed. As reported in the weekly AVIATION WEEK 
AND AEROSPACE TECHNOLOGY, one influential congressman even found 
it conceivable to go to Sen. Barbara Mikulski, who is 
responsible for NASA funding, with the clearly ungentlemanly 
question, "Is the honorable madam chairman still really 
attracted to the idea of getting in bed with the Russian bear?" 
<H5>  Birthday Gift </H5>
  According to preliminary estimates by NASA specialists, the 
total spending by the United States for building the Alpha 
station will be $19.4 billion -- $4.7 billion less than the 
original Freedom project. Despite such substantial savings, a 
group of representatives sent Vice-President Gore a note in 
which they unanimously announced that "Congress will insist that 
the United States is capable of building and putting on line its 
own station, without anybody's help and at any time." 
  At the same time, however, supporters of the Alpha project 
feel that Russia, like the other partners in the international 
collaboration, should not require a cent of compensation for 
providing the Mir-2 modules, which will make it possible to 
build the long-duration orbital facility cheaper and two years 
faster. Russian specialists used to try to address the 
compensation issue, basing such compensation on the fact that, 
thanks to Russia's participation in the project, the United 
States will save $7 billion -- $4 billion as a result of the use 
of the Mir-2 modules, which are modified units of the tried and 
proven Mir complex, and $3 billion as a result of the reduction 
in the number of Shuttle flights needed. The White House 
administration and the NASA leadership, however, have wisely 
distanced themselves from the "inappropriate" claims of the 
Russian side. 
  Acting on the principle "not being too pushy," RKA director 
Yuriy Koptev, in an unofficial conversation with NASA director 
Daniel Goldin, announced that Russian is, as it were, in 
agreement with the "free partnership" for the realization of the 
joint project. That's why the appropriation of $400 million to 
the Russian side in the context of the contract concluded during 
the U.S. vice-president's December visit to Moscow can be 
regarded as nothing other than a birthday present. The hope is 
that that money, intended for supporting joint operations during 
the period of 1994-1997 -- that is, in the first, or 
preparatory, stage of the Alpha program -- will help to keep our 
space program afloat, that is, will preserve a considerable 
number of jobs at aerospace enterprises. 
<H5>  Caution </H5>
  The U.S. congressmen who are against the Alpha project cite 
as their concern the political instability both in Russia itself 
and in a number of CIS countries. The disheartening results of 
the elections for the new Russian parliament are being used by 
them as just one more ponderous argument in support of their 
negative attitudes. And then there's the recent political 
maneuver by Kazakhstan, which required $7 billion a year in rent 
for the Baykonur launch facility, which was built with the money 
of the taxpayers of the entire Soviet Union, and five million 
hectares of desert allocated for military testing grounds. 
  So one can understand the caution with which the U.S. and 
Western European community relate to Russia as a partner in all 
spheres of joint activity, including space activity. 

