Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Unbreakable Unity Between Illustrious Leader and People"-- </F>
KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, March 26 (KCNA) -- The unbreakable unity 
between the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il and the people 
renders Korean-style socialism making a long drive invincible 
and firmly guarantees a bright future of the revolutionary cause 
of chuche in Korea, declares NODONG SINMUN in an article today. 
  The article in the first part says the unbreakable unity 
between the leader and the people is a proud feature of Korean 
society united in one mind. 
  The dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il is quoted as saying: 
  "If the party enjoys the full support and love of the masses 
and is in perfect harmony with them, it can carry out any task, 
however difficult, creditably and with no fear of any enemy." 
  The article continues: 
  The grand features of our society where the leader and the 
people are in perfect unity find clear manifestation in that the 
entire party members, working people and people's army soldiers 
absolutely worship the illustrious leader and fully share the 
will and idea with him. 
  The Korean people have long since revered Comrade Kim 
Chong-il deeply, calling him "The Dear Leader." 
  Their worship of the leader is deepening in the struggle to 
defend Korean-style socialism. 
  The party members and other working people have the 
unanimous 
will to firmly trust and follow only the great General Kim 
Chong-il in any grim period and live under the magnanimous care 
of the revolution. 
  The dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il's idea and theory run 
through our society and serve as the guideline of life and 
struggle and the life-giving water for our people. 
  The grand revolutionary features of our society where the 
leader and the people are in unbreakable unity are fully 
demonstrated in that the entire people always entrust their 
destiny to the illustrious leader and resolutely defend the 
party and the leader. 
  The article in the second part says the unbreakable unity 
between the leader and the people is the source of invincible 
might in carrying the cause of Korean-style socialism to 
accomplishment through whatever ordeals. 
  In Korea the cause of socialism is firmly defended and 
promoted victoriously. It is entirely because the dear leader 
Comrade Kim Chong-il and the Korean people are in perfect unity. 
  The perfect unity between the leader and the people is a 
basic factor for resolutely meeting any challenge of the 
imperialists and firmly defending Korean-style socialism. 
  The imperialists and reactionaries today are concentrating 
their attack on isolating and stifling the DPRK after socialism 
collapsed in some countries. But, we are staunchly fighting 
against their attack without the slightest vacillation. 
  As long as we are guided by the dear leader, we will win, 
and 
when we fight closely united behind him, nothing can break 
Korean- style socialism. This unshakable conviction of the 
Korean people enables them to resolutely stand against the 
imperialists and consolidate Korean-style socialism into an 
impregnable fortress. 
  The unbreakable unity between the leader and the people 
serves as a great motive force pushing ahead with socialist 
construction in any circumstance and makes our society a large 
revolutionary family. 
  Today our party and people are famous as a militant party 
and 
invincible people who can do anything once determined. This is 
because socialism is being built on the basis of the unbreakable 
unity between the leader and the people. 
  Thanks to this unity, impressive noble communist virtues are 
in full play and socialism is making a vigorous advance with 
great viability and strength in Korea. 
  The people who advance full of revolutionary optimism, 
closely united behind the illustrious leader, are 
ever-victorious. 
  We will regard the unbreakable unity between the illustrious 
leader and the people as more valuable than our lives and, on 
this basis, will walk the long road of the Korean revolution to 
the last, pushing through trials and ordeals. 

