Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature] </F>
  [Text] President Yeltsin has not signed a cabinet reform 
decree yet, and, as one of his aides told Interfax on Thursday 
[6 January], claims about possible cabinet reshuffles are 
premature. 
  More than that, he added, the decree makes no mention of 
personal government appointments. A week after the document is 
signed and the first session of the Federal Assembly is held, 
Yeltsin is to ask Chernomyrdin to submit the list of deputy 
prime ministers for approval. 
  The prime minister intends to have four assistants, two of 
them first deputies. Even today government sources name with 
certainty Gaydar and Soskovets as candidates to the posts of 
first deputies. 
  Earlier, a well-placed source reported to Interfax that the 
president returned the decree for more work on it. On receiving 
the draft shortly before the new year, Yeltsin has discussed it 
in detail with Chernomyrdin and some other senior officials. 
  After studying it carefully, he has requested clarification 
on several important issues. 
  Observers regard as virtually decided the resignation of the 
current Deputy Prime Ministers Aleksandr Shokhin and Sergey 
Shakhray. They also believe that Deputy Prime Ministers Yuriy 
Yarov and Aleksandr Zaveryukha will step down, too. As for 
Anatoliy Chubays, it is not yet clear whether he will leave the 
government altogether or will stay as Chairman of the State 
Property Committee but step down as deputy prime minister. 
  A senior presidential administration official has confirmed 
that Shakhray will most likely leave the cabinet. In his words, 
Shakhray is engaged "in splintering activity, aimed at 
heightening confrontation even before the opening session of the 
Duma." 
  In saying that, the official referred to a "meeting, 
initiated by Shakhray" to bring together Duma members, elected 
from one-mandate constituencies in republics and other 
autonomies (the program of the Russian Unity and Concord Party, 
which is led by Shakhray, is popular among a significant part of 
parliamentarians from across the Russian Federation). 
  After a speech by Shakhray at that meeting, representatives 
of Tuva, Yakutiya, Karachayevo-Cherkessiya, Mari-El, Kabardino- 
Balkaria, Dagestan, Ingushetia, North Ossetia, Chuvashia, and 
other autonomies announced the formation of a parliamentary 
group and voiced their intention to nominate Shakhray to the 
post of Duma Speaker. In a document adopted at the meeting, its 
participants declared that their goal is to implement the 
provisions of the Federative Treaty. They demanded to elevate 
their group's status to that of a faction so that they can have 
equal rights in forming Duma structures. 

