Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Gdansk, March 4 -- Defence Minister Piotr 
Kolodziejczyk said in Gdynia Friday he hoped that in May Poland 
would be granted the status of at least an associate-member of 
the Western European Union (WEU). Kolodziejczyk was speaking at 
a press conference shortly after his return from Paris were he 
had held talks with French and German Defence Ministers Francois 
Leotard and Volker Ruehe, respectively. 
  "We return from Paris highly satisfied since we have gained 
more than we have expected, Kolodziejczyk said. [no closing 
quotation mark as received] He also said that Poland has two 
powerful allies who will support its bid for the WEU associate 
status. 
  According to the defence minister, the Polish-French-German 
cooperation in defence is of a great significance to Poland, 
bringing it closer to European security structures. 
  The French meeting, the first of its kind, opened up a new 
stage in the defence cooperation between the three countries. 
It was decided that the French, German and Polish defence 
ministers would hold regular tripartite meetings with the next 
one scheduled to take place in Warsaw in July. These meetings, 
to be held at least once a year, are to be preceded by working 
meetings of military experts, Kolodziejczyk announced. 
  Joint military exercises of Polish, German and French forces 
are also planned for this year. Details of two sets of 
Polish-French manoeuvres to be held in summer are to be 
discussed during a visit to Poland by the chief of the general 
staff of the French Armed Forces scheduled for March 9-12. 
  referring to possible threats to European security, 
Kolodziejczyk pointed mainly to a large military potential 
gathered in the Russian Kaliningrad district and to developments 
in Lithuania, Belarus and Ukraine. 
  According to Kolodziejczyk, participation of Russia in the 
"Partnership for Peace" initiative would diminish these dangers. 
He stressed, however, that Russia should firstly meet all 
conditions set by NATO for prospective partners. 

