CSO 

  [Text] Radical, Great Front, and Socialist deputies will 
sally forth today with a call for the impeachment of Judge Juan 
Jose Mahdjoubian, whose Friday ruling that there was not enough 
evidence to prosecute the defendants in the Comprehensive 
Medical Assistance Plan (PAMI) bribery case unleashed a storm of 
controversy. 
  Both Radical Jesus Rodriguez and Carlos "Chacho" Alvarez of 
the Great Front, as well as Socialist Hector Polino, stated 
yesterday that they will support the call for Judge 
Mahdjoubian's impeachment and also a proposal for Congress to 
name a committee to investigate all the charges of bribes or 
kickbacks in the PAMI. 
  Rodriguez declared that "the courts' complacent attitude 
toward power, the absence of effective watchdog agencies, and 
the lack of openness in government actions mean that it is up to 
Congress to take the bull by the horns." 
  According to the Radicals' plan, the investigating committee 
would have seven members, and would have 30 days to publish its 
conclusions. In other words, they would come out after the 
upcoming elections. 
  Meanwhile, Alvarez stated that Judge Mahdjoubian "must be 
impeached" because his decision "is shameful from all 
standpoints, and what it amounts to is condoning the 
distribution of bribes in broad daylight." 
  In Polino's view, the judge's ruling was "a mockery. From 
now 
on, only chicken thieves will be sent to jail." 
  On Friday, Mahdjoubian declared that he did not have enough 
evidence to prosecute the owners of clinics with PAMI contracts, 
who were arrested on 25 February. 
  When the police arrived, these people were standing in the 
bank lobby, exchanging envelopes without receipts. The envelopes 
contained money amounting to 25 percent of the payments they had 
received from the PAMI the day before. 
  The arrestees were accused by Councilman Anibal Ibarra, who 
contended that one of them, Osvaldo Calvo, president of the 
Association of Psychiatric Entities of the Argentine Republic, 
had been demanding bribes from the clinics to allow them to work 
with the PAMI. 
  From that time on, new accusations began surfacing in the 
capital and in various provinces, implicating the PAMI and its 
director, Matilde Menendez. 

