Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] By three votes to one, the First Chamber of the 
Appeals Court has issued the final ruling on the case involving 
Basques. It upheld the extradition of Jesus Maria Lizarralde 
Izaguirre, who was indicted for causing damage and destruction, 
illegal association, and illegally taking hostages. 
  Uruguayan justice has thus granted three extraditions to its 
Spanish counterpart. 
  The Basques who will be extradited are: Jesus Maria 
Lizarralde -- whose extradition was granted yesterday -- Jesus 
Goitia Unzurrunzaga, and Mike Ibanez Oteiza, all of whom are in 
custody at the Central Police Precinct jail. 
  The extradition requests on Pedro Maria Gomez, Jesus Lariz, 
Juan Jose Urrutia, and Amaia Araqustain, was rejected by a 
hearing court and upheld by the Appeals Court. 
  By three votes to one, the Appeals Court rejected Mirem 
Argutzane Delgado Iriondo's extradition, thus overturning a 
ruling by a hearing court. They were released. 
  The extradition of the three Basques who have been charged 
by 
the Spanish Government with belonging to the ETA [Basque 
Fatherland and Liberty] will not take place right now since they 
-- together with the other five who have been released -- have 
pending lawsuits under way here for the use of false documents. 
  Sources close to the Spanish Government last week linked the 
extradition of the Basques with the suspension of King Juan 
Carlos and Queen Sofia's state visit to Uruguay, which gave rise 
to contradictory reports. 
  Asuncion Valdes, the spokesperson of the royal household in 
Madrid, said the invitation to King Juan Carlos de Borbon and 
Queen Sofia to visit Montevideo "has been accepted." 
  Sources close to the Spanish Government and to the Spanish 
Embassy in Montevideo contended previously that Their Majesties' 
visit to Uruguay had been suspended over the stance adopted by 
Uruguayan justice. Carlos Conde Duque, director general of the 
Spanish Police, came to our country several weeks ago to meet 
with Interior Ministry officials. 
  Sources noted that Conde's visit demonstrated that the 
Spanish Government wishes to continue its good relations with 
Uruguay, but that it accomplished very little toward settling 
the requested extraditions. 
  The rejection of the Basques' extradition last year led to 
an 
exchange of letters between governments. 
  Spain lodged a protest about the rejection. This provoked a 
strong response by the Uruguayan Foreign Ministry, which 
underscored the independence of the judicial branch to settle 
this issue. 

