Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Information Minister Dr. Jawad al-'Anani by </F>
unidentified reporter, in Amman on 2 January] 
  [Text] [Reporter] Your Excellency, in his speech yesterday, 
His Majesty King Husayn said that the Palestinian side has 
promised that a Palestinian delegation will arrive in Amman to 
discuss priorities between the two sides in a frank and open 
atmosphere. His Majesty King Husayn said that this will be the 
last opportunity for understanding. How do you explain His 
Majesty King Husayn's remarks in this regard? 
  [Al-'Anani] I believe that His Majesty King Husayn's speech 
is based on a very strong concern, as usual, about making the 
Jordanian-Palestinian coordination on the highest level and very 
clear. This is because everyone is watching this relationship 
and many decisions will be made in accordance with this 
relationship. The other thing is that time is passing quickly 
and that events are changing rapidly. Moreover, there are 
timetables included in the Jordanian-Palestinian agreement. 
These timetables set dates for accomplishing matters. So, out 
of his concern about making this relationship clear and 
proceeding within sound frameworks, especially since any 
agreement between the Palestinians and Israelis affects us and 
the current peace talks affect both of us a great deal, 
coordination is a must. Based on this, postponing this issue or 
making Jordan wait longer than it should, will reflect 
negatively on us and on the Palestinian brothers. Therefore, I 
see in his majesty's remarks a strong concern about the 
importance of this cooperation and the need to put it within a 
set timetable so that it will not continue to be without set 
dates and results. Here lies the importance of His Majesty King 
Husayn's remarks. 
  [Reporter] What can we discern about Jordan's negotiating 
strategy from His Majesty King Husayn's speech concerning a 
peace treaty? 
  [Al-'Anani] I believe that His Majesty King Husayn has a 
great deal of experience regarding the Arab-Israeli 
relationship. He has continuously proven that he is farsighted 
concerning many issues. His awareness has preceded that of 
others most, if not all, of the time. So, his majesty knows 
full well that the peace talks should not lead to a treaty, 
except at the end. In other words, you must resolve all 
relevant issues. This is what was included in the 
Jordanian-Israeli agenda. First we should discuss water, 
people, land, and many other issues related to the peace process 
such as the refugees and the displaced issue. When all these 
issues are settled and when we become certain that peace will be 
just and comprehensive on all fronts and cover all these issues, 
then the talk about a peace treaty becomes clear. 
  If we declare an intention to sign agreements and going on 
to talk about them, we leave the field open for 
misunderstandings and various interpretations that could hold up 
the entire the peace process. There is a logical sequence that 
his majesty's speech made clear. 
  [Reporter] His majesty spoke about certain fears being 
raised about an Israeli domination under peace? 
  [Al-'Anani] His majesty's speech has made it absolutely 
clear that, as a man of vision, certain pieces of advice he has 
given to his brother Arab leaders, have turned out to be the 
right counsel. Take what happened in the 1967 war when we joined 
a war for which we were caught unprepared and thus passed up the 
opportunity to be better prepared in the future. Again, 
consider the Khartoum no's of the 1969 Arab summit. These 
created an emotionally charged atmosphere in which we could not 
bring our calmer reason to bear in weighing things and making 
the right decisions. The result has been agreements inferior to 
what we may have otherwise obtained. Now, his majesty has drawn 
attention to fears being raised with a view to delaying 
negotiations about peace. His majesty says that the Arab 
world's squandering of or failure to put the assets and 
resources it has at its command to good use may lie at the heart 
of the conflict. His majesty also blames Arab disarray. If we 
close ranks, as his majesty has been urging, and if we marshal 
Arab resources in the peace battle, we will not enable Israel to 
control the Arabs. We know that in the year 2025, there will be 
600 million Arabs. What will Israel be like then? Indeed, 
Israel has more to fear from the peace process. It is agonizing 
over the decision whether or not to make peace. Given its 
assets and resources, however, the Arab world is well positioned 
to counter Israeli or any other hegemony. 

