CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, February 17--India is open to a dialogue 
with Pakistan despite the intense propaganda barrage launched by 
that country on alleged human rights excesses in Kashmir, an 
official spokesman said today. 
  He said India is endeavouring to inform the world about 
Pakistan's efforts to gain propaganda mileage out of the Kashmir 
issue by projecting the state as a separate entity. Pakistan is 
more concerned about its political agenda rather than the issue 
of human rights, he added. 
  The spokesman said that Islamabad's vituperative language 
against this country is not conducive towards good bilateral 
relations. 
  Asked to comment on press reports about a forthcoming visit 
by the controversial U.S. State Department official, Ms Robin 
Raphel, the spokesman declined to comment. 
  India today warned Pakistan that the foreign secretary level 
dialogue will suffer a serious setback if Islamabad went ahead 
and moved a resolution on Kashmir at the U.N. human rights 
commission in Geneva. 
  An external affairs ministry spokesman said if Pakistan 
presses ahead with its resolution it would jeopardise 
continuance of the bilateral dialogue. 
  The spokesman said India was committed to resolving its 
differences with Pakistan through mutual consultations. The 
Prime Minister, Mr Narasimha Rao, has reiterated India's 
commitment for a peaceful comprehensive dialogue with Pakistan 
on all outstanding matters, including the Kashmir issue. 
  The spokesman expressed the hope that Pakistan would not 
insist on moving the resolution at the human rights commission 
meetings. 
  He said all our missions have briefed the member countries 
of 
the commission about the Pakistan's designs and intentions. "We 
are hopeful that these nations see through transparent 
propaganda of Pakistan behind the resolution." 
  The minister of state for external affairs, Mr Salman 
Khursheed, held a meeting with the ambassador of the member 
nations of the commission here yesterday, during which he stated 
that Pakistan had no locus standi to move the resolution on 
human rights when its own record on the issue was imperfect. 
  Mr Khursheed said India was always ready to have a dialogue 
with Pakistan under the Shimla Agreement. Six proposals were 
sent to Pakistan in January in the hope that agreement on these 
issue would create an atmosphere of confidence between the two 
countries. 
  But regrettably there was no formal response from the 
Pakistan government, he added. 
  Meanwhile, the external affairs ministry today ruled out the 
possibility of any immediate visit to the United States by Mr 
Rao. 
  "There is nothing to talk about it as yet. No diplomatic 
moves are afoot," the ministry spokesman said at his press 
briefing. 

