BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aleksandr Starikevich: "Belorussian [Belarusian] </F>
Government Does Not Wish To Cooperate With George Soros"] 
  [Text] Minsk -- The Belorussian communists and government 
have finally become united on a platform of hostility toward the 
West. This was again confirmed by the events which occurred 
prior to, during, and after the visit to Minsk of George Soros, 
founder of a network of charitable funds. 
  George Soros has invested about $2 million in Belorussia 
[Belarus] in the past one and a half years. This money has gone 
into the support and development of science, education, and 
other sectors. All programs pursue one goal: the creation of 
an open society. 
  Soros' funds are working on a similar basis in Russia and 
other countries which were once members of the socialist camp. 
The governments of practically all states are showing interest 
in cooperation with this organization -- except the Belorussian 
Government. 
  The Belorussian Government head has instructed the 
administration for coordinating the activities of the Council of 
Ministers administrative organs to investigate what the "Soros 
Belarus Fund" is doing. An interesting document has found its 
way into IZVESTIYA's possession which provides evidence about 
the Belorussian authorities' attitude to this organization. 
This memorandum was signed by Government Secretary Gennadiy 
Danilov, whose successes in exposing enemy spies on the 
Republic's territory are well known to Belorussian citizens. 
Here are some quotations from the document. 
  "...The fund is gearing its activities toward changing 
people's outlooks, inculcating the American way of life, and 
attracting cheap intellectual resources from our republic to the 
fundamental, natural, and social sciences in the United States." 
  The grounds for such a serious indictment are outlined 
below. 
It emerges that the Belorussian Ministry of Education proposed 
to American specialists that studies be organized in the United 
States for kindergarten workers, teachers, and school students. 
Gennadiy Danilov comes to the following conclusion: "In this 
way, the fund set about reorganizing the entire education system 
and training cadres for the future creation of an open society." 
  The government secretary goes on to expose the fund's 
intrigues in the field of publishing: "The programs' leaders 
give preference to foreign authors when publishing scientific 
literature. The publication of literature proceeds unchecked, 
without the Belorussian side providing analysis and expert 
opinion...." Moreover, "the program to develop the mass media 
has not escaped the fund's attention. Its aim is to abolish the 
state monopoly in the organs of the press and television...." 
  As you see, we are still in an age in Belorussia in which 
the 
state wants to have complete control over publishing activities 
and the mass media. It is no secret that this kind of control 
is one of the most important conditions for the revival of 
totalitarianism. Therefore, the "Soros Belarus Fund," which is 
operating strictly within existing laws, is provoking a negative 
emotional reaction from the present republic leadership. 
  It also follows from the memorandum's text that from as far 
back as 1992, the relevant bodies have been paying careful 
attention to Elizabeth Smedley, executive director of the "Soros 
Belarus Fund," knowing exactly whom she has met with and when, 
and where these meetings have taken place. The summary says: 
"Based on the above, it is becoming obvious that having the 
opportunity to act without interference, the fund has been 
striving to orient the republic's development toward Western 
traditions and values, make changes to the state-political 
system, and prepare the ground for implementing the idea of 
creating a social system based on an open society...." 
  But consider another interesting fact: The communist 
newspaper MY I VREMYA [TIME AND US] published in its 30 May 
issue an item saying that thanks to the Soros Fund's efforts 
"the working people have begun to die out" in Belorussia. The 
article's author did not even take the trouble to paraphrase the 
document cited above: Whole chunks of the article are identical 
to paragraphs in the memorandum without, it has to be said, 
reference being made to the original source (even the 
typographical errors and inaccuracies in the government document 
are repeated). This is a clear demonstration that what the 
government has on its mind is what the communists are talking 
about, which is evidence of the degree of independence of the 
latter from the power structures. 
  The fact that the communists are accusing Soros of every 
mortal sin is not surprising. But the prime minister also 
revealed his true motives for not wishing to meet with the 
American philanthropist after his departure. Kebich stated that 
he does not wish to meet with the person who has destroyed the 
Belorussian economy. 
  As the most effective programs are those which are carried 
out with the government's cooperation (in this case you cannot 
count on this), George Soros will reduce the volume of his aid 
to Belorussia. He also does not intend to invest money here in 
his capacity as a businessman, as he cannot see any signs of 
economic reform. 
  By isolating itself from everybody else, the Belorussian 
nomenklatura is hoping to recreate for itself the little world 
in which it once lived very well. 

