BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Thomas Mayer: "Waldheim Calls For Release of All </F>
CIA Files About Himself"] 
  [Text] Vienna -- Former President Kurt Waldheim would like 
the files about himself held by the U.S. intelligence service 
CIA to be published. "I do not mind if they are released," 
Waldheim told DER STANDARD on Wednesday [25 May]. 
  This would put an end once and for all to rumors about his 
working as an agent for the United States and the resulting 
"cover up" of Waldheim's alleged participation in war crimes by 
U.S. authorities. 
  This was prompted by reports in THE NEW YORK TIMES about new 
documents of the U.S. State Department. These are "top secret 
reports" by the U.S. Embassy in Vienna from 1961-68. 
  Their contents: Waldheim "is assessed by many sources as a 
prominent figure in the Foreign Ministry (in Vienna -- the 
editor) and has proved to be extremely cooperative and helpful 
in supporting U.S. interests," it was said in 1961. The U.S. 
Embassy sent almost identical assessments to Washington in 1966, 
after Waldheim had become UN ambassador, and in 1968, when he 
became foreign minister. 
  The paper asks why the United States supported Waldheim's 
election as UN secretary general in 1971, even though in 1948 he 
had been put on the list of suspects because of his service in 
the Wehrmacht in the Balkans. The fact that the CIA "did not 
find anything" when it made a security check in 1972 is 
considered an indication of his "cooperation" with the State 
Department. 
  After all, when Waldheim's wartime past became known in 1987 
he was put on the Watch List, THE NEW YORK TIME writes. Today 
there are still questions, not least about the "whitewashing 
description" of Waldheim's "cooperative support of U.S. 
interests," which, in intelligence circles, is an indication of 
work as an agent. 
  The former president sees such deductions as an attempt to 
"continue the slander campaign against me" in "a new version." 
The fact that he "was friendly" toward the United States, "does 
not mean that I was an agent." He does not doubt "that the CIA 
checked me." However, "the CIA was not able to report" more 
than a friendly attitude toward the United States, "because 
there is nothing else to report." 
  Waldheim assumes that the intention to generally "force the 
CIA to give information about prominent people" is at the back 
of the campaign. This view is confirmed by a corresponding 
appeal to the U.S. Congress in the article, he says. 

