BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Gerry Adams, "president of Sinn Fein, the </F>
legal political wing of the outlawed Irish Republican Army," by 
Martin Alioth in Belfast; date not given: "`Every Single 
Casualty Is Regrettable'"] 
  [Text] [Alioth] Mr. Adams, one year ago you wrote in the 
IRISH TIMES: "The division of Ireland has failed. The British 
presence in Ireland in incompatible with peace." Would you 
choose the same words again today? 
  [Adams] Of course, I would. Almost every day one can see 
the failure of British politics in Ireland and the frustrated 
experiment of division. The division did not work in Germany, 
or anywhere else for that matter; certainly not here. 
  [Alioth] But the Unionist majority in Northern Ireland has 
conclusively proven over the past 100 years that it will defy 
any solution it does not like, even through the use of force. 
Do you really want a united Ireland with 1 million alienated 
rebels? 
  [Adams] One must take into account that the Unionists have 
never stood on their own feet, but have always been dependent on 
the British. When this state was founded, it was not the 
Unionists, but the British who founded it. Consequently, we 
Republicans demand that the Unionists stand on their own feet. 
The Ireland that we want is not the exclusive miniature state 
that we have here in the north, but a comprehensive one, in 
which we will replace the terms Catholic and Protestant by 
generally accepted civil rights of the island of Ireland on the 
basis of equality. This requires the participation of the 
Unionists. 
  [Alioth] In your view, what would change politically and in 
everyday life if, tomorrow, the IRA were to publicly renounce 
the use of violence? 
  [Adams] First of all, I regard it as most unlikely that the 
IRA will do it. In a conflict one either beats the other side 
or reaches a negotiated settlement. The British have admitted 
that they are not able to beat the IRA militarily, and during 
the past 15 years I have said that this is not a military 
problem, which is where there cannot be a military solution, but 
that there has to be a political solution. Last year, Sinn Fein 
participated in a number of political initiatives, all of which 
were aiming at a peace agreement, a negotiated settlement. We 
talked to the British Government, there was the initiative 
between me and Mr. Hume from the Social Democratic and Labour 
Party [SDLP], and we met church leaders and other opinion 
leaders in all of Ireland. We reached agreement among Northern 
Irish Nationalists, which was supported by the government in 
Dublin, and of which the IRA said that it might be a basis for 
peace. All that led to the Downing Street Declaration of 15 
December 1993, which was described by the British Government as 
a first step toward a peaceful settlement. Therefore, it seems 
quite unlikely to me that the IRA -- and neither the British or 
the Loyalists -- might take unilateral action. The inner logic 
of the situation and the development of the past 14 months point 
to a multilateral negotiated settlement. Such a solution was 
delayed and stopped in the past three, four months and has to be 
followed up quickly now. This process will at one point lead to 
a demilitarization, that is to say an end to armed activities 
from all groups involved, including the IRA. This would, of 
course, be a major step ahead, because we would thus be moving 
toward a political solution. 
  [Alioth] In your opinion, what are the political 
consequences of the IRA killing yet another policeman in 
Northern Ireland? 
  [Adams] Meanwhile it sounds almost banal, like a cliche: I 
think that, in this situation any casualty has to be regretted. 
Every single casualty victim, whether it is a Royal Ulster 
Constabulary [RUC] officer, a British soldier, or, as quite 
recently, alleged members of Loyalist organizations, is 
regrettable. We need demilitarization; this is something I have 
always worked for. I have asked all parties involved to lay 
down their arms -- the IRA, the British, the Loyalists. And I 
have not changed my position. Last week we had the death of 
Theresa Clinton, the wife of a Sinn Fein member; there were a 
number of attacks against Catholics and the homes of Catholics. 
The IRA killed a RUC man. And most recently, the IRA killed two 
people, claiming that they were Loyalists. The families of all 
these victims will feel exactly the same: pain. One could say 
that Theresa Clinton had nothing to do with all that. She was a 
woman, it was hard luck that she was married to a Republican, 
while the RUC man was a responsible, armed voluntary member of 
the British Armed Forces, and so on. Yet, I do not think that 
such qualifications and half-justifications will bring things 
ahead. We must make sure that the chances for peace are not 
wasted. Whatever the justification or the circumstances of the 
conflict up to the winter of 1993 may have been, in a situation 
in which all sides claim to have the solution it is disgusting 
that people keep getting killed. 
  [Alioth] Did you ever consider that the strategy of the IRA 
and Sinn Fein of the past 20 years might have been 
counterproductive; that Irish unity was delayed through people 
becoming alienated with one another within Northern Ireland, and 
the North becoming estranged from the South? 
  [Adams] It has not delayed unification of Ireland, which 
would not even be on the agenda without the fight here in the 
north. Yet, certain aspects of the IRA campaign were certainly 
counterproductive, there can be no doubt. And the lasting -- 
let us say -- violence is repulsive to the people who live in 
the middle of it here, as it is to outside observers. The 
sooner armed activities cease, the sooner we will enter a 
nonviolent phase of the struggle, which will be all the better 
for all parties involved. 
  [Alioth] What to you tell people who claim that, after 20 
years in the political desert, the Republicans had lost the 
ability to evaluate their opponents' political room to maneuver. 
  [Adams] But that is certainly not the case. The mere fact 
that the peace process exists at all, and that expectations have 
been so high, prove the Republicans' readiness for dialogue with 
their opponents, even with their enemies. 
  [Alioth] In the last five months you constantly asked the 
British Government for "clarification" of the Downing Street 
Declaration. Is this not simply a trick to press for a meeting 
with a British negotiator before the IRA renounces the use of 
force? 
  [Adams] Well, the term trick is quite an unlucky word in 
this connection. Sinn Fein runs in the election, Sinn Fein wins 
a seat. In the last municipal election we won 12.5 percent of 
the vote, every third Nationalist supports our party. We are 
the party that gets the most votes in Belfast, the country's 
second biggest city, and we are the second biggest party in 
Derry and elsewhere in the six counties. It is not a trick to 
try and win a mandate, to get it, and then represent those from 
one received this mandate. I think that this is called 
democracy. The other parties asked for clarification and, quite 
correctly, got it. Every party did, sometimes even from Dublin 
and London. After all, it is our duty first of all to find out 
what the declaration is all about, because it can be -- and that 
is probably the intention behind it -- interpreted differently. 
I did not say anything about it in the past 10 days, and I am 
become sick only when I hear the word "clarification." I think 
that we are now in a crisis. When the British stonewall, reject 
any development, then everything will freeze, the Loyalists will 
step up their murderous campaign, the British will intensify 
military occupation. At Easter, the IRA suspended its 
activities for a few days to support a clarification. This was 
at a time when the Republicans were trying to be flexible and 
facilitate demilitarization, while what we have got is 
militarization. Then the IRA will, of course, take action 
again, and we are finding ourselves in the situation in which 
the entire peace process threatens to disintegrate. 
  [Alioth] Sometimes you give the impression that you would 
like to be more peaceful and conciliatory than you turn out to 
be. 
  [Adams] I would be a fool if I were not seeking peace. All 
of us, our children, our neighbors, have the desire to live in 
relative peace. I have lived in this conflict all my life. 
This is why I think that my longing for peace is maybe greater 
than that of others who do not live here. It is easy to make 
peace with friends, but it is absolutely difficult to do so with 
enemies. I am not interested in a temporary or partial peace. 
What we need -- and I am deliberately using the term -- is 
lasting peace, a lasting solution. I am convinced that we will 
get peace. I am convinced that the entire thrust of the fight 
points toward peace. Things are going too slowly, and it is 
frustrating to me that we have once more become hostages of the 
right wing of the British Conservatives, and that Mr. Major is 
prevented from providing clarifications to Sinn Fein. As far as 
I am concerned this is unbearable. We have to be patient and 
hold out. If John Major did not have his internal difficulties, 
how much further would he have gotten? All this indicates that 
a more stable British Government would deal with these central 
problems more comprehensively than has been the case in the 
past. The Republicans have always started from the assumption 
that the British will only consider the democratic option 
reluctantly, only when every other way out is blocked. 

