Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Ukrainian Presidential Edict on the Geological Exploration </F>
and Procedure for Utilizing Ukraine's Tectonically Produced 
Mineral Deposits" issued in Kiev on 30 December] 
  [Text] In order to ensure a comprehensive and more 
complete utilization of mineral raw-materials resources and 
improve the state of the environment, I resolve as follows: 
  1. To determine that all those remnants of raw materials 
resulting from extraction, enrichment, and processing of mineral 
raw materials that have been covered by geological studies in 
accordance with an established procedure and that have been 
valued and found to be of industrial significance are placed in 
the category of tectonically produced mineral deposits. 
  The tectonically produced mineral deposits are included into 
the State Fund for Ukraine's Mineral Deposits and are used in 
accordance with the procedure established by Ukraine's 
legislation on mineral resources. 
  2. To determine that the placement of remnants of raw 
materials resulting from extraction, enrichment, and processing 
of mineral raw materials in the category of tectonically 
produced mineral deposits does not entail any change in the 
existing legislation on the procedure for collecting payment for 
their presence in the environment. 
  3. Ukraine's State Committee for Geology and Utilization of 
Mineral Resources is in charge of organizing and 
methodologically ensuring geological exploration of tectonically 
produced mineral deposits. 
  4. In elaborating draft plans for socioeconomic development, 
Ukraine's Ministry of Economy, jointly with Ukraine's State 
Committee on Geology and Utilization of Mineral Deposits must 
provide, starting from 1994, for a separate item specifying 
capital on the geological exploration of tectonically produced 
mineral deposits within the limits of capital allocated for 
financing geological exploration. 
  [Signed] Ukraine's President L. Kravchuk 
  [Dated] Kiev, 30 December 1993 

