Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Gonzalo Marroquin] </F>
  [Text] Guatemala City, 15 Jan (AFP) -- Just two weeks 
before the referendum to approve or reject the reforms to the 
Guatemalan Constitution, the "yes" and "no" campaigns have 
intensified, while division and uncertainty increase among 
Guatemalans. 
  With Guatemalan President Ramiro de Leon Carpio at the head 
and backed by a million-dollar publicity campaign, the "yes" 
alternative has become stronger during the past weeks. The 
opposition is divided among those who support the "no" and those 
who are calling for abstentionism but do not have the resources 
to compete with the powerful publicity program displayed by the 
group calling for the "yes." 
  De Leon Carpio has told AFP "the yes will win" in the 30 
January referendum and said he was confident that "for the first 
time in Guatemala's history, a state's constitutional mandate 
will be interrupted without using force or measures of coup 
d'etat." 
  The only poll published up to now is the one by the magazine 
CRONICA. It has revealed that 70 percent of the people 
registered to participate in the referendum supports the 
approval of the constitutional reforms, although most people, 
not only in the rural areas but in the capital city too, are not 
familiar with the reforms they will approve. 
  Among the reforms--43 in all, including temporary 
articles--is the reduction of the legislative period for 
deputies and Supreme Court justices. Those two arguments 
strengthen the official campaign, which emphasizes "the exit of 
the deputies" who have been accused repeatedly of corruption. 
  The following political parties have joined the group that 
supports approval of the reforms: Guatemalan Republican Front 
(FRG), Union of the National Center (UCN), and Nationalist 
Authentic Central (CAN). The Guatemalan Christian Democracy 
(DCG) and other minority organizations will soon join officially 
the yes group. 
  Furthermore, and although it has not been stated openly, the 
business sector, which is represented by the Coordinating 
Committee for Agriculture, Commercial, Financial and Industrial 
Associations (CACIF), the Catholic Church, and the Army, 
apparently also support the yes vote. 
  Meanwhile, the opposition is too divided and does not have 
the resources to obtain positive results, according to 
Guatemalan political analysts. The "no" vote has been openly 
favored by the National Vanguard Party (PAN), the Guatemalan 
Workers' General Central Organization (CGTG), and several media 
sectors. 
  The largest opposition is in the people's organizations, and 
those reject holding the referendum. This sector includes the 
so-called Multisectorial Social Forum (FMS) [Foro Multisectorial 
Social] and the Labor and Popular Action Union (UASP). 
Approximately 1,500 peasants from those organizations marched to 
oppose the referendum on 14 January. The UASP has also warned 
that it will take "measures" to boycott the voting process and 
has threatened to place barricades and seize buildings to draw 
the people's attention. 
  All of those actions seem to be insufficient to stop the 
victory of the "yes" vote, however, because, in addition to the 
strong publicity campaign in its favor, it is expected that the 
government will transport people to vote in the interior of the 
country. Local analysts estimate that at least 50 percent of 
the 3.4 million Guatemalans who can participate in the process 
will cast their vote, although there is a large amount of people 
who have no possibility of knowing the reforms to the 
Constitution, as they can neither read nor write. 

