BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Jiri Pesek, chairman of the Czech section of </F>
the Border Demarcation Commission, by Katerina Perknerova; place 
and date not given: "The Czech-Slovak Border Should Be 
Demarcated by the End of 1995"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Perknerova] What are the main 
problems in the work of the commission? 
  [Pesek] Having studied the administrative border in the 
field, we discovered many instances when it passes through the 
middle of communities, even buildings. 
  [Perknerova] Can you give us an example? 
  [Pesek] Javornik is a specific example, as the border does 
not follow the ridge there but rather a contour line below the 
ridge. Hence, it would be logical to move it to the ridge. That 
was the first instance of a proposed change, although from the 
very beginning the Czech side was aware that the Slovak side 
would have to be compensated for this territorial gain at some 
other place -- it was a matter of some 600 hectares. 
  After talks with the mayors, we came to the conclusion that 
this solution is not feasible, and we narrowed the proposal to 
just the Kasarna recreation area, where tow lifts have been 
built on the Czech side, and around them some 40 private cabins 
and nine resorts owned by Czech proprietors. Moreover, this 
area is accessible only from the Czech side and represents 
approximately 45 hectares for which we have offered to the 
Slovak side compensation in the immediate neighborhood. 
  [Perknerova] Nevertheless, the government of ex-Prime 
Minister Meciar recently decided that the Kasarna region will 
remain the domain of the Slovak Republic. 
  [Pesek] That was a great surprise for me. After the talks 
between the interior ministers of the Czech Republic and the 
Slovak Republic in Piestany, the commission met twice, and the 
end result was that the matter of the Kasarna recreation area 
will be left for the meeting of the prime ministers as the only 
unsolved case. 
  [Perknerova] Any other disputed areas? 
  [Pesek] There were 16 in all. The Velka Javorina transmitter 
was among them, to name just one, and they have been gradually 
settled directly in the field. In all, there are four disputed 
areas left. In addition to the aforementioned Kasarna, the most 
frequently discussed locality is Sidonia as a part of the Czech 
community of Brumov-Bylnice, and the settlement of U Sabotu, 
which belongs to the Javornik community but, at the same time, 
-- with respect to services, health care, education, etc. -- is 
a part of the catchment area of the Slovak community of Vrbovce. 
The best known instance of an unnatural border is the Morava 
River, where it passes through its old dried up bed and zig zags 
around the current stream of the Morava. Both delegations of 
the Demarcation Commission pushed from the very beginning for it 
to be transfered to a channeled bed provided the Czech side 
compensates Slovakia to the tune of 120 hectares. 
  [Perknerova] Do you have any idea regarding the area you 
will 
offer Slovakia for the banks of the Morava River? 
  [Pesek] We have sought a solution by the mayors of the Czech 
border-region communities but, unfortunately, they have not been 
very accommodating, so we opted for the Slovak proposal of 
annexing the U Sabotu settlement to the Slovak Republic. 
Originally, we expected that this change would settle all 120 
hectares but we had to respect the contrary views of the 
citizens of the Javornik and Velka nad Velickou communities. We 
have arrived at a reduction of the considered compensation area 
upon receiving petitions from the citizens of Javornik and Velka 
nad Velickou, which, however, do not have the same weight as the 
views of the U Sabotu citizens whom the change affects most. In 
the final stage, there were 45 hectares at stake and 39 
single-family houses of Slovak citizens from the U Sabotu 
settlement. [passage omitted] 

