BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jesus Aranda and David Aponte] </F>
  [Text] The National Defense Secretariat [Sedena] has seized 
134,881 firearms, among rifles and handguns, so far in the past 
six years. The total number of weapons the Mexican Army and 
Navy seized reached 5,626, according to Sedena reports, during 
the first six months of 1994. 
  Of the total seized, 95 percent entered Mexican territory 
through so-called small-scale smuggling, especially through 
Chihuahua, Michoacan, Sinaloa, Jalisco, and Nayarit, reports 
indicate. 
  Meanwhile, Navy Secretary Admiral Luis Carlos Ruano Angulo 
has said the weapons the Mexican Army and Navy seized belong to 
drug traffickers, "but we have not found caches of weapons or 
anything similar." 
  Interviewed during the inauguration of the 15th Navy Health 
Medical Campaign, Ruano said the drug traffickers have economic 
resources to buy weapons, but "too much propaganda is being 
given to what you call goat horns [AK-47 submachine guns]." 
  LA JORNADA: In light of these circumstances, which 
are being denounced in the United States, isn't it necessary to 
change surveillance measures? 
  Ruano: There really is no need for that. Wherever 
weapons are being smuggled, it will be stopped. 
  According to Sedena reports, only 5 percent of the weapons 
that enter Mexico are brought in legally. Those weapons are 
given to state governments to supply their police forces, and a 
small portion winds up in the hands of civilians. 
  The cost of the weapons varies in accordance with their 
brand, caliber, condition, and use, and prices range from 
approximately 300-7,000 pesos 
  Mexican Army figures indicate that during the government of 
President Salinas de Gortari, the Armed Forces seized 54,208 
rifles and 60,673 handguns. In addition, 98,644 weapons, both 
rifles and handguns, that were seized are available to Sedena. 
  The report adds that in the first six months of 1994, Sedena 
seized 2,591 rifles and handguns, in addition to another 3,035 
that are at the disposal of civilian authorities. The Army 
seized 5,626 weapons during that period. 
  According to Army reports, most of the arsenal comes, 
presumably, from the United States, China, and the former Soviet 
Union. Reports also indicate the weapons enter the country by 
land, sea, air, and in small amounts; that is, through so-called 
small-scale smuggling. 
  Reports reveal federal organizations that receive a greater 
portion of the weapons are in Chihuahua, Michoacan, Sinaloa, 
Jalisco and Nayarit. The weapons presumably enter these states 
mostly by land and in an "organized" manner. 
  Meanwhile, Sedena makes, through its General Directorate of 
Factories, weapons under a German trademark exclusively for the 
Mexican Army. 
  Sedena stipulates the requirement a citizen must meet to 
legally buy a weapon. Requirements include that the person live 
honestly, comply with military service, and have no record of 
being sentenced for weapons use. Permits to bear weapons can 
also be obtained based on the nature of the person's occupation, 
the special circumstances of his place of residence, or any 
justifiable reasons that merit it. 
  A document in which the Mexican Army warned the Government 
Secretariat on the possible illegal entry of 20,000 AK-47 
submachine guns, better known as goat horns, was disclosed 
recently. The first shipment would reportedly consist of 2,000 
weapons of this type (rifles). 
  Sedena stated later the entry of those weapons, which would 
represent less than 20 percent of the weapons seized in the past 
six months, into Mexico has not been detected so far. 

