Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] 
<H6>  THE CITIZEN </H6>
  Government, ANC Wait for Freedom Alliance Split -- "The 
government and the ANC [African National Congress] are clearly 
waiting for the Freedom Alliance [FA] to split," notes the page 
6 editorial in Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English on 12 
January. They also hope the Inkatha Freedom Party, IFP, "will 
break away from the Freedom Alliance to fight the election on 
its own, with the aim of taking over Natal. So far the alliance 
is keeping together, but for how long is uncertain." 
<H6>  THE STAR </H6>
  Tanzania Message To PAC -- The Tanzanian warning to the Pan- 
Africanist Congress, PAC, to desist from using its territory as 
a base for attacks on South Africa is a significant development 
"because the prohibition extends to the issuing of hostile or 
inflammatory statements by the PAC's Tanzanian office," states a 
page 12 editorial in Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 13 
January. Pressure on the PAC to abandon its armed struggle is 
"starting to mount inexorably." Furthermore, the "cash-strapped 
PAC" must not wilfully misinterpret the meaning of Tanzania's 
message, "or it will find itself cut off from OAU funding." THE 
STAR believes PAC's "Africanist philosophy" has "much to 
contribute to post-apartheid South Africa. But it must first be 
disentangled from the racist sentiments which permeate PAC 
exhortations to kill `settlers'." 
  ANC Excludes Holomisa From Election Lists -- Hugh Roberton 
writes in an article on page 12 of THE STAR that Transkei's 
"military dictator," Bantu Holomisa, "has tacitly latched on to 
the ascending star of the ANC," and the ANC "must believe he is 
worth all the embarrassment and discredit they are inflicting 
upon themselves." In a Holomisa missive to the Transitional 
Executive Council, TEC, there was "an insidious menace 
attendant" on his demands for Transkei. "This is as close as 
Holomisa has come to saying to the ANC: 'if you want me inside 
your tent, pay up'. What is more, the demand-with-threats is 
being made even though Holomisa and the ANC agree that Transkei 
should cease to exist after the April election." However, the 
ANC "has given a hint that it may have seen the light in regard 
to Bantu Holomisa. It has pointedly excluded him from its list 
of election candidates for the Eastern Cape, Border and 
Transkei. This is an encouraging sign, for it would be a sad 
day for the new South Africa if any military bully should 
succeed in getting his way." 
<H6>  BUSINESS DAY </H6>
  Warning Against Tokenism -- The imminent arrivals of a 
mission from the U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corporation, 
OPIC, and a Canadian trade group are to be welcomed "if they 
lead to greater opportunities for South African exporters and 
manufacturers," begins a page 4 editorial in Johannesburg 
BUSINESS DAY in English on 13 January. "OPIC has made it clear 
at the outset that it is interested only in putting U.S. firms 
in touch with our black business community. There is nothing 
wrong with that if it does not imply tokenism. South Africa 
needs to develop more industries that can create jobs that last. 
And that does not depend on the colour of the businessman's 
skin." 
<H6>  SOWETAN </H6>
  TEC Faces Credibility Test -- Johannesburg SOWETAN in 
English 
on 13 January in a page 8 editorial believes the TEC is facing a 
"credibility test." "It has to address the spiralling violence 
in East Rand townships without being `confrontational' or 
`toothless'. When it met in Pretoria on Tuesday it appointed a 
task force to evaluate the East Rand situation and report back 
next week. Is this not postponing this grave problem by a 
week?" The TEC also "failed to take decisive action against 
kwaZulu Police commissioner Lieutenant General Roy During who 
ignored a TEC resolution to appear before its full sitting to 
answer questions on hit squads in the homeland. Instead, the 
session referred the matter to its management committee to 
'consider action' to force During to appear. This is playing 
marbles while Ulundi prevaricates." 
<H6>  CAPE TIMES </H6>
  Control Hostels, Disband Self-Defense Units -- "It is time 
that President de Klerk fulfilled his undertaking of September 
1992 and acted effectively to control the hostels," declares 
Cape Town CAPE TIMES in English on 11 January in a page 6 
editorial. "By the same token Mr Mandela owes it to President 
de Klerk to disband the 'self- defence units' which are 
terrorizing the East Rand. It is no good waiting until the 
National Peacekeeping Force can be deployed in March before 
disbanding these units and disarming them." 

