BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with King Husayn by Hisham Milhim in Washington; </F>
date not given--recorded] 
  [Text] [Milhim] Your Majesty: Your meeting with President 
Bill Clinton was the first since the recent Jordanian-Israeli 
agreement and the first since the disagreement on resolving the 
inspection measures at the al-'Aqabah Port. What do you expect 
now from the United States regarding bilateral ties and the 
peace process? Can we say that there will be greater 
concentration now on bilateral ties? Did you discuss, in this 
context, the issue of Jordan getting new economic aid from 
Washington or exempting Jordan from repaying some of its old 
military and nonmilitary loans? 
  [Husayn] As a matter of fact, we raised all of these issues 
with our friends in the United States during the visit. We hope 
they will play a great role in the coming stage to help Jordan 
overcome the difficult situation it is experiencing, 
particularly in the economic field and the debts, whether by 
postponing the repayment or easing the burden or writing off the 
debt in the future. On the bilateral level, there is a joint 
U.S.-Jordanian committee. We hope this committee will serve as 
a mechanism to promote relations in the future in all fields of 
importance to us and them. 
  [Milhim] Have you found understanding in the United States 
of Jordan's economic situation and a willingness to support you? 
  [Husayn] We sensed understanding of our situation and needs. 
At the same time, we believe there is a positive U.S. attitude 
now and regarding the future to support Jordan more with regard 
to its march to provide the needs of the human being, the most 
important element in its existence now and in the future, 
especially if a comprehensive peace is achieved, as we hope. 
  [Milhim] In light of the recent Jordanian-Israeli agreement, 
did you ask President Clinton that Washington continue or 
develop its role in the peace process, particularly since 
President Clinton has pointed out the need to achieve 
comprehensive peace? 
  [Husayn] There is no doubt that the U.S. role as a sponsor 
of the peaceful march is important. The U.S. contributions have 
so far made it possible for the talks to reach this point. We 
will begin -- and we hope this will take place next month -- a 
long, arduous phase of serious negotiations to tackle all the 
items on the agenda that was agreed upon and ratified here in 
Washington immediately after the Palestinian-Israeli agreement. 
We hope that all these issues will be addressed satisfactorily 
toward a comprehensive and just peace. We now feel that it is 
our duty to pay attention to our own concerns regarding the 
present and future of Jordan, because the existence of Jordan, 
apart from any other consideration, we believe, is the right of 
all its sons of all origins. Therefore, we have a national and 
pan-Arab mission in preserving a strong, constant Jordan in the 
region at present and in the future to play the role we have 
always played in the Middle East. 
  [Milhim] The recent Jordanian-Israeli agreement came as a 
surprise to some observers. What are the factors that led to 
the agreement, especially the timing? Is it true that Jordan is 
worried that it will lag behind other tracks, especially the 
Palestinian track? 
  [Husayn] The fact is that these questions about the timing 
are not justified. This is because after endorsing the agenda, 
we were supposed to begin immediately. If there was some delay, 
it was due to other incidents and concerns of other concerned 
parties in the region. When we saw a chance to begin to discuss 
the agenda that was signed some time ago, we welcomed this and 
preferred to see negotiations move to the region in particular, 
especially since one of the most important issues that must be 
discussed is Jordanian sovereignty over Jordanian territories, 
and returning and recognizing these territories in full. There 
is also the question of waters, the environment, and other 
issues. This requires that the meetings be held in the region 
itself so as to define these dimensions and address their 
requirements. As for Jordan's position, I once again reiterate 
with pride that Jordan has been, since its inception, the 
closest to the Palestinian cause, in terms of the people, the 
land, and the rights. Perhaps that has been our destiny as a 
family. We are proud of belonging to Jordan, since the Great 
Arab Revolt. We have offered a great deal and considered the 
cause one of destiny and future to us under all circumstances. 
However, Sir, in practical terms, regarding the recent years 
after 1967, we fought the battle along with our brothers, led by 
Egypt, as a reaffirmation of our Arab commitment to the 
Collective Defense Pact and our belonging to the Arab League. 
At a later stage, our brothers in Egypt chose to walk the path 
of peace. They were the leaders in 1967. After that, the 
Palestinian brothers, who are primarily concerned with this 
affair, decided to step forward and assume their 
responsibilities in looking for this right on their national 
soil. It was unreasonable for Jordan to lag behind or to wait 
for everybody else to address their own issues. Jordan, 
regrettably, has no support except from God Almighty in the 
region. Jordan has no support or backing from any superpowers, 
not even any countries in the region. For the sake of 
Palestine, the cause and the people, on the Palestinian national 
soil, and for the sake of the Arab nation and the defense of the 
depth of the Arab nation, Jordan must stay and continue. And it 
must be an example, not only with regard to political issues but 
also regarding many issues and problems which we face in our 
Arab nation, as well as in its democratic approach, respect for 
human rights, and political pluralism. At the same time, it 
must be a solid rock in the region. All circumstances, 
therefore, require that Jordan continue the quest. We are at 
the beginning of a long and arduous phase of negotiations. 
Whether we are going to succeed or not depends on the Israeli 
side, because we are not seeking peace at any cost. We are 
looking for a just, honorable, and lasting peace and for our 
people's right to live and dream. 
  [Milhim] Damascus reactions to the Jordanian-Israeli 
agreement were critical. It was alleged that Jordan renounced 
coordination with Syria, especially in light of your recent 
visit to Damascus. Can you explain to us your concept of the 
nature of the understanding which you reached with President 
Hafiz al-Asad? What is your opinion about the Syrian attitude? 
  [Husayn] In fact, I was surprised by the Syrian reaction. I 
have not heard anything from His Excellency brother Hafiz 
al-Asad on the personal level. We have been in continuous 
contact until the latest stage. I paid a visit to Damascus, we 
met, and we discussed all issues. Therefore, I believe the 
political dimension concerning the Middle East issues, as well 
as our decisive and pan-Arab issues, will be tackled on our 
level, myself and my brother the president. 
  Regarding the coordination in general, we used this term and 
did our utmost to achieve it. I am not here dealing with this 
issue in light of the recent Syrian stand, but in light of its 
basis, namely, the Jordanian-Palestinian situation. Our issues 
and interests are interlinked. So, we should be together in 
confronting the dangers facing us. Coordination in the full 
sense of the word has not been achieved yet on any level. Every 
now and then we ask the brothers how far they have gone in their 
talks, or we tell them where we are, if they ask. 
  Our brothers in Syria have their own definite and known 
problems concerning the occupied Syrian territory. We have our 
own problems. Coordination has not reached the level of minor 
details. They, in Syria, can afford to wait in light of their 
circumstances, situation, and potentials. However, our issue 
and its interlinkage with the Palestinian issue made us discuss 
this issue. Jordan, Syria, the Palestinian brothers, and 
Lebanon started from the same point in Madrid. We are seeking a 
comprehensive peace. This, however, does not mean we 
relinquished our right to address our issues. We also do not 
assume that Syria will relinquish its right to address its 
issues. Neither do we assume that Syria should relinquish its 
rights to deal with its problems. We coordinate, if that is the 
word, concerning issues that we must coordinate about; that is, 
issues that we and they agree to coordinate on. However, 
practically, coordination in the sense I meant, talked about, or 
searched for was really talk devoid of substance, save our 
endeavors to reach a comprehensive and just peace acceptable to 
future generations. 
  [Milhim] Is the absence of Arab coordination caused by the 
requirements of sovereignty or is it caused by political 
differences, apprehension, or basic lack of trust between 
certain parties concerned? Coordination is like a group dance 
and it seems that some participants are accusing others of not 
moving to the agreed tunes. 
  [Husayn] Let me be frank on this point. We cannot say to the 
Arab people that there is coordination when there is no such 
thing and then surprise them with what is happening. The 
Jordanian-Syrian coordination which was planned to be a 
Syrian-Jordanian meeting on the level of the heads of the 
governments is on another dimension. It is connected with 
efforts to realize some integration, dealing with the 
Syrian-Jordanian family relations, if we can use this term. It 
was hoped that issues would develop concerning Lebanon. Such a 
meeting was held with Egypt so that we could gather together and 
begin to proceed toward the conditions which we wish. This was 
postponed at the wish of our Syrian brothers and we hope the 
postponement will not be for long. 
  [Milhim] Does this mean that the Jordanian-Syrian relations 
have entered a period of coolness? Do you intend to contain the 
situation? 
  [Husayn] [Words indistinct] problem concerning us and I do 
not believe that there is a problem with the Syrian brothers. 
We have remained in contact and together we suffered much 
throughout a very long journey. Brother President al-Asad knows 
me very well and I know him and our relationship is built on 
sincerity and truthfulness. 
  [Milhim] Recently, you also lamented lack of coordination 
with the PLO. How do you describe the relationship between you 
and the PLO now? 
  [Husayn] A good relationship. We supported the PLO from the 
beginning and we addressed the Palestinian people as a whole and 
called on them to be cohesive and crystallize their ideas and 
ambitions through their cohesion, because the most dangerous 
thing is to break up in this critical phase. We also discuss 
the economic dimension. There is a Jordanian-Palestinian 
agreement followed by a Palestinian-Israeli agreement. Now we 
need a Jordanian-Palestinian- Israeli meeting to review all that 
happened and see where we might reach. Had there been 
coordination and a joint Palestinian- Jordanian stand from the 
beginning, we would have taken a short cut and perhaps realized 
more than what we have realized so far. Therefore, our position 
in the future will be to respond to any Palestinian appeal to us 
and help them in any way, one problem at a time because in the 
absence of real coordination, there could be integration in 
stands, this is the only choice. 
  [Milhim] Your Majesty can we imagine the Jordanian-Israeli 
negotiations in the coming months taking an advanced phase 
leading to signing a peace agreement even if no progress is 
realized on other tracks? This is what we understand from your 
statements. 
  [Husayn] It is very difficult to say how issues will develop 
but there is no reason why we should not have progress on all 
tracks so that all of us will reach the cherished goal and 
realize a just and comprehensive peace. 
  [Milhim] Five years ago you began the process of 
democratization and the expansion of the political base which 
led to the formation of parties and holding elections and other 
steps in this regard. Looking back, how would you evaluate the 
past phase? What were the most significant developments and 
what are the disappointments? Do you think that there should be 
a critical evaluation of what took place in the outgoing phase? 
  [Husayn] Critical revision is necessary all the time in the 
life of any people. I believe that this applies to us in 
Jordan, but the democratic choice and the participation of the 
Jordanians, regardless of their origins, in making their 
presence and future is an indispensable basis, in addition to 
the political pluralism and respect for human rights. Arab 
people need to feel--and I hope that the Jordanians now feel 
this--that they are not frustrated, that they are not shunned, 
that their rights and dignity are preserved, and that they 
practically and dynamically contribute to making their present 
and future. I believe that through this march, which could not 
resume except after the disengagement of administrative and 
legal connections with the West Bank, which was followed by the 
PLO's acceptance of Resolution 242 until we reached the present 
conditions--I say that through this march, which proceeded in 
very difficult circumstances and in the face of most dangerous 
challenges in the region, we have found ourselves stronger than 
we have ever been despite the continuous pressures and the 
difficulties which we are suffering. 
  [Milhim] Your Majesty: Prior to the outbreak of war in 
Yemen, Jordan contributed to the attempts to arrive at a 
political settlement. However, the explosion took place. How 
do you assess the situation in Yemen and the future of Yemen? 
What do the events in Yemen mean with respect to the absence of 
an Arab authority or Arab mechanism to prevent similar 
explosions in Arab states? 
  [Husayn] I believe that this situation or any similar tragic 
situation in the Arab homeland should be tackled within an Arab 
context. Therefore, we had responded to the brothers' appeal 
and tried the impossible for months to arrive at the accord that 
was signed in Amman. Representatives of the entire Yemeni 
people and all forces in Yemen without exception attended the 
signing ceremony and signed the accord. We had high hopes that 
that event would be a turning point. However, we were soon 
surprised by the consecutive explosions. At the beginning, we 
tried, through a Jordanian team and a fraternal Omani team both 
working as one team, to stop the deterioration. We were 
successful to a great extent. Later, the picture became broader 
in terms of participation by other brothers and various sides. 
In fact, we discovered that we could not continue our mission 
with respect to the military aspect of the Yemeni agreement. 
This is because unless there is political will, it would be 
difficult to continue the process of unifying the army and the 
Armed Forces. This was supposed to take place at the beginning 
of the unity. However, our brothers' efforts were negatively 
affected for a while after the Gulf crisis. Besides, we were 
all too preoccupied to perform our duty toward them in terms of 
providing advice to help them at that time. Therefore, we 
withdrew the military team, and so did Oman. Afterward, matters 
proceeded toward an explosion. We have a Jordanian medical team 
there doing its best on the humanitarian level. We still hope 
that those Yemeni figures who met in Amman as representatives of 
entire Yemen and its areas, political movements, and people will 
have the ability, just as they had the ability to meet in Amman, 
to maintain Yemeni unity and to create the logic and ability to 
accept even a small portion of the human and material losses on 
the Yemeni area, so that partition could be avoided, for, God 
forbid, Yemen could be partitioned even into more than south and 
north. We have always been supportive of a unified, modern, 
democratic, and strong Yemen to take its place in the Arab 
world. I do not know what the motives and reasons are, but, 
regrettably, it seems that many elements in the Arab world seek 
a future fragmentation, thus leading to potential dangers and 
disasters throughout the entire Arab world. We will not hesitate 
to undertake any effort for the sake of our brothers in Yemen. 

