Language: <F P=105> Latvian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Prime Minister Valdis Birkavs returned 
from Sweden and held a news conference immediately afterwards. 
Regarding what was said, go ahead, Guntis [Scerbinskis]: 
  [Scerbinskis] Prime Minister Valdis Birkavs reported on his 
visit. In Stockholm he had several important meetings. The 
first one that must be mentioned is the meeting with the prime 
ministers of the five Nordic countries, and here the main thing 
to note is that a new stable element is entering Europe, the 
five plus three. That is, the five Nordic countries plus the 
three Baltic countries. 
  The Nordic prime ministers expressed support for the quick, 
orderly, and complete withdrawal of the Russian Army from 
Latvia. Support was also expressed for Latvia's constructive 
position on the Skrunda issue, and the wording was that it is a 
significant investment by Latvia in the security of all of 
Northern Europe. The Nordic prime ministers likewise expressed 
support for Latvia's efforts to enter the European Union, and 
evidently there will be a speeding up of the signing of 
treaties, in the two trade treaties with the European Union. 
  What should also be mentioned is the meeting at a bipartite 
level with Sweden. What was discussed here were the issues of 
ports, an agricultural protocol, as well as the Baltic 
peacekeeping battalion possibly being trained in Sweden. 
Besides that, an interesting offer was made concerning weapons, 
and the Swedes are offering to locate arms manufacturing in 
Latvia. But (?that is still a job) for military experts. The 
third point that must be mentioned was a meeting between the 
prime ministers of the three Baltic countries. Here the main 
points that must be mentioned were consultations with Estonia 
about retired military personnel. It was also decided that 
Estonia is to prepare conditions for a competition for 
(?demarcating) the border for all the Baltic lands, since 
Estonia has gone furthest in this work. 
  [Announcer] So, Guntis Scerbinskis outlined the news 
conference held today by Prime Minister Valdis Birkavs upon his 
return from Sweden. 

