CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ruben Karagezyan: "The Problems Are Finding </F>
Solutions. Railroad Workers of Armenia and Georgia Work 
Together"] 
  [Text] From now on the railroads of Armenia and 
Georgia will coordinate their cargo shipments without the 
participation of intermediary firms. Their interference has made 
transportation work considerably more difficult and caused 
confusion in the rate policy. 
  The new principle for the operation of the railroad 
services of the two neighboring states was backed up by an 
agreement signed a couple of days ago in Tbilisi--while a 
government delegation from the Republic of Armenia headed by 
State Minister G. Martirosyan was there. The delegation 
discussed a number of issues regarding economic relations and 
ensurance of the safety of the operation of communications 
facilities of the two states. 
  Recently the capital of Georgia has become a kind of Mecca 
for transportation and communications leaders of the Republic of 
Armenia. They have been coming here very frequently to 
coordinate problems of mutual interest, to resolve operational 
issues related to cleaning up after the blowing up of the gas 
line, railroad bridges, and a strip of road, as well as other 
facilities, and to reach agreement regarding crucial problems 
that are of interest to the two parties. 
  It is known that for more than a year since withdrawing from 
the Ministry of Railways the Armenian Railroad has been in a 
crisis situation. The situation is exacerbated even more by the 
constantly increasing prices of electric energy, which have gone 
up almost 50-fold since the beginning of this year. Without 
state support, the railroad is trying to get out of the 
situation by itself. 
  "If we want to keep the railroad we cannot take the path of 
constantly raising rates for transportation of passengers and 
freight," said a member of the delegation, chief of the Armenian 
Railroad Administration Vladimir Asriyants. "This tendency is 
already having a negative effect on the volumes of 
transportation and frightening away clients, who prefer to use 
other means of transportation when they have relatively small 
volumes of cargo. 
  "After coordinating the tariff policy with Tbilisi we 
decided 
that until the end of the year, regardless of the price 
increases, we would not change the established rates for freight 
shipment. 
  "This meeting enabled us to take another step toward solving 
other problems and also removing certain obstacles standing in 
the way of efficient operation of the railroads. For example, we 
reached mutual understanding regarding an issue so important for 
us as efficient use of empty equipment. We had been experiencing 
great difficulties here--hundreds of empty cars in unusable 
condition were located in various stages of the Georgian 
railroad. Now, in keeping with the agreement, all of the 
maintenance of the unused equipment will handled by the Georgian 
railroad. 
  "And there is another detail that is of great significance 
to 
us [passage illegible] cars [passage illegible] for Armenia. 
  "[Passage illegible] work groups for finding these cars on 
the territory of Georgia and returning them to Armenia. These 
groups will also determine the value of stolen cargo, which will 
be compensated for by the Georgian side. 
  "An agreement was also reached concerning unimpeded 
unloading 
of our cargo in the ports of Poti and Batumi. The Armenian 
Railroad, taking into account the difficulty of the situation in 
these cities, has sent a diesel engine to Poti to organize the 
maneuvering work. We are being paid for operating this 
locomotive. 
  "In the plan for technical cooperation we agreed, in 
particular, to do repair work on rolling stock in the plants of 
Georgia and to jointly repair the tracks between the 
Sadakhlo-Ayrum stations and also the bridge across the river 
Khrami. 
  "Analyzing the statistics concerning the sabotage committed 
at night, we decided, for purposes of safety of the movement of 
the trains, to use the road mainly during the day. In 
conjunction with the Georgian side we are allotting labor and 
material resources for restoration work. We have developed 
measures providing for passenger safety and also for changing 
the schedule for movement of passenger trains, receiving and 
dispatching cargo, and providing for their storage on the 
territory of Georgia in extreme situations--explosions, natural 
disasters." 
  In conclusion, Vladimir Asriyants said that today, in spite 
of the sharp increase in the cost of ties and rails and the 
repair of locomotives, communications, and signalization, 
centralization, and blocking, the railroad administration is 
stepping up its work for improving the tracks and other railroad 
facilities from Yerevan to Ayrum and is preparing them for 
summer passenger transportation. 

