Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, 9 Feb -- As UNIAN has reported, Ukraine's 
Cabinet of Ministers has decided to allocate government credit 
for the financial stabilization of the economy. Addressed or 
targeted assistance to individual sectors has the purpose of 
unblocking monetary flows restrained by the crisis of 
non-payments, which have dangerously exacerbated in the last 
month. 
  A UNIAN correspondent has learned from sources close to 
Ukraine's Finance Ministry that the total value of government 
financial stabilization credit comes to 6 trillion karbovantsi. 
A government official, who wished to remain anonymous, informed 
the UNIAN correspondent that the value of the credit was shared 
out in the following way: Five trillion karbovantsi was issued 
to Ukraine's National Bank at an annual interest rate of 240 
percent, and 1 trillion karbovantsi to agricultural producers at 
30 percent. These funds were transferred via Ukraine's National 
Bank on 5 and 9 February. 
  According to preliminary data, credit of 5 trillion 
karbovantsi has been addressed to the State Committee for 
Material Reserves, the Ministry of Industry, the Ministry of 
Machine-Building, Military-Industrial Complex and Conversion, 
the Ministry of Power and Electrification, the State Committee 
for the Food Industry, and oblast trade directorates. The 
Ahrokhim [?state concern for agricultural chemical industry] and 
state concern for material supply and service in the 
agrarian-industrial complex will share 1 trillion karbovantsi 
between them to conduct the sowing campaign (for protecting 
plants and purchasing spare parts and fuel). 
  A government cable signed by Ukraine's Acting Prime Minister 
Yukhym Zvyahilskyy, and Viktor Yushchenko, chairman of the board 
of Ukraine's National Bank, was received at oblast directorates 
of the National Bank, commercial banks, ministries, and 
departments on 9 February. The cable obliges the Prominvestbank 
[Ukrainian State Commercial Construction Industry Bank], the 
"Ukrayina" agro-industrial bank [the Republican Joint-Stock 
Commercial Agro- Industrial Bank] and the Ukrsotsbank [Ukrainian 
Joint-Stock Commercial Bank of Social Development] to open a 
specialized account numbered 122 "Government credit for the 
financial stabilization of the economy" for the relevant 
ministries. In accordance with this cable, the ministries are 
to determine a set of enterprises and make settlements for 
electric power, fuel and energy resources, mineral fertilizers, 
agricultural technology and spare parts for it, and settlements 
with the railways, as fully as possible from the credit. 
  The cable from the Cabinet of Ministers and Ukraine's 
National Bank has categorically banned the payment of debts to 
commercial structures, and joint and other enterprises with a 
non-state form of ownership from the credit. The heads of the 
government and bank stressed that financial assistance is not 
being granted to enterprises with surplus currency. On 26 
February, commercial banks are obliged to direct the free 
surplus funds received from the government credit to the payment 
of contributions to the pension fund and budget to begin with, 
and only then to satisfying other current needs of enterprises. 
Commercial banks are also banned from using the surplus funds 
as credit resources. 

