Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 2 Feb (PL) -- The United States uses 
immigration matters as a tool of aggression against Cuba in an 
attempt to create internal problems and harm its image before 
the world, the Cuban parliament has signaled. 
  The 25-page report that the National Assembly intends to 
distribute widely at international levels adds that its powerful 
northern neighbor's hostility is not limited to the economic, 
trade, and financial blockade. It is also manifested in many 
other issues that endanger the nation's peace and security. 
  In this regard, it accuses U.S. leaders of encouraging the 
departure of illegal aliens and of encouraging desertion, within 
the framework of its hostile policy toward the Caribbean island. 
  The core of the immigration matters between both nations lie 
in the fact that the United States has permanently used them in 
the past three decades to discredit Cuba, upholds the statement 
prepared by the parliament's Foreign Relations Commission. 
  During the last fiscal year, 973,977 immigrants arrived to 
the United States; 132,173 were admitted as refugees. Of this 
total, 0.25 percent were legal immigrants from this nation, 
while 2.04 were refugees or illegal immigrants. 
  According to the Assembly, such small percentages do not 
justify the "out of proportion propaganda" surrounding the 
issue, while it accuses Washington of offering privileged 
treatment with clear political nuances to Cubans who arrive 
illegally on their territory. 
  In addition to financial support, after one year they 
automatically have a right to residency. "No other foreign 
immigrant is worthy of so many opportunities to reside, work, 
and live in the United States," the statement indicates. 
  During the past years, the Havana authorities have tried to 
normalize bilateral immigration relations so that these take 
place within the law and in an orderly fashion, the statement 
underlines. 
  Nevertheless, the United States continues making political 
use of the immigration relations and obstructs our nation's 
decisions, it notes. 
  Evidence of this, it adds, is how many of the so-called raft 
people, kidnappers, air pirates, and deserters are received as 
heroes in the United States although a visa had been denied to 
many of them by the U.S. Interests Office in this capital. 
  According to the document, in the past border guards have 
prevented some of these departures; most of the detainees are 
just returned to their homes as they are considered victims of 
the propaganda aired by anti-Cuban stations installed in the 
United States. 
  Cuba is most convinced of the need to end to these 
irregularities and their negative consequences. This is so not 
only for Cuba but also for the United States that with its 
actions encourages the crime of aircraft and boat piracy and 
kidnapping in violation of bilateral and international rules, 
concludes the parliamentary analysis. 
  The paradox of the immigration phenomena in its propaganda 
projection from the United States is that the Cuban policy on 
this matter never appears correct, the study concludes. 
  If Cuba facilitates administrative procedures and speeds up 
the endeavors of any citizens to obtain an exit permit, 
permanent or temporary, the U.S. Administration delays and 
complicates the procedures for the trip to its territory. 
  If, on the contrary, it prevents the departure of illegal 
aliens, Cuba is presented as a virtual jail by propaganda 
machinery, and what is even worse, "if such immigration was 
allowed freely it would also be attacked, but with the threat of 
military action," the document alerts. 

