BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 14 Jun (XINHUA) -- Elaborating on the 
significance of conducting national defense education at a 
founding ceremony of the selection committee for the National 
Defense Quiz Competition Organizing Committee today, Chi 
Haotian, state councillor and concurrently national defense 
minister, emphatically pointed out that the more we want 
stability, development, and to live and work in peace and 
contentment, the more we should value national defense 
education, understand the meanings of being vigilant in peace 
time and the danger of being unaware of warfare, and enhance the 
awareness required to safeguard our motherland's security, 
ensure national development, and safeguard national interests. 
  The National Quiz Competition on National Defense Campaign 
is 
sponsored by such units as the Science Dissemination 
Association, the All-China Writers' Association, and the State 
Commission of Science, Technology, and Industry for National 
Defense. The campaign's purpose is to promote national defense 
education for the nation and to enhance people's national 
defense awareness. Zhang Zhen, Central Military Commission vice 
chairman, and others met with attendees of the ceremony. Also 
present at the meeting were Yu Yongbo, General Political 
Department director, and others. 
  Chi Haotian called this competition an event of great 
significance. He said: The CPC Central Committee, the State 
Council, and the Central Military Commission attach great 
importance to national defense education for the nation; make 
the strengthening of national defense education and enhancing of 
people's national defense awareness a strategic task facing the 
entire party, military, and governments at all levels. In a 
complicated and turbulent international situation, a nation will 
not stand up without national defense and people will feel 
uneasy without soldiers' protection. A state must be equipped 
with national defense and become rich through building up its 
military power. China not only needs to accelerate its 
development, but needs to ensure its security. For development, 
we need to do a good job in economic construction; and for 
security, we need to strengthen national defense construction. 
A booming economy and strong national defense are the two key 
pillars -- representing fundamental national interests -- on 
which China relies on to stand on its own feet in the world. 
Consideration must be given to both economic and national 
defense development. We should strengthen national defense 
education focusing on outlooks on warfare, national security and 
interests and national defense knowledge; earnestly study Mao 
Zedong thought on the military and Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
thinking of army-building in a new era; enhance awareness of 
national defense; and create a fine social custom that the whole 
nation is concerned with national defense construction and 
everyone takes his responsibilities and does his bit for 
constructing and strengthening national defense. 
  Chi Haotian said: To strengthen national education on 
national defense is a way to pluck up the national spirit and is 
of great significance in promoting social stability and economic 
development. National defense education yields not only military 
efficiency, but also economic and social efficiency as well. 
Patriotism, revolutionary heroism, a national spirit that 
constantly strives to become stronger, and a selfless and 
devoted revolutionary spirit, as well as a cohesive force that 
strengthens the nation's unity, generated from a strong 
awareness of national defense, can be transformed as combat 
effectiveness and economic productive forces, thereby creating a 
stable and fine social environment for developing the national 
economy and maintaining long-term stability. 

