Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colombian Attorney General Gustavo Arrieta </F>
by unidentified EL TIEMPO correspondent; place and date not 
given] 
  [Text] Unidentified correspondent: A month ago, 
you told this newspaper that the Attorney General's Office was 
not satisfied with the process [of drug traffickers' 
surrendering to justice] and also that you would withdraw from 
the process if your suggestions were not heeded. Do you continue 
to think this way? Why? 
  Arrieta: I did not say I was dissatisfied with the 
process. Quite the contrary, I said it should be carried out 
but within certain legal and political parameters. One of them 
is, necessarily, the existence of a confession. Fortunately, 
this is what has happened and today, the Attorney General's 
Office, the Office of the Prosecutor General of the Republic, 
and the government of the Republic fully agree on this point, 
which has also been accepted by those who are to surrender. 
  Regarding the second point, the Attorney General's Office 
cannot withdraw from the process because its participation is 
determined by the law. However, we are thinking about the 
possibility of having somebody who is not the attorney general 
-- the deputy attorney general -- attend the preparatory 
meetings because it is not desirable to deplete our reserves in 
this type of situation. 
  Correspondent: The government hinted that the 
prosecutor general is being naive in this process and that the 
traffickers are trying to take advantage of this situation. Do 
you think this is so? 
  Arrieta: I don't think the prosecutor is acting 
naively. I believe he has taken an eminently juridical position 
as corresponds to an organization that is part of the Judicial 
Branch. In this context, it is inevitable that the drug 
traffickers, who have excellent legal advisers, try to obtain 
all the benefits and take advantage of the loopholes and 
confusion in a criminal law that is confusing, profuse, and 
wordy. Confronted with such a situation, we all have the 
responsibility of trying to avoid abuses to or the improper use 
of the law. 
  The government has vast experience on this issue. The 
experience is based both on the accomplishments and the failures 
of the surrender policy. Furthermore, it handles, as 
corresponds to a government, a political dimension that causes 
it to be extremely cautious and sometimes biased. 
  That is why it is necessary for us, without being naive or 
radical, to join our knowledge and experiences. In other words, 
let us forget the "La Catedral syndrome." We have to learn from 
the past and move forward with responsibility and without fear. 
  Correspondent: You also told EL TIEMPO a month ago 
that the drug traffickers had made no concrete offer. Does this 
still hold true? What exactly has Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela 
offered? 
  Arrieta: It is important that the country's 
expectations regarding this process be lowered. A few months 
ago we were told there would be massive surrenders and that drug 
exports would be eradicated. This, naturally, generated great 
hope, both for the public as well as for the government. 
Unfortunately, the Cali gentlemen changed their position and 
today only talk about the possible surrender of two persons, one 
of them relatively minor but the other one, Gilberto Rodriguez, 
of great importance because of his hierarchy in the so-called 
Cali Cartel. There is no longer talk about the eradication of 
drug trafficking but rather of a possible cooperation that could 
lead to new surrenders or to the gradual reduction of illegal 
activities. All this is important, naturally, but does not have 
the political or juridical relevance that the original offer 
had. That is why we should no longer talk about the Cali 
Cartel's surrender, but about the possible surrender of Gilberto 
Rodriguez. That is why I believe we have to lower expectations. 
  Correspondent: The discrepancies between the 
prosecutor general and the government are obvious. What is 
behind their positions? Will this situation obstruct the 
process? 
  Arrieta: Discrepancies of form and substance 
between the three institutions involved are inevitable in a 
process such as this because the persons in charge of the 
government, the Prosecutor's Office, and the Attorney General's 
Office are autonomous and willful and sometimes they have 
different opinions about what best suits the country. What is 
important is that we, as responsible and sensible people, do 
everything possible to reconcile our positions and to work 
harmoniously because this is what suits Colombia. If this is 
not produced, then each one will have to perform his legal and 
constitutional functions according to his beliefs of what is 
best. 
  Correspondent: The North Americans have demanded a 
common position and this does not exist. What will happen to 
the supplying of evidence? What will happen if they withdraw 
from the process? There is the impression that they are 
pressuring for "hardline" solutions and that they prefer 
captures to surrenders because they do not like the penalties 
(too light) that would be imposed in the case of surrenders. 
What can you tell us about this? 
  Arrieta: Unfortunately, a tense atmosphere in the 
field of legal cooperation has emerged and we have to overcome 
it because U.S. cooperation is of fundamental importance. But, 
regardless of how important this cooperation might be, it cannot 
be the soul of our policies nor can we depend entirely on it 
because legal cooperation cannot replace the efforts that must 
be made by our police, which are the ones that together with the 
Prosecutor General's Office, must gather the necessary evidence 
to prosecute drug traffickers. 
  About the North Americans preferring capture to surrender, I 
believe this is something all Colombians prefer also. However, 
if there is no capture, then the second best alternative would 
be the surrender. 
  Correspondent: What has been the position of the 
Attorney General's Office on the issues of confessions, 
indulgence because of collaboration, and house arrests? 
  Arrieta: My office has always maintained that 
confessions must be a necessary requirement, and not just any 
confession but solid, serious, and complete confessions in which 
the people and the court authorities may believe and as a basis 
for which sentences can be applied so that they do not engender 
impunity or demoralize the people. We have also insisted that 
collaboration must be significant, specific, and perceptible; 
that there must be a substantial delivery of assets; and that 
house arrests would apply only in exceptional cases, in minor 
cases. 
  Correspondent: It is evident that while the 
prosecutor general wants the process to move on quickly, the 
government wants to include elements that take into 
consideration national and international interests that would 
make the process move slower. How do you think the process 
should go? 
  Arrieta: This process has legal and political 
aspects, speaking in the broadest sense. One should not rush 
because we have learned from experience that if things are 
rushed, then errors are made. I also believe, though, that we 
all want the process to move as quickly as reasonably possible. 
I think that the Prosecutor General's Office now understands 
the government's concern and that the government now understands 
the problems of the prosecutor, and all of us know now that this 
process can move forward only if an interinstitutional effort is 
made and there is teamwork. 
  Correspondent: The role of mediator between the 
government and the Prosecutor General's Office has caused an 
ambivalent situation, in which the government accuses you of 
being the unconditional ally of the prosecutor. In addition, 
the Prosecutor General's Office argues that your stand is a 
reflection of that of the government. Where do you stand on 
this? 
  Arrieta: Yes, that is all true, and if the 
Attorney General's Office has tried to mediate, it is not only 
because we believe that position is one of our duties, but 
because we also believe public skirmishes weaken institutions 
and undermine the credibility and the trust people have in those 
institutions. We must not forget that only criminals fish in 
these troubled waters. 
  Correspondent: Regarding the surrender of the 
three presumed Cali Cartel members in January, is your 
prediction coming true that the ambiguity of some articles of 
the new Penal Code might create conditions that favor impunity 
in some particular cases? 
  Arrieta: I believe so because many of the articles 
were poorly drafted; have a confusing content and scope, and 
lend themselves to many interpretations. For the sake of 
preventing impunity, it is necessary that we wed our 
capabilities and efforts, act in a coordinated manner, and have 
the ability to stop any goals they will undoubtedly try to 
score. But, above all, criminals can only be sentenced when 
proof is available. 
  Correspondent: Related to the current controversy, 
what do you think about the remarks by the justice minister on 
the Prosecutor General's Office interpretation of Article 369E's 
scope. 
  Arrieta: The Attorney General's Office respects, 
but does not completely agree with the justice minister's 
interpretation of Article 369E, nor with the implementation the 
prosecutor has given it by opening a formal investigation on 
these proceedings. It is obvious, at least to us, that Article 
369E is related to the preceding articles that concern the 
granting of benefits. We believe that for Article 369E to be 
applicable, those who surrender must confess or collaborate, 
either in the proceedings pending against them or in new ones 
that are begun as a result of the surrender. 

