Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 4 Jan (MENA)--Arab League Secretary General 
Dr. 'Ismat 'Abd-al-Majid met the head of the PLO Political 
Department, Faruq Qaddumi, today. They discussed the latest 
developments in the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. They also 
discussed Arab reconciliation, restoring coordination between 
the Arab parties in the peace talks and the Arab League, and 
recent developments concerning the resumption of relations 
between the Vatican and Israel. 
  Qaddumi said after the meeting that the Palestinian side's 
primary concern in restoring ties between the Vatican and Israel 
is that no agreement should change the eventual status of 
Jerusalem. He noted the Greek Orthodox presence in the city. 
  Faruq Qaddumi said the Palestinian side is studying the 
agreement concluded recently between Israel and the Vatican to 
make the necessary response. He stressed the need for 
continuing the talks with the Vatican so that Jerusalem's status 
will not be affected by the agreement during the negotiations 
with Israel. 
  Asked about the remarks made by Dr. Nabil Sha'th, political 
adviser to Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat, to the effect 
that the Palestinian-Israeli agreement is ambiguous, Faruq 
Qaddumi said the Declaration of Principles calls for an early 
Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and part of the West Bank. If 
Israel wants to prove good intentions it must effect the 
withdrawal process. Qaddumi said this withdrawal is bound to 
partially improve the stalemate in the negotiations. But he 
noted that if Israel does not implement the agreement it will 
mean that it has failed to abide by a basic principle in the 
Declaration of Principles. 
  Asked about the differences between the Palestinian and 
Jordanian delegations and why the PLO did not sign the economic 
agreement, Faruq Qaddumi said the two sides are brothers, noting 
that his mission in Jordan, which will begin tomorrow, aims to 
reach an agreement in this regard. He said Foreign Minister 
'Amr Musa's visit to Jordan yesterday represents a step by a 
major Arab country to promote coordination between Jordan and 
the PLO, because Egypt's task has always been aimed at 
strengthening Arab cohesion. 
  Asked about reports that King Husayn of Jordan has given the 
PLO a specific time to eliminate the differences between them, 
Faruq Qaddumi said King Husayn does not mean specifying a time 
in the real sense of the word; he was urging the Palestinians on 
the need to reach an agreement in the next stage. Qaddumi said 
the Palestinians very much want to complete the agreement on 
future issues, especially as the negotiations will continue for 
a long time. Qaddumi said he believed that Jordan also wants to 
safeguard the Palestinian issue because millions of Palestinians 
have long been living in Jordan. 
  Asked about Palestinian-Syrian coordination during the next 
stage, Faruq Qaddumi said: We eliminated the past estrangement 
and recent differences because we understand that Syria has a 
big heart and adopted the Palestinian cause right from the 
start. He added: If there are clouds in the relations with 
Syria, we and our brothers in Syria can eliminate the 
misunderstanding. 
  Continuing, Qaddumi ruled out the possibility of holding a 
summit meeting between Hafiz al-Asad and Yasir 'Arafat before 
President al-Asad's meeting with U.S. President Bill Clinton in 
Geneva in the middle of January. He said a summit between 
al-Asad and 'Arafat could be held later. He stressed that Syria 
is playing a basic role in the current peaceful settlement. 
  Asked whether the Palestinian side can give more concessions 
for the sake of reaching an agreement with Israel, Qaddumi said: 
We have no more concessions to make. Israel must make 
concessions. He said that no matter what Israeli Prime Minister 
Rabin says about reexamining the agreement, he is the loser, 
because we all know history is not proceeding in Israel's favor. 

