Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Lew Elias and Raphael Banda] </F>
  [Text] Mmabatho March 9 SAPA -- A policeman was killed and 
at least 37 people were wounded in escalating unrest in 
Bophuthatswana on Wednesday [9 March] as the embattled homeland 
government thwarted a bid by election officials to impose their 
authority there. 
  On the third day of anti-govermnent protests, riot police 
fought running battles with protesters, firing buckshot and 
teargas to put down the unprecedented unrest in the homeland. 
  To add to political woes besetting President Lucas Mangope's 
government, the African National Congress [ANC] called for a 
mass stayaway from work in Bophuthatswana on Thursday and the 
launching of a consumer boycott. 
  Pule Sekwana, speaking for civil servants who have embarked 
on a widespread strike that has triggered much of the unrest in 
the homeland, said on Wednesday: "The strike will continue and 
we will bring down the government down." 
  In the first death in the unrest, the homeland's information 
service said the policeman was shot dead "by members of the 
public" in the Bophuthatswana township of Mabopane, north-west 
of Pretoria. The policeman was at a police post when gunfire cut 
him down. 
  A doctor at a Mafikeng surgery told SAPA he had treated 35 
people for gunshot wounds on Wednesday afternoon and another 
victim for other injuries. Those treated were apparently victims 
of police shooting protesters late on Wednesday afternoon around 
the capital Mmabatho and in neighbouring Mafikeng. Another man 
was treated for gunshot wounds at Mafikeng's Victoria Hospital. 
  "Most of the people we treated were shot in the torso and 
upper body, and we removed buckshot from many of the wounds. We 
also treated a number of grazes which could have been caused by 
sharp ammunition," said Dr Anwel Hoosenmia, who treated the 35 
victims at his surgery. 
  Earlier, riot police clashed with students at the University 
of Bophuthatswana, firing volleys of teargas shells as the 
students erected barricades with rocks and tree branches and 
hurled stones at the police. No injuries were reported. The 
street outside the university campus resembled a battle field 
with streets signs and huge garbage skips blocking the road and 
access to the campus still being controlled by heavily armed 
police. 
  The Independent Electoral Commission [IEC], meanwhile, 
failed 
on Wednesday in its bid to impose its authority in the homeland, 
after two-hour talks with President Mangope and his cabinet. 
"The government of Bophuthatswana stated it is unable to 
accede to the iec requests as this would be tantamount to 
acceptance of the non-recognition of Bophuthatswana's 
sovereignity," said a joint statement released after the 
meeting. The IEC delegation was headed by its chairman, Mr 
Justice Johann Kriegler. 
  The IEC requested the homeland government to permit 
electioneering and voter education campaigns and to allow voting 
facilities for South African citizens. 
  Mr Justice Kriegler said the meeting had clearly failed to 
achieve its objectives and delegates would have to continue 
trying to negotiate an agreement. he told reporters after the 
meeting that the Transitional Executive Council and the South 
African Government might take "such action as they see fit" 
following Bophuthatswana's rejection of its demands. 
  The TEC said on Tuesday it would cut diplomatic ties with 
the 
homeland, cut financial assistance and restrict the movement of 
the homeland's officials in South Africa if Bophuthatswana 
failed to allow free political activity within a week. 
  Bophuthatswana's Economic Affairs Minister Ephraim Keikelame 
accused South Africa on Wednesday of "aggression and 
intimidation" and "denying the rights of Bophuthatswana citizens 
of self-determination". He said south african citizens living 
in Bophuthatswana had "the right to vote freely if they want to 
campaign on the soil of South Africa but not in Bophuthatswana". 
  But the homeland's striking civil servants, demanding 
protection for their pensions in the face of political 
developments in South Africa, said they were now also pressing 
for the immeditae reincorporation of Bophuthatswana into South 
Africa. The homeland is to be reincorporated into South Africa 
after the April 26-28 elections. 
  The strike has triggered the worst unrest seen in 
Bophuthatswana in its 17 years of "independence". Schools have 
been closed and health services and general government 
administration severely disrupted. 
  And a day after striking employees of the homeland's 
broadcasting corporation took President Mangope's son hostage, 
the president on Wednesday fired all workers and announced the 
closure of radio and television broadcasts. The striking 
Bophuthatswana Broadcasting Corporation workers are demanding a 
50 per cent pay increases. 
  "The Bophuthatswana cabinet today decided to close Bop 
Broadcasting Corporation's [BBC] two television stations, Bop-TV 
and Mmabatho TV, and the three radio stations, Radio Bop, Radio 
Mmabatho and Radio Sunshine, until further notice," BBC Chairman 
Eddie Mangope announced in a statement. 
  President Mangope, who survived a military takeover in 1988 
after South Africa sent in troops to put down the rebellion, has 
accused Foreign Minister Pik Botha of stoking unrest in 
Bophuthatswana to justify his ouster and military intervention. 
  Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging [Afrikaner Resistance Movement] 
leader Euguene Terreblanche, joining the fray, on Wednesday 
offered to send his militants to the homeland to help Mr Mangope 
withstand what Mr Terreblanche called an African National 
Congress/SA Communist Party/Pik Botha plot. On Tuesday the 
Conservative Party charged the chaotic events in the homeland 
were a "communist textbook case". 
  In another development striking teachers marched to the 
South 
African Embassy in Mmabatho on Wednesday to demand South 
Africa's military intervention in the homeland. 
  Following the late afternoon clashes around Mmabatho, Dr 
Hoosenmia said he and his wife, Dr Sumedha Munim, spent most of 
the afternoon treating victims at their Mafikeng surgery. A 
police armoured personnel carrier Hippo was parked outside. Dr 
Hoosenmia said patients in the surgery were prevented from 
leaving the premises by the police. Two of those treated in the 
surgery were sent to hospitals in South Africa as their wounds, 
both in the stomach, were too serious to be treated in the 
surgery. 
  The centre of Mafikeng on Wednesday night still showed signs 
of the running battles with dirtbins thrown on streets and 
garbage littering most of station street in the city centre. 
Many store windows shattered in the unrest had been been 
replaced while glazers were working in the dark to repair other 
damaged shopfronts. 
  Staff at PG Glass in Mafikeng went on strike at 4pm, leaving 
only one company, Motorglow, to repair the many broken plate 
glass windows. Motorglow also replaced more than 100 car 
windows and windscreens on Wednesday afternoon. 

