Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yelena Kotelnikova: "The President Legitimizes </F>
the Russian Federation Committee for the Administration of State 
Property's Policy: Privatization Program Is Approved"] 
  [Text] The specifics of Russian denationalization, 
which is aimed simultaneously at creating millions of property 
owners and attracting major private investment in enterprises 
undergoing privatization, will remain as is. The evidence of 
that is the edict signed by President Boris Yeltsin on 24 
December 1993, "On the State Program for the Privatization of 
State and Municipal Enterprises in the Russian Federation." As 
Deputy Prime Minister Anatoliy Chubays acknowledged, this 
document not only legitimizes the measures aimed at stimulating 
destatization of enterprises implemented by the Russian 
Federation Committee for the Administration of State Property 
[GKI], but also will ensure a "triumphal" completion of 
voucher-based privatization before 1 July 1994. It is obvious, 
however, that preserving a balance between social and economic 
interests in the post-privatization period will require 
additional regulatory measures, which will depend directly on 
how the political situation develops. 
  The State Privatization Program approved by the president 
envisages resolution of tasks both social (forming a broad 
stratum of property owners via voucher-based privatization) and 
economic (increasing the effectiveness of the national economy 
by attracting investment into production). The ideologues of 
voucher-based privatization believe that the above factors will 
permit them to complete denationalization in the environment of 
national consensus. Therefore, in the destatization of 
enterprises, privatization bodies will continue to take into 
account the opinion of labor collectives. In addition, 
preferential treatment has been expanded for socially 
disadvantaged strata of the population (in particular, the 
disabled, pensioners, and military servicemen). 
  At the same time, given the continuing production decline 
and 
the absence of obvious advantages of denationalization carried 
out so far, the authors of the State Privatization Program--GKI 
specialists--built into the document the stimuli for a labor 
collective to choose such an option of preferences that will 
allow the most qualified specialists to be brought into managing 
the enterprise undergoing privatization. In the event that they 
fulfill their economic obligations, they will be able to become, 
on a preferential basis, the owners of the controlling share of 
stock. 
  In addition, the State Privatization Program formalized a 
score of presidential, government, and departmental measures 
that provide preferential terms for exchanging vouchers for 
stock of enterprises undergoing privatization at voucher 
auctions, as well as the activities of voucher investment funds 
in the primary stock market--through tax preferences, by 
removing restrictions on formation of the controlling share of 
stock, and so on. Also among other important parts of the new 
program is the fact that it regulates the relations between 
enterprises' stockholders and their administration--until now 
there were no legislative acts protecting the right of small 
stockholders, despite the fact that 55 million persons already 
have become stock owners. But the main item is that the new 
State Privatization Program permits the ideologues of 
voucher-based privatization to completely control this process. 
Despite the fact that sectoral ministries have managed to expand 
the list of enterprises not subject to privatization from 30 to 
36 percent, supply at the primary stock market may be increased 
through the stock of enterprises potentially facing bankruptcy. 
At the same time, the document formalizes the supremacy of the 
federal program over regional ones, giving it a de facto status 
of a direct-action federal law. Anatoliy Chubays believes that 
the inclusion of this provision shows that the president 
considers the position of Moscow Mayor Yuriy Luzhkov--one of the 
main opponents of the State Privatization Program and 
voucher-based privatization--unacceptable, and now local 
specifics will be taken into consideration in strict compliance 
with the state program. At the same time, the state program's 
authors built into it a number of measures aimed at stimulating 
privatization in the regions (in particular, the state program 
declares preferential financing for them). 
  At the same time, the state program formalizes the leading 
position of the GKI and the agencies it coordinates during the 
post-privatization period--first and foremost by attaching to 
privatization bodies the functions of development and 
implementation of enterprises' investment policy. This factor in 
the environment of investment shortage will enhance the GKI and 
its structures' influence on regions and enterprises. On the 
other hand, such a state of affairs will objectively contribute 
to strengthening the GKI's position in the government, which in 
the final count may result in neutralizing the current effective 
system of lobbying by sectoral ministries. It is possible that 
the GKI's desire to preserve its leading position in defining 
investment policy and protecting the emerging investment market 
from pressure on the part of the banking lobby (which so far has 
been successful in fending off implantation of foreign capital 
in their field) will turn out to be a decisive factor in 
limiting the banks' legal participation in privatization (until 
legal norms regulating activities of investment banks are 
introduced). At the same time, the State Privatization Program 
envisages especially favorable treatment for foreign investors 
regardless of their legal status. Apparently, this approach is 
meant to compensate for the risk that investing in the Russian 
economy entails. However, despite the proclaimed loyalty to 
foreign investors, the main active subjects in the investment 
market still will be specialized (voucher) investment funds, 
whose dominant position is the result not only of their social 
status but also of skilled cadres. 
  [Box, page 3] 
<H5>  Anatoliy Chubays on the Results of Privatization in 1993 </H5>
  --Political: There is no political force that 
could stop privatization in Russia. 
  --Economic: About one-half of Russian enterprises 
are in private ownership; among them, of 14,000 large 
enterprises subject to privatization 11,000 have become 
joint-stock compamies. 
  --Social: Of 110 million Russians who have 
utilized their vouchers, 55 million became stockholders; 600 to 
800 voucher-based auctions are taking place every month. [End of 
box] 
  [Box, page 3] 
<H5>  Measures To Stimulate Foreign Investment </H5>
  --Legalization of foreign investors' participation (both 
physical and legal persons) in voucher auctions. 
  --Authorization to sell an enterprise to a foreign investor 
in the event that he is the only participant in an auction, bid, 
or investment bid. 
  --Enabling foreign investors (on the basis of a government 
decision) to participate in the privatization of facilities and 
enterprises in the military-industrial and fuels and power 
generation complexes, as well as those engaged in mining and 
processing of strategic materials, precious metals, and stones. 
[End box] 
  [Box, page 3] 
<H3>  Anticipated Revenue From the Implementation of the State 
Privatization Program in 1994 And Its Distribution </H3>
  --The total amount of revenue generated by privatization in 
1994 is estimated to be 0.7 trillion rubles [R] in privatization 
vouchers and R0.8 trillion. 
  --The value of dividends paid on the stock reserved in 
federal and state ownership in 1994 will amount to an estimated 
R200 billion. 
  --The government has the right to modify the indicators and 
the norms of distribution of revenue received from privatization 
upon taking into consideration the state of Russia's financial 
system, the state of the property market, and proposals 
submitted by appropriate privatization bodies. 
  --Revenue from privatization in the budgets at all levels 
must be directed at maintenance of social and household-oriented 
objects and financing of post-privatization support of 
enterprises. 

