Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Negotiations among Nigerois resumed this 
afternoon in Ouagadougou. The Coordination of Armed Resistance 
-- which includes all the Tuareg movements -- and a Niger 
Government delegation were received in turn by President 
Compaore in the early evening. The first group to arrive in the 
country was the eight-member Tuareg delegation and were the 
first to be received by President Compaore. The half-hour 
audience granted to each group enabled them to remove the final 
obstacles and pave the way for the beginning of a new round of 
talks at the same table scheduled for 15 February. There was 
much optimism at the end of the meeting. The Niger Government's 
position was put forward by the Niger foreign minister. 
Abdourahamane Hama, who is leading the government delegation, is 
interviewed by Yannick-Laurent Bayala. He thinks that 
everything is ready for the resumption of talks with the Tuareg 
rebels. 
  [Begin recording] [Hama] This is indeed a great moment for 
Nigerois. We finally have this opportunity here in Ouagadougou 
to discuss a problem which is very vital to our country's future. 
  [Bayala] Can the meeting effectively begin on 15 February? 
  [Hama] We think that as far as the Niger Government is 
concerned there is no reason why the meeting should not begin. 
  [Bayala] How can you be sure of that? 
  [Hama] I think that for now, we will not discuss the problem 
in detail for now. Negotiations need to be prepared. The fact 
that we will be meeting to see how we will proceed in the coming 
months and weeks to solve the problem is already a big step. 
The Niger Government is prepared to find a solution to the 
problem; President Mahamane Ousmane said so when he took office 
and he reiterated that at the United Nations. I think the fact 
that such an important government delegation, including at least 
five or six ministers, and high-ranking members of Air and 
Azaouak are here in Ouagadougou is an important sign of our 
goodwill. 
  [Bayala] President Mahamane has met Tuareg traditional 
rulers. Does it mean that the different sides have finally got 
to the point where they have set aside their differences in 
spite of the recent violence? Several people have recently 
died from that. 
  [Hama] I think that contacts and dialogue between the two 
sides were never broken off. Today, we are simply formalizing 
that dialogue to solve the problem in concrete terms. 
  [Bayala] The Tuareg delegation leader, Mano Dayak, speaks of 
the magnitude of the problem and reaffirms his delegation's 
willingness to find a negotiated solution. 
  [Dayak] Our problem is a regional problem and it should be 
seen in that light. We are pleased about efforts being made by 
Burkina Faso to find a solution to the problem as soon as 
possible. 
  [Bayala] Mr. Mano Dayak, several opportunities have been 
missed. Will this one be grasped? 
  [Dayak] There have certainly been several missed 
opportunities in Ouagadougou indeed but that was not the 
resistance's fault: We were the ones who suggested that the 
first meeting should be held in Ouagadougou. There were 
definitely problems which have made it impossible for us to meet 
here up until now. We are here now and that is the main thing. 
We can now say that things are really going to get under way. 
  [Bayala] There has been fresh violence lately in Niger and 
the government has blamed it on the Tuareg resistance. Do you 
deny responsibility? 
  [Dayak] The truce ended at the beginning of June. We are, 
therefore, unfortunately in a war situation. We are sorry about 
that, but we hope that there will be a solution and we are ready 
for that. I think if there is a conflict or if tension resumes 
in the subregion, no one can be blamed or criticized for that. 
We would like to put an end to that situation. We are calling 
on the Niger Government to embark on frank and sincere dialogue 
as soon as possible to end these kinds of actions. 
  [Bayala] Mano Dayak, people are very much in favor of 
Algerian and French representatives taking part in the 
Ouagadougou negotiations. 
  [Dayak] The Algerian Government has always been involved in 
various negotiations and discussions. Algeria is part of the 
subregion and wants to find a solution to the problem. Right 
from the beginning it has endeavored -- just as Burkina Faso is 
doing now -- to find a solution. It will be involved in ongoing 
negotiations as one of the observer countries. 
  [Bayala] Just like France? 
  [Dayak] Yes, France will be present at the negotiation as a 
mediator. We did not come to Ouagadougou for the negotiations 
proper. That will take some time. It is a technical meeting to 
determine which countries will be mediating, what the future 
political negotiations will be, and where they will be held. 
France and Algeria will be certainly involved in the 
negotiations. The coordination's demands will be contained in a 
document which we will publish in Ouagadougou. This is very 
important for us because our problem is an African one. We 
would therefore like to find a solution within and African 
context and Ouagadougou is an ideal place for that. We will be 
demanding a minimum of rights for our people who have always 
been marginalized in Niger. They should now be entitled to the 
same rights as other Niger communities. That is what we are 
calling for now, otherwise there will unfortunately be no peace. 
We are calling for regional autonomy for the whole community 
politically and economically. [end recording] [passage omitted] 

