BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Though North Korea Has Said It Would Open the </F>
`Najin-Sonbong Region'...."] 
  [Text] North Korea has announced a plan to liberalize 
investments and to use port facilities in the Najin-Sonbong 
region as part of an economic open-door policy to break through 
its economic difficulties. 
  The North Korean economy has faced serious difficulties 
because its economic ties with Russia have drastically weakened 
since the end of the cold war, because its relations with China 
have not been smooth, and because its "chuche-oriented economy" 
has become more inefficient. 
  North Korea has reached the moment when it has to, 
unavoidably, open itself up to the capitalist global economy to 
overcome its economic difficulties. North Korea's agony is that 
its domestic system is not flexible enough to absorb fully a 
possible shock from a Chinese-style open-door policy. 
  Therefore, a difficulty facing North Korea is that it is 
trying to carry out a "policy for opening its economy on a 
limited scale" without making domestic reforms, rather than 
pursuing a policy for boldly opening its economy while making 
domestic reforms. China has successfully carried out a bold 
open-door policy despite significant adverse effects; while 
North Korea is experimenting with a limited open-door policy in 
the Najin-Sonbong region, the northernmost border area, to 
prevent a shock from the open-door policy. 
  North Korea is now facing two difficulties. North Korea must 
resolve its economic difficulties to maintain its system -- 
then, North Korea's opening up will be inevitable. If North 
Korea opens up economically, however, it would exert an 
unpredictable influence on its hardened system. 
  North Korea will not be able to bring about successes in 
opening up if it does not make reforms. If North Korea is to 
bring about successes in opening up, which is necessary for 
maintaining its system, it must go beyond its efforts in the 
Najin-Sonbong region and carry out an open-door policy while 
making domestic reforms. It must quickly replace its political, 
economic, social, and cultural systems, which have so far helped 
maintain its secretive regime, with new ones that can 
accommodate a new open-door policy. 
  Unless North Korea makes these efforts, it will not be able 
to expect the same successes, which China has brought about by 
opening up, from its introduction of capital and technology from 
advanced capitalist countries that may be possible when the 
North Korean nuclear issue is resolved. There will be many 
trials and errors in North-South economic exchange and 
cooperation and no great successes will be brought about before 
North Korea opens up while "making reforms." 
  North-South economic cooperation will bring about 
substantial 
successes only when North Korea provides itself with systematic 
mechanisms that help bring about successes in opening up. 
Therefore, North-South economic cooperation must be prudently 
carried out in step with the speed of North Korea's opening up. 

