BFN 

  [Text] Amman (PETRA)--School curiccula in the occupied west 
Bank, including the self-rule Jericho area will continue to 
follow the Jordanian educational curricula while schools in Gaza 
Strip will follow the Egyptian system, according to Yasir 'Amr, 
head of the Palestine Higher Educational Department of the 
Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO). 
  "But with help from the United Nations Educational 
Scientific 
and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), there will be a gradual 
reconciliation between the two systems, said Mr. 'Amr who has 
been appointed minister of higher education under the national 
Palestine authority. 
  In a statement Sunday [19 June], Mr. 'Amr said that the 
Palestinians are determined to erase the last traces of the 
Israeli occupation of over 27 years, and this can be achieved 
through an efficient educational system and in close cooperation 
with Jordan and Egypt. 
  Referring to the educational system in the occupied Arab 
lands, as run under the Israeli rule, Mr. 'Amr said that only 13 
administrators were appointed to supervise the work of 22,000 
teachers and 608,333 students in 1,500 schools. 
  This situation, coupled with Israel's repeated closure of 
schools over the past 27 years, clearly manifests Israel's 
disregard of the Palestinian people's right to education, said 
Mr. 'Amr. 
  "We want to retain the strongest possible ties with Jordan, 
and education is one of the fields in which we can achieve this 
end," added Mr. 'Amr. 
  Mr. 'Amr said his department has recently concluded 
agreements with UNESCO, under which the latter would finance and 
help carry out educational programmes in Palestinian lands, 
including educational radio broadcasts. 
  UNESCO has also agreed to set up a Palestinian centre for 
developing educational curricula, to be financed by the Italian 
government, added Mr. 'Amr. 
  The department has been in contact with the commissioner 
general of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA), 
the Arab League Educational Sientific and Cultural Organisation, 
as well as the Islamic Educational Scientific and cultural 
organisation (ISESCO) to help implement Palestinian educational 
plans, added, Mr. 'Amr. 
  Mr. 'Amr said the curricula of academic and vocational 
training in the West Bank and Gaza Strip is bound to be at the 
basis of the future of the Palestinian society. 

