BFN 

<F P=106> [By Manan Osman and S. Jayakrishna] </F>
  [Text] Kuala Lumpur, Mon. -- The Pacific community must 
not be inward-oriented and discriminatory towards the rest of 
the world, Prime Minister Datuk Sri Dr. Mahathir Mohamed said 
today. He said they must be open to the world, to exports, and 
investments technology and comprehensive economic penetration of 
the rest of the world. 
  "We would be foolish if we of the Pacific get together in 
order to circle our wagons to raise the barricades and to keep 
everyone else out," he said in his keynote address at the 27th 
International General Meeting of the Pacific Basin Economic 
Council (PBEC) at Shangri-la Hotel. 
  Vietnamese Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet and Colombian Minister 
of Foreign Trade Dr. Juan Manuel Santos also addressed the 
meeting, which has as its theme "Profiting from Pacific 
Dynamism: Opportunities and Challenges for the Private Sector." 
  More than 700 participants, including economic ministers and 
top businessnen from the Asia-Pacific region are taking part in 
the three-day meeting held here for the first time. 
  "Our Pacific Era must so be built upon the firm foundation 
of 
a liberalising Pacific economic system that is fast reducing the 
obstacles to the flow of goods and services," Dr. Mahathir said. 
  "We owe it to the world and to ourselves to also proceed on 
the basis of lowering the obstacles to businesses located 
outside the Pacific Rim. A mercantilist Pacific makes as much 
sense as a mercantilist Canada or a mercantilist Japan or a 
mercantilist United States." 
  Dr. Mahathir said even as the Pacific community was 
committed 
to open regionalism at the global level and open 
superregionalism at the Pacific level, it must be committed to 
open regionalism in all the various regional schemes which they 
embarked upon. 
  He said the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and 
the free trade area between Australia and New Zealand (Anzcerta) 
must all seek to reduce the barriers to external economies as 
well as the participating member states. He said the same must 
hold for whatever was tried in East Asia. 
  "The East Asian scheme or economic cooperation, including 
the 
East Asia Economic Caucus (EAEC), which has been the victim of 
so much deliberate misinformation, must be wedded to this idea 
of open regionalism." 
  Dr. Mahathir said peace and stability were essential 
prerequisites for the Pacific Age. He said that without peace 
and stability, all the basic assumptions of progress had to go 
back to the drawing board. 
  "Fortunately for us in the Pacific, not perhaps for 15 years 
has the strategic environment been so conducive for peace and 
stability. In so many parts of the Pacific peace and stability 
have already broken out or are being strenghtened." 
  He said he was aware of the conflict potential in the Korean 
peninsula that could change the entire strategic picture and 
future of the Pacific. 
  "I know of the possibility of the division of Canada. I am 
aware of the issues in Mexico and some of the internal security 
concerns in North and Central America. But I am confident that 
China will not break up that the Japanese are not going to lose 
their sense and there will be no violent maritime conflict in 
the region. All these and other security issues will be thrown 
up in the course of time and cannot be dealt with the old 
mindset of confrontation power and deterrence which can never 
create warm and cooperative peace, which can only guarantee the 
rigidifying of a status quo and the vicious circle of enmity, 
armament suspicion, and hatred." 
  Dr. Mahathir said there were now tremendous opportunities to 
go by a different path, to cooperate with those whom one 
disagreed or whom one had yet to come to an agreement. He said 
there were so many opportunities to work with those whose 
perspectives and interests differed from one's own yet presented 
possibilities of harmonisation, or at worst, an agreement to 
agree to disagree without being disagreeable. 
  He urged Pacific countries to work together intimately and 
diligently to build a Pacific Peace "worthy of the name of the 
ocean which washes our shores." 
  He said it also seemed somewhat obvious that the Pacific 
countries should build not only a community of cooperative peace 
but also mutual prosperity. 
  Dr. Mahathir said he believed that there were at least two 
pillars for such an endeavour which should be stressed at this 
point in time. 
  "The first is to ensure a Pacific market system which 
unleashes the ferocious force of enterprise and catalyses all 
the synergistic potential of the Pacific, and the second is to 
ensure the development of a Pacific economic system firmly 
wedded to open regionalism. We have seen the bankruptcy of the 
central command economy. On the other hand, we have seen what 
can be done when markets are opened and liberated and when goods 
and services are freed to respond to the commands of the 
marketplace rather than the specific targets and dictates of 
bureaucrats, planners, and politicians. We have seen what China 
has been able to achieve, what Vietnam has been able to 
accomplish. We should seek the further opening of the 
transition economies and the wedding of all our economies to the 
market system. However macho we are on the Pacific, we must 
never forget the global community. I believe we must escape the 
trap that has been a source of weakness in Western Europe. It 
is very difficult to find Europeans who believe that they are 
incredibly Eurocentric. At the same time, I am confident most 
of you will agree with me when I say that it is difficult to 
find Europeans who are not in fact, whether they know it or not, 
incredibly Eurocentric." 
  Dr. Mahathir also reminded Pacific countries that the 
Pacific 
Era would be still born if they quarrelled and fought among 
themselves or divided the Pacific or created discriminatory 
trading blocs, drew a line down the Pacific, or unwilling to 
extend to each other the normal rules and regulations -- like 
the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status -- that were the norms 
between trading economies. 
  He added that to try to build a Pacific community along the 
lines of the European Community would be extremely disruptive 
and damaging to the long-term building of a Pacific community. 

