CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Oleg Panfilov, Glasnost Defense Fund expert, </F>
under the heading "Chronicle": "Persecution of Journalists and 
the Press in the Former USSR: April 1994 -- 2 Killed, 3 Beaten, 
23 Persecuted by the State"] 
  [Text] A previous report covering January-March 1994 
was published by NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in April. The information 
published here is based on reports from the periodical press, 
human rights organizations and journalists. 
<H5>  Azerbaijan </H5>
  18 April: Under the pretense of rounding up draft 
evaders, at approximately 2:00 pm military personnel and police 
burst into the editorial offices of the newspaper AZADLYG, 
detaining 15 (according to other reports 11) journalists, 
including some beyond draft age -- Ganimat Zakhidov, Khikmat 
Sabiogla, Rafig Mamedli, Khikmet Zeynalov, Gorkhmat Ibragimov, 
Kyanan Salimov, and others. The detainees were taken to 
Sabailskiy Military Commissariat and released three hours later. 
  19 April: Police officers detained AZADLYG deputy 
editor Bakhaddin Gazyyev. Relatives and colleagues have not yet 
been able to learn his whereabouts. It is presumed that he has 
been forced to take up active military service at the front. 
  22 April: Police officers burst into the AZADLYG 
editorial offices and without presenting any documents took 
Zokhrab Amirkhanly, head of the newspaper's Humanitarian 
Section, and correspondent and Information Center staffer 
Yadigar Mamedli by force to the Sabailskiy Military 
Commissariat. Another group of police stormed into the Musavat 
Party building and forcibly took eight individuals to the same 
military commissariat, among them Mekhman Dzhvadogly, head of 
the party's Information Center, Chingiz Firudinogly, a 
correspondent for the newspaper YENI MUSAVAT, and Rovshan 
Aliyev, a correspondent for that paper and for GOLOS UKRAINY. 
Several hours later all the journalists with the exception of 
Rovshan Aliyev were released. It is possible that he is 
currently in active military service. 
  23 April: Yashar Turkazar, a Musavat Party 
activist and a YENI MUSAVAT carrier, was detained near the 
Musavat Party headquarters. 
<H5>  Armenia </H5>
  15 April: Vardges Petrosyan, editor-in-chief of 
the newspaper YERKIR NAIRI, Armenian Supreme Soviet deputy, 
writer and chairman of the Armenian Culture Fund, was killed by 
several shots fired at point-blank range in the driveway outside 
his home. One of the most widely circulated stories is that this 
was the result of a blood feud. 
<H5>  Belarus </H5>
  29 April: Three Belorussian newspapers were forced 
to cease publication due to rising printing costs. Before that 
happened the editors of those papers published a joint appeal to 
parliament and the government entitled "The Belorussian Press Is 
at Death's Door." On the eve of Belarus presidential elections 
NARODNAYA GAZETA and ZVYAZDA were advised to change their 
editorial line. 
<H5>  Georgia </H5>
  April: Klara Abramiya, the writer of an article in 
the newspaper SHANS concerning the activities of Georgia's 
ambassador to Russia, began receiving death threats and demands 
that she publish a retraction. Bondo Kurdadze, the newspaper's 
editor, came under automatic weapon fire on the way to his home. 
  9 April: The editorial offices of the newspaper 
SVOBODNAYA GRUZIYA were attacked by unidentified individuals. 
The paper's property was damaged by a grenade. It has been 
suggested that the grenade was actually intended for a column of 
demonstrators, supporters of Georgia's ex-President Zviad 
Gamsakhurdia, who were passing by the editorial offices at the 
time. 
  15 April: The Georgian Council of Ministers 
distributed a resolution in which Archil Gogeliya, Georgian 
Television chairman, was instructed to "institute strict 
censorship on coverage of matters pertaining to Abkhazia." 
However, no official directives establishing direct censorship 
were issued. 
  28 April: Akakiy Mikadze, staff correspondent for 
the weekly MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI, was attacked during a recess in 
a Georgian Parliament session. The assailants were Georgian 
Parliament deputies Tengiz Sigua and Tengiz Kitovani, who 
threatened Mikadze over his "bad articles." Tengiz Kitovani 
struck Mikadze in the temple with his fist. 
<H5>  Kazakhstan </H5>
  April: On the night of 16 April Viktor Rachkov, an 
employee of the newspaper KARAGANDA and a deputy in the local 
maslikhat (council), was run over by an automobile in 
Karaganda. He died 18 hours later without regaining 
consciousness. Officially, the automobile accident was listed as 
an ordinary traffic incident. However, it is known that Viktor 
Rachkov had reported frequent phone threats to his colleagues. 
According to information from a group of Karaganda journalists 
who conducted their own investigation into Rachkov's death, "not 
all the injuries on the body of the deceased support the traffic 
accident story. Furthermore, the deceased's clothing showed no 
sign of a collision with an automobile," assertions which were 
specifically confirmed by emergency medical personnel. 
<H5>  Kyrgyzstan </H5>
  12 April: Publication of the Moscow weekly 
ARGUMENTY I FAKTY was terminated. The official explanation was 
declining circulation. The only publication from Russia 
currently being published in Kyrgyzstan is KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA. 
<H5>  Latvia </H5>
  April: The Latvian Saeima (parliament) passed a 
law on radio and television campaigning during elections to 
local self-government bodies. Under that law campaigning on TV 
Channel One was to be conducted exclusively in Latvian, with 80 
percent Latvian campaign ads on all other channels. 
  13 April: Latvian general procurator Yanis 
Skrastins issued the newspaper ATMODA a warning because the 
newspaper had allegedly printed articles "inciting violence." If 
the newspaper does not take action in response to this warning, 
a court could order it shut down. The newspaper's editor has 
stated that the paper does not intend to change its position. 
  20 April: Listening devices were discovered in the 
editorial offices of the newspaper DIENAS BIZNES, following 
which the Latvian Security Service sent the Latvian general 
procurator a letter requesting that a criminal investigation of 
the matter be undertaken. 
<H5>  Lithuania </H5>
  April: The board of the Lithuanian Television and 
Radio Company requested that the Lithuanian Government allocate 
funding for broadcasts of Ostankino Television and Radio Mayak 
programming. If the response to this request is positive, the 
broadcasts will be carried beginning at 6:00 pm each day. 
<H5>  Moldova </H5>
  26 April: A law was enacted within the territory 
of the unrecognized Dniester Moldavian Republic [DMR] under the 
title "On Protection of the Honor and Dignity of the President 
of the DMR." According to this law individuals who publicly 
insult the president of the DMR may be given a large fine or 
sentenced to up to six years in prison. Media outlets that 
disseminate materials that offend the president's honor and 
dignity are subject to closure. The Tiraspol City Court is 
currently hearing a suit by DMR President Igor Smirnov against 
the military commandant of Tiraspol, Russian Army Col. Mikhail 
Bergman, and the independent Asket Television Studio for the sum 
of R100 million [rubles]. A similar suit against Bergman and the 
television studio has been filed by DMR Supreme Soviet chairman 
Grigoriy Marakutsa. 
<H5>  Russia </H5>
  April: Andrey Kolobayev, an employee of the Moscow 
magazine KRIK, was beaten by militia officers while on official 
business in Syktyvkar (Komi Republic) and detained in a holding 
cell for five days. One possible reason for this was an 
appearance by Kolobayev on local television in which he levelled 
criticism at the local administration. After intervention by 
deputies from the Komi parliament and the Komi Republic minister 
of internal affairs Kolobayev was released. 
  April: The Pressa Publishing House suspended 
publication of 10 Moscow newspapers on account of financial 
difficulties. The newspapers were SOVETSKAYA ROSSIYA, 
FEDERATSIYA, 24, KHOZYAIN, SROCHNO V NOMER! and others. 
  6 April: Igor Mishin, president of the independent 
television company 4 Kanal stated that an attack on the 
television company office on the night of 7 April was political 
pressure on the eve of local elections. The intruders stole R10 
million in cash and documents after breaking out bars over the 
windows. 
  8 April: During a recess in a State Duma session 
deputy Vladimir Zhirinovskiy attacked Aleksandr Pyatkovskiy, a 
correspondent for the magazine STOLITSA, who had been sitting 
next to Zhirinovskiy during a clash with deputies and had 
recorded Zhirnovskiy's statements on a dictaphone. Upon seeing 
that, Zhirinovskiy began threatening Pyatkovskiy and attempted 
to twist his arm and take the dictaphone away from him. 
Aleksandr Pyatkovskiy has filed suit in connection with this 
assault. 
  14 April: Moscow's Presnenskiy Court heard the 
case of independent journalist Yaroslav Mogutin, who was accused 
of "malicious hooliganism" under Article 206, Section 2 of the 
Russian Federation Criminal Code. The grounds for the case were 
an article by Mogutin which appeared in the weekly NOVYY VZGLYAD 
under the title "Dirty Ends" and which used "obscene 
expressions." Mogutin's attorney, Genrikh Padva, noted that this 
is the first criminal case against a journalist over the use of 
obscene language. Support for the journalist has been expressed 
by the International PEN Club and the UNESCO Artists' 
Federation, as well as by approximately 60 well-known Russian 
cultural figures. In response to a petition by the attorney, the 
judge turned the case over to the procuracy for review. 
  16 April: Besik Urigashvili, an IZVESTIYA 
correspondent, was assaulted by militia officers on Bolshaya 
Bronnaya St. at approximately 9:30 pm. The officers demanded to 
see the journalist's documents, and when Urigashvili asked for 
an explanation as to why they were checking his documents in 
particular, they hit him with a nightstick, cutting his scalp. 
They made offensive remarks to the journalist, calling him 
"black." The journalist was taken to the 108th Militia Precinct 
and was released upon presenting his press identification card. 
  21 April: The Russian Federation Presidential 
Judicial Chamber on Information Disputes adopted a ruling 
entitled "On the Publication of the Article 'People Live Here!' 
in EKSPRESS-GAZETA, No. 5, 1994." The Judicial Chamber had at 
the request of the State Duma reviewed a Kupriyanov article 
devoted to deputies' perquisites. In the Judicial Chamber's 
ruling the article was termed "inaccurate and not objective" and 
found to be "a flagrant violation of legal and ethical 
standards." In view of this the Judicial Chamber recommended 
that Kupriyanov be dismissed from his current position. 
According to commentators, the Judicial Chamber does not have 
the authority to make that decision. 
  22 April: Grigoriy Musaelyan, director of the 
Russian Press House, received notice of that organization's 
immediate eviction -- within three days -- from a building 
located at 19 Novyy Arbat St. The Russian Press House's previous 
move occurred a few months ago, when the building it then 
occupied was needed to house the Russian parliament. In this way 
approximately 40 Russian newspaper have been forced to deal with 
moving instead of doing their jobs. 
  26 April: Sports journalists arriving at the 
awards ceremony for Olympic champions at St. George's Hall in 
the Kremlin were refused admittance. 
  29 April: According to information provided to 
MOSKOVSKIY KOMSOMOLETS by unnamed sources, a memorandum has been 
circulated within the President's administration forbidding 
staff members to have contacts with journalists. This applies in 
particular to those who are oversee powerful structures or have 
access to classified documents. 
<H5>  Tajikistan </H5>
  18 April: Employees of the republic's newspaper 
and magazine industry went on strike to protest nonpayment of 
their salaries for three months. Also, printers are experiencing 
shortages of paper and offset printing plates, causing large 
gaps in newspaper and magazine publication schedules. 
<H5>  Turkmenistan </H5>
  10 April: Turkmenistan's president signed an edict 
removing Dzhumadurdy Nepesov, editor-in-chief of the magazine 
YASHLYK, from his position. Appointed to replace him was 
Durdymukhamet Kurbanov, who is secretary of the presidential 
press service and has written two books about Saparmurad 
Niyazov. YASHLYK journalists expect that when the new editor 
arrives the entire editorial staff will be fired. 
<H5>  Ukraine </H5>
  April: On the night of 9-10 April an explosion 
occurred at the editorial offices of MESHCHANSKAYA GAZETA 
(Simferopol, Republic of Crimea). The blast destroyed windows 
and doors in the building. In the opinion of MESHCHANSKAYA 
GAZETA's editor this act was directed at the newspaper, which is 
the most popular in the Crimea and constantly prints articles 
about corruption in the highest echelons of power. 
<H5>  Estonia </H5>
  April: Members attending a meeting of the Central 
and Eastern European Newspaper Publishers' Association sent a 
letter to Estonian Prime Minister Mart Laar, calling on him to 
refrain from ideological pressure on the media. 
  1 April: Broadcasting of programs from Russia's 
Ostankino Television was terminated in Estonia due to nonpayment 
of debts. The motives behind this were that, firstly, Ostankino 
was supplying hostile information and, secondly, there was no 
other means of forcing the Russian-speaking population to take 
an interest in Estonian news programs. 
  4 April: Forty Estonian Parliament deputies 
proposed that that country's government replace the board of the 
state-owned Rahva Haael joint-stock company and cease its 
persecution of the newspaper EESTI SONUMID. On 28 March the 
company's board fired Toomas Leito, editor of the newspaper 
RAHVA HAAEL, who the following day announced his intention to 
begin publishing the newspaper EESTI SONUMID. The Estonian 
Parliament deputies stated that "this event makes it possible to 
include Estonia in the list of countries where freedom of the 
press is in danger." 
  * * * 
  The Glasnost Defense Fund is grateful to anyone who is 
interested in protecting freedom of speech and can provide 
information regarding persecution of journalists and the press. 
  Telephone: (095) 201-3242 or (095) 201-4420 Fax: (095) 
201-4947 

