BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 10 May -- The ministers of foreign affairs 
and the government agree on the legalization of drugs. 
Responding to whether Bolivia will follow Colombia's lead with 
regard to the legalization of drug consumption, they stated on 
10 May that this issue cannot and should not be considered from 
a unilateral standpoint, but rather as a part of a general 
context. The government rejects this because it wants to 
prevent the country from becoming a "Mecca" for drug traffickers. 
  Both ministers seek to ward off the possibility that Bolivia 
will embark on a legalization process, since, as Government 
Minister German Quiroga pointed out, it would turn the country 
into a "Mecca for drug trafficking." 
  Quiroga said: "The trafficking issue must be assessed within 
a general perspective rather than individually, as a nation. It 
would be terribly dangerous if one country became the 
traffickers Mecca. This is why we must be part of a general 
approach, part of the measures adopted by all countries, both 
producers and consumers." 
  Foreign Minister Antonio Aranibar called the issue delicate 
and pointed out that it must be solved by the international 
community as a whole, as the community of nations is now 
debating this issue. 
  The government minister, who holds more radical ideas, 
voiced 
his firm opposition to the decriminalization of cocaine as 
Colombia proposed. He believes it would turn the country into 
the "Mecca" for the production, consumption, and peddling of 
psychotropic drugs and a place where drug kingpins would thrive. 
  Quiroga pointed out that the legalization of consumption 
should be part of a consensus process and policy among several 
countries. He added that it would be most inappropriate for 
Bolivia to make a unilateral decision. 
  He stated that Colombia's stance on this issue should be 
considered as "leaving one's opponent unmarked and making a 
false move," which may have appalling consequences for the Latin 
American country that may become the world's center of drug 
consumption and distribution. He added: "This is most 
dangerous." 
  Quiroga noted that one cannot favor the legalization of 
drugs 
on the premise that interdiction has allegedly failed since the 
two points are different, but at the same time, are constituent 
parts of a whole. Interdiction is a fundamental part that seeks 
to track and punish traffickers while crop substitution programs 
seek to devise economic solutions to solve the problem of 
surplus coca production. "The two paths should run parallel: 
Interdiction and crop substitution could otherwise run 
separately instead of being part of an overall policy," he said. 
  Quiroga said Bolivia should coordinate with other countries 
toward a coordinated action. The government minister remarked 
that the country has achieved very encouraging results in its 
struggle against trafficking, even though it did not eradicate 
all surplus coca plantations. He added that this subject is 
under discussion with U.S. authorities. 
  Quiroga contended that aid for the balance of payments 
should 
not be exclusively linked to the reduction of coca crops, but 
should also consider blows dealt to trafficking, the destruction 
of maceration pits, the dismantling of laboratories, and the 
number of drug gangs arrested. He said: "It is not just a 
question of destroying coca crops, it is a war against 
trafficking." Quiroga also denied any alleged pressure over the 
mandatory eradication of surplus plantations and a reduction in 
economic aid toward the balance of payments. 

