Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of an 
editorial and articles published on the moderate vernacular 
daily CHUNGANG ILBO in Korean on 16 February on North Korea's 
"lightning acceptance" of nuclear inspections by the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). 
  The paper publishes on page 3 a 2,300-word article by 
Vienna- 
based correspondent Yu Chae-sik, entitled "Strategic Concession 
Fearing International Pressure -- Also Can Be Intentional Delay 
Tactic To Gain `a Lot.'" Noting that North Korea on 15 February 
informed the IAEA of its decision to "accept nuclear 
inspections" in a "lightning manner," the article says that with 
this, tensions regarding "the crisis of a war breaking," which 
has been openly talked about by the people, have now been 
"calmed down for a while." 
  The article points out several observations made by relevant 
IAEA officials in Vienna concerning the background of "North 
Korea's abrupt turn around" from the position of refusal of 
inspections. First, North Korea "yielded to the tough pressure" 
of the international community, of the United States, in 
particular. Explaining the process of the past contacts between 
the United States and North Korea on the inspection issue, the 
article says that an agreement was reached between the two sides 
but there was no "progress" in the six contacts held between 
North Korea and IAEA owing to differences in positions on the 
scope of the inspections. The IAEA declared that if normal 
inspections of "seven nuclear facilities" are not accepted, it 
will not dispatch an inspection team to North Korea. Prompted by 
this, "voices for sanctions on North Korea" and "criticism" of 
the Clinton Administration's "moderate policy" began to "surge." 
Pointing to the U.S. Defense Department's announcement of its 
operational plan to "occupy Pyongyang" and to the U.S. "final 
notice" on referring the issue to the UN Security Council, the 
article notes that this situation has driven North Korea to 
keenly realize that it can "no longer endure" the situation and 
that it may "loose" even what it has already gained. North Korea 
is also clearly aware that the United States has become the only 
"superpower" of the world which will "put its decision into 
practice without fail" once it decides to do so. 
  Second, the acceptance of inspections at the "final stage" 
is 
North Korea's "original strategy." In other words, even after 
North Korea agreed to accept inspections of "seven facilities," 
it is attempting to "gain some more" during negotiations with 
the United States. Judging that nothing can be obtained from 
"seven declared facilities," North Korea made a "strategic 
concession" in order to prepare itself for high-level talks with 
the United States while continuing the dialogue. 
  The article says that another observation which should not 
be 
overlooked is that North Korea agreed on inspections because the 
IAEA made "a certain concession," as revealed by North Korean 
Councilor Yun Ho-chin. If this is true, the article says, the 
IAEA might have decided to apply special regulations only to 
North Korea, not the "general regulation" which is applied to 
all IAEA members, thus leaving room for "making an issue" among 
its member states. 
  The article stresses that North Korea's acceptance of 
inspections is significant because it "halted the two trains 
dashing toward each other" but it is only the "beginning" of the 
North Korean nuclear issue because more thoroughgoing 
negotiations should be held between North Korea and the United 
States and between North Korea and the IAEA in order to ensure 
"transparency" of the North Korean nuclear issue through 
"special inspections" of two undeclared facilities in Yongbyon. 
  The paper publishes on page 3 a 1,300-word article by 
Washington- based correspondent Chin Chang-uk entitled "The 
United States Is Embarrassed by the Entanglement of Its Policy 
on North Korea." The article says that although the United 
States "immediately" announced a statement on 15 February 
"welcoming" North Korea's acceptance of nuclear inspections, it 
cannot conceal its "embarrassment" for the "abrupt entanglement" 
of its policies on North Korea, noting that the United States, 
judging that North Korea would not accept inspections until the 
IAEA Board of Governors meeting on 21 February, worked out 
"concrete measures" for economic sanctions against North Korea 
by referring the inspection issue to the UN Security Council. 
  The article says that the U.S. embarrassment is shown by its 
difficulty in deciding whether it would deploy Patriot missiles 
to the ROK or not and it has stated that an "urgent revision to 
the plan" to stage the 1994 Team Spirit joint military exercise 
is "necessary" in the event that the IAEA inspection team visits 
North Korea in the future. The article says that the United 
States should also make a "difficult diplomatic reversal" of its 
discussions with permanent member states of the UN Security 
Council because it had already discussed with them "sanctions 
against North Korea." 
  On the other hand, the article goes on to say that the U.S. 
Government believes that a series of such "hardline measures" 
have had the effect of making North Korea accept nuclear 
inspections. However, it also thinks that a "drastic revision" 
in the direction of its policies toward North Korea will be 
necessary. The article notes that it is likely that the United 
States will strongly demand that North Korea accept the 
inspection of "two undeclared nuclear facilities" in addition to 
the issue of exchanging special envoys between North and South 
Korea. The article says that whether the United States will 
deploy Patriot missiles to the Korean peninsula or not, even 
after North Korea accepts nuclear inspection, will become "a 
point of contention" between the United States and North Korea. 
  The paper published on page 3 a 1,000-word editorial 
entitled 
"The North's Acceptance of Nuclear Inspection Is Only the 
Beginning." Noting North Korea's acceptance of inspections as 
"fortunate," the editorial says that this is only a "clue" to 
the solution of the problem and that North Korea will demand 
discussions of "economic assistance and improved relations" by 
holding the third round of high-level U.S.-North Korea talks. 
The paper stresses that a "satisfactory result" should be 
brought about by the IAEA inspection and "peaceful use" of North 
Korean nuclear facilities must be "confirmed." The editorial 
also emphasizes that "practical dialogue" between the North and 
the South should be held before the issues of suspending the 
Team Spirit exercise and of holding high- level U.S.-North Korea 
talks are discussed. 

