Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The United States Should not be Judge and </F>
Jury"] 
  [Text] The U.S. Government periodically issues a document 
on the human rights situation in the world's countries. In an 
overall way it should be an objective evaluation due to the 
status of who formulates opinions on a topic that has as many 
facets as the question of human rights. 
  Taking the segment that pertains to Paraguay as a basis, we 
can observe in its writing a certain tendency to magnify certain 
events, such as focusing only on the negative aspects without 
any mention of the progress that has been achieved. 
  Beginning with isolated incidents, many of them not even 
considered important by us, it is not convenient to formulate 
generalities because it is a near certainty that errors will be 
made that do not compare with the seriousness that official 
documents should have. 
  This is precisely what has happened with the document to 
which we are referring. From the detailed reading of the 
incidents mentioned as violations of human rights, it can be 
deduced that they occurred under fortuitous circumstances 
without the Paraguayan Government having had any intention of 
violating them in an overall manner. 
  By using the same method, not even the United States would 
be 
exempt from peccadilloes in a similar examination, because even 
in similar cases in the United States the police must act 
energetically to prevent violence by radical groups, for 
example. Or the Army invade sovereign countries. But no one 
cries that the United States has violated human rights. 
  The United States cannot go against the principle that no 
one 
can be judge and jury, as this report intends to do. At best, a 
supranational organization may have the authority to pass 
judgment on such a delicate issue. 
  A valid critical judgment of Paraguay is that which compares 
the human rights violations cases under the previous regime with 
how the human rights situation fares in today's democratic 
transition process. If this comparison is made, it will be 
obvious that today we are living under conditions quite 
different than those in the recent past. 
  Today, the norm is to uphold human rights; human rights 
violations are the exception. This fact can be ascertained by 
any national or international organization. 
  We hope, therefore, that reports of this nature in the 
future, whatever their source, will be based on real and 
objective national events. 

