Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] According to the PNP [Peruvian National Police] 
Intelligence Directorate (Dirin), a tribe of Aguarunas is 
cultivating extensive poppy farms in the area known as 
Naranjillo in Rioja Province, San Martin Department. The PNP 
reported that the natives are not allowing the police to enter 
the area. 
  It has been learned that another group of Aguarunas is 
farming poppies in the Campanilla region in Juanjui, which is 
the center of operations of the criminal gang headed by "El 
Vaticano." 
  Moreover, it has been learned that in Palmapampa, in the 
Apurimac River valley in Ayacucho, a group of settlers openly 
support drug trafficking activities. 
  Regarding poppy farming, from which opium is extracted to 
manufacture heroin, a PNP spokesman said that the Aguarunas are 
armed and do not allow the police to get near their poppy 
plantations. 
  He added: "We have to avoid a clash with the natives, 
because they are unaware that they are engaged in criminal 
activity." 
  In this regard he added that a drug trafficker operating in 
this area had won the confidence of the Aguarunas, who in 
exchange for the poppies obtain food, medicine, and some money. 
  The spokesman said that for the time being the police are 
trying to contact the Aguaruna chiefs to inform them that they 
are participating in a crime subject to drastic punishment. 
  It has been learned that residents of Palmapampa, in the 
Apurimac River valley in Ayacucho, openly support the activities 
of Peruvian drug traffickers who has previously been expelled 
from the Upper and Lower Huallaga regions. 
  A PNP officer said that a few days ago Palmapampa residents 
impeded a PNP helicopter from landing. The helicopter was 
carrying personnel to undertake an investigation into coca 
farming in the region. 
  The source added: "Local residents fired shots at the 
helicopter with weapons supplied by the drug traffickers." 
  He also said that although the helicopter did land, the 
police were not allowed to enter the village. 
  The PNP colonel commanding the police detachment was told, 
in 
explanation of this action, that the residents live from coca 
farming. 
  The PNP is also facing problems in the antidrug fight in 
Oxapampa and Caballococha. 
  In these areas drug traffickers have better means of radio 
communication than do the PNP or the Armed Forces. 

