BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio interview with Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak by </F>
unidentified program announcer; relayed by Warsaw TV Polonia 
Network in Polish--live] 
  [Text] Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Just as it did 
a week ago, today's "Bilans" program is going out live. Our 
guest then was Professor Grzegorz Kolodko, deputy prime minister 
and minister of finance. Today, on the other hand, we have 
Waldemar Pawlak, chairman of the Council of Ministers, in the 
studio. 
  Almost nine months have passed since Prime Minister Pawlak's 
cabinet was formed. We are now in the middle of 1994, and it is 
therefore time for a summing up. We would like to do this on 
the basis of two documents. The first is the prime minister's 
report, given on 8 November of last year. The second is the 
"Strategy for Poland," the government's program up to 1997. 
  Prime Minister, let us recall your Sejm report. You stated 
then that the struggle with unemployment is among the 
government's highest priority tasks. Unemployment has fallen 
but only insignificantly, and the prospects are not too 
encouraging because it is estimated in the "Strategy for Poland" 
that, in three years' time, more than 2.5 million Poles will be 
without work. 
  [Pawlak] Indeed, unemployment is a very serious social 
problem, a problem for the entire state. I think that not all 
of us are aware of the scale of this problem. We have a 
situation where, if we take all of those who do not have work 
and those who take retirement and annuity payments, and, on the 
other hand, those who do work, we get proportions that are in 
practice one to one. So, this shows how difficult it is to 
actively overcome this very troublesome phenomenon. 
  I would like to very clearly stress that the problem of 
unemployment and of reducing the scale of unemployment, reducing 
the number of unemployed, has two very important aspects. On 
the one hand, the creation of new jobs and the reduction of that 
number of unemployed and, on the other, the need for the labor 
market to absorb young people who have finished their schooling. 
And it must be said that, over these three years, Poland's 
population will increase by about 600,000 people. And so, 
limiting unemployment does not only mean reducing this number, 
but also absorbing this population growth. That is, around 1.5 
million new jobs must be created by the year 2001 so that 
unemployment does not grow. And this shows what a serious 
phenomenon this is. 
  [Announcer] So, we must come to terms with the fact that, 
nevertheless, 2.5 million Poles will be without employment in 
the year 1997? 
  [Pawlak] I think that if things go well, if economic 
processes run well, this scale of unemployment may be smaller. 
As you know, from the point of view of these processes that we 
are having to deal with, this is quite difficult because, on the 
one hand, we have the stabilization of the national economy, the 
limitation of these economic factors, and of inflation in 
particular, and, on the other, the need for the creation of 
jobs. And we wish to draw attention, along this road, to the 
investment-friendly character of our program, to the creation of 
new jobs, the close association of modernization programs with 
the local situation on the labor markets. 
  An active approach to issues of unemployment is very 
important, as is the promotion of industries and activities that 
will absorb a large amount of labor. We need not immediately 
take the most modern technologies in every area. It is worth 
recalling here an old anecdote of [Henry] Ford's, who, when 
asked whether he was a supporter or an opponent of automation, 
said that he was an opponent because a robot would not buy a car 
from him. And I think it is worth remembering this. 
  [Announcer] Prime Minister, unemployment is also associated 
with the countryside and with agriculture. I will quote two 
figures: 27 percent of the professionally active [population] 
produces 7 percent of the gross national product or of the 
national income, let us say. It is clear that this relationship 
must change. What proposal do you have, not so much for 
agriculture as for the countryside? The countryside, as is well 
known, suffers from underinvestment. It stands civilizationally 
much below the cities. There is quite simply an awful lot of 
work to do there. 
  [Pawlak] Our approach to the issues of the countryside is 
significantly broader than merely the problems of agriculture 
and employment in agriculture. And this is how these matters 
are conceived by one of the key programs of the "Strategy for 
Poland," the very title of which indicates the essence of this 
approach. The point is the development of rural areas. 
  [Announcer] But Prime Minister, at the same time--I am sorry 
to interrupt--but, at the same time, the Strategy [for Poland] 
includes the clause that the amount of cheap credit for 
agriculture will be significantly, must be, successively 
limited, while cheap credits for agriculture were the basis of 
the Polish Peasant Party's election campaign. 
  [Pawlak] Not only theirs. 
  [Announcer] Among others. 
  [Pawlak] Well, all right. This is.... 
  [Announcer, interrupting] [words indistinct] 
  [Pawlak] Let me just say a little. I wish to show that our 
concern is that we look at the countryside not just as 
agriculture but, above all, as the place where 38 percent of the 
population of Poland lives and where people work in many and 
various spheres: in the agricultural infrastructure, in 
[agricultural] processing, in services and trade. And we draw 
attention to the renewal of the countryside and the 
multifunctional development of the countryside as this basic 
goal, in order to create realistic possibilities for the 
attainment of incomes alongside [those from] agriculture. This 
is so that we can look to the future and not to the past and 
what took place in other countries tens of years ago. 
Development of the infrastructure--telephones, water mains, 
roads, gas--is very important. This conditions the possibility 
of the creation of many modern enterprises. Already today we 
have very specific examples. There is a very modern (?syringe) 
factory near Lomza, computers are produced near Nowy Sacz. 
There are often specific, local opportunities that people are 
capable of exploiting marvellously. An example that I recently 
had the opportunity to familiarize myself with very closely, as 
well as with the evolution of the [associated] milieu, is 
Swarzedz [in western Poland], which is showing itself capable of 
very ambitiously and quickly adapting this local specificity to 
the current needs of the market. These examples demonstrate that 
the countryside must be treated differently, and, from the point 
of view of the prospects for development in other countries, as 
well, the developing countries, where there is a trend toward 
returning to living outside the great urban agglomerations. 
  I do not think this present situation is a burden for us but 
a chance--that is, if we can make use of it. 
  [Announcer] Summing up, Mr. Prime Minister, let us us talk 
about agriculture for a moment. Will Polish agriculture become 
relatively competitive with, for example, West European 
agriculture, before the end of the century? 
  [Pawlak] It is already competitive, and Europe is very much 
afraid of our agriculture. For example, there are certain 
actions that hinder the availability of our agricultural 
products, especially fruit and vegetables, on European markets. 
  [Announcer] But, Mr. Prime Minister, we have also introduced 
a surtax. 
  [Pawlak] Yes, but you know well that the European Union has 
had such charges for decades. So, we are not always following 
with our solutions in such a way that we end up with comparable 
tools for such comparable competition, giving our producers the 
same chances. [sentence as heard] 
  Recently, yesterday I think, the Council of Ministers' 
economic committee discussed a program for the development of 
agriculture up to the year 2000. And this is, as it were, 
another level for those programmatic proposals we have been 
putting forward. A strategy is a general program showing 
general directions. On the other hand, the Agriculture Ministry 
has already put forward detailed solutions concerning that part 
of the economy. 
  [Announcer] Mr. Prime Minister, I know that agriculture and 
rural affairs are very close to your heart, but let us talk 
about the "Strategy for Poland." There are certain basic 
indicators that are very optimistic. For example, the growth of 
the GNP by over 20 percent, a fall in inflation in 1997 to 9 
percent, are forecast there. At the same time, there is talk of 
reducing taxes, about increases in subsidies for culture, 
education, health. Do you not think that such an excess of 
these just objectives is at variance with the realities? In 
other words, is the "Strategy for Poland" a realistic program? 
  [Pawlak] I think it is very much a realistic program. The 
structure of this program is a directional one, showing the main 
objectives, conditions, main objectives, resources, threats, and 
implementation criteria. And we wish to discuss these 
objectives thoroughly with various groups so that there is 
agreement as far as the aims are concerned. And, as far as 
resources are concerned, we have to be very flexible under the 
circumstances and life force of our flexible approach, so that 
these aims can be within reach. It is also important that we 
know the major threats because then we can effectively reach our 
objectives, on the other hand.... 
  [Announcer, interrupting] Such as, for example, the lack of 
social peace and strikes, Mr. Prime Minister? 
  [Pawlak continues] On the other hand, implementation 
criteria 
are also included there, which allow us to assess whether and 
how fast we are approaching these objectives. 
  [Announcer] But aren't you afraid that that very lack of 
social peace, the strikes we have at present, will make it 
impossible to implement the program? And the second matter, the 
issue of strikes. You said yesterday that the latest strikes in 
the steel industry were being inspired from the outside. Please 
excuse me, but this reminds me of rhetoric from the past. 
  [Pawlak] Oh no, no. This is an old trick that can still be 
found in today's "Wiadomosci" [television newscast], that this 
is not information but interpretation. I did not say it, and 
this can be easily checked. It was just a coincidence that 
problems with the sale of steel on European markets happened at 
the same time as strikes in our steel industry, and this is 
where we are scoring an own goal, I am sure. This is 
irrespective of intentions and is unequivocal because, in such a 
situation, we are losing out to the competition. 
  [Announcer] We are into the last 40 seconds. And [there is] 
a very important issue, the issue of local government. This 
area is the most criticized. 
  [Pawlak] I wish to stress very clearly that the government 
has decided on broad cooperation with and support for local 
government, and in such a way that the local governments will be 
able to effectively implement their tasks. The point here is, 
above all, not to centrally transfer responsibility to local 
governments without the resources that will later safeguard the 
correct implementation of these tasks. We have had such a 
phenomenon in the case of education, and we have put the case 
very clearly. Those parishes [gminy] that make the decisions, 
that adopt resolutions, can take over schools. If the country's 
situation improves, I think it will be possible to much more 
easily and effectively pass on an ever wider range of tasks to 
the local governments, together with the resources for this. 
What happens when these tasks are entrusted without resources 
can be seen from the example of, for instance, the handover of 
certain tasks in the communal economy, the generation of 
thermal-energy, for instance. 
  And I think there is one more issue associated with these 
structural transformations. 
  [Announcer, interrupting] We must end. 
  [Pawlak] This is just one sentence. The point is that it is 
often said that we again need a district [powiat] level of 
administration. I do not think that, for the time being, we are 
in so hopeless a situation as to have to reach for a third 
layer--that is, to carry out a reorganization. It is worth 
considering the exploitation of the potential that exists 
already--for instance, the handover of wider entitlements, 
especially in the sphere of voivodship budgets for voivodship 
local assemblies [sejmiki], so that they, together with the 
voivoda, are able to create significantly better solutions and 
economically exploit those opportunities that are available at 
the local level, at the voivodship level. 
  [Announcer] Thank you very much, Prime Minister. We have run 
out of time. 

