Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Reviewing this year's [1993] diplomacy, the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs [MOFA] has prepared a report 
entitled "Review and Outlook of the International Situation," in 
which predictions are made on focal points of 1994. The report 
cites two points -- Japan-U.S. relations and North Korea's 
nuclear development issue -- as Japan's largest diplomatic tasks 
in 1994. 
  The government thinks the outcome of Japan-U.S. 
comprehensive 
talks -- the main topic at the Japan-U.S. summit talks slated to 
be held on 11 February next year -- will have a significant 
impact on future ties between the two countries. On the basis 
of this understanding, the government plans to exert all-out 
efforts to work out measures to deal with Japan-U.S. relations. 
On the other hand, the government plans to immediately resume 
negotiations for normalization of diplomatic ties between Japan 
and the DPRK once an agreement is reached at U.S.-DPRK 
negotiations. 
  The leaders of Japan and the United States have held summit 
talks twice; the first meeting was in September this year when 
the UN General Assembly was held, and the second meeting was in 
November during the unofficial summit talks of the Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation (APEC) ministerial conference. However, a 
MOFA source offered a severe view, saying: "The leaders of both 
countries merely exchanged yells [as published] at their 
previous two summit talks. They will directly face the problems 
and have a dispute at the February summit. It will be a tough 
summit meeting." The government wants to lay a new foundation 
for improving bilateral relations by seeking agreements 
regarding "government procurement, autos and auto parts, and 
insurance," which are priority matters at the comprehensive 
economic talks. 
  On the issue of North Korean nuclear development, the 
government wants to start working-level discussions in Beijing 
for resumption of the Japan-DPRK negotiations which were 
suspended in November last year, should North Korea agree at 
U.S.-DPRK negotiations to accept nuclear inspections by the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). 
  However, the government is determined at the same time that 
it has no choice but to firmly maintain the fundamental stance 
of cooperating with both the United States and the ROK in 
imposing economic sanctions against North Korea should the 
U.S.-DPRK negotiations be ruptured. 
  Regarding Japan's policy toward Russia, the report says that 
although there was a sign after President Yeltsin's visit to 
Japan in October that negotiations on the northern territorial 
issue would take a turn for the better, the political situation 
in Russia will be in a fluid state once again due to the 
emergence of the Liberal Democratic extreme right nationalist 
party which was a big winner in the December election for the 
new federal council. The report is leaning to the pessimistic 
view that stagnation of the territorial negotiations is 
unavoidable. 

