BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Pascal Virot: "Socialist Party: Rocard Calls </F>
For `New Alliance'"] 
  [Excerpts] Because his European campaign has been 
foundering, because his Socialist "friends" have been hoping for 
a dismal showing, and because, after all, the 12 June election 
appears to be no more than a warm-up before the presidential 
election, [Socialist Party Secretary General] Michel Rocard 
called yesterday, in a meeting in Creteil (Val-de-Marne), for "a 
new alliance" between the forces of the Left, "born of a will to 
work together in view of the presidential and municipal 
elections" of 1995. Even though his friends deny any 
similarity, this initiative is strongly reminiscent of one taken 
on 17 February 1993 in Montlouis-sur-Loire, where the former 
prime minister called for a "big bang" of the Left in the 
immediate run-up to a parliamentary election that turned out to 
be disastrous for the PS [Socialist Party]. This time, Michel 
Rocard has drawn up a timetable, with the first major event 
scheduled for 13 June. On that day, he intends to address the 
Communist Party [PC]; the Greens; the friends of Charles 
Fiterman and Philippe Herzog, who are currently marginalized 
within the PC; as well as the "orphans of the Left," so that 
they can tackle "the organizational, electoral, and policy 
initiatives needed to shape the new alliance" and achieve a 
federation of the Left. Is this last-ditch attempt likely to 
turn the tide? Michel Rocard's friends have not concealed that 
since his European campaign took a turn for the worse, he had no 
choice but to "take an initiative." [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Excerpts From Rocard's Creteil Speech </H5>
  The PS leader was in Creteil yesterday evening. Here are a 
few excerpts from the speech he made there. 
  ``We must fight fragmentation and pull together. No less is 
expected from us.... The European campaign will end in a few 
days. We cannot wait to give it a sense of purpose for the 
future.... Ours is the task of forging a `new alliance' for all 
those who want to reform society. I intend to work toward this 
new alliance, born of the will to work together in view of the 
presidential and municipal elections, which will dominate 1995. 
No single party, no single force can hope to achieve that. 
There is a strong connection between the revival of the Left and 
that of the Socialist Party: One cannot happen without the 
other. We Socialists know that our party cannot remain a closed 
shop. What we need is a broad and open movement able to unite 
today's progressive aspirations, those that are being expressed 
from within the various parties of the Left, those of the 
various associations, the demands of women to have their say in 
political life, the concern intellectuals feel at being left out 
and having no other choice than remaining silent or having their 
words distorted by the media. 
  ``Today, being part of a movement that unites all those men 
and women who share the same reform goal must be our common 
ambition. 
  ``As of 13 June, with all those who deem it necessary and 
are 
willing to participate, I shall take the organizational, 
electoral, and policyh initiatives needed to shape this `new 
alliance' that I have been looking for, that we have been 
looking for in the country for months. Provided we are up to 
the task, be assured that our hope for actual solidarity both in 
France and in Europe will be fulfilled.'' 

