Language: <F P=105> Armenian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Minister of the Interior Vano Siradeghyan by </F>
correspondent Ida Martirosyan; date and place not specified] 
  [Excerpts] We know that the interview below by our 
correspondent will cause dissatisfaction among some of our 
readers. The questions that are posed with "sharp" propositions 
could have been further sharpened. They could rise above the 
level of rumors, probe deeper issues and perhaps allude to the 
interior ministry's aspirations to become a state within a 
state. While we hope that we will have that opportunity in the 
future, we cannot fail to mention with satisfaction the interior 
minister's considered, balanced, mature responses which portray 
the growth of a statesman and a politician. 
  [AZG] One would think that gunfire in Yerevan subsided 
somewhat recently. 
  [Siradeghyan] Why do you say "one would think"? Do you not 
believe your own ears? 
  [AZG] Perhaps I am being facetious. Yes, gunfire has 
subsided, but some think that the cold and the low morale have 
blunted even gangsterial emotions. Is this really fully the 
result of police work? 
  [Siradeghyan] After the president's decree was issued we 
seized from the population approximately 1,000 guns. That is 
equivalent to the arsenal of two brigades of internal security 
forces. If we extend the analogy, that means two brigades which 
are not subject to the authority of anyone. Today those people 
have been disarmed. Of course, I am not so naive as to think 
that the guns of all "free gunmen" have been seized, but most of 
them do not fire their guns any more. [passage omitted] 
  [AZG] Is the mafia concept a reality or a ghost in our 
country? I am referring only to the purely criminal aspect--say 
the gangs--and not the economic and political aspect. 
  [Siradeghyan] If we speak about purely the criminal aspect, 
then it should be called gang activity. The mafia, on the other 
hand, is multisegmented and multilayered. Obviously it also has 
its gangster elements, but it cannot exist without senior-level 
sponsors in the government, say, the prosecutor's office, the 
interior ministry and the parliament. I must concede that there 
was a time when the situation that was created in our country 
was contributing to the creation of a classical mafia structure. 
That did not happen, however, because we were able to intervene 
in time and to eliminate several large gangs which could become 
the basis for future growth. Today we have already imprisoned 40 
to 50 persons. Many people expressed the fear that if we arrest 
all the "authorities" then chaos will ensue in the criminal 
world, with blood feuds and assassinations. We were also 
prepared for such an eventuality. I must say, however, that, 
although there were a few incidents, the general pattern of 
crime did not change. Thus we achieved our objective. [passage 
omitted] 
  [AZG] Fine, but I am more interested in the "sponsors." What 
about you? 
  [Siradeghyan] That is the most difficult part of the work 
and 
is based on empirical information. I may know the "sponsor" of 
this or that gang, but to catch him in the act... Let me give a 
basic example: When we began our "purge" of the crime world, 
they began collecting signatures in the parliament in defense of 
well-known crime figures. These are five or six men whose last 
names are very well known in the capital. To this day they 
continue collecting signatures in their defense. How can we be 
surprised when there are parliamentary deputies who have been 
convicted of criminal activities in the past? Those people 
mingle in that environment, and obviously will defend it. 
[passage omitted] 
  [AZG] It is said that the police force in our country is 
depoliticized. Even so, you are considered a political figure, 
and a very powerful one. At one time they thought there was a 
battle of personalities at the top between Levon Ter Petrosyan 
and [former prime minister and defense minister] Vazgen 
Manukyan. That correlation of forces became accepted and its 
resolution was conventional. Now there is another theory that, 
after that episode, the president could expect another one. In 
other words, being the head of a consolidated, trained and 
well-armed agency like the Ministry of the Interior, you may, in 
some set of circumstances, become, let us say, the president's 
opponent or rival in political affairs. Further, it is even 
alleged that there are already differences between you and the 
president. 
  [Siradeghyan] That is truly fabulous, I have nothing to say. 
You know, it would be ludicrous to say that I am not a political 
figure. Everywhere in the civilized world the interior minister 
is a political figure. It is only natural that the head of that 
ministry be the political support and ally of the head of state. 
  [AZG] In other words, you do not have any differences with 
the president? 
  [Siradeghyan] That cannot happen. If it does happen I would 
resign from this position--or the president would tell me to 
step down and I would do so. There is no such problem. If there 
were, our domestic situation would be like that of Georgia or 
Azerbaijan, where one leader does not trust the other. 
  [AZG] I hope you will not think my questions about "rumors" 
are tactless. It is simply that since there are certain rumors 
they must be answered. For example, it is said that you exercise 
control over certain economic and financial domains. One example 
is gasoline. Another is the practice of raising and lowering the 
foreign currency exchange rate so that you can pay for the 
Korean automobiles--there was so much talk about that. 
  [Siradeghyan] What has been said is mean. Yes we were 
involved in the supply of gasoline. When there was no gasoline 
on the market we brought 20 wagons of it from Georgia. We kept 
that shipment and planned to release it on the market at the 
time the new currency would be issued. There is nothing criminal 
about that. We have a special trading structure for such 
activities and that structure was created before I took office. 
We hope that we will be able to cut the price of gasoline. 
  [AZG] By a so called "goods intervention"? 
  [Siradeghyan] Yes, but we failed to flood the market with 
goods. We sold our gasoline for a week, but the people who 
really control the gasoline business simply kept their supplies. 
  [AZG] It appears that they are not fools. How did all that 
end? 
  [Siradeghyan] We failed completely not because our opponents 
were more clever but because our allies did not act. The other 
ministries did not come to our aid. A massive flooding of the 
market with goods simultaneously with the issuance of new 
currency did not take place. Thus our enterprise vanished into 
the thin air like the gasoline. We stopped our project realizing 
that we may go bankrupt. Today we are doing it with established 
prices. We had borrowed to buy the gasoline and we still have 
not been able to repay our debt. One reason is that we gave some 
of the gasoline to emergency services and the city hall. That is 
the reality of the "gasoline legend." As for the rumors, time 
will put everything in its place. Now let me address the issue 
of the automobiles. Our original contract was for [Russian] 
Zhigulis, but then we asked our colleagues for cheaper cars. 
This led to Hyundai cars, on each of which we saved 
approximately $5,000. The clamor that was raised by some, 
including some parliamentary deputies, about that issue could 
have been put to better use. It is ridiculous to hear some 
allegations that those funds should have been spent for the 
stabilization of the new currency. Could that have been done 
with such small sums? There are methods to do that. We had 
allocated $1 million for the stabilization of the currency. 
However, when the government realized after spending half that 
sum that nothing is happening it did not spend the second half. 
Also we do not have the reserves to import hard currency on a 
continual basis. Nobody will give us such loans. It is 
impossible to maintain a stable currency exchange rate without 
backing the currency with goods and without a working economy. 
Thus, those rumors that the currency declined in value because 
we spent dollars to purchase cars is simply ridiculous. 

