BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Great Potential in Sino-U.S. Cooperation"] </F>
  [Text] At the Sino-U.S. trade and investment talks held in 
New York, entrepreneurs from the two countries took only two 
days to conclude and sign 62 agreements and contracts, under 
which the U.S. side would make investment in or sell equipment 
to China for a total amount of $5.4 billion. Major consortia 
headed by Morgan and Dupont, as well as large multinational 
groups headed by IBM, Merrill Lynch, the American Computer and 
Telephone Corporation [mei guo dian nao dian hua gong si 5019 
0948 7193 5207 7193 6114 0361 0674], and so on, took an active 
part in the talks with the Chinese side. Earlier, the Chinese 
trade delegation had also held similar activities in Los 
Angeles, signing $1.3 billion worth of contracts and more than 
$4 billion worth of agreements of intent with U.S. businessmen. 
All this shows that China is an enormous market with powerful 
appeal. Meanwhile, it also shows that there are extremely broad 
vistas for cooperation between China and the United States. 
  China's economy is growing at a rate which has rarely been 
seen in the world. It is anticipated that the total amount of 
imported goods will reach $1 trillion in the next seven years. 
In China, 12 million telephone lines will be installed, 1,000 
km of railroads will be built or renovated, 3,500 km of highways 
will be constructed, and from several hundred thousand to 
several million sedans will be imported each year. Just think, 
where else can people find such a huge market in the world? It 
is precisely because of the sustained economic growth in China 
that the economic and trade cooperation between China and the 
United States has been able to develop rapidly these past years. 
The volume of trade between the two countries reached $27.6 
billion in 1993, a 70-fold increase compared with that before 
diplomatic ties were established in 1979. 
  However, dark clouds have been consistently cast over the 
otherwise exceptionally favorable situation of cooperation, 
namely the threat by U.S. authorities to withdraw the 
most-favored-nation [MFN] status from China under the pretext of 
the human rights issue. 
  Everybody knows that the withdrawal of MFN status will not 
only cause an onslaught on the trade between the two countries 
but will also certainly infringe upon the economic contacts and 
affect the political and diplomatic relationships between China 
and the United States. The gate, which was opened by former 
President Nixon in conformity with the historical trend of the 
times, will probably be closed again. This certainly runs 
against history and, therefore, is a perverse act, against which 
sagacious Americans will rise to express their opposition. Over 
the past period of time, voices calling for unconditional 
renewal of MFN status for China have been heard here and there. 
The U.S. Government's stand of linking human rights with trade 
has not gained any support from the international community. A 
short time ago, former Singaporean Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew 
once again warned the United States not to exert pressure on 
China through the human rights issue because that simply would 
not work and would only jeopardize the economic growth and 
strategic stability in Asia. In order to continue brandishing 
the baton of MFN status, the United States tried by every 
conceivable means to obstruct China's reentry into GATT and was, 
therefore, bogged down in an extremely isolated situation. Even 
its allies -- the various European countries -- unanimously 
stand for China's reentering the international trade 
organization as early as possible. 
  The withdrawal of MFN status will do harm not only to 
mainland China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan, but also to the United 
States itself. This is obvious to all and China has repeatedly 
expounded on this view. However, China is absolutely not afraid 
of U.S. threats having made full preparations for the worst a 
long time ago. Just as Wu Yi, minister of foreign trade and 
economic cooperation, said: "If there is darkness in the east, 
there is sunlight in the west," and "if the north turns dark, 
the south is bright," so "the sky over China will never 
collapse." 
  Recently, China sent a number of high-level delegations to 
visit the United States and clarify its points of view, showing 
its sincerity in seeking positive development and cooperation 
with the United States. We are now waiting to see if the 
Clinton administration will make the correct political decision. 
There is an old Chinese saying: "It is impolite not to 
reciprocate." If the United States makes a choice for 
development and cooperation, the Chinese will certainly 
coordinate with it so that there will be fruitful results 
arising from equal and reciprocal exchanges; but, if the United 
States disrupts the trade relations which are based on MFN 
status, the Chinese side will certainly "give tit for tat." 
China is opposed to linking trade with human rights because they 
belong to entirely different matters. Fair-minded people in 
various countries have noted that, along with the economic 
development and increased democracy and legal system in China, 
the human rights situation has improved considerably and will 
continue so to do. There are only a handful of anti-Chinese 
elements in the United States who take advantage of a couple of 
criminals to attack China and who are not actually concerned 
with human rights in this country. 
  What merits our attention is that some U.S. forces hostile 
to 
China have not only stirred up trouble on the issue of MFN 
status but have also availed themselves of various opportunities 
to provoke incidents and confront China. There is a rumor that 
they want to take advantage of the Dalai Lama's upcoming visit 
to the United States to set off another new surge against China. 
There is also a report that the United States is going to 
increase its sales of weapons to Taiwan to create tension across 
the Taiwan Strait. All this obviously runs counter to the U.S. 
commitment to a "one China" policy and is deliberately aimed at 
splitting China. In the face of this, under no circumstances 
will China sit idly by and remain indifferent. Certainly, the 
objective of these individuals in the United States will never 
be achieved. 

