CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Igor Ryabov under the rubric "Scandal": </F>
"Academician Transfers to Reserves"] 
  [Text] The president has relieved Anatoliy Kuntsevich 
of his duties as chairman of the Committee on Convention-Related 
Problems of Chemical and Biological Weapons. Is he the last 
victim of the "chemical war" in the Moscow City Court? 
  It is still not known who personally initiated the trial of 
Vil Mirzayanov. The collective authorship is more or less clear: 
the State Security Committee and the military-industrial 
complex. But there is a live soul behind every departmental 
initiative. Somebody has to give an order, after all. 
  Jurists believe that the Mirzayanov case came about as a 
result of the absurd legal arrangement which allows people to be 
charged with disclosure of state secrets, the list of which 
itself constitutes a secret. It is absurd, they say, but what 
can one do--such is the law. But even this assumption prompts a 
question: Well, who initiated the charges, who is the champion 
of complying with laws that violate human rights? 
<H5>  Death Transported Through the City </H5>
  Both during the trial and after it, the greatest suspicions 
as to who was behind the prosecution initiative centered on the 
Committee on Convention-Related Problems of Chemical and 
Biological Weapons and its chairman, Lieutenant General and 
Academician Anatoliy Kuntsevich. 
  Many scientists who took Vil Mirzayanov's side believed that 
Anatoliy Kuntsevich played the role of watchdog of the 
military-industrial complex in the "chemical-bacteriological" 
sphere. And did everything from his high position to keep the 
shroud over the process of chemical disarmament and destruction 
of the chemical warfare stockpile as tight as possible. The 
lieutenant-general, on the other hand, categorically denies any 
involvement in this matter. 
  There will be no investigation of the topic "find the 
author." The problem does not encroach on state interests. The 
rights and interests of citizen Vil Mirzayanov have been 
restored--he has been released from the Sailor's Rest prison. 
What else could one want? So all that is left for us to do is 
sound out private opinions and follow the fate of the 
"suspects." And the latter depends to a large extent on those 
who are in a position to conduct a secret (internal) 
investigation. 
  Yuriy Baturin, the president's national security adviser, 
promised during his meeting with chemist-scientist Vladimir 
Uglev at the time Vil Mirzayanov was on trial that justice would 
prevail. And the case was indeed dismissed. Should we take 
Anatoliy Kuntsevich's dismissal on 7 April as a triumphal march 
of justice "a la Baturin"? 
  The official wording for Anatoliy Kuntsevich's dismissal is 
a 
"one-time gross violation of duties." The military had 
transported a large consignment of chemical waste through the 
streets of a major city, which is categorically forbidden. 
Anatoliy Kuntsevich had given the go-ahead on the transport. 
Cause for dismissal even without Mirzayanov's case. Except not 
in our country. Usually such flaps are ignored. 
  Would Anatoliy Kuntsevich have been dismissed had it not 
been 
for the public outcry during the Mirzayanov trial? Why was it 
not done before the court hearing, when many scientists talked 
unceasingly about violations in the destruction of chemical 
weapons and about much greater quantities of chemical substances 
in military warehouses than the convention committee's data 
implied? 
<H5>  No Revenge, Please! </H5>
  Vil Mirzayanov has the most subjective opinion of Anatoliy 
Kuntsevich. Cannot be any more subjective: Vil Mirzayanov was 
spending time with criminals while Anatoliy Kuntsevich continued 
to occupy the chair of chairman of the convention committee--the 
main plaintiff. 
  "Kuntsevich's dismissal is a result of the fact that there 
comes a time when the truth comes out," said Vil Mirzayanov in 
an interview to NOVOYE VREMYA. "Kuntsevich is not a 
scientist--he is a nomenklatura general. He probably has not set 
foot in a laboratory for the past 40 years." 
  In the chemist's opinion, the convention, which the 
committee 
had signed, does not ban the development of chemical weapons. 
And this development had been going on, says Vil Mirzayanov, 
even before criminal charges were brought against him. In the 
opinion of Mirzayanov's colleague Vladimir Uglev, many types of 
chemical warfare substances are being hidden in Russia under the 
guise of training and reserve toxic substances. 
  "The convention has already been submitted to the Duma for 
discussion, and destruction of chemical weapons must commence 
within a year after ratification. Russia is not ready for it," 
maintains Vil Mirzayanov. "As long as Anatoliy Kuntsevich was in 
charge of the convention committee, nothing was done in this 
respect in the sphere of chemical disarmament. Kuntsevich only 
fooled everyone, announcing new plans and acquisition of new 
credits." 
  A quantity of 40 tonnes had been officially stated for 
convention purposes, but Vil Mirzayanov says there are 70 tonnes: 
  "The generals decided to destroy the `extra' 30 tonnes their 
own way, to which evidence in Shikhany points. That is precisely 
why the recent secret move of chemical substances had taken 
place--those, from the undeclared category." 
  If this is so, Lieutenant General Anatoliy Kuntsevich is 
completely in the right place, and Vil Mirzayanov is being 
unfair to him: Kuntsevich's doctorate thesis was on the topic of 
decontamination of combat equipment contaminated with soman. 
Academician Kuntsevich does know how to destroy toxic substances. 
<H5>  Out of Sight </H5>
  How Anatoliy Kuntsevich is viewed abroad is a special topic. 
Vil Mirzayanov contends that "in the West, Kuntsevich is 
considered a trickster, not an authority--as an IZVESTIYA item 
said." 
  Mirzayanov is supported by THE WASHINGTON POST's Jeffrey 
Smith--on the subject of bacteriological weapons, however, which 
were also under Anatoliy Kuntsevich's jurisdiction: 
  "Inspections by American and British specialists confirmed 
that a considerable part of the biological infrastructure 
associated with the Russian military remained largely intact." 
  That Russia continues to develop bacteriological weapons was 
reported in 1993 by a defector--a high-ranking scientist who 
participated in bacteriological weapons development. 
  "In Washington's opinion," writes Smith, "Kuntsevich's 
activities stood in the way of progress in resolving the 
biological weapons problem." 
  It is obvious that one of the reasons for Anatoliy 
Kuntsevich's dismissal was the hostile attitude toward him on 
the part of the American White House. One of the birds Boris 
Yeltsin aimed to kill by signing the order to fire the 
academician was the desire to remove an obvious irritant from 
the Americans' sight. 
<H5>  Authoritative Person Needed </H5>
  According to MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI, before signing the order 
the president offered to let Anatoliy Kuntsevich resign on his 
own. The committee chairman procrastinated, and when he did 
write a letter of resignation, it was too late. 
  Member of the convention committee Igor Vlasov refused to 
say 
anything about the chairman's dismissal: 
  "The president's press secretary Vyacheslav Kostikov has 
made 
all the comments. I am not going to comment on rumors and 
conjectures." 
  Aleksandr Ivanov is currently handling the duties of 
convention committee chairman. According to Igor Vlasov, on 7 
April Anatoliy Kuntsevich became ill and issued an order 
temporarily naming Ivanov acting chairman. After that, the 
president's edict came out. Anatoliy Kuntsevich is still ill, 
and visiting a polyclinic. 
  "He has all the proper medical certificates," says Igor 
Vlasov. 
  Igor Vlasov maintains that he is not aware of the 
president's 
offer to allow Anatoliy Kuntsevich to resign voluntarily. Also, 
"it is not for us to decide who will head the convention 
committee." 
  "If an authoritative scientist rather than a military man 
like Kuntsevich heads the committee, the resignation will make 
sense," suggests Vil Mirzayanov. He named as potential 
candidates Aleksey Yablokov and Vitaliy Goldanskiy. 

