CSO 

  [Text] Fujitsu has decided on a plan to boost greatly the 
production ratio of new computer products put on sale during the 
fiscal year in fiscal 1994 to 60 percent, about double the 
existing amount on a money basis. Because the price collapse of 
existing products has been severe, it will shorten the cycle for 
improvement and introduction of products. It is viewed as a 
pause in emergency evacuation-type cost reductions such as 
reduction in number of parts which began with the recession and 
they have shifted to an offensive restructuring (business 
rebuilding). 
  Sales of the Fujitsu computer division amount to 70 percent 
(1.49 trillion yen for fiscal 1993 estimate) of total company 
sales (2.16 trillion yen for same), including software. The 
ratio occupied by products introduced during the fiscal year has 
advanced to 30 or 40 percent so far; in fiscal 1993 it was 35 
percent, but the plan for fiscal 1994 is to boost it to 60 
percent. 
  With downsizing (shift of demand to small machines) in the 
background, price competition has intensified for personal 
computers, work stations, and peripheral equipment and prices 
collapse easily. Because the profit margin becomes thin a few 
months after they go on sale, the company has decided to shorten 
the cycle of product improvement and introduction, centering on 
the small machine field to ensure earnings in fiscal 1994 and to 
shift to a policy of expanding new product production. The 
number of new products during a year, including improvements, 
normally amounts to over 1,000 items, but the idea is to 
increase them on a large scale in fiscal 1994. At the same time, 
they aim to extricate themselves from an earnings structure 
where nearly half the sales of the computer division is occupied 
by large machines and related products. 
  Fujitsu is affected by a high dependency on large machines 
for which demand has sharply decreased and ordinary profit fell 
to a deficit (8.7 billion yen) in the March 1993 quarter, but as 
a result of cost reductions such as expansion of overseas parts 
procurement advantageous to the high yen and integration and 
consolidation of machine types, prospects are that the March 
1994 quarter can secure an ordinary profit of 27 billion yen. 
They are making a full-scale reorganization of business sectors, 
taking advantage of the review of the computer division product 
introduction plan. 

