BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Oblast Administration Chief Yuriy Matochkin </F>
by V. Kostomarov in Kaliningrad; date not given: 
"Administration Head Yuriy Matochkin: `The Most Open Oblast in 
Russia'"] 
  [Excerpts] As the press has already reported, the 
Russian-Polish talks on border issues recently ended 
successfully in Kaliningrad. During the talks, Oblast 
Administration Head Yuriy Matochkin met with a group of 
journalists whose questions dealt mainly with border problems. 
  [Kostomarov] How would you assess Russian-Polish relations 
in 
border issues? 
  [Matochkin] I rate them as positive. As you know, we have an 
agreement on the so-called border cooperation concluded between 
the governments of the two countries. This agreement is a basis 
for another accord with all Polish border voivodships. We hold 
regular meetings, and the process of economic cooperation is 
expanding. In other words, we have no major problems on the 
border with Poland. This was also confirmed at our meeting with 
Jan Wojcieczuk, chief commander of the border guards of the 
Republic of Poland, who headed the Polish delegation at recent 
talks on border issues in Kaliningrad. True, recently we put 
forward a claim to the Polish side.... 
  [Kostomarov] What claim in particular? 
  [Matochkin] It is linked with the introduction of new 
requirements for service passports by Poland (even though in 
accordance with the 1972 agreement between the former Soviet 
Union and the People's Republic of Poland). This halted the 
traffic at the border for some time. Now this problem has been 
resolved to a certain extent. At least, the Poles issue free 
visas on the border, and the traffic has been renewed. 
  Speaking about our region in general, Kaliningrad is 
Russia's 
most open oblast today. Currently, we have 24 border crossings, 
and this is not the limit yet. Today, we are working on opening 
several new international crossing points. I believe that their 
number will reach 30. Incidentally, this question was discussed 
with the Polish delegation in great detail. 
  General Colonel Andrey Ivanovich Nikolayev, commander in 
chief of the Russian border troops, is well informed about these 
plans. We have told him in particular that it is necessary to 
open the large international crossing point "Mamonovo 2." 
Furthermore, we want all the facilities to be under one roof 
for the first time -- that is, separate Russian and Polish check 
points rather than one under the same roof. [passage omitted] 
  [Kostomarov] What is the relation between the customs regime 
and the development of a free economic zone? 
  [Matochkin] It is most direct. There are two conditions 
necessary for the actual functioning of a free economic zone -- 
a preferential customs regime and preferential taxes. As for 
the first condition, such a regime was put into effect as of 
February last year. 
  [Kostomarov] In your opinion, why have attempts at smuggling 
to Kaliningrad Oblast from Lithuania not been suspended? 
  [Matochkin] Thus far, the border with Lithuania has not been 
delineated. An administrative rather than a state border is 
being guarded. Given this fact, there are a million problems, 
including the one of contraband. What is the greatest trouble 
here? There are plans to ship oil products, for example, from 
Ryazan to Kaliningrad. The cisterns reach Lithuania and vanish 
there. We begin a search. The consignment agreement has been 
concluded with some fictitious firm. Therefore, the Russian 
State Customs Committee has decided to take deposit duties. 
However, this has not been very effective and it has hampered 
the registration of loads for law-abiding citizens. It is the 
latter rather than various crooks who primarily suffer. 
  [Kostomarov] It seems that the extraction of oil on the 
Curonian Spit is also linked with border problem. 
  [Matochkin] The oil shelf is the object of negotiations on 
the sea and land borders that Russia and Lithuania are currently 
conducting. The Lithuanian side is clearly interested in moving 
this border southward and cutting off the oil field D-6 that is 
viewed as having a future. 
  According to our overall information, and we are closely 
cooperating with border guards in this issue, Lithuania has no 
legal basis for such claims. It is playing for time and looking 
for arguments. However, there are no arguments, and any 
international court would confirm this, because in such cases 
sea borders run perpendicular to the coast line. In general, 
this example demonstrates that the Russian Government must 
clearly define its economic policy toward the Baltic states. 
  [Kostomarov] The current press, particularly the foreign 
one, 
abounds in comments on the statement made by Army General Pavel 
Grachev, Russian defense minister, concerning the establishment 
of a special defense region with a single command on the 
territory of Kaliningrad Oblast. Some politicians and mass 
media in neighboring countries believe that the emergence of 
such a defense area threatens their security. Would you object 
to this? 
  [Matochkin] I would like you to notice that this will be a 
defensive rather than an offensive region! Certainly, this is a 
purely military issue, but the administration, as you 
understand, is informed about it. Our territory is small. 
Therefore, it is rational even from an economic viewpoint to 
have a single command here. Meanwhile, the Baltic Fleet and the 
11th Army have separate infrastructures -- for example, 
storehouses, food supplies, and so on. At the same time, one 
must note that the size of the Army is being reduced. 
  [Kostomarov] How do you assess the plan to allow young 
people, drafted for service from Kaliningrad Oblast, to perform 
their duty here in the region, for example, in the border troops? 
  [Matochkin] We are implementing this model vigorously now. 
We launched this project back when Andrey Ivanovich Nikolayev 
was the Army commander in Kaliningrad Oblast. We believe that 
our region is special, and that young people from Kaliningrad 
Oblast must serve primarily here. 

