CSO 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H8>  Bauza Pressures PJ Senators </H8>
  According to the 4 May Buenos Aires daily CLARIN, Secretary 
General of the Presidency Eduardo Bauza, at the request of 
President Carlos Menem, on 3 May met with Justicialist Party 
(PJ) senators to urge them to approve the draft Patents Law 
"whatever the cost." CLARIN explained that "if the law is 
approved, Clinton will invite Argentina to join NAFTA, and if 
the law is not approved, there will be harsh trade sanctions 
against Argentina after 30 June." 
  The daily noted that in spite of Senate President Eduardo 
Menem's promise that the Senate would approve the draft law by 
30 June--the deadline set by the United States for passage of 
the law before trade sanctions would be applied--there are no 
signs that both houses of Congress will pass the law by that 
time. The draft law must pass through five committees before it 
can be approved and sent to the lower chamber. Furthermore, 
"there is every indication that its movement through the Chamber 
of Deputies will be more difficult than through the Senate," 
CLARIN emphasized. 
The daily added that when U.S. Ambassador James Cheek stated 
he was confident the Argentine Congress would approve the law by 
the 60-day deadline, he "did not take into account" the 
opposition of the Radical Party (UCR) bloc in the Chamber of 
Deputies, which wants to discuss ratification of the GATT 
treaty, with its section on intellectual property rights, before 
discussing the Patent Law. CLARIN commented that the terms of 
the GATT agreement are more advantageous for Argentina than the 
draft Patent Law. 
<H8>  Granillo Ocampo on Possible Sanctions Delay </H8>
  On 9 May Argentine Ambassador to Washington Raul Granillo 
Ocampo said that the 60-day limit the United States had allowed 
Argentina for approval of the Patents Law before trade santions 
would go into effect "would probably be extended to six months," 
according to the 10 May Buenos Aires daily LA NACION. After that 
time, the ambassador predicted, the U.S. Government would impose 
trade sanctions if intellectual property rights do not receive 
adequate protection in Argentina. Granillo Ocampo confirmed the 
Argentine Government's "commitment" to approve a "new patents 
law which would recognize the intellectual property rights of 
[pharmaceutical] laboratories." 

