Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by XINHUA reporter Guo Lingchun (6753 3781 </F>
2504): "Hong Kong 1993: Full of Confidence and Expectations"] 
  [Text] Hong Kong, 3 Jan (XINHUA) -- Sino-British relations 
reached a low ebb in 1993 due to disputes over the issue of Hong 
Kong's political system. Although people in Hong Kong had some 
worries and anxieties, various signs showed the world: It was a 
year with more expectations and confidence than anytime before. 
  On 10 December 1993, the Hong Kong Government, in disregard 
of the will of Hong Kong residents and the opposition of the 
Chinese side, gazetted parts of the "political reform bill." A 
dark cloud overshadowed Hong Kong, and people made forecasts on 
whether the next day's weather would be cloudy or fine. It was 
on the next day, that Hong Kong's economic lifeline, namely its 
stock market, ushered in an historical moment -- the stock 
market index broke 10,000 points. The United Stock Exchange was 
a happy place; directors of the board and brokers opened 
champagne to celebrate this long awaited day. 
  In analyzing the stock market trends, professionals noted 
that despite the noncooperative attitude of the British side in 
the transitional period, the Chinese Government's pledge to 
firmly maintain and guarantee Hong Kong's long-term stability 
and prosperity enabled the people to have a far-sighted view. 
Foreign investors also expressed their satisfaction over Hong 
Kong's investment environment with China's support. 
  The booming stock market was just one example. A few days 
later, a large real estate transaction took place in Hong Kong. 
A consortium composed of five companies in Hong Kong purchased 
a residential area in Bijiashan's Longpingdao at the 
unprecedented price of HK$3.94 billion. Real estate experts 
marveled at the transaction and commented: "In the wake of the 
rupture of the 17th round of Sino-British talks, the developers 
apparently continue to think Hong Kong's real estate market has 
good prospects in the future." A responsible person of the 
consortium said with a smile: "Personally, I am full of 
confidence in Hong Kong's real estate market after 1997." 
  Let us recall some transactions of Hong Kong's expensive 
property and land in 1993. During the year, 27 real estate 
transactions each exceeding HK$500 million were purchased by 
local consortiums. It can be said real estate "led the market." 
Although most experts believe Hong Kong's housing market has a 
slight chance of rising in the next few years, the immediate 
competition shows that real estate moguls see a bright future 
for the market. 
  Not all people are without worries, some are silently 
adopting a wait-and-see attitude. However, the closer to 1997 
the more Hong Kong residents are awaiting "one country, two 
systems," "administering Hong Kong by residents in Hong Kong," 
and the policy of "no change for 50 years." All kinds of 
erroneous reports and rumors cannot obstruct people's optimistic 
expectations for the future. The Chinese Hong Kong Economic and 
Trade Association, which was established at the end of 1993, 
named its first activity as "Successfully Marching Toward the 
Year 2000." The director of the association publicly announced: 
We are convinced that "one country, two systems" will be firmly 
implemented in Hong Kong in 1997. 
  During 1993, education to popularize the Hong Kong Basic Law 
became a social custom. Several dozen civil units have 
organized joint meetings to systematically promote various 
activities. More and more people in Hong Kong are learning 
about their rights and obligations. The Preliminary Working 
Committee for the Preparatory Committee of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region [HKSAR], which shows the "image" of the 
HKSAR government, has been accepted by more residents in Hong 
Kong. Cheng Jienan, secretary general of the influential civil 
political organization, "The Association of Democratic 
Construction," commented on a public opinion poll and said: 
People in Hong Kong have gradually understood that the Chinese 
Government has the need and capability to make preparations for 
the transition in 1997. 
  From people's signed letters to the Secretariat of the 
Preliminary Working Committee and from constant telephone calls 
received by XINHUA Hong Kong Branch, we know the innermost 
thoughts and feelings of people who are concerned about their 
own fate. They put forward plans for administering Hong Kong in 
the future, suggested things to which good attention should be 
paid in the course of "recovery," and expressed other views. 
This indicated that a brand new attitude of being the masters 
of the country is brewing in this land, on which the 100-year 
colonial rule will soon end. 
  The heat of emigration which once engulfed Hong Kong has 
begun to cool down, and "the return of talented people" has 
become a new custom. Some say this means "tired birds know it 
is time to return" and some say it is due to the economic 
recession in Europe and America. However, according to the view 
of a scholar of the Hong Kong Personnel Management Association, 
the good, bright prospects of Hong Kong's economy have provided 
a golden opportunity for those who have returned to use their 
skills. According to a statistical report, of the Hong Kong 
residents who went abroad to settle down in foreign countries in 
the past 10 years, some 12 percent have returned to their 
homeland. The number will continue to rise this year. 
  It is estimated that Hong Kong's economic growth in 1993 was 
five percent. In reviewing the past and looking toward the 
future, authoritative people in various trades all mentioned the 
"powerful push of the Chinese factor." People in trade circles 
have made encouraging remarks in the past few days to say 
goodbye to the old year and greet the New Year: With the 
accumulation of foundation work over many years plus the support 
of the vigorously developing economy on the mainland, Hong 
Kong's future prospects are very bright! 
  In 1993, people focused their attention on the development 
of 
Sino-British relations and its influence. The unilateral ending 
of talks by the British side cannot prevent the pace of Hong 
Kong's return, but has made hesitaters give up their illusions. 
Therefore, people in Hong Kong are more confident and have more 
expectations than ever before. A businessman said: "We are 
convinced that China's policy for Hong Kong is a mature and 
stable one." 

