Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Vitaliy Churkin, President </F>
Yeltsin's personal envoy for issues concerning the former 
Yugoslavia, by Bogoljub Lacmanovic in Moscow on 27 December: 
"Realist Autonomy for the Serbs"] 
  [Text] "If the present peace plan for Bosnia-Herzegovina 
is not signed on 15 January in Geneva -- that is, by the end of 
January 1994 -- the consequences for all parties to the conflict 
will be disastrous," Vitaliy Churkin, President Yeltsin's 
personal envoy for issues concerning former Yugoslavia, told me 
during our one-hour interview. Surprised, I gave him a long, 
sharp look, trying to decide whether behind this "dark forecast" 
there only lay an attempt to place more pressure on the parties 
to sign the peace agreement through a public message in the 
papers. 
  Churkin caught the look and continued: "No, no. I am sure 
that the present peace plan cannot hold forever without being 
signed, especially since the plan contains resolutions to 99 
percent of the disputed issues, and there is tension about 
whether the plan will be signed. I will allow a term of two 
months at the most, but if the plan is not signed by then, I 
believe that the peace plan will fail, as will all the positive 
achievements related to it. Then, when the snow begins to melt, 
all the conflicting sides will take their gloves off and start 
fighting with their bare hands. In short, what could not be 
solved at the negotiating table will be solved on the 
battlefield. Consequences will be terrible not only for Bosnia 
and the entire former Yugoslavia, but for Europe as well. It 
will then be difficult to stop the war, Europe will be faced 
with a new wave of refugees, and the burden of humanitarian aid 
will also increase. However, we are doing this interview for 
the new year's edition of your paper, so let us be optimistic. 
I also hope that reason will prevail and that the conflicting 
sides will sign the peace agreement in Geneva on 15 January." 
  I interviewed Vitaliy Churkin on 27 December in his office 
of 
first deputy foreign minister of Russia on the seventh floor of 
the high rise at the Smolenskaya Square in Moscow, built 
immediately after World War II. Only two days had passed since 
Churkin's return from the peace talks in Geneva and Brussels, 
and he was still under the impression of their unsuccessful 
ending, although the peace plan was "very close" to being 
signed. I first asked him if a positive move had been made 
after all toward resolving the crisis in Bosnia and the former 
Yugoslavia. He replied: 
  [Churkin] A positive move has been made, but I have the 
feeling that we have again come to the point at which things can 
be stalled and negotiations continued, but an end to the 
negotiations cannot be seen. If 99 percent of the contentious 
issues have therefore been agreed upon and if there is a desire 
for peace, I see no reason for not signing the peace plan. 
  [Lacmanovic] Vitaliy Ivanovich, does that mean that you also 
believe that the Croat and Serb sides have granted enough 
concessions to the Muslims? 
  [Churkin] It seems that the Muslims have not accepted the 
agreement and the formula that the European Union has proposed 
for their access -- that is, exit -- to the Adriatic Sea. In 
Geneva, Presidents Tudjman and Milosevic agreed upon the 
parameters important for the agreement: 17.5 percent of the 
territory to the Croats, 33.3 percent to the Muslims, and 49.2 
percent to the Serbs, while the Serbs and the Muslims still have 
to agree upon the details on the map. In my opinion, it was 
possible to sign the peace agreement in Brussels on the basis of 
the formula proposed by Presidents Tudjman and Milosevic, and 
the negotiations on disputed details should have been continued. 
This mechanism of finishing the peace plan is contained in the 
document that all three sides initialed this fall on the British 
aircraft carrier near Split. That was the reason I, as an 
observer, asked for permission to speak at the meeting in 
Brussels and suggested to the conflicting sides that they sign 
the peace agreement immediately and then continue the 
negotiations on the disputable or unresolved issues. 
  [Lacmanovic] The Muslims have obviously turned their back on 
your proposal. 
  [Churkin] In Brussels, I was amazed to see that this side 
first rejected the plan proposed by the European Union and then 
dared to say: Since this plan is not acceptable, let us seek 
and elaborate on another variant. A thousand and one variants 
of, for instance, an exit to the sea can be made. Channels, 
tunnels, or new roads to the sea can be constructed, but I am 
now asking where the guarantees are that this thousand and one 
variant will then be accepted. 
  This is why I proposed in Brussels that in case any of the 
conflicting sides (which need not be the Serb one) blocks the 
peace process, the conditions of suspending the sanctions be 
elaborated to the minutest detail and that there be no waiting 
for the final signing of the peace agreement. I would like to 
stress that this is a matter of precisely arranged conditions 
for lifting the sanctions. It is my opinion that our proposal is 
also in the interest of Croatia and that Zagreb should 
understand it correctly and accept it. I believe that this 
proposal concerning the sanctions suits all the conflicting 
sides in Bosnia, where I also include the Muslims, whose aim it 
is that the agreement be reached and that the peace plan be 
signed. 
  [Lacmanovic] You have said that the signing of the agreement 
in Brussels was "very close." Exactly what was it that remained 
disputed? 
  [Churkin] Apart from the access to the sea for the Muslims, 
they also claim that the offered access at Prevlaka would 
require the construction of a road that would be too expensive, 
and there are also some disputed issues concerning Mostar, while 
between the Muslims and Serbs, there are some disputed details 
concerning Sarajevo and the widening of their access to the Sava 
River. 
  [Lacmanovic] Vitaliy Ivanovich, do you believe that 
Croatia could really offer the Muslims some better access or 
exit to the sea than what President Tudjman has offered now in 
Geneva, without this concession being quite unacceptable to the 
interests of the Croatian state? 
  [Churkin] It is hard for me to judge. This is an extremely 
difficult and complex issue. I did not dwell on it too much, 
distancing myself from the position of the European Union. It 
seemed to me that the first variant, which was elaborated on the 
British aircraft carrier, satisfied everyone. It turned out 
later that I was wrong. I have the impression that this problem 
is not being considered with due attention. I repeat: If there 
is a sincere desire to reach an agreement, then there is no 
reason not to sign it. How the ships will sail and similar 
issues are technical details. It seems that everything is being 
made to go in circles. 
  [Lacmanovic] An increasing number of unbiased analysts and 
commentators have concluded that the Muslim leadership presents 
new demands at each new meeting in order to make the 
negotiations more difficult, when behind all this lies their 
rejection of the plan on the territorial division and 
Bosnia-Herzegovina as a union of three peoples. While you were 
attending the negotiations in Brussels, the Bosnia-Herzegovina 
ambassador in Russia told Moscow TV that Bosnia was indivisible 
and that it should remain an integral state. 
  [Churkin] Everyone knows that among the Muslims, there are 
people who do not like the present peace plan and who are 
persistently trying to create the illusion that there is no 
conflict in the Bosnian war -- that is, that there is no 
conflict of interests. They think it is possible to "roll back" 
the present situation in Bosnia to the beginning. This is not 
possible, and if we were to concentrate on these people, the war 
in Bosnia would continue forever. 
  I believe that the tragedy of the Muslims is being made 
worse 
by the fact that they are trying to extend the war. They think 
that in this way, they will reach their goal -- a united Bosnia- 
Herzegovina. However, they are neglecting the fact that the 
longer the war lasts, the further their ideals are from reality. 
The continuation of war raises new barriers among the people. 
The sooner the war is ended, the more chance there will be of 
strengthening the relations that connect and unite the Muslims, 
Serbs, and Croats in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Lacmanovic] Some analysts explain the present Muslim 
actions at the negotiations by the alleged support of the United 
States. Even Lord Owen, after the unsuccessful negotiations in 
Brussels, blamed Washington for the "idealist" approach to the 
problem of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Churkin] I have not seen this statement and will, 
therefore, not comment on it. However, since you have asked an 
extremely important question, I will answer it, although not 
directly because of my diplomatic role in the entire conflict. 
  First, I would like to emphasize that the culprits for the 
conflict should not be sought outside but within the entire 
former Yugoslavia. All the conflicting sides are to blame and 
not someone else or someone besides them, especially since so 
much blood has been spilled. Naturally, external factors also 
play a role in that conflict. I personally believe that the 
peace agreement has not been signed in Brussels because the 
international community was not decisive enough for the task it 
was faced with: to bring the job to the end. To put an end to 
the endless meetings and negotiations, it would take the 
decisiveness of the European Union, Russia, and the United 
States. If the other international forces had been as 
determined in Brussels as Russia was, the peace agreement would 
have been signed there. The Russian position is that, because 
of the danger that the conflict in Bosnia brings, the peace plan 
should be signed immediately. If not today, then tomorrow. 
  [Lacmanovic] At the meeting in Brussels, you presented some 
proposals regarding the solving of Croat-Serb relations. 
  [Churkin] Yes, I welcomed the progress achieved in the 
negotiations between Presidents Tudjman and Milosevic a day 
earlier and asked both sides to immediately start working on the 
formula for the mutual recognition of the FRY and Croatia and on 
establishing diplomatic relations, which would ultimately result 
in solving and determining the final political status of the 
Croatian territory with the Serb majority. Our plan has several 
stages: the first is reaching an agreement on ending armed 
conflicts, and then the two sides establishing the first degree 
of economic relations (for the start, opening the traffic on the 
Belgrade-Zagreb road). What could follow is the mutual 
recognition of the two states and the establishment of 
diplomatic relations between Belgrade and Zagreb, which would 
facilitate a constant dialogue, and, most importantly, all this 
would open the door to the last and most important stage, which 
is the resolving of the fundamental problem -- that is, the 
political status of the Krajina. 
  I would like to point out that when I talked to President 
Tudjman about this sequence and plan for resolving the 
Croat-Serb relations, I did not have the impression that he was 
not accepting it. Therefore, this idea should now be elaborated 
upon. 
  [Lacmanovic] However, Milosevic and the Serb leadership have 
not agreed to the diplomatic recognition of Croatia because they 
do not want to or think that this way they can dispute the 
Croatian state borders. 
  [Churkin] The Serb leaders did not tell me their reasons, 
but I also think that this is the issue and that they do not 
want to separately consider the situation in the Croatian areas 
with a Serb majority called the Krajina. In the present 
situation, when there are only attempts to negotiate a 
cease-fire in Croatia and the establishment of the first 
economic relations, it is unrealistic to expect that Belgrade 
will start working on the diplomatic recognition of Croatia. 
However, from a diplomatic point of view, it would be good (and 
it is possible) to find a way that would, for instance, allow 
for appointing ambassadors. The most important thing now is to 
find a viable formula that would open the door to the final goal 
-- determining the political status of the Croatian areas with a 
Serb majority. 
  [Lacmanovic] Does this viable formula imply the creation of 
a "state within a state" -- that is, the establishment of 
Croatia as a federation? 
  [Churkin] You must be referring to the interview I gave to 
one of the Zagreb papers last summer. The correspondent asked 
me questions insisting on various formulations, to which I 
responded. It is up to the correspondent and the papers to 
interpret the conversation in a certain way and in a certain 
context, but I was not talking about a federation and a state 
within a state. My position was, and is now, that the Serbs in 
that area in Croatia should be given realist autonomy. It is up 
to the two sides to agree upon what the form of this autonomy 
will be and what it will be called. Therefore, what matters is 
content and not the formal title. 
  [Lacmanovic] Croatia has already made the greatest possible 
step in that direction. This fall, President Tudjman proposed 
autonomy for two Serb districts in his peace initiative. 
  [Churkin] I consider President Tudjman's first step 
extremely important and positive. The most important thing is 
that the two sides now start a process of negotiation based on 
this peace initiative. To be honest, I do not think that 
President Tudjman's positive proposal will remain his last step 
in seeking the solution to the problem. It will take a lot more 
effort before the political status of this region in Croatia is 
solved. 
  [Lacmanovic] Is that the reason you practically started the 
initiative to implement the "modus vivendi" formula, which the 
European Union proposed for the Croatian territories controlled 
by rebel Serbs? 
  [Churkin] A good idea or a plan usually has many authors. I 
would like to remind you that this summer, I managed to organize 
a meeting of the representatives of Croatian authorities and the 
Knin Serbs in Topusko, at which the negotiations on a cease-fire 
and establishing economic relations were first started. 
  [Lacmanovic] Does your initiative in Brussels mean that the 
Russian side believes the Croat-Serb contradictions can be 
solved without untying the Bosnian knot first? 
  [Churkin] Why not? It would be useful. The latest meeting 
of Presidents Tudjman and Milosevic in Geneva has shown that 
this is also possible. 
  [Lacmanovic] Croatia is convinced that a peaceful agreement 
with the Serbs is not possible if the sanctions against 
Belgrade, which supports and encourages the separatism of the 
Knin Serbs, are lifted. However, Russia persistently supports 
the lifting of the sanctions against Serbia. 
  [Churkin] First, the sanctions are not only damaging Serbia 
but the entire geopolitical region around it, and it is 
impossible to keep the sanctions in effect forever. Second, the 
sanctions were introduced as an instrument that should lead to a 
peaceful agreement on Bosnia. It would be unrealistic to expect 
that this agreement can be reached without having informed the 
Serbs of the exact conditions for lifting the sanctions. 
  I know that the Croat side would like the lifting of the 
sanctions to be directly connected to the solving of the problem 
of its territory controlled by the Serbs. The Russian position 
on this issue is strictly a matter of principle. As a member of 
the Security Council, Russia's position is that this body should 
act in a legalist way. In this specific case, this means: The 
sanctions against Serbia were introduced because of the 
situation in Bosnia- Herzegovina, and if this conflict is 
solved, the sanctions should be lifted. During the negotiations 
on the British aircraft carrier, the three conflicting sides 
agreed upon the conditions for lifting the sanctions. According 
to the final account, the solving of the Bosnian problem will 
pave the way to the gradual normalization of the Croat-Serb 
contradictions, and this is precisely why I would like to ask 
the Croat side to consider the problem of the sanctions in its 
complexity. 
  [Lacmanovic] Vitaliy Ivanovich, I am certain that you are 
aware of the fact that you and your statements are frequently a 
target of severe criticism in the Croatian press. 
  [Churkin] I am not only attacked in Croatia. I am attacked 
by the Serb and Muslim side, too. This is not surprising. In a 
way, I am proud of it, as it confirms my belief that I am 
carrying out my diplomatic tasks objectively. I have no 
anti-Croat, anti-Serb, or anti-Muslim tendencies. I have 
visited nearly all the areas of conflict, and I know how 
difficult it is to determine who is the angel and who is the 
devil. 
  This year, I have spent 190 days traveling, and the vast 
majority of these trips was connected to seeking peace for the 
territories of the former Yugoslavia. I spent at least 300 
hours on a plane. That is two weeks. I visited Zagreb five 
times this year. 
  I still claim that Russian policies are very balanced in 
relation to all the sides of the former Yugoslavia. During my 
visit to Croatia, I discovered that the people were very 
friendly to me. Russian-Croatian state relations are good, and 
all the conditions for strengthening the economic relations 
between our countries exist. 

