BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" article by Carlos Fazio, PRENSA LATINA </F>
contributor and Uruguayan journalist residing in Mexico, 
entitled: "What Should Be Done With the CIA?"] 
  [Text] Mexico City [no date as received] -- The case of 
Aldrich Ames, a mole or double agent, who gave sensitive CIA 
information to Moscow for the last 10 years, is the spark that 
has set off a great espionage scandal between the United States 
and Russia that has momentarily put an end to Bill Clinton and 
Boris Yeltsin's honeymoon. 
  But beyond the game of geopolitics and its strategic 
consequences, the Ames affair has had a destabilizing effect 
within the agency that had been his sponsor, the CIA, which was 
already undergoing a life-and-death struggle. 
  From its headquarters in Langley, Virginia, the Company 
still 
maintains an impressive bureaucracy of 22,000 people and handles 
an ultrasecret budget of approximately $30 billion a year. 
  However, since former President George Bush declared his 
final victory over the "Evil Empire" -- the former Soviet Union 
-- and the end of the Cold War, the mecca for U.S. espionage has 
lost its way, and even today it wanders blindly in pursuit of 
confusing objectives and goals. 
  So much so, that for the past couple of years a number of 
U.S. congressmen have been insisting on the need to redesign the 
role of the CIA in today's world. 
  But the search for the identified enemy in today's world is 
more complex than it was when the East-West confrontation 
existed; that is to say, capitalism vs. communism. 
  Obviously, there still are focal points of tension in 
different parts of the world, providing the raw material for 
this "watchdog of democracy" -- which has a great deal of 
expertise in the assassination of leaders and foreign 
dignitaries, as well as in destabilizing campaigns -- raw 
material that encourages it to run amok and provide work for a 
large number of its boys. 
  Today, apparently state-of-the-art spying is not moving in 
that direction. The chiefs of the Company sensed this toward 
the end of 1991, when they drafted an internal document, 
"Changemasters," and hand-in-hand with the so-called 
globalization and bloc policy, they determined that geopolitical 
confrontation between the old superpowers (the U.S. and USSR) 
was giving way to eventual economic and trade wars. 
  Therefore, the "war for markets" became a tangible glut of 
hypothetical short-term scenarios, of greater importance than 
ideological confrontation, which was the leitmotif of the Cold 
War. 
  Robert Gates, who preceded current CIA Director James 
Woolsey, gave priority to economic espionage during his stay at 
the Langley bunker. Revelations that spies from France and 
Great Britain, the principal U.S. allies in the free world, had 
infiltrated U.S. high-technology firms, led Gates to a reversal 
of objectives. He sent Company men to spy on friendly 
countries, emphasizing the collection of secret documents in the 
fields of advanced technology, industry, and economics. The 
only problem was that, as in other areas of the agency's work, 
Company spies arrived late and ill-prepared to battle for 
information. 
  In today's world, as well as in the world of spying, the 
CIA, 
as never before, is facing strong competition. Not only abroad, 
but also within the United States, the CIA faces fierce 
competition in the fight for privileged information from 
agencies such as the DIA (Defense Intelligence Agency), the FBI, 
the National Security Council (which reports to the Presidency), 
and the State Department's External Operations Agency [as 
received]. 
  Of course, on the subject of redesigning the role of the 
CIA, 
President Clinton himself has pointed out other objectives to be 
pursued, such as drug interdiction, monitoring the spread of 
nuclear weapons, and tracking the sale of rocket technology. 
  But while it continues to search for enemies, the lack of 
clear objectives and internal rivalries has lowered the morale 
of the largest U.S. espionage agency. 
  Even worse, the "Ames case" has increased this uncertainty 
and pessimism: Langley shivered and longed for the good old 
days and the bygone Rambos of liberty. 
  Wolf Blitzer, a CNN White House correspondent and defense 
issues expert, came to a hard-hitting conclusion: These are the 
worst of times for the CIA. According to Blitzer, who 
interviewed James Woolsey, the CIA "seems to have lost its soul" 
and is trying to find a "reason for its existence." Woolsey was 
vague and elusive; he has yet to recover from the blow he 
received from Aldrich Ames, the mole in Moscow's service. 
  It was said in February, when Ames was arrested at his home 
in Virginia, that in the wake of the initial damage control 
measures a witch hunt would be launched. That has not yet 
happened, except for a few dirty, public, and yet minor scuffles 
with Moscow. But it is still early. Moreover, as we have seen, 
Woolsey has many problems -- among them, taking care of his 
"former friends" as well as his "new friends." 

