CSO 

  [Text] Katsuji Nakazawa of the Tokyo Mercantile Department 
reports, "Steel which is a typical commodity among industrial 
materials is suffering from low prices and prices for many types 
of steel have fallen to new historical lows because of slow 
demand and a barrage of imports. In the middle of March, the two 
major makers--Tokyo Steel Manufacturing and Nippon 
Steel--engaged in the third price war for H-shaped steel, which 
is a principal construction material. Currently, there are signs 
that prices may have bottomed out, but it is very difficult to 
predict future pricing. The question is, how will steel prices 
stand up in the future after having dropped for about four 
years? One must keep an eye on steel prices in any attempt to 
predict the future of the economy." 
  "Alas, Nippon Steel and Tokyo Steel Manufacturing engaged in 
the third price war for H-shaped steel." When Tokyo Steel 
Manufacturing announced in the middle of March that it would 
drop principal steel materials manufacturer prices by 20 percent 
and Nippon Steel immediately countered with its own price cuts, 
market sources which felt the brunt of the price war lost 
confidence in the markets. 
  Nippon Steel, the leading blast furnace operator, and Tokyo 
Steel Manufacturing, an independent electric furnace operator, 
had already engaged in two fierce sales wars. The first such war 
was triggered in September 1982 when Tokyo Steel indicated that 
it would compete with Nippon Steel in announcing that it would 
make H-shaped steel of the same standard as those produced in 
blast furnaces. The second war was initiated in May 1984 when 
Tokyo Steel Manufacturing announced a major reduction in 
H-shaped steel. 
  President Masanari Iketani of Tokyo Steel Manufacturing 
revealed his determination to compete with Nippon Steel in his 
remarks, "Blast furnace operators increased their production 
just when demand was decreasing. We will compete with them with 
prices that barely cover production costs." In the last two wars 
for H-shaped steel, Tokyo Steel Manufacturing's market share was 
boosted, but this time around, Nippon Steel has positioned its 
construction materials division strategically and is poised to 
maintain a firm competitive position. 
  In the handling of H-shaped steel, major distributors such 
as 
specially franchised outlets receive shipments and the 
franchised outlets impose a margin and resell to construction 
firms and secondary sales outlets. 
  Lingering demand owing to a prolonged recession has been 
complicated by the third price war, resulting in market prices 
for sales to construction firms which are one-half or 33,500 yen 
per ton compared to four years ago. 
  Ordinary shaped steel used for construction is also facing 
widespread price cuts. The market price of angle steel which is 
an important component of ordinary shaped steel was around 
47,000 yen per ton in the early part of April. Tokyo Steel 
Manufacturing which had once abandoned the production and sale 
of angle steel, reentered the market officially in May. It set 
the manufacturer price at 35,000 yen per ton, 20 percent below 
manufacturer prices of the other steel firms. As a result, 
market prices have dropped to the 42,000-yen level. 
  The price-cutting offensive being waged in the ordinary 
shaped steel sector which is a specialty of Toa Steel, an 
affiliate of NKK Steel, is part of Tokyo Steel Manufacturing's 
strategy to compete with the blast furnace group, but even 
sources in the electric furnace industry comment, "Tokyo Steel 
Manufacturing is in the process of trying to destroy weaker 
small producers." 
  In the area of plate steel, blast furnace firms and 
automobile makers have agreed to price cuts on automotive sheet 
metal for this fiscal year for the first time in five years, 
while an agreement has also been reached for price cuts on heavy 
plate steel for shipbuilders. The reason for such agreements lie 
in the fact that automobile makers and shipbuilders which until 
now used only domestic blast furnace steel had begun to procure 
steel from South Korea where prices are more than 20 percent 
below domestic prices. 
  Comments are heard from sources such as at Nissan Motors 
which say, "A strong yen has inspired a demand to lower material 
costs, which means that it is only logical to face up to demands 
for reducing the domestic-overseas price differentials on sheet 
metal." 
  "Prices May Stabilize, But Low Prices Will Persist for 
a Long Time" 
  The market price of H-shaped steel has fallen significantly 
along with cuts in manufacturer prices. Market prices on angle 
steel and special-shaped steel will probably drop further to 
levels commensurate with those established as manufacturer 
prices. However, since manufacturer prices have already fallen 
below manufacturing costs, there is no room from a cost 
standpoint for additional manufacturer price cuts. 
  Tokyo Steel Manufacturing has set the manufacturer's price 
of 
33,000 yen per ton for H-shaped steel as the "final price" from 
which further cuts cannot be made and has announced the 
cancellation of the system of after-the-fact adjustments to 
compensate distributors for losses suffered because of sharp 
market price drops which in effect were cuts in manufacturer 
prices. 
  Even Nippon Steel has analyzed "Japan Steel Manufacturing's 
market measures as being serious and has concluded that further 
price cuts will not take place," and has also implemented 
cancellations in the after-the-fact adjustment system. This 
means that an armistice is in the process of being established 
between Tokyo Steel Manufacturing and Nippon Steel on H-shaped 
steel where sharp price cuts had taken place. 
  Since distributors will move to raise resale prices in 
response to pricing measures taken by the makers, the market for 
construction steel such as H-shaped steel should form a bottom. 
However, the important private-sector demand for steel used in 
office buildings will most likely not recover for another two to 
three years. A substantial rise in overall construction steel 
prices will be difficult and the probable scenario will reflect 
stable low prices. 
  Prices for sheet steel used on automobiles and domestic 
appliances will bounce off the bottom owing to the recovery in 
consumer purchases. Some steel makers like Kawasaki Steel say 
that "initial steel crude production plans of 22.4 million tons 
for the April-June period have been revised upward by 1.6 
million tons because of increased demand for sheet steel." 
Prices will also stop dropping. However, fierce competition from 
imports will preclude any attempt at price hikes and any 
bottoming of prices will result in low prices for the long term. 
  "Price Wars Will Heat Up Further and Price Drops Will 
Continue" 
  The steel makers engaged in reckless expansion during the 
bubble period. Capacity for production of H-shaped steel has 
grown to 7 million tons. However, current demand is 3.5 million 
tons per annum, meaning that one-half of the capacity is excess. 
As long as excess capacity remains, the steel makers may speak 
of production cuts, but will not be able to enforce major 
production cuts. 
  Even if H-shaped steel prices stop falling temporarily, 
there 
is the possibility that makers will look upon the situation as a 
"good opportunity" to resume increased production, create 
production excesses and cause prices to drop again. The 
armistice on the third H-shaped steel war may just last until 
inventory adjustments are completed and later lapse into another 
"shooting war." 
  Beginning in April, Tokyo Steel Manufacturing entered the 
steel sheet pile market which in the past was monopolized by the 
blast furnace operators. Manufacturer prices were set at about 
one-half of those established by blast furnace operators. It was 
as if it had challenged the blast furnace operators as a "price 
destroyer." This price war affecting steel sheet pile and angle 
steel will not end until weak makers either withdraw from the 
market or fall by the wayside. 
  "Recovery in Economy Will Cause Sharp Turnaround" 
  Steel demand for public works projects will increase sharply 
after summer. Private-sector demand for automobiles and domestic 
appliances should recover and progress smoothly and corporate 
capital investments should recover gradually. Inventory of 
H-shaped steel held by the "Tokiwa-kai," wholesalers who handle 
Nippon Steel's products, will drop significantly during the 
summer. Demand will turn around and will cause the 
supply-and-demand situation to tighten and for market prices to 
rise sharply toward levels which prevailed before the current 
recession. 

