BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentator's article "Control Population Growth and Build </F>
an Economically Strong Province"--marking the fifth anniversary 
of the promulgation of the "Hebei Provincial Regulations on 
Family Planning"] 
  [Text] It has been five years since the "Hebei Provincial 
regulations on family planning" were issued and put into effect. 
Formulation of the regulations indicated that Hebei began to 
manage its family planning work according to law. 
  Over the past five years, party committees and governments 
at 
all levels in the province have regarded enforcement of the 
"regulations" as an important part of the endeavors to 
strengthen the legal system and to disseminate laws and as the 
foundation for making family planning work successful. People's 
congresses and governments at all levels have made it a system 
to supervise the enforcement of the "regulations." Based on the 
"regulations," Hebei has also issued detailed rules for 
enforcement, methods for explanation and enforcement, 
comprehensive management measures, methods for managements of 
transients, and other supporting documents. Law-enforcement 
contingents for family planning have been established at all 
levels from higher levels downward. Nearly 50 percent of 
Hebei's counties and cities have established courts for 
implementation of family planning to protect the legal rights 
and interests of the masses. The extensive and intensive 
publicity and enforcement of the "regulations" through various 
measures have enabled the masses to understand and abide by 
laws, restrict their child births with the "regulations," and 
greatly raise their awareness in implementing family planning. 
The "regulations" have helped stabilize the family planning 
policies, standardize the government behaviors, and maintain 
close cadre-populace ties. The promulgation and implementation 
of the "regulations" have helped gradually change the passive 
situation in family planning work and effectively control the 
inordinately large population growth. Since 1991, Hebei has 
fulfilled the state-assigned population plans for three years in 
a row. During the third baby boom when the number of women at 
the peak child-bearing age period was increasing every year, 
Hebei's birth rate declined from 20.32 per thousand in 1988 
before the "regulations" were promulgated to 15.43 per thousand 
in 1933. Calculated on the basis of the 1988 birth rate, 
850,000 fewer babies were born in these five years. This played 
an important role in promoting Hebei's economic and social 
development. 
  We should also note, however, that there are still some weak 
links in the enforcement of the "regulations." Leaders of some 
localities have failed to regard management of family planning 
work according to law as an important task; the "regulations" 
have yet to be publicized very intensively and extensively and 
to be enforced comprehensively; rural people who do not 
understand or abide by laws are rather many, and multiple child 
births by party members and cadres in violation of discipline 
have remained conspicuous; some localities have failed to 
implement the regulations on punishments and rewards; some 
localities have failed to standardize management of work and 
even practiced fraud; and some cadres, thinking that all their 
acts, no matter what, are reasonable as long as they are taken 
for family planning, have resorted to oversimplified and rigid 
measures and even violated laws in their administration, thus 
affecting the party-populace and cadre-populace relations. This 
shows that enforcement of the "regulations" is a long-term task. 
  This year is an important year for promoting the overall 
economic reform and accelerating establishment of the socialist 
market economy system. A better job in family planning will 
have a very important significance in rural areas' endeavor to 
achieve a fairly comfortable standard of living more rapidly, in 
maintaining Hebei's good trend in economic construction and 
social development, and in building an economically strong 
province. Firmly focusing on economic construction, the central 
task, we should further implement the "regulations," 
institutionalize family planning more rapidly, ensure 
fulfillment of various population growth control targets, and 
raise Hebei's overall family planning work to a new level. 
  Implementation of the "regulations" has a bearing on 
reform, development, and stability, which meet the overall 
interests. This is because the new problems in family planning 
work arising in the process of establishing the market economy 
system should be addressed by deepening reform; because 
population is an issue on development, which can be 
fundamentally resolved only when consideration is given 
comprehensively to the relations between economic and social 
development and population growth control; and because family 
planning is the matter concerning the vital interests of 
thousands upon thousands of families and only when the 
"regulations" are comprehensively enforced can we maintain close 
party-populace and cadre-populace ties and safeguard the stable 
and united situation. Therefore, leading cadres at all levels 
should have a stronger sense of responsibility and more 
initiative in enforcing the "regulations," take the lead in 
studying, publicizing, and enforcing the "regulations," and be 
models in studying, understanding, and enforcing laws. 
  We should continue intensifying the publicity and 
application 
of the "regulations." As family planning is the mass work, 
publicity to the implementation of the "regulations" cannot be 
separated from the masses. Publicity should be given in a 
repeated, in-depth, and persistent manner to make the 
"regulations" known to every village and household. Meanwhile, 
publicity of the "regulations" should be coordinated with 
patient and meticulous ideological work and with the publicity 
of the good persons and good deeds in exemplary enforcement of 
the "regulations" so that the masses, especially peasants, will 
understand that only with fewer births can they achieve 
affluence and a fairly comfortable life at an early date. We 
should persist in the direction of incentive and let the people 
who implement the "regulations" of their own accord gain real 
benefits. Cadres at all levels, especially rural cadres with 
party membership, should publicize the "regulations" through 
their own exemplary implementation of the "regulations." 
  To implement the "regulations," we should carry out 
administrative work strictly according to law. The 
"regulations" not only put forward standards and requirements on 
the masses' child births but also standardize the government 
behavior and protect the legal rights and interests of the 
masses. All localities should conscientiously intensify the 
education and training of leading cadres, cadres in charge of 
family planning, and law-enforcement personnel so that they will 
strictly act according to the "regulations" and will never 
resort to oversimplified and rigid methods, violate laws, or 
exceed the bounds. In this way, they will not only succeed in 
family planning work but also maintain close party-populace and 
cadre-populace ties. 
  The market economy is a legally codified economy. The market 
economy also calls for establishment of necessary laws for 
family planning and higher demands on management of family 
planning according to law. Population is an economic, social, 
and development issue and also an important political issue. 
Party committees and governments at all levels should approach 
enforcement of the "regulations" from the perspective of the 
effort to seize the opportunity, deepen reform, open wider to 
the outside world, promote development, and maintain stability 
and, strictly meeting the demands of the "regulations," actively 
guide the masses to further embrace the ideas of giving births 
according to law, giving fewer births, and practicing sound 
upbringing and accomplish the population growth control targets 
in high quality to promote early attainment of the grand goal of 
building an economically strong province. 

