BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 30 (CNS) -- China is poised to adopt 
five measures this year to alleviate the burden on enterprises 
in a bid to create the conditions for state-owned enterprises to 
be involved in fair market competition. The measures are listed 
as follows. 
  First, the taxation rate will be unified in order to 
reinforce the ability to service debts and allow state-owned 
enterprises to obtain capital. Starting January 1, 1994, 
revenue tax on enterprises making use of domestic capital was 
set at 33 percent while the budgetary regulated tax imposed on 
state-owned medium- and large-sized enterprises as well as the 
energy and transport fund together with the budgetary regulated 
fund levied on state-owned enterprises have been cancelled. 
According to industrial policy, state-owned solely-funded 
enterprises which needed strong support could retain their 
after-tax profits. Cost accounting for enterprises is 
standardized and interest resulting from loans is included into 
the cost. Enterprises could make use of the above- mentioned 
practices to strengthen their servicing ability. 
  Second, the debt burden shouldered by state-owned 
enterprises 
should be settled reasonably. Enterprises locked in 
difficulties in repaying loans for fixed-assets investment are 
allowed to defer the debt repayment after examination and 
approval by the creditor bank. Enterprises long suffering from 
bad debts are allowed to have part of their funds reserved for 
bad debts to be settled by a creditor bank. 
  Third, non-production-oriented business will gradually be 
separated from enterprises. Schools which have long been run by 
enterprises for the children of workers and service business for 
workers have to be separated from the enterprises as much as 
possible. Those schools and service businesses can instead be 
supported by the government or by private groups. 
  Fourth, redundancy of workers seen in some old enterprises 
has to be solved. Workers made redundant can be settled in 
tertiary industry and in economic entities newly created for 
service. Policy has to be formulated to encourage some workers 
to turn to township enterprises, three type foreign-funded 
enterprises and privately-owned enterprises while at the same 
time workers are allowed to seek jobs for themselves. 
  Fifth, enterprises which have long run in the red are 
subject 
to bankruptcy, merger, reorganization or transformed into joint 
ventures as a radical solution to the burden on enterprises. 

