SUMMARY 
                                           While seeking to wrest as many concessions as possible from 
Israel and the United States in the aftermath of the Hebron 
massacre, PLO leaders also appear to be maintaining a degree of 
flexibility in their position on terms for resuming peace 
negotiations with Israel.  In addition, PLO statements aimed at 
Palestinian audiences appear to be preparing popular opinion for 
a compromise. 
                                     END SUMMARY 
   Following meetings in Tunis between Palestinian leaders and 
delegations from Israel and the United States, PLO Executive 
Committee member Yasir 'Abd-Rabbuh reiterated PLO demands that 
Israel must take action against Jewish settlers in the occupied 
territories before the PLO will agree to resume negotiations. 
Meetings with U.S. officials, he told an interviewer, "have not 
achieved progress," and he complained that Washington is seeking 
to link issuance of a Security Council resolution on the Hebron 
massacre to PLO acceptance of a date for resumption of 
negotiations.  A Security Council resolution, 'Abd-Rabbuh argued, 
would be effective only "if it ensures practical steps . . . to 
guarantee international protection for the Palestinian people" 
and should not be "a bargaining card to resume talks."  More 
specifically, he called for "ending the settlers' presence in the 
heart of Hebron" and other areas constituting "hotbeds of tension 
and explosion," "tackling the issue of the presence of armed 
settlers . . . in Palestinian towns and villages," and "providing 
international protection, especially in Hebron" (Radio Monte 
Carlo, 15 March). 
   Other recent statements by mainstream PLO leaders and media have 
also stressed that Israel must act against settlers and that 
security for Palestinians in the territories must be ensured, but 
the statements appear to have been carefully crafted to avoid 
taking any uncompromising positions that might threaten 
resumption of negotiations.  For example: 
   --PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat branded Jewish settlements in Hebron 
as "illegal" in an interview with a French newspaper but said 
that he is "not asking for them to be destroyed, but moved."  He 
also repeated his call for an "international presence" in the 
territories to ensure Palestinian security, but appeared careful 
to couch the demand in terms designed not to offend Israel.  Such 
an international presence, he said, would be consistent with the 
provisions of the Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles (DOP)--a 
condition laid down by Israeli leaders.  In addition, 'Arafat 
suggested an armed international force only when questioned 
explicitly on the subject, asking rhetorically "who will protect 
this international force?  The armed Jewish settlers?" and 
answering that the observers must "protect themselves." 
Similarly cautious on U.S. policy, 'Arafat complained that the 
United States is blocking inclusion of any reference to Jerusalem 
in the UN Security Council resolution currently under discussion 
but was circumspect overall in commenting on U.S. policy.  "We 
must . . . wait until the whole U.S. reaction is revealed at all 
levels and not just in the Security Council," he said, and he 
asked rhetorically whether the United States will "be up to the 
responsibilities which it has shouldered since the signing of 
this DOP."  He also demanded that Israel complete withdrawal from 
the Gaza Strip and Jericho by 12 April in keeping with the DOP, 
but when asked what he would do if the deadline was not met, he 
answered only "that would mean that the Israeli Government had 
decided not to respect our agreements" (Paris Le Figaro, Il 
March). 
   --Commenting on Israel's decision to ban extremist settler 
organizations, PLO official Ahmad Quray', a key figure in 
negotiating the DOP, described the Israeli action as "a good step 
in the right direction" but "not enough."  There must be, he 
added, "a more substantial solution" specifying that "measures 
must be taken around the Ibrahimi Mosque [sight of the Hebron 
massacre] and the locations of settlers" (Ool Yisra'el, 13 
March). 
   --A PLO radio commentary excoriated the United States for 
allegedly blocking a Security Council resolution on the Hebron 
massacre, but avoided any explicit threats or demands.  The 
United States, the radio charged, is "resisting this desire for 
justice by the international community" and displaying its 
"support for, bias toward, and collusion with Israel; that is, in 
favor of terrorism, crime, and massacre."  Washington's "strange 
and abnormal logic," the commentary added, "runs counter to 
justice and history" and "destroys the foundations of the peace 
process," to the detriment not only of Palestinians but of "all 
parties, including Israel and the protector of its terrorism, the 
United States" (Voice of Palestine [VOP] in Yemen, 13 March). 
   Preparing Palestinian Opinion for a Deal 
   Two recent commentaries in PLO media addressed to Palestinian 
audiences strongly suggest that the PLO leadership, mindful of 
popular Palestinian anger following the Hebron massacre, is 
attempting gradually to prepare Palestinian opinion to accept an 
eventual compromise formula on resuming formal peace negotiations 
with Israel. 
   --A VOP commentary said that 'Arafat "is under strong pressure to 
leave the peace talks" but argued that the peace process must 
continue.  Palestinians, the commentary said, are seeking "a more 
effective U.S. role" following the massacre, but it warned that 
"there are limits to what the Clinton administration can do in 
its dealing with the Yitzhaq Rabin government" and that "the PLO 
should be satisfied with achieving limited gains."  "What will 
eventually be required," VOP argued, "is to effect a balance 
between the Palestinian and Israeli negotiators."  Although 
Palestinian gains may initially be limited, the commentary 
concluded, "unquestionably the decision to go ahead with the 
negotiations will achieve more significant gains in the future"- 
-a conclusion it justified by noting that "for the first time, 
the . . . issue of settlements . . . is being raised inside the 
Israeli Government itself" (10 March). 
   --An article appearing in the PLO's weekly news magazine 
acknowledged that the PLO's demand for a Security Council 
resolution "condemning the massacre, calling for an international 
presence in the occupied territories . . . and indicating that 
Jerusalem is part of the occupied territories as a condition for 
resuming bilateral talks with Israel" could result in "some sort 
of confrontation with the United States."  Nonetheless, the 
article continued, the PLO "realizes that the United States has a 
genuine interest in resuming the negotiations as soon as 
possible," along with other members of the international 
community.  Moreover, the article argued, "Israel's position is 
weak," thus giving the PLO a chance for "better political gains 
than previously offered to it."  Under these circumstances, the 
article concluded, "it is inevitable that the PLO return to the 
negotiating table."  The PLO, it explained, "is not in the 
business of revenge governed by instant angry reactions, but is 
seeking a political achievement that may return things to the 
right track and make up for our loss in the negotiations [on the 
DOP] in Davos and Cairo" (Filistin Al-Thawrah, 13 March). 
   Implications 
   PLO leaders clearly see an opportunity following the Hebron 
massacre to extract concessions on some issues, most notably 
settlements, on which they deferred to Israeli demands during 
negotiations leading to the DOP.  Moreover, they are undoubtedly 
also concerned that they must be seen to have made significant 
political gains before returning to negotiations in order to 
satisfy angry and skeptical Palestinians in the territories. 
'Arafat has almost certainly decided that he must eventually 
continue negotiations on the DOP, but judging by his conduct of 
the talks leading to the Cairo agreement in February, he will 
seek to prolong the current diplomatic maneuvering until he is 
convinced he can make no further gains. 
   (AUTHOR: MORTON.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703) 733-6094.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/CB 16/2148z Mar 

