BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary] </F>
  [Text] On Wednesday April 6, a Palestinian youth in a 
martyrdom-seeking act carried out a car-bomb attack against a 
commuter bus in central Afula in northern occupied Palestine. 
At least eight Zionists were killed and more than 60 were 
wounded in the attack. The Islamic movement of HAMAS [Islamic 
Resistance Movement], in a telephone contact with REUTER news 
agency, claimed responsibility for the attack, announcing that 
the attack was carried out in retaliation to the massacre of the 
fasting Muslims in al-Khalil mosque. 
  According to political observers, the act is unprecedented 
in 
its nature since it has been carried out inside the occupied 
territories and therefore, is very significant. 
  Observers say this kind of operation against the usurper 
forces is completely understandable for the world opinion 
because it was predictable in the wake of the horrible crime 
committed by the Zionists in the al-Khalil mosque in which the 
worshipers were gunned down indiscriminately. 
  Though the Israeli security forces had taken precautionary 
measures during the 40-day period after the al-Khalil incident, 
they hardly thought that the Islamic Resistance Movement of 
Palestine would be able to inflict such a severe blow on the 
Zionists inside the occupied territories where security was 
tighter as compared to other regions. 
  Actually the operation proved that the intifadah is not 
restricted to only the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, but the 
struggle against the usurpers is widespread throughout the 
occupied territories and that all Palestinians believe in the 
struggle. 
  By laying down his life on Wednesday, the Palestinian youth 
drove home the point to the Zionists that they cannot spill the 
blood of tens of Palestinians with the support of their Western 
allies and escape from paying the price for the brutal act. 
  There is no doubt that the Western media consider the attack 
as a terrorist action, but for those fighting against the 
Zionist usurpers inside the occupied territories the act of the 
Palestinian youth can never be considered as a terrorist act, 
rather it is considered as a brave act in retaliation to the 
horrible crime of the Zionists in al-Khalil mosque. 
  The usurper regime of al-Qods [Jerusalem] will be well aware 
that the outcome of its suppressive policy and aggression 
against the rights of the Palestinian Muslims would be nothing 
except the retaliatory operations and further, there is no 
doubt, that the continued aggression of the Zionists will not 
only fail to hold the Palestinian Muslims' struggle for 
liberation, but would give it further momentum. 

