Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Jan 31, BNS -- Estonian Prime Minister 
Mart Laar, along with government heads of many other states, 
attended Friday through Sunday [28-30 January] the World 
Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. 
  Laar spoke at the forum about Estonian economic reforms. He 
focused on the cost of the reforms for the population of the 
country and stressed that the success of the reforms doesn't 
mean an immediate growth of the population's income. 
  Several participants in the discussion following Laar's 
address expressed the hope that Estonia, unlike several other 
countries, will not abandon the course of quick changes, and 
gave their support to Laar's wish for "less foreign aid and more 
open markets." In the opinion of participants, this allows to 
speed up the pace of reforms and reduce a feeling of political 
disappointment. 
  Elimination of barriers in world trade and promotion of a 
free economy became the principal topics of the World Economic 
Forum, the government's press service informs. 
  Much attention was given also to the situation in Russia and 
to the economic and political integration into the European 
Union of Central and East European countries. 
  Laar's article in Thursday's issue of the INTERNATIONAL 
HERALD TRIBUNE, in which he urged to continue shock therapy in 
Russia and not support the softening of reforms there, drew a 
great deal of attention at the forum. 
  Several speakers, like economists Jeffrey Sachs and Anders 
Aslund, and former Russian Finance Minister Boris Fyodorov, 
expressed opinions similar to those in Laar's article. All 
three left their jobs in Moscow in protest against the change in 
the Russian Government's policies. 
  Swedish Prime Minister Carl Bildt stated that hyperinflation 
in Russia poses a threat to entire Europe. He arrived at the 
conclusion that plans of action have to be worked out in case 
the situation in Russia becomes critical. 
  Richard Erb, deputy chairman of the International Monetary 
Fund, voiced his opinion that Estonia is in the forefront among 
Central and East European countries in transition from a command 
economy to a free market. He cited Ukraine as an example to the 
contrary. 
  The CNN television company recorded a 30-minute program with 
Laar that will be shown next week. It gave the Estonian premier 
an opportunity to elaborate and comment on his views. 

