BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional guerrilla activities monitored through 30 
March. 
  COLOMBIA 
  On 21 March, the 36th Front of the Revolutionary Armed 
Forces 
of Colombia (FARC) attacked government and police facilities in 
Angostura Municipality, Antioquia, killing one policeman and 
injuring two. In the attack, four FARC guerrillas were killed 
and four wounded. The guerrillas destroyed police headquarters, 
the municipal palace, the Agrarian Bank, and some homes. The 
rebels also cut off telephone communications during the attack. 
(Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 23 March 94 p 8A) 
  GUATEMALA 
  On 22 March, an ORPA (Revolutionary Organization of the 
People in Arms) guerrilla column partially burned La Igualdad 
farm at La Reforma, San Marcos Department, leaving three wounded 
soldiers and approximately 500,000 quetzales in damage. Eight 
rebels overpowered security personnel and demanded diesel to 
burn the owner's house, two coffee mills, and various vehicles. 
Another rebel group detonated a bomb, destroyed 125 quintals of 
coffee, and partially destroyed a coffee dryer. A military 
patrol from El Baluarte farm chased the rebels who had mined the 
road. A Claymore mine exploded, and one officer and two 
soldiers were critically injured. (Guatemala City PRENSA LIBRE 
in Spanish 23 March 94 p 91) 
  An eight-grenade explosive device was defused by the 
National 
Police at a bridge in Zone 12, south of Guatemala City. 
Policemen defused a Claymore mine, a type of mine used by 
Guatemalan rebels, near the same bridge. Morris Eugenio de 
Leon, a spokesman for the Army's Press and Information 
Department (DIDE), warned on Thursday that urban guerrilla group 
activities have again increased in the country. (Mexico City 
NOTIMEX in Spanish 2306 GMT 24 March 94) 
  NICARAGUA 
  Five of the men who killed Javier Barahona, political 
secretary of the Sandinist National Liberation Front in Wiwili, 
were killed on 26 March in El Venado, eight miles northeast of 
Wamblan, during a clash between Army and recontra forces. The 
dead recontras include Jose Davila Reyes, alias ``Omar,'' and 
``El Lobo,'' armed leaders who kidnapped Barahona in La Maranosa 
and later savagely murdered him in Aguas Rojas community. Major 
Juan Alberto Molinares, chief of staff of the IV Zone, reported 
five recontras were killed, six were wounded, and five AK-47 
rifles and backpacks were seized. (Managua BARRICADA in Spanish 
26 March 94 pp 1, 12) 

