BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Qu Zhihong (2575 1807 4767)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 21 Jun (XINHUA) -- The protection of 
intellectual property rights in China, a country rapidly 
advancing with its endeavors toward reform and opening up, is an 
issue of close attention not only at home but also in the rest 
of world. During an interview with this reporter, Shen Rengan 
[3088 0088 1626], deputy director of the State Copyright Bureau, 
said that while everyone can see the remarkable successes the 
Chinese Government and relevant departments have achieved in 
protecting copyrights, certain people abroad have disregarded 
these facts and accused the Chinese Government of being not 
earnest in protecting intellectual property rights. They have 
also tried to use this as an excuse for exercising economic 
pressure on China. Their accusation is neither objective nor 
just. 
  Shen Rengan said: China was indeed quite late in introducing 
copyright protection, but the development has been 
extraordinarily fast. After the "PRC Copyright Law" went into 
effect in 1991, China has also promulgated many other supporting 
regulations, such as the administrative regulations governing 
copyright management. With the enactment of these laws and 
regulations, China's copyright protection has been codified into 
law. Meanwhile, China also joined, in October 1992 and April 
1993 respectively, the "Berne Convention," and the "World 
Copyright Convention" and the "Convention for Recorded 
Products." It also established ties with more than 100 
countries on protecting each other's copyrights. Since then, 
copyright protection at home has been associated with 
international copyright protection. These developments, 
achieved in just a few years, are unprecedented in the world. 
  Shen Rengan continued: According to law, all Chinese 
citizens, legal entities, and organizations can request that the 
people's court protect their copyrights when they have been 
violated, and their copyrights will be effectively protected by 
law. Meanwhile, to conform to China's situation, we also have 
established channels for administrative protection, which, in 
addition to serving authors and copyright owners, can alleviate 
the pressure on courts and make copyright protection and 
punishment of copyright infringements more efficient. On the 
other hand, the establishment and development of copyright agent 
services and organs to manage copyrights collectively also have 
positive effects in protecting the legitimate rights and 
interests of copyright owners and disseminators of creative 
works and in promoting copyright trade between China and other 
countries. These achievements show that China not only has 
drawn up a universally acknowledged advanced law for protecting 
copyrights, but has also established a relatively sound system 
for enforcing the law. 
  Of course, China, being a sprawling and populous country, 
must continue to make great efforts over a long period of time 
before the Chinese people are fully aware of copyright 
protection and before the vast number of consumers obey the 
copyright law voluntarily. Shen Rengan frankly admitted that 
China still faces serious problems regarding implementing the 
"Copyright Law" and protecting authors' rights and interests. 
He said: Copyright piracy is now our biggest challenge. He 
said: In their quest of economic interests, certain lawless 
elements have pirated and sold great quantities of books, audio 
and video tapes, laser discs, and computer sofeware. Not only 
have these people infringed upon the economic and spiritual 
[jing shen 4737 4377] rights and interests of creators of 
intellectual property, the interests of cultural and 
scientific-technological industries, and the interests of the 
states, as well as upset the normal market order, but they have 
also affected the development of cultural, scientific, and 
technical exchange and economic relations and trade between 
China and foreign countries and produced effects harmful to 
China's reform and opening up as well as the nation's material 
and spiritual construction. 
  Shen Rengan said: China has been fighting and sanctioning 
against copyright piracy. Incomplete statistics show that, in 
1993, the State Press and Publications Administration 
confiscated three million copies of pirated publications, and 
480,000 boxes of pirated videocassette tapes. This year, to 
deal with rampant problems involving pirated compact discs, the 
administration has conducted inspections in over ten provinces 
and municipalities -- including Guangdong, Shanghai, Fujian and 
Beijing -- and the widespread drive has achieved remarkable 
results in screening and consolidating the markets, 
manufacturers, and vendors of audio and video products. 
  Shen Rengan said: Copyright piracy is not a problem in 
China only, but is also a problem troubling the governments of 
many countries. Such governments have taken all kinds of 
measures to combat this phenomena. The Chinese Government and 
relevant departments are not exceptional in this regard. People 
can see from the great deal of work we have accomplished that 
the Chinese Government is extremely serious in establishing a 
system for protecting intellectual property rights and enforcing 
the copyright law. Unfortunately, certain people abroad have 
disregarded these facts and have complained about certain 
problems which are inevitable during the process of establishing 
and improving the system of protecting intellectual property 
rights. These people have even threatened to conduct so-called 
investigations and exercise pressure through imposing 
"sanctions." Shen Rengan solemnly pointed out that this is not 
a constructive attitude in seeking a solution. 
  Shen Rengan indicated that improving the system of 
protecting 
intellectual property rights has become a basic national policy. 
To make the operations in this area more effective, he said, 
China will amend the "Copyright Law" and the "Regulations for 
Implementing the Copyright Law" and supplement the copyright law 
with provisions on criminal sanctions. The State Council and 
other relevant departments are also taking measures to solve the 
many problems in managing and producing audio and video products 
in an effort to support the fight against piracy. Meanwhile, we 
will direct even more personnel to handle cases of copyright 
piracy and strictly punish the violators so as to safeguard 
copyright owners' rights and interests and the dignity of the 
law. Shen Rengan stressed, in particular, that what they have 
done is primarily for the sake of China's cultural and 
scientific-technological development, because the biggest 
victims of copyright piracy are our own authors, and the 
publishing, audio and video, movie, and software industries. He 
expressed the belief that, following the improvement of China's 
legal system and the development of the economy, China will 
continue to improve in its endeavors toward protecting 
intellectual property rights. 

