BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Development Minister Michel Roussin: "France </F>
and Rwanda: Putting an End to Unfair Accusations"] 
  [Text] A vast manhunt has caused destruction and bloodshed 
in Rwanda. This is a daily horror story for hundreds of 
thousands of men, women, and children who are hounded, 
mutilated, and murdered. Faced with such a tragedy, how can we 
fail to feel terror, astonishment, and indignation? A feeling 
of impotence overcomes us, given the scale of this tragedy. 
There is only one certainty: The international community has a 
duty to show solidarity with Rwanda. 
  France -- as it has demonstrated -- is not shirking its 
responsibilities. But it cannot act alone. 
  1. Many French people discovered, through this tragedy, how 
close the links were between France and Rwanda. Some turned 
them into a caricature and only remembered support deemed to be 
excessive for a regime which was nonetheless changing. 
Franco-Rwandan cooperation is different from that: It is 
primarily aid to the population of the order of 100 million 
francs [Fr] in 1992 in sectors as varied as coffee, rice, and 
forestry. It is also the presence of nongovernmental 
organizations (NGO) and local French communities. In 1993 
France, together with Belgium, was Rwanda's main partner. But 
there were many countries cooperating with this country: 
Germany, the United States, Switzerland, and Canada. 
  It is precisely because France was a major partner that it 
became involved in the changes in that country. On 1 October 
1990, armed elements of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) -- who 
had, it will be remembered, come from Uganda -- entered Rwanda. 
The discussions which opened between the Rwandan Government and 
the RPF led to the signing of a peace agreement in Arusha on 4 
August 1993. These agreements, concluded with the support of 
various countries in the region and of the whole international 
community, were implemented by President Habyarimana. They led 
to a process of political openness which was unprecedented in 
Rwanda's history: Recognition of 14 political parties, revision 
of the Constitution, then liberalization of the press, a 
transitional government with an expanded base, in other words 
expanded to include the Tutsi minority which obtained five out 
of 21 ministries, and the creation of a new national army. The 
RPF expressed "its most sincere thanks for the role of observer 
in our negotiations played by France." 
  2. The murder of President Habyarimana suddenly interrupted 
this change. What was to be done then? 
<H5>  The Security of French People </H5>
  Faced with the rapidly developing insecurity, the French 
Government's first duty was to ensure the safety of its 
nationals. Would anybody have understood it if we had left our 
600 fellow citizens in Rwanda in the middle of the massacres? 
The risks were real: Three Frenchmen were killed shortly after 
the events started. We also brought home 900 other threatened 
individuals, including those Rwandan employees of the 
cooperation services who wished to leave. The family of the 
murdered president was also evacuated. It is strange to say 
that France should be criticized for acting in this way: Other 
countries may have felt it right to abandon the families of the 
leaders with whom they had hitherto maintained normal relations. 
Doing likewise would have condemned them to death. Our 
traditions are different. The comparison between the welcome 
given to President Habyarimana's family and aid for the Rwandan 
population is pointless, as the figures show. 
  This immediate action by France to help its nationals was 
immediately accompanied by humanitarian aid for the Rwandan 
population. This aid is the biggest contribution from the 
international community. Having said that, there are still vast 
requirements which must be satisfied. It is our duty not to 
remain inactive. Health Minister Douste-Blazy has gone to the 
region, to Burundi and Tanzania where more than 300,000 people 
have taken refuge. That visit made it possible to identify the 
needs and respond to them without delay: dispatch of trucks, 
and water purification equipment. 
  Humanitarian aid is certainly not a substitute for political 
action. But, it must be remembered that there cannot be a 
military solution to the Rwandan tragedy. Only negotiation on 
the basis of the Arusha agreements will make it possible to 
establish a lasting peace and to overcome the hatred in time. 
  3. This is why everybody must now shoulder his 
responsibilities to ensure that solidarity with Rwanda is more 
than just a slogan: 
  * The Rwandans first: Without a minimum of agreement among 
the parties, a UN intervention is doomed to failure. Rwanda 
must want to live at peace with itself. It has shown in its 
recent history, between 1990 and 1993, that violence can break 
out there suddenly and brutally. It is not to "ethnicize" the 
conflict to recall its historical antecedents: the existence of 
a Tutsi dynasty, the 1959 revolution, the social and economic 
issues of the interethnic rivalry, the displacement of 
populations (130,000 Tutsi exiles back in 1963). The ethnic 
rationale is still relevant. Only its gradual elimination will 
enable this country to live in peace. 
  * The Africans must mobilize. The Arusha agreements were 
concluded thanks to the aid of Rwanda's neighbors. 
<H5>  Judging Those Responsible </H5>
  Today, Africa remains silent about the biggest human 
disaster 
of the end of this century. No stance has been taken, no 
condemnation has been made, there has been no public protest. 
The political leaders, the intellectuals, the African citizens 
seem to be paralyzed. How can we explain this astonishing 
silence in face of a tragedy taking place on their doorstep? 
Africa must react in order to end this suffering. 
  * The international community also delayed a long time in 
taking any initiatives. 
  France, convinced of the need for diplomatic action, has 
used 
all its influence in the Security Council to ensure that the 
United Nations shoulders its responsibilities. It is prepared 
to help the African countries which want to place contingents at 
the disposal of the United Nations. France is prepared to do 
anything useful to speed up the deployment of this force or its 
strengthening. I hope that our other partners will do likewise. 
  Finally, France has asked the UN Human Rights Commission to 
identify those responsible for this genocide and to judge and 
condemn them. 
  Glimmers of hope are appearing. In Kigali, the blue helmets 
have succeeded in evacuating hundreds of civilians to safe 
areas. The RPF military officials and those of the Rwandan Army 
have opened preliminary discussions to reach a cease-fire. 
There is therefore no inevitability because the sides involved 
agree to negotiate. 
  Africa and the international community must not show 
indifference. 
  France, for its part, has not forgotten Rwanda. 

