Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] 
<H6>  THE CITIZEN </H6>
  Warning Against Risky Election Road Shows -- "We don't think 
State President de Klerk should go on roadshows -- and neither 
should ANC [African National Congress] president Nelson 
Mandela," says the page-6 editorial in Johannesburg THE CITIZEN 
in English on 25 February. The country is "in too volatile a 
state to risk incidents in which they may be harmed in any way." 
As for the National Party (NP) signing a pledge that its 
members will not take part in violence, or Mandela calling on 
his supporters to allow other leaders and parties into the 
townships, "is not going to prevent election violence or 
safeguard leaders." 
<H6>  THE STAR </H6>
  Role for DP, PAC in April Election -- Johannesburg THE STAR 
in English for 28 February in a page-10 editorial finds that the 
Democratic Party (DP) and the Pan-Africanist Party (PAC) "each 
has a special place" in the forthcoming April election. "Cool, 
reasoned, at times rather sanctimonious, for today and tomorrow 
the DP's value is as a conscience. In decades to come, the DP's 
stress on individual rights will surely turn out to have been 
the pioneer of a new and nobler age. The PAC could hardly be 
more different. It has a gigantic (`we will win') capacity for 
self-delusion; an unquestioning faith in the (African) group; a 
Marxian (Groucho?) grasp of logic. Yet the two parties have a 
common concern: part of the PAC's support is about reluctance 
to see Big Brother ANC become overlarge, just as part of the 
DP's background concerns the same fear in respect of the Nats. 
That sentiment is invaluable in any society, and vital for the 
health of a democracy. The challenge is to let the adherents of 
both polar positions believe there is a place in the sun for 
them." 
<H6>  BUSINESS DAY </H6>
  ANC `Naivety' on Building Business Confidence -- 
Johannesburg 
BUSINESS DAY in English on 28 February in a page-14 editorial 
says the ANC leaders' attempts to develop business confidence 
have been less than unconditionally successful for a number of 
reasons. "First, even when the ANC expresses roughly the correct 
sentiments on key issues, it displays some naivety on how 
confidence is built. Arguing, for example, as Ramaphosa did, 
that an ANC government would lift exchange controls when it was 
satisfied business would not export capital is putting the cart 
before the horse. A regime permitting a free flow of capital is 
one ingredient needed to develop confidence. Second, the 
careful work carried out in the business community is regularly 
negated by ill-considered statements, such as those about 
nationalising mineral rights. It may be true that the business 
community is oversensitive, and sometimes sees threats where 
there are none. But that is a function of the uncertainty of 
our times, and the ANC needs to display greater awareness." 
BUSINESS DAY wonders how successfully the ANC will manage the 
"often conflicting pressures from the business sector on the one 
hand and the party's mass constituency on the other." 

