Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Wealth Serves People in Korea" -- KCNA headline] </F>
  [Text] Pyongyang, February 14 (KCNA) -- All the lines and 
policies shaped in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
wholly serve for defending the interests of the people. All the 
wealth of the nation is used solely for the promotion of the 
welfare and health of the people. 
  This is an eloquent proof of the politics of love for the 
people pursued by dear Comrade Kim Chong-il who put up the 
people as the most beautiful and excellent beings in the world 
and deeply worships them. 
  The Pyongyang Maternity Hospital called the cradle of 
happiness is associated with the great love of Comrade Kim 
Chong-il for the people. 
  One day when the construction of the hospital was 
progressing 
in the finishing stage, Comrade Kim Chong-il acquainted himself 
with the inventory of the equipment of the hospital and its 
interior designs. Learning that the floors of some corridors 
were designed to be covered with artificial stones, he gave 
instructions to pave all the corridors and stairways with 
marbles, saying that the hospital was a palace for the "king" of 
the country and marbles must not be spared for it. He earnestly 
said that, although its construction costed a great deal, we 
should spare nothing for the children and it should be decorated 
with jewels. 
  Under his loving care, the floor of the central hall of the 
hospital was adorned with a big "jewel carpet" with pictures of 
magnolia, camellia, broad bellflower and ginko leaves done with 
35 tons of rare natural jewels with a large chandelier with 
brilliant beads hanging over them. 
  He holds children dearer than jewels and places the 
happiness 
of the working people above money. 
  One of the legendary stories about the love of humanity on 
this land is that he blasted ten sintering furnaces at the Nampo 
smeltering complex years ago. While giving on-the-spot guidance 
to the complex, he found that a small amount of gas was leaking 
from the sintering furnaces for non-ferrous metal. Saying that 
although the sintering furnaces were valuable assets of the 
country, health of each worker is more precious than wealth, he 
gave instructions to blow up all of them. 
  Such politics of love has produced many legendary stories in 
Korea. To cite a few examples: A mine which held a big share 
in the nation's ore production, was closed for the environment 
of a workers' district, a school was set up for two children, 
military helicopters and special trains were sent for human 
lives and a large trading ship changed its course to save a 
crewman from a critical condition while sailing the ocean. 
  This is why the Korean people are sincerely following 
Comrade 
Kim Chong-il, looking up to him as the father of the nation. 

