Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug seizures and arrests related to drug trafficking 
monitored through 24 March. 
<H5>  Bolivia </H5>
  Personnel from the Special Antinarcotics Forces, FELCN, and 
the Attorney General's Office arrested 10 people and seized 3 kg 
of cocaine and marijuana during a 48-hour operation in Cobija, 
Trinidad Department. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 6 Mar 94 
National Section p 3) 
  FELCN agents arrested three drug traffickers with 16.3 kg of 
cocaine in La Angostura township, 60 km from Santa Cruz. The 
detainees are Luis Marquez Tucumano, Paulino Lopez Montano, and 
Roberto Perez Rodriguez. They brought the drug from Cochabamba. 
(Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 8 Mar 94 p 13) 
  FELCN agents seized 5,000 liters of chemical precursors in 
Quijarro after National Railway Enterprise personnel reported a 
shipment hidden in a van loaded with cement. The drug was bound 
for Santa Cruz. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 12 Mar 94 p 13) 
  Minister of Government German Quiroga Gomez issued a warning 
on the huge improvement in Bolivian drug trafficking technology 
to the extent that large quantities of cocaine hydrochloride are 
being produced in Bolivia. This highly pure substance was only 
processed in clandestine Colombian laboratories until a short 
time ago. According to FELCN files, the drug trafficking gangs 
started to install sophisticated cocaine processing laboratories 
five years ago. National Defense Secretary Mario Soliz said drug 
traffickers are using sophisticated technology and modern 
strategies that can be superior to those of the Mobile Rural 
Patrol Unit, Umopar. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 12 Mar 94 
National Page p 5) 
  Umopar Deputy Commander Juan Melean reported that most coca 
growers "are defending their plantations through the 
self-defense brigades and the installation of explosive devices 
to prevent them from being destroyed." He said Umopar detected 
electric explosive devices along paths and in maceration pits in 
the San Jose, Cotoca, and Entre Rios settlements in Chapare, 
Cochabamba Department. He noted that the characteristics of the 
explosives show that they were manufactured by experts closely 
linked to drug trafficking. (Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS in Spanish 
13 Mar 94 p A4) 
  FELCN discovered a modern cocaine laboratory at Huarapucu on 
19-20 March. Police destroyed the laboratory, which was capable 
of processing up to 100 kg of cocaine per day, and reportedly 
identified the owners, but no one has been arrested yet. (La Paz 
Radio Fides Network in Spanish 1100 GMT 21 Mar 94) 
  FELCN agents on 20 March discovered a rehabilitation center 
for common criminals that was used by a Bolivian police officer 
as a cocaine factory. Martin Jira used a prison in El Chapare to 
illegally produce the drug. Nearly 100 inmates worked in the 
coca maceration pits built in the compound, where chemicals and 
other elements to process cocaine sulphate base also were found. 
(Madrid EFE in Spanish 1731 GMT 22 Mar 94) 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
  Amazonas Federal Police Superintendent Mauro Sposito stated 
that drug-sniffing dogs are having difficulties detecting 
cocaine transported inside the pulp of regional fruits, a trick 
commonly used by drug traffickers. This is the case of the 
cupuacu from Amazonas, which is being closely controlled by 
federal agents at airports and ports in Manaus. (Sao Paulo FOLHA 
DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 21 Mar 94 Section 1 p 2) 
<H5>  Chile </H5>
  The Metropolitan Antinarcotics Brigade arrested seven people 
who were members of two drug trafficking rings that operated in 
Nunoa District and Santiago Centro and in Valparaiso. The 
detainees are Luis Grandon, Jeanette Vardy, Gustavo Ramirez, 
Luigi Inostroza, Marta Rodriguez, Robin del Solar, and Dany del 
Solar. OS-7 Carabineros arrested farmers Ivan Lazaro and Alidio 
Taucare in Arica when they were about to sell 2 kg of cocaine. 
(Santiago EL MERCURIO in Spanish 13 Mar 94 p C7) 
  OS-7 Carabineros from Arica arrested Peruvian Isidora 
Mendoza 
Quispe, 22, when she was about to enter the country with four 
packages containing more than 5 kg of cocaine paste. Carabineros 
also arrested Bolivians Eudosia Huallami Ayavire and Eleuterio 
Lucas Calle with 838 grams of cocaine paste in Iquique, and 
Alejandro Cifuentes Janet in Cerro Navia District, Santiago. 
(Santiago EL MERCURIO in Spanish 14 Mar 94 p C11) 
  Investigative Police personnel arrested Pedro Marin, 37, and 
Lilian Encalada, 47, and seized more than 50 kg of cocaine in 
Arica. Also arrested were Walter Castillo, Christian Vergara, 
and Emilia Cortes. OS-7 Carabineros also detained four people 
and seized 5 kg of cocaine paste. The detainees include Lilian 
Choque, Dante Umiet Choque, and Raul Lauca Aica. (Santiago 
Television Nacional de Chile Imagen Internacional in Spanish 
0100 GMT 20 Mar 94) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  More than 6 metric tons of drugs, including cocaine base, 
cocaine hydrochloride, and marijuana, were burned on 23 March in 
the presence of Interior Minister Juan Briones. It is estimated 
that there are approximately 200,000 hectares of coca that 
produce 60 percent of the cocaine base. The minister also 
reported that experimental poppy fields have been spotted in 
Peru. (Lima Global de Television Network in Spanish 0100 GMT 23 
Mar 94) 
  On 20 March, Peruvian police arrested Margarita Cachique 
Rivera in Lima's San Isidro District. She is a top member of the 
drug trafficking ring known as "Hermanos Cachique Rivera," and 
the owner of the 3,500 kg of cocaine paste seized by security 
forces on 27 February at a clandestine air strip in Madre de 
Dios Department. Her arrest is considered a severe blow to 
Peruvian drug trafficking after the capture of Demetrio Chavez 
Penaherrera, aka Vaticano. The gang led by Abelardo Cachique 
Rivera took control of the cocaine paste market after the arrest 
of Vaticano and is responsible for the monthly shipment of 1,000 
kg of cocaine paste to Colombia. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 0017 GMT 
24 Mar 94) 

