CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrey Zverev, chairman of the </F>
Inter-Departmental Commission for Economic Security of the 
Russian Federation Security Council: "The Reforms and the 
Country's Economic Security"] 
  [Text] The forecasts of political scientists and 
economists about a possible economic collapse are not so far 
from the truth. The most important economic and social 
indicators bear witness: a headlong drop is continuing in 
practically all sections of the national economy. In comparison 
with 1992 the gross domestic product has declined by 12 percent 
and the physical volume of production by 16.2 percent. A real 
threat to the economic security of the country has emerged. What 
are its basic features and what needs to be done in order to 
deflect the approaching calamity from Russia? The author of this 
report reflects on these and other questions. 
  In the strongly centralized unitary state with a planned 
economy that was the USSR, the problem of economic security was 
to a considerable extent subordinate in importance relative to 
military and foreign policy activity and concentrated primarily 
on the maintenance and augmentation of the resources of the 
defense industry and of state reserves and the barring of a 
large payments balance deficit. The main goal of the solution of 
these problems was to secure the economic, military, and 
ideological invulnerability of the country from external forces. 
Internal security was maintained in general by non-economic 
methods. 
  Under the present conditions of the absence of a single 
national economic plan and the contradictory action of market 
mechanisms, the achieving of the country's economic security 
requires special economic, informational, and managerial 
procedures. 
  What is meant here? 
  The economic security of any state presumes such a state of 
its economy under which, as a result of steady progressive and 
efficient economic development, internal social and political 
stability and the required defense potential, defined as the 
level of reasonable sufficiency, is secured, the country's 
international economic position is strengthened, its position on 
world markets becomes stronger, and its political role and 
influence in the world community is increased. 
  This problem has become extremely acute in our time. The 
achievement of economic security is determined both by external 
factors--the drastically increased openness of the Russian 
economy to the world market and the intensification of its 
dependence on its active influence--and by internal causes 
related to the acquisition of economic development mechanisms 
and stimuli completely different than before. 
  The command-administrative system has been dismantled. 
Centralized planning relationships are being more and more 
widely replaced by market mechanisms--economic interest and 
consumer demand. Thus, already in 1993, only a year after the 
beginning of large-scale reforms, the volumes and list of 
products being produced, intersectorial relations and 
proportions, the utilization of the capacities of enterprises 
and their operating mode have been practically totally 
determined by demand, market requirements, and financial 
limitations. This is the most important result of the reforms 
under way--the development of market relationships and a 
beginning to orienting production to authentic and realistic 
requirements. 
  At the same time, analysis of economic development in 
1992-1993 reveals that far from all the shifts and 
transformations taking place under the influence of the market 
correspond to Russia's national interests and its economic 
security. While positively evaluating the movement toward a 
market economy, one nevertheless needs to note the continuously 
increasing excessive "price" which society has already paid and 
will be forced to pay for the strategy and tactics selected for 
the conversion to the market. The scale of the present crisis 
and its internal structure are having an extremely painful 
effect on the solution of social problems and are fraught with 
the irreversible destruction of the country's economic and 
scientific-technical potential. 
  During the last two years alone the drop in production based 
on the most important macroindicators has come to about 30 
percent, and relative to the pre-crisis level has approached 40 
percent (even more according to some estimates). The drop in 
production during the last two years is steady in character from 
month to month (with certain individual exceptions). At the same 
time it is important to emphasize that recently the drop in 
production, which in some measure was previously structural in 
character, is acquiring the attributes of universal degradation, 
striking the most progressive and highly technological sectors 
and types of production to the greatest degree. Under present 
conditions the loss of production volumes is the loss of a 
market, moreover not only the world market but also the internal 
market. Once having yielded place on the market, occupying this 
niche anew is extremely complicated. 
  Collosal slumps in production, primarily in the fuel 
sectors, 
the emerging deficits of resources intended for maintaining the 
army and fleet in proper condition even now do not permit one to 
provide the required regimen of training exercises, drill, and 
sometimes even of operational duty. An enormous number of 
warships are at anchor. The air and ground armed forces are not 
performing the full volume of training programs. 
  The state doesn't have the right to further withdraw from 
the 
fact that the greatest demand limitations and drop in production 
are observed primarily with respect to products which can in no 
way be placed in the category of the non-competitive and, 
especially, of the unnecessary. Thus, given an overall drop in 
production in 1993 of 16 percent, the output of mineral 
fertilizers fell by 22 percent, protein feed--by 33 percent, 
rolled sheet--by 21 percent, diesel locomotives--by 33 percent, 
tractors--by 35 percent, fabrics--by 27 percent, and shoes--by 
34 percent. It is impossible not to take note also of the 
uncontrollably developing redistribution of industrial output in 
the direction of the raw material sectors. 
  The debate concerning the degree of the interference of the 
state in the economic life of society and first of all in the 
sphere of money-credit and financial relations has become the 
core of discussions concerning the subsequent paths of the 
reforms. This dispute is not original. The fact is that the role 
of the state in regulating the economy was discussed over the 
centuries. With us this problem has boiled down to rather 
primitive questions--is there a Gosplan [State Planning 
Committee] in Japan or isn't there, will the government allot 
money for the agro-industrial complex or quite the opposite? So 
low a level of discussion indicates at least two things--first, 
the unwillingness of the "marketeers" to debate about rather 
incontrovertible and obvious things, and precisely about the 
fact that the state in Western countries in actual fact actively 
and at times even aggresively interferes in all spheres of the 
economy and, secondly, the inadequate theoretical level of their 
opponents, the "statists," who don't know, apparently, that 
there was such a scholar as J. M. Keynes, who has created a 
doctrine under the name of "Keynesianism," the basic idea of 
which is precisely the interference of the state in the economy. 
  Let us note, however, that to argue about who is right, 
Keynes or Friedman, and whose recommendations to adhere to 
during the conversion to the market, means to run to the same 
extremes by which the disciples of the plan and of the market 
sinned at the end of the 1980's, or, let's say, to assert that 
it's better to break an egg from the blunt end and not from the 
sharp end. 
  One-sidedness is also quite fatal under our conditions of 
market conversion. One can encounter the idea that it is enough 
to "liberate" prices and to not interfere in the economy and all 
will be in order, the hostages of which we are already for the 
third year, perhaps only in textbooks as an illustration of how 
one must not do. 
  The key thought of the adherents of the "Chicago school" is 
to overcome inflation at any price. In the process the 
sequestering of budget expenditures and the reduction of the 
money supply emerge as the main weapon of this struggle. 
However, it is generally known that inflation is a category not 
only of the sphere of monetary circulation but also of 
production. In essence, inflation is a multi-factor process 
which affects both monetary circulation and production. This is 
an axiom. That is why to restrict emission while not paying 
attention to the catastrophic state of affairs in industry is a 
fatal policy. Of course, it is possible to not pay debts to the 
budgetary sphere for the sake of lowering the inflation level 
but what happens with debtors is well known. A bitter hangover 
after the banquet of the "deflationists" of 1992-1993 awaits the 
economy in the spring and summer. 
  It would be a dangerous delusion to assert that a given 
model 
approved in other countries is suited for Russia. Yes, of 
course, there are economic laws which operate in any country. 
But the conclusion that Freidman's doctrine is eternal because 
it is true should not at all follow from this. Russia needs its 
own path, which under present conditions can be formulated as 
"stop and go," simply put, to balance on a tightrope, to pass 
between the Scylla of hyperinflation and the Charybdis of mass 
unemployment and social shocks. 
  Let's examine, for example, the extraordinarily complex 
situation developing in the agrarian sector of the economy. 
Agrarian reform is a measure which has long since come to a head 
which is directed to the creation of a mixed agricultural system 
and its adaptation to market relationships. At the same time, 
while the overall trend of the reform is positive, the agrarian 
sector is presently in profound crisis. The reform began here 
spontaneously to a certain degree, which has had an effect on 
the character of its development. Despite the great number of 
decisions adopted, up to now we don't have an integral program 
for the development of the agrarian sector even for the next few 
years. 
  Meanwhile, the situation with the supplying of the 
population 
with foodstuffs even earlier (prior to 1990) represented the 
most important problem of achieving economic security and always 
was a cause giving rise to social tension. The population's 
tobacco and milk "riots" of 1990 and 1991, which took place even 
with a higher saturation of the food market than now, are 
memorable. The transition to a market system of food 
distribution--when its shortage is manifested not in empty store 
counters but in the weekly increase in the prices of top 
priority food products--at first glance somewhat lessens the 
acuteness of the problem. However, such a situation cannot last 
for long. The social tension in this sphere remains hidden so 
far and does not spill out into the streets. However, with a 
continuing tendency towards an increase in the prices for basic 
foodstuffs and a simultaneous reduction of real money incomes, 
ever broader strata of the population can slide into a situation 
that is "beyond the limit" for them. And this is fraught with 
the manifestation of very serious social consequences. 
  The drop in investment activity is no less profound and 
dangerous regarding its social and political consequences. 
During the last two years alone the volume of investments in the 
Russian economy has shrunk more than two times and today comes 
to about 40 percent of the pre-crisis level. With such 
investments there can be no talk not only of expanded but also 
of simple reproduction. Not only progressive structural 
reorganization, but even simple maintenance of production 
volumes at a fixed level, is impossible. The special criticality 
of the situation in the investment sphere is related to the fact 
that the depreciation of fixed production capital is approaching 
60 percent, i.e., the threshold beyond which the destruction of 
the country's production potential begins. 
  The basic factors which have been responsible for the 
investments crisis have been primarily high inflation and the 
drop in production. Inflation has especially strongly restricted 
the internal investment opportunities of the enterprises and 
substantially reduced the basic source of capital 
investments--depreciation allotments. The complex financial 
situation of the enterprises has not permitted them to 
compensate for the reduction of the real volume of depreciation 
allotments by funds from profit, which were distributed in the 
direction of current consumption. The internal funds of the 
enterprises being directed to investment are inadequate already 
even for the simple reproduction of fixed capital. At the same 
time, under conditions of high inflation, the banks are not 
interested in granting long-term loans of an investment 
character, in connection with which about 60 percent of all 
capital investments are accounted for by the meager internal 
funds of the enterprises. Some 15 percent of the financing from 
the republic budgets and 16 percent from local budgets came from 
centralized funds in 1993. In 1993, of 149 facilities for which 
commissioning at the expense of budget funds in accordance with 
the federal program was envisaged, only 10 have been 
commissioned. 
  The process of the accumulation of incomplete construction, 
the volume of which increased by 20-25 percent in 1993, 
continues. 
  Despite the increase in the influx of foreign investment 
into 
the Russian economy ($400 million USA in 1993 as compared with 
$290 million in 1992), their amounts remain still so 
insignificant that they don't play any appreciable role in the 
overall process. 
  The problem of increasing proven mineral resources requires 
special attention. The inadequate financing of geological 
exploration work has resulted in the disruption of the required 
ratios between production and the growth of new reserves. For 
example, for normal reproduction it is necesssary to accrue 2.5 
tonnes of new reserves for every tonne of oil produced. In 1993 
oil production amounted to 352 million tonnes but the growth of 
reserves to only a little more than 300 million tonnes. This 
threatens a drastic drop in the production of oil in the future, 
the overcoming of which will require very lengthy periods of 
time. The same situation is developing with respect to many 
non-ferrous metals and, in particular, with respect to gold. As 
a result Russia, which possesses enormous potential mineral 
reserves, may find itself on the verge of a fuel and raw 
material famine. 
  The expanding crisis has also struck the sphere of science 
(including basic and sectorial, planning and design work and 
experimental production). First-class, world level, collectives 
are breaking up. Leadership in a number of directions of 
scientific and technical progress is being lost and the material 
base is hopelessly aging. The country is losing intellectual 
potential and with it also hopes for the revival and prosperity 
of Russia. 
  The state of scientific and technical potential should be 
evaluated as critical, which directly broaches questions of the 
country's economic security. The crisis in the 
scientific-technical sphere, which is reflected in the drastic 
decrease in the share of expenditures for science, the reduction 
in the number of those employed in this sphere, and the closing 
of a number of scientific schools with a world recognition with 
respect to certain very important directions of basic research 
strategically dooms the country to technical backwardness and 
undermines its scientific and technical independence. 
  The drastically increasing openness of the Russian economy 
to 
the world market and the increase in its dependence on its 
active influence should be included, first of all, among the 
external factors exacerbating the problems of economic security. 
  Historically, the structure of Russia's export-import 
relationships developed under conditions of a "directive" 
economy and "willful" prices, which in many respects do not 
correspond to real material and labor costs. This determined the 
substantial effectiveness of foreign trade at the level of the 
high world prices for the goods being exported from Russia. 
  With the transition to market relationships and the gradual 
establishment of equilibrium prices for exported and imported 
goods, the effectiveness of foreign-trade relationships is 
undergoing substantial deformation, which already at the present 
time is resulting in the transformation of relations in foreign 
trade. 
  The correlation of external and internal prices will give a 
rather clear idea about the change in the effectiveness of 
foreign trade. At the same time the dynamics of external world 
prices is under the substantial influence of Russian exports, 
especially in those cases when trading operations are being 
carried out at dumping prices. 
  The most negative processes connected with the effectiveness 
of foreign trade are to be noted with respect to petroleum 
products and non-ferrous metals. Thus, for petroleum products 
internal prices are ever more persistently approaching world 
prices, which already makes their export unprofitable in 
comparison with the export of crude oil. Such a situation is not 
to be observed in any of the petroleum-exporting countries. The 
effectiveness of export is steadily decreasing for all 
non-ferrous metals. Among export goods a significant excess of 
internal prices over external is still maintained only for crude 
oil, although even here the process of a definite convergence of 
these prices is present. At the same time, apparently, crude oil 
will still be able to remain a profitable export resource for 
some limited time. 
  The rather high volume of exports in 1993 has been achieved, 
basically, through a significant increase in the physical volume 
of raw material exports. However, such growth has not resulted 
in a growth of foreign currency earnings identical to it. In 
comparison to 1992 the effectiveness of the export of petroleum 
products has come to 67 percent, that of phosphate 
fertilizers--52 percent, fabrics--66 percent, and aluminum--66 
percent. 
  An increase in the effectiveness of foreign trade has been 
noted only for ammonia and nitrogen fertilizers (109 and 156 
percent respectively). 
  The steady dynamics of a reduction of the effectiveness of 
the export of basic resources and the convergence of the 
internal prices for these resources with world prices poses the 
problem of the prospects of Russian foreign-trade relations and 
of Russia's place in the international system of the division of 
labor exceptionally acutely. 
  This question is becoming further exacerbated against the 
background of the convergence of external and internal prices 
for imported goods (primarily foodstuffs). The trend now 
beginning to show brings Russia closer to the place of an 
exporter of primary raw material resources, an exporter of 
products whose production is the most "dirty" and ecologically 
dangerous. 
  Determination of the most important parameters 
characterizing 
the population's living conditions and standard and elimination 
of the possibility of social, national, territorial and other 
conflicts is the most important task of achieving economic 
security. 
  Price liberalization and restraint of the growth of wages 
and 
social payments has led to a drastic fall in the real value of 
the population's money incomes. Miscalculations and errors in 
the development and implementation of the economic policy of 
recent years have resulted in the catastrophic reduction of the 
people's living standard. The nominal increase in the 
population's monetary incomes in comparison with the end of 1991 
has been able to half compensate for the growth of prices. Based 
on the level of the consumption of goods Russia has found itself 
thrown back to 10-20 years ago. 
  One of the most negative results of the economic refoms 
being 
carried out has been the drastic fall in the real value of the 
population's money savings. The deflator of the gross domestic 
product (GDP) has increased 431 times since 1991. As for the 
financial assets of the population being kept in the Savings 
Bank, they have increased only 6.5 times. Thus, taking the 
reduction of the purchasing power of the ruble into account, the 
monetary savings of the population have been devaluated by 98.5 
percent. 
  According to the calculations of the Ministry of Labor a 
stratum of super-rich people, about three million persons, 
exists in Russia at the present time. Primarily these are the 
heads of brokerage firms, commercial banks and exchanges and 
persons engaged in export-import operations. One should also 
group with them the representatives of the criminal 
world--corrupted representatives of the executive power and the 
leaders of organized crime who form part of the group of the 
population possessing super-high incomes. The primary sources of 
the initial accumulation of capital are: speculation, usury, the 
appropriation of rent revenues which previously went to the 
state, as well as criminal activity. Thus, society is rapidly 
stratifying into a relatively small prosperous stratum and the 
basic mass of the population which is growing poorer. According 
to the data of the Ministry of Labor the "poorest" constitute on 
the order of 40-50 percent, and the "ordinary poor" 30-35 
percent of the population. 
  The most numerous in the past middle layer of the population 
today comes to only 10-15 percent. A drastic deterioration of 
its professional and social structure is occurring at the same 
time. Previously skilled workers, the intelligentsia, and 
managers basically represented the middle class. Now all these 
strata have sunk to the social bottom. The growing distinction 
in the sphere of material goods depends on personal efforts only 
to a minor degree. The enrichment of some through the 
impoverishment of others is taking place on a scale never seen 
before. 
  The level of the education and the skill of the overwhelming 
portion does not correspond to the size of their wages since the 
social stratification that is going on both by its scale and by 
its directions does not correspond with the changes in the 
economy and the structure of the population's employment, the 
parameters of which are equal to the majority of developed 
countries. 
  There are no objective preconditions in the present year of 
1994 for a change in the trends that have developed. Apparently, 
the forming of a very extensive, but possessing insufficient 
purchasing power, lowest stratum of the population, which will 
be compelled to direct all its monetary incomes to satisfy 
primary needs and not for savings, will continue. The 
preconditions for creating a base for stable economic growth are 
also thereby undermined. 
  The most important task for assuring economic security is 
achievement of the economy's resistance to external influences 
and its ability to quickly and effectively adapt to changing 
conditions. Relationships of an excessive dependence on external 
factors develop otherwise. Thus, excessive dependence on 
external deliveries of components and materials and a high share 
of imports in the consumption of foodstuffs are factors which 
impair the country's economic security. 
  In the final analysis security from external influences 
means 
the attaining of national sovereignty in the area of control 
over production resources and retention of independence in the 
sphere of developing and conducting economic policy. It stands 
in the way of the establishment of the effective control of 
foreign companies over the key sectors and individual most 
important enterprises of Russia. 
  Under conditions of an increase in spontaneity in the 
economy, given inadequate legal regulation, the difference in 
prices on the internal and world markets, the low ruble exchange 
rate and high rates of inflation, commodity-money flows, being 
inevitably subordinate to the law of the maximumization of 
profit, are oriented primarily to external relations. The chief 
negative consequence of this is primarily the outflow of capital 
from the country, proceeding mainly through illegal deals, and 
the intensified export of strategic raw material. A real drain 
of material and financial resources from the country is taking 
place, which undermines prospects for economic stabilization. 
  The high degree of its foreign debt is a significant 
external 
disturbing factor for Russia's economy. 
  The factors mentioned bring Russia's attention acutely to 
the 
problem of achieving foreign currency and credit security. At 
the present moment the state doesn't have a sufficient quantity 
of foreign currency to service the external debt. The country's 
credit rating, which could ensure access to world credit, is 
very low. And that is why we need to the highest degree a 
foreign currency policy which would prevent the drain of foreign 
currency from the country and promote its influx into Russia. 
  The process of privatization under way can potentially serve 
as one of the threats to economic security. This is connected 
primarily with an exchange rate of the ruble relative to the 
dollar which is extraordinarily low and is continuing to fall. 
By virtue of this the need arises to protect state property from 
cheap sale and from the establishment of the control of foreign 
capital over key sectors of the economy. 
  Quite reasonable and well-founded complaints about the 
extremely low profitability of privatization and about the 
exclusion of commercial structures, primarily the banks, from 
this process are now being expressed ever more frequently. A 
concept of coordination and interconnection between the 
structural policy of the state and its share in the capital of 
enterprises being made joint-stock companies (the so-called 
golden share) is also lacking. 
  The growing unemployment is also connected with the 
privatization process to a considerable degree. The overall 
number of unemployed in Russia came to 3.8 million persons at 
the end of January 1994, including the 893,600 persons 
officially registered in the employment service. However, this 
is only the beginning. A sudden surge of unemployment awaits us 
in the very near future, to which, firstly, the start of 
"voucher-less" privatization, secondly, extension of the process 
of clearing up the finances (sanirovaniye) and of the bankruptcy 
of enterprises, thirdly, the coming broad diffusion of the 
circulation of bills of exchange (veksel) and the right secured 
in the law of recourse to the recovery of debts on the property 
of debtors unable to pay, and, finally, fourth, the forthcoming 
sale of the "golden" shares, which as is known, were left in 
state ownership only for three years, will contribute. 
  The prompt development of mechanisms for regulating the 
labor 
market as well as for the social protection of the temporary 
non-working population is necessary in this connection. 
  By now crime in Russia has come to represent a real threat 
to 
Russia's national security and the course of the reforms that 
are underway. Like in a mirror, Russian crime reflects the 
overall state of our society and, first of all, its 
foundation--the economy. Organized crime is especially dangerous 
in a period of political and economic changes. More than 4,000 
organized criminal associations have been unmasked in Russia; 
moreover, every fourth one of them is protected by corrupted 
officials in various structures. According to expert estimates, 
up to 40 percent of the entrepreneurs and two-thirds of all 
commercial structures have been drawn into these relationships. 
  The growth of social and political instability and the 
weakening of state structures is not the least of the factors in 
the expansion of crime. Corruption represents a special danger. 
The illegal utilization of a state post to obtain personal 
benefits is a special "culture medium" for criminal groupings. 
However, the most terrible thing in this abnormal phenomenon is 
the fact that the corruptability of officials of the law 
enforcement and other state institutions engenders among the 
public a profound distrust of the authorities and undermines the 
faith of the people in the law and the state. 
  The striving of organized crime to penetrate the country's 
economy increases. Arguments are being heard lately that the 
investment of illegally obtained funds in the legal economy will 
contribute to its stabilization. World experience indicates that 
organized criminal activity destabilizes all areas of the 
economy and upsets the natural action of market forces, since 
the huge revenues of criminal groups are taken out of normal 
market circulation. 
  And that is why it is quite obvious that curbing crime is a 
national task. It must be carried on in parallel with all 
measures to strengthen Russian statehood but be implemented far 
more rapidly and effectively. 
  An especial threat to the security of Russia as a state is 
that today the same disintegrating processes which led to the 
break-up of the USSR are gathering force in Russia. Apart from 
the very complex ganglions of inter-nationality contradictions 
conveyed to us as a legacy from the past, no less acute problems 
are emerging as derivatives from the present state of the 
economy. 
  The new growths of a civilized economy and hopes for 
national 
rebirth of peoples have in many instances become the hostages of 
extreme forces, political adventureres of various kinds, and 
criminal and corrupted structures. Inter-regional and 
inter-nationality conflicts and the weakness of the federal 
power are leading to the appearance of local dictator candidates 
who play the separatism card, behind which only a striving for 
unchecked power is quite often to be divined. 
  The process of the delimitation of the powers of the center 
and the territories proceeds spontaneously. The regional organs 
of administration either secretly appropriate extra powers to 
themselves or get them with the help of various edicts, decrees 
and directives. The lack of solution of the problem of budget 
federalism, which has provoked a very real tax war with the 
center, has become a problem of economic security. The result of 
this is the delay of tax transfers to the federal budget. The 
actual inequality of the territores both in the creation of the 
revenue portion of the budget and also in the distribution of 
subsidies, which together with other factors has been a cause 
for the process of sovereignty declaration which has begun, has 
become more pronounced. 
  There are a great number of examples of the granting of 
privileges to individual regions. The situation when its 
economic situation depends on the status of the region is the 
objective basis of the striving of subjects "done out of their 
share" for an increase in their own status and a declaration of 
sovereignty. 
  The differentiation of regions according to the level of 
economic development inherited as a legacy from the past is 
being further intensified through the ignoring of the regional 
sector in the policy of the reforms being carried out. The 
regions where the sectors which have found themselves 
"depressed" at the present stage--light industry, non-ferrous 
metallurgy, the timber industry, the chemical industry, the 
military-industrial complex--were dominant in the structure of 
production have turned out to be in the most difficult economic 
situation. 
  The transition to market relationships and the weakening and 
rejection of the state regulation that previously existed, which 
at least to some degree maintained the balanced nature of 
inter-regional development, has intensified the acuteness and 
contradictoriness of territorial problems. As a result almost 
the entire territory of Russia now has problem regions of 
various kinds. A complex and extreme social and economic 
situation is characteristic for all the zones of the North and 
the militarized regions of the Center, the Urals, and South 
Siberia. The social and economic degradation of Kalmykia, Tuva, 
the republics of the Northern Caucasus and certain regions of 
the Non-Chernozem Zone is accelerating against the background of 
the weakening of territorial regulation. 
  In connection with these ever more sensitive problems the 
achievement of economic security at the regional level is 
becoming more urgent. This gives rise to the immediate need for 
developing as rapidly as possible an economic mechanism of 
federal relations and for developing firm and unshakeable 
principles for the interrelations of the Center with the 
subjects of the Federation. 
  The government is taking steps to achieve stabilization in 
the economy. In this connection it is important to note that at 
the 4 March expanded session of the government it was decided to 
examine such questions as the development of the budget system 
of the Russian Federation in 1995, which envisages the further 
improvement of the process of budget formation, strengthening 
budget discipline, improvement of the tax system, and the 
putting of accounts in the national economy in good order, etc., 
in as short a time as possible. The solution of these questions 
as soon as possible may change the situation in the economy for 
the better. 
  In summing up what has been said, let us note that the 
situation can get out of control in the very near future. A 
situation may emerge which chess-players call tsugtsvang [as 
transliterated]--each new move leads to a worsening of position. 
And then, despite all the calamities of the last two years, this 
period will appear as a time of universal prosperity. 
  Now, it seems, it is necessary to consider the basic 
approaches and criteria for the introduction of a state of 
economic and financial emergency. Many are thinking and writing 
about this, but it is not clear what this means and what 
specific forms and mechanisms it is to take. The development of 
such a concept is an urgent matter. 
  In principle the notion of "emergency" is alien to Russia 
and 
to Russians. During recent years the people have repeatedly 
lived in emergency conditions. A normal, stable situation and 
the creation of a favorable climate for the domestic producer 
are, on the contrary, needed now. Preferably one needs in the 
economy not a special or emergency situation but the setting 
(even legislatively) of basic macroeconomic 
parameters--regarding the gross domestic product, the budget 
deficit, inflation, unemployment, etc.--lower than which one 
cannot sink in any case whatsoever. 
  We have touched upon only some of the problems which to one 
degree or another determine the country's economic security. The 
development of a "National Economic Security Doctrine," which 
will define its basic criteria and give concrete expression to 
them in a system of economic and production indicators, is the 
most important task of the country's administration at the 
present time. The system of criteria and evaluations created 
must serve as a guide for the activity of the Government so as 
to not permit the approach of the economy to dangerous limits 
and to reduce the risk of harming Russia's vitally important 
interests. 
  Our information report. Andrey Viktorovich 
Zverev was born in 1955. He graduated from the Moscow Finance 
Institute and the All-Union Correspondence Law Institute. He is 
a Candidate of Economic Sciences, a full member of the 
International Computerization Academy, and academic secretary of 
the "Computerization and Finances" Department. He worked in the 
management board of USSR Gosbank in 1981-1983, in USSR Gosplan 
in 1983-1990, and from August 1990 as RSFSR Deputy Minister of 
Finance. In August 1991 he was acting Chairman of USSR Gosbank 
and after that First Deputy USSR Minister of Finance and head of 
the budget administration of the Inter-State Economic Committee 
with the rank of minister. In 1992-1993 he worked in the Center 
for Information and Social Technologies under the Government of 
the Russian Federation. Since May 1993 he has been head of the 
Economics Department of the Staff (apparat) of the Russian 
Federation Government. He was appointed chairman of the 
Inter-Departmental Commissison for Economic Security of the 
Russian Federation Security Council by an edict of the President 
of the Russian Federation in December 1993. 

