Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Following the death of drug kingpin Pablo Escobar 
Gaviria and the arrest of Peruvian drug trafficker Demetrio 
Limoniel Chavez Penaherrera, aka "Vaticano," the Cali cartel's 
main cocaine base paste supplier, a new and major matter of 
concern has surfaced in the struggle against drug trafficking. 
  The discovery of poppy plantations in various areas of 
northern Peru is a warning of the serious repercussions this 
psychotropic plant can have at various national levels if it 
ever replaces coca cultivation. 
  A shift in the production line of the major drug trafficking 
mafias not only warns us about the implication this may have in 
our economy, taking into account that 15 to 25 percent of our 
currency is generated by drug trafficking, but also in the 
national pacification plan's objectives. 
  The subject is alarming for several reasons that are quite 
obvious and that place coca cultivation at a disadvantage with 
cultivation of poppy, which is a narcotic. 
  Poppy, which in the 40's was found in Bambamarca (Cajamarca 
Province) is used to produce opium, which, in turn, is used to 
produce heroin, which in clandestine markets in the United 
States and Europe is sold for prices much higher than cocaine. 
  While a kilo of this product is not worth more than $23,000 
in Miami, the same quantity of heroin costs $150,000. 
  Another reason why poppy might replace coca is the 
advantages 
it offers in its cultivation. 
  Poppy grows in the same type of soil coca does. There is 
this type of soil all along the eastern and western slopes of 
the Peruvian Andes mountain range. The Cajamarca and Amazonas 
valleys are the best areas. 
  According to technical research, while 22,000 coca plants 
grow per each cultivated hectare, 160,000 poppy plants grow in 
the same cultivated surface. 
  The significant price reduction in cocaine base paste during 
the past few years is another good reason why 120,000 coca 
growers may shift to poppy cultivation. 
  Experts on the matter such as Ricardo Soberon Garrido 
maintain that the people who promote the cultivation of poppy 
are allegedly the same people who deal with cocaine, maintaining 
the same structure and working system. In this sense, they 
assure the peasant they will buy the harvest and finance the 
sowing. 
  Soberon, member of the Andean Jurists Commission, believes 
the way to prevent the spread of poppy cultivation is by 
granting commercial aid and infrastructure to those communities 
liable to receive poppy seed, as has been detected in Upper 
Huallaga. 
  As for the government proposal to punish poppy growers with 
a 
20-year prison sentence, Soberon says the Penal Code does not 
solve the cultivation problem; quite the contrary, it increases 
the prices at the cultivation sites, the price of bribes, and 
encourages cultivation in more inhospitable and ecologically 
vulnerable regions. "This neither persuades nor dissuades the 
producer who has to survive." 
  According to Law No. 26223 (latest amendment to the Penal 
Code), whoever, by threats or for illegal purposes, forces 
another individual to grow cocaine or poppy plants will receive 
a life sentence. 
  According to Soberon, this falls within the framework of the 
"Fujimori doctrine" that regards the peasants involved in coca 
growing as victims of the social and economic circumstances in 
which they are involved and not as a level of the drug 
trafficking chain. 
  In Soberon's opinion, it is easy to predict that the new 
potential poppy growers will be the same individuals who grew 
coca. The product's price is the simple reason for this. 
  As for the reasons the government seeks to severely repress 
poppy growers, Soberon believes it is not the type of drug 
(cocaine and heroin) but rather the act of drug trafficking that 
must determine the degree of the sentence. 
  According to research by Adolfo Alcantara Vasquez, of the 
Interior Ministry Executive Agency for Drug Control (Ofecod), 
the country is at the right moment to start campaigns to prevent 
poppy cultivation. 
  Vasquez maintains that the strategy for this would be to 
develop alternative projects designed to create areas to contain 
its expansion, thus preventing the soil's deterioration. 
  He recommends that the National Police Antidrug Division, 
Dirandro, propose the creation of an office designed to spot the 
areas where poppy cultivation is developing. 
  Vasquez ended by stating that having determined that poppy 
is 
more profitable than coca cultivation and that coca farmers are 
still critically poor, the poppy cultivation problem should be 
taken seriously. 

