Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jean-Claude Oppeneau: "Biotechnology and </F>
Environment"] 
  [Text] There is no shortage of examples of the contribution 
biotechnology has made to solving environmental problems. New 
markets are opening up to these technologies which have already 
been used in the treatment of water, waste or, contaminated 
land. However, organisms converted by genetic engineering 
require vigilance and reflection by both researchers and 
manufacturers in terms of their security and ecological impact. 
A balance must be found between economic competitiveness and 
respect for the environment. 
  Biotechnologies are taking an increasingly important part in 
solving environmental problems. The fungus Phanerochaete 
chrysosporium, for instance, secretes enzymes which can damage 
lignin. The phenomenon is well known, but less well known are 
the results of recent research which show that this fungus can 
also degrade certain herbicides, heavy oils, or toxic products. 
It is also thought it may be used to treat hydrocarbons which 
have accumulated in the ground. This could enable the 
rehabilitation of certain contaminated sites, a crucial problem 
today. These hopes have captured the interest of many 
companies, notably in the United States, and have resulted in a 
race to select hyperproductive lines with a view to 
optimization. The use of fungi seems promising for the future 
because these organisms can colonize vast regions while bacteria 
develop in more limited zones. 
  There is also increasing talk about biomass combustion and 
the use of biofuels. Although wood combustion is used 
relatively little in France, other countries have no hesitation 
about using it regularly and, in Denmark, new incinerators burn 
hay. Despite its critics, biofuels continue to be tested and 
the comparative eco- audit between rapeseed and diesel does not 
condemn vegetable diester. Other options exist such as wheat 
and beetroot for the production of ethanol and oxygenated 
components for lead-free gas or wood for the production of 
methanol, for example. Not forgetting the latest developments 
by English researchers who are experimenting on power supply for 
diesel engine generating units using an algae which feeds on the 
liquids used for reprocessing sewage water. This green monocell 
algae, chlorella, has an extremely rapid growth rate and the 
carbonic gas resulting from combustion is recycled to improve 
the output of photosynthesis even further. 
<H5>  New Markets </H5>
  Biology opens up whole new technological areas for processes 
and products. Because they are young these have the specific 
characteristic that they can benefit from studies on risks 
parallel to their development. This has been a rare occurrence 
throughout history. It was remarked that this was a growing 
problem during discussions on the presentation of the bill on 
genetically modified organisms (GMO's) at the National Assembly. 
In economic terms, a recent American report "Biomarkers 93: 
Forecast for High Growth Markets" puts forward several 
interesting figures. The use of ground bacteria (indigenous or 
exogenous) to treat contamination should grow to the tune of 20 
to 30 percent per year between now and the end of the decade. 
It is estimated that the market for microorganisms capable of 
desulphurizing carbon will rise to several billion dollars a 
year around the year 2000. For the recuperation of metals in 
waste using biological processes, this estimate rises to nearly 
two billion dollars in 1998. 
<H5>  Living Mechanisms </H5>
  We are entering the age of "worker microbes." True, 
sauerkraut or Roquefort cheese were already made with their 
help. The use of microorganisms for industrial production is, 
when all is said and done, ecologically satisfactory. As living 
beings, they require more "natural" or "softer" working 
conditions than traditional industrial processes. Factories 
using them will essentially be more hospitable than those using 
machines. Temperature, pressure, acidity, etc., will not create 
areas of danger as threatening as those in chemical or nuclear 
environments. However, some regulations on their production and 
utilization need to be enforced. 
  The Environment Ministry is very concerned by the industrial 
use of microorganisms and prior research. There will be 
extraordinary progress in their utilization at the beginning of 
the next century and this will lead to drastic changes in 
life-styles. This is one of the reasons why it is so important 
to initiate an in-depth deliberation on the effects of this 
progress, on the impact of genetic engineering, and to lay the 
foundations of a policy centred on precaution and ethics while 
encouraging innovation and research and providing guarantees for 
a controlled evolution. Progress is fast moving in this field. 
There are many patents and production authorizations in the 
world and France does not always take the lead on these issues. 
<H5>  Water and Biotechnology </H5>
  The biotechnology-environment twosome have already come 
along 
way together. Important research programs have enabled 
processes to be developed and some of these are operational 
today. In terms of water, whether for the production of 
drinking water or the purification of waste water, the use of 
microorganisms in an aerobic or anaerobic environment is 
inevitable. For drinking water, the excess of dissolved 
biodegradable organic carbon undergoes biological treatment 
using the properties of bacteria fixed on active carbon and 
biological nitrification or denitrification is often used. The 
treatment of waste water frequently requires a biological 
process which includes lagooning, and, if a higher level of 
purification needs to be achieved, treatment on bacterial beds 
or the use of activated muds. Today, however, in order to 
overcome certain difficulties linked to mechanical procedures, 
the development of biofilters, which lead to increasing the 
biomass activated by the use of cultures of microorganisms fixed 
on a fine granulated environment, is indispensable. For the 
treatment of residual industrial waters, the use of membrane 
bioreactors could be advantageous. 
  Similarly, the biological dephosphatization of water is an 
interesting option. The diversity of usable biotechnologies 
today and the capacity to discover new approaches for the future 
will enable current techniques to be improved considerably. 
<H5>  Waste Too </H5>
  The outlook is the same for the treatment of waste. We know 
about the methanization of silage, slaughter house residue, 
brewery dregs, etc., but also of household waste. We know how 
to develop rudimentary mechanisms, perfectly adapted to 
developing countries. In this respect, the remarkable experience 
of the treatment of residue from the Thies slaughterhouse in 
Senegal should be mentioned. This process enabled the 
elimination of solid and liquid residue through methanization 
and lagooning with water hyacinths which supplied the energy 
required to operate the slaughterhouse. Furthermore, it 
transformed the substrate and yielded a protein-rich material 
capable of increasing the production of marsh cultures for a 
lower than usual cost. In other respects, bioleaching and 
biofixing are subject to increasing research for the treatment 
of waste which is rich in heavy metals. 
<H5>  Cleaning Up Contaminated Land </H5>
  Rehabilitation treatment for contaminated land is another 
field of investigation undergoing rapid development. The 
problems this poses for the substrata and in relation to ground 
water or future exploitation are such that it is absolutely 
necessary to clean up these lands. But the cost of doing so can 
reach excessive levels if the most suitable process is not 
chosen. The biological solution is often the most acceptable. 
This question is central to many programs around the world. 
Some EUREKA projects were recently launched focusing on the 
different possibilities and certain results look promising. 
<H5>  From Air to Biosensors </H5>
  Another important area of biological cleaning covers the 
reduction of atmospheric pollution, the desulphurization and 
denitrification of smoke, the elimination of toxic products such 
as organochlorinates and deodorization. Biological sensors 
provide one example of the usefulness of microorganisms for the 
development of new instruments. In environment-related 
applications, systems using fluorescent bacteria or bacteria 
which are sensitive to certain types of pollutants in measuring 
sensors enable the quality of waterways to be controlled or 
alerts to be raised. Biotechnologies have not yet ceased 
surprising us in the fight against pollution. Who would have 
thought we would be able to use these technologies to recuperate 
precious metals in minerals in which traces of these are present 
and for which traditional processes generated pollution? 
<H5>  Agriculture and the Environment </H5>
  Genetic engineering is now also at the service agriculture 
and again relations with the environment are far from 
negligible. There are currently many joint programs between the 
National Agronomic Research Institute [INRA] and the Environment 
Ministry. 
  Obtaining plants capable of resisting insects and fungi 
could 
liberate farmers from the overuse of chemical products which 
would greatly benefit both the land and animal life. 
Entomophagous insects could also be used which would have the 
effect of limiting the use of pesticides. Once again, the 
limits of these applications would have to be studied and 
in-depth work undertaken on the biological resistance 
phenomenon. We should keep in mind the proliferation of insects 
in Venice or the case of crickets in Africa. Other inventions, 
such as plants with protein reserves, salt resistant plants... 
could be a godsend to developing countries. 
<H5>  Genetically Modified Organisms </H5>
  Opinions vary on the subject of genetically modified 
organisms (GMO's) introduced into the environment. Some say 
they are monsters created in laboratories which stand no chance 
of survival and which will be ruthlessly eliminated by natural 
selection processes. For others, they will invade the 
environment, all environments indiscriminately, and will 
therefore drive out other microorganisms and create other 
problems. It is indeed possible that they possess different 
properties than those planned by their inventors and, most of 
the time, we ignore their capacity to adapt to different 
environments. We should remember that undesirable species 
easily invade whole continents while man often has difficulties 
introducing species he would like to propagate. The debate is 
vast. 
  It seems obvious that the necessary and adequate conditions 
for the survival or the rapid multiplication of GMO's are the 
responsibility of ecology specialists because information 
resulting from in vitro culture alone will not provide the 
responses required. This is why the use of these organisms 
should be accompanied by research on their ecological impact. 
The effects of the introduction, whether deliberate or 
accidental, of various organisms (the problems of myxomatosis, 
killer bees, elm disease) are well known. 
  Transgenic plants also merit further reflection. Introducing 
a foreign gene into a plant, with ulterior exploitation motives, 
requires reflection on the possible consequences before the 
choice of the different elements which constitute the 
construction chain--the plasmid vector, the transformation 
system and the plant to be transformed--are even made. This is 
not about being alarmist but being equipped with the best 
possible knowledge of the genetic content of the material about 
to be developed. This could avoid difficulties at the time of 
field testing or during homologation processes. 
<H5>  Biodiversity </H5>
  In some respects, biotechnology can aggravate genetic 
harmonization--and the reduction of genetic diversity is a 
fundamental problem today. Paradoxically, it can also help 
provide solutions. Genetic erosion can be combatted by 
constituting stocks of genes through developing tissue cultures. 
In Mali, for example, peasants imported potato tissues from 
Belgium. They succeeded in importing a more disease-resistant 
vegetable material while economizing on the transportation cost 
for plants. 
  Ecological research must be strengthened to test the 
evolution that blind development in genetic engineering could 
bring about, and particularly in the plant world. Nature is 
being increasingly moulded by man, but biodiversity is certainly 
an indispensable advantage for its survival, notably if we are 
entering a period of galloping demography. This is why an 
approach where the use of biotechnologies is controlled and 
regulated is needed. 
<H5>  Necessary Scientific Vigilance </H5>
  Biotechnologies are no less abstract than other modern 
industrial processes. Escherichia coli, a famous bacteria, 
despite its presence in our intestines, is no more familiar than 
carbon 14 or any other isolated molecule, although its use is 
growing, and under many different guises. So are we not dealing 
with them regularly. So "artificial" bacteria need not be 
experimented more commonly than plutonium or dioxin. Creating 
it, watching over it and using it will be the task of 
specialists for a long time to come and not that of ordinary 
mortals, other than exceptionally. This is why scientific 
vigilance is capital, as it is important to evaluate the 
ecotoxicological consequences on different environments. 
  At the beginning, techniques calling on microorganisms, 
which 
some people said had been used since antiquity, did not seem to 
be at the source of any particularly great risk. But the 
appearance and utilization of genetic engineering techniques 
have completely changed this conviction. These techniques, 
which enable the potential of microorganisms to be transformed, 
and even new capabilities to be brought about by modifying the 
genome, have given rise over the past decades to questions based 
on both ethics and security. The experience we have to date of 
their utilization and industrial application is not yet 
sufficiently advanced in a certain number of sectors to enable 
all the doubts we have encountered to be removed completely. 
<H5>  Reconciling Contradictions </H5>
  The approach is directed, like for a number of other 
activities, by a search for an indispensable balance between two 
levels which can, in certain cases, seem contradictory, namely, 
economic competitive activities and the lives of people. So if 
preventive and regulatory activities must be introduced, 
scientific research must bring light to bear on potential risks, 
and researchers must adopt a practically simultaneous attitude 
of vigilance in relation to the future impact of their results 
on the environment from the very launch of a project. This is a 
golden opportunity, for once, to develop new techniques having 
taken their consequences into consideration from the very 
beginning 

