BFN 

  [Text] The provincial scientific and technological award 
meeting was ceremoniously held at Nanjiao Guesthouse in Jinan on 
the morning of 15 April. 
  In 1993, the broad masses of scientific and technical 
workers 
across the province conscientiously implemented the principle of 
invigorating Shandong through science and education, made 
important contributions to invigorating Shandong's scientific 
and technological undertakings and promoting economic 
development, and achieved more than 2,800 major scientific and 
technological findings, 61 of which attained the domestic 
leading or advanced level. The meeting presented awards to some 
scientific and technical workers who won the 1993 state 
invention award, the state scientific and technological progress 
award, the state spark award, and the provincial scientific and 
technological progress award, and the spark award. 
  The meeting was presided over by Jiang Chunyun, secretary of 
the provincial party committee. Zhao Zhihao, deputy secretary 
of the provincial party committee and provincial governor, gave 
a speech at the meeting. He pointed out: It is necessary to 
fully recognize the new tasks and new demands which economic and 
social development has set on scientific and technological work, 
actively promote the conversion of scientific and technological 
achievements into practical productive forces, further 
strengthen the popularization of scientific and technological 
achievements, perfect the science and technology popularization 
system, stabilize the ranks of scientific and technological 
popularization workers, improve the conditions for popularizing 
science and technology, and form a tremendous force in society 
in which all people attend to the work of popularizing science 
and technology. Zhao Zhihao stressed: To rely on scientific 
and technological progress to invigorate Shandong's economy, the 
crucial issue involved is to have a rank of scientific and 
technical personnel who are rigid in ideology and strong in 
skills. It is necessary to conscientiously implement the 
principle of holding fast to one end and leaving the whole field 
open, do a good job in the transfer of professional personnel 
and in structural adjustment, and make the distribution of 
scientific and technological resources more rational. We 
should actively attract personnel in a planned manner, 
strenuously train and cultivate scientific and technical 
backbone forces for the next century, and unceasingly strengthen 
Shandong's ranks of scientific and technical workers. 
  Jiang Chunyun gave a speech at the end of the meeting. He 
set forth four demands. First, all localities across the 
province should firmly cultivate the concept that science and 
technology are the primary productive forces. If we want to 
maintain a sustained, steady, and sound development in the 
national economy and to smoothly realize the grand objective of 
the national economic and social development, we must attend to 
the development of science and technology which are the primary 
productive forces with great determination, daring, and 
strenuous efforts. The party and government top leaders at all 
levels should personally attend to the primary productive 
forces, take the lead in learning science and technology, and 
unceasingly broaden and enrich their own knowledge. Second, we 
should give play to the creativity of scientific and technical 
personnel to the greatest extent, fully mobilize their 
enthusiasm, and realistically regard them as representatives of 
real productive forces. It is necessary to conscientiously 
implement the party's policy on intellectuals, create a good 
work and living environment for them, and enable them to work 
freely, to display their talent and ability, and to make greater 
contributions. Third, it is necessary to unswervingly follow 
the path of combining economy with science and education and 
realistically rely on science and technology to promote our 
economic development. Science and technology should 
realistically serve the main battlefield of economic 
development. The educational sector should cultivate more 
outstanding and competent economic, scientific, and technical 
professionals. Fourth, it is necessary to rely on deepening 
reform to instill vigor and vitality into scientific and 
technological work. In line with the demand of building the 
socialist market economy, we should promote reform of the 
scientific and technological system, reform and improve the 
scientific and technological management system, and strengthen 
the vitality and motivation of scientific and technological 
development. 
  In his speech, Jiang Chunyun expressed hope that the broad 
masses of scientific and technical workers will promote their 
achievements, advance in the wake of victory, boldly scale the 
heights of science and technology, and make greater 
contributions to invigorating Shandong through science and 
education and promoting better and more rapid economic 
development in Shandong. 
  Provincial leaders Li Chunting, Lu Maozeng, and Ma Zhongcai 
attended the meeting. 

