Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Yu Ui-taek, DPRK official </F>
responsible for the North Korean Far East forestry mission, by 
YOMIURI SHIMBUN correspondent Akihiro Naito in Khabarovsk on 15 
March] 
  [Text] There has been a flurry of reports that many North 
Korean workers have deserted their logging sites in the Russian 
Far East region which have been run by the DPRK (North Korea) 
and that they have been rushing for the South Korean Embassy in 
Moscow and other South Korean diplomatic missions in Russia in 
search of political asylum. It has been reported that they have 
deserted because of harsh labor conditions and economic 
difficulties in their homeland. YOMIURI SHIMBUN correspondent 
Akihiro Naito interviewed Yu Ui-taek, the party secretary 
general [title as published] responsible for the North Korean 
Far East forestry mission, at the mission's office in Khabarovsk 
on 15 March. The mission is the organization responsible for 
overseeing the logging operations. 
  Referring to the desertion of North Korean loggers, Yu 
admitted -- the first time that a North Korean official has done 
so -- their desertion, saying, "In the past one year, three or 
four workers have fled." Yu added that they were murderers or 
thieves. In the interview, Yu denied a South Korean report that 
"they have deserted by the hundred." As for labor conditions at 
the logging sites, which international human rights 
organizations have described as an "inhuman environment," Yu 
stressed that the loggers are given three meals a day and that 
they are treated well. 
  In the interview, Yu said: "A total of 10,000 North Korean 
loggers are now working here, and some bad loggers have 
committed crimes. North Korea has asked Russian police to 
search for them." In this way, he suggested that Public Security 
Ministry (North Korea's police organization) officials posted at 
the logging sites have not been engaged in "hunting for the 
deserters," as some media have reported. In the interview, Yu 
said "workers who commit crimes" are either deported to North 
Korea or are sent to an "educational facility" at the logging 
sites to be corrected. 
  In the interview, Yu stressed: "Because our workers do not 
live in cities, there are no welfare facilities. We import 
vegetables and food from North Korea. Our workers live here 
free of concern." 
  North Korea launched a full-fledged logging operation in the 
Russian Far East region after an intergovernmental treaty [was 
concluded between North Korea and the former Soviet Union] in 
the 1960's. Under the intergovernmental treaty, the former 
Soviet Union was committed to providing machinery and fuel while 
North Korea was committed to supplying workers. The former 
Soviet Union (and now Russia) have taken 64.5 percent of the 
logs, while North Korea has taken 35.5 percent of them. 
  According to Yu, about 10,000 North Korean laborers are now 
working at the logging sites, which are concentrated in 
Chegdomyn in the Khabarovsk region and in Teinda in the Amur 
region. There are nine logging sites in the Khabarovsk region, 
and 6,000 North Korean workers are logging there, with some of 
them living together with their families. 
  The intergovernmental treaty expired at the end of 1993. 
According to Yu, Russia has asked for a higher quota, and 
negotiations on extending the treaty are under way between the 
two countries. For this reason, the two countries have agreed 
to provisionally extend the treaty to the end of March 1994. 

