BFN 

  [Text] Nanjing, June 29 (XINHUA) -- The scenic city of 
Suzhou, in east China's Jiangsu Province, is trying hard to 
strengthen environmental protection while vigorously developing 
the local economy. 
  Local officials said that the city has relocated about 100 
factories or workshops from the old city proper, in combination 
with the adjustment of the economic structure and technological 
upgrading of enterprises. 
  It has completed pollution treatment for 134 projects in the 
city, and built or extended three sewage treatment plants. 
  The city has delineated zones where smoke, dust and fixed 
noise sources have been brought under strict control. 
  As rural industry has been developing fast, great 
improvement 
has also been made in environmental protection of the city's 
suburbs. 
  Surveys show that the quality of drinking water sources for 
rural residents of the city has met government-set requirements. 
The quality of air over the city have also met government 
standards. 
  The city has worked out over 30 sets of local environment 
protection rules and regulations, covering air, dust, noise, the 
treatment of pollutant discharges and supervision and management. 
  Right in Suzhou, construction of a 70 sq km modern 
industrial 
park, a joint development project between China and Singapore, 
is being carried out. 
  The city has adopted policies to further strengthen 
treatment 
of the environment in the planned industrial park and in 
adjacent areas, to meet standards in developed countries, the 
officials said. 
  For instance, the Suzhou Sulphuric Acid Factory, which used 
to be located close to the northern side of the park, was asked 
to stop production and the site has become a heat and power 
plant to supply the industrial park. 
  Besides changing the course of a sewage canal to avoid 
sewage 
from Suzhou city going to the industrial park, the city has also 
extended its sewage treatment plant in the eastern part of the 
city to take more sewage from the industrial park. 

