CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yuriy Shafranik, Russian minister of fuel and </F>
energy, prepared for publication by Sergey Panasenko: "We Know 
Exactly What Direction the Reforms Are Taking"] 
  [Text] Russian Minister of Fuel and Energy Yuriy 
Shafranik was the most recent guest of the ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA 
editorial staff. The manager of the leading sector (if not the 
key one) of the Russian economy set forth his views on how the 
country's fuel and energy complex has to be developed and 
responded to journalists' questions. Today we are offering our 
readers an account of this conversation. 
  PRICES. "...Everyone is talking about world prices 
today. They have set the task: come up to world prices. We have 
already come up to them, even exceeding them, for many 
commodities. But at that time, around 1990, it would have been 
correct to think not about an increase in prices as such, but 
their relationships. There is a price for a metric ton of oil, 
or grain, or gold--and everything else 'related' to them. After 
all, this is the way it is all over the world, and this 
proportion is practically identical everywhere. And this 
correlation ought to be scheduled by directive for a five-year 
period so that every economic manager knows: his energy costs 
this much now, and in a month it will cost that much, so that he 
can be prepared... 
  "But what has happened today? There are free, world prices 
for the final products, but there are no free prices at all in 
the TEK [fuel and energy complex]. Everything is being 
regulated. Some prices are regulated strictly, and others not as 
strictly--petroleum is regulated least strictly--but everything 
is being regulated. As a result, in developed foreign countries, 
energy expenditures account for up to 35 percent of the price of 
a commodity, but here they account for up to 15 percent of the 
cost. It is cheap, and hence it is wasteful. We do not have any 
commodity that is in a position to compete with Western 
commodities with respect to the energy consumed in its 
manufacture. Ammonia requires 400 kilowatt-hours to produce 1 
metric ton. In other parts of the world, no more than 80 
kilowatt-hours are needed. And this is the way it is with 
everything: metal, machinery; sometimes the gap is not this 
ridiculous, but one always exists. This is where it is 
apparent--in the profitability of our industrial exports! 
  "And it is not enough that they are still not paying us! You 
know that the rate for electric power varies by territory in 
Russia. Here you have Krasnoyarsk Kray and Irkutsk Oblast, where 
it is the lowest. And nearby the Kuzbass, where it is more 
expensive. So where do you think the percentage of nonpayment is 
higher? Where it is less expensive! And many have not been 
paying simply because they did not want to, not because they 
were unable to pay. It has been to their advantage--50 percent 
of all Russia's nonpayments are 'sitting' in the fuel and energy 
complex! The sector has 5 million mployees and half of the 
nonpayments. And we have been unable to do any more about this 
lately. Thanks to the government, there is now a decree on 
responsibility for nonpayment for fuel and energy resources. 
Strict measures have been stipulated there. We have been 
authorized a great deal: to exclude all facilities except the 
military and those of the highest categories. 
  "Naturally, the zero hour will come, when either there will 
simply be no oil and gas because the prices have been frozen and 
nothing is left for renovation or reproduction--and oil and gas 
are the most capital-intensive production facilities in the 
world, or else we will have to 'release' all the prices at the 
same time..." 
  THE RUSSIAN FUEL AND ENERGY COMPLEX AND OTHER 
COUNTRIES. "...Last year we increased the sale of our 
output in other countries by 13 percent and we restored the 
markets we had lost. Not all of them, but some of them. We 
increased the foreign commodity turnover of the TEK's outputby 
23 percent, but the prices dropped, and the increase was only 19 
percent in real income for this reason. 
  "The debtors are a sore point here, of course. Take Ukraine 
for example. How many disputes there have been: whether to pump 
or not to pump. It is simple to look like a patriot: if 
Shafranik stops pumping, he is a hero. This often happens here 
for some reason: you are a winner if you don't work. If you do 
not pump, you can tell everyone you are a patriot. We will not 
give them oil until they pay! But in the meantime, over the past 
3 months Ukraine bought 2 million metric tons of petroleum 
products in Rotterdam--and it even paid a little less than we 
were asking, incidentally. 
  "If I had been the president of a private company here, I 
would tell you exactly: friends, do what you want, but I will 
ship out half of it on credit for 2 years. This is what they do 
throughout the world. Because the worst thing is to lose a 
market that you already hold. This is a crime for both a company 
and a state! And we are walking on a knife's edge here. But 
Ukraine's debt for oil has not increased since September 1993, 
by the way. And it is better for us to index these debts and to 
settle them as we please. The state will help in the final 
analysis. 
  "They are forgiving, deferring, and recalculating our 
foreign 
debts--aren't you indignant? Because this is all normal. 
  "For some reason, behind all these cries about debts no one 
has noticed that Ukraine's nonpayments are much less than 
Russia's. Yes, we have now made large concessions to them on 
gas. But after all, we drove these prices up to the European 
level by decrees in the 1992-1993 period, that is, we did what 
we had to do for Russia. This was a tremendous success, and it 
must not be underestimated. We brought settlements with our 
neighbors up to the world level on the job without the hue and 
cry. So should we spoil all this now? 
  "Incidentally, we went even further--we are receiving 
property to settle the debts. Ukraine is transferring to us a 
controlling block of stock in the Lisichansk complex; it 
includes three plants, the best NPZ [petroleum refineries] in 
the former Soviet Union, and our product is showing up right 
away in Rostov and farther away--in Stavropol and Krasnodar. 
Certainly, refine the oil and rush it to the ports: it is pure 
profit. And we are planning a new refinery today, valued at 1 
billion..." 
  THE RUSSIAN FUEL AND ENERGY COMPLEX AND WESTERN 
CAPITAL. "...There is a great deal of talk to the effect 
that we are not allowing Western oil companies here. But why 
should we receive them with open arms? We are taking positions 
in the struggle in other countries, and only in the most 
difficult places, where it is very hard to extract the oil. The 
world has been divided. And when we established the first three 
independent companies, they ran into the 20 world giants right 
away; naturally, even though you are dealing in a friendship, 
the law of the market is the law of the market: it is clear they 
do not have a burning desire to allow competitors here. And I 
have told Western representatives many times: 'Colleagues, do 
you think everything should be simple here, without a struggle? 
Are you struggling at home? Yes. So struggle here!' 
  "What is associated with this is another matter. Are there 
positive examples of new investments? There are. Are we 
gradually improving the laws? We are. Do not look at a case, but 
the trend. Is the trend as a whole a positive one? 
  "They agree: it is a positive one. I am not talking about 
political stability and everything like this--they have their 
own problems there. I am talking about economics. 
  "Generally speaking, we should not divide the investment 
process into Western and non-Western. It should be approached as 
a process. If there is an easy conversion, what difference does 
it make who is investing what and what he wants to receive? The 
truth lies in something else. With the current taxes, it will 
soon be simply unprofitable for either us or the foreigners to 
extract petroleum in Russia. Our enterprises and Western 
enterprises are in the same boat here. 
  "Is there a danger in taking 'Western' money in this field 
in 
the sense of loss of control? Well, generally speaking, I am for 
the risk, for the danger. I believe in myself. Everything must 
be done simply by using one's head. If they installed something, 
or sold something, but left control... But you understand that 
while we are discussing the danger, production is declining and 
work positions are being cut back. This is where the real danger 
is. But 70 percent of all orders for the Sakhalin project stay 
in Russia. And for 70 percent of all these billions from the 
West--the orders and work places remain here. What else can we 
speak about here, and what nuances can we argue about?.." 
  THE FUEL AND ENERGY COMPLEX AND THE STATE. 
"...Russia has the most efficient power engineering in the 
world. Russia has the best ecological indicators for discharges 
per kilowatt of energy. The largest yield of capacity per 
kilowatt... In general, this is one of the few sectors that 
operate efficiently today. We worked through the winter 
efficiently, practically without interruption. But we were paid 
30 percent of what was owed over the past 6 months. If this is 
operating in accordance with the market, a great many people 
should have suffered... 
  "So the consumers are not paying. What is happening to the 
investments? Our share in incomes for the state budget is under 
50 percent, if everything is taken into account. And 6 percent 
of the expenditures. This is with all the subsidies, including 
for coal. Last year we received the ridiculous amount of 3 
percent of the overall sum in credits. The result: the rate of 
decline in all investments from all sources averaged 16 percent 
for Russia as a whole and 28 percent for the fuel and energy 
complex. This is for the most capital-intensive sector, where 
there are simply no projects with a cost recovery period of less 
than seven years! 
  "They are not allowing us to earn, either. The tax component 
is more than half of the price of gas, more than 60 percent of 
the price of oil, and over 75 percent of the price of petroleum 
products. And these are only the direct taxes. But when you go 
somewhere in 'Komineft' and start to familiarize yourself with 
local affairs, it turns out that 83 percent of the price goes 
for taxes there. 
  "Meanwhile, we should take advantage of the fact that there 
is a recession in industry and the demand for energy has also 
declined, although compared with the overall recession, it has 
not declined much. We should not worry about this--on the 
contrary, we should actively invest in developing surplus energy 
capacities now. Throughout the world, they are holding the 
reserve of capacities at a minimum of 20 to 25 percent, but we 
had about 3 to 5 percent in 1990. But what kind of a market is 
it without a surplus? Moreover, this is the most powerful 
anti-inflationary factor, for where there is a surplus under 
free prices, they go down, not up. But in order to at least 
record a free surplus of the capacities, this reserve, 
investments are needed. 
  "Do you know that in principle it is not profitable to trade 
in petroleum products in Russia? So now they are making a fuss: 
someone has taken crude oil to Rotterdam, but our refineries are 
standing idle... Yes they have taken it there. Yes, they are 
standing idle. And they will continue to remain idle as long as 
the excise and other taxes are such that it is more 
profitable--more profitable, you understand!--to ship crude oil 
to Rotterdam and refine it there. 
  "And I do not separate myself from the government in this 
case. We succeed in accomplishing some things, we do not succeed 
in others. But we have recently prepared about 40 documents, 
basic ones for us, and 10 decrees have been issued already. We 
are refining and polishing them. I should say that our sector 
has now been provided with a program, and we have an accurate 
conception of what we will be doing and how to implement the 
reform. Many draft laws have already gone through the 
government, and others are still there. The Law on Oil and Gas, 
amendments to the Law on Mineral Resources, the Law on Energy 
Conservation--these the government has already passed. The 
Decree on 'Production Sharing', that is, the rules for dividing 
output that is produced, has been confirmed by an edict and will 
be approved by parliament. We have prepared six laws on our 
energy strategy. Even more of these laws are needed, and we will 
prepare them, send them through every conceivable and 
inconceivable expert, then conduct them through the parliament. 
  "We have worked out our own approach. Briefly, this is what 
it is. To maintain as many capacities as possible, to mobilize 
the collectives, to implement shareholding, to consolidate and 
build up everything vertically, completing it to the end 
product--we will bring our companies out right at the gasoline 
pump, without middlemen. This year there will be 10 of these 
companies, not four as there are now. Naturally, we have to find 
money and invest it in resources, in a resource base. And by 
fair means or foul, we have to go beyond Russia's borders--to 
Vietnam and Nigeria, and to extract it there. We have an 
agreement with Azerbaijan on the Caspian shelf, and this is the 
richest one. One more extremely important project is the 
pipeline consortium from Tengiz to the Black Sea. So the 
approaches, I reiterate, are completely clear..." 
<H8>  * * * </H8>
  We have incredibly inexpensive energy, and where it is 
cheap, it is wasteful. We do not have any commodity that is in a 
position to compete with Western commodities with respect to the 
energy consumed in its manufacture. 
  We are prepared to pump half the oil abroad on credit, 
if necessary. Because the worst thing is to lose a market that 
you already hold. This is a crime for both a company and a 
state 
  With the current taxes, it will soon be unprofitable 
for either us or the foreigners to extract petroleum in Russia. 
Production is declining and work positions are being cut back. 
This is where the real danger is. 
  We will bring our companies out right at the gasoline 
pump, bypassing the middlemen. Today we have a clear conception 
of what must be done and what we will be doing. 

