BFN 

  [Text] According to a DYN news agency dispatch, the 
Argentine and UK Governments will begin negotiations on possible 
"offshore" oil exploitation around the Malvinas Islands. A 
special commission has been charged with conducting the talks, 
which will start on 1 July. Deputy Foreign Minister Fernando 
Petrella will head the Argentine mission. 
  In an interview with DYN, Foreign Ministry Secretary General 
Andres Cisneros asserted that "we have agreed to sit down at the 
negotiating table, to see how we can avoid having future oil 
exploitation affect the interests of the parties involved." He 
thus alluded to the Argentine-UK controversy over the 
sovereignty of the Malvinas Islands. 
  Cisneros pointed out that in the course of the talks 
"Argentina will use all the legal and political resources it has 
at its disposal to claim its rights before the governments and 
companies interested in tapping oil in the area." 
  Around the end of the year, or at the beginning of 1995, the 
British Government allegedly intends to license several offshore 
ventures for hydrocarbons prospecting in the area near the 
Malvinas Islands. This move is reportedly based on prior 
studies claiming that the area could be rich in oil and gas. 
  A report drafted and published by the British Geological 
Survey -- consultants for the Malvinas' British authorities -- 
argues that recent seismic studies over an area extending 200 
square km around the Malvinas Islands revealed the existence of 
sedimentary basins comparable to the North Sea oil fields (which 
belong to the United Kingdom). 
  The Argentine Government questions the real perspectives for 
a feasible exploitation of these resources from an economic 
standpoint. It has even expressed certain reservations about 
the interest international companies allegedly have in 
participating in oil prospecting in the area. 
  The executive branch is nevertheless getting ready to tackle 
a round of negotiations with the British Government to be held 
in London and in Buenos Aires, as was decided last year by the 
High Level Group in charge of conducting bilateral economic and 
political negotiations under the so-called diplomatic umbrella 
agreed upon by both parties in 1990, which leaves out the 
question of sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands. 
  Cisneros conceded that "Great Britain continues to show 
hostility toward Argentina in international forums. The 
islanders refuse to establish any kind of trade with the only 
neighbor they have in the world, and react to it as if it were 
an uncouth and hostile country even though 12 years have already 
elapsed since the war." 
  Cisneros concluded by ruling out the possibility that the 
United Kingdom might decide to go ahead in the development of an 
oil prospecting scheme in the Malvinas islands without having 
reached prior agreement with Argentina. 

