SUMMARY 

                                         Protesting a series of recent developments concerning the Korean 
nuclear issue, Pyongyang has used unusually harsh language to 
accuse Washington of reneging on its "promises" and has 
threatened to reactivate the process of withdrawal from the 
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT).  To add weight to this 
threat, Pyongyang is even hinting at a readiness to resume 
nuclear fuel reprocessing.  Nonetheless, Pyongyang's rhetoric has 
stopped short of ruling out a negotiated settlement of the 
nuclear issue. 

                                  END SUMMARY 

   Pyongyang's most recent pronouncement uses some of the harshest 
language employed in an authoritative statement since high-level 
U.S.-DPRK nuclear talks started last year.  The pronouncement, a 
31 January North Korean Foreign Ministry spokesman's statement, 
accused the United States of "a brazen-faced betrayal" and of 
having "completely reneged on promises" made to the DPRK by 
supporting the IAEA demands for "full-scope inspections" of North 
Korean nuclear facilities (Pyongyang radio, 31 January).  The 
statement warned that if Washington "persists in reneging on its 
promises to the end," Pyongyang will be "no longer bound by 
promises made to the United States."  The statement in effect 
indicated that North Korea would: 

   + Once again declare its intention to withdraw from the NPT. 

   + Lift its current "freeze" on "all nuclear activities "--a 
formulation that up to now has kept Pyongyang from refueling 
reactors or extracting plutonium from spent fuel. 

   + Reconsider its decision to eventually shut down its existing 
and prospective graphite-moderated reactors, which produce 
readily extractable plutonium. 

   Pyongyang is apparently trying to foster the impression that, if 
necessary, it is willing to risk aggravating its current 
international isolation.  Apparently to this end, the 31 January 
statement warned Washington against overvaluing the importance of 
bilateral talks to Pyongyang or miscalculating Pyongyang's 
eagerness for diplomatic recognition.  "We have lived up to now 
without relations with the United States," the statement 
declared, and "we can and will live that way forever." 
Intimating a willingness to face the consequences of a breakoff 
of contacts, the statement went on to declare that should the the 
United States adopt any other measures than dialogue, the DPRK 
will take "commensurate countermeasures." 

   Pyongyang's Stance     The 31 January statement mapped out what 
looks like a tough North Korean negotiating position on the 
inspection issue. 

   + It reiterated Pyongyang's earlier contention that just because 
Pyongyang has "temporarily suspended" the effectuation of its 
withdrawal from the NPT, this does not mean that North Korea 
regards itself as currently bound by the treaty's provisions.  In 
line with this contention, the statement maintained that North 
Korea's return to the NPT, along with the attendant requirements 
for full-scope IAEA inspections, can only be settled through 
future DPRK-U.S. negotiations. 

   + The statement also claimed that Washington had agreed "toward 
the end of last year" that Pyongyang would accept only limited 
nuclear inspections necessary to ensure the continuity of IAEA 
safeguards, pending further DPRK-U.S. talks.  The IAEA, the 
statement said, is now demanding full-scope inspections and 
Washington, "instead of making efforts to straighten out" the 
IAEA, is supporting its demands.  This, the statement said, 
constitutes a violation of the "spirit" of the "DPRK-U.S. 
agreement."  Moreover, the statement went on, the United States, 
in "a brazen-faced betrayal," is once again bringing up the issue 
of special inspections of "two military sites "--sites that the 
IAEA suspects to be nuclear waste storage facilities. 

   + In addition, the statement claimed, Washington had agreed to 
hold a third round of bilateral talks and call off Team Spirit 
military exercises.  In violation of this alleged agreement, the 
statement said, Washington is now claiming that unless Pyongyang 
accepts the IAEA's inspection demands, the third round of the 
DPRK-U.S. talks cannot be held and sanctions against North Korea 
will have to be entertained.  Moreover, according to the 
statement, the United States is "bent on" conducting "large-scale 
military exercises, including Team Spirit,"  and "U.S. official 
circles" are saying that if Team Spirit cannot be conducted, 
Washington plans to continue "other military exercises" in the 
South or "even in Hawaii." 

   The statement also complained about a recently reported visit to 
South Korea by CIA Director Woolsey.  It accused him of 
"plotting" to strengthen intelligence gathering against the 
North, which, the statement contended, "strongly suggests" full- 
fledged war preparations.  Nevertheless, the statement, 
continuing the effort to preserve dialogue with the Clinton 
Administration, asserted that it would be "U.S. hardline 
conservative forces" that would be held responsible should a 
"catastrophic situation" result. 

   Signs of Flexibility     In a move presumably designed to allow 
for negotiating room, the 31 January statement devoted relatively 
little attention to the issue of the potential deployment of 
Patriot missiles in South Korea.  The statement noted that 
Pyongyang "cannot overlook" any deployment of the Patriots, but 
stopped short of issuing an ultimatum on this issue.  Instead, it 
claimed that "hard-line conservative forces" in the United States 
are  hurrying" to deploy the missiles as part of an effort to 
gain "military supremacy" over the North.  It ridiculed as 
"sophistry" a statement attributed to a U.S. State Department 
spokesman that the missile deployment cannot be regarded as 
provocative, calling the potential deployment a "reckless, new 
war provocation." 

   Before the 31 January statement, the Patriot issue had generated 
- a number of pronouncements in the North Korean media, including 
comments by Pyongyang radio and KCNA (28 January), and a 
statement by a spokesman for the Committee for the quasi-official 
Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of the Fatherland (CPRF) 
(Pyongyang radio, 31 January).  While Pyongyang radio attacked 
U.S. "conservative forces and bellicose elements" for allegedly 
backing a Patriot deployment and warned of its consequences (28 
January), the CPRF statement mainly targeted South Koreans, 
appealing to them to "stage antiwar, antinuclear peace" 
activities and "more bravely fight the present rulers" of the 
South. 

   Implications     The harsh language of the authoritative Foreign 
Ministry spokesman's statement seems designed to project an image 
of North Korea's determination not to cave in to outside 
"pressure" on the nuclear issue and a willingness to face all the 
consequences.  At the same time, its failure to spell out 
specific demands, coupled with its effort to blame 
"conservatives" for complicating the issue, suggest that the 
North Korean leadership still hopes for a negotiated settlement. 

(AUTHOR: YIM.  QUESTIONS AND/COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, ASIA 
DIVISION ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6534.) 

EAG/BIETZ/DEW 03/0052Z FEB 

