Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Aracely Careaga, vice president of the </F>
National Commission for Attention and Social Prevention by Mirta 
Rodriguez Calderon; date and place not given; first 5 paragraphs 
are BOHEMIA's introduction] 
  [Text] The rigor with which she approaches her work and the 
meticulousness that characterizes almost every aspect of her 
conduct make Aracely Careaga, vice president of the National 
Commission for Attention and Social Prevention (CNPAS), one of 
those people who are always seen to be striving toward a goal, 
dedicated to getting a handle on the future, committed to 
tomorrow. 
  Careaga, who is in charge of one of the most sensitive and 
controversial programs of our time, does not make small talk 
easily and is not very articulate when it comes to casual 
conversation; it is impossible to imagine her engaging in 
hallway gossip. Her personality reflects the rough life in the 
mining town where she grew up, Matahambre, but her bright eyes 
also occasionally reveal a natural exuberance and a joie 
de vivre. 
  Perhaps that is why, whenever she talks at a gathering, 
whenever she visits provinces and municipalities to make 
criticisms here and to call for changes there, and whenever she 
gets excited about a project that is coming along nicely and 
people who are making improvements, I think back to when she 
headed that first group of women who, in the 1970's, went to 
Angola to lend a hand and to put their lives on the line for 
internationalism. She would go on to fulfill other missions 
there. 
  First she was a telephone official, then a leader of the 
Federation of Cuban Women (FMC), then a Party official, then 
back to the Federation, then a deputy to the National Assembly 
for a while. Aracely Careaga had a close relationship with Vilma 
Espin for many years, during the times (separated by nearly 
three five-year periods) when social work attained institutional 
status. 
  Originally a teacher, she earned a university degree in 
social sciences. The vice president of the CNPAS agreed to 
answer questions for BOHEMIA to shed light on social issues that 
have been steeped in controversy, provoking many discussions 
these days: Will theft and corruption continue to run rampant, 
or will decent people who are inspired by the revolution finally 
prevail? 
<H5>  Urgent Action </H5>
  [Rodriguez Calderon] Many people believe that crimes against 
the economy, the rise of the black market, unofficial trading, 
and theft of all kinds are growing and multiplying, encouraged 
by the general atmosphere of indolence and permissiveness. How 
does the vice president of the CNPAS react to these opinions, 
which are obviously based on views of reality? 
  [Careaga] It is clear that these crimes, negative acts and 
behaviors, thefts and diversion of resources have arisen out of 
the lack of control and enforcement, and the indolence of those 
who are responsible for the people's property. All of that, plus 
the presence of unscrupulous individuals who take advantage of 
our plight to line their own pockets. 
  There is no doubt that many of the items sold for exorbitant 
prices on the black market have been taken from state units, 
enterprises, and warehouses that are feeding that market. 
  The most serious repercussions of theft are not economic but 
ideological, because the first ones to be corrupted by the 
people involved in that are their families. The social cost of 
these acts is so high that, in my opinion, if there is no 
authority, we must seek the authority to take action against 
them, and do it right away. I think we must act from the top 
down, and I emphasize that phrase because we must start from the 
top. We must respond forcefully: enforce existing state control 
mechanisms and implement new ones if those do not work. 
  We must impose the appropriate penalties on officials and 
administrators who are unable to account for the resources 
entrusted to them, and most importantly, it is necessary that 
the fight against economic crime in the workplace be waged by 
the masses, to counter certain attitudes of acquiescence and 
complicity with a strong offensive. 
  [Rodriguez Calderon] For several years, since they were 
restructured in 1986, the Social Prevention Commissions have 
worked, in some provinces more than others, to save people, to 
put those who have committed crimes and taken the wrong path 
back on the right track. Yet crime is on the rise, and there are 
more and more criminals. In view of that fact, do you and your 
associates have doubts about the effectiveness of the work of 
the CPAS? What is your assessment of this situation? 
  [Careaga] To understand certain problems, the rise in crimes 
such as theft and larceny, it is necessary to begin with an 
analysis of the complex situation we live in, under the 
conditions of the special period, the restrictions and shortages 
of all kinds that we face. That causes an increase in crime and 
in the number of offenders. 
  At times like this, when our people are undoubtedly 
responding positively, there are some who choose the easiest 
path, who twist and corrupt, who reject honest work and profit 
at the expense of those who do work and build. 
  These developments should not lead us to the erroneous and 
subjective conclusion that the political, preventive, and social 
work carried out by the commissions as well as other agencies 
and organizations in our society are not necessary or effective. 
Examples abound of individuals who once chose the wrong path but 
have been given a chance, have mended their ways, and are now 
useful citizens in society. 
  I think that one very encouraging sign we can point to, in 
contrast to those undesirable realities, is the fact that there 
is very little juvenile delinquency, and the proportion of 
juveniles among offenders in general is steadily decreasing. 
<H5>  Strategies to Combat Alcoholism </H5>
  [Rodriguez Calderon] Tell me some good news. Give me some 
examples of the CPAS's primary objectives for the near future 
.... 
  [Careaga] There is a lot of good news all over the place; in 
all provinces, we are working enthusiastically on our greatest 
problems. The alcoholism program, for example, is a strategy 
that is well under way. 
  Of course, everyone knows that this is no easy task, 
especially in some parts of the country, such as the eastern 
provinces, where alcoholism is prevalent. We must put a stop to 
the trend we are seeing among young people, who drink for the 
sake of drinking, and who think they have to drink to have fun. 
We must research this phenomenon further, but studies that have 
already been done show that the vast majority of alcoholics 
started young, were youthful drinkers. 
  I am very hopeful about the work that is being done, that 
has 
already begun, in education. Social prevention must begin in 
school and continue from there. 
  There are examples of successful projects in Villa Clara, in 
encouraging people to spend their free time with their families 
and engage in recreation with them: in Sagua, in Caibarien, in 
Placetas.... In Las Tunas, efforts to treat and rehabilitate 
individuals with deviant, antisocial, or criminal behavior have 
been outstanding; terrific work is being done there. In 
Matanzas, valuable experience has been gained in work with 
youngsters. I could enumerate, one by one, important and 
far-reaching projects that are being carried out in practically 
every province.... 
<H5>  People Come First </H5>
  [Rodriguez Calderon] You, personally, in your work, see the 
gloomiest side of life, where people suffer, commit crimes, 
become alcoholics, are deprived, commit suicide, or lose some of 
their humanity. How do you, as a woman, deal with these 
situations? How do you maintain your optimism so that you can go 
on living? What are the positive aspects of doing this kind of 
job? 
  [Careaga] I face it without pessimism, and with a great deal 
of objectivity. I am convinced that our work is necessary, 
because we are helping to save a misguided child or teenager, to 
find the seed of improper behavior and eliminate it before it 
grows into a crime, to extend a hand and give a second chance to 
someone who made a mistake and is willing to change. But I am 
also aware that there are people who are not capable of being 
guided, trained, educated, or reformed so that they can be put 
on the right track. 
  It is true that we work on the gloomy side of life, but that 
does not discourage me or undermine our optimism. Because we 
feel rewarded when teenagers or youngsters with problem behavior 
or criminal activity are saved by the proper help and attention, 
and today are workers or students; some of them have fulfilled 
internationalist missions. And above all, because we have 
children and young people who fill us with pride. 
  [Rodriguez Calderon] Do you think our society is healthy? 
Explain your opinion. 
  [Careaga] Without any hesitation whatsoever, I can say that 
ours is one of the healthiest societies in the world. Because we 
can be proud of the fact that we have no street urchins or child 
prostitution or pornography; no children are kidnapped to become 
involuntary organ donors; there is no drug addiction, begging, 
or unemployment; we do not have children who have no school to 
go to, or people who die for lack of medical care. 
  Moreover, we have young people who go to school, work, and 
make contributions to science; who spend part of their vacation 
time doing volunteer work for the food plan. Ours is a dignified 
and honorable society, a society, in short, where social justice 
prevails, and where people come first. 

