CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Egon T. Lansky: "How Bad Can Things Get in </F>
Slovakia? Well, Don't Expect Any Improvement"] 
  [Text] Within the last four years, since the Communists 
turned capitalists, Slovakia has turned into a country that 
truly deserves the name "Absurdistan." Much of the credit for 
this dubious way of "visualizing" Slovakia belongs to Vladimir 
Meciar, the recently deposed Slovak leader who, as premier and 
interior minister, has been either at the helm or nearby since 
1989. But it would be wrong not to acknowledge the contribution 
of nearly all the politicians in Slovakia who have aspired for 
some room at the top level of decision-making. 
  Take Jan Carnogursky, the Christian Democrat and former 
dissident who, as a fundamentalist and nationalist, supported 
for quite some time the liberally oriented defenders of 
Czechoslovakia. At the same time, he stubbornly pursued his idea 
of "Slovakia's own little star and chair" within the structures 
of European politics. 
  As head of the Slovak government during the final years of 
Czechoslovakia, Carnogursky was the true creator of the 
impossible idea of Slovakia as a sovereign subject of 
international law and simultaneously part of Czechoslovakia. In 
his 1992 campaign, Meciar successfully planted this idea into 
the minds of a large part of Slovakia's electorate, which 
ultimately led to the end of Czechoslovakia. 
  Or take such outstanding stalwarts of Meciar as Milan Knazko 
and Jozef Moravcik, without whom Meciar hardly would have 
returned to power in 1992. Both served as foreign ministers; 
both were fired by Meciar. Both are today leaders of small 
splinter groups from the original Movement for a Democratic 
Slovakia (HZDS); both have lost most of their credibility in the 
eyes of potential coalition partners. 
  The same goes for Slovak President Michal Kovac, a one-time 
Communist turned Catholic nationalist, who turned against Meciar 
in the name of democracy. Or Peter Weiss, whose 
Communists-turned-Social Democrats (which is OK, almost) have 
helped Meciar attain and maintain power, first by cautiously 
maneuvering with middle-of-the-road nationalist policies, and 
then by continuing to negotiate with both the government and the 
opposition to find out whether it would be more opportune to 
support the government or to bring it crashing down. 
  The true nationalists at first supported Meciar silently, 
refusing to enter a coalition while their leader was a member of 
the Cabinet. They then signed a coalition treaty in order to 
obtain some fat posts within the government, even though it 
meant ridding themselves of their own leader, who in the 
meantime had a personal conflict with the premier, who had 
accused him of fraud. 
  So Slovak Parliament now has another splinter group of 
slightly less nationalist nationalists, not to mention various 
individual defectors and dropouts from the so-called Movement 
for a Democratic Slovakia, until recently the party in power. 
  As a result of these assorted defections, splits and 
personal 
animosities, the coalition of the ultra-nationalist portion of 
the nationalist party with the HZDS of Meciar managed to stay in 
power. Not in their own right, since they have been in a growing 
minority for quite some time, but thanks to the deep discord 
among the opposition parties and groups. 
  Obviously, uniting against Meciar was not enough, and the 
lines dividing Communists and anti-Communists, nationalists and 
democrats (the few there are), as well as ultra-nationalists, 
Catholic nationalists and less nationalist nationalists, often 
run across rather than between political groups. Not to mention 
the Hungarians, whom everyone needs but few want to cooperate 
with. 
  At the end of the day, it was the president who forced the 
Parliament to its final effort: a vote of no-confidence in 
Meciar. He accused Meciar of serious mismanagement to the point 
of using the privatization process as a tool to fill the coffers 
of his own party, an accusation which in a Western country would 
be enough to bring a politician not only to his downfall but to 
court. The last straw, though, was the speech by the premier 
himself, demonstrating what Knazko, once one of Meciar's 
staunchest allies, has called Meciar's ability to "use a lie as 
a working method." 
  It is a measure of the irrationality of Slovak politics that 
with divisions and animosities as deep as described, chances are 
that even new elections will not bring a decisive change toward 
a stable, more democratic and, above all, viable government. 
  No matter who is going to constitute the future transition 
government, at best it can merely stabilize the social situation 
and organize early elections. Outside of the present Parliament 
there are, even after the recent mergers, at least two groups of 
democratic politicians partly bickering with one another. 
  Considering the complete lack of both political vision and 
personalities, chances are that what we will see in Slovakia 
after the elections is a weak government that is incapable of 
tackling the serious social and economic problems. It is 
possible that Meciar could return to power. 
  I am not sure which of the two alternatives is worse. But 
then, as my fellow commentator in the Austrian daily DIE PRESSE 
says, to analyze Slovak politics one needs a psychologist, not a 
political analyst. I would even say a psychiatrist. 

