BFN 

  [Text] Brussels, April 27 (AFP) -- NATO and United Nations 
forces are combing the exclusion zone around the Bosnian town of 
Gorazde for any remaining Bosnian Serb heavy weapons, the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organisation said here Wednesday. A NATO 
spokesman said a "robust" reconnaisance was still in progress 
and warned: "If any (heavy weapons) are discovered, they must be 
removed immediately or they will be subject to air strikes." He 
also reiterated NATO's determination to bomb the Bosnian Serbs 
if they attacked Gorazde or any other UN-declared "safe areas" 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The spokesman was speaking after a meeting of the North 
Atlantic Council, comprising the ambassadors from NATO's 16 
member countries. "The council was encouraged by signs that its 
objectives of lifting the strangulation of Gorazde has been 
achieved," he said. 
  Current information indicated that the Bosnian Serbs had 
generally complied with NATO's ultimatum that they withdraw all 
their heavy weapons from a 20-kilometre (12.5 mile) radius 
around Goradze by 0001 GMT Wednesday. "This development gives 
hope for the future. Nonetheless the alliance emphasises that 
the ultimatum remains in force and that it will continue to 
monitor the situation with the utmost vigilance," the spokesman 
said. 
  NATO called on all sides to avoid all "provocative actions" 
and warned the Bosnian Serbs against any hostile actions against 
UN personnel. It also warned that freedom of movement should be 
unimpeded at Gorazde and at the other UN-declared "safe areas" 
covered by NATO's air-strike umbrella -- Sarajevo, Srebrenica, 
Tuzla, Bihac and Zepa. "The council reiterated its 
determination to conduct air strikes in coordination with 
UNPROFOR (UN Protection Force) if Gorazde and other safe areas 
in Bosnia are attacked or exclusion zones violated," the 
spokesman said. He stressed that NATO's air strike threats were 
intended to underpin current efforts by the United States, 
Russia, the European Union and the United Nations to bring the 
combatants in Bosnia back to the negotiation table. "The 
council welcomed in particular the constructive engagement of 
Russia in the search for a negotiated settlement," the spokesman 
said. 

