Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Installment No 132 of the serialized memoirs of Xu Jiatun: </F>
"Xu Jiatun's Hong Kong Memoirs"] 
  [Text] 3. A Sharpening Political-System Controversy 
(Part One of Two) -- Hongkongers From All Walks of Life Call for 
a Faster Pace of Direct Elections, With Cha Liang-yung's 
Mainstream Plan' Being Criticized as Conservative"] 
  Once Beijing declared martial law, the drafting of and 
consultation on the Basic Law essentially stalled. A trip to 
Hong Kong by the Chinese Drafting Committee delegation, which 
had been originally scheduled for 22 May 1989, was temporarily 
postponed due to the sharp change in the Beijing political 
situation, and Ji Pengfei also cancelled a visit to Hong Kong. 
Some Hong Kong figures publicly announced that they were 
quitting their jobs on the Basic Law drafting and advisory 
committees, with the Seventh Plenary Session of the Advisory 
Committee, which had originally been scheduled for 3 June, also 
declared postponed due to the situation in both Beijing and Hong 
Kong. 
  The sound of gunfire in Beijing on 4 June left Hongkongers 
feeling even more in the same sort of danger. Would Hong Kong 
be able to preserve its capitalist system for 50 years unchanged 
after 1997? Would China make good on its promises to practice 
one country, two systems, and to allow Hong Kong to be ruled by 
Hongkongers? And would there still be any democracy or 
freedom? Hongkongers questioned all of this. So with a mind 
to obtain more safeguards for after 1997, Hongkongers made new 
demands concerning the substance of the Basic Law, particularly 
the political system's democratic processes, thus sharpening the 
controversy over the political-system plans. 
  The radical democracy-faction forces expanded 
unprecedentedly 
due to the 4 June incident, also exploiting the widespread 
acceptance among Hongkongers of "using democracy to resist and 
restrict communism," and calling for the Basic Law to be 
renegotiated and redebated, with some even shouting the slogan: 
"Down With the Basic Law altogether." 
  The political-system plans put forth by all social strata 
and 
factions, including the moderates (and even some left factions), 
all called for a faster pace of democracy, or direct elections. 
  Before describing the calls and new positions and plans put 
forth by all sides to speed up the pace of democracy, it is 
necessary to return to certain conditions of the "mainstream" 
plan that resulted from soliciting advice on the drafting of the 
Basic Law. This is because almost all of the later plans for 
speeding up the pace [of democracy] were directed at this 
"conservative" plan. 
  Returning to 1989, the consultations on the drafting of the 
Basic Law resulted in a "dual-Cha plan," which was the product 
of and based on the "mainstream" plan of Drafting Committee 
member Cha Liang-yung [2686 5328 6978]. 
  At the end of 1988, prior to a meeting of the Drafting 
Committees' Special Political-System Group in Guangzhou, I was 
resting one Sunday in November at the Beiling Residence in 
Shenzhen, when Cha Liang-yung, one of the conveners of the 
Drafting Committee's Special Group, sought me out. I invited 
him to the Beiling Residence, asking him in passing to taste the 
Huaiyang food of our famous cook who had recently arrived from 
Yangzhou. 
  After we met, Cha Liang-yung briefed me on his 
political-system plans, such as for the Chief Executive to be 
produced through a general election group form, and for the 
Legislative Council [LEGCO] members to be produced through a 
proportional distribution of general elections and other forms. 
His most important position was to begin "examining" the full 
implementation of general elections for Chief Executive and 
LEGCO members for the Fourth [executive and legislative] 
Session, i.e, for 15 years after 1997, with certain procedures 
(such as majority approval by LEGCO or voting by the whole 
people) being used to determine whether to fully practice 
general elections for LEGCO members and the Chief Executive. 
  While I certainly did not object to choice through general 
election and proportional production of legislators, I held that 
"examining" this for the Fourth Session was a little too early, 
suggesting that it might be pushed back a session or two. I 
considered at the time that as it was hard to guess how the 
situation might develop, with the pace of democracy unable to be 
completely determined by man-made means, the "legislative" 
timetable ought to give a little more attention to the 
"security" factor. If conditions ripened sooner, the 
"legislation" could be amended, with the "examination" also 
occurring earlier. 
  He explained to me that if conditions were not yet ripe for 
general elections by the Fourth Session, an "examination" of 
them might not be approved. 
  As we had exchanged views, and future variables were 
numerous, we did not continue the discussion. 
  At the meeting of the Special Political-System Group in 
Guangzhou, Cha Liang-yung presented this plan that he had 
proposed. It was said that he had had another plan, for 
extending the general elections to 30 years after 1997, which 
had been leaked too soon and had run into opposition, so had 
been changed to the current one, for an "examination" of general 
elections 15 years in advance. 
  I only half-trusted this version. What I believed was that 
my view had influenced him, so that after our meeting, he had 
revised his original plan. But what I distrusted was that my 
suggestion had been to postpone the matter for one or two 
sessions, or 5 to 10 years, not 15 years. The "examination" of 
general elections for the Fifth Session of LEGCO members and the 
Fourth Session of the Chief Executive was Cha's original stand 
in our discussion. 
  But regardless of those facts, Cha Liang-yung's subsequent 
statement under pressure by reporters in the midst of 
ever-sharpening debate, that "Xu Jiatun is more conservative 
than me," was certainly the truth. In our exchange of views, 
mine were certainly more "conservative" than his. 
  Cha Liang-yung's plan was revised slightly at the meeting of 
the Special Group in Guangzhou, being called the "mainstream 
plan," with much discussion among all parties, and the major 
criticism being that it was too "conservative." 
  At the time, as Ji Pengfei had not called a meeting in 
advance to consolidate the Party's views, I did not know whether 
Li Hou and Lu Ping had a "bottom line" when they hosted the 
meeting of the Special Group. And my exchange of views with Cha 
Liang-yung was also just my own idea, as many other plans were 
also in existence at the time. So I held that it was a little 
early to describe Cha Liang-yung's plan as "mainstream." 
  So when I later asked Mao Junnian [3029 6874 1628] [deputy 
director of the Hong Kong Office of the NCNA], who had attended 
the meeting, why Cha's plan was called the "mainstream" one, he 
replied that "this was the majority view of the group." 

