Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The government has decided to make public its 
position on the appearance of Valle drug kingpins before justice 
authorities. By failing to confess their crimes, the kingpins 
are hoping that the government will open investigations against 
them, whereupon the lack of evidence will virtually preclude any 
further action against them. 
  According to Justice Minister Andres Gonzalez, the 
government 
has expressed its concern and alerted Prosecutor General Gustavo 
de Greiff so that "the nation can head off the legal maneuvering 
of criminals who are trying to evade responsibility" and set up 
"an eventual impunity" for themselves. 
  The minister, in a seven-page letter, said that in a shrewd 
interpretation of the regulations on surrendering to the 
authorities, the drug traffickers' attorneys think their clients 
can go to justice officials without confessing to any crimes or 
cooperating in any meaningful way, so that cases will be opened 
and then they will be let go for lack of evidence. 
  "These individuals, assuming that no formal evidence will be 
provided in an investigation against them, are counting on a 
preliminary inquiry or formal prosecution to begin under the 
aforementioned regulations and then to result in no 
determination of criminal liability because of their failure to 
cooperate. 
  "In the first case, if a preliminary investigation takes 
place, they are hoping that after the four-month term is up, as 
provided in the code, the Prosecutor General's Office would be 
forced to issue an order of dismissal, which would not make the 
case res judicata, but would be a convenient 
mechanism for making it appear that the individual is not a 
suspect in any crime. 
  "In the second case, that is, if they try to get a criminal 
investigation opened, their objective is none other than to have 
an inquiry begin that would then find no evidence against them, 
whereupon they could request (...) that the Prosecutor General's 
Office issue a ruling in the preliminary hearing that would 
preclude a probable cause proceeding. That order would indeed 
make the case res judicata, which could eventually 
lead to impunity for them." 
  With reference to the letter, De Greiff told EL TIEMPO 
yesterday that "the Prosecutor General's Office, as a division 
of the judicial branch, will not issue general directives; it 
will issue only the writs and other orders that are within its 
purview, in each particular case. Therefore, it will take no 
position on the minister's letter." 
  The minister's letter comes in the wake of the appearance of 
three alleged drug kingpins of the Valle region, Elmer Herrera 
Buitrago ("Pacho Herrera"), Luis Carlos Ramirez Abadia, and Jose 
Olmedo Ocampo, at the Prosecutor General's Office between 11 and 
14 January of this year. 
  Herrera, Ramirez, and Ocampo and their attorneys stated that 
they were appearing before justice officials pursuant to Article 
369E of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which provides that 
anyone who has good cause to believe he is being sought by the 
authorities may appear before justice officials to clarify his 
legal status. 
  After the appearances, the Prosecutor General's Office 
ordered the corresponding preliminary inquiries to begin, 
because, as De Greiff explained, no charges had been filed or 
evidence gathered that would make it possible to arrest them. 
  The appearance of the three alleged drug traffickers 
precipitated meetings this week between De Greiff and Attorney 
General of the Nation Carlos Gustavo Arrieta and President Cesar 
Gaviria. The latter expressed concern that he had not been 
informed of the matter and called for closer cooperation. 
  The government believes that Article 369E applies to cases 
of 
individuals who "are known to be or firmly believe themselves to 
be sought or pursued by the authorities." 
  In other words, people who are currently being investigated 
or who, knowing that no such investigation is taking place, turn 
themselves in precisely to confess their crimes. 
  According to Gonzalez's letter, in the government's view, 
"if 
a person merely appears before the authorities without providing 
any evidence of a punishable act or possible criminal liability, 
there are no grounds to open an investigation, because that 
would mean putting the responsibility for initiating criminal 
action in the hands of potential defendants," with the risk of 
the maneuvers mentioned above. 
  Launching investigations prematurely without solid evidence 
or without a confession or acknowledgement of guilt by the 
individual could result in impunity, according to the government. 
<H5>  Confession </H5>
  The executive branch's position on this matter is that, when 
individuals who are not the subject of criminal investigations 
come forward, Article 369B of the new code applies, "which is 
why the article is entitled `Benefits for Persons Not Being 
Prosecuted.'" 
  Specifically, the article states: "If the person giving 
testimony freely and spontaneously confesses his participation 
in punishable acts, pursuant to Article 33 of the Political 
Constitution, and cooperates to ensure that justice is done, an 
investigation shall be opened in his case." 
  This is the scope of the new regulations for the surrender 
policy, says the minister. In essence, these regulations require 
effective cooperation with law enforcement so that a preliminary 
investigation or formal probable cause proceeding may take 
place, resulting in sufficient evidence to prosecute the person 
appearing to provide such evidence. 
  "We cannot forget the basic objective of the justice system, 
which is to bring criminals to justice, either by pursuing them 
until they are arrested and convicted, or by applying the 
surrender policy on the basis of cooperation for effective 
administration of justice." 
  Finally, in his letter to De Greiff, the minister urges that 
a consensus be reached so that "we can continue the surrender 
program on the proper terms" and so that the government can 
decide what guarantees it will offer, including incarceration 
facilities and other security measures. 
  "Because this issue is so important for the country, the 
government believes it is essential to maintain close and 
constant cooperation and coordination with the Prosecutor 
General's Office and the Attorney General's Office in this 
regard. In that way, the concerns that have been expressed can 
be taken into consideration and a consensus can be reached on 
such vital issues, and this will benefit the surrender policy," 
emphasizes the letter. 
<H5>  [Box, p 22A] </H5>
<H5>  Highlights of the Letter </H5>

  -  The mere fact that a person appears before the appropriate 
authority on the pretext that he is being sought by law 
enforcement is not, in our opinion, legal grounds for issuing an 
order to open a preliminary investigation or probable cause 
proceeding; if that were to occur, the decision to pursue 
criminal action would be placed exclusively in the hands of 
those who are deceitfully trying to get a criminal prosecution 
going against themselves (...). 
  Anyone who appears without intending to cooperate is only 
trying to inveigle the authorities into issuing a decision that 
will serve as an obstacle later on, to prevent unfavorable 
rulings when the state manages to obtain sufficient evidence of 
his guilt. 

  -  A person appearing for the sole purpose of having an 
investigation opened so that the state will try to prove that he 
committed a punishable act runs counter to the purpose of the 
regulation, which is to ensure the effectiveness of justice; 
unless the person simply confesses his crime, in which case 
Article 369B of the Code of Criminal Procedure should be 
applied. 
  -  The application of Article 369E of the procedural 
statute is predicated upon cooperation with justice authorities. 
Indeed, the aforementioned regulation is part of the legal 
institution known as "surrender to and cooperation with justice 
authorities," which is aimed at imposing the proper penalties on 
those who have violated other people's rights but who have 
agreed to abide by the social and legal order. That is also the 
reason why the appearance is made exclusively before the 
prosecutor general of the nation or his deputy. 
  -  The provisions 
that set forth rewards for cooperating with justice authorities 
distinguish between two situations: that of persons who are 
being prosecuted and that of persons who are not. 
  As for the first case, it necessarily implies that the 
authorities have evidence of the person's guilt, so coming 
forward and cooperating effectively are among the many criteria 
taken into consideration in the discretionary decision to grant 
the benefits provided by law (literal E), Article 369A. 
  Now, if the person is not being criminally prosecuted, 
Article 369B of the Code of Criminal Procedure should be 
applied. It was specifically designed to address such cases, 
which is why it is entitled "Benefits for Persons not Being 
Prosecuted." Its second paragraph states: "If the person giving 
testimony freely and spontaneously confesses his participation 
in punishable acts, pursuant to Article 33 of the Political 
Constitution, and cooperates to ensure that justice is done, an 
investigation shall be opened in his case...." It should be 
noted that in this case, appearing before the authorities is not 
one of the criteria for deciding whether to grant benefits, and, 
therefore, it was expressly excluded as a reason for granting 
benefits during the debate and passage of the law in the 
Congress of the Republic. 

  -  From the above, it is concluded that as we interpret 
Article 369E of the procedural statute, the following 
prerequisites would have to be met for its application: 
  a. That there be effective cooperation in the administration 
of justice, in accordance with the criteria that govern such 
matters. 
  b. That there be a preliminary investigation or formal 
probable cause proceeding. 
  c. That such proceedings result in sufficient evidence to 
prosecute anyone who is thought to be involved in criminal 
activity or who has come forward to provide such evidence. 


