Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Shahzad Badar] </F>
  [Text] Islamabad -- The money generated by narcotics 
business in Pakistan amounts to 25 percent of the shadow economy 
i.e five percent of the total gross domestic product (GDP). 
This was stated by the International Narcotics Control Board 
[INCB] member while launching the Board's annual world drug 
report for the year 1993. Matti Teravainen Director of UNDCP 
[United Nations Drug Control Program] launched the report at the 
UN Center on Monday. 
  According to the UN member internal drug sales in Pakistan 
were generating a revenue of 1.2 billion dollars while the 
illegal export earnings amounted to 1.3 billion dollars 
annually. It was also said that half of the opium produced in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan was consumed locally. 
  The representatives expressed satisfaction over the efforts 
made by the Government of Pakistan to curb the drug menace. 
Both the Pakistani and UN representatives were of the view that 
the unstable situation in Afghanistan was one of the main factor 
hindering the proper checking of drug trafficking across the 
border. Secretary Narcotics Board, Dil Jan Khan was absolutely 
silent over some of the questions put by Press reporters. The 
Secretary revealed to the newsmen that the government was 
serious in dealing with drug cartels and said that the 
government had disqualified several politicians and had laws to 
forfeit the property of drug-barons. Why are the politicians 
only disqualified and not imprisoned came a question from a 
reporter which the Secretary did not answer. 
  According to the Report of the INCB the drug situation has 
worsened during the past two decades. The report draws 
attention to the more use of synthetic stimulants in all regions 
of the world. They report reveals substantial seizures of 
fenetylline [as published] tablets in the Middle East, smuggling 
of amphetamines and pemoline [as published] in West Africa. 
Amphetamines abuses in the Scandinavia and other parts of 
Europe including designers drugs were also said to be growing at 
an alarming rate in America and Asia. 
  The Report of the INBC says that Afghanistan is one of the 
largest producer of opium in the world with 57,000 hectares 
under poppy cultivation and 2,000 tonnes production of raw opium 
annually. The opium production in Pakistan is estimated to be 
140 to 180 tonnes annually. Most of the processing of opium 
into heroin is believed to take place in Tirah area of the 
Khyber District close to the Afghanistan border with 100 heroin 
laboratories operating in the region. 
  According to an estimate mentioned in the Report about 70 to 
80 per cent of the heroin seized in Europe in 1992 had 
originated from Pakistan and Afghanistan and reached Europe via 
Balkan route i.e. through Iran and Turkey which is the main 
route of drug trade. 

