CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Valeriy Gromak under "The State: Words and </F>
Deeds" rubric: "For Sale After Being Under Arrest?: the Russian 
Oceanographic Fleet May Lose a Unique Research Ship"] 
  [Text] After fortunately escaping seizure in the port 
of Las Palmas (Canary Islands), the research ship "Akademik 
Sergey Vavilov" returned to its home shores. But in Port Stanley 
(Falkland Islands), another research ship, the "Akademik Ioffe," 
which also belongs to the Institute of Oceanography imeni P.P. 
Shirshov of the Russian Academy of Sciences, has been under 
arrest since 17 March as a hostage for the "Vavilov" that 
"slipped away." However, the story of the seizure of one ship 
and the "escape" of another began long before the unpleasant 
outcome for the Russian side and it is not yet over. 
  Just a few years ago research ships of this class performed 
an enormous amount of work in the study of the world oceans, 
including in the interests of the Russian Navy. For example, it 
was only because of the unique equipment and efforts of the 
command of the research ship "Akademik Mstislav Keldysh" that it 
was possible to clarify the situation with respect to the 
nuclear submarine "Komsomoletz" lying on the bottom of the sea. 
For well-known reasons, however, today it is practically 
impossible to maintain the unique fleet and to carry out 
research through the means of the state budget only. Last year, 
therefore, the Institute of Oceanography of the Russian Academy 
of Sciences leased the reseach ship "Akademik Sergey Vavilov" to 
the Russian-German joint enterprise "Polar Shipping" out of St. 
Petersburg for a period of five years for tourist cruises. Under 
the contract, the charterer had the right to make tourist 
cruises and to obtain an income from this activity under that 
condition that the charterer will assume all of the expenditures 
for the maintenance of the ship, including material-technical 
supply, the cost of fuel, the payment of the crew, and 
registered repairs. As payment for the five-year lease, the 
company "Polar Shipping" obligated itself to pay the 
expenditures of two scientific expeditions on this ship for 100 
days each and costing $400,000. 
  But after just six months of operations, the company refused 
to finance the first expedition. Moreover, in the period from 
the 8th through the 15th of November of last year in the port of 
Bremerhaven (Germany), a German firm carried out a repair of the 
research ship "Akademik Sergey Vavilov" for the sum of 338,800 
German marks [DM]. The company "Polar Shipping" assigned an 
intermediary firm to perform work in connection with the 
repairs, but when it came time to settle accounts there was no 
one to pay. On 15 December of last year, the Institute of 
Oceanography canceled the contract with the joint enterprise 
"Polar Shipping." Not having contract relations with the 
representative of the German intermediary firm, the institute 
naturally could not control his actions and the institute did 
not sanction the servicing of the ship on credit. 
  Meanwhile, the German creditor companies, despairing of the 
prospects of somehow getting back the funds invested in the 
repairs, turned to the supreme court of the Falkland Islands, in 
whose district the research ship "Akademik Sergey Vavilov" was 
operating in those days, to demand the money from the ship 
owner, the Institute of Oceanography. In those same latitudes, 
another ship of the institute, the "Akademik Ioffe," made a 
cruise with paid passengers on board under contract with a 
Canadian tourism company. The captain of the "Vavilov" was 
warned of the threat of seizure, and, landing his passengers in 
one of the ports of Argentina, did not go to the Falklands. The 
completely unsuspecting crew of the "Akademik Ioffe" stopped 
there in Port Stanley. It is now well known how that ended for 
them. The ship was seized. It is still unclear what will happen 
next. In Russia, they prefer not to talk about the incident, and 
in Germany, judging by published articles, they are formulating 
prospects that are by no means pleasant for us. In the article 
"Double Freight," for example, one German newspaper writes: "The 
scientific research ships "Akademik Sergey Vavilov" and 
"Akademik Ioffe" were built in Finland in 1988 and their cost 
exceeded $30 million. Today it cannot be ruled out," the 
newspaper stresses, "that the indebtedness of the German company 
will lead to the sale of the ship "Akademik Ioffe" at auction." 
  I tried to find out from Igor Mikhaltsev, doctor of physical 
and mathematical sciences and the head of one of the 
laboratories of the Institute of Oceanography, what they think 
about this in Russia. By directive of the president of the 
Academy of Sciences of the Russian Federation, Igor Yevgenyevich 
was appointed chairman of a special commission to investigate 
this entire story. But through intermediaries I. Mikhaltsev 
refused to meet with the correspondent prior to the conclusion 
of the trial and the final end of this whole story. 
  As of today, the captain of the "Akademik Ioffe" has sent an 
official protest to the governor of the Falkland Islands. A 
letter about defense was sent through an English legal firm that 
undertook to represent the interests of the Oceanographic 
Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences in the ship. At the 
same time, the institute appealed to a maritime arbitration 
commission in Moscow with an action against the company "Polar 
Shipping" to prevent the sale of the ship at auction. To "free" 
the ship, it is necessary to make a deposit to the Supreme Court 
of the Falkland Islands or to provide a guarantee from a 
first-class Western bank and then to proceed with the trial in 
accordance with the procedures of the English court. The amount 
of the deposit is considerable--about DM400,000 for the claim of 
the shipyard, $50,000 for legal services, and $25,000 to pay for 
the forced stay in the port. Depending upon the course of the 
review of the case in the Supreme Court of the Falkland Islands, 
there may be additional claims of other German firms for a total 
of DM1,125,985.29. It will then be necessary to make a deposit 
for these claims as well. 
  Of course the ship owners have no idea where they can seek 
such funds. But something else is clear. Russian science, which 
has made a truly titanic contribution to the investigation of 
the world oceans, must not lose its authority and the authority 
of a power by degrading itself to the point of transporting 
tourists on unique ships. For this reason, the return of the 
seized ship is a matter of the honor of Russia and it is in its 
interests not to diminish the dignity of domestic scientists 
through the temptation of irresponsible business even on behalf 
of the noble goals of scientific research. 

