BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Yo'el Marcus: "The Eunuchs and the </F>
Castrated"] 
  [Text] Upon being discharged from the hospital Hayim 
Haberfeld expressed his disappointment that the prime minister 
had not inquired about his condition, visited him, or phoned him 
even once. "I have never seen such a thing in all my years in 
politics," said the man who lost four toes to diabetes, as well 
as the Histadrut labor federation elections. Of course, it was 
all Haberfeld's mistake. If instead of lying in the hospital he 
threw a cocktail party and included trendy clothes designers, 
hairdressers, businessmen, industrialists, and several sycophant 
journalists among his guests, not only would he have received a 
phone call, but the royal couple themselves would have honored 
him with their presence. 
  Did we say royal? Well, it is no slip of the pen. We have 
seen all sorts of regimes in this country -- a semi-messianic 
regime, a semi-bolshevik regime, a semi-chaotic regime, a 
full-blown down-to-earth regime, and a full-blown 
pomp-and-circumstance regime a la Ze'ev Jabotinsky -- but we 
have never had any regime as monarchical as Rabin's. However, 
contrary to present-day monarchs who are mostly symbolic figures 
in ornate uniforms, Rabin sees himself as an anointed autocrat, 
like the kings of ancient history. 
  Haberfeld served as secretary general of the Histadrut for 
only 19 months, but paid the cumulative price of the mistakes 
committed by Labor and the government with regard to the Qupat 
Holim sick fund. Primarily, however, he paid the price of 
Rabin's personal failure in the Ramon affair. Only the 
government, which allowed the situation to deteriorate to such a 
point, is to blame for Qupat Holim's woes and the suffering that 
will be inflicted on its three million customers in the next few 
months. Instead of being angry with itself, however, the throne 
is angry with Haberfeld. Had this happened a few centuries ago, 
he would probably have been beheaded in the town square, seeing 
as how in the Byzantine court that surrounds the prime minister 
only one person is right while all the rest are guilty and 
losers. 
  More than one foreign journalist has recently expressed 
surprise that the government's popularity in public opinion 
polls is not soaring in spite of its peace policy. Quite the 
contrary, a feeling of despondency (or "down syndrome," as one 
journalist put it) hovers over the country. Rabin's men 
attribute this to a mid-term crisis (apparently fashioned after 
a mid-life crisis) but I doubt this is a passing mood. This is 
a confidence crisis caused by the gap between the arrogance 
projected by the prime minister's court and the gradual collapse 
of the main elements that instill a sense of confidence in the 
citizens (housing, jobs, health, and pension). We will reap the 
fruits of Gaza-Jericho only in the distant future, if it has a 
follow-up. But, when it comes to the well-being of the 
citizens, the feeling at present is one of hopelessness. 
  Although there is as yet no evidence that the state health 
law will provide the population with better health care, what we 
are witnessing now is a retreat to Qupat Holim's darkest days. 
Pension funds, the bedrock of security for wage-earners in 
their old age, are on the verge of collapsing. In many places, 
the economic hardships are unbearable and the chances of buying 
a house are growing dimmer by the day. Thousands of learned 
analyses about the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange will not alter what 
seems to be the real reason for what is happening there: a 
basic lack of faith in the government's promises to improve the 
economy. Shulamit Aloni is right when she says that "Labor is 
in a state of deterioration." Highway overpasses do not build a 
country. 
  The nature of the regime emerging in the second reign of 
Rabin the First is largely to blame. The court consists of two 
types of royal advisers: the eunuchs and the castrated. The 
former are Rabin's closest advisers, who have learned from 
experience that only by being yes-men will they keep their 
positions, seeing that the prime minister absolutely abhors 
anybody giving him advice that conflicts with his own views. 
Although they are mere clerks, his minions intimidate cabinet 
ministers and other elected officials. Neither in the infamous 
days of MAPAI [Israel Workers Party, a Labor precursor] nor in 
the days of Begin, who was regarded as a demigod, was there a 
court so manipulative of the media, so intolerant of criticism, 
and so imperious on the personal and political level. 
  It goes without saying that the castrated are elected 
officials and prominent Labor members who are cabinet ministers. 
It is hard to recall another elected government that was so 
subservient to, so scared of, and so groveling to the prime 
minister as the current one. The nation's leaders are divided 
into several categories: Those to whom Rabin is indebted to but 
does not care about, those he cannot stand, those he does not 
appreciate, thoes he scorns, and those he would gladly fire from 
their jobs if his ability to make decisions was anything like 
his ability to look down on his colleagues in the government. 
What all of them have as a common denominator is that although 
they bear collective responsibility, none of them has the 
foggiest idea of what is going on -- they are not consulted on 
either strategy, tactics, or the considerations deciding the 
fate of the country, except for those occasions when Rabin needs 
a rubber stamp. 
  And so it has come to pass that at this time unto Israel 
there is a king. But where is the leadership? 

