BFN 

  [Excerpts] Vientiane, June 10 (KPL) -- Lao President Nouhak 
Phoumsavan yesterday evening hosted a banquet at the National 
Assembly Hall in honour of the visiting Myanmar [Burma] SLORC 
[State Law and Order Restoration Council] Chairman Senior 
General Than Shwe and his party. 
  President Nouhak Phoumsavan and Senior Gen. Than Shwe 
exchanged a toast at the banquet, both appreciating the 
increasingly growing relationship and cooperation between the 
two neighboring countries. [passage omitted on President Nouhak 
Phoumsavanh's speech] 
  Senior Gen. Than Shwe also described the fruit of the 
Myanmar-Lao relations and cooperation in his speech whose text 
is as follows: 
  "I am most grateful to Your Excellency and Madame Phoumsavan 
for the kind hospitality extended to us since our arrival this 
morning in the beautiful city of Vientiane, the arrangements for 
the banquet, and the warm words of welcome expressed to our 
delegation and the compliments offered to the Union of Myanmar. 
On behalf of the Myanmar delegation, I wish to reciprocate the 
sincere sentiment of friendship conveyed to us by Your 
Excellency this evening, by stating that geography alone is not 
the factor that made us neighbours, but the spirit of kinship, 
cooperation and mutual understanding is also an element which 
completes the feeling of friendly neighbours. 
  Our two countries share the similar experience of a colonial 
past while we are bound by the common heritage of tradition and 
culture, including our values and customs enriched through the 
long established history of respective nations. It is therefore 
appreciated that in our struggle for freedom and independence, 
Myanmar and Laos have been striving for unity of national races 
and consolidation of political and economic forces leading to 
the establishment of a system best suited to the conditions of 
each country. I am happy to note that in the Lao People's 
Democratic Republic you have promulgated the first constitution 
in 1991, promoting the unity of the Lao people and enhancing the 
leadership of the government in building a people's democracy 
which constantly applies the foreign policy of peace, 
independence, friendship and cooperation, taking part actively 
in the common tasks of the nations of the world. 
  We in Myanmar have also been in the process of realising 
consensus on the guidelines and principles of a firm 
constitution through the national convention held in January 
1993 with 700 delegates representing eight different walks of 
life from among the 45-million population. It is our historical 
assignment to realise the emergence of a state constitution 
which will generate the unity, peace and prosperity of our 
nation. We are implementing our share of contribution through 
unswerving to promote peace and stability among nations based on 
the principle enshrined in the United Nations charter and 
through application of our active and independent foreign policy 
reflecting the five principles of peaceful coexistence. 
  I am most encouraged to learn that the close cooperation 
between our two countries have fruitful results, particularly in 
the fields of high level exchange of visit, sharing experience 
and technology in agriculture, forestry, construction works and 
recreational facilities. There has been increasing contacts 
between the two countries in the religious fields by exchange of 
visits among sanghas [monks], and donations of religious objects 
and material as well. After we had first established, in 
December 1990, cooperation in drug abuse control through the 
meetings of national commissions, further consolidation was 
achieved by signing the memorandum of understanding on drug 
abuse control among the People's Republic of China, the Lao 
People's Democratic Republic, the Union of Myanmar, and the 
Kingdom of Thailand on 26 October 1993 in New York. In addition, 
Myanmar, Laos, and Thailand have been able to hold ministerial 
meetings in 1992 and 1994 on the subject of drug suppression. 
  In order to further strengthen the atmosphere of friendship, 
cooperation and understanding, it is envisaged that a joint 
commission could be established while cooperation in tourism, 
industries, and promotion of trade and commerce between the two 
countries would be encouraged. I hope that these aspirations 
will be fulfilled during the current visit which is designated 
to signal the conclusion of [the] Myanmar-Lao boundary treaty. 
  We are increasingly aware of the delicate and complex 
transition of situations in our region and beyond. We also 
realised that such situations developing even without our own 
making will not spare us to chart our own course of development 
alone. It is, therefore, imperative to build a sound working 
relationship through trust and interdependence among nations. 
In order to achieve this aim, mutual goodwill and cooperation 
should be widely practised in our bilateral relations as well as 
in our relations with the neighboring countries, ensuring peace 
and harmony in the region where we belong. Constructive approach 
to all issues that exist among us would result in resolving 
peacefully all the differences. Only in this atmosphere of 
peace and stability, we will be able to achieve progress and 
development of nation. I hope that my visit will in a most 
constructive way contribute towards the accomplishment of our 
aspiration. 
  It is my firm belief that a strong desire to build 
substantial and friendly relations with neighbours will always 
receive positive response when there is mutual trust and 
goodwill. To arrive at such an atmosphere, we will have to 
establish closer relations among nations. 

