pp 17-20 
<F P=103> 944Q0161B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MIROVAYA EKONOMIKA I MEZHDUNARODNYYE 
OTNOSHENIYA </F>

 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V. Babak: "Problems in Russian-Central Asian </F>
Integration"] 
  [Text] It is probably too early to discern any specific and 
lasting characteristics of the new Russia's relations with the 
independent states of Central Asia. These relations are still 
being established, and they are being influenced by many 
different factors. 
  Relations between Russia and its neighbors in the southeast 
never had a "horizontal" structure. In other words, they were 
never equal, and this includes all seven decades of the Soviet 
era. The structure was always clearly "vertical." Certain 
stereotypes in approaches to these relations still exist in 
Moscow and in the capitals of the new states. Some Russian 
officials are inclined to view the former Central Asian 
republics as second-rate states and to believe that relations 
with them are of much less importance than relations with 
Ukraine, Belarus, and the republics of the Transcaucasus, not to 
mention the "distant foreign countries." 
  This obvious underestimation of the new states by Russian 
officials has been due and is still due to two main factors. The 
first is the legacy of the past, when these republics were seen 
by the former center not only as entities that were less 
developed in the economic and technological sense and in other 
respects, but also as less significant entities, bound by their 
subordinate position to "swallow" anything Moscow offered them. 
The continued underestimation of the new states by the present 
Russian leadership is particularly apparent in the 
incomprehensible indifference with which Moscow reacted to the 
tragedy in Tajikistan, as if all of this were happening not in 
one of the former union republics, but in Sri Lanka, Colombia, 
or some other country where events would not and could not 
affect Russia in the least. 
  In the second place, this underestimation of the states of 
the region stems from the exaggerated view of the role of the 
United States and the Western powers in Russia's future. This 
view of the West's exceptional role in the fate of today's 
Russian Federation sometimes leaves no time or place for the 
necessary consideration of other states in the contemporary 
world, including the "former relatives" from the so-called 
nearby foreign countries. 
  It is probable that people in Alma-Ata and in other capitals 
of the new states southeast of Moscow are aware of this lack of 
Russian consideration and are drawing their own conclusions from 
this. In this context, it is interesting to recall that the 
leaders of Kazakhstan and the Central Asian states met in 
Ashgabat for their own conference just a few days after the 
leaders of Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus met in Belovizh Woods. 
There is some indication that President N. Nazarbayev of 
Kazakhstan made a great effort at that meeting to persuade his 
colleagues from neighboring countries to "overlook" Moscow's 
obviously tactless behavior and to consent to participation in 
the new commonwealth of the former Soviet republics. After all, 
at that time there was still a strong possibility that a 
"Slavic" CIS-I and a "Turkic-Islamic" CIS-II would rise from the 
ruins of the USSR. 
  The declaration of the CIS would seem to have created real 
opportunities for genuinely equitable relations between Russia 
and these countries, based on the total and actual sovereignty 
of each state, but the existence of these opportunities did not 
necessarily mean that these relations would be established in 
the near future. The nature of these relations would also be 
influenced considerably by the fact that the Central Asian 
states would be incapable of living as truly autonomous entities 
for a long time.* (Footnote: A study of the viability of the 
former Soviet republics as independent states by experts from 
Deutsche Bank, based on an analysis of 12 major economic, 
social, and geopolitical parameters, is interesting in this 
context. Each parameter was graded on a scale of 10, and the 
maximum number of points was therefore 120. According to this 
method, the most viable of the countries of the region was 
Kazakhstan, which was given only 55 points. The scores of the 
other republics were even lower: 32 for Uzbekistan, 27 for 
Turkmenistan, 24 for Kyrgyzstan, and 18 for Tajikistan.) After 
all, the sovereignization of the former Soviet republics was not 
a sudden and immediate act, culminating in the declaration of 
independence, but a fairly long and complex process of 
transition, including, in particular, a transition from one set 
of relations with Moscow to another set based on absolutely 
different principles. The main distinctive feature of this 
transition period is the need for the simultaneous resolution of 
a large group of problems connected with the establishment of 
independence. 
  Genuine independence requires certain economic, political, 
and other prerequisites. In particular, it requires an economy 
capable of supplying the population of these republics with at 
least the minimum needed for survival, either by means of 
domestic production or by means of trade with other states. 
Unfortunately, the legacy most of the Central Asian states 
received from the earlier regime is of no help at all in the 
satisfactory attainment of this goal. On the economic level, 
republics like Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan are insolvent and have 
to depend to a considerable extent on financial support from 
other states, primarily Russia. As for Kazakhstan and 
Turkmenistan, the presence of a variety of commercial minerals 
(in Kazakhstan) or of large deposits of energy resources, 
primarily gas and oil (in Turkmenistan), makes their hope of 
economic independence more realistic. The situation with regard 
to Uzbekistan, which also has a variety of natural resources, is 
approximately the same. 
  Russia and its Central Asian partners in the former union 
are 
victims of the earlier centralized system of economic 
management. It inflicted much more damage, however, on the 
republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan. Their economies are 
almost colonial. This has made the new states in the region 
extremely dependent on the economic ties that were forged in the 
Soviet (and in some cases, pre-Soviet) era, especially with 
Russia. Their excessive and clearly asymmetrical economic 
dependence on Russia is influencing bilateral relations with 
Moscow, distorting ties, precluding a truly equitable 
association, and contributing to the preservation of the earlier 
relationship between the center and the periphery. 
  Meanwhile, Moscow's inability, for several reasons, to give 
the states of Central Asia the necessary assistance and its 
apparent economic insolvency as an effective benefactor have 
promoted processes of alienation from Moscow and a search for 
solutions to the present economic crisis in plans for the 
integration of the states of the region and/or their 
redirection--primarily toward Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, and other 
countries. 
  Obviously, possibilities for the economic integration of the 
Central Asian states are extremely limited. The economies of 
these republics are more likely to duplicate than to supplement 
one another. Without outside assistance, it will be extremely 
difficult for them to emerge from their present state of crisis. 
It appears that N. Nazarbayev's persistent appeals for a new 
federation or confederation of former Soviet republics in any 
form, even an extremely abbreviated one, but with the necessary 
participation of Russia, are based on a profound awareness of 
present realities and on the recognition of the fact that 
without Russia's help, they are more likely to be doomed to a 
vegetative existence like Afghanistan's than to develop 
according to the Turkish model. If, however, the CIS continues 
to exist in its present nebulous form, sooner or later the 
states of the region are certain to establish their own 
confederation. 
  After achieving their independence, the states of Central 
Asia had to face the need to safeguard their own security. 
Turkmenistan alone has a border of almost 2,500 kilometers with 
Iran and Afghanistan and cannot defend it effectively without 
help. Tajikistan is clearly helpless against the danger of 
invasion by various gangs from neighboring troubled Afghanistan, 
and its security can only be guaranteed by collective efforts. 
Kazakhstan, the largest and strongest of these states, has a 
long border with China, and people in Alma-Ata must remember the 
earlier Chinese claims to part of Kazakhstan's territory. All of 
these circumstances dictate the need for a system of collective 
security in the region, preferably with the inclusion of 
Russia's military strength. It is not surprising that the CIS 
treaty on collective security was signed by all of the states in 
the region (with the exception of Tajikistan, which was unable 
to take part in the conference because of internal political 
difficulties) in May 1992 in Tashkent. 
  In any event, security appears to be the sphere that could 
unite Kazakhstan and the Central Asian states in some kind of 
military-political alliance. The signatories to the treaty on 
collective security might include neighboring states as well as 
CIS countries: Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan, as well as the PRC 
and some others. Even the temporary presence of strategic 
nuclear forces in Kazakhstan would enhance the role of all of 
the Central Asian states in the regional system of collective 
security. 
  The consolidation of the democratic government in Moscow 
could be a factor contributing to regional integration. 
Democratic and fundamentalist ideas seem equally dangerous to 
people in the Central Asian capitals. The members of the earlier 
communist elite who have a strong foothold here simply want to 
update the facade of government without losing their dominant 
position. In response to the inevitable advancement of 
democratic forces, which are most likely to have the sympathy 
and support of Moscow, the leaders of the states in the region 
might launch collective efforts to defend their own 
pro-communist orders (Kyrgyzstan might be the only exception, 
but it does not define the policy line in the region). 
  As far as the future patterns of integration by the Central 
Asian states are concerned, the specific forms of unification 
probably will be influenced less by their relations with Russia 
than by their relations with each other. The existing conflicts 
and differences between the states of the region suggest that 
most of their leaders will not be inclined to agree to a 
federation, which would subordinate their own interests to the 
interests of the group. Furthermore, a federation of Central 
Asian states would be dominated by Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, 
which is unlikely to appeal to the other members. This is why an 
association based on a confederacy seems to be the most 
preferable form of integration for the majority of these states 
at this time, because it would allow them to coordinate their 
efforts for the resolution of common problems while preserving 
the effective independence of all of their leaders. 
  COPYRIGHT: Rossiyskaya Akademiya Nauk Institut mirovoy 
ekonomiki i mezhdunarodnykh otnosheniy RAN, 1993 

