BFN 

  [Text] The DPRK military delegation led by Comrade Choe 
Kwang, member of the Political Bureau of the Workers Party of 
Korea Central Committee, vice chairman of the DPRK National 
Defense Commission, and chief of the General Staff of the Korean 
People's Army [KPA], which is visiting China, inspected the 
Armored Force Engineering Academy of the Chinese People's 
Liberation Army [PLA] on 6 June. Commandant of the academy Major 
General Cai Kangsheng, Vice Commandant Major General (Sun 
Jiangrong), and other functionaries concerned, welcomed the 
delegation. 
  The head of the delegation inspected the honor guard with 
Cao 
Gangchuan, deputy chief of General Staff, and the commandant of 
the academy. The delegation looked over the tanks and armored 
cars receiving training at the academy, and an exhibition hall 
that exhibited technological achievements. 
  On 7 June, the delegation inspected the sixth artillery 
division of the Beijing military region. 
  On 6 June, Zhang Wannian, chief of the General Staff of the 
PLA, arranged a banquet for the delegation. Members of the DPRK 
military delegation led by Choe Kwang, the chief of the General 
Staff; the DPRK ambassador to China; and the embassy military 
attache were invited. Cao Gangchuan, deputy chief of the 
General Staff of the PLA; the political commissar of the Navy 
Department; the political commissar of the Air Force Department; 
the deputy commander of the Beijing military region; and other 
functionaries concerned were on hand. 
  Speeches were exchanged at the banquet. In his speech, Zhang 
Wannian, chief of the General Staff, said that the Armies of the 
two countries of China and the DPRK have a long tradition of 
friendly relations. He emphasized that the friendship concluded 
between the people and Armies of the two countries through blood 
ties is invincible. He stated that the heroic and diligent 
Korean people and the People's Army achieved great results in 
socialist construction and national defense building under the 
leadership of the Comrade President Kim Il-song, the great 
leader of the Korean people and close friend of the Chinese 
people, and the respected Comrade Kim Chong-il. He also said 
that the Chinese people and Army are happy about those results 
as though they were their own. 
  He said that he hopes that the Korean people and the 
People's 
Army achieve greater results in the future under the leadership 
of the respected Comrade President Kim Il-song and Comrade Kim 
Chong- il, the supreme commander of the KPA. 
  On 7 June, the delegation met with the Chinese National 
Defense Minister Chi Haotian. During the meeting, the defense 
minister said that the people and Armies of the two countries 
fought shoulder to shoulder during the anti-Japanese war period 
opposing the Japanese imperialist aggressors, and that during 
the fatherland liberation war, they shed blood and fought 
together in one dugout against the U.S. imperialist aggressors. 
He emphasized that the friendship between the two countries was 
truly bonded by blood. He said that since the people and Armies 
of the two countries shared joys and sorrows on the road of 
revolutionary struggle, they were one in mind. He stated that 
China is happy with the results being achieved by the Korean 
people and the People's Army in socialist construction and in 
strengthening national defense, as though the results were their 
own. 
  Next, the defense minister arranged a dinner for the 
delegation. Participants of the banquet and dinner made a toast 
for the long life of the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song, for 
the long life of the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il, and for 
the long life of the Chinese party and state leaders including 
the respected Comrades Deng Xiaoping and Jiang Zemin. 

