BFN 

  [Text] President Suleyman Demirel has said that if Greece 
unilaterally extends its territorial waters to 12 miles, this 
will lead to very great difficulties and conflicts. Demirel 
said: Faits accomplis always have very bad consequences. We 
hope that our neighbor Greece will refrain from making faits 
accomplis that will lead to situations with which it will not be 
able to cope. 
  The president observed the Sea Wolf-I 94 exercises and 
attended a briefing session at the Fatih frigate. Fleet 
Commander Admiral Guven Erkaya discussed the details of the 
exercise. 
  Replying to reporters' questions, President Demirel pointed 
out that if Greece extends its territorial waters to 12 miles, 
Turkey will not have access to the sea. He stressed that Greece 
should not disturb Turkey by means of certain faits accomplis. 
He pointed out that historical problems exist between Turkey 
and Greece, caused by the fact that they are neighbors. He 
added: One of them concerns the territorial waters, another one 
is the continental shelf, yet another one is the FIR [Flight 
Information Region] line. There are other similar problems. 
For the past 20 to 25 years, the two sides argue about these 
problems. Sometimes these arguments are harsh. I believe that 
if anything is to be resolved, or if one of the sides has 
anything to say, it should be done in peaceful ways. However, 
if Greece unilaterally extends its territorial waters to 12 
miles, this would lead to very great difficulties, to conflicts. 
It would lead to very great conflicts. 
  President Demirel stressed that faits accomplis always have 
very bad consequences. He added: We hope Greece will refrain 
from faits accomplis that will lead to unmanageable situations. 
This might be interpreted as a threat to Greece. It is not. 
The point is that Turkey is determined to resolve our conflicts 
with Greece in peaceful ways. I hope Greece will not force fait 
accomplis on Turkey in areas where Turkey is extremely 
sensitive, such as the territorial waters issue. The 
consequences would be bad. 
  Asked what the Russian reaction will be to the new sea 
traffic arrangements in the straits that start on 1 July, the 
president replied: I believe that Russia will understand what 
we want. 
  Demirel pointed out that Turkey is not violating the rights 
granted by the Montreux Convention. He stressed that great 
damage is being caused to Turkey because the ships sail through 
the straits in a disorganized way. He said: Had the accident 
which occurred in Bosporus a while ago taken place deeper inside 
the strait, Turkey would have incurred great losses. 
Inconceivable losses. No one has the right to cause such loss 
to Turkey. What Turkey is introducing now is discipline. I 
hope the Russian Federation will understand that. 
  In a speech during the briefing session, the president 
pointed out that every unit of the Turkish Armed Forces has high 
discipline and a high level of training. Turkey is not hostile 
to anyone, he said, and the Turkish foreign policy is not a 
hostile one. 

