Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Former Deputy Prime Minister Michio Watanabe, head 
of the Watanabe faction in the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP], 
criticizes the ruling coalition more severely than any other LDP 
faction leader. Concerning the high approval rating for the 
Hosokawa cabinet, Watanabe grumbled: "It is no use saying 
anything about it now." He levels caustic criticism at the 
cabinet's failure to launch an effective pump-priming package. 
In particular, Watanabe is critical of the government's 
decision to postpone the compilation of the fiscal 1994 budget 
until next year. Some officials close to Watanabe have begun to 
say: "He may be aiming at the downfall of the cabinet." 
  Just before the government-proposed political reform bills 
passed the House of Representatives on 18 November, Watanabe 
eagerly told LDP members: "If the LDP maintains its unity, it 
will not necessarily be defeated in the elections. It is 
impossible for the ruling coalition, which is composed of seven 
political parties and a parliamentary group, to field unified 
candidates." By making this remark, he tried to ease a sense of 
crisis within the LDP that, "if a single-seat constituency 
system combined with proportional representation is introduced, 
the LDP will be further divided." 
  However, immediately after it became clear that it was 
impossible to enact the political reform bills before the end of 
the year, Watanabe began to say: "Real political reform lies in 
the prevention of corruption." Recently, he severely criticized 
a decision on extension of the current Diet session, saying: "If 
the Diet fails both to promote deliberations on the reform bills 
and to compile the fiscal 1994 budget within the year, we may as 
well call for the dissolution of the Diet." His remark 
indicates he is ready to face a general election following the 
dissolution of the lower house. 
  By continuously passing severe criticism on the ruling 
coalition, Watanabe aims to maintain the unity of the LDP and 
"seek ways to form a new LDP-led coalition" (according to a 
Watanabe aide). Some LDP members claim: "LDP President Yohei 
Kono cannot contend with the ruling coalition because he takes 
the same political stance as Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa." 
They "expect Watanabe, a good contender, to become LDP 
president." It seems that encouraged by their expectations, 
Watanabe is promoting his own strategy for attaining political 
power. 
  The "research commission on security in Asia" is now in full 
swing. Taku Yamasaki, former director general of the Defense 
Agency and a senior Watanabe faction member, serves as chief 
secretary of the commission. Many people think the commission's 
full-swing activities are aimed at strengthening the LDP's 
centripetal force and maintaining party unity. 
  Nonetheless, three out of four LDP members who voted for an 
extension of the current Diet session and left the LDP were 
Watanabe faction members. This fact suggests that Watanabe's 
own centripetal force has weakened. Other LDP factions are 
turning their cool eyes on the Watanabe faction, thinking "more 
members will leave." It is likely that for the time being, 
Watanabe will have difficulty deciding on how he should act. 

