BFN 

<F P=106> ["ron"-signed report: "Stercken Criticizes Deficit in </F>
Turkish Democracy"] 
  [Text] Ankara -- Hans Stercken, chairman of the Foreign 
Affairs Committee of the German Bundestag, has criticized the 
Turkish Government for not pursuing the country's 
democratization vigorously enough. He also rejected German 
accusations that the Turkish Army is using German weapons 
against the Kurds in southeastern Anatolia. Stercken is 
currently paying his last official visit to Turkey. At the end 
of the legislative period, he will resign as chairman of the 
Bundestag committee. Stercken held talks with members of the 
Turkish Government and representatives of the pro-Kurdish 
"Democracy Party" (DEP). The expert on Turkey, who has been 
promoting German-Turkish relations since his first visit to 
Ankara in 1956 and who describes himself as an "unreserved 
friend" of Turkey, presented to Turkish President Demirel and 
Foreign Minister Cetin a document he described as a 
"memorandum." In this document, he views democracy in Turkey 
critically. He told FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE that he wants to 
discuss with his "Turkish friends" what should happen in the 
country. Turkey, which wants to orient itself toward Europe, 
must adapt to the European standards -- concerning the respect 
for human rights, for example. The Turkish Constitution, which 
was adopted in 1982, is insufficient and in no way corresponding 
to European standards. 
  Thus, the Preamble of the Turkish Constitution and Article 3 
stipulate the indivisibility of the country and of the people as 
a principle that has priority over most basic rights. As a 
result, the Constitution bans the secession of regions from the 
country's territory. Thus, the Turkish military has to 
intervene if political efforts by the Kurdish minority might be 
aimed at the secession of southeastern Anatolia. 
  Stercken stated: "If Turkey claims that the fond European 
hopes are not coming true, I must tell them that, in view of the 
fact that the constitutional, legal, and human rights situation 
does not correspond to European standards, even an unrestrained 
friend of Turkey as myself is not in a position to compensate 
that." He was disappointed that the leadership is reluctant to 
seriously continue the development of democratic structures. 
Many Turkish officials are talking about democratic reforms, 
referring to a coalition document of the conservative "True Path 
Party" (DYP) and of the "Social Democratic Populist Party" 
(SHP), which was adopted two years ago and which also submits 
proposals for amendments to the constitution. Yet these 
proposals are not being implemented systematically. Instead, 
"the politicians still act according to old concepts." Stercken 
admitted there are also leaders in Turkey who see a need for 
action, but the political efforts are usually short-lived and 
not systematic. Occasionally there are signs that somebody 
wants to strengthen democracy, but then the overcoming of an 
economic crisis is usually considered more important. As far as 
the Kurdish issue is concerned, he does not see any readiness in 
parliament to act. The deputies are hiding behind the 
government's decisions. Also, the current local laws, according 
to which 25 percent of the votes can defeat three-quarters of 
the voters by a majority of votes, do not strengthen the 
confidence of the citizens in democracy. 
  Stercken stated that it is about time for Turkey to settle 
its internal problems. The Turks themselves are not yet fully 
aware of the great significance of their country in foreign 
policy. No country is surrounded by so many regions like 
Turkey. Stercken advocated a political settlement of the 
Kurdish conflict on a secure legal basis. Only in this way can 
the extremist "Kurdish Workers Party" (PKK) be "marginalized." 
The general staff has also known for a long time that the 
"Kurdish problem" cannot be settled militarily. A political 
settlement of the conflict would even relieve the military 
because all expectations which have so far been linked with the 
Army have not been fulfilled. Stercken also pointed out that 
any kind of fundamentalism is a step back, no matter whether 
Islamic or other fundamentalist ideas are involved. Yet he 
himself was apparently more worried about the increase of 
fundamentalist groups in Turkey than the politicians in the 
country. 
  Stercken was confident that Turkey will master the task of 
democratization. First it must achieve economic consolidation. 
Confidence in the economic and financial policy must be 
restored. In this connection, he considers it dangerous to brand 
the sale of parts of state-owned enterprises to foreign 
companies within the privatization scheme as "a sellout of 
national assets." 
  In his balance sheet of German-Turkish relations, Stercken 
also criticized German positions. He considers accusations that 
the Turkish Army used German weapons against Kurds unfounded. 
So far, no evidence has been furnished. It is normal for 
German weapons to be found in eastern states. Turkey is a NATO 
country. For decades, Germany has been supplying weapons to 
Turkey. It is logical that weapons are not used on beaches but 
in conflict zones -- at the border with Iraq, Syria, and Iran. 
He strongly criticized the "self-proclaimed princes of peace" 
in Germany who often travel to Turkey without the required 
background knowledge, creating "annoyance and confusion" there 
because they want to acquire a stronger profile during the 
election campaign in Germany. Stercken emphatically advocated 
the deportation of rioting Kurds. "I have never made a secret 
of the fact that these people should not enjoy any hospitality 
in Germany." 

