CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lubomir Sedlak: "Transport Ministry Prepares To </F>
Privatize Czech Railways"] 
  [Text] Between 20 and 30 percent of the Czech railway 
system could soon wind up in private hands, according to 
Transportation Minister Jan Strasky. Speaking at a conference 
on the railway system sponsored by the Konrad Adenauer 
Foundation, Strasky noted that three railway lines are already 
slated for sale during the second wave of privatization. 
  "It is not yet clear whether the state will actually sell 
the 
tracks of these or any other lines to those interested, or just 
lease them out," Strasky said, stressing that any new owners 
"would always have to respect the right of the state" to buy the 
line back if the owner should go bankrupt. 
  Josef Bazala, who is in charge of commerce at Czech 
Railways, 
said that about 20 entrepreneurs are interested in operating 
private freight lines. The railway has not begun discussing 
private ownership of passenger lines, as parliament has yet to 
settle some of the legislative issues involved. 
  With 10,000 kilometers (more than 6,000 miles) of track, the 
Czech Republic has one of the densest rail networks in Europe, 
but the infrastructure is largely obsolete. Only 5 percent of 
Czech tracks allow a train speed of more than 120 kilometers (75 
miles) an hour. 
  Partly due to growing problems within the rail network, 
trains are losing business to other forms of transportation. The 
volume of freight carried by railways dropped 11 percent in 
1993. "To make [railways] more efficient, we have to introduce 
competition onto the tracks," said Josef Zatloukal, head of the 
Transport Ministry's policy-making department. 
  Vlastimil Hlidek, who heads the railway department at the 
Transport Ministry, says that the absolute priority for Czech 
Railways in the near future is modernizing the Czech segment of 
the Berlin-Prague-Vienna line. Among possible sources of 
financing for this project are such prestigious institutions as 
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the 
European Investment Bank and possibly the World Bank. 

