BFN 

<F P=106> [Hans Strandberg report: "Bridge Consortium Meets With a </F>
Rebuff"] 
  [Excerpt] The Water Rights Court does not consider that 
the bridge consortium has demonstrated that the link across the 
Oresund does meet the criteria for a so-called zero solution 
with regard to the flow of water into the Baltic Sea, but 
asserts nevertheless that such a zero solution is achievable. 
  The court's pronouncement yesterday -- its second on the 
Oresund link -- will delay construction, perhaps until after the 
election, and is open to differing interpretations -- as was 
rapidly demonstrated. First provincial governor Ann-Cathrine 
Haglund: 
  "The important thing is that the Water Rights Court has said 
that a zero solution is technically possible." 
  Then Berith Cavallin of the Skane Nature Protection League: 
  "I think that this is a clear message to the government that 
it is time to say `no' to the Oresund bridge." 
  The court has remained firm on its demand for an absolute, 
mathematical zero solution -- that is, that the bridge should in 
no way reduce the inflow of oxygen and salt into the Baltic Sea, 
in order not to disturb the ecology of the Baltic Sea. 
  Thinking hitherto has been that building the bridge itself 
will slow down water through flow by 0.5 percent, and that the 
channel should then be dredged to reduce this figure to zero. 
The Water Rights Court is now saying that the bridge consortium 
has not produced figures that demonstrate that the present 
configuration of the link achieves this figure of 0.5 percent. 
  This means that there is a risk, the court claims, that the 
bridge consortium will not achieve the zero solution or the 
demand for a maximum of 7 million cubic meters of dredged 
material. 
  But even if this is the case, the court is nevertheless 
saying "yes" in principle and is proposing, for example, that 
the water inflow on the Danish side be increased by shortening 
one of the artificial islands south of Saltholm by 900 meters. 
  Nature does not always behave as in theory and this is why 
it 
is impossible to check whether a zero solution really has been 
achieved until the bridge is built. The Water Rights Court is 
therefore repeating its demand that two independent research 
institutes should undertake detailed simulations of water and 
salt flow. [passage omitted] 

