Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Damien Ntiranyuhura] </F>
  [Excerpts] Bujumbura, Feb 2 (AFP) -- Burundi opposition 
parties suspended a strike Wednesday [2 February] after three 
days of ethnic and political clashes between Tutsis and Hutus 
which have left 46 dead, according to the paramilitary police. 
  The Collective of Opposition Parties announced that it was 
temporarily halting a protest over Burundi's leadership "to 
enable salaried employees and households to collect their pay 
and stock up" on Thursday and Friday. 
  Earlier Wednesday, soldiers of the Tutsi-dominated army 
fired 
in the air to disperse Tutsi demonstrators who had put up 
roadblocks in the northern Ngagara district of the capital. 
  Bujumbura paramilitary police, Major Lambert Sibomana, on 
Wednesday said in a broadcast that 46 people had been killed, 73 
youths arrested and 12 houses burned down in the strife between 
Tutsis and the Hutu majority. 
  The justice ministry on Saturday sacked five Tutsis among 
the 
seven judges in the constitutional court, who had been due to 
rule on the election of a new head of state, Hutu Agriculture 
Minister Cyprien Ntaryamira, by parliament. 
  Ntaryamira was elected on January 13 in place of the late 
Hutu president Melchoir Ndadaye, assassinated on October 21 in a 
military coup bid which led to the deaths of tens of thousands 
of people as ethnic strife swept the highland nation in central 
Africa. 
  The ruling Burundi Democracy Front (FRODEBU) and the main 
opposition Union for National Progress (UPRONA), backed 
Ntaryamira, but other, extra-parliamentary, opposition groups 
dismissed the move as a "civilian coup." 
  In a statement Wednesday, the Collective said it "thanks 
citizens of the capital who have positively supported this 
initiative to defend peace, legality and the independence of the 
judiciary" by shutting shops and closing the city down. 
  Opposition leaders have refused to meet Prime Minister 
Sylvie 
Kinigi, a Tutsi, to try to settle the dispute. 
  On Wednesday, one party leader, Joseph Nzeyimana of the 
Rally 
for Democracy and Economic and Social Development, said on the 
radio that "the opposition refuses to talk to a government which 
has made itself both prosecutor and jury in this affair." 
  The trouble began after justice officials on Saturday sacked 
five Tutsis among the seven members of the constitutional court, 
which had been due to rule on the election of Ntaryamira. 
[passage omitted] 
  In the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa, a gathering of foreign 
ministers in the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) on 
Wednesday denounced what they called "negative actions" aimed at 
"torpedoing efforts to bring peace" to Burundi. 
  In a statement, the OAU ministers expressed their "full 
support for the OAU in its backing for the legitimate 
government." 
  The pan-African body has agreed to deploy a 
confidence-building and protection mission of 200 men, including 
180 soldiers, in the country, but the opposition has vowed to 
oppose this move. 
  Kinigi's government asked for international help after it 
was 
forced into hiding in foreign missions for several weeks after 
the murder of Ndadaye, the first elected Hutu president, and 
some of his aides. 

