Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Gianluca Luzi: "De Mita Gives In to Segni"] </F>
  [Text] Rome -- Ciriaco de Mita, former prime minister, 
former secretary of the DC [Christian Democratic Party], and 
leader of its left-wing faction, will not be running as a 
candidate in the 28 [as published] March general election. 
Although expected for the past several days, this dramatic 
decision was eventually reached last night at Piazza del Gesu, 
where the Italian Popular Party [PPI] leadership met to decide 
on its candidates for the various constituencies. The thankless 
task of conveying the news to De Mita fell to the PPI's Campania 
coordinator, Ortensio Zecchino, who went to the former DC 
secretary's home at around 2100 hours [2000 GMT]. De Mita's 
exclusion set the seal on a tense, agitated, and exciting day 
that seemed to alternate constantly between a break down and a 
resumption of negotiations with Segni's Pact. 
  "There must be goodwill on both sides. I have it, but Segni, 
too, must not allow himself to be angered by a few former 
Christian Democrats who want to wage a nonexistent war on a DC 
that no longer exists." It was 1830 hours [1730 GMT] when [PPI 
Secretary] Mino Martinazzoli emerged from his office on the 
second floor of Palazzo Cenci Bolognetti for a coffee at the 
corner bar. There had been a constant stream of people in and 
out of the building all day. Popular Party officials shuttling 
between Piazza del Gesu and Largo del Nazareno, Mario Segni's 
headquarters. Representatives from the electoral constituencies 
arguing lost causes. At one point adman Gavino Sanna appeared. 
Would he be taking care of the Pact's election campaign? "No," 
Sanna smiled. "What election campaign is there for me to 
conduct, if there is not even a product to advertise." 
  The atmosphere was tense: On the one hand there was the 
demand made by Segni's Pact to stamp even the PPI's candidates 
with its own symbol. On the other there was the pride of 
Martinazzoli's new grouping, which did not want to give the 
impression of excessive submissiveness. And, although everyone 
swore that actual names had not yet been discussed, there was 
the main problem -- the candidates for the Irpinia 
constituencies that Segni absolutely rejects, starting with De 
Mita. 
  Throughout the afternoon rumors emerged from the Directorate 
offices concerning the electoral fate of De Mita, Mancino, 
Mattarella, and Gargani. They are out; no, they are running. 
De Mita is out, but is competing on his own with a party of his 
own. These are not just nobodies: Mattarella is one of the 
symbols of renewal. De Mita, Mancino, and Gargani are the 
essence of the DC left, and in Irpinia they represent what is 
still a very substantial source of votes. To resist the demands 
of Segni and the Pact was not only a matter of pride for the 
PPI, but also a matter of electoral logic. Before setting off 
for Largo del Nazareno in midafternoon, Pierluigi Castagnetti, 
political secretariat chief, explained: "Mattarella and Mancino 
are not under investigation. The charges against Mattarella are 
entirely without foundation, as any idiot knows. Mancino has 
received no notices of investigation." Giampaolo D'Andrea, a 
close aide of Martinazzoli's, added: "There is no issue as 
regards Mancino; there is none because there is no issue 
regarding individuals; it is a procedural matter." As he left 
Piazza del Gesu Giuseppe Gargani pointed out that the PPI in 
Irpinia had been successful in the runoffs: "My candidacy? I 
am just awaiting a decision by the party." At last the 
decisions came: De Mita will not be fielded. Mattarella will 
head the list for Palermo. Mancino (the Interior Ministry had 
Segni redesign his symbol for the proportional vote) will be 
competing for a seat in the Senate, while Gargani will stand in 
his single-candidate constituency. 
  An agreement between Martinazzoli and Segni is very close. 
"I consider it important," the PPI secretary said, "to point 
out that I have sought, and am still seeking, a political 
operation. If Segni is not presuming to carry out a take over, 
he has no reason not to recognize, as I do, the rationale behind 
this attempt, which is above all important for the Italian 
people, because it will prevent the scene from being dominated 
by a competition between blocs that are at the same time both 
the result of quick-change acts and dangerous." In other words, 
Martinazzoli is saying that, as long as Segni does not presume 
to be the PPI's leader too, agreement can be reached and the 
center can hope to achieve something in the elections. 
  "Agreements are established when the end is reached," 
Martinazzoli warned. "We are exchanging views on the names of 
candidates, and I believe that as long as there are no excessive 
demands on either side, but an awareness of the political 
importance of an agreement, matters will be resolved. 
Otherwise, they will not." 
  There should be no further obstacles now, though the final 
"stamp of approval" to some extent lies with Segni. Indeed, the 
final selection procedure envisages a meeting between the 
regional coordinators of the Pact and the PPI for a preliminary 
examination of candidates. Then the national officials assess 
the work of the regional coordinators; and, last, only in 
controversial cases, is a decision made by Segni, whose ruling 
is final. 

