BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 22 (XINHUA) -- The growth of the 
notarial system has brought benefits for the reform and open 
policy, and the socialist market economy in China. 
  China's notarization system, resumed at the end of the 
1970s, 
has made rapid progress in the drive for economic development. 
  Statistics released by the Ministry of Justice show that 
16,000 notaries-public are working busily in 3,000 offices all 
over the country. Their business scope ranges from exit 
formalities for Chinese citizens to civil and economic items 
concerning both external and domestic affairs. 
  Documents issued by Chinese notarial offices are effective 
in 
130 countries and regions. 
  Notarization is playing an increasing role in the promotion 
of the market economy. Some 98 percent of business contracts 
are notarized, according to experts here. 
  Some 99 percent of nearly 100 million yuan (about 11 million 
U.S. dollars) in circulating funds and agricultural loans issued 
by financial institutions has been repaid promptly as a result 
of being guaranteed by notarial documents. 
  The Beijing notarization office has issued over 11,000 
economic notarial certificates involving a huge sum of money for 
over 150 foreign-funded firms and organizations in recent years, 
smoothing the way for commodities, technology and labor to enter 
international markets. 
  China's Ministry of Justice has authorized 83 Hong Kong 
lawyers as notaries to legally guarantee mainland exchanges with 
Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan since 1981. 
  With the progress of the housing reform, notarization is 
also 
used in house auctions and purchases, and mortgage loans, as 
well as the rebuilding of old residential areas. 
  In the early days of the rural reform notaries managed 
nearly 
30,000 agricultural responsibility contracts. 
  Notarization is becoming increasingly popular in the fields 
of company leasing, contract operation, enterprise mergers, 
assets division, bidding, contracts for projects abroad, labor 
service, fund import, patent application and inheritance. 

