Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Yuriy Glukhov "Observer's Opinion" article: "Afghan </F>
Patience"] 
  [Text] For several days in a row fierce fighting has been 
going on in Kabul. It has also spread to north Afghanistan, to 
the Mazar-e Sharif area, which until now had been considered 
safe. Since 1 January over 100 mojahedin gunmen were killed and 
over 800 were wounded in the Afghan capital as a result of 
rocket and artillery bombardments. Around 4,000 civilians -- 
including women, children, and old people -- have been 
hospitalized with injuries. 
  The new outbreak of violence amounts to a kind of showdown 
between Afghan President B. Rabbani and Prime Minister G. 
Hekmatyar. This time General Dostom appears side by side with 
the latter. The very same "Red general" and commander of Uzbek 
formations who went over from Najibollah's side to that of his 
opponents. It was he who, in that new alliance, forcibly 
blocked the entry of Hekmatyar's troops into Kabul. So 
Hekmatyar hitherto had a score to settle with Dostom. 
  But the alliance of yesterday's enemies and the bloodletting 
between friends (let us recall the fate of Taraki or Amin) is a 
usual phenomenon in Afghan political life. As in a 
kaleidoscope, the pattern of alliance can form from surprising 
combinations. Nevertheless they have their own logic every time. 
  The current outburst of enmity and the new marriage of 
convenience is a reaction to the strengthening of Tajik 
influence in the country's life. Most of Afghanistan's 
population are Pushtuns. Political power has traditionally 
belonged to them. All the Afghan kings have come from Pushtun 
tribes. And of course it was taken for granted that the 
Pushtuns would run affairs in the capital. 
  But what happened? The post of head of state was taken by a 
Tajik. The ambitious Pushtun leader Hekmatyar, head of the 
Islamic Party of Afghanistan, could not even enter Kabul. 
Sessions of the coalition government he heads take place in 
Chahar Asiab, 25 km from the capital. 
  Rabbani is supported by another Tajik -- Shah Mas'ud, the 
regime's "strong man." His clout, authority, and power have 
been accumulated during his years of dogged resistance to 
republic government troops in the Panjshir Valley. It was no 
accident that he became the first defense minister after 
Najibollah's overthrow. 
  Another powerful figure is Ismail Khan, a Tajik. He "rules" 
in Herat, which has become the center of a kind of "Emirate of 
West and South Afghanistan." It comprises six provinces, or 
around 40 percent of the country's territory. They border Iran. 
In his domain Ismail Khan has managed to disarm all other 
opponents and minor detachments. 
  Rabbani's recent trip to Dushanbe was possibly the spark for 
the new outbreak of fighting. It is known that Hekmatyar made 
repeated threats to extend the jihad, the struggle for the 
triumph of Islam, to the Central Asian republics of the former 
Union as well. In that case a normalization of the situation on 
the Afghan-Tajik border, or a strengthening of ties between 
Afghan and former Soviet Tajiks, do not suit him. This 
ultimately leads to the strengthening of Rabbani's positions. 
  Hekmatyar and Dostom are pursuing different aims in the 
alliance against Rabbani. The first's ambitious task is to 
restore the Pushtuns' power in the country's state structures 
and to strengthen personal influence. The second's is to 
preserve the maximum independence from Kabul. At present Dostom 
has control of Afghanistan's six northern provinces with their 
center in Mazar-e Sharif. This area is a symbol of business 
activity. Field commanders who grew rich from the war have 
started acquiring real estate. By ensuring regional stability 
Dustum was able to create a local front uniting various 
political forces, from neocommunists to fundamentalists. What 
suits the "Red general" most is a constantly weakened center. 
  Given the almost complete regional autonomy, instability in 
Afghanistan is becoming a chronic illness. The situation is 
exacerbated by the manifestation not only of national-ethnic but 
also of religious conflicts. Tajiks profess Islam of the Shiite 
persuasion. The Pushtuns are Sunnis. Besides domestic friction 
they have a different foreign policy orientation. The center of 
Shiism is Iran. For Sunnis the highest authority is Saudi 
Arabia. Eternal internecine conflict and the inability to find a 
common language are leading to Afghanistan's self-destruction 
and to the self-destruction of Afghan national groupings. It is 
quite possible that in the near future it will not be they but 
Tehran, Islamabad, and Riyadh playing Afghan patience. 

