Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Xie Yicheng: "Airport Boosts Security </F>
Checks"] 
  [Text] Long queues are commonplace at Beijing Capital 
International Airport's security gates now that all passengers 
flying to eight southeast coastal cities must have their bags 
searched. 
  The stringent measures are among several taken by the 
airport 
following the hijacking of several mainland jetliners to Taiwan 
this year. 
  The airport has expanded its list of articles banned from 
being carried onto airliners to include scissors, hair sprays 
and all kinds of knives. 
  The airport has enlarged its checkpoint staff from 200 in 
August to more than 260 people today. 
  "We are making efforts to upgrade our professional training 
to international standards," said Wang Zhengqing, head of the 
airport's security checkpoint. 
  A special training agency will be soon established and 
outfitted with advanced detection devices. 
  The airport had examined 7.18 million people and 22 million 
pieces of luggage by the end of November. It uncovered 12,200 
pieces of contraband including 61 firearms, 551 bullets and 268 
electric stun guns, police sticks and tear gas weapons, as well 
as confidential State papers, protected relics and animals. 
  "We keep two things in mind: To guarantee traveler safety 
and to improve service," Wang said. "But considering current 
conditions, it's not easy to tighten inspections while 
attempting to let travelers pass without a hitch." 
  Since carry-on bag searches were introduced in mid-November, 
the checkpoint has only been able to process three or four 
passengers each minute compared with eight or nine persons 
before. 
  During peak periods, the security check lines have caused 
overcrowding and flight delays. 
  "Yet the majority of travelers have been understanding and 
cooperative regarding our stringent check-in procedures," Wang 
said. 
  To speed inspections, the airport plans to add another two 
channels for domestic flights early next year. Currently, all 
four domestic and all three international security gates are 
being used. 

