CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Amit Baruah: "Yangon [Rangoon] To Look Into </F>
Delhi's Charge on Heroin"] 
  [Text] Tamu (Myanmar), March 2. 
  Myanmarese [Burmese] enforcement authorities have promised 
to 
examine India's contention that large quantities of heroin are 
flowing across the border to India through Moreh in Manipur and 
other parts of the country. 
  This agreement was arrived at across the table at the 
first-ever meeting of Indo-Myanmar officials held at a place 
close to Tamu (Sagaing division) on February 28 and March 1 as 
per the recent bilateral agreement to prevent illicit 
trafficking in narcotic drugs. 
  Myanmar [Burma], according to estimates, produces more than 
2,000 tonnes of raw opium annually, about 60 per cent of the 
total worldwide. Most of the estimated 2.5 lakh kg produced 
travels to Western countries. 
  In a free and frank exchange, a departure from the mistrust 
that has marked relations between the two nations, officials 
arrived at a modus operandi to coordinate enforcement efforts. 
  Talking to the press after the meeting, Police Lt. Col. Hkam 
Awng, Deputy Director in the Myanmarese Central Committee for 
Drug Abuse Control, Yangon, said they were "surprised" to hear 
that large quantities of heroin, entering India from the Myanmar 
border, had been seized by the Indian authorities. 
  "We take this issue very seriously. We will look into it," 
Lt. Col. Awng-said. Earlier seizures of the dreaded drug, he 
maintained, had been of small quantities. 
  Recently, the Manipur police seized as large a quantity as 
one kilo while the Delhi police arrested an individual with 
another kg of "number four" (the purest grade) heroin 
originating in the Tamu-Moreh area. All this evidence was placed 
before the Myanmarese delegation. 
  `Govt. not linked': The Myanmar official, however, 
refuted allegations that Myanmar authorities were in any way 
benefiting from the drug trade. "These allegations are totally 
untrue," the Lt. Col. said, denying stories in the Western press 
that there were links between drug lords and the Myanmar 
Government. 
  According to Mr. M.D. Sharma, Director-General of Police, 
Manipur, who led the Indian delegation, the seizure of one kg of 
heroin by the Delhi police from Mr. Jagdish Chawla had further 
confirmed that large quantities were entering Moreh from Tamu. 
  Mr. Sharma said that Mr. Chawla after his arrest had told 
the 
police that this was his "16th trip" with the drug from the 
Tamu-Moreh area. The 15 runs earlier had been successful ones. 
  LTTE, the recipient: He said that the drug from 
Moreh travelled to Bombay and Madras and then made its way to 
Sri Lanka. Mr. Sharma said there was evidence to suggest that 
the LTTE [Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam] was the recipient of 
the drug, which, obviously, is used to finance its terrorist 
activities. 
  In a bid to put a lid on the profitable drug trade, India 
and 
Myanmar have agreed to exchange regular intelligence and 
information apart from the decision to set up wireless links 
between the two countries pending the introduction of satellite 
telephones. 
  Apart from the regular quarterly meeting of "contact 
officers", there will be monthly ground-level meetings of field 
officers as well to facilitate enforcement efforts. Meetings 
between officers for the Myanmar-Mizoram, Myanmar-Nagaland and 
Myanmar-Arunachal Pradesh officers will also be held as a result 
of the discussion. 
  In turn, the Myanmar authorities stressed that large amounts 
of Phensydyl, a cough mixture containing codeine, was creating 
problems for them. Detailed maps showing the routes of entry 
from the Indian side of the border were presented. 
  Myanmar officials confirmed that they had no information to 
suggest that there had been movements of Acetic Anhydride, used 
to produce heroin, from the Indian border into their country. 
  Seizures in the Shan State of Myanmar, however, revealed the 
chemical was now entering from China. India also referred to a 
shipment of some 400 tonnes of Ammonium Chloride to Yangon, to 
which the other side said it was for the manufacture of 
"Myanmarese medicine". 
  The Myanmar delegation informed Indian authorities that they 
had stationed special Narcotics Task Forces at Myitkyina, Katha, 
Mandalay, Homalin, Monya and Kalay -- believed to be the main 
trafficking routes. 
  Lt. Col. Hkam Awng, when asked, said they had no reports of 
any laboratories refining heroin along the Indo-Myanmar border. 
He said that major income substitution programmes were under way 
in his country to wean people away from poppy cultivation. 
  "A lot of development is going on. We are engaged in the 
task 
of changing the socio-economic structure of these areas. A whole 
new Ministry has been set up for the purpose," he maintained. 
  Going by the reactions from both sides, the first-ever 
meeting of Indian and Myanmar officials drawn from the police, 
narcotic control authorities, intelligence agencies and customs 
and revenue intelligence was a success. 

