Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lothar Spaeth: "Ways of Getting Out of the </F>
Innovation Crisis"] 
  [Text] Germany's status in technology 
is in jeopardy. Dr. Lothar Spaeth, managing director of 
Jenoptik, believes that nothing less than a major thrust in 
innovative developments can save Germany's traditional leading 
industrial position. Spaeth, the former minister president of 
Baden-Wuerttemberg proposes a new technology policy. 
  When, in the face of the current recession, we ask ourselves 
if Germany industry had taken advantage of the "fat" years of 
the 1980s to improve its competitiveness, the answer must be a 
resounding "no." The structural deficits revealed by the 
downward economic trend attest that in recent years we have been 
living too much off past achievements while neglecting 
innovation. 
  If we continue to rely on older products, whose net product 
has stagnated and whose markets have shrunk, we shall not be 
able to achieve sufficient growth in the future to ensure full 
employment in the western part of our country or to build up 
employment in the eastern sector. This trend can only be 
confronted by a qualitative leap forward. Neither marginal 
improvements nor quantitative growth can reverse the trend. 
Germany absolutely needs an innovative thrust to capture the 
expanding world markets with new, high-quality products, 
processes, and problem solutions. 
  In this report I have listed what prerequisites I believe 
Germany needs to undertake such a new beginning. I also point 
out the dangers and pitfalls that lay ahead and the measures 
that must be taken now to create a secure, promising economic 
future in Germany and in Europe generally. 
  Obsolescence. German technology is becoming 
increasing obsolescent. This becomes immediately evident when we 
compare our technology products with those of our competitors. 
The so-called RCA-Values (Revealed Comparative Advantage), which 
indicate the degree of industrial goods specialization in 
foreign trade, shows this clearly. 
  To be sure, Germany remains, as before, a leading exporter 
of 
some advanced technology. However, really top technological 
products only appear in the export figures on a below average 
level. 
  The danger therefore exists that in a few years the 
technologies, which are still considered advanced today (e.g., 
in the automobile and machine tool sectors), with their 
so-called "mature" products and processes, will no longer be 
profitable in Germany. Of course, our economy will still need 
such "cash cows" to ensure high income and employment figures in 
the future. 
  Nonetheless, it is obvious that, owing to the deficits in 
"birthing" new technologies, an insufficiency will develop in 
income- and employment-intensive products in the advanced 
categories. The top technologies of today, considered "problem 
children" because of their characteristic high risk and 
investment requirements, will be the advanced technologies of 
tomorrow. Instead, two trends could appear: 
  First, withdrawal from the mass markets into exclusive 
niches, since cost-covering prices can only be obtained by 
marketing special products. Of course, employment requirements 
will drop and there will be an insufficient cash-flow to ensure 
new developments. 
  Second, an innovations gap develops and the technological 
top 
position is lost. Should Germany be cut off from the 
technological "nourishment chain" because more and more links of 
that chain have been captured by American and Japanese 
competitors, this competency loss could only be made good--if it 
could be made good at all--through very high overall economics 
costs. 
  Catch 22 Situation. Technologically speaking, 
Germany finds herself in a double bind. On the one hand, Japan 
and the United States threaten to dominate the top technologies, 
and, on the other hand, cheap Asian and East European labor 
costs are pressuring traditional German mature products. Germany 
has found herself in this hopeless position between the leaders 
in top technologies and the low cost producers because she does 
not have a clear competitive advantage in either of the two 
fields. Rising unemployment and the growing number of needy 
industrial centers will tie up the resources required for 
technological renewal. 
  It is not yet known whether this vicious circle can be 
broken. While the German Federal budget is supposed to increase 
4.4% in 1994, the budget for research will remain 
nominally the 
same, i.e., it will drop in real terms. Due to reunification, 
the share of the economy's total expenditures for research in 
the gross domestic product has dropped dramatically from 
2.88% 
in 1989 to the 2.66% in 1991. The situation is aggravated 
by 
the fact that of the 85,000 researchers in East German industry 
in 1989, more than 70,000 have already been discharged. 
Deindustrialization in the former GDR is devastating the 
research community and is--to a great degree--retarding economic 
development there. 
  Competence. It is not yet sufficiently understood 
by the public that the loss of technological competence will 
inevitably result in strategic, i.e., long-term disadvantages 
and economic dependencies for Germany and for Europe. Defenders 
of the liberal foreign trade theory should realize that 
different laws pertain to the high technology markets and that 
it is extremely important whether a country producers microchips 
or potato chips. 
  Such purely statistical thinking completely misjudges the 
importance investments in the so-called key technologies play in 
our future. Our country's standard of living, which is based on 
innovation and export, is already endangered and significant 
cutbacks are predictable if we fall behind further 
technologically on the world market. 
  The following conclusions must be drawn: 
  First, resources have to be concentrated and strategically 
redirected. The federal government is already in debt for its 
two largest budget items--social services and debt servicing 
(according to the 1997 financial plan, 112 billion German marks 
[DM] in taxes alone) to the point where the scope of possible 
actions in promising future fields rapidly disappears. Financial 
resources used as subsidies to support dying industries--whether 
in western or eastern Germany--are no longer available for 
promising future developments. 
  Second, in concord with the strategic importance of high 
technology, research policy must also be strategically 
redirected. The presently held definition of research foci 
(priorities and posteriorities) is very promising in this 
regard. This approach must not be opposed by any orthodox 
economic policy. Rather, all parties must participate in the 
"strategic dialogue" between the political, economic, and 
scientific sectors initiated by former Minister of Research 
Riesenhuber. 
  An intensified concentration and coordination of efforts in 
research and technology is especially urgent at the European 
level. Instead of breaking down into innumerable scattered mini 
projects as happened in the case of JESSI, the European 
microelectronics initiative, far fewer, but essential research 
areas have to be established--each with precise targets. 
  Third, guidelines have to be established to promote 
innovation. Technological, structural, and economic policies 
must all be interconnected, especially in the new federal 
states, to ensure that all resources are concentrated in 
innovative nuclei. 
  Legislation ought not make research and production in the 
technologies of tomorrow impossible by imposing excessive 
conditions, thereby causing them to develop and flourish outside 
Germany. 
  The risk capital market for the founders of innovative 
companies is still very much underdeveloped in Germany. German 
inventors and new company founders often founder for lack of 
start-up capital for the economic utilization of their 
innovations. Governmental incentives for private capital lenders 
could improve the situation in this regard. 
  The transfer of the results of research to the appropriate 
companies must be accelerated. German basic scientific research 
is still predominate in many fields. Unfortunately, the economic 
profits that might be derived from scientific successes are 
often lost because the theoretical breakthroughs are not 
converted into real products quick enough. 
  The public must be made aware of the fact that our country 
is 
now confronted by a critical challenge, the meeting and mastery 
of which is mostly dependent on our innovative capability (in 
technical as well as societal matters). A comprehensive public 
discussion of problems pertaining to future technological 
developments, which would create understanding and acceptance 
for new economic and technical opportunities, is therefore 
highly desirable. The opening of East Europe has imparted an 
additional dynamic to the technological competition in the 
Europe-USA-Japan triad. At the same time, Germany is being 
confronted with another great challenge in the problems 
associated with unification. 
  All the more reason for a reevaluation of policies now. With 
respect to economic performance as measured by the per capita 
gross domestic product, Germany today is in the sixth position 
in Europe, behind Italy. Germany must rid herself of compulsive 
distribution and redistribution thinking and return net product 
to top priority. 
  We in Germany are currently warring over individual assets, 
while the sources of our collective standard of 
living--innovation, productivity, and strength on the world 
markets--are gradually drying up here at a time when they are 
bubbling forth in other countries. 
  It should be clear to all of us that international 
developments are not going to wait on Germany and that global 
competition is rapidly entering a new phase. In the second half 
of the 1980s, international direct investments grew three times 
more rapidly than did world trade. That alone illustrates the 
new, global dimension of technology, markets, and companies. 
"Global players," who research, produce, and sell in several 
countries, dominate the scene. 
  At the same time, people, capital, and know-how have become 
much more mobile. As Germany becomes less attractive as a site 
for research and production, companies react by selectively 
distributing their activities and resources geographically. As 
the exodus of development and production in the high technology 
sector proceeds, ever more top German researchers will leave the 
country because they will no longer be able to find the 
conditions necessary to pursue their work in Germany. 
  This trend will intensify the desire to cling desperately to 
obsolete production practices. We are investing too much money 
in trying to make outdated facilities more efficient, instead of 
transplanting them to low-wage countries, where they could 
continue to be operated profitably and the money that would have 
had to be invested to increase plant efficiency at home could 
flow into the development of new products. 
  It would be to our mutual benefit if these new production 
opportunities were quickly realized in the East European 
countries. In this way, Germany could both retain her position 
on the volume markets as well as stay abreast of the Japan-South 
East Asia and the United States-Mexico competition in high tech. 
  In addition, such a strategy would provide the basis for 
closer economic cooperation with the reformed East European 
countries. This strategy could provide the opportunity for 
Europe to transform its economies through its own efforts by 
means of free trade and industrial cooperation. Strengthening 
economic performance in the West and distributing certain other 
sectors of industrial work to our eastern neighbors could well 
be the basis for stability and well-being throughout Europe. 

