BFN 

  [Text] Tirana, April 6 (ATA) -- The delegation of Ad Hoc 
Committee of Council of Europe [CE], headed by the vice 
president of Parliamentary Assembly, Lord Finsberg, held talks 
on April 6 afternoon with the Albanian permanent delegation to 
the Council of Europe, composed of Mr. Eduard Selami, Ali 
Spahia, and Namik Dokle. 
  Later, the representatives of the Council of Europe held 
talks with the minister of justice, Mr. Kudret Cela, and the 
attorney general of the republic, Mr. Alush Dragoshi. 
Journalists were not allowed to participate. 
<H5>  Albania Demands New Ways of Cooperation With the Council of </H5>
Europe -- Minister of Justice Meets With the Delegation of the 
Council of Europe 
  Albania demands new ways of cooperation with the Council of 
Europe as well as material assistance which will help improve 
the image of and consolidate the role of law, the minister of 
justice, Kudret Cela, said at the meeting with the delegation of 
the Ad Hoc Committee of the Council of Europe on April 6 
afternoon. 
  Minister Cela informed the European parliamentarians of the 
reform carried out during the last two years in the Ministry of 
justice. The realization of this reform, he said, has been 
considered in three main directions, administrative, structural 
and the reform in consciousness. 
  Mr. Cela familiarized the representatives of the Council of 
Europe with the work carried out regarding the draft 
constitution as well as a series of other laws not previously 
existing in Albania, such as advocacy and notary. Mr. Cela also 
said that the new civil code had already been approved by the 
government and will soon be submitted to the parliament. The 
new criminal code is concluded and is expected to be submitted 
to the government for approval. All these changes in the 
judicial system create possibilities for Albania to be admitted 
to the Council of Europe, Mr. Cela concluded. 
  The representatives of the Council of Europe asked Mr. Cela 
many questions about the independence of the judicial system in 
Albania, the content of the new criminal code, the composition 
and functioning of the High Council of Justice, and the 
functioning of advocacy. 

