BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Analysis" by Kang Changxing: "King Husayn's Visit To </F>
Washington Yield Constructive Results"] 
  [Text] Amman, June 24 (XINHUA) -- Wounding up [as received] 
his official visit to the U.S., King Husayn of Jordan left 
Washington Thursday [23 June] heading for London on his way back 
home. 
  Public opinion here considered King Husayn's visit as being 
successful and yield [words indistinct] economic, political and 
military fields. 
  During his visit, King Husayn held separate talks with U.S. 
President Bill Clinton, Secretary of State Warren Christopher 
and other high-ranking officials on the bilateral relations, the 
situation in the Middle East region, the latest developments in 
the peace process, especially on the Jordanian-Israeli track, 
and the economic and military cooperation between the two 
countries. 
  The talks aimed at bolstering the bilateral relations and 
boosting trust and understanding between Jordan and America. 
  Political observers here stressed that this visit 
contributed 
to identifying the viewpoints of Jordan and the U.S. on the 
peace process. 
  The visit came in the light of remarkable progress on the 
Jordanian-Israeli track of peace talks on the demarkation of the 
border lines, water quotas and security along with other issues. 
  King Husayn highlighted his commitment to his positive 
attitude toward the Jordanian-Israeli peace talks, voicing his 
readiness to meet Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin at a 
suitable time. 
  Jordan's positive attitude, which came at a time when the 
peace talks on the Syrian-Israeli track has been deadlocked 
since the Hebron massacre in February, is highly-appreciated by 
the American side which deems it as a courageous step. 
  This indicates that Jordan is trying to assure the U.S. that 
it is still playing an important and indispensable role in the 
peace process. 
  On the other hand, the American side needs a new progress on 
the Jordanian-Israeli track to reactivate the stalemated talks 
on the Syrian-Israeli track, and then to put the 
Lebanese-Israeli talks on the right track. 
  King Husayn made it clear that his country still endeavors 
to 
reach a just and comprehensive settlement for the Arab-Israeli 
dispute and will not sign any peace deal with Israel without 
securing progress on the other Arab-Israeli tracks. 
  He pointed out that Jordan seeks to safeguard its national 
interests as well as the pan-Arab common interests. 
  The American side voiced its support for the Jordanian 
tendency and its commitment to reaching a just and comprehensive 
settlement in the Mideast region, thus enabling Jordan to 
coordinate its stance with the other Arab sides. 
  King reviewed with the U.S. officials the economic problems 
Jordan faces now due to the Gulf war, pointing out that this 
situation is incompatible with the role played by Jordan now. 
  He called on the American side to extend economic and 
military aid to Jordan to enable it to get out of the economic 
crisis and play more positive role in the Mideast peace process. 
  The American side voiced its understanding and sympathy 
toward this call. 
  Bill Clinton pledged his support for Jordan to alleviate the 
burdens of its due debts to the U.S. amounting to about 1 
billion U.S. dollars. 
  The U.S. Administration will support the Jordanian economic 
development and meet the Jordanian security prerequisites in 
view of the progress achieved in the peace process, Clinton 
pledged. 
  He also pledged to help convince the Western creditors to 
reschedule Jordan's some 6 billion dollars debts due to them. 
  The positive results secured by the visit of King Husayn to 
the U.S. will necessarily activate the Middle East peace process 
and help Jordan play greater role in this process. 
  Political observers anticipate a new progress to be secured 
on the Jordanian-Israeli track of peace talks relating to 
border-line demarkation and water quotas. 

