Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nikolay Kireyev under ``Our Own Correspondent </F>
Conducts Investigation'' rubric: ``Cholera 'Canard' on Toxic 
Pillow''] 
  [Text] Kaluga-Tula -- At the end of last week, radio and 
television excited Russians with a report that a vibrio similar 
to cholera vibrio had been found in the quiet and glorious river 
Protva in the territory of the Zhukovskiy rayon of the Kaluga 
Oblast (almost in the Moscow suburbs). The Protva is a tributary 
of the Oka, and there and to its mother the Volga it extends its 
hand... 
  To put it briefly, an overstrained people was panicked. I 
phone Vasiliy Churin, head of the rayon administration of the 
motherland of Marshall G.K. Zhukov. I ask him to confirm or 
deny the information. 
  ``Yes, we just learned of this ``news'' ourselves from the 
Radio Rossii reports and from the television program Utro 
[morning],'' stated the rayon director. ``Everything is calm 
here.'' 
  I dial the number of the oblast center of the Russian 
Federation State Committee for Sanitary-Epidemiological 
Oversight. S. Pavlov, the deputy chief physician on 
epidemiological matters, believed that what was found in the 
water was not cholera but what is called NAG-vibrio 
[nonpathogenic paracholera vibrios unrelated to the cholera 
vibrio O antigenic group]. I was advised to turn to A. 
Ovsyannikov, acting head of the center's department of dangerous 
infections, for more complete and exact information. 
  Aleksandr Petrovich confirmed that a vibrio unrelated to 
cholera was floating in the Protva. It was not discovered 
accidentally. Local associates of the epidemiological oversight 
took samples to test for cholera in all rayons from May through 
September at fixed points on open reservoirs (water discharge 
and swimming sites). But the final analysis is done in the 
Kaluga laboratory. A. Ovsyannikov did not know from where the 
information was leaked. 
  The takeoff of the cholera ``canard'' over the Protva echoes 
the extraordinary incident that happened in Tula's Proletarskiy 
rayon. There late at night duty nurses of the First Aid station 
were alarmed by a sharp unfamiliar smell. The called the 
militia. Upon arriving at the site, the duty person sounded the 
alarm for the service patrol post service battalion. The militia 
cut their way through an area with a radius of 350 meters and 
closed the road. They then summoned workers from the municipal 
gas service, Vodokanal, sanitary-epidemiological station center, 
and gas rescue workers. 
  They tested the gas for its phosgene, yperite, and 
hydrocyanic acid content and for the presence of other toxic 
chemicals. But it turned out to be ``of an unknown nature.'' And 
it came from two feather pillows thrown in a trash container in 
the yard of an apartment house. 
  It became clear that specialists from various laboratories 
have rather narrow capabilities for conducting quick analyses. 
But they were not capable of establishing the presence in the 
atmosphere of the gas used in everyday life to destroy those 
very cockroaches, German cockroaches, and Colorado potato 
beetles. 
  Several persons were hospitalized for poisoning as a result 
of the ``gas attack.'' After a day or two, all they were able to 
determine was a ``charge'' of two saboteur-pillows. They were 
impregnated with trichloromethaphos vapors. Evidently, 
inexperienced exterminators of cockroaches or fleas stopped up 
their toilet bowl with them because that was where they were 
forced to dump so highly concentrated a toxic chemical. They 
rinsed it with water, they stopped it up with the down feathers, 
and the poison went to play tricks in the sewer system. And then 
they threw the pillows in the trash. As you see, our emergency 
rescue and other services keep a vigil day and night ready to 
sound an alarm or false call. And really! The unresolved secrets 
on their conscience -- as in the Bermuda Triangle...And all 
because of a frankly weak laboratory base. 
  Moreover, those directly responsible for the night alarm in 
Tula were never found. 


