Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Tokyo NHK General Television Network in 
Japanese at 0054 GMT on 27 February in its weekly 75-minute 
"Discussion" program, which begins at 0000 GMT, carries a 
17-minute live interview with Kozo Watanabe, deputy general 
secretary of Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party], on the current 
domestic political issues, mostly regarding Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa's reported plan to reshuffle his cabinet. The 
interviewers are NHK commentator Takashi Yamamoto and Tsukuba 
University professor Ikuo Kawashima. 
  Yamamoto notes that the coalition is about equally divided 
over the issue of the cabinet reshuffle, with Shinseito and 
Komeito supporting it and the Social Democratic Party of Japan 
[SDPJ] and two other parties disapproving it. Yamamoto then 
asks Watanabe for comment. Watanabe says that Prime Minister 
Hosokawa thinks it is time to realign the cabinet into one 
appropriate for long-term rule now that he has surmounted the 
major hurdle of political reform issues, while people not in 
favor of the cabinet reshuffle think the present cabinet should 
be maintained at least until the Diet deliberations on the 1994 
budget are over. Watanabe expresses support for the cabinet 
reshuffle, saying: "If the prime minister makes a decision, 
everyone should cooperate with him." 
  At 0057 GMT, the topic turns to the widely circulated 
reports 
that the true intention of the cabinet reshuffle is to remove 
Masayoshi Takemura from the post of chief cabinet secretary, and 
Professor Kawashima asks for Watanabe's view on that. Watanabe 
says, "Even though the newspapers are stirring up the matter, 
what is important is for the coalition parties--particularly the 
five parties--to cooperate in turning this government into a 
long-reigning one." But Watanabe is also critical of 
Takemura's attitude towards the prime minister, saying "The 
chief cabinet secretary is a person who must support the prime 
minister," and questioning the advisability of a chief cabinet 
secretary "standing out too much." 
  Yamamoto asks Watanabe whether someone from Shinseito will 
take over the post of chief cabinet secretary in case a cabinet 
reshuffle does come, Watanabe replies, "No. At least Shinseito 
is not asking for it." 
  At 0059 GMT, Yamamoto brings up the reports that the Social 
Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ], the Democratic Socialist 
Party, and Shinto Sakigake [Harbinger Party] are trying to 
create a new political group in an alliance separate from 
Shinseito and Komeito. Asked to comment on the reports, Watanabe 
says, "Even that is mostly the creation of the mass media." He 
says the coalition must win in the House of Councillors election 
next year if it wants to realize further political reforms and 
to foster political stability in the aftermath of the reforms. 
He says all the parties in the coalition must remain united in 
order to win in the election. Watanabe also says Shinseito 
wants to solidify ties with the Japan New Party first of all, 
and then with other member parties in the coalition. 

