CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nikita Kirichenko and Yelena Makovskaya: "The </F>
Central Bank Does Not Want To Be Overseen"] 
  [Text] Early last week the State Duma held hearings 
on the draft of the new law on the Central Bank. Because the 
hearings were organized in violation of the working rules of the 
Duma they should be considered unofficial, a kind of exhibition 
match. However, the careful selection of the audience and the 
fact that the extracurricular debate received unusually 
extensive treatment in the mass information media gives our 
KOMMERSANT experts reason to think that this was a match that 
"counted." 
  Most likely the observers were witnesses to the first 
(in the new political realities) round of the struggle between 
two committees, the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank 
itself, for the part of "concertmaster" in determining the 
directions of credit-monetary policy. In our view, the fact that 
the group of bankers who have an interest in this was sparsely 
represented indicates that the discussion was primarily an 
"internecine" political squabble. 
  Boris Fedorov, the chairman of the Duma subcommittee on 
credit-finance policy and the Central Bank, submitted his bill 
for discussion by those assembled. In concept it would replace 
the Central Bank charter with a direct law. Of course, it 
quickly became clear that in the State Duma committee on the 
budget, taxes, banks, and finances itself there are two 
approaches to the procedure for amending the Law on the Central 
Bank of the Russian Federation. The subcommittee headed by Boris 
Fedorov defends the variant of direct replacement of the 
existing law with the new one (including, in the author's words, 
the content of the former law). But the representatives of the 
subcommittee on banks support a different position and suggest, 
in order not to drag out the procedure of updating the law, 
adopting the main amendments to the present law in this 
parliamentary session and working in parallel on its articles. 
Most likely the further procedural fate of the amendments in 
banking law will follow the latter scenario, for practically 
everyone in attendance blamed the developers of the law on the 
Bank of Russia for the fact that the articles of the law were 
not looked at by an attorney, and as a result the law does not 
correspond at all to the law on banks and banking. 
  It must be noted here that, in addition to the deputies, 
participants in the discussion of the draft law on the Central 
Bank included representatives of the Association of Russian 
Commercial Banks, the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank, and 
three banks who are agents of the government (Tekhnobank, 
Stolichnyy Bank, and Most-Bank). According to KOMMERSANT's 
information the heads of other leading commercial banks were not 
invited to the meeting. The lack of a banking quorum, naturally, 
had an effect on the constructiveness of the debate. (In this 
connection the former parliament has to be given credit for the 
fact that the deputies last year found a way to bring in almost 
all the banking elite to a similar meeting to discuss amendments 
to banking law). 
  The people at this meeting gave primary attention to the 
provisions of the draft law on the Supervisory Council at the 
Central Bank, the prohibition of Central Bank participation in 
the capital of commercial structures, the functions of the 
Central Bank in operations to service the foreign debt, the 
prohibition on preferential credit for the budget, and the right 
of the Ministry of Finance to "veto" Central Bank decisions. 
  The key issue over which fights flared up was the planned 
creation of a Supervisory Council at the Bank of Russia, 
consisting of 11 persons representing the Central Bank itself, 
commercial banks, government servants, industrialists, 
agrarians, and scholars, who are elected for terms of 5 years. 
In the opinion of the lawmakers, the Supervisory Council should 
take part in adoption of decisions that are crucial for the 
banking and finance system (that is, determine Bank strategy) 
without interfering with its operational activity. 
  Formation of the Supervisory Council at the Central Bank, 
proposed by the draft law and expected, in the words of the 
deputies, to "reflect the interests of all strata of the 
population," is directly tied, in the opinion of KOMMERSANT 
experts, to the question of representation in these very strata. 
The impression is formed that the authors of the draft intended 
to establish something like a mini-parliament at the Central 
Bank. 
  The statement by Aleksandr Khandruyev, deputy chairman of 
the 
Central Bank, on this problem was quite emotional. He 
determinedly opposed the establishment of oversight over the 
Bank of Russia and stated that creating the institution of a 
"collective chairman" would threaten the Central Bank's 
constitutional right to independence. 
  In the words of Aleksandr Khandruyev, the ability of this 
body, formed in part from representatives of nonbanking circles, 
to make professional decisions on specifically banking issues 
raises doubt. Concurrently the fears of the Central Bank deputy 
chairman raise the possibility of lobbying for the interests of 
a narrow group of people through the new body. At the same time 
Aleksandr Khandruyev confirmed that the Bank of Russia has 
developed its own version of the law, which envisions the 
formation of a similar coordinating council, but one with purely 
consultative powers. 
  KOMMERSANT experts note for their part that if the idea of 
the Supervisory Council is put into effect the Russian banking 
system will instantly be changed from a two-level system into a 
kind of cyclical system unlike anything in world practice--bank 
representatives of the second level will have the right of a 
deciding vote in determining the strategy of the federal bank 
while it, in its turn, will embody this strategy by regulating 
the activities of those same second-level banks. The 
intellectual force of this idea can be compared, for example, 
with assigning the Dembelskiy Council of the General Staff to 
develop Russian military doctrine. 
  But another requirement of the Central Bank, that it refrain 
from commercial activity, received unanimous support at the 
meeting. (It apparently was assumed that this meant Central Bank 
participation in the capital of certain banks.) The result of a 
prohibition on participation in the capital of commercial banks 
should be withdrawal of the Central Bank as a shareholder in 
Sberbank and Vneshtorgbank (the Central Bank has already 
announced its withdrawal as a shareholder of the Sofintreyd 
Company, see KOMMERSANT No 17, p 5) and its refusal to 
participate in joint foreign banks. In our view, however, this 
measure will require development of an alternative path for 
state credits and a change in state policy relative to private 
persons. In fact, if Sberbank loses its primary shareholder, the 
state, will state guarantees of personal deposits be preserved? 
And if they are preserved, who will provide them and on what 
basis? 
  Deputy minister of finance Andrey Kazmin, supporting the 
draft as a whole, said that for now one should not talk (or 
write articles into the law) about refusing to grant credit to 
the budget at preferential interest, just as the functions of 
servicing the foreign debt should not be transferred to the 
state treasury that is being created. At the same time Andrey 
Kazmin did not agree with the right granted to the Central Bank 
to issue state securities ("1-year term") because he considers 
it improper for the same entity to issue securities and the 
rubles that support them. At first glance this appears to be a 
solid argument, but nonetheless it does not seem indisputable to 
us. After all, the Ministry of Finance, for example, still has 
not been refused the right to extinguish unpaid budget debts 
with its own notes and to issue "gold" certificates while it has 
the state gold reserve at its disposal. 
  The bankers in attendance supported Boris Fedorov's draft 
law. They were especially enthusiastic about the intention to 
establish oversight over the Bank of Russia. In support of this 
point of view the representative of Most-Bank cited the flagrant 
fact that for 18 months the Central Bank has not had a chief of 
the administration of commercial banks (in fact the functions of 
director were assigned to the acting director). But the speaker 
did not want to be consistent and did not demand that oversight 
be established over the Ministry of Finance for the same reason 
(where the minister himself is only an "acting" minister). 
  The attitude of representatives of the ARB [possibly 
Association of Russian Banks] toward the draft law on the 
Central Bank appeared ambiguous to observers. On the one hand 
the draft was supported, yet on the other during his closing 
speech Sergey Yegorov, president of the ARB, suddenly 
"sidestepped" by declaring that the association cannot make a 
final choice because its specialists have not yet seen the 
version of the draft law prepared by the Bank of Russia (the 
silent reproach against the Central Bank seemed fair). 
  For their part, having carefully studied the draft law on 
the 
Central Bank prepared by the Duma in the context of other laws 
adopted recently, the KOMMERSANT experts were amazed to find the 
prospect that the Central Bank of Russia would be defenseless 
against the curious outside glance. It is not even a matter of 
the Supervisory Council which, as already noted, is less for 
supervision than to make strategic decisions during the very 
process of which--if it does not become a mockery--it will be 
assumed that there is access to all strategic and operational 
information. In addition to the existence of the Council and the 
need for exhaustive reports to the parliament, according to the 
new draft law the Central Bank "is obligated to consult with the 
government on monetary-credit and currency questions and provide 
requested information" (Article No 23). Along with this, under 
the law on the status of deputy (which has gone through all the 
stages of confirmation by parliament) the Bank of Russia must 
throw open the door to any curious lawmaker, immediately review 
his questions, dump the most secret documents into his lap, and 
allow the guest into the Council of Directors. Our KOMMERSANT 
experts, chiefly from a feeling of humanism and compassion for 
the state banking system, will refrain from congratulating the 
Central Bank on its conversion into an information-consulting 
structure to which we are related in spirit. 
  It appears that under the set of laws adopted and proposed 
for adoption the concept of banking and commercial secrecy in 
Russia would de facto cease to exist. (Let us note that de jure 
it remains unclear: does the concept of banking secrecy apply to 
the state bank of Russia? The Duma draft law does not clarify 
this, and the issue was not touched on during the discussion.) 
In other words, there are already several hundred persons today 
(deputies, Duma apparatchiks, and state officials) who will 
receive direct access to information coming into the Central 
Bank and not falling in the category of state secrets. But this 
information will include not just figures on the rate of 
inflation "for the report period," but also, for example, 
information on second-order bank balances, the currency 
positions of exchange players, and the passports of export (and 
in the future import) transactions. 
  At the same time we are inclined to think that this issue 
was 
left practically untouched (if we disregard the statements by 
Aleksandr Khandruyev above about a possible surge in lobbying) 
during the Duma discussion just because the representatives of 
banking and business circles who attended the discussion 
organized by Boris Fedorov were, putting it mildly, not entirely 
representative. 

