Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Deng Xiaoping: "Gist of Speeches Made in Wuchang, </F>
Shenzhen, Zhuhai and Shanghai -- from 18 January to 21 February 
1992." Numerals in parenthesis are explained in notes at end of 
text] 
  [Text] I 
  I was here in Guangdong in 1984. At that time, rural reform 
had been under way for several years, while urban reform and the 
construction of the special economic zones (1) were just 
beginning. Eight years have elapsed. This time, during my trip 
here, I have found that the rapid growth in Shenzhen and Zhuhai 
special economic zones and some other areas is beyond my 
expectations. After what I've seen, my confidence has 
multiplied. 
  Revolution emancipates productive forces, so does reform. 
The overthrow of the reactionary rule of imperialism, feudalism 
and bureaucrat-capitalism has helped release the productive 
forces of the Chinese people. This is revolution, and thus, 
revolution brings about the emancipation of productive forces. 
After the establishment of the basic socialist system, it is 
still necessary to fundamentally change the economic structure 
that has hampered the development of productive forces and to 
establish a vigorous and dynamic socialist economic structure to 
promote the development of productive forces. This is reform, 
and thus reform also brings about the emancipation of productive 
forces. In the past, we only stressed development of productive 
forces under socialism, without any mention of the need for 
their emancipation through reform. Such formulations are 
incomplete. Both the emancipation and the development of 
productive forces should be addressed. 
  In upholding the line, principles and policies since the 
Third Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee of the 
Communist Party of China (in 1978 -- Tr. [translator]), it is 
essential to adhere to the principle of "one central task and 
two basic points." (One central task is economic construction, 
two basic points are adherence to the four cardinal principles 
of socialism, the Communist Party leadership, the people's 
democratic dictatorship, and Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong 
Thought; and persisting in reform and opening policies -- Tr.) 
Without adherence to socialism, implementation of the reform and 
opening policy, development of the economy, and improvements in 
the livelihood of the people, we would find ourselves in a blind 
alley. The basic line should be adhered to for 100 years, and 
there must be no vacillation. Only by keeping to this line can 
we win the trust and support of the people. Anyone who attempts 
to change the line, principles and policies adopted since the 
Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee will not 
be countenanced by the man in the street and will be toppled. I 
have said this several times. Without the achievements of the 
reform and opening policy, we could not have weathered the June 
4th Incident (2). And if we had failed, chaos would have 
prevailed and a civil war would have broken out. The "cultural 
revolution" was a civil war. Why was our country able to 
maintain stability after the June 4th Incident? It was because 
we had carried out the reform and opening policy, which has 
boosted economic growth and improved the people's living 
standards. Therefore, the army and the state power should 
safeguard this line and system and these policies. 
  In the short span of the past 10-plus years, the rapid 
development of our country has delighted the people and focused 
world attention. This fact suffices to prove the correctness of 
the line, principles and policies adopted since the Third 
Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee. Nobody can 
change this even if he wants to. After all that's been said, 
one sentence sums it up: stick to this line and these 
principles and policies. Since the reform and opening policy 
was carried out, we have formulated quite a few statutes, which 
are all-inclusive. Clear-cut guidelines and policies have been 
worked out and expressed in accurate language concerning the 
economy, politics, science and technology, education, culture 
and military and foreign affairs. The recent Eighth Plenary 
Session of the 13th CPC Central Committee (3) was a successful 
meeting. It affirmed that the rural household contract 
responsibility system with remuneration linked to output should 
remain unchanged. Any change in that system might cause unease 
among the people, who would assert that the Party Central 
Committee had altered its policy. In the initial period of the 
rural reform, there emerged in Anhui Province the issue of the 
so-called "Idiot's Melon Seeds." (4) At that time, many people 
felt uncomfortable with this man who made a profit of 1 million 
yuan. They called for a struggle against him. I said that he 
should not be touched, because such a move might cause people to 
claim that the policy had changed, and the loss would far 
outweigh the gain. There are many more issues of this kind, and 
if not properly handled, they could easily shake our policies 
and affect the overall situation of reform. The basic policies 
for urban and rural reform must be kept stable for a long time 
to come. 
  Of course, as the reform is implemented, these policies 
should be improved or amended wherever necessary. But we should 
remain unwavering in our general direction. It is alright even 
if there are no new ideas. The main thing is that we don't 
change these policies and don't let people feel our policies 
have altered. Then, there will be great hopes for China. 
<H6>  II. </H6>
  We should be bolder than before in conducting reform and 
opening, and have the courage to experiment. We must not be 
like women with bound feet. Once we have a clear objective in 
our minds, we should dare to struggle and achieve breakthrough. 
The important experience of Shenzhen is daring to pioneer. 
Without a daring and adventurous spirit and without energy and 
vigor, it is impossible to break a good, new path and start new 
undertakings. Who dares to claim that he is 100 percent sure of 
success right from the outset and without taking any risk? 
There is no such thing as infallibility. I have never had such 
notions as thinking I'm 100 percent correct. Every year, the 
leadership should sum up experience, they should persist in what 
is correct and take immediate steps to amend what is wrong, and 
as new problems emerge, they should lose no time in tackling 
them. It will probably take another 30 years to form a more 
mature and better established system in all fields of endeavor. 
The principles and policies under such a system will be better 
shaped. We have increasingly enriched our expertise in building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. Judging from the 
provincial press, much know-how with local features has been 
accumulated. This is good. Creativity is precisely what we 
want. 
  Those who are unable to move ahead with reform and opening, 
and who lack the courage to break new ground, are, to put it 
bluntly, afraid that they would be introducing too many 
capitalist factors, and therefore taking the capitalist road. 
The crux of the matter is whether this road is "capitalist" or 
"socialist." The criterion in making such a distinction should 
primarily be whether it promotes the growth of productive forces 
in a socialist society, whether it enhances the overall national 
strength of the socialist state and the people's living 
standards. As to the concept of building special economic 
zones, some people disagreed with the idea right from the start, 
fearing that it would mean practicing capitalism. The 
achievements in the construction of Shenzhen gave a definite 
answer to these doubters: special economic zones practice 
"socialism," not "capitalism." In the case of Shenzhen, the 
public ownership sector constitutes the mainstay, with foreign 
investment accounting for only a one-fourth share. Even in the 
sector of foreign capital, we can benefit from taxation and 
labor services. We should have more of these three kinds of 
ventures. (5) There is no reason to be afraid of them. We 
dread nothing so long as we keep our heads sober. We have our 
advantages; we have the large and medium-sized state-run 
enterprises and the rural enterprises. More importantly, state 
power is in our hands. Some people argue that capitalism will 
grow as more foreign capital flows in, that capitalist factors 
will spread as foreign-funded enterprises increase, and that 
means the development of capitalism. These people lack basic 
common sense. In the current stage, foreign-funded enterprises 
in China are allowed to make money in accordance with existing 
regulations and policies. But the state levies taxes, workers 
get wages, and we can learn technology and management. In 
addition, we can secure information and expand our markets. 
Therefore, subject to the constraints of China's overall 
political and economic conditions, foreign-funded enterprises 
are useful supplements to the socialist economy and in the final 
analysis, they are conducive to socialism. 
  Whether there should be more planning or more market factors 
is not the essential difference between socialism and 
capitalism. The planned economy is not equivalent to socialism 
because there is planning under capitalism too, and the market 
economy is not equivalent to capitalism because there is a 
market under socialism too. Both planning and markets are 
economic means. The basic nature of socialism is to emancipate 
and develop the productive forces, eliminate exploitation, rule 
out polarization, and ultimately achieve common prosperity. 
This principle must be made clear to the people. Are 
securities and the stock market good or bad? Is there any 
danger with them? Are such things unique to capitalism? Can 
socialism make use of them? We allow a wait-and-see attitude 
but experiments should be conducted resolutely. If our judgment 
proves correct and feasible after one or two years of practice, 
the stock market may be extended. Otherwise, we may simply 
close it. We may close it quickly or slowly or leave a loose 
end. Why be afraid? So long as we stick to this attitude, it 
will be alright and we will not commit any major mistakes. In 
brief, if socialism wants to win the edge over capitalism, it 
must be bold to absorb and learn all civilized achievements 
created by human society and all advanced forms of operation and 
management which reflect the laws governing modern socialized 
production practiced in various countries around the world 
today, including developed capitalist nations. 

    To take the road of socialism is to realize common 
prosperity 
step by step. The concept of common prosperity was put forward 
in this way: where conditions permit, some areas may develop 
faster than others. Regions which enjoy faster advance can help 
promote the progress of the less developed regions, finally 
achieving common affluence. If the rich keep getting richer and 
the poor poorer, polarization will emerge. The socialist system 
should and can avoid polarization. One solution is to let 
regions first becoming prosperous support poverty stricken areas 
by paying more taxes and profits. Of course, this should not be 
done too soon. At present, we should not weaken the dynamics of 
developed areas, nor encourage the practice of "eating from one 
big pot." When and on what basis we raise and settle this issue 
requires deliberation. It can be envisaged that by the end of 
this century, when China reaches a moderately prosperous level, 
we should raise and settle this issue. By that time, while 
advanced areas should continue to grow, they should also 
vigorously help underdeveloped areas through paying more profits 
and taxes and transferring technology. Most of the 
underdeveloped areas abound in resources and have great 
potential for development. In short, taking the country as a 
whole, we are certainly able to settle the problem regarding the 
wealth gap between the coastal and hinterland areas gradually 
and smoothly. 
  Opinions were divided over the reform and opening policy at 
the very beginning. This is normal. The difference was not 
only over the issue of the special economic zones, but also 
included the bigger issue, that of the rural reform featured by 
the introduction of the rural household contract responsibility 
system with remuneration linked to output and the abolition of 
the people's commune system. (6) Initially, in the country as a 
whole, only one- third of the provinces engaged in reform. By 
the second year, more than two-thirds of them had followed suit 
and almost all the remainder joined in the third year. At 
first, people were not enthusiastic about rural reform and many 
took a wait-and-see attitude. Our policy permits this stance, 
which is much better than coercion. In carrying out the line, 
principles and policies adopted since the Third Plenary Session 
of the 11th CPC Central Committee, we did not resort to 
compulsion and mass movement. People were allowed to follow the 
line on a voluntary basis, doing as much as they wished. In 
this way, others gradually followed suit. Absence of raised 
contention is one of my inventions, which is aimed at buying 
time for an endeavor. Once disputes occur, they will complicate 
matters and waste much time. As a result, nothing will be done. 
Without controversy, we can make bold experiments and forge 
ahead without hesitation. The rural reform has followed this 
pattern and it should also be the case with urban reform. 
  At present, Rightist tendencies are affecting us, as are 
"Leftist" ones. But it is the "Leftist" tendencies that are 
deep-seated. Some theorists and politicians try to scare the 
public with political labels. That is not Rightist, but 
"Leftist." "Leftism" carries a revolutionary color, giving the 
impression that the more "Left," the more revolutionary. 
"Leftist" tendencies led to dire consequences in the history of 
the Party. Some fine things were destroyed overnight. Rightism 
may ruin socialism, so can "Leftism." China should maintain 
vigilance against the Right but should primarily guard against 
the "Left." The Right exists as displayed in the turmoil. The 
"Left" also lives. To regard reform and opening as introducing 
and developing capitalism and to see the danger of peaceful 
evolution coming mainly from areas of the economy are "Leftist" 
tendencies. We must keep a clear head, then we will not commit 
gross errors. And once problems emerge, they can be put right 
and corrected easily. 
<H6>  III. </H6>
  In grasping opportunities to promote our development, it is 
essential to boost the economy. At present, some neighboring 
countries and regions have registered faster economic growth 
than us. If we fail to progress or advance too slowly, a 
problem will arise when our people make comparisons with 
surrounding states and regions. Therefore, those blessed with 
conditions advantageous to development should not be obstructed. 
In areas where conditions permit, local development should 
proceed as fast as possible. Nothing is to be dreaded so long as 
we stress efficiency and quality, and develop the 
export-oriented economy. Low speed equals stagnation and even 
retreat. Opportunity must be grasped. The present offers 
excellent chance. I worry that we may lose it. If we fail to 
seize the opportunity, it will slip from our hand as time flies. 
  In developing China's economy, we should strive to reach a 
new rung every few years. Of course, this should not be 
interpreted as encouraging an unrealistic high speed. We should 
be down to earth and stress efficiency to realize steady and 
coordinated progress. Guangdong, for example, should vault 
several steps and strive to catch up with the "four small 
dragons" (7) of Asia in 20 years. In relatively developed areas 
such as Jiangsu, growth should be faster than the national 
average. Take Shanghai for another example. It has every 
necessary condition for faster progress. It enjoys obvious 
advantages in personnel, technology and management and has 
far-flung influences. In retrospect, one of my major errors was 
failure to include Shanghai when we started the four special 
economic zones. Otherwise, the situation in the reform and 
opening in the Chang Jiang River Delta, the entire Chang Jiang 
River valley and even the whole country would be quite 
different. 

    Viewed from the experience of recent years, economic 
development can reach a new stage every few years. We actually 
started reform in 1980. In 1981, 1982 and 1983, reform was 
primarily in rural areas. In 1984, the focus turned to urban 
areas. The years from 1984 to 1988 witnessed comparatively rapid 
economic growth. During those five years, rural reform brought 
about many changes, which were characterized by substantial 
increase in crop production and farmers' income and the rise of 
rural enterprises as a new force. Purchasing power of farmers 
increased and numerous new houses were built. Along with some 
luxurious consumer goods, the "four major articles" -- bicycle, 
sewing machine, radio and watch -- entered ordinary farming 
households. The increase of farm and side-line products, the 
expansion of rural markets and the transfer of surplus rural 
labor vigorously stimulated industrial development. 
  In those five years, the gross industrial output value 
amounted to over 6,000 billion yuan, with an average annual 
growth rate of 21.7 percent. Industrial products increased by a 
big margin in the areas of food, garments, housing, transport 
and commodities of daily use, including color TV sets, 
refrigerators and washing machines. Capital goods such as rolled 
steel and cement experienced substantial growth as well. In 
this way, agriculture and industry, and rural and urban areas 
interacted and promoted each other. This gives us a vivid, 
convincing picture of the development process. It can be said 
that during this period, China's wealth swelled considerably and 
the national economy mounted a new stage. From 1989, we began 
the drive to improve the economic environment and rectify the 
economic order, which I endorsed since it was indeed necessary. 
The overheated economy resulted in a number of problems. For 
instance, the issue of excess bank notes led to a major price 
fluctuation. Duplicate construction was prevalent and caused 
waste. 
  However, what would be a comprehensive view of the five 
years 
of accelerated development? Those five years could be called a 
leap forward, but unlike the earlier "Great Leap Forward," (8) 
it did not hurt the organic whole and the mechanisms for 
economic development. In my opinion, that period made no small 
contributions. The economic readjustment effort obtained some 
achievements. But in judging these years, can we consider only 
the economic readjustment drive as contribution to stability, or 
should the half decade of accelerated growth also be counted as 
a contribution? At least in one respect? Without the leap 
forward in those years when the overall economy went up to a new 
level, the retrenchment drive in the following three years could 
not have proceeded so smoothly. It seems that we should hold on 
to opportunities in a certain period to accelerate our 
development for several years. As problems crop up in the 
process, we will solve them immediately and continue to forge 
ahead. Fundamentally speaking, when we gain in economic 
strength, we will gain the initiative in handling the various 
contradictions and problems. For a major developing nation like 
China, it is impossible to attain a slightly faster economic 
growth always at such a calm and smooth pace. Attention must be 
paid to steady and coordinated development, but steadiness and 
coordination are only relative, not absolute. Development is 
the cardinal principle. The issue should be made clear. If we 
fail to make a proper analysis and thus incur misunderstanding, 
we will become overcautious and dare not emancipate our minds 
and act boldly. Consequently, we will lose opportunities. Like 
a boat sailing against the current, we must forge ahead or be 
swept downstream. 
  Foreign experience has shown that some countries have 
experienced rapid development periods or undergone a number of 
high growth stages, as demonstrated in Japan, South Korea and 
parts of Southeast Asia. Now, we have all the necessary 
domestic conditions and enjoy favorable international 
environments. Furthermore, we can display the superiority of 
the socialist system whereby we can pool efforts to undertake 
major work, thus it is possible as well as necessary, in the 
prolonged process of China's modernization drive, for us to 
bring about several fast-growth periods with good economic 
returns. We must foster such ideals and ambitions. 
  Fast development of the economy must depend on science, 
technology and education. I've said that science and technology 
are the prime productive force. Over the past one or two 
decades, they have progressed most rapidly in the world! One 
breakthrough in the high-tech field will promote the growth of 
several industries. Could we have developed so rapidly in recent 
years without science and technology? We must advocate science 
for it is where our hope lies. Over the past decade, China has 
recorded substantial progress in science and technology. I hope 
greater progress can be obtained in the 1990s. Every trade 
should set a definite strategical target that must be attained. 
China should have its place in the world in the high tech areas 
as well. I am no professional, but I should thank the 
scientists and technological experts for their contributions to 
China and the honors they have won for our country. We should 
keep in mind the days when scientists of the older generation, 
such as Qian Xuesen (9), Li Siguang (10) and Qian Sanqiang (11), 
successfully developed the atomic and hydrogen bombs, the 
satellite and many other high technologies under extremely 
difficult conditions. We should say scientists are luckier now 
as they enjoy better conditions than their predecessors and so 
we may require more of them. I have said that intellectuals are 
part of the working class. Veteran and middle-aged scientists 
are important and so are their young counterparts. We hope all 
those studying abroad will come back. All overseas students may 
return and enjoy proper arrangements, regardless of their 
previous political attitude. This policy toward them must 
remain unchanged. They should be told that it's better to return 
home if they want to make their contributions. I hope that 
concerted efforts will be made to accelerate progress in China's 
scientific, technological and educational undertakings. We will 
develop science and technology, and the higher and newer the 
technologies the better. And we will be all the more delighted, 
as will the people and the nation. We love our country, we 
should make it more developed and prosperous. 
<H6>  IV. </H6>
  We should persist in tackling two matters: On the one hand 
reform and opening, and on the other, a crack down on all sorts 
of criminal activities. We must be steadfast with regard to 
both. We must not be soft in striking at all felonious acts and 
wiping out various evils. Guangdong is trying to catch up with 
Asia's "four small dragons" in 20 years, a goal not only in 
terms of economic growth, but also of improved public order and 
general social environment. We should surpass them in both 
material and cultural construction. Only this can be regarded 
as socialism with Chinese characteristics. Singapore boasts 
good public order under a strict administration. We should 
learn from their experience and surpass them in this regard. 
Since China opened its door to the outside world, decadent 
things have come in along with the others and vices such as 
drug-taking, prostitution and economic crimes have emerged in 
some areas. Special attention must be paid to these problems 
and resolute measures be taken to ban and crack down on vice, 
never allowing it to spread unchecked. After the founding of 
New China, it took only three years to wipe out these maladies. 
Who in the world can eliminate opium-smoking and drug-taking? 
Neither the Kuomintang nor capitalism could have succeeded in 
doing this. But facts have proved the Communist Party capable 
of exterminating these depravities. During the entire process 
of reform and opening, we must persistently oppose corruption. 
To cadres and Party members, the building of a clean government 
is a matter of great importance. In addition, we must depend on 
the legal system, which provides a securer guarantee. In short, 
we can ably build up a socialist civilization with advanced 
culture and ideology so long as we develop our productive 
forces, maintain a certain level of economic growth rate and 
stress the two tasks of reform and crack down on criminal 
activities. 
  In the whole process of reform and opening, we must 
persistently adhere to the four cardinal principles. At the 
Sixth Plenary Session of the 12th CPC Central Committee (12), I 
pointed out that the struggle against bourgeois liberalization 
must be conducted for 20 years. Now it seems it will take 
longer. The rampant spread of bourgeois liberalization may have 
serious consequences. It has taken the special economic zones 
more than 10 years to reach the present stage. They can 
collapse overnight. Collapse is easy but construction is 
difficult. If we neglect the symptoms, troubles will occur. 
  Defending the socialist system with the proletarian 
dictatorship is a basic viewpoint of Marxism. Marx said the 
concept of class struggle was not his invention. His real 
creation was the theory of the proletarian dictatorship. 
History has proved that the rising and fledgling class that has 
just taken over power is, generally speaking, weaker than its 
hostile class. It must therefore resort to dictatorship in 
consolidating its political power. Democracy is applied for the 
people and dictatorship over the enemy. This is the people's 
democratic dictatorship. It is just and not in the least wrong 
to consolidate the people's power by employing the force of the 
people's democratic dictatorship. We have practiced socialism 
for only several decades and are still in the primary stage. It 
will take a considerably long historical period to consolidate 
and develop the socialist system, and that requires unremitting 
efforts and struggle by several generations or 10 or even dozens 
of generations to come. We must never treat the matter lightly. 
<H6>  V. </H6>
  A correct political line must be guaranteed by a correct 
organizational line. In a sense, personnel form the key to the 
issue of whether we can do well in China's domestic matters, 
whether socialism, reform and opening can be adhered to, and 
whether the economy can grow faster and the country enjoy 
longterm peace and stability. 

    Imperialism has pursued peaceful evolution in China, placing 
its hope on the generations to come after us. Comrade Jiang 
Zemin and his peers can be regarded as the third generation, and 
there will be a fourth and fifth. As we of the older generation 
are still alive and carry weight, hostile forces realize that no 
change is possible. But after we are dead and gone, who will 
arise as a bulwark? Therefore, we must educate the army, the 
organs of dictatorship, the Communist Party members and the 
people including the youth. If anything goes wrong in China, it 
will have its root within the Party. We must keep a clear head. 
We must pay attention to the fostering of successors, selecting 
and promoting those with both ability and political integrity to 
the leadership in line with the requirements of being 
"revolutionary, young in age, well educated and professionally 
competent." Continuation of the Party's basic line for 100 
years and long-term peace and stability in the country depend on 
this condition. It is relevant to the overall situation. This 
is a current issue that has not been settled smoothly. I hope 
it will be resolved satisfactorily. The issue drew my attention 
when I resumed work after the "Cultural Revolution." We found 
that we veterans alone could not settle the problem of realizing 
enduring stability, so we recommended others, genuinely looking 
to the third generation. But the problem remained unsolved. 
Two persons have failed, and not on economic issues, but on the 
issue of opposing bourgeois liberalization. We could not make 
concessions in this regard. In late May 1989, I said that we 
should be bold to choose for the new leadership those who are 
widely acknowledged to be steadfast followers of the reform and 
opening policy, with records of good performance. This would 
convince the populace that we are sincerely and wholeheartedly 
engaged in reform and opening. The masses judge from practical 
results. When they see that socialism, and the reform and 
opening policies are still the best, our cause will flourish 
forever. Further efforts should be made to choose and promote 
young people to leadership. The present central leadership is a 
little advanced in years. Those slightly over 60 are counted as 
young. They may work another 10 years. But in 20 years' time 
when they are over 80, they may be able to chat and talk like 
what I'm doing today, but they won't have enough energy to 
concentrate on work. The current central leadership has done a 
good job, of course, many problems remain, but problems are 
never few at any time. [sentence as published] It is essential 
for elders like us to stand aside and give young comrades a free 
hand, waiting for them to mature. We elders should consciously 
offer our seats to them and give them some help, but never 
putting obstacles in their way. Older people should, out of 
goodwill, help them when matters are bandied improperly. We 
must pay attention to the fostering of successors. I insisted 
on retiring in order to avoid making possible old-age mistakes. 
The elderly have both strong and weak points. They tend to be 
stubborn, and therefore, they should be aware of their 
limitations. As they age, they should make greater efforts to 
avoid errors in the final stage of their life and be more 
modest. Now we must continue choosing younger comrades and help 
them mature. Blind faith is not in order. I was already in a 
high position in my twenties. I was no more knowledgeable than 
you, but I did my job. More young people must be chosen, helped 
and trained and allowed to bloom. When they reach maturity, we 
will feel relieved. At present, we still have worries. 
Essentially, we must deftly manage the internal affairs of the 
Communist Party and prevent any trouble from arising. Then we 
may rest assured. Whether or not the line established at the 
Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee for 
China's development can continue depends on you, especially on 
the education of future generations. 
  We are now facing a problem of formalism. TV news programs 
are full of meetings, there are too many conferences. Articles 
and speeches are lengthy, and they are repetitious with little 
fresh language. Reiteration in speech is needed, but one must 
be concise. Formalism is a kind of bureaucracy. We must spend 
more time on practical matters. That means saying less and 
doing more. Chairman Mao did not convene prolonged meetings, 
his essays were short and concise and his speeches succinct. He 
asked me to draft the work report to be delivered by Premier 
Zhou at the Fourth National People's Congress on the proviso it 
be no more than 5,000 Chinese characters. I fulfilled the task. 
Surely 5,000 Chinese characters were adequate. I suggest you 
do something about this problem. 
  In studying Marxism, we must grasp the essence and learn 
what 
is effective. Weighty tomes are for a small number of 
specialists, how can the masses read them? It is formalistic 
and impracticable to require that all people read such works. 
My first initiators into Marxism were Manifesto of the 
Communist Party and The A.B.C of Communism. 
Recently, some foreign commentators have been saying that 
Marxism cannot be toppled. This is so not because of the 
existence of so many magnum opuses, but because Marxism is the 
irrefutable truth. Seeking truth from facts is the essence of 
Marxism. This is what we must advocate, not bookism. The 
success of the reform and opening has not relied on books, but 
on practice and the spirit of seeking truth from facts. The 
patent right for inventing the rural household contract 
responsibility system with remuneration linked to output belongs 
to the farmers. Many things in the rural reform stemmed from 
the grass-roots. We have turned them into general guides for 
the whole country after processing and upgrading. Practice 
serves as the sole criterion of truth. I have not read many 
books, but I believe in Chairman Mao's thesis of seeking truth 
from facts. In the past, we relied on this in fighting wars; 
and we continue to rely on this in the current construction and 
reform. We have advocated Marxism all our lives and in fact, 
Marxism is not abstruse. Marxism is a simple thing, a very 
simple truth. 
<H6>  VI. </H6>
  I am convinced that the number of people espousing Marxism 
will increase in the world, because it is a science. It has 
uncovered the law governing the development of human society by 
using historical materialism. Feudal society replaced slave 
society, capitalism supplanted feudalism, and, after a 
protracted process, socialism will certainly supersede 
capitalism. This is an irreversible general trend in social 
development. But the road is full of twists and turns. In the 
several centuries that capitalism took to replace feudalism, 
were there not numerous restorations of monarchical rule? Thus, 
in a sense, temporary restorations are regular phenomena 
difficult to avoid. Some countries have suffered serious 
setbacks, and socialism has seemingly been weakened. But the 
people will have tempered themselves and drawn lessons from it 
and that will make socialism develop in a healthier direction. 
Therefore, there is no need to panic, to believe that Marxism is 
vanishing, that it has lost its value and is vanquished. 
Nothing of the sort! 
  Peace and development are the two major issues of the world, 
and neither one has been resolved. Socialist China should show 
the world through its deeds that it is opposed to hegemonism and 
power politics, and will never seek hegemony. China is a 
staunch force in safeguarding world peace. 
  We must push ahead along the road of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. Capitalism has been developing for 
several centuries. The time we have spent on building socialism 
is quite short, not to mention the two decades we ourselves 
lost! It will be an extraordinary achievement if we build our 
country into a moderately developed country within a century 
starting from the founding of New China in 1949. The period 
from the present to the middle of next century is a crucial one. 
Let us immerse ourselves in hard work, as we are shouldering 
heavy burdens and bear major responsibility. 
NOTES: 
  1. In July 1979, the Central Committee of the Communist 
Party of China (CPC) and the State Council agreed to experiment 
with establishment of special export zones in Shenzhen, Zhuhai 
and Shantou of Guangdong Province and Xiamen of Fujian Province. 
In May 1980, the CPC Central Committee and the State Council 
decided to rename the four as special economic zones. In August 
of the same year, the 15th Session of the Standing Committee of 
the Fifth National People's Congress approved Regulations 
Concerning the Special Economic Zones in Guangdong Province. 
This was followed by the successive establishment of these 
special economic zones. In 1984, Deng Xiaoping inspected the 
three zones at Shenzhen, Zhuhai and Xiamen. Aiming mainly at 
absorbing and utilizing foreign capital, the zones have adopted 
special economic policies and management systems. Their 
economic ownership system features a pluralistic structure 
dominated by socialist public ownership. Their economic 
activities are based on market regulation guided by state 
macroeconomic control. Foreign investment is facilitated by 
preferential treatment. The zones enjoy-comparatively greater 
rights of economic management. Prior to 1985, the four 
concentrated mainly on infrastructure construction in order to 
create a good investment environment. Starting from 1986, they 
strove to develop export-oriented economies based on industry 
and characterized by the combination of industry with foreign 
trade and the simultaneous promotion of agriculture, animal 
husbandry, fisheries and tourism. In April 1988, the First 
Session of the Seventh National People's Congress passed a 
resolution approving the designation of Hainan Island as the 
Hainan Special Economic Zone which implemented more flexible and 
open economic policies. The existing five special economic 
zones function as opening windows for China's socialist 
modernization drive. They also constitute trials of the 
nation's economic structural reforms. 
  2. When Hu Yaobang passed away on 15 April 1989, the public 
gave vent to their grief in various forms. During the mourning 
activities, a handful of people, with ulterior motives, 
concocted rumors to confuse and poison people's minds with 
demagogy. They used big and small character posters to slander 
and rail at the Party and state leaders, instigating opposition 
to Communist leadership and socialism. On April 26, Renmin 
Ribao (People's Daily) published an editorial entitled "A 
Clear-Cut Stand Must Be Taken Against Turmoil." The connivance 
and support by Zhao Ziyang, then general secretary of the CPC 
Central Committee, encouraged the turmoil. On May 13, the 
Beijing Autonomous Students Union, an illegal student 
organization, instigated the inception of a hunger strike by 
some individuals and occupied Tiananmen Square for a long 
period. To ensure social stability and restore normal order, 
the State Council decided to enforce martial law in part of 
Beijing from May 20. Taking advantage of the great restraint 
exercised by the government and the army, the organizers and 
plotters of the turbulence continued to occupy Tiananmen Square 
and organized various illegal activities. The unrest eventually 
developed into a counter-revolutionary riot. On June 4, the 
Party and government, relying on the people, adopted resolute 
measures and suppressed the counterrevolutionary riot. 
  3. The Eighth Plenary Session of the 13th CPC Central 
Committee was held from November 25-29, 1991 in Beijing. The 
plenary session examined and passed the Decision of the CPC 
Central Committee on Further Strengthening Work in Agriculture 
and in Rural Areas. The session fully confirmed the Party's 
basic policies for rural areas and the great achievements of the 
rural reforms since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC 
Central Committee. It emphasized that the household contract 
responsibility system should continue, along with improvements 
in the dual-level system which combines unified and independent 
management and unswerving deepening of rural reforms. The 
plenary session also examined and approved the Resolution on the 
Convening of the 14th CPC National Congress. 
  4. This refers to a self-employed individual in Wuhu City of 
Anhui Province who became rich through employing workers to 
process and sell melon seeds known as "idiot melon seeds." 
  5. The three kinds of ventures include Sino-foreign joint 
ventures, cooperative and solely foreign-owned enterprises. 
  6. After the CPC Central Committee convened a working 
conference in Chengdu in March 1958, an upsurge occurred to 
merge small agricultural cooperatives into big ones. It 
received affirmation and support from Mao Zedong. In August, 
they were named people's communes. In the same month, the CPC 
Central Committee held an enlarged meeting of the Political 
Bureau at Beidaihe which adopted the Resolution Setting Up 
People's Communes in the Rural Areas. Thus the people's communes 
were quickly set up throughout the country without undergoing 
any experimentation. Large in size and having a higher degree 
of public ownership than cooperatives, the communes integrated 
government administration and economic management and brought 
workers, peasants, merchants, students and soldiers together. 
Usually a township formed a commune but some counties also 
became communes. With their highly centralized management, the 
communes put the poor and the rich on an equal footing and 
introduced equitable distribution of wealth. Subsidiary 
production teams and even commune members were forced to hand 
over their property without compensation, stirring up a 
"communist wind" that spread unchecked across the country. 
After the winter of 1958, and in the spring of 1961 in 
particular, the CPC Central Committee and Mao Zedong made a 
series of policy demarcations in regard to people's communes and 
corrected some errors. However, the excessive centralization 
and egalitarianism existing in the people's communes lingered on 
posing a dilemma that restrained peasant initiative and rural 
productivity. Following the Third Plenary Session of the 11th 
CPC Central Committee, the system of the people's communes 
gradually changed under rural economic structural reforms. In 
October 1983, the CPC Central Committee and the State Council 
issued the Circular on Separating the Functions of Government 
from Commune Management and Establishing Township People's 
Government in line with stipulations in the Constitution of the 
People's Republic of China. The work was basically completed 
throughout the country by the end of 1984, indicating the demise 
of the people's communes in rural areas. 
  7. Here refers to the newly industrializing countries and 
regions -- Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan and the Republic of 
Korea. Since the 1960s, they have been called the "four small 
dragons" of Asia because of the speedy economic growth. 
  8. In May 1958, the Second Session of the Eighth National 
Congress of the CPC formally adopted the general line of "going 
all out, aiming high and achieving greater, faster, better and 
more economical results in socialist construction." In the 
meantime, the Party rashly launched the "Great Leap Forward" 
movement. At first, unduly ambitious targets were set for 
agricultural production and newspapers advocated "high-yield 
satellites." In this atmosphere of boasting and hyperbole, the 
enlarged meeting of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central 
Committee convened in Beidaihe in August announced that steel 
output in 1958 would reach 10.7 million tons, double that of the 
previous year. After the gathering, an upsurge occurred in the 
nationwide movement to make steel. Similar movements also 
surged in industry, transportation, post and telecommunications, 
education, culture and public health undertakings. All were 
spurred on by the slogan "taking steel as the key link" and 
pushed the "Great Leap Forward" movement to a climax. "Left" 
errors marked by overly high targets, issuing of arbitrary 
direction, bragging and exaggeration spread unchecked, 
disrupting normal economic construction orders, wasting large 
amount of manpower and resources and causing serious 
disproportion in the national economy. 
  9. Qian Xuesen was born in Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, in 
1911. He went to study in the United States in 1935 and returned 
to China in 1955. He joined the Communist Party of China in 
1958 and subsequently held such posts as director of the 
Institute of Mechanics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
vice-minister of the No. 7 Ministry of Machine-Building 
Industry, vice-minister of the State Commission of Science, 
Technology and Industry for National Defence, and chairman of 
the China Association for Science and Technology. He was also 
an alternate member of the ninth to 12th CPC Central Committee. 
Qian directly participated in and organized China's study and 
experimentation on carrier rockets, missiles and satellites, 
making outstanding contributions to China's spaceflight 
endeavors. 
  10. Li Siguang (1889-1971) was born in Huanggang, Hubei 
Province. He studied in Japan and Britain and was a university 
professor and member of the Central Research Academy. He 
visited Europe in 1948, and returned to China in the following 
year. Li joined the Communist Party of China in 1958 and held 
such posts as director of the Institute of Palaeontology of the 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, vice-president of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, minister of geology, and chairman of the 
China Association for Science and Technology. He was also a 
member of the Ninth CPC Central Committee. All his life, Li 
studied and taught palaeontology, glaciology, seismology and 
geomechanics. As a pioneer of geomechanics, Li made outstanding 
contributions to China's petroleum prospecting. 
  11. Qian Sanqiang (1913-92), whose ancestral home was in 
Wuxing (present-day Huzhou) of Zhejiang Province, was born in 
Shaoxing. He went to study in France in 1937 and returned to 
China in 1948. Qian joined the Communist Party of China in 1954 
and held such posts as director of the Institute of Modern 
Physics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, vice-minister of the 
No. 2 Ministry of Machine-Building Industry, vice-president of 
the Chinese Academy of Sciences and honorary chairman of the 
China Association for Science and Technology. He made 
outstanding contributions to the founding of China's atomic 
energy sciences and the development of atomic and hydrogen bombs. 
  12. The Sixth Plenary Session of the 12th Central Committee 
of the CPC was held in Beijing on 28 September 1981. The 
session adopted the Resolution of the Central Committee of the 
Chinese Communist Party on the Guiding Principles for Building a 
Socialist Society With an Advanced Culture and Ideology. In 
discussing the draft of this resolution, Deng Xiaoping delivered 
an important speech on opposing bourgeois liberalization. 

