CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "After the Scandal: NTV Accused"] </F>
  [Text] The scandal surrounding Petersburg TV, about which 
OBSHCHAYA GAZETA and many other newspapers wrote in detail, has 
died down. However, readers have been calling and writing to our 
editorial office, requesting information on the development of 
events. How did the "Kurkova case" end, and did it end, they ask. 
  According to the information available to us, the St. 
Petersburg procurator's office conducted an investigation of the 
company's financial activity. In the words of B. Kurkova's 
assistent, V. Pravdyuk (published in the local Petersburg press 
last week), no evidence of compromise was found, and the 
criminal case is being filed not against B. Kurkova, but against 
"three fugitives on the run" (Syroyezhin, Arkhipov and 
Mikhaylov), who up until recently managed the company's 
commercial activity and tried to gain possession of $1.5 million 
intended for the purchase of television equipment. They will be 
accused of financial machinations and gross counterfeiting of 
documents. 
  At the same time, Bella Kurkova, as the local press reports, 
has admitted her personal responsibility for the fact that the 
people who have shown themselves from their very worst side in 
this entire episode were hired for work by her and enjoyed her 
unlimited trust. 
  The company's legal service intends, after generalizing all 
the newspaper publications (and there have been over 200 of them 
during the "reporting period"), to file a court suit against 
those publications which contained lies, slander and insults to 
the honor and dignity of the collective. 
  As the newspaper NEVSKOYE VREMYA reports, at the meeting of 
the management of the GTRK [state television-radio channel] 
"Petersburg channel 5" with the collective of the editors of 
Petersburg TV "Publicist," Viktor Pravdyuk announced that the 
"story with accusations of bribery was merely a smokescreen for 
a large-scale operation on the takeover of the television 
broadcasting networks by various commercial structures hiding 
behind the NTV television company." 
  "We must consider the full acuteness of this battle," V. 
Pravdyuk continued his thoughts in an interview with the 
newspaper VECHERNIY PETERBURG. "NTV represents not only the 
mighty `Most-Bank' association, but foreign capital as well 
(primarily Israeli)." From among several expansions of the 
abbreviation "NTV," the well-known slavophile V. Pravdyuk 
believes the closest to the truth is "Non-Russian TV." 
  The general director of NTV, Igor Malashenko, whom I asked 
to 
comment, characterized all these accusations addressed at his 
company as being "delerium." NTV, in Malashenko's words, does 
not intend to encroach upon the television networks of the 
Petersburg channel. To pay for outdated and worn relay lines 
stretching over hundreds of unpopulated kilometers is an overly 
expensive and senseless luxury. The hatred by the heads of 
Petersburg TV toward NTV, in Malashenko's opinion, does not lend 
itself to rational explanation and has a clinical character. 
  In short, despite the accusations of Kurkova and company in 
corruption and financial abuses which have supposedly been 
rescinded, the situation in Petersburg TV, as before, cannot be 
called healthy. According to information received from several 
associates of the company, the conflict between part of the 
collective and the leadership is deepening. Although the 
management itself maintains that there is no global conflict, 
only that a small portion of the people have a "lack of 
understanding of the general problems, envy, the desire to 
enrich their pockets at the expense of state broadcasting--these 
types of authors, hindered in their grabbing instincts, shout 
most loudly about censorship and fear" (quote from interview 
with Pravdyuk). 
  Be that as it may, instead of looking for the enemy on 
foreign territory, is it not better to look at ourselves? The 
creative state of the Petersburg air time persistently demands 
this. 

