Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Ma Chenguang: "Asian Family Planning </F>
Urged--Conference Pushes More Regional Cooperation"] 
  [Text] Premier Li Peng yesterday called for greater 
regional cooperation to stem the population tide sweeping across 
Asia -- home to 60 percent of the world's populace. 
  He pledged that China will continue its efforts at 
population 
control by sticking to its family planing policy; those efforts 
help develop the economy and improve people's daily lives. 
  And other Asian nations should formulate their own 
strategies. But their plans need to be developed according to 
individual characteristics, he said in a written statement to an 
Asian Pacific population seminar. 
  The question of population is a question of development in 
essence, the Premier added, and can only be tackled at its root 
according to each country's natural conditions, tradition and 
economic level. 
  The 10th Asian Parliamentarians Meeting on Population and 
Development is seeking solutions to Asian population problems. 
  More than 50 parliamentarians and scholars from 17 nations 
were drawn to the two-day seminar, organized by the Asian 
Population and Development Association (APDA) based in Japan and 
the Education, Science, Culture and Public Health Committee 
(ESCPH) of the National People's Congress of China. At the 
opening of the meeting, APDA Chairman Fukusaburo Maeda said 
controlling Asia's population is a decisive global issue. Its 
populace is expected to top 3.34 billion people this year. 
  It has six of the 10 most populated countries in the world: 
China, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Japan and Bangladesh. 
  Maeda praised China's efforts to contain its birth rate, an 
"unmatched success in population policy while proceeding with 
rapid economic growth." 
  The population by the end of last year was 1.18 billion, 
according to the newly published statistics. 
  The birth rate fell from 33.43 per thousand in 1970 -- 
before 
family planning -- to 18.09 in 1993. And natural population 
growth has continued its fall, from 14.55 per thousand in 1981 
down to last years 11.45. 
  Without the policy 15 million more babies would have been 
born over the past five years. 
  Maeda said quick solutions to overpopulation in Asia would 
help ensure domestic stability. 
  Analysts recommended controlling the birth rate eradicating 
poverty, creating sufficient food and job opportunities, 
improving education standards, literacy rates and living 
conditions. 
  Chinese ESCPH Chairman Zhao Dongwan said that the nation's 
ultimate goal is to educate and explain to the people why family 
planning is so important. That way, he said, future generations 
will carry on the practice on their own. 
  He admitted that obstacles to China's development and 
population quality still exist, including economic and social 
development, resource utilization and environmental protection. 
  China, by sharing problems of unbalanced population problems 
and socio-economic development with other developing Asian 
countries, needs to strengthen cooperations with them to further 
contain its expansion of population. 
  Also yesterday, NPC Standing Committee Chairman Qiao Shi, 
parliamentary leader, met with the Asia-Pacific parliamentarians 
and scholars at the Great Hall of the People. 

