Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Potchefstroom Jan 31 SAPA--African National Congress 
[ANC] President Nelson Mandela on Monday [31 January] told 
supporters not to engage in violence against innocent people. 
  Speaking at Potchefstroom's Ikageng Stadium, Mr Mandela said 
some of "our" people wanted to kill every Zulu because they 
thought incorrectly that all Zulus belonged to the Inkatha 
Freedom Party. "Even if they do support Inkatha, do not kill 
them. Sit down and talk," he said. 
  Mr Mandela said all parties should be allowed to canvass 
freely in townships, but this did not include Bophuthatswana's 
President Lucas Mangope. "I won't say to you you must allow 
Mangope to canvass in the townships -- that I will not say," he 
said. 
  Crime and violence had reached unacceptably high levels in 
South Africa, which was now known as the most violent country in 
the world, said Mr Mandela. 
  About 18,000 people had died in political violence since 
1984, with as many as 12 people dying daily. There were 775 
assaults every day and about 51 people were killed daily in 
non-political violence. Fraud had increased by 80 percent in 
the past few years and 1,058 people were raped daily, although 
only 68 of these cases were reported to police. 
  Mr Mandela said the SA Police force was not sympathetic to 
blacks and 64 percent of black adults felt hostile toward police. 
  Every South African had the right to live in safety, free 
from crime and violence. The ANC planned to create social 
justice and a democratic order which meant people would respect 
the law of the country. 
  Mr Mandela stressed that community policing was the most 
viable option to combat crime. "The police must be visible and 
in touch with the community." Better training was needed, not 
more police. 
  Much of the culture of violence had its roots in apartheid, 
which had caused poverty and human degradation, said Mr Mandela. 
  There was no quick fix for the costly and complex process of 
uplifting poor people. "But if we develop human potential and 
people are able to participate in the social and democratic 
process, we will have responsible and productive people." One of 
the most important ways would be through education. 
  At present, 25 percent of annual expenditure was spent on 
education. The ANC did not need more funds to implement its 
ambitious youth and adult education programmes. "Waste, 
inefficiency and corruption must be stopped if we are to meet 
out goals within budget. The ANC has budgeted R[rand]14 billion 
for salaries, R1 billion for teacher training, R1 billion for 
school supplies and R500 million on school buildings." 
  Mr Mandela received a tumultuous welcome on his tour of the 
Western Transvaal where thousands of people flocked to see their 
hero during a hectic two-day schedule including seven mass 
meetings in the scorching sun. 
  After speaking to a small group of farm workers at the 
Boskop 
Training Centre outside Potchefstroom on Monday morning, Mr 
Mandela sped to the Ikageng Stadium to address the squatter and 
poorer community. 
  He explained the ANC's Redevelopment and Construction 
Programme and the ANC election manifesto which promised a 
"better future for all". 
  His final stop on Monday is the Potchefstroom town centre's 
banquet hall, where he will address businessmen and academics. 
  Security has been stepped up for fear of a rightwing 
interference. 

