BFN 

  [Text] Tehran, April 20, IRNA -- Leader of the Islamic 
Revolution Ayatollah 'Ali Khamene'i on Wednesday [20 April] in 
an unprecedentedly harsh tone attacked the United Nations and 
its secretary general for their "hideous record" in connection 
with Gorazde. 
  The supreme leader condemned the U.N. and its secretary 
general Butrus Butrus-Ghali for helping the Serbs in massacring 
the defenceless people of Gorazde. 
  "The United Nations has had the worst and ugliest 
performance 
in this test and the secretary-general who is at the helm of the 
U.N. establishments has set the worst precedence for himself 
among Muslims," Ayatollah Khamene'i said. 
  The leader of the Islamic revolution was speaking to 
officials in charge of hajj pilgrimage. 
  "The issue of Bosnia-Herzegovina is so heart-rending that no 
words can describe the magnitude of this catastrophe," Ayatollah 
Khamene'i said. 
  He also lashed out at leaders of arrogant powers for their 
collaboration with the Serbs in victimizing Bosnian Muslims. 
  "Today, the mouthpieces of arrogant powers have been forced 
to admit that Bosnian Muslims are denied any help just because 
they are Muslims... This shows that the disgraceful dictatorial 
system prevailing in the world cannot tolerate to see a Muslim 
country established in the heart of Europe," he said. 
  Ayatollah Khamene'i said that while Serbs have taken 
possession of all weapons and military facilities of the former 
Yugoslav government, the U.N. is preventing Bosnian Muslims from 
getting arms in order to protect themselves under pretext of an 
arms embargo against both sides. 
  The leader of the Islamic revolution said that the United 
Nations, while opposing the despatch of peacekeeping forces to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina by Muslim states, has commissioned its forces 
to assist the Serbs. 
  Ayatollah Khamene'i instructed all committed members of the 
Islamic Revolution's Guards Corps (IRGC), army and basij 
(volunteer forces) to prepare to fulfil their duties as soon as 
obstacles are removed. 
  The leader also called on Iran's Red Crescent Society to 
escalate its efforts to supply the besieged people of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina with food supplies and other basic goods. 
  Elsewhere in his speech, Ayatollah Khamene'i said the annual 
hajj pilgrimage is the most suitable means of voicing support 
for the Muslims of the world, particularly Bosnian Muslims and 
for delivering from the pagans and criminals. 
  "Deliverance from pagans is the spirit of the hajj and means 
a huge crowd of Muslims who cry out against the savagest enemies 
of humanity and their supporters... Therefore, the presence of 
Muslims in the hajj rituals should be meaningful and 
purposeful," the supreme leader made it clear. 
  "The objective of the large gathering of Muslims in a holy 
site and at a given date is to arouse a feeling of unity and 
grandeur among each and every Muslim and to make decision on the 
fate of the Islamic Ummah (nation)," he said. 
  "Under the present conditions in today's world, Muslims 
should show in one way or the other their interest in the 
matters of expedience relating to the Muslim world and should 
express antipathy towards the enemies of Islam," Ayatollah 
Khamene'i pointed out. 
  The leader, saying the huge assembly of Muslims in the hajj 
has clear objectives and lofty political concepts, noted "Those 
somehow involved in the hajj pilgrimage must not make a 
compromise on this divine ritual for political considerations." 

