BFN 

  [Text] At a forum with representatives of teachers and 
students from Shandong Industrial University held on the morning 
of 9 April, Jiang Chunyun, secretary of the provincial party 
committee, stressed: The institutions of higher learning across 
the province should work closely line with the overall situation 
of grasping favorable opportunities, deepening reform, expanding 
the scale of opening up, promoting development, and maintaining 
stability to fulfill the three tasks, such as reform, 
development, and stability; to catch up with the pace of the 
times; to meet with the requirements as set forth by the new 
situation and the new tasks; and to make new, greater 
contributions to the building of the socialist modernization. 
  Together with Han Xikai, deputy secretary of the provincial 
party committee; Zhang Ruifeng, vice governor of the provincial 
government; and Cui Weilin, vice chairman of the provincial 
committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference and chairman of the provincial education commission, 
Comrade Jiang Chunyun arrived at Shandong Industrial University 
at 0830. They first watched the exhibition on the achievements 
made during the monthly scientific and technological campaign 
organized by the Communist Youth League committee of the 
university as well as the achievements made in the first applied 
scientific and technological invention contest, and fully 
affirmed the achievements. Then, they went to the [words 
indistinct] laboratory and heard the introduction of the 
situation. At the mess hall of the university, the comrades, 
including Jiang Chunyun, tried to understand, in detail, the 
situation relating to the varieties of dishes and the prices of 
the food. Comrade Jiang Chunyun visited two student dormitories 
and the houses of two teachers to understand their living and 
housing conditions. After that, at the sports center of the 
university, the comrades, including Jiang Chunyun, held a forum 
with representatives of teachers and students of the university. 
  After hearing the reports by the university leaders and the 
speeches by some teachers and students, on behalf of the 
provincial party committee and the provincial government, 
Comrade Jiang Chunyun set forth five requirements for how to 
improve the work of the institutions of higher learning. 
  First, the institutions of higher learning should cultivate 
more skilled persons for the development of the socialist market 
economy. To suit the demands of the socialist market economy, 
universities should cultivate more qualified skilled persons in 
a rapid manner so as to satisfy the needs of the socialist 
modernization. 
  Second, institutions of higher learning should bring into 
full play the advantages of wisdom and intelligence so as to 
make greater contributions to Shandong's economic and social 
development. We should positively explore ways for linking 
science and technology with the economy, accelerate the 
transformation of scientific and technological findings, and 
make greater contributions to comprehensively implementing the 
strategy of relying on science and education to rejuvenate 
Shandong and the provincial strategic goals for economic 
development. 
  Third, the deepening of reform has injected new vitality 
into 
the higher education. The reform of the higher educational 
cause should be conducive to the adherence to the school-running 
orientation of socialism, the mobilization of the broad masses 
of teaching and administrative staff members' working 
enthusiasm, the cultivation of increasingly more skilled 
persons, the stability of the campus order, and the 
self-development of institutions of higher learning. According 
to the requirements of the socialist market economy, we should 
further readjust the structure of specialized courses, optimize 
teaching contents and teaching methods, pay attention to the 
students' quality and ability, and make the students better suit 
the social demands. 
  Fourth, we should show concern for the working, studying, 
and 
living conditions of the teachers, the students, and the 
administrative staff members; and realistically help solve their 
practical difficulties and problems. The party committees and 
governments at various levels and relevant departments should 
pay attention to helping schools eliminate difficulties and do 
more concrete and good deeds for the teachers and students. 
Appropriate jobs should be arranged for the students graduated 
this year so that they will bring their talents into full play. 
The school should issue certificates of graduation to the 
students who are not covered in the recruitment quotas so long 
as they pass the examinations. The province will allocate 
special funds to subside the small number of the students with 
living difficulties due to the price hikes. 
  Fifth, we should adopt realistic and effective measures to 
maintain the stability of institutions of higher learning. The 
departments concerned and all social fronts should proceed from 
the overall situation of social stability, carry out the system 
of responsibility for stability, and ensure the university 
should have a stable social environment. We should guide the 
broad masses of teachers, students, and administrative staff 
members to take the overall situation into consideration, 
observe discipline, and concentrate energy on their teaching and 
studying. The broad masses of teachers and students should 
consciously resist the influence of bourgeois liberation and 
corrosive ideas; firmly foster accurate ideals, convictions, 
outlook on life, and outlook on value; and be persons of the new 
generation with ideals, morality, education, and a sense of 
discipline. 
  Jiang Chunyun finally urged that the broad masses of 
teachers 
and students of the university should work and study hard; build 
the university into a center especially training senior 
engineers and technicians, a high-tech research center, and a 
new high-tech development center; and make greater contributions 
to Shandong's economic development. 

