BFN 

  [Text] Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, May 27 KYODO -- The 
International Whaling Commission (IWC) Friday [27 May] wrapped 
up a five-day conference after making a landmark decision to 
create a whale sanctuary and rejecting Japan's request for 
permission to catch 50 minke whales. 
  The IWC turned down Japan's request to allow it to catch 50 
minke whales a year along the shores of Japan to support coastal 
communities affected by an IWC-moratorium on commercial whaling. 
  The request was voted down overwhelmingly, with 14 countries 
voting against it. Nine other nations voted for it and seven 
countries abstained. 
  The IWC's cold shoulder, which came on the heels of the 
Thursday decision to establish an antarctic sanctuary, dashed 
Japan's last hope for commercial whaling. 
  The IWC parlance again underscored Japan's increasingly 
isolated position in the international community over the 
whaling issue. 
  It put Japan in a tight corner, posing for it a crucial 
decision on whether it should give up what it calls a 
longstanding cultural heritage of whale eating or bolt out of 
the international organization, observers said. 
  Japanese officials were infuriated over the outcome of the 
session and cried foul play. 
  Kazuo Shima of the Fisheries Agency, Japan's chief delegate, 
blasted the IWC's rejection of Japan's request for a special 
quota on minke whales. 
  Shima argued it is discrimination against Japan since the 
IWC 
decided to increase the number of bowhead whales that Alaskan 
natives may kill under a clause that permits whaling by 
aboriginal groups. 
  "It is a discriminatory handling and is a great 
disappointment for us," he told a news conference. 
  "Bowhead whales are a kind that live only in a small 
number," 
Shima said. "Alaskan aborigines' whaling is partly commercial 
and is no different from Japanese whaling along the shores. It 
is unfair." 
  Shima also criticized the IWC's decision to create a 
sanctuary and its voted call on Japan to reconsider its whaling 
for research. 
  "Japan's argument that further discussions at the IWC 
Science 
Committee are necessary (to make such a decision) was ignored," 
he said. "We cannot allow an emergence of black holes in the 
research on whales. We will continue our research program." 
  Japanese whalers are allowed to catch up to 330 minke whales 
annually under a 12-year research program approved by the IWC. 
  But Japan has been accused by countries opposed to whaling 
and by environmentalists of hunting whales for commercial 
purposes under the guise of a scientific study. 
  The Japanese Government remains on the surface undaunted by 
the international call for reconsidering its research whaling. 
  "We will continue the current whaling research in the 
Antarctic Ocean and will soon start a similar research in the 
North Pacific region," one official said. 
  But some have admitted the planned establishment of a 
sanctuary will make it virtually impossible for Japan to 
continue the study in the current manner. 
  Although Japanese delegations were slightly encouraged by 
the 
IWC's endorsement of the need for scientific research, they did 
not rule out the possibility of Japan's walking out of the 
organization. 
  "We will decide on the issue after consultations with the 
government and people concerned," Shima said at the news 
conference. 

