BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature: Compiled by </F>
Nikolay Zherebtsov, Andrey Petrovskyy; edited by Vladimir 
Shishlin] 
  [Text] As INTERFAX has learned from a well-placed source in 
Kiev, Ukraine's President Leonid Kravchuk had a telephone 
conversation with Russia's Premier Viktor Chernomyrdin on 
Monday. The two leaders discussed an incident, involving an 
attack by Ukrainian special troops on an Odessa-based division 
of Black Sea Fleet ships put into reserve and the arrest of 
three naval officers. (INTERFAX Note: As the Black Sea Fleet's 
Spokesman Andrey Grachev has reported to Interfax, about 120 
Ukrainian servicemen assaulted Odessa's division of Black Sea 
Fleet ships on Sunday. They arrested the Division Commander, 
Captain First Class Oleg Feoktistov, the Coast Base Commander, 
Captain Second Class Dmitry Starikov, and the Division's Chief 
of Staff, Captain Second Class Aleksandr Zelenk. These officers 
were hand cuffed and have been held in custody without any 
charge. The other servicemen and their families have been 
locked in their compound by special forces.) 
  Although a Russian government spokesman has confirmed 
Chernomyrdin's telephone conversation with Kravchuk, he has 
declined to divulge its substance. 
  Meanwhile, the Russian cabinet has resolutely protested to 
Ukraine's government at the latest attack and the previous use 
of force against the Black Sea Fleet's ship "Cheleken" at Odessa. 
  It released a statement in Moscow on Monday, describing 
Kiev's actions as a crude violation of the agreements reached by 
the presidents of the two countries to refrain from one-sided 
actions toward the Black Sea Navy and respect all bilateral 
accords. The document also says that the actions trampled upon 
the international law and human rights and were undoubtedly 
deliberate. 
  The Russian Government demanded that the servicemen and 
members of their families be set free immediately, the rules on 
naval facilities that existed before the provocation be restored 
without delay, an investigation be conducted, and all necessary 
measures be applied to those who are to blame. The Russian 
Government stressed that Moscow had always sought to promote 
friendship and cooperation with Kiev. 
  The Duma Council on Monday asked Ivan Rybkin, the chairman 
of 
the Russian parliament's lower house, to send Kravchuk a cable 
concerning the seizure of Russian ships in Odessa. In an 
interview with INTERFAX, a Duma member Sergey Shakhray, a deputy 
premier has blamed the incident on the absence of operational 
procedures for Russia and Ukraine in regard to the Black Sea 
Fleet. (INTERFAX Note: President Kravchuk has described the 
Massandra accords on the Black Sea Navy (on its transfer to 
Russia) as a protocol rather than a decision. No one has 
revoked the fleet-sharing agreements reached in Yalta and 
Zavidovo, Kravchuk declared.) 

