CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V. Peremyshlev: "What the Coming Year Has in </F>
Store for Us" 
  [Text] The annual general meeting of stockholders of 
Zheldorremmash AO [joint-stock company] has been held. As is 
customary, they tallied the results of the past year and mapped 
plans for the future. The figures are more or less clear: in the 
dry terms of the report, the labor collectives, despite working 
under extraordinarily difficult conditions, generally managed to 
accomplish the tasks of repairing the rolling stock of Russia's 
railroads and manufacturing spare parts, and they basically met 
their contractual obligations. At the same time, the total 
volume of commercial output by the AO's enterprises declined by 
almost 10 percent last year compared with 1992. In the first 
quarter of this year, the decline reached 22.5 percent. 
  Things will be harder in the future, which, as we know, has 
to be built on the foundations of today. And in many plants, it 
is not bright. Naturally, nonpayments are killing everyone. 
Right now the railroads owe the plants 145 billion rubles, which 
is more than their output for two months' work. And that in turn 
means the inability to acquire circulating capital and failure 
to pay personnel on time. In some plants, payments haven't even 
been made for March. It's a familiar picture. 
  Immoderate tax burdens are keeping the plants on their 
knees: 
91 out of every 100 rubles earned go to the budget, either 
federal or local. And, as one of the speakers said unhappily, 
you can't settle accounts with the budget with metal, or timber, 
or even Zhiguli cars. Only money. The kind of real money which 
there is not enough of to pay wages and buy circulating capital 
with. 
  The plants haven't been able to keep up with their bank 
loans. Last year, debts accumulated in the amount of 141 billion 
rubles, for which the banks are skinning the enterprises alive 
in the form of terrific interest rates. 
  This mournful list of things which are falling apart and the 
plants cannot afford could be prolonged indefinitely. They 
cannot undertake serious rebuilding of the enterprises, which 
stand there like architectural monuments in their primitive, 
unsightly form--some of them like the Ufa Locomotive Repair 
Plant, which was built in the last century, in 1888. The only 
things being rebuilt are those which are absolutely essential in 
doing repair work. 
  Under these circumstances, the conception that was to be 
submitted--namely, work without reducing volumes or the number 
of personnel--could not stand the test. Harsh reality dictates 
that the only means of salvation is to bring the number of 
personnel into line with dwindling volumes. If this isn't done, 
the directors' laments that the plants are going to "expire" or 
"shut down" will come true. 
  But here's the striking thing: some of the speakers 
asked--demanded--that the Ministry of Railways and the officers 
of the AO provide investment and firm targets along with no less 
firm financial support, and much else; others, fewer in number, 
seemed to be embarrassed and said that they didn't feel right 
complaining, that things were not as bad for them as for their 
colleagues. By mastering the production of new products--tank 
cars, for example--the Roslavl and Saransk plants have improved 
their financial position. The Chita people have started 
manufacturing fire engines and want to adapt some of them for 
use in the North, which, undoubtedly, will boost demand. An 
engine with a redesigned gimbal drive and a tank with a 
zinc-plated interior turned out to be better than the one 
manufactured in the Ukrainian city of Priluki. Railroad fire 
fighters are also interested in the engines. But the plant 
director acts like a proper merchant: there's money ahead. And 
he's confident it will come. 
  In particular, people are buying not only fire engines but 
also purely railroad-related goods and services--repairs to 
electric train sections, electrical machinery, and locomotive 
wheelsets. However, it is these products--wheelsets, for 
example--that some plants are behind in: the Michurinsk Plant 
(46 sets), Novosibirsk (20), and Ulan-Ude (225). And the 
Transbaykal Railroad needs 200 wheelsets right now. At the 
Moscow hub alone, 300 electric railcars stand idle: some of them 
lack motors, others lack compressors, still others lack 
wheelsets. Only about half of the repair needs of the country's 
motorized car rolling stock are being met. 
  You have to agree with the arguments of Deputy Minister A. 
Kondratenko, who said that no one is buying electric locomotives 
or diesel locomotives, but they will buy electric trains. And 
there is equal demand for repairs to them. Therefore, repair 
technologies have to be, if not flexible, at least "soft" in 
order to meet demand more easily. 
  Many people viewed declining shipments as nothing more than 
a 
summer rain--hey, it'll pass. And we can maintain our capacity 
and cadres. As soon as the sun peeks through, they said, the 
freight will surge again, repairs will be needed more frequently 
and in greater numbers, and we'll be right here with our sleeves 
rolled up. But it is obvious to everyone today that these 
calculations are not coming true. This would seem to be a time 
for showing initiative and sound entrepreneurship, but 
apparently not. They got their knuckles rapped for showing 
initiative. 
  One and a half or two years ago, people at the top kept 
close 
track of the kind of subsidiary work--now it was called 
auxiliary work--that the enterprises were engaged in, for fear 
it would take them away from their main job of repairing rolling 
stock for the sector. Now the leash has been loosened. But it is 
still well remembered by those who hold the leash and those who 
were led by it. This accounts for some people's excessive faith 
that the leader knows where he's going and that he will take 
care of the one he's leading, supplying him with orders, 
financing, and the rest. The leader would like to remain the 
leader, and sometimes, out of habit, tugs on the leash. But his 
powers are no longer what they used to be. 
  The AO's administration is still doing a lot for the plants, 
finding work for many of them and steering them to demand. It 
has worked out 40 programs, essentially long-term trends in the 
work of the repair sector. At the suggestion of the concern's 
management, the Novosibirsk Electric Locomotive Repair Plant in 
April repaired the first ChS series electric locomotives, and 
the Yaroslavl and Yekaterinburg plants are starting to repair 
them; at the Velikiye Luki Locomotive Repair Plant they're 
starting to repair electric trains and manufacture cement and 
grain carriers. There is a very solid program underway to 
manufacture spare parts for foreign-made equipment in Russian 
enterprises and master the latest technologies. 
  Lots of good and interesting things are being done in 
Zheldorremmash. But the question now is how to keep the plants 
operational and geared to the actual needs of the sector, how to 
protect them against bankruptcy and, at the same time, not let 
them fall by the wayside. There are plenty of people today who 
want to invest capital in a smoothly-running, high-tech industry. 
  In order to prevent misunderstandings to the effect that the 
management of the sector, say, only cares about the railroads 
and treats the plants as stepchildren, in our opinion, firm and 
honest rules of the game are needed: the Center accepts exactly 
as many orders as it can supply with equipment, repairs, and 
financing. And it makes this known in advance, however difficult 
this may be under present circumstances. Otherwise, the plant is 
free to find its own sources--that is, orders. And if something 
unforeseen should happen tomorrow, so that plans have to be 
cancelled, it should pay in full for the violation. And under 
this arrangement, the plants won't have to wait for whatever 
from the management--everything will be stipulated. 
  Does this variant guarantee that the plant will not, sooner 
or later, slip out from under the sector's wing? Of course not. 
But it will be clear, at least, who is to blame. But the plants 
aren't going to go their own way: everyone needs an organizing 
and coordinating center (and the AO's management is taking a 
liking to the new relations, built on marketing, scientific 
research, and financial substantiation of decisions). Especially 
a competent center. It's no wonder that the meeting was attended 
by representatives from plants in practically all the republics 
of the former USSR, many of whom never gave a thought to 
breaking ties with the concern, which is now the Zheldorremmash 
AO. And they want to become full-fledged participants. Because 
they have found out for themselves what it's like to be off by 
yourself alone. 
  Candidate of Historical Sciences I. Yanin once wrote (see 
GUDOK, 30 October 1993) that "the interaction between the state 
and our sector as a unified, centralized state structure or 
corporation, is highly instructive and, if you please, has 
macroeconomic importance. The appropriate conclusions need to be 
drawn." 
  Why not, then, make use of this productive thinking--without 
arguing in favor of centralism, to be sure. After all, 
state-and-sector, sector-and-association, and 
association-and-enterprise constitute pairs that essentially 
resemble a matryoshka doll: one fits inside the other, and they 
basically duplicate one another. Successful entry into the 
market on the level of the plants vis-a-vis the Zheldorremmash 
AO will also be instructive for larger "matryoshka dolls," up to 
and including the state level that covers all the rest. 
  Let us hope that recent edicts by the President of Russia, 
in 
particular the one regulating the tax situation, reducing profit 
taxes on added value, will provide the sector's plants with an 
extra dose of oxygen and, in this way, make it easier for them 
to adapt to the new economic reality. 

