Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] With the participation of the God-seeking masses, 
devoted to the pure rites of Muhammad, may peace be upon him and 
his scion, the Friday prayers were staged today throughout the 
country. 
  Ayatollah [hmad Jannati led the Friday prayers in Tehran, 
and 
expressed his condolences on the anniversary of the demise of 
Her Holiness Zaynab [daughter of first Shiite imam], may peace 
be upon her. He then set out to describe highlights of her 
fruitful life and her services as the disseminator of the 
liberating message of the uprising by Imam Husayn. 
  In his second sermon, the acting Friday prayer leader of 
Tehran referred to the start of the new Christian year, and 
criticized the Vatican for its recognition of the Zionist 
regime. He expressed hope that world powers and organizations 
which consider themselves Christians will review their past 
behavior and refrain from displaying a coercive and criminal 
attitude toward innocent people. 
  Tehran's Friday prayer preacher then described the saddening 
living conditions of the Muslim people of Bosnia-Herzegovina, in 
particular during the winter, and paid tribute to their 
continued resistance to attacks by the aggressors. He called 
for more help from the Islamic world for the Muslim people of 
Bosnia. 
  Ayatollah Jannati then alluded to parts of the remarks 
graciously made by the eminent leader [Khamene'i] in his meeting 
with the members of the Assembly of Experts [on 29 December]. 
He said: In view of the spiritual and divine status of the 
position of leadership in society, who like divine prophets 
shoulder the responsibility of guiding the people toward Islamic 
values and of safeguarding the general interests of Islamic 
societies, the people must fully obey the eminent leader with 
utmost love and sincerity. In this way the might of Islam and 
the Muslims may be enhanced even further, especially in the face 
of conspiracies hatched by the enemies. 
  He then referred to Grand Ayatollah Araki and expressed 
satisfaction at the concentration of marja'iyat [status of being 
a source of emulation] in him. 
  In another part of his second sermon, the acting Tehran 
Friday prayers leader tribute to the personality of Mr. Hashemi- 
Rafsanjani and his valuable services, and considered him as a 
unique personality. He then asked the Almighty to grant 
ever-increasing success to our country's president. 
  Furthermore, Tehran's Friday prayer preacher enumerated the 
government's infrastructural policies aimed at reforming the 
country's economic structure. He stressed the need to pay 
tribute to all the steps taken by the government, and at the 
same time to speak out about existing problems in a sincere 
manner and suggest solutions for them. Ayatollah Jannati also 
referred to the emphasis placed by the eminent leader on the 
need to reduce consumption and increase production so as to 
improve the country's economic conditions. Following on this, 
he called on the people and the officials to refrain from waste 
and to have consideration for the the low-income groups. He 
also considered that firm but just confrontation of offenders is 
a factor capable of strengthening the Islamic system of our 
country. 
  In conclusion Ayatollah Jannati praised the country's 
officials for their efforts to stage events for Book Week. He 
said: The spread of the culture of book reading will bring 
growth and progress to the society. 

