Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Baltic Business Weekly" feature] </F>
  [Text] For already two months in a row Estonia has an 
unusual for that Baltic nation high monthly inflation of about 
5.5 percent, which is not likely to fall in the oncoming several 
months. 
  But Prime-Minister Mart Laar says the inflation is going to 
drop due to slower growth in the country's hard currency 
reserves. 
  The consumer price index in Estonia rose 5.2 percent in 
February, down just a bit from January's 5.5 percent, prompting 
experts to review the earlier predicted 15-25 percent annual 
inflation level for this year. 
  Goods became an average 4.6 percent more expensive last 
month, the report by the Statistics Department shows. The price 
rise for food was reported at 6.8 percent, and for manufactured 
goods, 0.9 percent. The prices of services rose 6.3 percent. The 
total price rise in the country was 43.1 percent when compared 
with the same month a year ago. 
  Fruit and vegetables topped the price rise list for separate 
groups of goods with 15 percent in February. Milk, dairy 
products and eggs followed with 11.9 percent, and fats, with 9.7 
percent. Also substantial was the rise of alcohol prices, 10.3 
percent, mainly due to a increased excise tax. Expenses for 
housing went up 5.1 percent in February, and for transport and 
communication, 5.0 percent. 
  Relatively high inflation rates in the first two months of 
the year have rendered it unlikely that Estonia would be able to 
make the year within the earlier predicted 15-25 percent 
inflation level. There is not much improvement in prospect this 
month, as price rises became effective on March 1 alone for 
telephone calls, ferry and railway tickets, water supply, 
sewage, and, in some places, for bread and milk. 
  Experts questioned by BNS now predict an annual inflation of 
around 30 percent for 1994. 
<H3>  Estonian Premier Mart Laar Predicts 1994 Inflation at 40 
Percent </H3>
  Laar emphasized that the high rate of inflation observed 
through the first two months of the year will not reduce in the 
first half of the year and will amount to a monthly 5-6 percent. 
  The Premier believes, however, that in the second half of 
1994, inflation will drop to 1.5-2 percent a month which would 
allow not to exceed the level of 40 percent through the entire 
1994. 
  According to Laar, one of the main reasons for the inflation 
spirals in early year is a fast growth in the country's currency 
reserves. "Estonia currently has such an amount of money which 
is simply hard to handle," Laar told BNS. 
  In the premier's words, an interim hike in inflation 
resulted 
from a too speedy development of Estonia's economy over the 
second half of 1993. "This is something new. The IMF experts 
have been also surprised and cannot provide an explanation," 
Laar said. According to the premier, "similar was experienced 
some time ago by the Czechs." 
  The premier also highlights that despite growing inflation, 
"there are no causes for alarm. We receive encouraging reports 
about a slowing pace in the growth of hard currency reserves. 
This means that inflation will start to drop in two-three 
months." Laar stressed in addition that Estonia has sufficient 
guarantees, such as a balance budget, eliminated subsidies and a 
solid money legislation, to survive from such financial shakes. 
  Meanwhile, the Bank of Estonia said the inflation in January 
was only 15.6 percent due to the increasing money supply. The 
bank's monthly economic overview says that high inflation of the 
last months "had no monetary basement". 
  More grounds for the Laar's optimism lie in the fact that 
another source triggering inflation will go down soon. "To a 
large extent, inflation is explained by our decision late last 
year to liquidate the remaining subsidies to households for 
transport, housing and energy. The major part of inflation 
attributes directly to the suspended subsidizing of prices for 
these services," stressed the premier. 

