BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by SPD Chairman Rudolf Scharping at the Bundestag </F>
in Bonn -- live] 
  [Text] Ladies and gentlemen; Europe is a success story -- 
and it has to remain one, too. This is why the decisive task 
for the next few months and years will be to consolidate the 
conditions under which Europe managed to become a success story: 
intensive cooperation for shared prosperity and joint security, 
integration of the states to guarantee peace. After all, 
European integration is the attempt -- the largely successful 
attempt -- to consolidate the vision of a peaceful continent 
after the devastating experience of two terrible fratricidal 
wars on this continent. [applause] This is why we support the 
intensification of European integration. And we also support 
the enlargement of the European Union [EU]. One will probably 
need more imagination than that of economic and monetary 
cooperation and associate membership treaties if the states of 
eastern central Europe, in particular, should be given clear 
prospects for EU accession. [applause] 
  Prague, Warsaw, and Budapest are European cities. The fact 
that the people there had to live under communism, a system that 
was forced upon them, does not justify their being seen as mere 
postcommunist states today. [applause] This idea is 
deliberately intended to build on what Czech President Vaclav 
Havel said. I also want to make clear that our behavior so far 
in West Europe as well as in Germany is regarded as insufficient 
by these countries because the lofty words from the beginning of 
a new era in 1989/90 have in many cases been absolutely 
inconsistent with the actions that followed. 
  After the end of the East-West conflict it is no longer 
enough to say what the western community of states stands 
against. This community now faces the much more interesting 
challenge to say precisely what it stands for and to act 
accordingly. [applause] 
  Ladies and gentlemen; Europe is more than a political 
vision. 
In the past few decades we attempted to promote the process of 
European integration mainly economically and also to convey it 
in an economic sense. Important as the economy is, one must not 
lose sight of the political vision of this Europe, and make sure 
that the economic conditions for integration improve. Those who 
told people in Europe for decades that European integration was 
first and foremost an economic process, primarily seeking to 
increase the prosperity of the people, are making political 
opportunities smaller than they should be, and now have to face 
the justified question of how plausible this vision actually is 
when the result is that 20 million are without work on this 
continent, 4 million of these in Germany. [applause] 
  Who would dispute, Mr. Chancellor, that Konrad Adenauer, 
Ludwig Erhard, Kurt-Georg Kiesinger, Willy Brandt, Helmut 
Schmidt, and yourself have made great efforts toward European 
integration? But looking at the past is not enough. We will 
only create enthusiasm for the European process if we get across 
a clear idea of what the economic, financial, social, and 
ecological future of this continent will look like. You have 
said little on that. And even though I accept your not giving us 
details of your EU presidency before your declaration in June, a 
declaration that gets stuck in general terms and does not say 
anything on the specific conditions under which European policy 
is conducted today and how it is to be realized by the people of 
Europe, will not be nearly sufficient. [indistinct 
interjections] 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, Germany is the country facing the 
biggest social and economic gap in the EU. That means that we 
should be particularly interested in working toward decreasing 
these economic and social gaps through our own efforts and 
common initiatives. [applause] We have the lowest growth rate 
and highest unemployment rate in Europe. And there is a reason 
for this, Ladies and Gentlemen. Reasons that are also to be 
found in policies, not just in abstract, distant statements on 
structural adjustment processes that the European and German 
economies are going through. Let me explain this by way of a few 
examples: The economic capacity in the Thuringia is 28 percent 
of the EU average. Calabria has a share of 63 percent, central 
Portugal has 36 percent. That means that with Hamburg we have 
the richest economic region in Europe, at 190 percent of the EU 
average; and at the same time we have some of the economically 
weakest regions in Europe. I am asking myself... [indistinct 
interjections] I am asking myself, how it can be explained 
against this background that the Federal Government praises the 
European Commission's White Paper on Growth and Employment, 
while at the same time trying to prevent, through its European 
policy, one concrete step being taken after the other with the 
help of this White Paper. [applause] This is the reality. You 
are saying pleasant things, and you are doing the opposite of 
what you say. [applause] We would do much better, also in 
overcoming our own problems, if we did it together with Europe. 
No national economy, no bigger national economy that is, has so 
many international links as the German economy. Seventy percent 
of our exports go to the European Economic Area, 35 percent of 
our GNP comes from exports. With these figures we are far ahead 
of the United States and Japan as far as international 
interdependence goes. That is why we must be interested in a 
closer economic cooperation in Europe. And with the U.S. 
Administration considering this White Paper to be a good 
guideline for a common industrial, growth, and employment 
policy, I am surprised that the Federal Government does very 
little, next to nothing, toward a joint European promotion of 
the proposals of this White Paper for growth, employment, and 
jobs. [applause] 
  Speaking about the contradiction between word and deed, I 
also want to say something about the financial contribution that 
you fixed at the Edinburgh summit in 1992, even though you knew 
that Germany, regarding its prosperity and its citizens' 
prosperity, no longer ranked second in the EU, but seventh. 
  Those who in such a situation fix Germany's contribution 
until 1999 and are thus responsible for payment of a sum that is 
over 3 billion German marks [DM] higher than it should be, those 
who at the same time help finance a British contribution rebate 
totaling DM1.2 billion, should at least demand higher funds from 
the EU in aid for change and reconstruction in eastern Germany. 
If you fixed it -- which I consider grossly negligent -- the 
least thing we must ask you to do is to push through a higher 
return flow in structural funds and aid for reconstruction in 
eastern Germany. [applause] 
  Since you, Mr. Chancellor, do not want us to be seen by the 
public as Europe's paymaster, since you know but did not 
mention, that this may constitute a problem for the mood toward 
Europe and its acceptance by the people, you should have the 
obligation to ensure fair financial conditions within the EU. 
  Ladies and gentlemen; Europe certainly means not just 
economics. However, people are asking themselves, since European 
integration has for decades primarily been represented in 
economic terms, why is there so much unemployment? We must 
create better investment conditions in Europe, give companies a 
stable framework for investment, do more for research and 
education in Europe, develop our common infrastructure in a 
committed way and at higher financial expense, and we must make 
sure that this Europe of the citizens and regions overcome its 
deficit of democratic anchoring. [applause] 
  I mention this latter aspect because you, Mr. Chancellor, 
are 
among those who intend to give the Council of Ministers more 
responsibilities that are now in the hands of European 
institutions. In some cases, this is not in line with the goal 
to strengthen the European institutions. 
  But let me say something in connection with investment 
conditions and the development of the infrastructure. We have 
cooperated intensively and well with France. This should remain 
so on the basis of firm friendship. There are some examples of 
sound economic cooperation in Europe, especially in the 
aerospace sector. However, I ask myself why there has been 
virtually no initiative until recently not only to expand 
existing railroad lines, but to create joint railroad systems in 
the trans-European network. [applause] 
  For example, we in Germany afford ourselves the production 
of 
the ICE [Intercity Express] train, which has the banal defect of 
being too wide and too heavy to be used elsewhere in Europe. 
Mr. Chancellor, by the way, as a central element of a common 
infrastructure, the point is not just railroad tracks, but also 
power systems, and the so-called data highways with which you 
have had major difficulties -- to put it cautiously. 
  However, if a concentrated attempt is made in the triad, in 
Japan and the United States, to modernize industry ecologically 
by cooperation between science, industry, and the government, to 
increase spending on research and technology, to improve 
educational and training opportunities, I ask myself why in your 
rather general statement, you do not mention the fact that the 
backlog in Europe and Germany must be abolished. You cannot 
speak about this because in that case, you would have to speak 
about the shortcomings of your policy. [applause] 
  It is terrifying to see that in such a country as Germany, 
which has to rely more than other countries on the quality of 
its research and technology, the faster translation of their 
results into production, and the high standard of training, we 
are making only distressingly little effort in education and 
science, and we are lagging far behind, even by European 
standards. When you talk about Germany's competitive strength as 
an economic center it would be appropriate to concede that this 
kind of education and science policy, which reduces spending on 
education and intends to cut student grants so they have to 
study longer, which no longer offers any essential future 
prospects in the area of dual training, and which has lowered 
the research and technology budget to 1.9 percent of the total 
budget and made yet another DM250 million cut this year, 
constitutes a central, long-term risk for Germany as economic 
center, a risk for which you will be held responsible. 
[applause] 
  No real collective or joint efforts are being made in this 
sphere. And the results are obvious, which I will demonstrate 
with the help of a single figure: Four of every 1,000 employees 
work in the field of research and as engineers in the EU; in the 
United States this number is eight -- exactly double -- and in 
Japan it is nine. If one looks at these figures and also at the 
developments regarding patents, one becomes aware that, unless 
we manage to improve European cooperation in the areas of 
research and technology, science, universities, and major 
research institutes, and unless we manage to translate the 
results thus received faster and jointly in Europe into 
technological and economic reality, then this continent will 
remain the part of the world where unemployment is highest and 
where growth rates are lowest. 
  Mr. Chancellor, it would be good and important for you to 
comment on this issue so that empty words and Sunday speeches on 
the undeniable achievements of the EU and the shared past do not 
create the belief here that we are living in safe conditions in 
Europe because -- particularly from the economic, technological, 
and social point of view -- we unfortunately do not. [applause] 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, apart from much closer cooperation on 
the basis of the European Commission White Paper on Growth and 
Employment, the Fight Against Unemployment, and the Preservation 
of Social Rights, it would be essential to improve cooperation 
in Europe, especially in the last field. It is correct when you 
say that some of the things that are incorporated in the 
guidelines were forced into it by the national governments, and 
that, consequently, the protest against a certain bureaucracy in 
Europe would actually have to be directed against those who are 
responsible for them in the nation states. You made a 
self-critical remark, and I would like to add another one. 
  The parties that stand behind your policy speak a lot about 
deregulation, and as far as flexibility, investments, and the 
labor markets are concerned, one cannot say much against it. 
Yet why have you obstructed regulations and guidelines -- some 
for years -- intended to help make Europe more homogeneous, to 
protect people's social rights more effectively, and why do you 
still obstruct the European Commission's desire -- to mention 
only this one example --that foreign workers on German building 
sites be paid according to the conditions of the country in 
which they work and get paid, rather that the less favorable 
working and pay conditions that are based on conditions in the 
worker's country of origin. [applause] 
  Those who talk about unemployment and the competitiveness 
of enterprises must ensure fair conditions of competition. 
Illegal employment, for example, and the blocking of such 
guidelines do not have anything to do with fair conditions of 
competition. [applause] 
  Why are you still blocking the guidelines for the so-called 
atypical working conditions, which are not so atypical? If, on 
the one hand, you advocate part-time work to reduce 
unemployment, why do you not say anything about the 10 million 
male and female temporary workers in Europe -- there are far 
more women than men -- who cannot work with social security and 
in safety because of your policy? It is high time something be 
done here [applause] because if we do not also create a Europe 
with its vision of a joint economic and strong future and of 
joint social security on such concrete questions, that is, 
including the question of codetermination in European 
enterprises, then you cannot expect acceptance, enthusiasm, and 
commitment in Europe, but this mixture of indifference and 
weariness will be final, although we need enthusiasm to cope 
with Europe's future. [applause] 
  Why are you still blocking appropriate opportunities in 
connection with the reporting on poverty? I could give many 
examples. But I still want to take up what you said in 
connection with internal security. I think that this is highly 
interesting. It was a beautiful sentence. We have to give the 
right answer to this challenge. What is it? When our highly 
esteemed chancellor makes a statement here in this house... I 
should add: our highly esteemed compatriot, because one has to 
be a little careful, Madam President... 
  [Kohl, interrupting] I would make a point by stating that we 
are not compatriots! 
  [Scharping] Since you are so narrow-minded as to call 
yourself only a Palatine, and not a Rhineland-Palatine, this is 
all right. In that case we are not compatriots. [applause] 
  This may be the case. I only wanted to point out the 
following: We have to produce the right answer to this 
challenge. Mr. Chancellor, it is not only your duty to raise 
questions or generally to use nice formulations, but to be 
specific. Therefore, I am wondering, regarding, for example, 
the fight against drug crime, which you were completely right to 
bring up as central point, why your government is still blocking 
blows against the central nervous system of this crime, that is, 
its financial profits. Why? [applause] 
  I know very well that some of you propose the protection of 
property. But how do you propose to get hold of those who sit 
in Colombia or elsewhere and are responsible for the DM250 
billion that is being channeled into Europe? How is this 
supposed to work? Do you first want to bring them to trial in 
Germany and have them sentenced before touching their property? 
I think that this is a grossly negligent policy. [applause] 
It not only goes against legal tradition of our Western 
partners, particularly the United States, but it also goes 
against the people's need for security. Thank God, so far it is 
still the case that the majority of people also associate the 
chance of greater internal security with open borders. This is 
the judgment of the majority. 
  But I predict that if you intend to continue this policy, 
you will not ensure security in Europe. [applause] 
  So, growth and employment, combating unemployment, 
preserving 
and guaranteeing social rights in Europe, improving the natural 
bases of life instead of taking environmental protection 
measures after the harm has been done -- all these are areas in 
which this Federal Government cannot achieve much in Europe, 
because you have failed in this area in your country. [applause] 
  Or do you seriously believe that Finance Minister Waigel is 
particularly credible in Europe by calling for stable finances 
in Europe but being responsible at home for the highest debt 
Germany has ever had? [applause, shouts] It may be unpleasant 
for you, but it is a fact. 
  Of course, the criteria of the Maastricht Treaty are more 
important than the timeframe. But what is the situation in 
connection with the criteria? Apart from the fact that others 
do not meet them either, you have pursued a financial policy 
that has led to a continuously increasing tax burden, especially 
for medium and normal income earners, a tax burden of over DM100 
billion for the people every year, and nonetheless, you are 
responsible for state debt totaling DM2000 billion every year -- 
DM65,000 per capita in Germany. [applause] 
  It is quite interesting for me to see that you have become 
more lively. It is an Achilles' heel for you. I understand 
very well that at the very moment we no longer speak in general 
terms, but mention the specific problems of German and European 
policy, not only the differences, but also the serious 
shortcomings of your own policy, come to light. [applause] 
  In this respect, I wish to mention one last point. I spoke 
of a perspective of the European states, which for current EU 
members must consist of deepening, and for other European 
countries, of enlargement. The chance to improve economic 
conditions, restore social justice, and ensure the protection of 
the bases of life, is not only a problem for our own country. 
It can be solved better in European concert. 
  Europe was, is, and remains the vision of a peaceful 
continent through integration and growing together. However, if 
this is to remain so, we must resist the old nationalism, which 
creates new radicalism. [applause] It is amazing that there is 
so much talk about the Europe of the citizens and regions, but 
it is a truth that the German laender had to defend their 
regional rights to be able to maintain their regional identity. 
  It is also a truth that perspectives of cooperation must be 
developed not only in economic and security policy terms, but 
that, like all our other European partners and neighbors, we in 
Germany must also think about the causes of nationalism and 
about ways to combat them. 
  I think it is regrettable that virtually nothing has been 
said in this respect. I clearly state that the participation of 
neofascists in the Italian government is an alarming signal. 
[applause] 
  I am ready to admit that, because of the necessities of 
cooperation, a federal chancellor and a foreign minister cannot 
make as tough statements as others can -- and must, in my view. 
That is why I understand that the federal chancellor and the 
foreign minister maintain a low profile, but I do not understand 
that members of the Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social 
Union [CDU/CSU] do not comment as clearly on this topic as is 
every democrat's duty. [applause] I have looked very closely at 
what the Bavarian government said in this respect. 
  And, I am also saying this to you, Mr. Chancellor; it would 
be important to make it clear that humanitarianism and 
civilization have to be defended anew and fought for day after 
day. This has become obvious not only with the example of 
Yugoslavia, but also by the burning homes, the fighting 
demonstrators, the young people who chase foreigners, and many 
other things that we have experienced in Germany and other 
neighboring countries in Europe. It would be good if 
politicians were to assume a clear and unambiguous position 
here. And as a senior representative of our state, this applies 
to you, too. [applause] 
  I shall not forget these things, nor the reasons that make 
such phenomena possible in the first place: social despair and 
unemployment. How do you propose to talk to a young person in 
eastern Germany about the future when 25 percent of them have to 
join the lines of the unemployed after their vocational 
training, and when they even know that beforehand, during their 
training? If, however, you do not do anything against the 
economic and social problems in our country and on our 
continent, then you will not eradicate the roots for new 
radicalism, for violence, and for hatred against those who are 
weaker. [applause] 
  It was almost exactly a year ago that a house was set on 
fire 
in Solingen. Mr. Chancellor, I thought it was a fateful mistake 
of yours to speak sympathetically, yet to say that you would not 
attend the funeral ceremony because it would lead to 
demonstrations. [applause] 
  To leave no doubts about my party's position and my personal 
political view, I would like to add that, in our opinion, he who 
sets fire to other people's homes or puts their lives or health 
at risk is a hooligan and must be put in prison. And those 
paving the way for them must be kept out of German parliaments. 
[applause] 
  To add a conciliatory statement to the discussion of the 
past 
few days, I would like to say that it is good to know that the 
newly elected federal president has made an absolutely clear 
statement on this issue, something I would wish from you as 
well, Mr. Kohl. [applause] 
  Ladies and gentlemen, by way of summing up, I would like to 
say that I respect the efforts made by this Federal Government. 
I also respect that this federal chancellor advocates personal 
convictions, which, however, raise two questions. One question 
is what the position of his own party is, and particularly that 
of the Bavarian CSU. The second question is: Can you agree -- 
and I really consider this to be important -- that we 
politicians have the duty not to come up with nice statements, 
general declarations, or lofty words, but with concrete deeds. 
[applause] The problem of your policy is not the nice words 
that you say or the goals that you define, but the truly great 
difference between what you say and what you do in reality. If 
you do not want to face a debate on political reality, which 
makes it possible to weigh what you actually want to convey with 
your words, then you are also contributing to the people's 
disenchantment with politics, because the arbitrariness of 
concepts is often confounded with the arbitrariness of politics. 
  Ladies and gentlemen; in terms of words, the government's 
policy on Europe can scarcely be faulted, but in terms of deeds 
it is often incomplete and half-hearted, particularly where jobs 
and people's social rights are at stake, as well as our future 
competitiveness, research, technology, education, and science, 
and the preservation of the natural basis for our life, so that 
our children can have a decent future. [applause] 

