Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V. Grachev: "Not That Bad?"] </F>
  [Text] The heads of oblast law enforcement agencies had a 
meeting with journalists last Wednesday at the suggestion of the 
oblast administration. 
  I have to say right away that I do not share the skeptical 
views of some of my colleagues with regard to this gathering. It 
is true that the specific purpose of the press conference was 
absolutely obvious: Deputy Administration Chief Valeriy Bagin, 
who conducted the press conference, frankly admitted that the 
crime rate is rising, but the public must not lose all hope. Law 
enforcement agencies are doing their job in spite of all 
obstacles and are adapting to the new conditions. Criminals do 
not feel as unconstrained as some news programs have suggested. 
  It seems to me that this is a valid statement. The reason 
for 
the rising crime rate is not the unsatisfactory performance of 
the police, the courts, or the procuracy. The main cause is the 
steady disintegration of the economy and all the foundations of 
our daily life. The personnel of the police force, the courts, 
the procuracy, and other law enforcement agencies that did not 
leave, in spite of all inducements, and move into the 
comfortable offices of commercial structures--where everything 
is peaceful and where the pay is much higher--might deserve more 
respect today than anyone else, in spite of all the remaining 
problems, in spite of the fact that people feel the need to hide 
behind iron gates, and in spite of the fact that "every flock 
has its black sheep." 
  The statements at the press conference were reserved: The 
situation is still under control, thank God, and has not reached 
the point of total chaos and lawlessness. Furthermore, there 
have been some successes: Several homicides that were "pending" 
for several years were recently solved, the organizers of the 
recent notorious and bloody fights between mafia clans were 
exposed and arrested, and the invaluable canvases of the Russian 
old masters that had been stolen from the Tyumen Art Gallery 
were recovered. Even the president heard about this case. The 
devastated service for the prevention of economic crime is being 
revitalized to some extent. 
  It is extremely difficult to do this work today. As I look 
through my notes, the following details stand out: Viktor 
Simonov, administration chief in the State Trade 
Inspectorate--subjected to intense psychological pressure by 
criminal gangs during inspections of commercial stores, around 
90 percent of which are paying protection money to racketeers. 
Valeriy Borisov, chief of the regional administration for action 
against organized crime--identified more than 100 criminal gangs 
and broke up over 30 of them last year. The gangs are 
well-organized: They have power structures, fighting forces, and 
economic divisions for the "laundering" of money, the 
organization of credit operations, and so forth. Last year the 
regional administration solved more than 400 serious 
crimes--homicides, cases of extortion, and racketeering. 
Veniamin Basharin, chief of the oblast internal affairs 
administration: The criminals feel invulnerable. They commit 
murders here and then go abroad--to Kazakhstan, Georgia, or 
Armenia. Ten people were arrested in connection with the mafia 
clan warfare and two are still at large. The main culprit--a 
professional hired killer--was "brought to light" in Kazakhstan, 
but our request for his extradition led to a whole series of 
other events. It took the threat of road blocks on all 
highways--so that not one vehicle carrying lumber or anything 
else could reach Kazakhstan--before the murderer was finally 
turned over to us. Our neighbors in Sverdlovsk Oblast also 
experienced bloody confrontations and have not found the guilty 
parties yet. In the words of V. Basharin, the present 
irresponsible behavior of some citizens is interfering with the 
performance of police work: People cannot be arrested for 
vagrancy. They do not have to work if they do not want to. They 
are free to make their own choices, but this is a breeding 
ground for criminals. Witnesses are another big problem. They 
are completely unprotected by the state and the law and are 
intimidated and threatened. People are afraid of saying 
anything, and criminals escape responsibility for crimes because 
of a lack of evidence. There are many other problems as well, 
but the number of solved crimes was nevertheless higher than in 
1992 in some areas. V. Belyayev, chairman of the oblast court: 
Legal protection should not depend on attendant circumstances, 
but it does. Judges are not the problem: They will work as many 
hours as they have to. The problem is the shortage of jurors. 
People do not want to serve on juries. By law, their place of 
employment pays them the average wage for the time they spend in 
court, and who wants that? There are not enough auxiliary 
personnel in the courts, no process servers, no gasoline, no 
vehicles or guards to bring the criminals to court, etc. 
Witnesses cannot be called because people are afraid. 
  That is the situation in our law enforcement agencies today. 
As I have already said, however, they are still doing their job. 
They have finally begun taking action against people who take 
bribes: Last year they investigated 146 cases of bribery. The 
figure is not that high, but at least there has been some 
progress. They prevented 120 crimes connected with forged bank 
remittance notes during the year, saving 46 billion rubles. 
  Someone asked when the agencies would restore order in the 
market: The prices there, after all, are being set by the market 
mafia. Simonov replied that the market is a matter of constant 
concern to the State Trade Inspectorate. Prices drop as soon as 
the inspectors arrive, but the next day they are raised again. 
Basharin said that a special office of the internal affairs 
administration had been opened to take charge of the market, and 
he assured the press that order would be restored. All of the 
same problems still exist: There are no witnesses to testify. 
People either do not want to get involved or are simply afraid. 
Nevertheless, the situation in the market will get better. The 
registration of "foreigners" from the former fraternal 
republics, who are largely responsible for the present situation 
in the market, should be a big help. Those who behave 
unscrupulously run the risk of losing their licenses, and that 
does have an impact. 
  There were understandable questions about the amnesty. In 
view of the present crime wave, no one at the press conference 
was in favor of this. The prognosis was that this would cause 
more outbreaks of criminal behavior and that things would get 
worse. 
  There were many other questions as well. Some of the answers 
were reassuring and some were not. The law enforcement officials 
agreed to hold regular press conferences. I had the idea that it 
might be best to arrange for televised conferences of this kind 
once or twice a month for the whole oblast population, so that 
the people who have locked the iron gates of their homes can see 
that they can rely on the services of the police force, the 
courts, the procuracy, the trade inspectorate, and even the 
former State Security Committee, now renamed the 
Counterintelligence Committee, all of the individuals entrusted 
to combat corruption, the illegal drug traffic, and the theft of 
our national resources. They could take a look at these people 
and ask them--if they have a telephone--whatever they want to 
ask them, and find out what lies ahead. What bothers the people 
most, after all, is the uncertainty and unpredictability of 
events and the extremely depressing suspicion that the state and 
its law enforcement agencies have simply forsaken all of us. 
Mutual understanding is a great achievement, especially at a 
time of crisis. 

