BFN 

<F P=106> [By Annie Thomas] </F>
  [Excerpts] Kigali, June 14 (AFP) -- Truce talks between 
Rwandan rebels and the government broke down Tuesday [14 June] 
after militiamen abducted and probably killed between 30 and 40 
people, many of them children, who had been sheltering in a 
Kigali church, the UN said. 
  UN officials in the capital said the group was abducted from 
the Sainte Famille parish and was feared dead. 
  "When they take them away they usually kill them," said 
General Henry Anyidoho, the deputy commander of the UN 
Assistance Mission (UNAMIR) here. The news came hours after 
reports of a fresh massacre of Tutsi civilians in a refugee camp 
in neighbouring Burundi. 
  The rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) broke off 
UN-sponsored peace talks with the government when news of the 
abductions filtered through. 
  Rebel negotiator Frank Mugambage warned the incident could 
jeopardize the future of the talks, adding that if government 
soldiers were not responsible then they were accomplices to the 
act. The RPF added it was seeking clarification from the UN 
mission here of unconfirmed reports that Tutsi civilians had 
been killed in the church. 
  Mugambage said his superiors would decide whether the RPF 
would attend the scheduled resumption of the talks Thursday. 
  Anyidoho said the abduction was reported by the priest in 
charge of the parish, which is in the government-controlled city 
centre and where some 3,000 people have taken refuge. Earlier in 
the day Hutu militiamen had prevented members of the tiny UN 
presence from evacuating civilians from Sainte Famille, said 
UNAMIR military spokesman Major Jean-Guy Plante. Meanwhile 
reliable sources in Burundi reported that more than 100 Tutsis 
were slaughtered overnight Monday in a refugee camp at Bugabira, 
northeastern Burundi, by a band of Rwandan Hutus who stole 
across the border between the two countries overnight. 
  Burundi has the same ethnic mix as Rwanda, which in April 
was 
plunged into an inter-ethnic bloodbath that has claimed up to 
500,000 lives. 
  At least 515,000 Rwandans have also fled the country, 
including 414,000 to Tanzania, according to census figures from 
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). 
  The UNHCR said Tuesday in Geneva it was searching for new 
sites for refugee camps with Tanzanian authorities as current 
facilities near the Rwandan border were now overstretched. 
[passage omitted] 
  Questioned earlier about latest developments in Gitarama, 
the 
headquarters of the interim government south of Kigali which the 
RPF said it had captured Monday, General Marcel Gatsinzi, the 
head of the government talks delegation, simply confirmed that 
"there is fighting over there." Mugambage, however, said the 
town was "under total (RPF) control." 
  A UN military spokesman said he had been told by an RPF 
officer that the United Nations could visit Gitarama, which lies 
50 kilometres (30 miles) southwest of Kigali, probably Thursday. 
  Rebel radio claimed RPF rebels "now controlled many of 
Rwanda's prefectures, among them Byumba, Kibungo, Kigali, 
Gitarama and a big portion of Ruhengeri." 
  Meanwhile in Tunis, South African President Nelson Mandela 
pledged to send aid to Rwanda, but remained torn over UN calls 
for Pretoria to dispatch 50 armoured personnel carriers there. 
  The vehicles would pave the way for the long-delayed 
deployment of thousands of UN troop reinforcements there, UN 
Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali told AFP at the weekend. 

