Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by "deu": "Union Bundestag Group Wants To Facilitate </F>
Arms Exports"] 
  [Text] Bonn -- The dispute dividing government and 
opposition on the subject of arms export controls is 
intensifying. Pressured by the arms industry, the coalition 
Bundestag groups and the Economics Ministry are trying to relax 
the German guidelines for arms export, which are stricter than 
those of most other countries. One of the reasons for this is 
job security. Karl Lamers, foreign policy spokesman of the 
Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union [CDU/CSU] 
Bundestag group, told a newspaper that the German arms export 
guidelines put German companies at a disadvantage: "Thousands of 
jobs and high-tech know-how that are of enormous importance for 
the civilian industry threaten to be lost." 
  Lamers demands a uniform European Union [EU] policy on arms 
exports. This is also mentioned as an objective in the section 
on joint foreign and security policy of the Maastricht Treaty. 
Lamers said that, due to the resistance of other European 
states, however, the high German standards cannot be maintained 
in Brussels. 
  Bonn's attempts to facilitate arms exports through Brussels 
meet with strong resistance from the Social Democratic Party of 
Germany [SPD]. SPD Bundestag group manager Peter Struck said 
the constitution demands that the Bundestag be consulted by the 
Federal Government first. The constitutional amendment passed 
when the Maastricht Treaty was ratified says: "The Federal 
Government, before agreeing to an introduction of new laws by 
the EU, gives the Bundestag the opportunity to comment. The 
Federal Government bases its negotiations on these comments." 
  Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul, deputy SPD chairwoman and 
European 
affairs expert, accused the government of negotiating a 
softening up of arms export guidelines in the European Council 
of Ministers, "behind the Bundestag's back, ignoring the 
constitution, and excluding the public." The government is "by 
no means entitled to do this." 
  The Economics Ministry denies negotiating uniform export 
guidelines for traditional armament products within the EU. 
These negotiations only refer to dual-use products. This means 
products that can be used for both civilian and military 
purposes, such as machinery, special steels, and pesticides. 
Reinhard Goehner, government coordinator for aerospace and 
space technology, has repeatedly said that it will not be 
possible to maintain the strict German export regulations. 
Negotiations on dual-use products have reached the final stage. 
  The German guidelines for traditional arms and dual-use 
products were tightened after the second Gulf war in early 1991. 
UN inspectors had discovered that a large share of Iraqi 
dictator Saddam Husayn's arms supply came from German companies. 
Since then, the German arms industry constantly complained about 
disadvantages compared to other countries, especially France and 
Great Britain. 
  Arms producers from these countries have blamed the Germans 
for being unreliable, the German arms industry said. Over the 
past four years, 280,000 jobs were lost in the armament 
industry. Yet, according to the Stockholm-based SIPRI 
Institute, with a 3.1 billion-mark turnover, Germany was still 
the world's third largest arms exporter in 1992. 

