Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpt" from introductory speech by Radovan Karadzic, </F>
president of the republic of Srpska, at the Serbian assembly 
session in Bijeljina on 17 January -- recorded] 
  [Text] We are making concessions for peace, the 
concessions are being accepted, peace is not being secured, new 
concessions are demanded, and this is then repeated, with us 
extending and advancing this platform at our expense, and every 
time the platform is (?newer) and has more Serbian concessions 
and yet there is no peace. 
  Esteemed deputies, you must decide whether we should stop 
making concessions. You, as well as the general population, the 
people that you represent, must decide when we should put a stop 
to all this. You must decide how many people have to die for a 
Serbian village for us then to give that Serbian village to the 
Muslims. It is much easier for us to give a Serbian village 
away without anyone getting killed. This means that had we 
accepted at the (?Lisbon) conference [words indistinct] without 
casualties, it would have been easier for us to move our people 
from some of their homes, because we would have created a state. 
These generations would have suffered, this segment of the 
population would have suffered, but from the national point of 
view, the job would have been finished. 
  The longer the war lasts, the more our young men get killed 
in defense of their hearths, and the fewer concessions we can 
make. We must state this openly. Our people believe us, but 
are shaking their heads wondering why we have been making so 
many concessions. We always said that we made concessions 
because of peace. We do not have a surplus of Serbs, we want to 
save every Serb. However, the other side is preparing for a 
long and bloody war. The other side is rejecting all peace 
initiatives. The other side is violating cease-fires. The 
other side is arming itself. The other side is trying to 
deceive us in the negotiations, so that we demobilize both 
psychologically and in our frame of mind, to adjust ourselves to 
the peace that is about to happen, whereas they are preparing 
for even fiercer offensives, probably next Spring. 
  It seems to me that this round of talks in Geneva is the 
turning point and that nothing will be the same again after it. 
We cannot allow ourselves to prepare for a peace that will not 
happen. If there is no peace, if it becomes clear at this round 
of talks that there will be no peace, we will have to prepare 
for war. Gentlemen, as you know, we have been waging a war 
according to peacetime laws. We have not proclaimed a state of 
war. We proclaimed a state of immediate danger of war even 
though a war was declared on us. This is one of the great 
achievements of this assembly, of the people in general, and of 
the republic of Srpska, the fact that we created the state on 
our own, according to peacetime laws. 
  If this state comes under threat, above all by our immediate 
enemies and then their allies and helpers from all over the 
world, as well as the strongest military force in the world, 
NATO, and the countries that support it, then we must prepare 
for war. Our state is two years old, or rather two years young; 
it is mature and strong enough to defend itself. On the other 
hand, the preparations for defense will (?dissuade) possible 
aggressors from their intentions. 
  Therefore, I think that today, in open discussions, we 
should 
come up with as many ideas as possible on what to do next. I 
personally think that the existing platform should be offered 
until it is rejected there, although we believe the Muslims have 
already rejected it, because the official representative of 
their delegation told our official representative that this was 
out of the question. This is quite clear and we should prepare 
back-up alternatives. 
  These back-up alternatives should come from today's 
discussion, from your views. We know how many times we [words 
indistinct] convincing you, begging you, explaining to you to 
accept compromises. We have no regrets. We think that it was 
our duty to ensure peace to our people, above all, even if at 
the cost of some territories. However, it has now [word 
indistinct] that we no longer have the choice nor the right to 
deceive ourselves, because we are facing an enemy that does not 
want anything, an enemy that is supported by almost the entire 
world, an enemy that expects us not to do anything militarily, 
and to adhere to a platform that is very conciliatory. 
  I am still of the opinion that if peace were established, if 
killings stopped, it would still pay to make the sacrifices 
contained in the current platform. With (?this) we would save 
many of our lives and many houses. However, if this peace is 
not to come to pass, we must come to a new position, even if 
this position remains [word indistinct]; we must have back-up 
alternatives, even if they remained unpublished, but we must 
arrive at a platform on the basis of which you representatives 
would act in the interest of ending the war and the realization 
of our aims. 
  All our aims are still valid, except the creation of the 
republic of Srpska. They are still valid because we are 
involved in a peace process that has had no success. With their 
definitive historical aims, the Serbian people have embarked on 
the path. They are entitled to them. They have no obstacles in 
the way, noone who has a right to obstruct them. They will try 
to obstruct us (?illegitimately), but all these things are still 
valid: the unification with Krajina, the unification with 
Serbia, the defining of borders, the outlet to the sea, and the 
creation of an economic and political system. We are simply 
running late because the other side, which is continually losing 
battles to us, does not want to sign a peace, an honorable 
peace, a more than honorable peace, peace that offers them more 
territory, significantly more, one and half times more territory 
than they control at this moment. 
  Therefore, I appeal to you to make new proposals with brief, 
concise speeches -- I have the right to ask that of you as I 
(?was) brief myself -- from among which we will extract one or 
two back-up alternatives for our future actions. Thank you. 

