BFN 

  [Text] Army Commander-in-Chief Gen Wimon Wongwanit 
yesterday urged Phnom Penh to settle any misunderstandings along 
the border with Thailand through diplomatic channels, not the 
media as this might worsen the situation. 
  Foreign Minister Prasong Sunsiri also warned that Thais' 
patience with the Cambodian accusations was wearing thin. 
  "We've been patient over the allegations for some time. The 
Cambodians should know that. I have no problem maintaining my 
patience but the people may not be able to do so," said Sqn Ldr 
Prasong. 
  The army commander said allegations by senior Phnom Penh 
officials should be backed with substantiated evidence. 
  "Anyone who condemns us should have evidence to back their 
claims," he said. 
  Gen Wimol said diplomatic channels should be used to settle 
disputes, not the Press as it sometimes distorts the facts and 
helps deteriorate the situation. 
  Phnom Penh Co-Premier Prince Norodom Rannaridh has accused 
the Thai military of assisting Khmer Rouge forces during recent 
fighting in Pailin. The military denies the allegation. 
  The army commander said if Phnom Penh had evidence to 
substantiate its claim, it should be handed over through 
government representatives so the problem could be solved. 
  He said the military had said on several occasions that it 
was not involved in the internal conflict in Cambodia between 
the Khmer Rouge and Phnom Penh forces. 
  He also said international press agencies sometimes have 
ulterior motives against the army and "intended to destroy our 
credibility". 
  Gen Wimon said it was in the interests of Thailand, as a 
neighbour to Cambodia, to see permanent peace restored. 
  He asked that the public not be misled by international 
press 
reports. 
  The Thai military has closely observed UN resolutions and 
played a key role in establishing peace in that country. 
  Gen Wimon's comments follow a re cent United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees' protest over the Thai military's 
repatriation of Khmer refugees following the fall of the Khmer 
Rouge stronghold at Pailin earlier this month. He said the UNHCR 
had always tried to dictate what Thailand should do. 
  "But I'd like to ask the person who represents the UNHCR if 
his country is willing to accept the Cambodian refugees if his 
country is asked to do so," he said. 
  Thailand has always cooperated wi1h the UN and assigned 
troops as part of UN peace-keeping forces in Cambodia, he said. 
  Gen Wimon said the Thai military was bitter when it was told 
by the UN it had no money to pay for Thai soldiers. This meant 
the cost had to be borne by the Thai Government. 
  Thai soldiers have never created problems for Cambodia. They 
wanted to see the people there live in peace and prosper like 
other nations, he said. 
  The Army chief said the military would take tough action 
against border violations by "uniformed" Cambodian bandits who 
cross into Thailand to steal from villagers. 

