Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Burmese Troops Are Crushing Khun Sa"] </F>
  [Text] The Burmese Government has sent its ground and air 
forces to mop up the ethnic minority troops under the command of 
Khun Sa. Heavy clashes have been reported since December inside 
of Burma, opposite the Thai border at Chiang Mai and Mae Hong 
Son. 
  The sound of gunfire was not heard over the new year 
holiday. 
The Burmese Government, however, has reportedly sent more troops 
to crush the international drug kingpin's army and cut off the 
huge income he earns each year from his opium crops and the 
export of heroin. 
  About 20 heroin refineries are believed to exist in that 
part 
of the Golden Triangle in Burma that is under the control of 
Khun Sa, who is said to command an army of over 6,000 troops. 
If the Burmese junta cannot stop Khun Sa's expansion, the world 
faces a bigger danger from drug addiction. 
  The world looks upon Thailand as a transit route for opium 
and heroin smuggled out of the Golden Triangle for distribution 
worldwide. Thailand has never been able to stop the flow of 
drugs completely, no matter how tough its prevention and 
suppression measures are. 
  The vice chairman of China's Narcotics Suppression 
Commission 
once said that, only a few years after the country opened up in 
1976, it began to encounter several problems related to 
narcotics--especially heroin--flowing out of the Golden Triangle 
and the Economic Quadrangle to its north. 
  China seized 900 kg of heroin in 1991, but in 1992 it seized 
a total of 4,200 kg of heroin. Most of the arrests were made in 
Yunnan. Heroin is therefore one of the most worrisome problems 
China now faces. 
  It can be assumed that without effective measures by both 
Thailand and China to stop production at its source--and halt 
the flow of narcotics from the Golden Triangle and the Economic 
Quadrangle in Burma before they reach international 
markets--narcotic drugs will surely continue to flood world 
markets. 
  We cannot rely entirely on the capabilities of the Burmese 
soldiers to suppress Khun Sa's army and provide the only hope 
for preventing people around the world from becoming slaves to 
drug addiction. It is the duty of Burma's neighbors--Thailand, 
Laos, and China--to cooperate closely in their efforts and 
seriously prevent and suppress the trafficking of all types of 
narcotic drugs. 

