Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Another military offensive by troops from the 
Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Labor Party 
[MPLA-PT] and mercenaries failed in Cuanza Sul Province. The 
Futungo de Belas troops had tried to recapture Quibala District, 
under the full control of the National Union for the Total 
Independence of Angola [UNITA]. According to Kapula Ndanda, 
correspondent for the Voice of Resistance of the Black Cockerel 
[Vorgan], the MPLA-PT mounted from Conde a large-scale offensive 
from three points: Gabela, Ebo, and Waco-Kungo. The Armed 
Forces for the Liberation of Angola [FALA] have already 
inflicted heavy defeats on the MPLA troops since the beginning 
of the clashes in Waco-Kungo. Kapula Ndanda reports from Cuanza 
Sul. [passage indistinct] 
  In Menongue District, Cuando Cubango Province, Jose Eduardo 
dos Santos' troops carried out military actions with the aim of 
winning Cuchi District on 25 March and penetrating FALA 
defensive lines on the outskirts of Menongue. Vorgan 
correspondent in the region Abilio Jorge said the reply by the 
Angolan people's armed wing, FALA, was quick. They killed 77 
soldiers from the People's Armed Forces for the Liberation of 
Angola [FAPLA], including Major Americo, commander of the second 
battalion of the 15th [words indistinct], and captured a 
quantity of war materiel, including 21 AK's, four PKM's, three 
RPG-7's, six RPG-7 shells, tens of thousands of rounds of 
ammunitions and a number of documents. When carrying out the 
operations, FAPLA forces were supported by fighter planes coming 
from Lubango, which killed many civilians and destroyed villages 
and communes. 
  In Cuanza Sul Province, Eduardo dos Santos' regime has been 
killing defenseless civilians as a result of bombings by the 
Futungo de Belas aircraft. According to our correspondent Muti 
Yakivela, the MPLA-PT air force made up of Antonovs and South 
African-made Puma helicopters, indiscriminately bombed the 
residents of Cuio District at 1700 and 2200 on 22 March. The 
people killed include 12 innocent children. In the face of this 
tragic situation, the Angolan people ask Eduardo dos Santos what 
kind of democracy does he want to establish in the country with 
the massacre of innocent civilians and opposition sympathizers 
with savage bombings carried out by fighter aircraft? 

