BFN 

  [Text] Freetown, June 27 (AFP) -- Clashes between rival 
groups in an armed Liberian faction left at least 50 people dead 
over the weekend on the Liberia-Sierra Leone border, reports 
said Monday [27 June]. 
  Reports reaching the Sierra Leone capital Freetown said 
hundreds in the Tonkia chiefdom, some 260 kilometres (160 miles) 
southeast of the capital, fled and one witness, named as Tommy 
Fefegula, put the number of dead at around 50. 
  Fefegula said the fighting began between United Liberation 
Movement factions belonging to the rival Mandingo and Krahn 
clans in the two Sierra Leone border villages of Njama and 
Tigbema. 
  He said the Mandingo faction Saturday ordered the civilian 
population to leave their villages in order to teach a lesson 
"once and for all" to Krahn fighters. "They then opened fire 
with heavy guns which resulted in many casualties among the 
combatants," he added. 
  A local chief told AFP by telephone that a Krahn detachment 
had earlier crossed into Liberia to fight the Mandingo faction 
at their base in Kawalahun on Friday evening. 
  Last week, tribal leaders petitioned the military government 
of Captain Valentine Strasser in Sierra Leone "to remove ULIMO 
soldiers from the chiefdom." ULIMO troops have been helping 
Sierra Leone combat its own rebels of the Revolutionary United 
Front in the area for over two years. But villagers have 
complained about the ULIMO presence, accusing them of attacking 
villagers and military posts. 
  The acting chairman of ULIMO's military affairs committee, 
Major General David Bropleh, said Monday the incident over the 
weekend was being investigated. 
  Inter-ethnic violence within ULIMO broke out in the west of 
Liberia four months ago, after the Krahn faction complained that 
Mandingos were given most of the movement's posts in 
transitional institutions set up in Liberia since March 7. 
  ULIMO is one of the three signatories to a peace accord 
signed in 1993 to end the Liberian civil war. The agreement 
gave each one-third of the posts in Liberia's collective 
presidency, government and transitional parliament. 

