Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Fabio Agrana] </F>
  [Text] Panama City, 20 Jan (EFE) -- Panamanian President 
Guillermo Endara told EFE that Panamanian authorities were 
informed and "indirectly" assisted Italian police in dismantling 
one of the main money laundering networks of the Cali Cartel. 
  However, the Panamanian head of state denied Italian reports 
that arrests were made in his country in connection with the 
"Unigold" operation, which on Wednesday destroyed a network that 
laundered $100 million monthly from the sale of Colombian 
cocaine in the United States through large amounts of gold sent 
to Panama. 
  In statements to EFE, Endara said that according to the 
security reports he has received, an international operation was 
conducted with the participation of Italian police, and although 
Panama "was not directly involved, it was kept informed of the 
situation by other agencies." 
  The cooperation, Endara added, was "at the level of 
information," which the Italians did not request directly but 
received through unidentified organizations. 
  Endara said he does not believe that these kinds of 
drug-related activities affect the international image of 
Panama, whose international banking system and Free Trade Zone 
have been considered by U.S. counternarcotics experts as "very 
vulnerable" to money laundering. 
  "This happens in all countries, and we always cooperate when 
asked," the president stressed. 
  According to reports by authorities, the network dismantled 
in Italy was led by Colombian citizen Gustavo Jesus Upegui 
Delgado, former accountant of late Medellin Cartel chief Pablo 
Escobar and currently one of the main financial leaders of the 
"Cali Cartel." Upegui has been arrested in Vicenza (northeast 
part of the country). Seven Italian businessmen were arrested in 
Vicenza and Arezzo on charges of participating in the money 
"laundering" network. 
  Reports from Italy said that four other unidentified people 
were arrested in Panama, but Endara asserted that no arrests had 
been made in his country in connection with the "Unigold" 
operation. 
  Italian authorities began the investigation last June after 
receiving a lead from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration 
(DEA). 
  According to reports from Italy, the dismantled gang used 
"narcodollars" to buy some 1,000 kg of gold bars per month, 
which were sent to Panama, where they were resold and the 
"laundered" money wired to the Cali Cartel in Colombia. 
  Alessandro Pansa, director of the operation and one of the 
individuals responsible for the Central Operation Center of 
Italy's Criminal Police, said in his country that the 
trafficking operations were so large that they threatened to 
alter the gold market. 
  Endara said that unlike other countries, Panama does not 
control the sale of gold, which "comes and goes without a 
problem." 
  Italian investigators identified three corporations, all 
based in Arezzo, as the owners of bank accounts where the 
"narcodollars" were sent. The corporations are Simar Joyeros 
Mayoristas, which has an outlet in Panama, Aurea Trading 
International, and Eurocatene. 
  Panamanian sources at Simar Joyeros Mayoristas told EFE that 
their corporation had not participated in any drug money 
laundering operation, that no employee had been arrested, and 
that last year an investigation conducted by the Panamanian 
Customs Directorate cast no doubts on the corporation's 
activities. 
  According to government sources, the jewelry corporation in 
Panama is owned by Saul Schwartz, a Jewish businessman who on 1 
June was kidnapped under strange circumstances by unidentified 
individuals who released him uninjured after an unspecified 
ransom was paid through a rabbi. 

