BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Information Minister Jawad al-'Anani by </F>
Ashraf Khalil in Amman; date not given] 
  [Text] [Khalil] I sense from your words that the Jordanian 
media have meager resources and that they fail to interpret 
reality. What are the problems? 
  [Al-'Anani] I believe that what is happening in the 
Jordanian media--particularly television--is a reflection of 
what happened to the economy in the wake of the Gulf crisis; 
namely, the closure of the markets, the occasional challenge 
posed by the laws, and the major changes within Jordanian 
society itself. I do not want to use the expression "we are at 
a crossroads," because it has lost its meaning due to overuse. 
The truth is that our country is going through a process of 
change that is clear in all its forms. What you hear about the 
imbalance in the media sector, official or otherwise, represents 
the state that precedes transformation. 
  [Khalil] Is there a state of confusion? 
  [Al-'Anani] Maybe. Anyway, I am not concerned about that. I 
believe that it is natural to be frank and clear in discussing 
this matter, so that everybody can feel that what is happening 
is not a normal situation but a temporary stage that precedes 
stability after the society shifts from one administrative 
approach to another and from a certain type of relation between 
the ruler and ruled to another. 
  [Khalil] How do you think we can meet these challenges? 
  [Al-'Anani] A major discussion has started and should be 
enhanced about the role of the media in a changing society. How 
should it be? How can we reconcile the homeland's priorities and 
the need for creativity? How can we free creativity from 
bureaucracy? All these questions should be raised at the present 
stage, where democracy is the main feature of change. It is the 
stage of freedom of creativity and expression. How can we 
harmonize the heritage of the past, when expression was 
restricted, with future ambitions to set expression free and 
help it reflect conditions in the homeland? I do not think that 
we can work out magical, practical, and ready-made solutions "in 
a nutshell" for all these matters. 
  [Khalil] To what extent do the Jordanian media reflect the 
democratic experience in the country? 
  [Al-'Anani] I admit that the media are not reflecting it as 
they should. The media should take the lead in that context, 
which they do not do at present. 
  [Khalil] Are parties and national powers allowed to appear 
on 
Jordanian television? What are the criteria governing your 
decision to allow this or not? 
  [Al-'Anani] That has not happened until now. Party leaders 
have not appeared on television. But there are plans to show 
the different parties and intellectual trends on television soon. 
  [Khalil] Speaking about the parties, you know that 
colleagues 
in partisan papers are not members in the Press Association. 
What is your position on this? And what is your role as 
information minister in wrestling more gains and rights for the 
men of the media? 
  [Al-'Anani] We are all going through a process of change 
that 
includes not only official institutions, but also private ones. 
Some of the features of dictatorship exist, even in private 
organizations, and not only in public ones. Party papers for 
example do not publish the views of those who oppose them. We 
have to enhance the democratic experience among all. As for the 
membership of the Press Association, I believe that the law must 
be enforced. In other words, a journalist must decide where he 
stands; he should be a member of the association. Being a 
member of a specific paper is not proper. 
  [Khalil] So you support the stand of colleagues in party 
newspapers? 
  [Al-'Anani] Yes. This is a wrong situation that should be 
rectified. That is why you find non-governmental institutions 
doing something and accusing the government of doing it, just as 
you accuse me now. 
  [Khalil] In light of reports that some journalists are 
being pursued by the security forces and others are being 
brought to trial, and noting that the Journalists Association is 
in a weak position, what are you doing to protect the men of the 
press? 
  [Al-'Anani] I differ with you, sir. Those journalists 
violated the publication law. In the past, newspapers would be 
closed and journalists would be pursued for such an offense. 
Now, however, we use civilized methods: We refer violators to 
the court, which is an independent and a just legal authority. 
If the court rules for the journalist, he goes free, and if it 
rules against him, he is punished like any other violator of the 
law. Let me tell you again--so that you can realize the 
magnitude of the change--that in the past, the journalist who 
violated the publication law was deprived of practicing his 
profession, and his newspaper was closed. 
  [Khalil] But I am talking about some articles in the 
existing 
law, articles that do not suit the democratic practice. 
  [Al-'Anani] Where are these articles? I do not think this is 
true. 
  [Khalil] For example, Publication Law No. 10 of 1993 
violates 
the journalist's right not to reveal to court the sources of his 
information. Also, Law No. 50 of 1971, on protecting the 
state's secrets and documents, denies journalists access to 
information and punishes them if they obtain any document 
described as top secret, confidential, or classified. The 
punishment for revealing any such document is at least 10 years 
temporary imprisonment with hard labor. 
  [Al-'Anani] Do you know of any country in the world without 
secrets that must keep out of publication? What would happen if 
these secrets were published? There are things that are harmful 
to national security, and the courts must be the judge there. 
  [Khalil] Are you saying that media men are not aware of what 
harms national security? 
  [Al-'Anani] I am not accusing anyone. But are there not 
secret documents in the biggest world democracies? Britain, for 
instance, keeps its documents secret and publishes them only 
after the passage of 30 years. 
  [Khalil] Who decides that certain information must remain 
secret? 
  [Al-'Anani] The people in charge, the people in government, 
and those concerned with the protection of the country's 
security and stability. 
  [Khalil] Are the government agreement with the IMF and the 
ordinary trials unpublishable information? 
  [Al-'Anani] Why not? 
  [Khalil] What is the role of the Jordanian media in clearing 
the Arab air, knowing that the leadership in Jordan is calling 
for healing the Arab rift and renouncing Arab differences? 
  [Al-'Anani] I do not think the Jordanian media are giving 
the 
subject of Arab reconciliation the importance it deserves. The 
Jordanian media are busy and preoccupied with domestic affairs. 
  [Khalil] Isn't this negligence? 
  [Al-'Anani] By whom? 
  [Khalil] By all the Jordanian media. 
  [Al-'Anani] If I say yes, you will rush to accuse me of 
interfering in the affairs of the private press and media. 
Forget about that. But as a media observer, I tell you that we 
must engage in a dialogue to define a general strategy to 
highlight the interests of the Arab nation and Jordan in its 
heart. 
  [Khalil] Allow me to change the topic of discussion to the 
area of peace. What is your and the Jordanian Government's 
stand on the project of a Middle Eastern market or network? 
  [Al-'Anani] I do not support this project. I also believe 
that Israel does not support such a project. But our analysts 
are behaving as though Israel is doing its utmost to establish 
such a market and as though the whole thing will take place and 
we will sit down to discuss and make efforts over something that 
Israel does not want in the first place. 
  [Khalil] But Israeli Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres 
expressed this view in his book A New Middle East. 
  [Al-'Anani] What Peres is saying is not new. There is a 
difference between the American and Israeli viewpoints regarding 
this point. However, is there an Israeli decision to establish 
a market extending from Iran to Morocco and including Israel as 
a part of it? I do not think so, but they might start marketing 
this big concept to you. They will start by gradually 
introducing such an idea on a small scale to include the 
triangle: Israel, Jordan, and Palestine. This is a region they 
can operate with. 
  [Khalil] Do you support such an idea? 
  [Al-'Anani] Of course I do not. 
  [Khalil] Why? 
  [Al-'Anani] I believe that Jordan and Palestine are not yet 
ready to compete with Israel. Second, I do not believe that 
Israel will approach this project in a balanced and reciprocal 
manner. In other words, it will keep its restrictions on 
imports, trade, and economy, but will want the Arab countries, 
mainly Jordan, to function within this reality. We reject this 
totally because Jordan is a sovereign and independent state. 
However, the problem lies in Jordanian-Palestinian relations in 
light of Israel's control over the economy of the West Bank, the 
Gaza Strip, and the rest of the occupied territories. Israel is 
trying to exploit this situation to involve Jordan. We have to 
be aware of this and confront it because Israel wants to take 
without paying anything in return. 
  [Khalil] Since you are on the front line with the enemy, 
what are your plans to confront the Israeli media? 
  [Al-'Anani] First, we need to talk about the peace process 
with a scientific and mature approach. We need to be frank with 
the people about this subject. We should not allow wild 
imagination to control the ideas of people regarding the topic 
of peace. 
  [Khalil] What do you mean by imagination? 
  [Al-'Anani] There are some fantastic and exaggerated 
theories evaluating Israel's size and fearing the results of the 
peace process. These are based on the false notion that whoever 
goes to negotiate capitulates to Israel's demands. This does 
not apply in the case of the Jordanian negotiators at all. The 
evidence is that more than two and a half years have gone by in 
the negotiating process, and we on the Jordanian track have not 
progressed a single step forward. 

