Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Staff article: "Will We Be Buying Electricity From Abroad </F>
10 Years From Now?"] 
  [Text] 
<H6>  Power Plants Hopelessly Outdated </H6>
  The condition of Estonia's energy economy and energy 
production became somewhat obscured and aggravated after Estonia 
became independent. If most of the basic equipment, materials, 
fuels and know-how are obtained at world-market prices, then 
production (electric energy) is being sold below world market 
prices, judging by the talk about the overall poverty of the 
population. 
  Consumption of electricity is bound to go up in Estonia, as 
general economic development continues. It is possible to 
sustain this consumption with production from two big power 
plants. The currently operating power plants Eesti Elektrijaam 
[Estonian Electric Plant] and Balti Elektrijaam [Baltic Electric 
Plant] are hopelessly outdated. This has been confirmed by 
management team members of these plants, and proven by the study 
titled 'Analysis and Directions for the Development of Estonia's 
Energy Sector' conducted by the Development Bureau for 
Energetics. It is high time to start thinking about renovating 
or replacing these power plants, if our planning calls for 
meeting all of Estonia's energy needs domestically. 
<H5>  Colossal Sums Necessary for Renovation </H5>
  Amounts required for renovation, not to mention those 
required for replacement, run into billions of kroons. Anatoli 
Paal, director of the Baltic Power Plant has said (see T. 
Ojala's article 'Baltic Power Plant Is Fit For a Museum' in 
aRIPaEV, November 22, 1993) that bringing the 
capacity 
to generate one-kilowatt up to contemporary standards would cost 
$700. The projected capacity of the Baltic Power Plant, at which 
the equipment would work at its most economical level, is 1,435 
MW. Thus, the amount required for a complete overhaul at this 
plant is $1,005.5 million or 14 billion kroons at the current 
exchange rates. 
  If overhaul is not started over the next few years, we will 
be faced with a situation at the turn of the century where 
electricity would have to be imported from the neighboring 
countries. Can Estonia come up with the amount required for 
overhauling the Baltic Power Plant. 
  The study mentioned recommends that electric energy 
production based on oil-shale be continued as long as possible, 
because that will enable us to put off investing in in new 
generating capacities. 
<H5>  Electricity From Coal or Oil Shale? </H5>
  Producing electricity out of oil shale has its drawbacks. 
The 
energy content of oil shale is three times smaller than that of 
coal. Consequently, for purposes of energy production, the price 
of one tonne of oil shale should also be three times lower than 
the corresponding price of coal on the world market. However, 
from the mining point of view, this difference is not 
three-fold. In fact, there is no difference. 
  Should Estonia still plan to produce its electricity largely 
out of oil shale 10 years from now, it could do so only if oil 
shale miners did not demand the same wage as coal miners, or if 
tax payers picked up the wage difference in the form of state 
subsidies. 
<H5>  Low Cost of Electricity Makes Consumer Smug </H5>
  It is the job of the state to set down the rules of the 
game, 
and that also applies to the area of energy. It seems strange 
however that, in setting down the rules, the state should 
deliberately put the enterprise it owns in a difficult 
situation. If, in the world of commerce, those buying in 
quantities get their merchandise cheaper than retail customers 
then, in energy sales, for some unknown reason, things work the 
other way around. 
  This could not be explained by government attempts to help 
those struggling because, ultimately, the higher cost of 
electricity to industrial enterprises is paid for by the 
consumer. 
  The low price of electricity is conducive to consumer 
smugness and to taking advantage of the situation. 
  The most curious example comes from the small islands, where 
electricity is produced by diesel generators. The production of 
energy in the islands is significantly more costly than it is on 
mainland. In accordance with government resolutions, however, 
users on these islands pay the same rates as people on mainland. 
If some mainlander should decide to use electricity for heat, 
because it is cheaper and more convenient to use than other 
sources of heat, the state's interests are not significantly 
harmed, whereas the same behavior by someone on a small island 
would the same damage tens of times over. 

