Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, February 10 (KCNA) -- The national 
symposium marking the 20th anniversary of the proclamation of 
the programme for modelling the whole society on the chuche idea 
which opened here on February 8 closed Wednesday. 
  Speeches were made on the 8th and 9th by twenty persons 
including corresponding member of the academy, Prof. and Dr. Kim 
Chol-sik, first vice-president of the Academy of Social 
Sciences; Prof. Chong Tong-uk, president of the University of 
International Affairs; Choe Yong-kun, secretary of the North 
Hwanghae provincial committee of the Workers' Party of Korea; 
Prof. Yi Su-kun, Vice-president of Kim Il-song Higher Party 
School; Tong Kun-hun, first deputy curator of the Korean 
Revolution Museum; Prof. and Dr. Ho Yong-se, vice- president of 
the Political University of the Ministry of Public Security; 
Choe Yong-hwa, first vice-chairman of the Central Committee of 
the General Federation of the Unions of Literature and Art of 
Korea; Prof. and Dr. Yi Nung-hun, vice-president of Kim Il-song 
Political University; and Dr. Yi Sang-kol, deputy general 
director and chief editor of the Workers' Party of Korea 
publishing house. 
  The speakers profoundly explained the wise leadership and 
feats of the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il, who has put 
forward unique policies and vigorously guided the efforts for 
implementing the programme for modelling the whole society on 
the chuche idea with distinguished intelligence and outstanding 
ideological and theoretical activities. 
  They fully proved that it is a definite guarantee of the 
victory in the revolution and construction in our age to 
thoroughly embody the revolutionary idea of the dear leader 
which was systematized in an integral way with the revolutionary 
outlook on the leader as its foundation, putting the popular 
masses in the centre. 
  They said the Korean people have foiled the malicious 
challenge of the imperialists and the reactionaries and defended 
and further glorified Korean-style socialism centred on the 
popular masses, closely united around the party and the leader, 
true to the idea and guidance of the dear leader, who is taking 
the lead in the cause of modelling the whole society on the 
chuche idea. 
  They stressed that remaining faithful to the idea and 
guidance of the dear leader is the decisive guarantee for 
triumphantly advancing the popular masses' cause of 
independence, the cause of socialism. 
  A letter to Comrade Kim Chong-il was adopted at the 
symposium. 

