Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Miriam Ortiz; from the "24 Hours Newscast"] </F>
  [Text] The defense minister and the Colombian Air Force 
commander have decided to provide an explanation concerning the 
decision to shoot down airplanes which violate Colombian 
airspace. 
  Let us investigate when an airplane may be shot down and 
what 
attitude Air Force pilots must assume, according to the Aviation 
Routes and Procedures Manual. 
  The procedure begins once the airplane is detected by any 
one 
of four military radars located at San Andres, Guajira, 
Araracuara, or Leticia. Normally these planes are tracked from 
the United States by U.S. AWACS airplanes, which later give the 
information to the Colombian radar stations. Then, this signal, 
which is simultaneously received at the National Defense 
Military Headquarters in Bogota, is analyzed. This is where 
they verify if the airplane is legally in transit. If this is 
not the case, they order the closest air base to send A-37, 
Kfir, Mirage, OB-10, or Tucano fighter planes to intercept it. 
  When radio communication is not possible, the intercepting 
aircraft must use the following visual signals: First, move from 
side to side and turn its navigation lights on and off to warn 
the airplane it has been intercepted. Second, abruptly move away 
from the intercepted airplane, making a 90-degree turn upwards 
to tell it to continue. Third, lower the landing gear leaving 
the landing lights on. Then raise the landing gear to notify 
the airplane it must land. Fourth, repeatedly turn all lights on 
and off. If the airplane does not respond it is shot down 
immediately. 
  This norm will be enforced in approximately 45 days, after 
the Civil Aeronautics Board notifies all airplane companies. 
  [Begin recording] 
  Ortiz: General [Alfonso Abondano, Commander of the 
Colombian Air Force], how can you guarantee the safety of the 
pilots who will combat these drug traffickers, taking into 
account that most of the pilots working for drug traffickers 
have worked for the Air Force or have been Air Force pilots? 
  Abondano: We locate the airplanes through the Air 
Defense's Military Center. Once intercepted, our pilots cannot 
say they do not have the airplane in sight. [end recording] 
  According to the defense minister this decision was adopted 
because approximately 600 clandestine airplanes fly over 
Colombian territory each year. 

