BFN 

<F P=106> [Third in series of reports entitled "Sights and Sounds of </F>
Chinese Prisons" by staff reporter Tao Guangxiong (7118 0342 
7160): "Foreigners Serving Sentences in Shanghai Prison"] 
  [Text] Shanghai, 22 May (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--"I have 
traveled to many countries during my life and I am interested in 
local conditions and customs. An idea about Beijing opera face 
makeup crossed my mind and I began to create innovative Chinese 
Beijing opera makeups. I love `beauty creation.'" These were 
the feelings of British prisoner Rockland Campbell which he 
wrote about when participating in the 11th Beauty Creation 
Exhibition at Shanghai City Prison. The "Beijing opera facial 
makeup" he created featuring a high nose and blue eyes won 
second prize for its special characteristics. 
  Campbell could have received more art inspiration from the 
rich Chinese culture but he has to stay behind bars in China 
because of drug trafficking offences. Also serving prison terms 
with him in the Shanghai City Prison are British, American, 
German, Pakistani, and Burmese prisoners, 10 in all. They were 
punished by Chinese law either for drug trafficking or dealing 
in counterfeit money. 
  With the agreement of the prisoners, the prison authorities 
allowed this reporter to interview these "adventurers." Outside 
their cells, some were reading books, others were studying 
Chinese, and yet others were playing the electronic piano. They 
enjoy more freedom than Chinese prisoners. They do not have to 
wear a uniform, their hair styles are not restricted, they do 
not have to take part in physical labor, and they can go out 
[chu qi 0427 0637] at any time, if they want to. 
  Another British prisoner is Robert Davis. He told this 
reporter in bad Chinese that he was getting on very well there 
and that he was accustomed to the food and drink in prison. In 
the past he did not understand Chinese and he only began 
studying Chinese after he was sent to prison. There are written 
Chinese language materials as well as video and audio equipment. 
The instructor is very good and is ready to solve any problem. 
He bought a guitar and has taught himself to play. 
  The prison authorities said that the needs of foreign 
prisoners were basically met. For example, Mark Bebbo is a 
vegetarian. The prison provides him with food made of beans or 
eggs, butter, and fruit. The prison respects his religious 
beliefs but does not allow him to affect the religious 
activities of others. All foreign prisoners are required to 
study prison rules and discipline and Chinese law. 
  Robert Davis said that he did not understand Chinese law in 
the past but now he understands. This reporter asked him if he 
knew that the prison had been built by the British. He said: 
"I know but I do not thank them." 
  Rockland Campbell said Chinese prisons are not like foreign 
prisons, which are full of violence. He asked this reporter to 
tell his parents that he was getting on very well and hoped they 
would rest assured. 
  Foreign prisoners in China can meet with officials from 
their 
embassies in China once a month. The prison authorities said 
that so far they had not received any protest or complaint from 
foreign embassies or consulates about the lives of foreign 
prisoners in the prison. Robert Davis' parents came to see him 
in September 1992 to celebrate his birthday. The prison 
prepared a big cake for him. Davis' mother said: I have eaten 
many cakes but this one is the best. 
  The Shanghai City Prison provides the foreign prisoners with 
a copy of CHINA DAILY, a television set, and some foreign 
language books and magazines. These foreign prisoners have 
formed their own world in the prison but when there are sports 
competitions, they play tug-of-war with Chinese prisoners and 
form a "Chinese-foreign combined football team" against the 
prison's "officers' football team." Foreign prisoners who have 
performed well in serving their prison terms may have their 
terms shortened. A Pakistani prisoner named Harrid had his 
prison term reduced and consideration is also being given to 
reducing Mark Bebbo's sentence. 
  In the past, Shanghai City Prison has detained and 
transformed more than 350 foreign or stateless prisoners from 
some 30 countries. One of those in charge of the prison said 
that the prison reflects the dignity of Chinese law to foreign 
prisoners; on the other hand, it also gives expression to 
humanitarianism. China opens its gate to the world, not to 
crime. 

