BFN 

  [Text] During his investigation and study in Hegang city on 
8 June, Yue Qifeng, secretary of the provincial party committee, 
pointed out: The 16 foreign trade outlets which our province 
has built along Heilong Jiang are resources with tremendous 
potential. We should fully use these resources and turn them 
into multi-purpose ports linking up the waterways to form 
river-sea coordinated transport in an effort to bring along 
economic development in areas along Heilong Jiang. 
  Yue Qifeng said to leaders of Hegang city: Heilongjiang has 
treasures everywhere. The crucial issue involved is to pick up 
these treasures and turn them into economic advantages. He 
said: Hegang city is an industrial city with natural resources. 
To solve the current economic difficulties, first of all, we 
must rely on the efforts of the whole society. It is not 
realistic to rely only on the efforts of state-owned 
enterprises. We must comprehensively mobilize the endeavors of 
various economic sectors, such as collective enterprises, 
individual enterprises, joint-investment enterprises, 
neighborhood enterprises, and township enterprises, and let all 
levels and all forms of enterprises join efforts. 
  During his inspection tour to Nanshan Plywood Plant in 
Hegang 
city, Yue Qifeng said: Leading departments at all levels should 
study why this neighborhood enterprise can produce an output 
value of tens of million yuan with only several hundred workers, 
and why state-owned enterprises with several thousand workers 
can only produce an output value of several million yuan. This 
requires leaders at all levels not to keep their eyes only on 
large items. It is necessary to use the limited amount of funds 
in places where they are needed most. We must develop practical 
economic forms in line with the principle of making small 
investment but giving high yield and quick accumulation. We 
must prevent state-owned large enterprises from taking new 
burdens before changing the old mechanisms. Coal enterprises 
should free themselves from the shackle of the old production 
and management forms, broaden the train of thought, decontrol 
and invigorate business, develop diversified undertakings, and 
attain the goal of using sideline production to support the main 
business and small undertakings to support large ones. It is 
necessary to promote the principle of making all mines and 
mining units stand on their own feet and strive to turn all of 
them into a success. We should first support the well-developed 
enterprises before taking profits from them, draw profits from 
them properly, and must not drain the pond to get all the fish. 
  Yue Qifeng pointed out: The rate of changing the operational 
mechanisms of state-owned enterprises must now be quick. 
However, we must guard against the practice of formalism of 
putting on new shoes but retracing the beaten track and prevent 
the state-owned assets from being swallowed by the big common 
bowl. 
  He said: The most effective way to prevent the loss of 
state-owned assets is to turn them into state-owned people-run 
or people-owned and people-run enterprises. 
  Yue Qifeng stressed repeatedly: We must emancipate the mind 
in line with reality, and must not fear of negating ourselves. 
It is necessary to conscientiously investigate and find out the 
main reasons for restricting economic development. Only thus, 
can we strengthen the sense of crisis, urgency, and 
responsibility. 
  Ma Guoliang, deputy secretary of the provincial party 
committee, and Wang Xianmin, secretary general of the provincial 
party committee, also participated in the investigation and 
study. Ma Guoliang also worked out plans for implementing the 
guideline of Yue Qifeng's speech. 

