BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on news conference by Colombian President Cesar </F>
Gaviria prior to his departure for Venezuela with unidentified 
reporters on 6 May; place not given; from the "Caracol's 0600 to 
0900" newscast--recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Announcer] Santa Fe de Bogota -- President 
Cesar Gaviria Trujillo has rejected the legalization of the 
possession of drugs for personal consumption as ruled by the 
Constitutional Court. He said that the decision may encourage 
drug addiction. Criticizing the top constitutional court's 
ruling on the free development of personality [desarrollo de la 
peronalidad], he said that if this view is to become the norm, 
it should been done through a decision by the Congress of the 
Republic or by referendum. Gaviria added that [words 
indistinct] implementing this rule, one should study the 
possibility of amending the Constitution to limit the 
individual's right to development of the personality. This is 
what the president said, noting that he respects the Court 
ruling but does not agree with it. 
  [Gaviria] The government will abide by but does not agree 
with the Constitutional Court's ruling to legalize drug 
consumption for various reasons. First, the government believes 
this will encourage an increase in drug consumption in Colombia, 
thus seriously undermining the tranquillity of the people and 
family development. It could also significantly increase crime 
and violence. The government does not believe that this issue 
should become an aspect of the development of the personality of 
the individual. Carrying that view to an extreme may have 
exceedingly undesirable effects, so I hope the Court will 
explain this in the ruling to be announced to Colombians in a 
few days. The Constitutional Court must clarify a number of 
aspects so Congress can at least regulate them in a statutory 
law. This must not turn into an absolute right, because that 
would lead us to absurd decisions. The Court must make it clear 
that the use of narcotics by minors and adolescents must be 
limited or banned at the very least. Also, the Congress--or the 
Court--should be able to avoid or limit consumption in schools 
and universities. I would also say that the Court should make 
it clear....[pauses] It should at least give Congress the 
option of banning drug consumption in public places. If 
possible, it must also ban drug consumption by women who are 
pregnant or nursing. The free development of personality ought 
not lead to babies with birth defects caused by drug 
consumption. We must not say that we cannot control such things 
on account of the principle of development of the personality. 
That would lead to absurd situations. 
  It must also be clear that drivers or pilots cannot take 
drugs. No one could live in this society if that were allowed on 
the grounds that it is personality development. As president, I 
would say that free development of the personality cannot mean 
that Colombia is unable to campaign against drug abuse because 
that would hamper the development of the personality. We would 
become a society that regards drug consumption as desirable and 
advisable. We may almost have to encourage it, something that 
greatly disturbs the government. The government has taken 
other considerations into account. True, some U.S. states and 
European countries have legalized drug consumption. Those 
decisions, however, have had controversial results. I 
understand that consumption has increased in the countries where 
drugs have been legalized. 
  Aside from that, the legislatures have made those decisions 
following a very broad public debate. I do not know if 
countries or states allow the personal use of hard drugs like 
cocaine. I do not have that information. I have not heard of 
that because the extremely high level of addiction makes us 
quickly realize that it is not a matter of personality 
development but of a simple addiction or illness. 
  If we turn this into a personality development issue, that 
means we cannot force people to undergo treatment. I do not 
know of any country in the world that has reached that extreme. 
  I return to the same point. I think the ruling must allow 
Congress to pass a law governing all these aspects. I would 
also say that the countries that have taken these steps, as I 
said before, did so after a broad discussion and based on a 
political decision made by Congress or the citizens. I think 
that if this option were to be pursued, it would have to be 
discussed by Congress or made by decision of the citizens in a 
popular consultation. 
  I would even understand if the Court stated that this cannot 
be considered an offense or violation, but Congress' authority 
to make decisions of this type in a governing law must be 
preserved. If that is not possible, I hope the Court's ruling 
will allow Congress to establish restrictions on all I have 
said. I would go even further. I think this possibility must be 
examined in case it is decided that the state will be unable to 
establish those restrictions. We would then have to think about 
amending the Constitution to place limitations on the right of 
autonomy and the development of personality. We could even ask 
citizens in the near future if they agree with a change of this 
nature in the Constitution by way of a referendum. 
  As time goes by, I hope to say more about this issue. I 
really hope the Constitutionality Court will clearly establish 
that no abuses will be committed and that limitations will be 
established within this decision, with which the government does 
not agree. As I said before, I, as head of the government, will 
abide by this ruling as we are mandated to abide by the 
Constitutionality Court's rulings. I believe, however, that the 
promulgation of this law as the development of individual 
personality could have serious and dangerous implications for 
Colombian society. [Words indistinct] I hope the Court's ruling 
at least allows Congress, through a governing law, to place a 
series of limitations on that decision by the Court. Otherwise, 
there may be very grave implications for this society. 
  [Reporter] Mr. President, will the government take immediate 
action to overcome this impasse, taking advantage of the state 
of internal disturbance? 
  [Gaviria] No, no, no. We are not going to resort to the 
state of internal disturbance to respond to a Constitutionality 
Court ruling. We are forced to wait for the Constitutionality 
Court's ruling to analyze its scope and implications. Only then 
will we decide what to do regarding limitations on said 
decision. We hope we can resort to Congress to establish 
something that the Constitution and the very Court rulings have 
established; that is, that the law have reasonable limitations. 
We are living in a state of law, so it must be possible. I 
cannot imagine the Court granting the absolute right to consume 
drugs in Colombia. This could also lead to unreasonable 
situations. 
  If no limitations are set, it is possible that suicide and 
even abortion could be legalized. No! Personality development 
has clear limitations. In Colombia and all civilized societies, 
there are limitations. The Court has declared legal mayoral 
decrees establishing limitations on alcohol consumption, so I 
cannot understand how the Court deems it reasonable to establish 
limitations on alcohol consumption but not on drug consumption. 
I go back to another absurd point, which I hope the 
Constitutional Court ruling will clarify. This may mean that 
medical prescriptions for drug consumption cannot be written 
because they limit the development of personality, and people 
have the right to consume any drug with any number of effects. 
This is incorrect, and I hope the Court clearly establishes the 
capacity and right of society to set limitations in this 
instance. 
  [Reporter] Mr. President, could the Court ruling at some 
point support the prosecutor general's proposal to legalize 
drugs and [words indistinct] international level? 
  [Gaviria] I cannot answer that question. You would have to 
ask the prosecutor general directly. You would have to ask him 
if the elimination of sanctions on drug use is part of his 
proposal or if he believes the legalization issues must be 
studied further. Only the prosecutor general can answer those 
questions. 
  [Reporter] The U.S. Government protested Colombia's decision 
on the media. Is there any official statement on that yet? 
  [Gaviria] No, I think it is irrelevant. It is a domestic 
matter. I was not talking about international consequences, and 
I am not going to. I think we must discuss this here and now as 
a domestic issue; as a Colombian issue. 
  Again, I sincerely appeal to the sensibility and maturity of 
the Constitutionality Court and hope it does not make this an 
absolute right. If they do, it could lead us to truly absurd 
and dangerous situations. I hope we do not go so far as to call 
this an absolute right of an individual in the development of 
his or her personality that allows no limitations. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Announcer] That was President Cesar Gaviria before leaving 
for Caracas, Venezuela for a first visit with President Rafael 
Caldera. This is the president's first meeting after being 
elected OAS secretary general. 

