Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the Channel Africa report] </F>
  [Text] South African State President F.W. de Klerk has 
welcomed an increased foreign presence in the country for the 
elections due to be held in just more than three months' time. 
Mr. de Klerk was speaking in Pretoria after meeting with 
visiting Irish Foreign Minister Dick Spring. 
  [Begin De Klerk recording] It's great to be good friends 
again with Ireland. We, during our discussion, focused firstly 
on the process in South Africa, on the prospects of a free and 
fair election, the problem of violence -- what is being done 
about it, what can be done; on the negotiation process which has 
not been completed. As you know, some significant parties are 
not on board and we're trying to get them on board. Our meeting 
with Mr. Nelson Mandela will also focus on the state of 
negotiations. We also focused on the European Union's 
relationship to a new South Africa, the role it could play in 
ensuring that this first chapter of the new South Africa will be 
a very successful one; focused on how we could expand and the 
necessity for expansion of bilateral relationships in the sphere 
of trade and industry. I welcome the establishment of a 
cooperative organization between the private sector of Ireland 
and the private sector of South Africa. We welcome the 
establishment of full diplomatic relations. 
  By and large, may I say that we hope that also this visit 
will contribute towards good cooperation between us in South 
Africa, those in charge of the election -- the Independent 
Electoral Commission, the government and other parties, and the 
teams of international observers that we expect here to be 
vastly expanded as we come nearer to the election. We welcome 
the international observation which will take place. It is 
important that international community should satisfy 
themselves, and it is also important that their presence can 
make a contribution to ensure that there won't be intimidation 
because that poses the biggest threat to the coming elections. 
[end recording] 

