Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Mikhail Fedotov, Russian ambassador to </F>
UNESCO, by special correspondent Yuliya Rakhayeva; place and 
date not given: "Our Man in UNESCO"] 
  [Text] Mikhail Fedotov is an amazing person. No, honestly. 
In his youth--imagine--he was a Framist and shocked decent 
citizens (during the second half of the sixties there was a 
well-known literary group called "Fram" which debated with the 
renowned SMOG. Then he changed his mind and returned to family 
tradition: Fedotov is a fourth-generation lawyer. 
  I met him in the autumn of 1990 in the Moscow City Court 
where the USSR Union of Writers was trying to bring back the 
journal ZNAMYA which had left it and been set afloat. At that 
time Fedotov was representing the Ministry of the Press, which 
"criminally" registered the free journal and therefore was a 
codefendant in the case. At that time he was already deputy 
minister of the press. Somewhat later he became the director of 
RAIS (Russian Intellectual Property Agency) which had been 
formed out of the infamous VAAP [All-Russian Copyright Agency] 
of the KGB. And then he became the minister of the press of 
Russia. 
  Everyone recalls the president's Edict No. 1400. But 
few know that by Edict No. 1403 the former press minister 
Mikhail Fedotov was appointed Russia's ambassador to UNESCO. 
  Our special correspondent Yuliya Rakhayeva speaks with 
him. 
  [Rakhayeva] Mikhail Aleksandrovich, whose brilliant mind 
came 
up with the idea of making you Russia's ambassador to UNESCO and 
did you immediately have a positive response to this? 
  [Fedotov] As far as I know, this decision was suggested by 
the president himself--in any case I found out about it from 
him. I agreed at once--in the first place, I am not accustomed 
to arguing with the president; I have made it a rule: If I am 
working on the president's team, I will not argue with him. And 
in the second place, I understood that I could be useful here. 
And, finally, I wanted to get back to the work from which I was 
taken away after a half year. I worked in RAIS [Russian 
Intellectual Property Agency] for a half year and was pulled up 
like a turnip, after which I worked for a half year at the press 
ministry--and again I was transferred. I came here with the 
attitude that I would take it seriously and stay for a long 
time. In Moscow I was advised not to take it too seriously: They 
said UNESCO is a large, complicated organization, no matter what 
you do you will not figure it out, and therefore you should look 
at this as.... 
  [Rakhayeva] Honorable exile? 
  [Fedotov] More of a pleasant pastime. Well, even if it is an 
honorable exile--it is v-very honorable because of its high 
rank. But pleasant inactivity was not for me. There are machines 
created for entertainment and there are those that are created 
for work. And I am a machine created for work. 
  [Rakhayeva] The same workaholic, laboraholic of the kind 
that 
seemed to have completely disappeared from Russia. 
  [Fedotov] They are still around, I know quite a few people 
like that. My work day here ends at 0200 in the morning: I have 
to handle an immense quantity of business which has accumulated 
here, the collective of the permanent mission is not large, and 
UNESCO is indeed an immense organization and it takes a great 
deal of time and effort to go into all the details and try to 
find some new approaches of my own. Moreover, I am working on 
improving my English. As one UN bureaucrat told me, a very 
interesting result obtains when the position of ambassador is 
occupied not by a person from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
but by a nomenklatura appointee and not by a specialist in the 
area of foreign policy but a person with completely different 
baggage of knowledge, experience, and habits. 
  [Rakhayeva] But you, I think, have always been a person with 
different baggage, different from that of your predecessors. In 
brief, you have always been a rare bird.... 
  [Fedotov] True. And I am convinced that rare birds must join 
together in flocks and grow sturdy beaks and strong talons. 
  I came to work, and it was with a fresh view since I am a 
neophyte, a nonprofessional. Incidentally, I am not yet the 
ambassador but a permanent representative and no diplomatic rank 
has been conferred on me yet. I cannot say that this offends my 
pride in any way, but in UNESCO everything has significance, the 
more so since all my colleagues, the representatives of other 
countries, have the rank of ambassador. 
  [Rakhayeva] How do you explain this? 
  [Fedotov] Apparently I must first gain experience. Rank used 
to be conferred on political appointees immediately. 
  [Rakhayeva] Well, yes, they accumulated experience before 
that, in party or other similar work. 
  [Fedotov] And since I did not have that experience and times 
have changed as well, apparently I will have to wait. But that 
is all trivial. The fact is that I actually did come with 
certain ideas which had originated previously. 
  [Rakhayeva] Prior to when you were offered this post? 
  [Fedotov] Of course, it is simply that the same ideas may be 
realized by different means. And, for example, on the first day 
when I handed the general director of UNESCO my credentials, I 
expressed certain proposals in my greeting speech. One of the 
things I proposed was to consider the question of having the 
world community in 1997 celebrate the 500th anniversary of the 
code of law of Ivan III--the first all-Russian legal document. 
  [Rakhayeva] So do questions of law fall under UNESCO's 
jurisdiction as well? 
  [Fedotov] Well, in the first place, UNESCO as an 
intergovernmental organization of the UN system is entirely 
constructed on international law. Plus regulation of activity in 
the sphere of education, science, and culture, plus copyright 
law, protection of cultural assets under conditions of armed 
conflicts, restitution for cultural assets.... 
  [Rakhayeva] Yes, that is perhaps the most painful issue now. 
  [Fedotov] It is very painful, but there are also many 
others. 
Thus I suggested wording the question of the code of laws of 
Ivan III like this: "The 500th anniversary of the all-Russian 
rule-of-law statehood." 
  [Rakhayeva] Perhaps it would be more correct to say "attempt 
at rule-of-law statehood"? Did it really exist de facto in any 
stage of Russian statehood? 
  [Fedotov] When we celebrate a certain date we usually assume 
that there have been many ebbs and flows between it and the 
present day, which is natural. But as distinct from America, we 
have the possibility of counting all-Russian rule-of-law 
statehood almost back to the end of the 15th century. Of course, 
there are peoples with even more ancient legal canons. 
  [Rakhayeva] And with more durable ones that have become 
stronger with time since they were not always being uprooted 
like a turnip.... 
  [Fedotov] It seems to me that if this action goes as it 
should, it will serve as a reinforcement for today's Russian 
rule-of-law statehood. We will be able to look at our own roots, 
at our own history. And see that many of our laws that existed 
before 1917 have a right to be called some of the best in 
Europe. But we have gotten way off the subject! 
  [Rakhayeva] And all because Russia's ambassador to UNESCO 
became a doctor of legal sciences. 
  [Fedotov] Well, UNESCO got lucky with lawyers. For example, 
from 1965 through 1971 the ambassador to UNESCO was Professor of 
International Law Sobakin. But that was during the Cold War 
period; it was a completely different organization and, 
naturally, a completely different Russian government. The Soviet 
Union participated actively in the politicization of UNESCO. Now 
it is Russia that is exerting all efforts to contribute to 
further depoliticization. Because UNESCO's objective is the 
intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind. 
  [Rakhayeva] Solidarity in spite of what separates us? In 
spite of our economic and political differences? 
  [Fedotov] The intellectual solidarity of all countries that 
are members of UNESCO in resolving global problems, for example, 
in genetic engineering--protection of the human genome. There 
are questions of molecular biology, study of the ocean, and so 
forth, with the exception of health protection, which is handled 
by the WHO [World Health Organization], and questions of 
electronic communications, which are handled by the 
International Telecommunications Union. The spheres of science, 
culture, education, and communications--these are our four 
pillars. Naturally, all these spheres require legal regulation, 
which is provided by two kinds of documents: conventions and 
recommendations. The convention is the stricter document, it 
must be followed. For example, the Universal Copyright 
Convention, which we joined in 1973. Or the convention on 
wetlands. There is a whole list of them. And they are mandatory 
for all who have signed them. And there are the recommendations, 
"On Legal Protection of the Translator's Rights," "On Protection 
of the Natural and Cultural Legacy on the National Plane," and 
so forth. They are not mandatory but only recommendations, but 
still they are coordinated with all so that nobody will be 
against them. I suggested to UNESCO General Director Federico 
Mayor the idea of model laws. I did not conceive it, but I am 
trying to introduce it into UNESCO. This is the scholarly vision 
of a law--the way scholars imagine it, on the basis of 
experience accumulated by legislation of the most diverse 
countries. The first stage is the study of legislation, the 
second--synthesis and analysis and, finally, the 
third--development of a unified text. 
  [Rakhayeva] That is, reducing the legislation of various 
countries to a common denominator? 
  [Fedotov] Yes, standardization is what it is. 
  [Rakhayeva] But in what areas can such a thing be allowed so 
that it does not look like intervention in internal affairs? 
  [Fedotov] In no case will it be intervention in internal 
affairs. UNESCO is a bee that flies to various countries and 
gathers pollen and then, here in Paris, it produces honey which 
feeds all countries that are UNESCO members. It is very 
important that the model law not be mandatory for any state. But 
any state that has decided to adopt, for example, a law on 
culture or on education or on the press or on archives or on 
protection of the human genome from all experiments conducted 
today in the area of genetic engineering, regardless of whether 
it is a large state with legal traditions or a small one that is 
just developing--they can come to UNESCO and take the text of 
the model law. 
  [Rakhayeva] That is, the task of the legislators from 
various 
countries becomes extremely simplified: While previously it was 
necessary for them to come up with their own laws in the 
necessary area, frequently quite contradictory ones, now they 
are offered a prepared model on a silver platter. 
  [Fedotov] Take for example the laws on the press that are in 
effect in the majority of CIS countries today. All of them were 
created on the basis of the Russian law. That is, the Union, and 
then Russian law. But since they were all written by the same 
people.... 
  [Rakhayeva] And we know who these people are: Baturin, 
Fedotov, Entin. 
  [Fedotov] Where did the similarity of laws come from? What 
did we do, impose our law on the legislators of the CIS 
countries? Nothing of the kind! It is simply that they took the 
model which was, in the first place, available, in the second 
place, comprehensible, and, in the third place, the one that 
would fit fairly smoothly into their legal system. The same 
thing is happening today with copyright legislation. If a law is 
good, why not take it as a model? But if Russia itself were to 
send out its laws--that would be intervention. And then out of a 
sense of contradictoriness there can arise the question: Why 
Russian, maybe Chinese is better? The model UNESCO law should 
synthesize all the best that exists in the Russian, Chinese, 
Turkish, American, and so forth--and we will obtain the 
quintessence of world experience. 
  [Rakhayeva] The problem of the older and younger brother 
will 
disappear. 
  [Fedotov] It is simply that the older brother will be all of 
humanity. There are very many spheres for application of the 
model laws. The next day after a meeting with UNESCO General 
Director Federico Mayor when I shared my ideas, he convened the 
board of directors and said: You call me too much of an optimist 
with regard to Russia, but it turns out that I was not enough of 
an optimist. In the first place, Russia has made its regular 
payment on its debts to the UNESCO budget and, in the second 
place, the Russian ambassador has given me three wonderful ideas. 
  [Rakhayeva] One of them was the model laws, and the other 
two? 
  [Fedotov] Let me emphasize once again that it was not I who 
thought of the model laws--they already exist in the UN system. 
For example, there is the model criminal code, in whose 
development our scholars participated immensely. The second idea 
is linked to questions of copyright. Since two organizations 
work with them within the framework of the UN system--UNESCO and 
WIPO [World Intellectual Property Organization]--I suggested to 
Mayor that we determine spheres of interaction so that there 
will be no unnecessary duplication. We must find our angle. 
First of all it includes collective measures for combating 
piracy. 
  [Rakhayeva] Familiar ideas of the former RAIS director.... 
  [Fedotov] I presented them at the 27th session of the 
general 
conference of UNESCO and received support from a number of 
delegations--German, Spanish, French, Lithuanian, and many 
others. What does combating piracy mean to us? As of today, 
publishing piracy and audio and film piracy have reached quite 
fantastic proportions. 
  [Rakhayeva] It is what they call in the criminal world 
"unbridled behavior." 
  [Fedotov] Piracy is directly related to tax evasion. 
According to my figures, the piracy business in Russia has a 
turnover of about $10 billion, including operations involving 
computer programs. But, does our state not need this money? I 
think we must join forces with other countries--after all, it is 
impossible to fight piracy separately in Russia alone! 
  [Rakhayeva] No, why not? After all, we can drop the "Iron 
Curtain" again and solve all our problems at once! 
  [Fedotov] Except for one--that would mean death to Russia. 
And it is precisely collective measures for fighting piracy that 
could bring significant investments to Russia and open up the 
treasure house of world culture to it. Because as of today we 
can either obtain them for very large amounts of money or steal 
them. And since we do not have large amounts of money, the 
question is even simpler: They are either stolen or bought on 
the cheap. 
  [Rakhayeva] Or there are certain philanthropic, individual, 
discrete actions.... 
  [Fedotov] Within the framework of the collective fight 
against piracy we want to implement the project "cultural 
credit." After creating under the aegis of UNESCO a 
philanthropic organization that will offer users in Russia 
(cable television networks, video salons, and so forth), for 
example, video films at subsidized prices and licenses for them. 
I hope to make it clear to Western copyright holders that it is 
better to get a dollar than to get nothing. 
  [Rakhayeva] But it will probably be necessary to explain to 
the Russian entrepreneur as well that it is better to pay this 
dollar than to put your entire enterprise at risk. 
  [Fedotov] Unfortunately this risk is not very great today: 
The law exists but not the practice. 
  [Rakhayeva] Everything seems to be clear about the second 
idea. And your third idea? 
  [Fedotov] When I first arrived here I asked my coworkers if 
there were a document according to which the money of private 
individuals and organizations that materially support UNESCO 
projects was exempt from taxes. I was told that there was not; 
somehow nobody had ever thought of it. But, after all, any 
philanthropic fund stays alive precisely because of this! It was 
more difficult to push this idea through but I, a neophyte, was 
helped by workers of the permanent mission, among whom there are 
remarkable professionals. I will be sorry if these people are 
called back after their period of residence is over. 
  [Rakhayeva] You speak of this as though you had no say in 
it: 
God giveth and God taketh away. 
  [Fedotov] I cannot say that absolutely nothing depends on 
me, 
but a great deal still depends on the leadership of the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs. Thus we prepared and sent through the 
general conference a resolution which appealed to UNESCO members 
to take measures within the limits of their authority to 
encourage nongovernmental organizations and private individuals 
that finance UNESCO projects. I immediately informed the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia of this and prepared the 
corresponding draft of a presidential edict. In a discussion 
with Federico Mayor I said that it would be good if, following 
Russia, similar laws were adopted by other countries, and he 
answered that everything possible would be done to turn this 
snowflake into an immense snowball (incidentally, Mr. Mayor was 
recently awarded the Russian Order of Friendship of Peoples). 
And this would mean that throughout the world we could collect 
considerably more money for financing UNESCO projects. There is 
very little money now, UNESCO is a poor organization. 
  [Rakhayeva] Especially after the United States withdrew with 
such pomp. 
  [Fedotov] In the United States as well as in Great Britain 
now more and more people are advising in favor of returning. And 
with them a large amount of money will return as well. It is 
important to use this money wisely and not to support 
international bureaucrats. There are problems that affect 
absolutely everyone, for example, ecology. Here it is not enough 
to act separately; after all, everything in nature is 
interconnected. And do you know that UNESCO has declared 1995 a 
year of tolerance? The official Russian translation is the year 
of patience, which I object to. They tell me that tolerance is 
incomprehensible. I suggest that we should explain it. Tolerance 
is breaking away from fundamentalism. Any kind--religious, 
party, ethnic. And the acceptance of various viewpoints. Closer 
to this is the term "ecumenism." Within the framework of the 
year of tolerance there is the hope of organizing in Moscow a 
mega-concert of the remarkable French composer and musician 
Jean-Michel Jarre, who is a goodwill ambassador to UNESCO. Of 
course this entails immense difficulties because his concerts 
attract not thousands but sometimes millions of people. These 
are concerts of the streets and squares. The most interesting 
thing is that at Jean-Michel Jarre's concerts there are never 
any excesses, as distinct from the concerts of the majority of 
rock and pop musicians. His music calms you down, it is 
tolerant. And this is simply necessary in Russia now. 
  [Rakhayeva] Yes, even more than at any other time.... 
  [Fedotov] Another idea that is linked to the year of 
tolerance is the Star of Tolerance. 
  [Rakhayeva] This is apparently a title that will be 
conferred 
on a person with particular qualities. 
  [Fedotov] Not at all. It is a satellite that will be 
launched 
into lower orbit in the form of two hollow spheres made of 
light-reflecting material. And one will rotate around the other. 
They have to be large enough and at the same time light. They 
will be easy to see from various points. Imagine a young man 
strolling with his girlfriend and above them in the sky is the 
Star of Tolerance! And there will be two spheres--because there 
are two different viewpoints--two positions. And their 
unification symbolizes the idea of tolerance. 
  [Rakhayeva] Only, perhaps, not unification but peaceful 
coexistence? 
  [Fedotov] Perhaps you are right. Installed in one of these 
satellites will be a radio transmitter which sends signals to 
earth. It will be possible to receive them even with the tiniest 
of receivers installed in a badge, a pendant, or an earring, 
which will flicker to the tempo of some melody. 
  [Rakhayeva] Fantasy! 
  [Fedotov] And that is still not all. Using this radio 
transmitter it will be possible to control the lighting of 
cultural facilities. To this one might say: The rich, they say, 
have their own quirks. But for Russia this is a very important 
product because we can launch a satellite, using one of the 
missiles to be destroyed. Instead of being cut up into scrap 
metal the missile will be launched with the Star of Tolerance! 
This, of course, will require negotiations with the United 
States, since this possibility was not envisioned by the 
agreement on the reduction of nuclear weapons. I hope they will 
understand. Because this is good and beautiful. And when each 
person sees the badge on another person, he will understand that 
that person is an advocate of tolerance, patience for other 
viewpoints. These are the kinds of big ideas and projects we 
have. But there is also an immense number of small projects. For 
example, the creation in Nizhniy Novgorod under the aegis of 
UNESCO of a school that combines secondary education with 
farming skills. 
  [Rakhayeva] And what stage is that project in now? 
  [Fedotov] It is being developed and documentation is being 
prepared. There is a plan for the reconstruction of the Bolshoy 
Theater. 
  [Rakhayeva] And is it too much to repair the large hall of 
the conservatory? 
  [Fedotov] For now it is, but the Bolshoy Theater, the 
Russian 
State Library, the former Lenin Library, and the 
Hermitage--these are what UNESCO has taken on. There are many 
projects related to science. For example, the Moscow Engineering 
University under UNESCO's aegis, the creation of faculties and 
schools. 
  [Rakhayeva] Mikhail Aleksandrovich, did I understand you 
correctly when you said that you came to UNESCO not to do good 
for humankind as a whole but in order to do at least something 
for Russia? 
  [Fedotov] That is a rhetorical question. I came so that 
cooperation with UNESCO would bring greater advantage to Russia. 
And if it is good for Russia, it will be good for humankind as 
well. 
  [Rakhayeva] But is there any guarantee that by making 
contributions Russia will receive even an equal amount in 
return? Crudely: yes or no? 
  [Fedotov] In financial terms? Of course there is no such 
guarantee. For example, Russia contributes much more to the UN 
than to UNESCO. And what does it receive besides the opportunity 
to participate in the peacemaking forces? But this is how we 
participate in improving the world order. Through UNESCO we 
achieve concrete goals in the sphere of global humanitarian 
problems. True, UNESCO does not have the money required, for 
example, to reconstruct the Bolshoy Theater, but there is a 
possibility of attracting the necessary funds. 
  [Rakhayeva] Tell me, please, about the mechanism for 
attracting funds--this is not done through personal contacts. 
  [Fedotov] Well, why not, it is done through personal 
contacts 
also. But UNESCO has its own permanent contacts. The 
organization enlists high-class specialists, conducts expert 
appraisals, and renders intellectual assistance. And if the idea 
of exemption from taxes goes through it will be even simpler to 
attract money. I have already compared UNESCO with a bee. Once 
again: If the UN is the reason and power of our planet, UNESCO 
is its soul and conscience, and also its intellect--scientific, 
cultural, and ideological. 
  [Rakhayeva] And UNESCO is helping to acquire this intellect? 
  [Fedotov] Rather, to concentrate and improve it. UNESCO has 
a 
multitude of projects in this area. Large ones and some that are 
not so large. For example, financing a journal such as 
INOSTRANNAYA LITERATURA. And this, as you understand, is not 
all. The Russian Academy of Sciences received $300,000 for 
subscribing to scientific journals and trainees from the former 
Lenin Library are being sent for training to France, Germany, 
and Great Britain at UNESCO's expense. And so forth. So if you 
put it all together, this covers the sum of member 
contributions. The more so since so far Russia is in debt $60 
million. We are gradually paying it off; I do not think that 
Russia has the right to be a debtor. 
  [Rakhayeva] As a great power--and also as a country where 
today everything is one big unexpected event. 
  [Fedotov] It is simply necessary to be able to collect 
money. 
I think we have an absolutely incorrect tax policy; we must 
lower taxes and stiffen liability for paying them. 
  [Rakhayeva] And is it true that the television program 
"Russian Universities" comes out under the aegis of UNESCO? 
  [Fedotov] It does and it will continue to. I hope very much 
that whatever changes may take place with television Channel 4, 
this program will remain. Because it means access to culture, 
science, education, and the spiritual world. And if all we do is 
advertise "sneakers" we will lose this and everything else as 
well. 

