Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The National Legal Amazon Council met for the first 
time in Planalto Palace today. The council members discussed the 
prospects of sustainable development in the region. President 
Itamar Franco opened the council's meeting. 
  All the ministers and governors of the Amazon region are 
members of the council that was created in September. The 
council is an advisory organization of the president and its 
activities are linked to the Environment and Legal Amazon Region 
Ministry, which is in charge of all actions by the federal 
government in the Amazon region. The council is responsible for 
drawing up an integrated policy for the Amazon region and for 
articulating joint measures with the states and municipalities 
for sustainable development, for improving the standard of 
living of the Amazon population, for the protection of the 
environment, and for the preservation of Indian culture. 
  In his speech, President Itamar Franco said the Brazilian 
people will not yield their sovereignty over the Amazon and that 
it is in the interest of all to resolve the problems once and 
for all in a balanced manner: 
  [Begin recording] Responsibility regarding the 
Amazon region means seeking a policy for sustainable 
development, and for the improvement of the standard of living 
of its more than 17 million people. This responsibility demands 
a clear commitment to the protection of the environment and the 
rational use of the natural resources. [end recording] 
  President Franco also said it is necessary to update the 
debates on the Amazon, which is the last frontier of the human 
race and knowledge. He recalled that an integrated policy for 
the region is being defined by the ministry, which is in charge 
of coordinating federal action in the Amazon, and by the 
National Council: 
  [Begin recording] The defense of the territory, 
the presence of the Brazilian state in the unpopulated regions 
or in the distant regions with little population, the protection 
of the people of the forests starting with the Indians, the 
fight against the illegal means of depredation of natural 
resources, all of these things have been the constant concern of 
the government in drawing up its plans. [end 
recording] 
  President Franco also said the backbone of all the actions 
in 
the Amazon is the division of the region into environmental and 
economic areas. Franco added that this is the basis of knowledge 
for the rational and sustainable exploitation of the natural 
resources, and for defining the areas of preservation and 
occupation. 
  The National Legal Amazon Council created eight sectorial 
commissions. The Amazon represents 57 percent of the national 
territory and is the planet's greatest natural resource. 
Therefore, in order to take care of this region the government 
is creating ways to prevent abuse in the region. The council, 
which met for the first time today in Planalto Palace, decided 
to create eight sectorial commissions to resolve the region's 
problems in the areas of sustainable development, international 
relations, vigilance and protection of the territory, mineral 
prospecting, Indian population, forestry, science and 
technology, and also education, health and social affairs. 
  Environment Minister Rubens Cicupero gave as an example the 
area of gold prospectors who have no clear legislation for their 
work involving 400,000 workers. Ricupero said the current 
legislation is not applicable and this why all gold prospectors 
in the country are considered illegal. 

