Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Diplomatic Panorama" feature] </F>
  [Text] Russia has a perfect right not to allow the 
unauthorized entry into its territorial waters by Japanese 
ships. Border violations are intolerable, whoever commits them, 
Aleksandr Panov, Russian Deputy Foreign Minister, told Interfax. 
  He admitted the existence of a territorial dispute between 
the two countries and emphasized that Russia did not refuse to 
discuss it. "If one party says a problem exists, the other 
cannot say it does not," Panov observed. 
  In his words, the territorial issue will be one of the items 
on the agenda of the Russo-Japanese working consultations to be 
held in Moscow on February 21 and 22 under the joint 
chairmanship of Hiroshi Fukuda, Panov's counterpart, and himself. 
  The deputy minister also said that the Russian negotiators 
would raise the issue of Japanese ships crossing illegally into 
Russian waters. "We will insist that the Japanese authorities 
take the necessary steps to prevent this," Panov said. 
  The meeting will discuss "a wide range of issues" around the 
wording and signing of a peace treaty. "We do not expect any 
dramatic or sensational decisions or recommendations. It will 
be a usual working meeting," the diplomat said. 
  Commenting on the "Zhirinovskiy factor" Deputy Russian 
Foreign Minister, Aleksandr Panov, told Interfax that Japan had 
responded to the statements of the LDP [Liberal Democratic 
Party] leader "rather calmly." 
  According to the diplomat, "it was very difficult to 
determine the true position of Zhirinovskiy." Panov reminded 
that Zhirinovskiy had stated in his book The Last Breakthrough 
to the South his preparedness to give the Kuril Islands to Japan 
if he came to power, however, he failed to even mention the 
number of the islands which were to be given. Moreover, 
according to the information received by the Russian Foreign 
Ministry, the LDP leader stated the same position during 
conversations with Japanese representatives. However, on the 
other hand Zhirinovskiy said that he might threaten Japanese 
with a nuclear bomb, Panov remarked. 
  On the Japan visit by Director of the foundation Strategy, 
Gennadiy Burbulis, the deputy Russian foreign minister informed 
that Burbulis' visit was made so as to participate in the 
trilateral Japanese-U.S.-Russian conference on security in Tokyo. 
  Comparing the current situation in Russian-Japanese 
relations 
to the one last year, the deputy foreign minister pointed out a 
"significant move forward." In his opinion, the parties realize 
that it is necessary to create the appropriate atmosphere in 
many domains in order to resolve "very complex" issues 
concerning both states. "Both parties understand this very 
well. We believe that we have prospects for further development 
in our relations," Panov concluded. 

