Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Sixth of seven installments: Report on interview with Hu </F>
Angang (5170 7254 6921) and Kang Xiaoguang (1660 2556 0342) 
specialists of the Group for Analyzing the National Situation, 
under the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, by staff reporter 
Liu Lu [0941 7216]; place and date not given: "Anticorruption 
Perspective: Official Interest Rates Must Be Canceled, Because 
They Undermine Principle of Fair Competition"] 
  [Text] In recent years, a considerable proportion of the 
corruption cases which have been publicly disclosed in mainland 
China have involved people in the financial sector. This author 
asked He Angang and Kang Xiaoguang to comment on this issue. 
  They said that the capital factor is the most inadequate of 
all the factors of production, and the source of economic growth 
could also become a bottleneck to economic growth. Under the 
conditions of a market economy, that "all men are equal before 
the interest rate" is one basic condition for the main bodies of 
various economic sectors to enjoy fair competition and economic 
freedom. 
  In a report on the national situation, which is entitled 
"Radically Curing Corruption With an Innovative System," Hu and 
Kang gave a definition of "corruption" as an activity of "lease 
seeking [xun zu 1416 4436]." The essence of "lease seeking" 
activity is to exchange power for money. The party with money 
is a lease seeker, and the party with power is a government 
official. The economic rent [jing ji zu jin 4842 3444 4436 
6855] is tantamount to the price difference between the market 
and official rates. The greatest amount of "rent" on the 
mainland now is the interest rate on bank loans. The government 
still intervenes in most credit lines and forcibly fixes 
interest rates. The spread between different interest rates can 
be shared by the government and loan applicants. For many years, 
state-run banks have charged official interest rates to some 
enterprises, chiefly state-run enterprises, and market rates to 
other enterprises, chiefly those which are not state-owned. 
Moreover, official interest rates are much lower than market 
rates, and bank presidents and credit personnel give 
preferential treatment to the former by granting them credit 
lines, but they have discriminated against the latter. This is 
a typical practice of the "theory of the unique importance of 
class origin," which has disrupted the market economy principle 
of fair competition, and is one of the principal causes which 
has brought about a distorted money market and corrupt phenomena. 
  Hu Angang and Kang Xiaoguang made the following proposals to 
policymakers in their report on the national situation: 
  -- Practice a market interest rate system and abandon 
official interest rates. Under this system, deposit interest 
rates should fluctuate with loan interest rates, commercial 
banks have the right to decide interest rates independently, and 
government departments have no right to give directives to 
commercial banks about their credit and interest rate levels. 
Relaxation of interest rate controls should be effected in two 
steps: 1) gradually raising official rates and incrementally 
lifting restriction on credit lines as decided by market rates; 
2) unifying official rates with market rates and abandoning 
restrictions on credit lines. 
  -- Promote the development of commercial banks and allow 
fair 
competition between banks. Restrictions on banking businesses 
(including regional restrictions and trade restrictions) should 
be lifted, nongovernmental banks should be allowed to grow, and 
foreign commercial banks should be allowed to participate in 
domestic competition. The major specialized banks should be 
broken down into relatively small banks and should accelerate 
the establishment of a fair competition mechanism. 
  -- Provide loans to enterprises by mortgaging their assets 
(capital). If enterprises default on their loan repayments, or 
their assets do not offset their debts, these can be confiscated 
by the banks and sold to society by auction. 
  -- Subsidize basic industries including agriculture, 
communications, transportation, telecommunications, and so on 
with loans granted to them with government financial discounts, 
and change some of the money used to support and assist 
impoverished areas into subsidies by way of financial discounts 
to help them develop their economies. 

