BFN 

<F P=106> [By John Kohut in Beijing] </F>
  [Text] In a sign of just how nervous the authorities are 
in the run-up to the Beijing massacre anniversary, police are 
carrying their battle for social stability even into areas which 
do not impinge upon state security -- like fun. 
  Last Saturday night, public security literally pulled the 
plug on a party at Ritan Park, in Beijing's diplomatic area, for 
an American journalist preparing to return to the United States 
at the end of an assignment in China. 
  Just a few hours before hundreds of foreigners and Chinese, 
including some prominent figures in the world of film and music, 
were due to arrive, the restaurant managers announced that there 
was an electricity overload and the lights went out. Apparently 
taking instructions from the police, the managers would not 
allow a private electrician in to fix the problem and they 
rejected the idea of a party by candlelight. 
  Later, the entire road leading to the restaurant was blocked 
off by uniformed police, and nearly a dozen plain-clothes 
security agents guarded the restaurant itself until late that 
night, even after the party had moved to another venue. But the 
managers of that nightspot also seemed to have been warned off, 
and refused to sell disco tickets to Chinese guests. 
  Beijing is always tense around the time of the massacre 
anniversary, but this year residents have been struck by the 
bizarre extremes to which the authorities have been going. 
Among other things, officials have reportedly cancelled a 
charity bazaar, an art exhibition and a tennis club dinner, all 
sponsored by foreign embassies. 
  The Foreign Ministry last week called in a Western news 
agency and warned its reporters not to talk to dissidents, their 
families or friends, or other "sensitive persons". The ministry 
reminded the journalists of a rule, which had not been strictly 
enforced, that requires official approval for all interviews 
with private citizens. If the journalists disobeyed, the 
ministry said it would not be able to help them should trouble 
arise. 
  Dissidents had spoken privately for months about 
commemorating the fifth anniversary of the massacre, and there 
is still talk that some activities may take place to mark the 
date. But it is hard to see how they will be able to carry off 
any plans now, given the tight security. 
  Some dissidents, such as student leader Wang Dan, have left 
town to avoid trouble. Those that remain in the capital find 
themselves under heavy guard. The dissident Ding Zilin, for 
example, said that security agents had begun following her again 
after having left her alone for the previous few weeks. 
  "They're more open about it now," said Ms Ding. When she 
visited the doctor last week, two unmarked Mercedes-Benz cars 
filled with police agents followed behind her vehicle and a 
police motorcycle went ahead of her. When she takes the bus, 
plain-clothes agents follow her on and off. 
  On Saturday, a Chinese friend was searched by campus 
security 
for half an hour after visiting Ms Ding, who lives at the 
People's University, and Jiang Qisheng, a university PhD who was 
jailed for 1-1/2 years after the Tiananmen massacre, went 
missing after going to Ms Ding's home two days ago. 
  Ms Ding yesterday issued a statement to the Government 
saying 
she and her husband would go on a hunger strike from June 2 to 4 
unless plain-clothes agents stopped harassing them. Ms Ding's 
17-year-old child was killed in the massacre. "We are people who 
should not be penned up like animals in a zoo," she said. 
  In recent days, the entire security apparatus has been 
making 
its presence felt, as a threat to the population if nothing else. 

