BFN 

<F P=106> ["Voting '94/Youth '94" program featuring a debate among </F>
Panamanian vice presidential candidates Fernando Manfredo of the 
Papa Egoro Movement, David Guerra of the National Consensus 
Alliance, Arnulfo Escalona of the Arnulfist Party, Guillermo 
Quijano of the Change '94 coalition, and Raul Ossa of the 
Christian Democratic Party; moderated by Ricardo Samaniego; at 
the El Panama Hotel in Panama City -- live] 
  [Excerpts] [Samaniego] Good evening, viewers, and welcome 
to "Youth '94." Tonight we are coming to you live from the El 
Panama Hotel where Public Administration students are holding a 
seminar on today's political outlook. [passage omitted] We are 
going to begin by asking questions on a very current event -- 
namely, President Endara's nationally broadcast message, after 
which he showed the Panamanian people a video. Our first 
speaker will be Fernando Manfredo. 
  [Manfredo] I have just recalled one of the darkest chapters 
in our country's history. God willing, it will never repeat 
itself. What I question is whether it was appropriate for the 
president of the Republic to introduce this subject at this 
moment in the campaign. It would seem appropriate for a 
political party or a judicial branch official to present this 
type of material. Nevertheless, I personally believe that it was 
improper for the president to present this at a time when he 
should be showing total impartiality in the electoral process. 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Guerra, what is your opinion? 
  [Guerra] Over and over again, we have been hammering the 
point that we must not forget the past, especially at this time 
when we are about to choose our leaders for the next five years. 
I believe that advertising portrays everything as if it were 
new. This video forces us to remember that much can be said on 
the screen and on the radio, and that many things can be written 
on pieces of paper. 
  However, the Panamanian people must recall the past in a 
healthy manner to be able to decide the future. Your actions 
tomorrow will depend on what you have in your heart. I believe 
that what you have in your heart does not change from one day to 
the next, and much less when the main actors in your memory are 
still active in today's politics. It scares me to hear a 
current vice presidential candidate talking about how well he is 
doing in some business venture. It is important for the 
Panamanian people to remember all of this. However, the people 
must not only remember what was done by the the PRD [Democratic 
Revolutionary Party] or the military government. The people 
must also choose well. Today, we have seven presidential 
tickets, and it is important that we use this example to choose 
conscientiously. 
  [Samaniego] Dr. Escalona, your views? 
  [Escalona] With pleasure. This evening, I was forced to 
relive something that deep down we all knew, but something that 
we had never seen in action. We knew what was happening to us 
in the streets. We were afraid to go out, and we were afraid to 
let our children out because we feared they would never return. 
However, we did not know of the cynicism we saw tonight on 
television. We did not know how they handled their affairs. 
  You, young students, today more than ever I wish I were in 
your seats and not where I am sitting. But that is life. When 
I was a student, I wanted to be here. Today, however, I wish I 
could relive my life in this country without the things we are 
recalling today. I wish I were a student in order that I could 
live life to the fullest, as one lives when he is young. 
  I recall that when I was a student we had to read Plato. We 
had to read Plato's dialogues, and what caught my attention was 
when he wrote that the greatest virtue a ruler could have was 
the quality of being fair. None of those men has the slightest 
idea of what being fair is all about, and yet, we allowed them 
to stay on after a coup d'etat and cause all of those problems. 
  Now we are confronted by a paradox: They are aspiring to 
reach power by way of the ballot box. This generation and 
future generations will be condemned if we allow those people to 
hold any type of government in this country. They do not 
deserve the chance to repeat their past actions, much less with 
the blessing of the vote in the 8 May elections. 
  My skin burns. I find myself going out of my mind at times 
like this when I have to admit that there are Panamanians who do 
not deserve to be called brothers. Those blows we saw them give 
the Panamanian people were meted out to defend the atrocities 
they were cooking up and feeling proud about. You saw in that 
video how proud they felt about what they did. Do not let this 
happen again in our country. Thank you. 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Quijano, vice presidential candidate for 
the Change '94 coalition. 
  [Quijano] Poet Ricardo Miro wrote a famous phrase: I look 
back and at times it scares me. I am scared for the young 
people. I am scared that terror and fear will be enthroned 
again in Panama. It scares me that we could be robbed of our 
democracy, justice, and freedom. 
  Nevertheless, it was not just one term in office or the last 
term in office. It was 21 years of atrocities in this country. 
Residents of Chiriqui Province died in 1969 while struggling for 
democracy. The atrocities against human rights and the people's 
rights began on 11 October 1968, not June 1987. Many of you 
here tonight were not around in 1968; some of you were very 
young. That was when the disregard for human rights, freedom of 
expression, and freedom of action began. 
  Debates such as this one, where government and opposition 
candidates can present their views and defend their principles, 
would not have been possible during those 25 years. It would 
not have been possible for youths and adults, like those of you 
here tonight, to ask questions and for us to answer them without 
fear that a military boot would be waiting outside, or that we 
would be thrown in jail or get kicked out of the country. All 
that began in 1968 and ended in December 1989. 
  We must defend the principles of democracy, justice, and 
liberty, and young Panamanians, who represent the majority in 
these elections, must choose the best, most capable, most honest 
people -- those people who feel love for the homeland. Young 
Panamanian people, it is up to you to choose the best. 
  [Samaniego] Messrs. candidates, a controversy has arisen 
with 
the presentation of these music videos [as heard] by President 
Endara and the expectation that this created. Some wonder: 
Should President Endara have made this presentation rather than 
other politicians? What is your opinion about this? 
  [Quijano] Look, I believe the president should not have 
caused seven or eight days of anxiety to present this video 
along with his personal opinion. However, I could care less 
whether or not he presented these video clips. I believe it is 
advisable for Panama to know the truth rather than hiding the 
truth about what happened. Dr. Escalona said this here, and I 
was at Santa Ana Square on 10 May when those Dignity Battalion 
members attacked President Endara, Ford, Ricardo Arias Calderon, 
and myself. They ganged up on us and beat us with cudgels while 
the Panamanian Guard or Army looked on. 
  I certainly believe it is advisable to present the truth. 
The truth is never bad. The truth will always prevail -- 
sooner or later. This is not an appeal for violence. This is 
an appeal for harmony; it is an appeal for justice. We must 
recognize our sins in Panama and strive to rebuild our country. 
Let us defend our democracy, justice, and liberty. Let us look 
toward the future with optimism and greatness, because this is a 
great country and what we need is to be united and to define 
programs to resolve Panama's obvious problems, meaning poverty, 
unemployment, and corruption. 
  [Samaniego] Thank you. Dear viewers, we will now hear the 
opinions and questions from some of the young people who 
accompany us tonight on "Youth '94." 
  [Unidentified student] Thank you. To begin with, I have an 
opinion about what we have just seen. I believe politicians are 
always talking, but the situation is different for our people. 
I think the people hoped these elections were the beginning of 
a work program by all political groups, right? This is where my 
question comes in: What would be the Justice and Peace 
Commission's role after listening to these videocassettes? The 
question is for all of the candidates. 
  [Samaniego] Dr. Manfredo, can we start with you? 
  [Manfredo] I would rather have one of my comrades go first. 
  [Samaniego] Dr. Escalona? 
  [Escalona] With pleasure. The Justice and Peace Commission's 
role, until now, has been to prevent violence. It has been 
approached by those of us who are known as politicians, but you 
must remember that we are all politicians. Man is a political 
animal. Plato has described man, and I repeat this, as a 
political animal because we all carry the old city in our 
hearts. The old city is the homeland. We all have the homeland 
in our hearts, and therefore, if we talk about the homeland, we 
talk about politics. 
  Consequently, the expression that you, the politicians, and 
we -- namely, the ones who are not politicians -- is a form of 
participating in politics. [sentence as heard] I do not 
believe in those things. I believe all citizens are politicians 
and each occupies his place, whether on a larger or smaller 
scale, according to his activities and according to the position 
he wants to occupy in the future. He does this to fulfill his 
political role within the city or within the (?country). This 
compels us to establish the appropriate norms for a better 
lifestyle. 
  Referring to the question, it is very specific. Should the 
president of the Republic have presented these videotapes? Yes, 
a thousand times yes; and again, I refer to my knowledge about 
humans. This is part of the Republic's history. This cannot be 
denied; we have lived through this; this is part of our 
heritage. We should not hide this, because, for better or 
worse, it is the history of the Republic, and it should be 
brought out in the open. Whoever does not want to learn from 
history is bound to make the same mistakes because history helps 
inspire us and prevent us from falling for the same causes and 
under the same conditions. 
  Consequently, I believe that, if the president of the 
Republic learned about these videotapes, he did the right thing 
when he presented them to the Panamanian people. This is our 
history, and we cannot forget it because this is what happened. 
It is all there, and it should not only be revealed but also 
repeated so that all the Panamanians may know we lived those 
years under these harsh and difficult conditions. Those years 
cannot be repeated if we truly want to forge ahead. 
  [Samaniego] Thank you, Dr. Escalona. We have another 
question from the young people in attendance. 
  [Unidentified student] I want to know if it does the 
country any good for the president to have released the 
videotape to the public on the verge of elections, when he had 
four years of government to do so. 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Manfredo. 
  [Manfredo] In fact, that is my question: Why now? I am not 
questioning whether citizens should be informed of the inner 
goings-on of the Noriega government, the Noriega regime. The 
question I ask myself is this: If this has been available for 
some time, why release it now? This raises a series of doubts 
and suspicions regarding the president's impartiality. 
  [Samaniego] Engineer Guerra, do you have any response to 
this 
question? 
  [Guerra] Yes. I believe the president's assertion that he 
has had this information for just a couple of days, which 
perhaps some citizens may doubt now. Regardless of this, I 
believe that the information had to be released. Why? Because 
the impression given is that everything is fine, everything is 
normal, and this is not the case. I believe that, in fact, this 
video shows what the true intention is of the party that 
currently heads the polls and where are we headed. I believe we 
need to be very careful. 
  [Samaniego] Dr. Escalona. 
  [Escalona] Precisely, the student's question focuses on 
timing. He asks whether the time is right for the president to 
have presented this video. Each man's actions are his own 
responsibility. This is a private action by the civilian 
president of the Republic, who has explained very well that when 
he received these videocassettes he had to make a decision. At 
this time he had to make this decision. I must confess, young 
student, that I feel very satisfied of having learned about this 
video at the right time. I am very grateful that it was shown to 
me at this time, because I was able to see how the octopus 
worked from inside. I only knew of the actions from the outside 
-- actions that denied my son's freedom, actions that struck me 
in the street, actions that broke my car's windshield, actions 
that endangered the very existence of all citizens. What I did 
not know was the cynicism that these videocassettes show. It is 
well worth knowing this. How a $52 million dam was turned into 
a money scandal, solely and exclusively to keep the octopus 
going. Many thanks. 
  [Samaniego] Engineer Quijano. 
  [Quijano] I must accept the president's word that he knew 
about this video only a few days ago. He made the decision, and 
it was his very own decision. Regarding public affairs, I 
believe each man's or each women's private life is indeed 
private; however, the public life of the public official is 
public. The public life of the public man -- I was a minister 
for two and one-half years -- should be an open book that 
enables citizens to read it, investigate it, and analyze it. 
  [Quijano] All of us adults here experienced the 
dictatorship. We knew what was happening in the streets. What 
we never imagined was the extent of the manipulation taking 
place within the Presidency, how they played with the figures, 
how they manipulated the number of votes, how they would play 
around with the people's wellbeing. 
  There was even mention of specific names of individuals and 
union leaders who dared to say if the president of the Republic 
does not behave, he would be taught a lesson. That means many 
things, such as an indifference to the individuals' self-esteem. 
In this respect, I do believe it should have been said when he 
said he had first found out about the videos. 
  [Samaniego] Thank you, Mr., Quijano. Another question from 
the young voters. 
  [Unidentified student] I am a student at El Istmo 
University. We have just seen what was broadcast via television, 
and we all agree we should never return to that past. My 
question is, considering the results of the public opinion polls 
and the PRD's approval rating, would you all be willing to unite 
and form a common front, divorced of all selfishness in order to 
reach the Presidency? 
  [Quijano] I believe your question is quite valid. I believe 
the groups which support civilian rule in Panama represent an 
absolute majority compared to the militarists; these are the two 
trends now. My personal opinion is that we pro-civilian rule 
supporters must set aside our political ambitions to ensure a 
solid unity which will benefit the lower income groups. The 
young man here just pointed out all of this is in the past. 
That is correct; it is the past. 
  The people want solutions to their problems, concrete 
programs that will resolve issues such as education, health, 
public services, and employment. The people do not want 
programs that are a mere demagoguery. The people want real and 
effective programs. I believe we must set aside our personal 
and political ambitions if we expect to ensure unity and thus 
forge ahead. 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Manfredo, would you like to say something? 
  [Manfredo] I believe the opportunity was lost when the 
political parties--instead of attempting to ensure some degree 
of unity against a situation such as the one you mentioned or 
some unity in preparing a program--gave a sorry spectacle of 
political parties by splitting up the booty. Alliances were 
made based on who would get the Presidency, the vice presidency, 
ministries, autonomous agencies, embassies, and so forth. That 
merely resulted in totally discrediting the political groups 
that became involved in these negotiations. That is why our 
party decided to remain on the sidelines, because we were 
unwilling to get into that game of monopoly; in other words, I 
will give you a vice presidency if you give me two ministries. 
I will give you two ministries, and you give me an embassy. 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Escalona, as part of the government 
alliance, 
you participated in some of these negotiations. Was that the 
way things were done? 
  [Escalona] I can sincerely say only someone who ignores 
Panama's political situation can speak in such a way. Such a 
person has no idea whatsoever of how alliances were made. 
Alliances are over and above that minuscule world which only an 
imagination such as yours can think up. Alliances were not 
established for those reasons. 
  I would like to state the following. On two occasions 
presidential candidate Mireya Moscoso de Gruber has cited the 
need for the groups which support civilian rule to unite. We 
have not received any similar reply from other parties to this 
same call. We made this call on two occasions. Our party does 
not want to give those people we just saw on the video another 
opportunity for them to repeat another dark period in this 
country's history. Just look at what they intend to do. They 
just want to return to repeat everything over again. This is 
the only thing Toro [PRD presidential candidate Ernesto Perez 
Balladares] can promise that group which will ensure their 
return to power. There will be no other opportunity. They plan 
to repeat everything over again. Thank you very much. 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Guerra? 
  [Guerra] Thank you. I must disagree with Fernando Manfredo 
with respect to the manner in which the alliances were 
negotiated. First of all, I was able to witness the many times 
we attempted to ally or find some agreement with the members of 
the Papa Egoro Movement [MPE]. They always said they wanted to 
go out on their own, that they were different. In this respect, 
the search for unity was never their objective. They simply 
believed that they are holders of an absolute truth, and in this 
respect we disagreed. 
  The other inaccuracy being disseminated here is that 
everyone 
is conducting himself as if Toro Balladares is already the 
winner. Allow me to say that in the two previous elections, the 
same polls also conceded up to 35 percentage points to the 
government. The end result was quite different, because they 
had to resort to election fraud and the cancellation of the 
election in order to win. The only thing I can say to the 
Panamanian people is, first of all, those of you who were 
planning to vote for the PRD, for one moment just think about 
what you just saw. Cast your vote according to your conscience. 
Those of you who are allowing yourselves to be influenced by 
the polls, simply vote according to your conscience on 8 May and 
elect a different government. 
  [Samaniego] We will continue with another question. 
  [Quijano] I believe Mr. Manfredo made some comments with 
respect to divvying up the cake. I believe that we were all 
able to see in this video who were the ones dividing up the 
cake, and we could see this through the words of those 
government officials in office at the time. However, according 
to their own statements, they started to divide the cake as far 
back as 1968 and continued to do so until 1989. From 1968 to 
1977, there were no political parties in Panama because the 
dictatorship had outlawed them. We were living in a political 
dark age. At that time, the cake was being divided because 
there were no legislatures, no codes, no public bids to purchase 
sugar mills or cement plants, and no quotas; there was 
absolutely nothing. Everything was done through Omar Torrijos, 
the generals who followed, and the ministers who followed them. 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Manfredo is entitled to reply. 
  [Manfredo] Yes, I will be very brief. The alliance's 
negotiations with our party all featured the condition that we 
should concede the leadership to others. We insisted the 
alliance could only be based on concrete programs and... 
  [Guerra, interrupting] I must completely disagree with that, 
because it is simply not correct. Definitely, the issue now is 
not what took place. The young man just asked a very real 
question: Are we willing to reach an agreement? The answer in 
our case is yes, we are willing to reach a national agreement. 
Why? Because over and above party interest and individual 
interest there is the interest of what the country is going to 
do during these next five, 10, and 25 years. That is the reply 
we, the National Unity Movement [MUN], are giving the Panamanian 
people. 
  [Samaniego] We welcome Mr. Ossa, the Christian Democratic 
Party's vice presidential candidate, who is joining our group. 
Mr. Ossa, can you briefly give us your opinion on what you just 
saw over the television? 
  [Ossa] Congratulations to the students of the School of 
Public Administration for this opportunity. Tonight, we, the 
Panamanian people, watched video footage that makes us remember 
things we do not want to happen again. Human beings remember, 
but they are likely to forget about past events or experiences 
and repeat mistakes. It is fair for us to recall our negative 
experiences so they are not repeated. I think it is worthwhile 
to remember these things, and there are still many more things 
to remember. 
  [Samaniego] Another question by a young man. 
  [Unidentified student] Dr. Escalona, you speak of 
publicizing 
the mainland's history. Why did the government censure the 
video on the invasion of Panama, considering it won an Oscar? 
  [Escalona] As far as I know, the government has not censured 
any video. There have been remarks on it. I watched the video, 
and what it shows is a long way from what really happened in 
Panama. The video partially shows certain things from a 
particular viewpoint, to the extent I am convinced someone paid 
for the video to be manufactured like that. 
  [Samaniego] We will continue with more questions. Here is a 
student who, a few moments ago, asked to participate. 
  [Unidentified student] Good evening, Dr. Escalona, do you 
think the video the president has just aired will in any way 
help reinforce your slate and weaken the PRD? The PRD leads in 
all the opinion polls, while your slate is third. 
  [Escalona] That is probably why the video was aired. I 
cannot tell you for sure. I am sure, however, it has helped me, 
as I said before, to become thoroughly familiar with the 
movements of the octopus. I was aware of the military's will to 
defend their government. I knew of some of the things that were 
shown, but I was unaware of the callousness with which they 
talked about their so-called duty to beat the Panamanian people, 
to weaken a labor leader. These things have been educational for 
me. 
  [Student] The Arnulfist Party is in power, but the 
Panamanian 
people are crying PRD everywhere, meaning people are not 
satisfied with the current government, which has not given us 
what we wanted and asked for when we demanded a change. The 
fact this video has been presented by the president, who also 
belongs to the Arnulfist Party, makes us think. 
  [Escalona] These are everyone's opinions and speculations. 
You have every right to express an opinion and make 
speculations. May I reiterate this could be the purpose of the 
president showing or not showing the video. I dare not say what 
motivated him. I do dare say, however, it has been educational 
for me to have learned about this under any circumstances, 
today, tomorrow, or after the elections. I know the movements 
of the octopus from inside out. These movements and what moved 
them are thoroughly detailed there. They wanted to stay in power 
to retain the privileges they had already acquired. 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Manfredo, one reply to this remark. 
  [Manfredo] We will win on 8 May, not with the votes against 
the PRD but with the votes in favor of our proposal. 
  [Samaniego] Another question by another student. 
  [Unidentified student] My question is this. The video the 
president has presented is just a reaction of fear of seeing the 
PRD as a leader, of fear the government parties will win the 
next elections. Do you think this is a sign of agony on his 
part? 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Ossa, your opinion? 
  [Ossa] My attention has been drawn to the way he criticizes 
the president's actions by describing it as an agony, and he is 
not far from the truth. When he mentioned the announcement, the 
president said he was ill in the head and the heart. I think 
the president has created an unnecessary expectation throughout 
the country, because we all were familiar with 75 percent of the 
information included in the video. I remember having heard 
Solis Palma say over the television five years ago the ministers 
gave credit more to the Defense Forces than anyone else, and 
everyone knew this in Panama, but he is refreshing our memory. 
This workshop deals with the state's dynamics regarding 
globalization and the changes necessary in the state. This is 
one of the necessary changes, and this is why this must not 
happen in Panama again, but it will likely happen. 
  [Samaniego] Another question? 
  [Unidentified student] One of the candidates mentioned 
history. I have always liked history. My question is addressed 
to Mr. Escalona. I would like for him to remember two dates I 
have never forgotten--2 January 1931 and 20 December 1989. I 
would like him to give us an opinion. At the same time, the 
president's remarks give me the impression he is trying to pass 
judgment, not a formal one but a nationwide one, where the 
government is the judge, the people the jury, and the PRD the 
accuser. I would like for you to give me your opinion. 
  [Escalona] Three positions for three entirely different 
perspectives. First, January of 1931 was the first coup in the 
history of the Republic. History says this coup was aimed at 
Goytia. He could not handle it at the time and sought the help 
of Harmodio Arias. This coup changed the country's destiny, and 
a new leadership emerged, because Dr. Arnulfo Arias Madrid was 
born then and there. I remember this very well, because this is 
part of our history and part of the Panamanian people's culture. 
You remember things well. 
  Second, what happened on 19 December 1989? On that day the 
North American forces rained death over the country. Some call 
it invasion, others call it liberation. The result of this is 
that the Panamanian people welcomed the North Americans who came 
not to overthrow a government--and this is where the historic 
analysis is wrong--but to defend democracy, responding to a 
government decision to annul the elections. When the government 
made this decision and the OAS backed the government, the United 
States came up with Operation Just Cause and came to Panama to 
defend democracy. 
  [Samaniego] There is a question left unanswered from one of 
the students participating in "Youth '94" concerning the video 
the president of the Republic just presented. 
  [Unidentified student] I commented in my last question that, 
when the president's video was being broadcast, it gave the 
impression of being a public trial on a national level. Here, 
as I mentioned before, the government is the judge; the accused 
in this case would be the PRD; and the jury would be the 
Panamanian people. If a legal expert can give me a reply based 
on... 
  [Escalona, interrupting] I believe I have the right to 
respond to this question, and I will exercise that right. The 
question is whether this is a trial by jury, or whether this is 
a trial by magistrates. Here is Panama, we do not have the type 
of trial in which both magistrates and jurors participate. As 
far as I know, this only exists in Italy. This formula is used 
to enable the magistrates to compensate for errors the jury 
might commit. 
  There is indeed a victim here, as you have adeptly pointed 
out. The analogy is wrong, however, in terms of the victim. The 
only victim here is the Panamanian people; they are the victims. 
  Those good-for-nothings were feasting on and celebrating 
what 
they were taking from the Panamanian people, what they were 
milking from the Panamanian people. You saw for yourself. 
Sitting there you can see everyone, from the president of the 
Republic, to the commander of the National Guard, every single 
minister of state, and every single deputy minister of state. I 
saw Targidio Bernal among them, and he was only a deputy 
government minister. They were feasting. This was a 
demonstration of what they did to remain in government. Their 
idea was that the most important thing for a government was to 
make sure that it was not overthrown. They do not want to be 
overthrown, even if they are overthrown by way of votes. But 
this time we must overthrow them. Thank you. 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Ossa, as a lawyer, what is your analysis? 
  [Ossa] In my opinion, the student's perception is excellent, 
when he uses the analogy of a trial. I also agree with Escalona 
that the victim has been the people. He mentioned the 
plaintiff, the defendant, and the jury; however, he did not 
include the victim. According to the video, the people were the 
victims, and according to the current situation, the people 
continue to be the victims. Things have not changed. I would 
like to advise my colleague Escalona to be careful when he talks 
about those good-for-nothings, because he could be speaking of 
some people still in government. If you like, I can mention 
some names. 
  [Escalona] Go ahead, mention them. 
  [Ossa] The president's adviser, Menalco Solis, for example. 
  [Escalona] Go ahead, mention them, we are here to... 
  [Ossa, interrupting] You here can help me mention some 
names, 
right? 
  [Samaniego] No, you mention them. 
  [Ossa] I can mention, for example, Menalco Solis, who works 
directly with... 
  [Escalona, interrupting] Go ahead, mention them. We are... 
  [Ossa, interrupting] Do not call him a good-for-nothing, 
because this could offend him. Maybe this would be a 
situation... [pauses] Maybe the people would... 
  [Escalona, interrupting] I think it is your duty to mention 
these names. 
  [Ossa] I think the figure of speech is correct, and the 
application of the term good-for-nothing was correct. Maybe, 
Legislator Escalona is right after all. 
  [Samaniego] Does Mr. Manfredo have something to say? 
  [Manfredo] I agree with my colleague here. [laughter, 
applause] 
  [Samaniego] Let us continue with more questions for the 
vice presidential candidates on the current situation in the 
country following the video presented by President Endara. 
  [Unidentified student] I believe we have discussed the video 
on the previous government, but none of the panelists have told 
us what their plans are for areas such as health, housing, 
education... 
  [Samaniego, interrupting] We are going to discuss this in a 
moment. However, if you wish, they can briefly answer your 
question. 
  [Unidentified student] I would like that, because we have 
discussed the video, but they have not disclosed any plans or 
any solutions for housing, health, and education. We do not 
only want to talk about the video but also about those things 
the Panamanian people need. 
  [Samaniego] That is my fault, because I told them we would 
discuss the video, okay? Let us look at... 
  [Manfredo, interrupting] I have a brief comment on that. I 
agree that without forgetting the past, and without trying to 
reclaim the past, we must begin looking ahead to the future. 
  [Samaniego] Of course. Mr. Ossa? Mr. Quijano, pardon me. 
  [Quijano] I believe it is a very timely question. We have 
not addressed these issues because they have not been raised. 
During the commercial break, by the way, I wondered aloud when 
the young people would ask about programs for the future, 
because we must think of the future. 
  Briefly, in the area of education, I believe we should 
eliminate all remnants of statism from the national Constitution 
and open our borders to national and foreign universities to 
enable Panamanians to have the ability and facilities to educate 
themselves properly and adequately. The state must strengthen 
higher education and provide the necessary financing so that 
young students whose sole problem is money can receive an 
adequate education and, in turn, be prepared for the future. 
  [Samaniego] Engineer Quijano, forgive me for interrupting 
you, but this topic will be discussed after we present the PRD's 
news conference. We would like to wind up our discussion on the 
statements made by the president of the Republic. 
  [Quijano] Later, I would like to discuss the housing issue. 
  [Samaniego] Of course, all you want. [applause] Viewers, 
we are now going to see the news conference the PRD just held to 
discuss President Guillermo Endara's remarks on a nationwide 
television network. [passage omitted] 
  [Samaniego] Now we are going to hear the reactions of each 
of 
the candidates. Mr. Ossa, what is your reaction to the news 
conference the PRD presidential candidate has just given? 
  [Ossa] I noticed candidate Perez Balladares' reaction on the 
TV screen when he said he feels ashamed that the president 
remembered the past and everything else. I do not know whether 
the president did the right thing. I truly believe we need to 
remember things, but I looked up the definition of the word Toro 
in the Royal Academy's dictionary, and it says it is a 
tough-skinned mammal with a long tail. I guess it is true that 
one needs to be tough skinned to go before the country and say 
it is not good to recall the past when one has served as manager 
for Carlos Duque's 1989 campaign. I believe we need to remember 
this, too, and if a person has a long tail, he should try to 
discourage people from recalling the past. I think the 
president's decision to show the video was good because it prods 
the memory, and the PRD has no other option other than to say it 
was not good to have shown it. I simply believe that it was 
good to have shown it. 
  [Samaniego] Viewers and special guests, we will now go to 
our 
studios on the Transisthmian Highway for more reactions. After 
that we will return to "Youth '94." [passage omitted] 
  Viewers and friends we are back with "Youth '94." We will 
now hear more reactions on how the candidates and the people 
feel about President Guillermo Endara's message. [video cuts to 
live relay of an interview with Samuel Lewis Galindo, National 
Consensus Alliance presidential candidate, by an unidentified 
reporter] 
  [Reporter] Thank you, Ricardo. We are here at Las Rocas 
Building to hear what Samuel Lewis Galindo, presidential 
candidate for the National Consensus Alliance, has to say about 
President Endara's message. 
  [Lewis] He presented a documentary that depicts shameful 
events, and most of the Panamanian people condemned these events 
when they occurred. It is because of those things that 
happened, and also because of so many subservient civilians, 
that parties such as Solidarity were born. They were born from 
the need to give the people a change -- a real change from that 
ignominious past and from today, which is full of frustration. 
Today more than ever I believe that Solidarity is fulfilling a 
great duty. It is raising politics to a high level, and it is 
giving politics the dignity it should have and that the 
Panamanian people deserve. 
  [Reporter] What do you think was behind the president's 
decision to make this video public? 
  [Lewis] I believe that the president of the Republic should 
not have been the one to present a strictly political 
documentary. That should have been done by one of the parties 
that opposes the PRD to remind the people about incidents which 
have been condemned by everyone and which were a shame for the 
nation. [video returns to Samaniego at the El Panama Hotel, who 
introduces a three-minute recording of a 14 April news 
conference by PDC presidential candidate Eduardo Vallarino] 
[passage omitted] 
  [Samaniego] Mr. Ossa has already given his views about the 
PRD candidate's statements. We will now ask his opinion about 
the various reactions throughout the country. 
  [Ossa] I simply wanted to say, in 30 seconds, that the most 
important thing which occurred in Mr. Perez Balladares' 
statements is that he did not deny what appeared in the videos, 
although he did beat around the bush. He merely discussed 
whether the president had done the right thing or not. He did 
not deny the most important issue. In this case, silence can be 
taken for consent. 
  [Samaniego] Dr. Manfredo? 
  [Manfredo] I said at the outset of this program that I 
believed it was inappropriate for the president to personally 
present the videotape, but I was equally surprised by Ernesto 
Perez Balladares' appearance on television, because he is the 
candidate of the PRD, which supported Noriega's regime. I would 
have thought that, after viewing the videotape, he would be 
hiding in a closet, beating his chest and saying: mea culpa, mea 
culpa, mea gravissima culpa. [laughter] 
  [Samaniego] Engineer? 
  [Guerra] Politicians or politicos generally use words when 
they are convenient. They talk about feeling ashamed about the 
president's attitude, but they have never talked about feeling 
ashamed about the attitude they adopted during the 21-year 
regime. The other thing is that he is issuing an appeal for 
democracy today, when, for 21 years, he personally abetted 
dictatorship in this nation. Those are incongruent things, and 
I believe the essential thing is he cannot deny this. It would 
be barbaric, because it is there on video. He would have to 
claim he is not the one shown on the screen, although he does 
not really resemble the man shown on the screen. 
  [Escalona] The Scriptures say: They shall be known for their 
deeds. Candidate Ernesto Perez Balladares has shown today what 
he truly is. He has sought refuge in escapism. He has 
criticized the president of the Republic to avoid a problem 
which, he knows, he was a part of. They shall be known for 
their deeds. He has no other option but to do what the Holy 
Scriptures say -- and hear me well, Ernesto Perez Balladares -- 
tie a millstone around your neck and jump into the ocean. 
[laughter] 
  [Samaniego] Engineer Quijano, your answer? 
  [Quijano] The homeland is a remembrance of our history, and 
I 
believe that, at this point, Dr. Perez Balladares renounced the 
video presented by the president. He said the president had 
signed a document at the Santa Maria la Antigua University and 
that, for this reason, he should not have pointed out historical 
truths. Nevertheless, he never denied any act they perpetrated: 
when they attacked the Panamanian people on the streets; when 
they manipulated public funds at the Presidential Palace; when 
they played with the future of workers, nurses, and teachers; 
when they played with the 13th month bonus -- an acquired right 
of the Panamanian people. This is my reaction. 
  [Samaniego] Well, Panamanian friends and students, we will 
now give a round of applause for the candidates who answered the 
young people's call. Thank you for coming to "Youth '94." We 
also want to request a round of applause for the young people 
from the various universities who were here with us and who 
asked insightful questions in a respectful way. I congratulate 
you. Dear viewers, this has been "Youth '94" with the vice 
presidential candidates. Thank you, and good evening. 

