CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Shao Ning: ``Scientists Make Lots of Significant </F>
Discoveries''] 
  [Text] Chinese scientists working with the Chinese Academy 
of Sciences have made new advances over the past year in various 
basic research fields. 
  And the latest achievements have been acclaimed in world 
scientific and technological circles, according to the academy's 
annual report. 
  An abstract theory explaining the structure of minimal 
surface in Riemann's multi-dimensional space has been developed 
by Wang Guangyan, with the assistance of his PhD student, at the 
Institute of Mathematics. 
  The theory is the fruit of a synthetical study which brings 
together various branches of mathematics. Consequently, many 
famous mathematicians believe that the methods and ideas it 
introduces will have a long-standing influence on mathematical 
research. 
  In the field of mathematical statistics, Fang Kaitai at the 
Institute of Applied Mathematics and Wang Yuan at the Institute 
of Mathematics won international recognition last year for their 
new experimental design method based on the Theory of Numbers 
concept. 
  Their method has been widely and successfully used in China 
in agricultural, medical and chemical engineering research 
during the past decade and is now being applied to research 
projects throughout the world. 
  In the field of mechanics, Wang Ziqiang at the Institute of 
Mechanics has made considerable headway in the area of 
elastoplastic crack mechanics. 
  Since he won support from the China Natural Science 
Foundation for his crack analysis project, Wang has been 
constructing a mathematical model to describe the stress field 
of cracks. The aim is to explain the effect of external force 
upon given materials and provide a theoretical basis for the 
establishment of crack rules. Wang's work has been highly 
praised by authorities in this field. 
  In the field of physics, Ouyang Zhongcan, a research fellow 
at the Institute of Theoretical Physics, used the liquid crystal 
method to come up with a biological membrane model. The method 
has enabled him to solve many equations and deduce a model for 
the changes that take place in a biological membrane. 
  Biologists have proved his deductions with their 
experiments, 
and Ouyang has offered scientific explanations for many 
previously unexplained experimental phenomena. 
  Ouyang's work has brought condensed matter physics into 
biology. And he won the 1993 Outstanding Achievement Award from 
the Chinese Physics Committee. 
  Meanwhile, scientists at the Institute of High Energy 
Physics 
(IHEP) observed a laser oscillation signal in infrared and then 
achieved a saturated oscillation signal at the Beijing Free 
Electron Laser (BFEL) facility. This achievement confirms 
China's leading position in this field. 
  Scientists at the State Molecular Reaction Dynamics Lab in 
the Institute of Chemistry discovered a new tubular-structured 
hydrocarbon by using their time of flight serial mass 
spectrometer. 
  After the experiment they drew the conclusion that aromatic 
synthetic materials are often made up of these 
tubular-structured hydrocarbon--and that the specific 
differences between such materials is determined in their atomic 
component in diameters and the number of bonds with the hydrogen 
atoms. 
  The research has been highly praised by Professor 
Smalley--the discoverer of C60, and professors Dudley Robert 
Herschbach and Yuan Tseh Lee--both winners of the Nobel 
Chemistry Prize in 1986. 
  And advances have been made in research into how life on 
earth started. Scientists at the Institute of Organic Chemistry 
of Shanghai have accomplished the total and serial synthesis of 
molecule Nodrm-1, which plays the role of information 
transmitter between azotobacteria and bean plants. 
  Scientists have also dug deep into the structure of the 
Nodrm-1 molecule. This work will help research into the 
mechanism of nitrogen fixation, an important area of study in 
life chemistry. 
  In the field of biology, significant progress has been made 
in the area of trio-dimensional structures and the function of 
large molecules at the Institute of Biophysics. 
  Scientists have identified the crystal structure of one of 
the largest proteins on earth at a higher resolution than any 
other that was previously reported in the world. The protein, 
called phycoerythrin, has a molecular mass 45 times greater than 
that of insulin. And the research will assist photosynthesis of 
the protein. 
  Another research achievement was the discovery of 
well-preserved ape-man skull fossils in Tangshan. The discovery 
will supply much information on mankind's origin, evolution and 
early migration. 
  In other fields, the Institute of Botany has established a 
brand new information system on the pteriophyte family in China. 
  Meanwhile, Shi Liming at the Institute of Zoology of Kunming 
found that pandas lack variety in their protein heredity, which 
may serve as one of the major reasons for pandas' near 
extinction. 
  Also astronomers at the Beijing Astronomical Observatory 
observed and researched the supernova SN1993J by using the 
2.16-metre telescope in the Xinglong Observatory. 
  They found and then explained both the tremendous blue shift 
in its spectrum and its asymmetry in explosion. Other basic 
research breakthroughs include the supersensitivity mini 
cyclotron acceleratormass spectrometer, the synthesis of the new 
isotope thorium (Th237), the self-calibrated modulation 
convergence theory and work on how land atmosphere interacts 
with and influences the climate. 
  In industrial research, the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 
cooperation with local businesses has developed new 
manufacturing and automation techniques for boiler makers, 
chemical companies, textile producers, processing plants and 
machinery factories. 
  And a 863 state high-tech parallel computer has been 
developed at the Institute of Calculation. The computer uses 
many new techniques like data oriented processing. The 
calculation speed of the computer can run as high as 120 million 
instructions per second. 
  The Gold Office of Academia Sinica organized several gold 
prospecting research projects last year. 
  Headway has been also made in other applied research 
areas--synthetic fuel oils, fine bone pottery, high efficiency 
emulsion, and rain forecasting. 
  Scientists also developed the model for an agricultural 
disaster warning system by using remote sensing techniques and 
geographical information systems. Agronomists bred nine new 
varieties of rice, cotton, and other crops. 
  Researchers with the science academy received hundreds of 
awards in 1993. 
  Basic research and synthetic studies in frontier and 
multi-disciplinary areas will continue to receive support from 
the State. 
  And the institutes within the academy will establish sound 
links with universities and industries over the next few years. 

