Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Varadero, Cuba, 31 Jan (PL) -- Today, Cuban 
President Fidel Castro highlighted the impressive development of 
the Cuban tourism industry, and he also stressed that from now 
on Cuban efforts will be aimed at becoming more efficient and 
economical in that sector. 
  At the inaugural dinner of the Bella Costa Hotel in 
Varadero, 
approximately 140 km east of Havana, the chief of state said: 
Although we are just beginning (to strengthen that sector of the 
economy), there are encouraging achievements such as the high 
levels of growth and the increasingly good quality of services. 
  The Bella Costa, a 307-room facility which began operations 
six months ago, is owned by Cuban Tourism and International 
Trade Corporation, Cubanacan Incorporated, which handed over its 
management and marketing to LTI [expansion unknown], a German 
hotel company. 
  The German company, a subsidiary of LTU [expansion unknown] 
Airlines, runs three other hotels on the island: the Tuxpan in 
Varadero and Los Corales and Carisol in Santiago de Cuba. 
  In another part of his speech, Castro recalled that Tuxpan 
has the highest occupancy rate in the country, 92 percent. He 
predicted that the other hotels managed by LTI, a firm that has 
shown ability and ambition, will have similar success. 
  Regarding his lengthy conversation with LTU President Hans 
Joachim Driessen, the Cuban revolutionary leader said he 
discussed Cuba's competitiveness in the effort to become an 
important tourist attraction in the Caribbean. 
  He added that they also discussed LTI's experience with 
cruises on the Nile -- experience, he noted, that could be 
applied here. 
  Asked how he sees the island's future in the next two or 
three years, Castro said: Still with many difficulties but 
making progress, no doubt. 
  The other two speakers of the evening, Driessen and 
Cubanacan 
President Abraham Maciques agreed with each other by praising 
the cooperation between the two institutions. 
  Driessen and LTI Director General Wolfgang Hedderich arrived 
in Santiago de Cuba to attend the official transfer of the 
management and marketing of Carisol and Los Corales hotels to 
LTI. 
  The LTU charter company has 28 planes with a 7,863-seat 
capacity. LTI owns eight cruise ships and manages 11 hotels, 
four of them in Cuba. 

