The     recent dismissal of 129 employees from the state-controlled 
radio network appears to have been engineered not by the 
government but by the extreme right, which was expelled from the 
governing Hungarian Democratic Forum (MDF) last June. 
Nevertheless, the government's apparent acquiescence to the 
dismissals makes it vulnerable to charges that it shares 
responsibility.  While the dismissals may well have a chilling 
effect on press freedom, fears that they signal the return of 
centrally controlled media in Hungary appear to be exaggerated. 

   The announcement by government-appointed acting radio president 
Laszlo Csucs on 4 March that he was dismissing 129 employees- 
-including many of the radio's most prominent reporters--provoked 
widespread outrage among journalists and the parliamentary 
opposition, and dismay even among many in the MDF's own ranks. 
In a stormy session of parliament, Ivan Peto, the chairman of the 
Alliance of Free Democrats (SZDSZ)--the largest opposition party 
in parliament--denounced the dismissals as politically motivated 
"cleansing" that "surpasses . . . even the dismissals following 
the 1956 uprising."  The leader of the Hungarian Socialist Party 
(MSZP), Zoltan Gal, accused the government of wanting to 
transform the public service media into its own "mouthpiece," 
while a spokesman of the Federation of Young Democrats (Fidesz)- 
-the opposition party that has been most amenable to cooperation 
with the MDF--declared that the move "annulled the hope of a 
clean election campaign" and was clearly an attempt "to divert 
the public's attention" from the "inglorious details" of the 
government's record (MTI, 7 March).  At a protest outside the 
radio building organized by the Independent Union of Radio 
Broadcasters, which was attended by "thousands," speakers 
assailed the move as an attack on press freedom and asserted that 
the dismissed "have the sympathy of many colleagues" remaining at 
the radio (MTI, 10 March). 

   Government Ambivalence 

   The government's reaction to the development appeared equivocal. 
On the one hand, Prime Minister Peter Boross said that charges of 
government complicity in the affair were "ungrounded and false" 
(MTI, 7 March), and Defense Minister and MDF Chairman Lajos Fur 
denied "most firmly" that the government was behind it (Magyar 
Hirlap, 14 March).  On the other hand, government officials 
ignored demands that Csucs be replaced, and while they bemoaned 
the likelihood that the dismissals would hurt the government 
parties in the coming elections, they did not condemn the move 
without qualification.  Tamas Katona, political state secretary 
in the prime minister's office and a key player in past media 
negotiations, said the dismissals were the "right step at the 
wrong time" (Nepszabadsag, 8 March).  Similarly, while expressing 
dismay at the impact on his party, MDF parliamentary group leader 
Ferenc Kulin said that the dismissals may have been justified by 
"ethical" considerations and overstaffing (Kossuth radio, 4 
March).  He argued that the government has "no right" to 
investigate the dismissals because the radio network is an 
independent entity (Kossuth radio, 4 March), even though Csucs's 
appointment in 1992 as radio vice president had been widely 
viewed as a political move and was made in the face of opposition 
objections.  Kulin also tried to shift blame to the opposition, 
saying the media situation would not have become so "hopeless" if 
the opposition had not, in his view, obstructed government 
efforts to pass a law regulating the media (MTI, 7 March). 

   Despite the government's reluctance to condemn the dismissals 
unequivocally--and thus by implication criticize its appointee, 
Csucs--it appears that Csucs's move overstepped the tolerance of 
a significant number of government supporters: 

-- Even though the directors of Duna Television are widely 
considered to be government sympathizers--the opposition has 
charged that the board of trustees of the foundation running Duna 
"consists exclusively of the ruling party's politicians" (Magyar 
Hirlap, 7 April 1993)--its 15 March news program on speeches 
given at commemorations of Hungary's national holiday focused on 
those speakers who were clearly critical of the dismissals.  The 
program highlighted clips from the speeches of President Arpad 
Goncz and Budapest Mayor Gabor Demszky--both SZDSZ politicians- 
-who issued strong warnings on the threats to freedom of the 
press.  Moreover, the announcer drew attention to the fact that 
the main television channels' news program failed to report on 
Demszky's speech.  Duna Television is the specialized satellite 
channel that in effect is Budapest's third source of television 
news, even though it was set up to reach minority Hungarians in 
surrounding countries. 

-- Sandor Csoori, a prominent intellectual who is known to be 
close to the government, refused to let his recorded interview be 
broadcast on the 168 Hours radio program after he learned that 
the program's editor --well-known radio personality Akos Mester- 
-had been dismissed.  Because of Csoori's refusal and because 
several remaining journalists refused to work on the program out 
of sympathy with Mester, the 5 March program had to be cancelled 
(Nepszabadsag, 7 March). 

-- The pro-government dailies showed signs of sympathy for the 
purged radio journalists.  On 5 March Uj Magyarorszag featured an 
interview in which Mester's replacement as 168 Hours editor 
praised Mester as "an accomplished and excellent" journalist. 
Moreover, a Pesti Hirlap journalist showed considerable hostility 
to Csucs in an interview published in the 5-6 March issue, 
expressing his opinion that some of the dismissed were "star 
reporters who are highly regarded professionals with extensive 
experience." 

Csurka's Role 

   The widespread dismay in government circles over the dismissals 
suggests that despite the government's frequent complaints that 
an anti-government bias dominates the media, it was not the 
government but right wing extremist Istvan Csurka who engineered 
the move.  Although the dismissals may have been abetted in some 
government quarters--as pointed out in the press, someone in the 
government had authorized severance pay for the ousted employees, 
without which they could not have been fired (Nepszabadsag, 5 
March)--it is Csurka who has led the demands for political 
changes in the electronic media and who has been the strongest 
advocate of the current acting presidents of radio and 
television, who both seem to be his protegees.  Despite, or 
perhaps because of, opposition demands, the government failed to 
remove these Csurka supporters from the electronic media even 
after Csurka was expelled from the MDF last June, leaving them in 
a position to act on Csurka's conviction that holdovers from the 
communist era should be forced out.  Csurka has made this demand 
even though he has apparently been more than tolerant of other 
former Communist journalists who have refrained from criticizing 
him and the extreme right.  Thus, Csurka's candidate for 
television president was Alajos Chrudinak, a prominent broadcast 
journalist of the Kadar era, while Mester's replacement at 168 
Hours had served at the communist radio since 1971 (Uj 
Magyarorszag, 5 March). 

   There are ample indications that Csucs is Csurka's man and 
follows a Csurka-approved agenda.  Csurka's weekly, Magyar Forum, 
has lauded Csucs numerous times, including on 28 October when it 
praised him for taking the "brave" step of terminating an 
alternative news program, saying it had been a "Communist-liberal 
...agit prop" operation that enabled the "bolsheviks" to save 
themselves.  Csurka's party supports Csucs's candidacy for 
parliament (Nepszabadsag, 5 March), and Csurka appears to be the 
only prominent politician who unequivocally praised Csucs's 
recent move, telling parliament that "the good of the nation can 
be served by politically motivated dismissals . . . those 
dismissed told many lies and did damage to the country" (Kossuth 
radio, 7 March).  Moreover, although ousted broadcaster Akos 
Mester has often been critical of the government, he indicated 
that it was not the government that was behind the dismissals, 
declaring that the radio was taken over "not by the right, but 
the far right" (Nepszabadsag, 7 March).  Before the dismissals, 
Mester had made clear that by the far right he meant Csurka, 
indicating in the March issue of the monthly Kritika that Csurka 
was able to continue dominating the radio through Csucs even 
after his expulsion from the MDF.  The government had a "very 
hard time realizing" that the situation endangered its own 
interests, said Mester, adding, "By the time they wake up, it 
will be too late." 

Radio Coverage 

Despite charges that the dismissals were an attempt to restrict 
opposition access to the public as the elections approach, 
Hungarian radio has continued to broadcast opposition opinions. 
Possibly in response to pressure behind the scenes from the 
government to counter the negative publicity surrounding the 
dismissals, the radio has appeared eager to demonstrate that it 
remains an unbiased medium. 

-- The radio gave full coverage to the parliamentary debate on 
the crisis over the firings, giving the opposition's views 
extensive coverage.  In fact, the broadcast gave the last word to 
opposition leader Peto, who countered Boross's claim that the 
"international reaction to the affair is one-sidedly critical of 
the country" with the charge that "it is the affair itself that 
is denigrating the country" (Kossuth radio, 7 March). 

-- The radio's reporting on the Democratic Charter's 
demonstration for press freedom on 14 March--far from aligning 
itself with its director, Csucs--seemed to go beyond objective 
reporting to adopt a sympathetic tone toward the demonstrators, 
saying that "at least 15-20,000 people with torches demanded a 
free press and free radio," that "many" people wore blue ribbons 
to show solidarity with the "sacked journalists," and that, 
citing the "danger" to press freedom, the demonstrators  gathered 
at monuments that symbolize both "grief" and "eternal renewal." 

-- The radio has also broadcast some opposition interviews on 
other subjects, including a long, hard-hitting interview on 9 
March with SZDSZ politician Imre Mecs, who harshly criticized a 
recently passed law on communist-era informers, accusing the 
government of "hypocrisy" and "morally very objectionable 
behavior" and alluding--although without mentioning his name--to 
Csurka's confession of his own informer past. 

Implications 

Even if, as seems likely, the government did not approve the 
ousters, it is likely to be the major loser in the affair, since 
it is vulnerable to charges that it shares responsibility for the 
media crisis due to its reluctance to break completely with 
Csurka and his camp.  Despite numerous indications that the split 
between Csurka and the government mainstream is becoming ever 
wider--even Csurka's longtime friend, Defense Minister Fur, has 
declared that he has no contact with Csurka and his party because 
he finds their political behavior "shocking" (Magyar Hirlap, 14 
March)--the government will probably have to pay a price for not 
moving forcefully to remove all traces of its past association 
with Csurka. 

   At the same time, despite the assault on the national radio, 
there appears to be little danger that Hungarian voters will be 
denied ample access to uncensored information as Hungary 
approaches the election.  There is no sign that the Hungarian 
print media have been intimidated into moderating their 
overwhelmingly critical attitude toward the government. 
According to poll data, 61 percent of adult Hungarians read at 
least one newspaper a day, and the readership of the papers which 
sympathize with the opposition overwhelmingly outnumbers the 
readership of the progovernment papers, with the socialist daily 
Nepszabadsag alone having over a million readers and the pro- 
government paper Uj Magyarorszag trailing at the end of the 
readership list (Heti Vilaggazdasag, 11 July 1992).  Moreover, 
the obvious unease of many government politicians with the radio 
dismissals indicates that they too recognize the importance of 
media independence and will try to limit further blatant attacks 
on the electronic media. 

(AUTHOR.  BARCZAY.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF 
ANALYST/ELAG, (703) 733-6120.) 
ELAG/GILISON/DEW 23/2202Z MAR 

