BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundup" by Zhang Tiegang: "Grachev's Caucasus Tour </F>
Fruitful"] 
  [Text] Moscow, June 12 (XINHUA) -- Russian Defense Minister 
Pavel Grachev returned to Moscow on Saturday [11 June] night, 
winding up his four-day fruitful visit to the Caucasus. 
  During the trip, Grachev reached agreement on sending 
Russian 
peacekeeping troops to the Georgia-Abkhazia conflicting zone and 
agreement on building Russian military bases in Armenia and 
Azerbaijan. 
  The Russian minister arrived in Yerevan, the capital of 
Armenia, on Wednesday. There he held talks with Armenian leader 
Levon Ter- Petrosyan on stationing Russian military bases on the 
Armenian territory. 
  As a result of the talks, a Russian motorized rifle division 
and a motorized rifle regiment will remain in the cities of 
Gyumri and Yerevan. Grachev told reporters that there are plans 
to supply more ammunition to Russian troops to make them mobile. 
  Moreover, both sides decided to create the system of 
air-defense in Armenia in the framework of ensuring collective 
security on the Armenian territory. 
  Grachev and Ter-Petrosyan also discussed the implementation 
of a cease fire and the disengagement of troops in the zone of 
the Armenian-Azeri conflict, which was signed earlier this year 
in Moscow. 
  More than 3,000 people have been killed in six years of 
fighting over the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabkh, an 
Armenian- populated enclave surrounded by Azeri territory and 
theoretically ruled by Azerbaijan. 
  On Friday, Grachev arrived in the Georgian capital of 
Tbilisi, where he met with Georgian Leader Eduard Shevardnadze. 
They discussed the timing and a mechanism of the deployment of 
Russian peacekeepers in the zone of the Georgia-Abkhazia 
conflict. 
  Afterwards, the Russian minister left for Gudauta to discuss 
the same issue with Abkhazian leaders. 
  According to Grachev, both Georgia and Abkhazia agreed on 
having Russian peacekeeping forces stationed in the conflict 
zone. 
  Three Russian motorized-rifle battalions from two 
peacekeeping divisions in the Leningrad [St. Petersburg] and 
Privolgye Military Districts are ready to arrive at the conflict 
zone and also ready to take part in the disengagement of the 
warring forces and the enforcement of cease fire is a Russian 
paratrooper regiment now stationed in Gudauta. 
  Meanwhile, the commander of the Russian troops in the 
Transcaucasus has been ordered to prepare another three 
battalions for the peacekeeping operation. 
  Thousands of people have died since a war broke out between 
the breakaway Abkhazia and Georgia in August 1992. 
  Grachev arrived in Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan, on 
Saturday. One of the main topics in his talks with Azeri 
President Geydar Aliyev was the Azeri-Russian protocol on a 
cease fire and the disengagement of troops in the Azeri-Armenian 
conflicting zone, which was signed on May 17. 
  Both men also discussed the establishment of a rocket attack 
prevention station in Gabel, a major facility located in the 
north of Azerbaijan. According to Grachev, the Azeri president 
fully agreed that the station was of strategic importance for 
both sides. 
  They also talked about the creation of a single system of 
air- defense in the caucasus, a main topic in Russia's foreign 
policy in the "near abroad." 
  Returning to Moscow on the same day, the Russian minister 
told reporters that Aliyev had positively responded to all these 
issues and ordered his Defense Ministry and experts to look into 
details. 

