CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Cheng Lianchang (4453 6647 2490), Ministry of </F>
Personnel Office Vice Minister: "Speed Up Fostering and 
Development of Personnel Markets"] 
  [Text] Personnel markets are an important component of 
China's socialist market system. The Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee proposed "reform the labor system 
and gradually create a labor force market," an important part of 
which is energetically developing the personnel market. The 
basic function of the labor market is to play a fundamental role 
in allocating personnel resources through market mechanisms. For 
a long time now, the contradiction of wasted talent and a 
shortage of personnel has been prominent because of the dominant 
position of the centralized job placement system. Therefore, 
fully utilizing talent and rationally allocating personnel 
resources are important issues China faces in economic 
development and in thorough implementation of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's policy to "respect intellectuals and respect talent" 
with regard to establishing socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. 
<H5>  China's Personnel Market Development Situation </H5>
  Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, the centralized job placement system is ever more 
unsuited to reform, the open door policy, and the needs of 
economic development. Floating personnel characterized by the 
dual choice of personnel and units effectively has attacked the 
actual form of ownership over personnel by certain units and 
departments. It has broken the fetters on talent held by the 
centralized job placement system. Through the circulation of 
personnel many people have found work posts in which they can 
play a role. After more than a decade of growth, there have been 
striking successes in personnel circulation work. The party and 
the state have formulated a series of policies, laws and 
regulations to encourage and support the circulation of 
personnel, striving to create conditions in society for the 
circulation of personnel. Government personnel departments at 
all levels have commenced various forms of personnel circulation 
social services, sending a great number of personnel to 
enterprises owned by the state, foreign-funded enterprises, 
rural enterprises, scientific research organizations run by the 
people and the first line of agricultural production. Between 
1983 and 1992, more than eight million people have flowed 
through personnel circulation service organizations, promoting 
economic construction and development in various causes. 
Personnel circulation work initiatives have made a good base 
for personnel markets. Personnel markets grew rapidly after 
Comrade Xiaoping's southern tour and the 14th Central Committee 
of the CPC. At present nationwide there are nearly 500 fixed 
personnel market sites in existence. Preliminary market 
mechanisms have formed in areas where the economy is relatively 
developed. 
<H5>  Necessity and Urgency of Nurturing and Developing Personnel </H5>
Markets 
  However, the centralized job placement system still occupies 
a leading position in the current personnel management system. 
The personnel structure is irrational. Irrational personnel 
structure, the irrational use of personnel resources and under 
utilization of personnel still are common problems. On the one 
hand a relatively amount of personnel is underemployed. On the 
other hand personnel is in seriously short supply and deficient. 
An important way to resolve these issues is to accelerate 
nurturing and development of personnel markets. Use market 
mechanisms instead of the centralized job placement system and 
rationally allocate personnel resources through market 
readjustment. 
  At present, China's personnel markets are growing slowly. 
They have become "stagnant" markets among the essential ones, 
affecting the rational allocation of personnel and other 
production elements and the coordinated operation of the entire 
market system. 
  Current administrative system reforms, organizational 
reform, 
promotion of reform of the state's system of public officials 
and the personnel systems of enterpris e and facility sectors 
require establishment of employment mechanisms that people can 
enter and exit, where there is dual choice that encourages 
competition and uses the market to regulate personnel supply and 
demand. Various types of circulating personnel under 
organizational reform, plus those who leave their original unit 
via dismissals, resignation or discharge, requires that they 
select units in the personnel market. At the same time the 
employing unit must also select appropriate talent from the 
personnel market. By establishing complete personnel markets, we 
can forge a channel for personnel to enter and exit units, 
promote dual choices in personnel markets and units, and realize 
the best allocation. Therefore, accelerating nurturing and 
growth of personnel marekts has become an urgent task. 
<H5>  Overall Concept for Nurturing and Developing Personnel </H5>
Markets 
  The guiding ideology for nurturing and developing personnel 
markets is: under the state's macroeconomic readjustment and 
control, speed up establishment of personnel market policies, 
legal and regulatory systems, and social service and social 
security systems. Establish personnel markets suited to a 
socialist market economy to fully develop and use China's 
personnel resources, allow people to exhaust their talents and 
use them fully and grow in service to the economy and all 
undertakings. 
  The overall goals of nurturing and developing personnel 
markets are: Personnel choose employment themselves, units 
employ personnel themselves, the market regulates supply and 
demand, perfected social security and social services, and 
market regulation plays a basic role in allocating personnel 
resources under the state's macroeconomic readjustment and 
control. 
  The major steps in nurturing and developing personnel 
markets 
are: 
  Establish the dominance of personnel and units in 
personnel markets. Grant authority to personnel to choose 
employment themselves and units to employ personnel themselves. 
Ensure dual choice of personnel and units under public, equal 
and competitive conditions. Thoroughly destroy actual ownership 
of certain personnel by units and departments. Alter the state's 
unnecessary direct interference in employment of personnel by 
units. Allow personnel and units to become the mainstays of 
market activities. 
  Establish market regulating mechanisms. Further 
manifest the principle of to each according to his labor. Use 
rational labor compensation relationships. Utilize the market's 
mutual regulating role in personnel supply and demand 
relationships. Achieve rational deployment of personnel 
resources. 
  Enhance the state's macroeconomic readjustment and 
control functions. Via policies, laws and regulation, 
economic and certain administrative measures, the state 
normalized market activities, guides the direction of the flow 
of personnel, reduces market limitations and blindness, controls 
the volume and speed of personnel circulation and realizes a 
balanced state between the total supply and demand of personnel. 
  Perfect the social security system. Reform the 
current system in which units handle insurance. Establish 
complete unemployment, pension, disability, medical treatment 
and social security systems. As soon as possible, set up and 
promote insurance systems in which units of organizations and 
handle unemployment and pension insurance systems, creating good 
social conditions for personnel markets. 
  Complete the social services system. Fully use the 
organizational and service functions of circulating personnel 
service organizations under government personnel departments in 
personnel markets. Using them at the core, set up a circulating 
personnel organizational system which is multilayered, 
multifunctional and covers all of society. 
  Implementation steps in nurturing and developing personnel 
markets: For the most part, use the personnel market sites 
established and consolidated in medium-sized and large cities in 
the last few years. Formulate laws and regulations complementary 
to personnel markets. After a certain amount of practice, strive 
to form on a national scope a relatively comple te personnel 
market system. 
<H5>  Personnel Market Development Plans </H5>
  New topics which our personnel departments face are those of 
nurturing and developing personnel markets, and making the 
personnel system better suited to the needs of new conditions in 
the socialist market economic system. Towards this end, we must 
liberate our thinking, seek truth from facts, let concepts 
evolve, work solidly, and according to the principles of party 
cadre management and relevant government policies, gradually 
transform idle and short supply talent towards market 
circulation and rational use, readjusting for surplus and 
shortage. Gradually realize the transformation from personnel 
cirulation by unit towards dual choices. Gradually manifest a 
transformation of the centralized job placement system of the 
personnel resources deployment model towards the form of 
deployment of personnel resources in which state macroeconomic 
controls play a fundamental role in personnel markets. Make 
personnel work better serve the economy, serve the employing 
unit and serve personnel nurturing and use. 
  To explore establishment of a national personnel market, in 
October 1993 we held the first national personnel market talent 
technology exchange conference. The scale of the conference was 
unprecedented. Some 68 State Council departments, committees and 
bureaus and units from 40 provinces, municipalities, autonomous 
regions, municipalities directly under the central government 
and cities listed in the plan organized more than 4,000 
enterprise and undertaking units to recruit personnel 
nationwide. Good social and economic results were obtained: 
Some 90,000 people of various talents went to the conference in 
reply to recruitment and more than 30,000 people exchanged 
intentions. Some 350 patented technologies worth 37 million yuan 
were concluded, playing a role in motivating promotion of the 
formation of a nationwide personnel market. Shortly thereafter 
we also held a national personnel circulation work meeting. The 
experience of setting up personnel markets in various places was 
exchanged and the next work plan to develop personnel markets 
was studied. 
  The main work to further nurture and develop personnel 
markets should be: 
  Deepen reform and further promote rational personnel 
circulation. First, deepen reforms of the personnel system, 
and while promoting a national public servant system, further 
reform the employment system of undertakings and enterprises. 
Further implement dual authority to choose employment. Second, 
adopt measures and study how to solve existing residency and 
cadre identity issues so as to be appropriate for the needs of 
personnel circulation. Open up circulation channels for 
personnel in different areas and different ownership system 
units. Third, further reform "centralized job placement system" 
personnel methods. Expand the scope of personnel circulation. 
Where conditions exist, personnel markets can work, whether the 
choice is for individual people or organizations, undertakings 
or enterprises. To better suit the needs of economic 
development, we also must adopt some active measures to open up 
international personnel exchanges. 
  Energetically develop personnel markets, enhance 
personnel market construction nationwide. Personnel market 
construction involves two aspects. On the one hand we must 
implement dual choice authority through reform and legislation, 
set up a complete social security system, perfect social 
services, and promote the formation of personnel market 
mechanisms. On the other hand we must really resolve the 
personnel market's necessary issues of sites, equipment, 
organization and staffing. Guide personnel markets to develop in 
the direction of diversity and networking. Gradually form 
different layered and different scales of pers onnel market 
systems centered around various medium-sized and large cities. 
Based on various places where personnel markets are set up, 
accelerate establishment of nationwide unified, open, 
competitive, orderly personnel markets by establishing personnel 
information networks and organizing united recruitment 
activities. 
  Stress ancillary policy and legal and regulatory 
work. Developing personnel markets and promoting nationwide 
personnel circulation urgently requires enhanced per sonnel 
circulation legislative work. Resolving some current irrational 
personnel circulation phenomena and strengthening macroeconmic 
guidance also requires this. 
  Enhance personnel circulation service organization 
work. An essential social condition of establishing 
personnel markets and initiating personnel circulation work is 
the establishment and perfection of personnel circulation social 
service systems. On the one hand, further enhance work on 
personnel circulation organizations under government personnel 
departments. On the other hand encourage and guide the growth of 
sector, industry, unit and civil-run personnel circulation 
organizations. 
  Do a good job of personnel information work. This 
is fundamental work for setting up personnel markets and opening 
up personnel movement. Only by taking hold of a large volume of 
personnel supply and demand information and implementing social 
exchanges can personnel circulation results be improved to 
provide better service to personnnel and units. At present not 
only are we preparing the first national personnel information 
network, preparing to select several key information journals to 
publish personnel information periodicals but we also are taking 
note of developing the role of broadcasting, television, 
newspapers and other news media in personnel information work to 
advance the socialization of personnel information through 
various forms. 
  Nurturing and developing personnel markets is a systematic 
social process involving reform of the insurance and welfare, 
medical treatment, household registration and housing systems. 
Reliance on personnel departments alone is insufficient. It 
requires the strong support of each level of the government and 
relevant sectors. We hope to make nurturing and developing 
personnel markets an importart job to master in building a 
socialist market economic system, to bring it into overall 
market system planning to ensure coordinated development of 
personnel markets and other essential markets to make personnel 
markets play their proper role in China's socialist market 
economy. 

