Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Stock Exchange: Results and </F>
Prospects: `The Year of the Central Exchange' Has Not Yet 
Arrived"] 
  [Text] Today we can ascertain with complete certainty 
that the Moscow Central Stock Exchange (MTsFB) has grown into a 
developed national structure that operates not only throughout 
all of the Russian Federation, but in the international arena as 
well, expanding cooperation with the stock exchanges of the 
U.S., Western Europe, and Asia. The MTsFB is a type of practical 
training ground for the processing of Western technologies in 
the spheres of trading and clearing and deposit services. What 
was last year like for the Russian securities market and for the 
MTsFB in particular? 
  Despite certain successes, the securities market in Russia 
continues to retain features of a small, developing market in 
which primary placing of orders is predominant and the volume 
and liquidity of the secondary market are still extremely low. 
The basic features of the contemporary stock market include the 
absence of a precise, formulated plan of development, an 
underdeveloped material base and infrastructure, a high risk 
level related to securities, and the absence of optimal 
regulation by the government. The general condition of the 
contemporary Russian securities market attests to its 
rudimentary nature and to the unavoidability of rises and falls 
in the near future. Nevertheless, this development should be 
considered an important factor in stabilizing the country's 
economic situation. 
  "To be perfectly frank, the past year has failed to live up 
to our expectations," states Vyacheslav Pankin, MTsFB president. 
"In analyzing the tendencies that were then revealing 
themselves, I thought that we would be able to call 1993 the 
`year of securities' with all justification. The burgeoning 
growth of privatized enterprises spoke in support of this and 
promised a great issuance of stocks and other securities. In 
actuality the market did begin to fill with securities. Some 
banks have already issued stock ten times, but major politics 
interfered. You probably remember -- the long opposition of the 
executive and legal authorities, and then the high levels of 
inflation. The government was more involved in politics than in 
economics. As a result, many potential investors preferred not 
to take risks and worked in short-term markets. The rise of the 
securities market that we had counted on did not materialize." 
  Despite the MTsFB president's fairly restrained assessment 
of 
last year, it should be noted that it was nevertheless a year of 
significant events. 
  One of the first steps taken by the exchange in the 
direction 
of implementing contemporary principles of stock trading was the 
development of fairly strict rules on listing -- the procedure 
for placing securities on the market for trading based on an 
analysis of the issuer's financial condition. The basis for 
these rules was the listing regulations of the leading stock 
exchanges of the world. 
  The MTsFB moved toward this consciously, despite the risk of 
losing potential issuers, who might be attracted by the more 
liberal rules of other exchanges. Immediately following the 
introduction of this procedure the turnover in securities on the 
MTsFB decreased. Whereas in August-September 1991 the volume of 
transactions on the exchange comprised 271.8 million rubles, in 
1992 it equalled only 74.9 million rubles for the entire year. 
However, today the MTsFB, having passed through the unavoidable 
period of decreased sales volume, has once again become one of 
the most highly liquid secondary markets in Russia. In the 
course of last year the market sold securities worth 779.3 
million rubles, which is greater than 1992 volumes by a factor 
of more than 10. Opportunities have arisen to establish real 
balanced supply and demand prices. 
  Leading experts from the finance ministry, 
Goskomimushchestvo 
[State Property Committee] and the Russian Fund on Federal 
Property, and representatives of the exchange's stockholders 
have been recruited for work on the MTsFB committee. As of 20 
July 1993, the date of the first committee meeting, the register 
of securities quoted on the MTsFB has included the stock of 39 
of the largest commercial banks, industrial enterprises and 
trade companies representing all regions of Russia. The results 
of operations involving securities that are listed on the MTsFB 
comprised 164 million rubles (35 percent of total volume of 
transactions). 
  In May 1993 the MTsFB exchange council confirmed changes in 
the "Regulations for Listing Securities for Exchange Trading and 
for Exclusion From Trading on the MTsFB." This document 
stipulates that issuances and stock transactions not recorded in 
the exchange in the course of three months are transferred into 
the so-called "waiting zone," and after 3 months have elapsed if 
no transactions have taken place involving the stocks in 
question, the issuances will be subject to a delisting procedure. 
  Thus in September 1993 the number of MTsFB listings 
decreased 
by four. The stock of Kuzbassbank, SVAKbank, Unikombank and the 
GUM [State universal store] Trading House were placed into the 
"waiting zone." As a result, during the year the stock exchange 
index for stocks included on the MTsFB register equalled 
2207.61. Its peak level (9523.81) occurred in March, and the 
lowest figure (1724.14) was seen in February, when only three 
transactions worth 200,000 rubles were carried out on the basis 
of 116 stocks. 
  Many factors contributed to the growth in trading on the 
MTsFB. Up until the summer of 1993 securities trading on Russian 
exchanges increased primarily as a result of voucher operations. 
A considerable increase in securities trading began in June. 
Each month the proportion of operations involving vouchers 
decreased and that of operations involving other forms of 
securities increased. For example, in August the MTsFB carried 
out extensive transactions worth over 317 million rubles in the 
financial bill market. It is evident that with the lengthening 
of the stabilization period for the ruble exchange rate the 
participants in the financial market began to seek new spheres 
for supplementing their capital. Among the internal factors that 
affected the pace of growth in trading volume is the 
organization of daily trading in the MTsFB's own operations hall 
on Ilinka Street near central Moscow's Birzhevaya Square [Stock 
Exchange Square], the historic name of which was restored thanks 
to the initiative of the MTsFB. 
  Within the MTsFB structure of transactions involving 
different groups of securities, stocks (54.5 percent of total 
sales in 1993) and the bill market (43.8 percent) clearly 
dominate. The MTsFB administration has expressed satisfaction at 
this fact since stocks are traditionally the number one 
commodity for stock exchanges, and the bill market is a new form 
of debt securities for the Russian market at the same time that 
it is an integral part of trading on classical stock exchanges. 
The insignificant proportion of options (0.001 percent) on the 
MTsFB corresponds to the general underdevelopment of the futures 
and options markets in Russia. 
  Within the stocks group, bank stocks are unreservedly 
predominant (61.3 percent). The interest in bank stocks is 
stable, and practical experience has shown that trading in the 
stock of one bank will invariably be replaced by interest in the 
stock of another bank. It should be noted that the orientation 
of investors primarily towards the bank sphere has been observed 
for over a year now. The basis for this tendency is the great 
regularity in the transition from one sphere to another during 
the development of a market economy. The stage of initial 
accumulation of capital, for which the predominance of trading 
capital is characteristic, is over. The effectiveness of 
investing assets in intermediate trading structures has 
decreased steadfastly during the last year. As a result, bank 
stock has replaced stock from exchanges and other structures 
representing the intermediate trading sector, which was more 
popular in 1991 and early 1992. 
  Second in transaction volume is a group of stocks from 
trading houses and trading companies, consisting primarily of 
securities from Mikrodin Company, which sells fairly large 
blocks of 50 to 200 shares. 
  According to Vyacheslav Pankin, one of the main conceptual 
problems today is what model to select for further development 
of the stock exchange in Russia -- the American or the European. 
Existing law favors a mixed form. But then it will be possible 
to say with all certainty that in coming years banks will crowd 
from the market all securities of small brokers. At present, 
however, banks themselves prefer to be involved in the issuance 
of their own stock and to give credit for earned capital. 
  According to a decision by the exchange council, this year 
it 
is planned to introduce a "short money" exchange on the MTsFB, 
futures contracts in SKV [freely convertible currency] and check 
auctions. Electronic trading methodologies will be perfected. 
The problems of accounting for securities in depositories and 
the implementation of a register for stockholders will be dealt 
with. 
  Among the basic priorities is the restoration of a building 
which was transferred to the exchange's balance by the Moscow 
government and which is an architectural monument. It is planned 
to allocate about $10 million for its restoration. Moreover, two 
commercial banks will be partners in this matter, which once 
again attests to the fairly high rating of the MTsFB in Russia's 
business world. 
  To my question as to whether in the future security issues 
from the republics of the former USSR which have entered the 
ruble zone would be quoted on the exchange, Mr. Pankin answered 
that in principle this has not been excluded. However, at the 
present time due to the high level of inflation in these 
republics it is quite unlikely. Naturally, they would begin in 
the "waiting zone." 

