BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Toby Moore, transport correspondent: "Luggage </F>
Bar-Code To Beat Bombers"] 
  [Text] Airlines are being ordered by the Government to stop 
unaccompanied luggage being put on board aircraft, as part of 
attempts to prevent a Lockerbie-style disaster. 
  The decision follows successful trials at Manchester Airport 
with a refinement of the bar-code system used to price goods in 
shops. 
  An explosive device hidden in luggage without an 
accompanying 
passenger brought down Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie in 
December 1988, with the loss of 270 lives. 
  Since then, fast, thorough checks make sure that passengers 
and luggage are booked on the same flight. But the risk remains 
on a terrorist checking a bag onto a flight and then walking out 
of the airport. 
  It is then up to random screening in baggage-handling areas 
and the watchful eye of an X-ray operator to spot anything 
suspicious. 
  The Manchester trial of equipment designed by Ferranti has 
convinced ministers it is now possible to make sure that luggage 
does not enter an aircraft without an accompanying passenger. 
  Lord Mackay, the aviation minister, will use a visit to 
Manchester Airport on Monday to announce that from July 1 every 
airline operating international flights out of Britain must 
introduce some system to ensure that luggage and passengers 
match. 
  Using the bar-code technology favoured by the Government, 
travellers would have a code stamped on their boarding pass when 
checking-in and the same code stamped on luggage they send for 
storage in the hold of their flight. Airline staff will use a 
device to read the bar-code on the boarding passes. This will 
tell the airline's computer system that a particular passenger 
has boarded. 
  The baggage handler will use a code-reader to check luggage 
sent for stowage. It will give him a pass or fail signal that 
the luggage is authorised for the flight and matches someone who 
has at least checked in. If the passenger fails to board, the 
airline's computer will automatically register that there is 
unaccompanied luggage on board. The system will show instantly 
where the unaccompanied luggage is stored. This will end the 
long process of taking out every single item of baggage. 
  Bar-coding will also make it less likely that baggage will 
end up at the wrong destination. "Airlines spend millions of 
pounds each year reuniting luggage with passengers," said a 
Department of Transport spokesman. 
  Meanwhile, the first system for automatically detecting 
explosives in luggage is now installed at Heathrow and Gatwick. 

