BFN 

  [Text] Paris, April 20 (XINHUA) -- French President 
Francois Mitterrand today proposed a quadripartite emergency 
meeting between Western Europe, the U.S., Russia and the UN to 
work out a coordinated position for solving the Bosnia crisis. 
  The press bureau of the presidential office announced that 
Mitterrand made the suggestion in a telephone conversation with 
U.S. President Bill Clinton. 
  Earlier this month, Mitterrand had respectively wrote to 
Clinton, Russian President Boris Yeltsin, executive president of 
the European Union, Greek Prime Minister Andreas George 
Papandreou and UN Secretary-General Butrus Butrus-Ghali. 
  In the letters, Mitterrand asked the four sides to 
coordinate 
their positions and urge the warring parties in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina to resume peace talks immediately in a bid to 
seek a political solution to the crisis. 
  On April 18, Mitterrand also had telephone talks with German 
Chancellor Helmut Kohl. French official sources said Kohl 
agreed to such a quadripartite emergency meeting while Yeltsin 
also gave his consent in a telephone conversation with Kohl. 
  In a related development, a spokesman of the French Foreign 
Ministry said today that French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe had 
telephone talks with U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher 
Tuesday afternoon and reiterated the following French position 
on an end to the Bosnia conflict: 
  -- Adoption of a UN resolution on an immediate cease-fire 
in, 
the withdrawal of the Serb troops from and the deployment of UN 
peacekeepers in Gorazde. 
  -- Effective measures to protect the security zones 
designated by the United Nations in Bosnia-Hercegovina. 
  -- A united position among Russia, Western Europe, the 
United 
States and the United Nations for pressing the warring parties 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina to resume peace talks. 
  "The U.S. secretary of state agreed in principle that it is 
necessary to further coordinate the diplomatic actions of all 
parties," but he failed to take a clear-cut stand on the French 
proposal, the spokesman said. 

