Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] In order to strengthen nuclear non-proliferation, 
the Science and Technology Agency (STA) has proposed the idea of 
creating an ``international system for control of plutonium and 
highly enriched uranium,'' which will unify the control of 
nuclear materials, track plans for their use and make this 
information available internationally. The goals of this system 
are appropriate control of nuclear materials that are being 
generated by the dismantling of nuclear weapons and increased 
transparency in their use. The study group on the international 
control of plutonium (chaired by Hiroyoshi Kurihara, a member of 
the board of directors of the Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel 
Development Corporation (PNC)), a research committee for the 
director-general of STA's Nuclear Energy Bureau, drew up a basic 
framework for the system and presented it as an interim report 
to the Japan Atomic Energy Commission (JAEC) at the end of last 
week. STA wants to continue studies through exchanges of views 
with other countries and then complete the system. 
  According to STA, countries participating in this system 
will 
in principle be (1) countries that are dismantling nuclear 
weapons, (2) countries that have nuclear weapons and carry out 
commercial reprocessing, (3) countries that are implementing a 
nuclear fuel cycle, and (4) countries that are using plutonium 
and highly enriched uranium for research on peaceful use of 
these substances. 
  Participating countries will register with the system all 
the 
plutonium and highly enriched uranium (over 10&percnt; enriched) 
in 
each facility. They will report to the system their utilization 
plans; and they will get confirmation from a committee composed 
of representatives from all participating countries. Plutonium 
in excess of the utilization plans will be controlled in a 
storage and control facility to be established by the 
participating countries. Withdrawal of excess plutonium will be 
via request by the owner country and will be within the scope of 
its utilization plan. Also, the secretariat of the proposed 
system will be a function of the secretariat of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). 
  Additionally, the plan is to create a multilateral study 
forum composed of the IAEA and interested countries to work on 
the creation of this system. 

