Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Blendi Fevziu article: "State Secret -- Serious Threat"] </F>
  [Text] The trial of the year is approaching for the 
independent KOHA JONE, the country's largest newspaper, just as 
in May 1992 when every television news broadcast declared that 
the newspaper's director Nikolle Lesi was at the center of 
corruption in Lezhe, and in March 1993, when Editor-in-Chief 
Frangaj was held under house arrest for spreading panic. Now, 
in the final days of January 1994, Editor-in-Chief Frangaj and 
the journalist Martin Leka have been moved to one of the cold 
cells of Tirana prison. The controversial Press Law has begun 
to stretch its tentacles, as expected, only toward those 
opposing the government. KOHA JONE is again made accountable 
for revealing a secret, and the accuser in both cases is Defense 
Minister Zhulali. The case of a minister prosecuting a 
newspaper for stealing secrets twice within the space of 10 
months in unique. The case of an editor-in-chief of the 
country's largest newspaper being arrested with total ease on a 
simple charge raised by the minister is also unique. Logic 
dictates otherwise. The minister should be removed from the 
cabinet for incompetence. A minister who cannot keep his 
secrets in peacetime, and fills the pages of newspapers with 
them, cannot serve the country in time of war. The main 
question worrying the public today, however, is whether the news 
published in KOHA JONE is a secret and to what limits state 
secrets should extend. 
  The first question is very simple, and it seems that Frangaj 
and Leka are suffering because of a whim of Zhulali. The news 
about disarming officers ran round the offices of all the 
newspapers the following day, and thus would have circulated 
throughtout Albania. This argument has already been mentioned. 
Thousands of officers would return home unarmed and they could 
not lie to their wives and children that they had forgotten 
their revolvers at their units. 
  This is all the more true because is was a matter of an 
order, and since its formation the army has always acted on the 
basis of orders. Not every order is a secret. The document 
ordering the disarmament did not carry this seal. Moreover, 
this was not the first time. Months ago, ALEANCA and KOHA JONE 
published a memorandum of Gazidede, addressed to Kudret Cela, 
asking for the removal of S. Ngjela's right to practise law. 
This letter was headed "secret," but this did not prevent the 
newspapers from publishing it on their first pages. Gazidede 
not only did not raise a charge over the revelation of [words 
indistinct], but called on Prime Minister Meksi to make the 
necessary explanations before parliament. 
  State secrets are now the greatest surprise of the Press 
Law. 
Their unlimited scope, without boundary markers, could turn them 
into accident black spots where journalists could suffer for 
their profession zeal. They could become a weapon for the state 
to threaten rebellious citizens, and the Frangaj-Leka case is 
more than an example. From today, we will all become the slaves 
of this law, and our articles will be slashed by self-censorship 
and by state secrets. 
  The arrest of the two journalists is unjustifiable. If they 
have broken the law, they can be investigated while remaining 
free, which is entirely normal. The extreme measure of 
detention rather resembles pressure. None of their Albanian or 
foreign colleagues can agree to such a thing, which is a big 
minus mark for any regime. 
  RILINDJA DEMOKRATIKE violates the Press Law every day and at 
every moment, but nobody has accused it. It would be enough to 
mention the story of the files and the pseudonyms to directly 
prosecute the editor-in-chief of RILINDJA DEMOKRATIKE. If the 
daily lists of collaborators with the State Security Service 
published by RILINDJA DEMOKRATIKE are true, the newspaper is 
falling foul of the law. Parliament has still not decided to 
open the files and any act against this stand is considered 
illegal. It could quite easily be called revealing a state 
secret, and somebody could be punished. If the pseudonyms are 
false, RILINDJA DEMOKRATIKE could be accused of slander and 
disinformation, and the Press Law provides for such things. 
  The Press Law continues to strike at those who oppose it, 
through more than 38 court sessions against four criminally 
charged journalists of KOHA JONE, two of them charged in more 
than one case. Frangaj and Leka will continue to remain in 
isolation, because a minister can no longer trust his staff, and 
his secrets are walking the streets in the shape of disarmed 
officers. 

