BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 23 KYODO -- Japan and the United States 
have made steady progress in bilateral trade "framework" talks 
on government procurement, a Japanese official said Thursday [23 
June]. 
  "We are advancing step by step," the official at the Foreign 
Ministry said, briefing reporters on two days of 
subcabinet-level talks that ended Thursday. 
  The official said the latest meeting between Deputy Foreign 
Minister Sadayuki Hayashi and Deputy U.S. Trade Representative 
Charlene Barshevsky took up every topic under the government 
procurement category of the framework negotiations. 
  The subjects for talks included the most sensitive issue of 
how to set "quantitative criteria" as a way to gauge the 
openness of Japan's market, the official added. 
  Talks on the framework's government procurement area 
comprise 
medical equipment and telecommunications equipment. No U.S. 
trade officials could be reached for comment on the latest 
meeting. 
  The Japanese official said the high-level talks were held on 
the basis of Japanese proposals shown in a market-opening 
package in March. 
  "It would not be correct to say the Japanese side has been 
120 percent satisfied with the results of the two-day 
discussion," the official said. 
  But he added, "mutual understanding has been deepened." 
  The official said the latest talks gave him impression that 
the spirit of a may agreement between Japan and the U.S. to 
resume the long-suspended framework talks is "still alive." 
  He was referring to the accord that clarified Washington's 
pledge not to seek any "numerical targets" in restarted 
framework talks. 
  The official acknowledged both parties are still divided 
over 
the treatment of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp. (NTT) 
under telecom trade talks. 
  "Japan and the U.S. have remained unchanged in their basic 
stance on the matter," the official said. 
  Tokyo has insisted that NTT, a private company, should not 
be 
included in the agenda of the bilateral government procurement 
talks while the U.S. has proposed differently, saying the 
Japanese telecom giant is partly owned by the government. 
  The official said the two countries are likely to hold 
working-level talks on government procurement in Washington next 
week or the week after next, in order to keep the talks moving 
ahead, the official said. 
  Government procurement is one of the three priority trade 
sectors under the framework talks along with insurance and trade 
in auto and auto parts. 
  Trade talks on the three areas recently resumed after a 
hiatus of three and a half months following the rupture of the 
summit between then Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa 
and U.S. President Bill Clinton in February. 

