Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Seoul vernacular newspapers on 29 March 
carry editorials on ROK President Kim Yong-sam's meeting with 
PRC President Jiang Zemin regarding the North Korean nuclear 
issue. 
  The moderate TONG-A ILBO carries on page 3 an 800-word 
editorial entitled "A Pledge of Dialogue and Cooperation." 
Noting the significance of the ROK-PRC summit talks to discuss 
the North Korean nuclear issue, as well as economic cooperation 
between the two countries, the report says it is considered 
desirable that the two leaders of the ROK and PRC have agreed to 
support denuclearization on the Korean peninsula and to work 
together for the settlement of the nuclear issue on the Korean 
peninsula. 
  Referring to their agreement to resolve the North Korean 
nuclear issue by urging North Korea to accept additional nuclear 
inspection by a team from the International Atomic Energy Agency 
[IAEA] based on a statement issued by the president of the UN 
Security Council rather than a resolution, the report says, 
"this is consistent with the position and principle of the 
Chinese Government in dealing with the Korean peninsula issue or 
the North Korean nuclear issue." 
  Noting President Jiang Zemin's remarks calling for the 
settlement of the North Korean nuclear issue peacefully through 
dialogues between the United States and North Korea, between the 
North and South, and between North Korea and the IAEA, the 
report says, "it is possible that President Jiang Zemin's 
remarks may cause the North Korean nuclear issue to remain 
unsettled, considering the fact that the suspicion of the 
nuclear issue cannot be dispelled unless North Korea accepts the 
additional nuclear inspections within six weeks." 
  Referring to the need for China's active participation in 
resolving the North Korean nuclear issue, the report says that 
it is important to settle the North Korean nuclear issue in 
order to promote economic cooperation and exchange of cultures 
between the two countries. 
  The pro-government SEOUL SINMUN carries on page 3 an 
800-word 
editorial entitled "The Cooperation by the Two Leaders of the 
ROK and PRC Regarding the North Korean Nuclear Issue." 
  Referring to the agreement to jointly make efforts to 
denuclearize the Korean peninsula and to the importance of the 
ROK- PRC summit talks in resolving the North Korean nuclear 
issue, the report says: "It is very significant that the ROK and 
the PRC have the same opinion that peace and security on the 
Korean peninsula are very important in achieving prosperity in 
the Northeast Asia." 
  Noting a pledge of security on the Korean peninsula made 
during the ROK-PRC summit talks, the report says, "in other 
words, this is China's pledge indicating that it will never 
forgive any threat posed to peace and security on the Korean 
peninsula. This can be regarded as the most powerful wedge to 
prevent North Korea from invading South Korea." 
  The report concludes that President Kim Yong-sam's ongoing 
visit to China serves as a firm foundation for the development 
of ROK-PRC relations. 

