Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Valeriy Rudnev report: "State Committee for the State of </F>
Emergency [SCSE] Case: Defendants' Latest Ploys"] 
  [Text] The questioning of defendants continues at the court 
session hearing the State Committee for the State of Emergency 
[SCSE] case, which has resumed after a long recess. 
  Marshal Yazov is clearly sticking to the line previously 
agreed with the other defendants -- the line previously followed 
by KGB General Vladimir Kryuchkov -- of talking more about 
Mikhail Gorbachev and less about himself. He notably stated 
that, in his opinion, the former USSR president agreed in 
principle with the SCSE members' actions in August 1991. 
According to the marshal, Gorbachev's parting words to the SCSE 
group on 18 August were: "Act, and we shall see." True, Yazov 
acknowledged that Gorbachev did not agree with the introduction 
of a state of emergency in the country. However, knowing 
Gorbachev's character, the marshal stressed in his testimony 
that his words could have been interpreted as a wish to avoid 
responsibility. "There can be no question of the USSR 
president's having been isolated in any way," Yazov stated. 
"Gorbachev isolated himself for three days." 
  Evaluating the nature of the emergency measures introduced 
by 
the SCSE group, the USSR marshal drew the court's attention to 
the fact that troops had not dispersed constitutional bodies or 
interfered with their activity. And the Defense Ministry had 
started withdrawing armored vehicles from the capital as early 
as 19 August in order to avoid potential provocation. The 
decision to withdraw all troops from Moscow was made on 20 
August. Moreover, Yazov stated, the USSR Defense Ministry, 
after consultations between Russian President Boris Yeltsin and 
Pavel Grachev, commander of the country's airborne troops at the 
time, even sent a battalion of airborne assault troops to defend 
the White House. Now, however, according to Yazov, it is thought 
that those assault troops deserted from the Defense Ministry and 
went over to Boris Yeltsin. 
  Yazov, like Kryuchkov, does not acknowledge his guilt. On 
the other hand, he does regard as criminal the actions of 
Gorbachev and the former president's kindred spirits who 
destroyed the USSR. 
  However, it is most likely not the defendants' testimony 
that 
is proving really intriguing in the historic trial under way in 
the Russian Supreme Court. That testimony is already known to 
everyone (it only remains for a movie to be made of it all). 
Perhaps the only interest is in the dwindling number of 
defendants in the dock: How many of them will be there to hear 
the verdict? 
  Of the 14 SCSE members arraigned by the investigators in 
1991 
only nine remained by the end of 1993. Two of them -- Anatoliy 
Lukyanov and Vasiliy Starodubtsev -- were intending to leave the 
courtroom at the start of 1994: They were both elected deputies 
in the new parliament and were fully counting on receiving 
immunity. However, the court deemed otherwise: Citing the law, 
it ruled that a deputy's immunity from criminal prosecution does 
not apply in this case to Lukyanov and Starodubtsev, 
  The defendants immediately came up with new ruses. Notably, 
Valentin Pavlov did not appear for trial on the day appointed by 
the court, claiming illness. After checking out Pavlov's 
"sickness certificate," the panel of military judges ruled that 
the defendant's nonappearance had no legal basis and warned him 
that there could be a change in the measures employed to secure 
his appearance in court, in other words, he could be held in 
custody. 
  Anatoliy Lukyanov made an attempt to impose his own rules on 
the court. He initially covered his absence from court with a 
medical certificate. But the "sick" Lukyanov's regular 
appearances in parliament exposed this lame ploy. Then Lukyanov 
told the court that he could sit in the dock only during that 
time free from the discharge of affairs of state in parliament. 
That trick did not work. In its judgment the panel of military 
judges ruled that no business, even affairs of state, can exempt 
a defendant from the duty to be in the place determined by 
criminal proceedings, namely the dock. 
  The SCSE trial continues. What will the defendants dream up 
next? 

