Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Pedro Chamorro] </F>
  [Text] Yesterday afternoon, Colonel Javier Carrion 
MacDonough, second in command of the EPS [Sandinist People's 
Army] General Staff, held an extensive news conference on Army 
activities in 1993 and plans for 1994. 
  According to Carrion, as of January 1993, there were between 
2,300 and 2,400 rearmed men among the various groups operating 
primarily in the Nueva Segovia and Jinotega Departments. 
Approximately 1,700 irregular troops have been demobilized as a 
result of the amnesty, and as a result of the closure of the 
security zones or enclaves this past October. The EPS began 
several operations aimed at curbing those groups that decided 
not to take advantage of the amnesty and who chose to carry out 
activities like burning ranches, kidnappings, and robberies, 
thereby endangering the coffee harvest instead. 
  In recapping the irregular groups' activities in 1993, 
Carrion explained that 2,388 operations had been executed; of 
this amount, 761 had a political-military nature and 1,627 were 
strictly against criminal activities. 
  Carrion pointed out the EPS sustained 129 casualties in 
clashes against irregular groups, of which 49 were fatalities. 
  As of October 1993, the 3-80 Northern Front began to expand 
throughout Nueva Segovia, and "El Chacal" [Jose Angel Talavera] 
crossed the border into Honduras. The high-ranking military 
officer said "El Chacal's" presence in the region along the 
Honduran border caused the EPS General Staff to fear that 
tensions could develop with Honduras. The Army also believed he 
could be using Honduras to regroup his forces considering the 
fact there were no longer any security zones in Nicaragua. 
  Carrion explained that another important EPS activity 
included protecting produce growers by offsetting the so-called 
"Matches Plan" [plan fosforo], "El Chacal's" plan of blocking 
the 1993-94 northern region coffee harvest. 
  In recapping the 1993 accomplishments as relates to 
pacification efforts, Carrion said 1,700 armed irregulars had 
been disarmed and more than 8,000 rifles had been seized as part 
of the BED [Special Disarmament Brigade] program. Other weapons 
of war seized during 1993 include 150 machine guns and more than 
1,000 kg of plastic explosives. This entire arsonal was 
destroyed. With these 8,000 rifles, the total amount of war 
equipment seized and destroyed since 1990 is 51,409 pieces. 
  Twenty-two groups were disbanded and more than 100 people 
were placed at the disposal of judicial authorities as part of a 
joint program with the National Police. 
  With respect to 1994 activities, Carrion indicated they will 
basically be similar to those carried out in 1993 -- in other 
words, to continue fighting the irregular groups and protecting 
farmers. According to the EPS officer, both undertakings will 
utilize 79 percent of the troops. 
  He also referred to activities like military training and 
upgrading, where 42,000 man-hours were invested during 1993. 
  Carrion talked about several other 1993 activities: 
supporting the "Glass of Milk" program; helping to transport 
turtles from Najapa's La Laguna lake when it dried up; 
establishing a permanent presence along the San Juan River, 
particularly in the southern area near the Si-A-Paz forest 
reserve where tourists from Costa Rica continue to fish 
illegally; and the prevention of animal contraband in the 
aforementioned reserve. 
  He referred to support of communities stricken by natural 
disasters, like the 1993 floods of Malacatoya and some Managua 
neighborhoods; the prevention of illegal fishing, which in 1993, 
despite insufficient ships, resulted in the capture of 77 pirate 
sea vessels operating in the Atlantic side. 
  These activities encompassed the fight against drug 
trafficking, including tackling this sensitive problem together 
with the civilian population and the National Police, thereby 
dealing some heavy blows to the mafia; projects carried out in 
several of the country's production areas, including locating 
land mines which killed five EPS soldiers, including a 
specialist officer. 
  He also talked about building housing units for the officers 
corps; preparing an EPS inventory to be given to the OAS as part 
of international agreements; formulating an officers retirement 
plan and a military bill proposal which will regulate the 
institution once it is approved by the National Assembly. 
  With respect to social conflicts which have affected the 
country, such as the current transportation system strike, 
Carrion indicated the EPS will only intervene if these events 
turn into armed conflicts like the Esteli takeover, which the 
National Police was unable to control. He added that permanent 
communication is being maintained between the EPS and the 
National Police. 

