Narcotics   Problems 

<F P=102> 94WD0287A Baku BAKINSKIY RABOCHIY in Russian 22 Feb 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94WD0287A </F>
<F P=104>  Baku BAKINSKIY RABOCHIY </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kh. Ordukhanova: "An Invitation to Dialogue"] </F>
  [Text] A "round table" was held the other day at the 
Internal Affairs Ministry of Azerbaijan, on problems of the 
struggle with drug addiction and the drug business. Today 
BAKINSKIY RABOCHIY invites the readers' attention to the 
statements of its participants. Azerbaijan Internal Affairs 
Minister Vagif Novruzov opened the meeting: 
  In recent times an increase in drug addiction, drug business 
and the crime which thrives on that soil has been observed 
throughout the world. This has to be alarming to the government 
of any country. The UN has drawn up a Worldwide Program of 
Actions for International Cooperation in the Struggle with the 
Illegal Production and Distribution of Narcotic Substances. 
Azerbaijan too has joined in this struggle. But the narcotics 
situation in the republic has become much more complex. 
Specialists affirm that if decisive measures are not taken, 
tomorrow it may be too late. 
  There are a number of reasons for the worsening narcotics 
situation in the republic. These include the increasing 
complexity of the operational situation connected with the start 
of the economic reforms; the decline in the people's standard of 
living; and the opening of the borders, which aids the expansion 
of the scope of the drug business. And the prerequisites exist 
for the development of the drug business in the republic as 
well--practically every region has its own raw-material base, 
and the appropriate climate. The drug business is an adaptable 
one, and the dealers have begun to re-organize their operations 
to make use of such channels, and to adopt methods which they 
did not even dream of two years ago. Azerbaijan is becoming a 
trans-shipment point for the transfer of narcotics from Asia to 
Europe and the other way around. One group was arrested with 
1,387 kg of morphine. They were following the 
Afghanistan-Turkmenistan-Azerbaijan-Georgia-Turkey route and 
were arrested at the Sarpi border post on the Turkish border! At 
present, synthetic drugs are enjoying great "demand." Whereas, 
for example, a gram of hashish is enough for one cigarette, from 
one gram of morphine one can make 100 doses of solution for 
injection. One gram of trimethylphentanil makes one thousand 
doses for injection, and this drug is 5,500 times more powerful 
than morphine. 
  While starting new airlines and developing transport ties 
with foreign countries, which of course is laudable, one should, 
in my view, also develop a clear-cut system for combatting the 
penetration of drug dealers into the republic. I understand that 
the lion's share of the work falls to the MVD structure, and we 
are doing our job; nevertheless, this path is strewn with many 
difficulties. Suffice it to say that one has to work under 
extreme conditions, and that the employees in the MVD 
Administrations do not have the reliable and all-encompassing 
social and legal protection which the current situation demands. 
  Chief of the Administration for Combatting Drug 
Addiction and the Drug Business, Adalyat Ibragimov: 
  The number of detected crimes in the drug business realm has 
noticeably increased. Whereas, for example, in 1992, 1,305 
crimes were registered under Articles 225, 226, 226-1, 226-2, 
226-3, 226-4, 226-5, 226-6 and 227 of the Criminal Code of the 
Azerbaijan Republic, in 1993, 1,755 criminal cases were brought 
under these same articles. Approximately 740 kg of various 
narcotic substances were confiscated from the criminals, as well 
as hundreds of kilograms of raw narcotic plant materials, 
weapons, and R10 million in counterfeit currency. Criminal 
proceedings were instituted against 13 citizens of the IRI 
[Islamic Republic of Iran], and 81 from CIS countries. 
  On 25 November 1993, IRI citizens Farzad Shafi and Mashallah 
Shafi were arrested in Baku, as they were attempting to sell 850 
grams of a narcotic substance (Tiryak). 
  On 30 November 1993, other citizens of the IRI were arrested 
in Baku: Dzhafar Garakhanly Safar, who was trying to sell a 
large amount of narcotics (raw opium); and Khalili Gysymlu 
Nursret, Shekh Imampur Veli, Siyavushani Mekhti Ali, and Amir 
Guseyn Khagigat Pilavar Akhmed, who were trying to sell 685 
grams of a narcotic substance (raw opium) for R1,300,000; and so 
on. 
  Just a few days ago we completed an operation for the arrest 
of a native of Fizuli, A. Alyshev, who was in possession of 
nearly a kilogram of raw opium, the black-market price of which 
would amount to R20 million. 
  Last year 3,994 drug addicts were registered, among whom 
were 
268 women and 36 juveniles. We have carried out Operation 
"Hash-Hash-93", during which drug-enforcement agents in 26 
rayons of Azerbaijan instituted criminal proceedings on 41 
counts of growing illegal narcotics-bearing plants. 
  We are now introducing a unified automated system--a "data 
bank"--by means of which we will be able to exchange information 
and operational data about drug dealers, trans-shippers and 
other persons occupied in the drug business. The system permits 
establishing a legal mechanism for the control of joint 
operations, and to prevent the commission of crimes in this 
sphere. We are about to conduct meetings with our Turkish and 
Iranian colleagues, at which we plan to work out a mechanism for 
joint operations. 
  I must note that we meet more frequently with 
representatives 
of our neighboring states than with our colleagues from other 
law-enforcement organs and services. We do not have a single 
coordinating center in the struggle with the "white death." We 
often have to act at our own peril and risk, and do not sense 
the aid of the public. I would think that the conclusions of our 
"round table" will not allow anyone to remain indifferent to the 
inevitable fate of thousands and thousands of citizens of our 
republic. 
  Chief Physician of the Republic Narcological Clinic 
System, Azhif Abdullayev: 
  Drug addiction has not yet reached a threatening level in 
our 
republic, but medicine is already experiencing serious 
difficulties even with the number of patients we already have. 
  It is no secret that drug addiction is a serious and 
dangerous disease, to which a person subjects himself 
voluntarily. But drug addiction is also a crime, for narcotic 
substances are not freely available for sale, and the 
acquisition, use, storage and transmission to other persons 
comprise all the elements of a crime. The very worst thing is 
that the ranks of drug addiction are being filled at the expense 
of our youth. The reasons are many: curiosity, a strong desire 
for acute sensations, and the lack of complete information on 
the consequences of using narcotics. Unfortunately, certain 
young people are under the dangerous misconception that they can 
discontinue their use of drugs at any time, if they want to. But 
from the very first injection of opium or the first drag of 
hashish, a person finds himself in the trap of the "white 
death"--from which it is almost impossible to escape, and 
treatment does not always produce the expected effect. Death at 
a young age (frequently--suicide or purposeful overdose), 
psychiatric disorders, and birth defects in one's offspring--are 
a tragedy for ones relatives and dear ones; these misfortunes 
await everyone who falls to the temptation. Statistics show that 
in his short life, every drug addict draws up to six other 
people into his "circle." The experience of our narcological 
service shows that a drug addict either turns to crime, or 
suffers withdrawal symptoms, or takes an excessive dose. The 
costs of narcotics are continually increasing, and that means 
their use is growing and expanding as well. The drug business is 
a very profitable one, and of the tens of thousands of people 
crossing our borders, some are attracted to the drug business in 
order to improve their own financial situation. 
  We are particularly delinquent in taking preventive 
measures. 
In my opinion, everyone should be involved in prevention, and 
that is why I am delighted to come to today's meeting. I believe 
that propaganda plays a very useful role at any level--in 
elementary school, at the institute, and in the mass information 
media--and that it will bring the appropriate returns. 
  The time has come for physicians, jurists and social 
organizations to take action, such that every person who wants 
to "get high" would realize and understand the consequences of 
his habit, which is ruinous and fatal for both himself and for 
those around him. As a rule, it takes some time from the day he 
takes his first puff or his first needle until the day he 
becomes an addict, and during all this time he is not in a 
vacuum or in isolation. Frequently this takes place in the eyes 
of his parents, teachers or fellow-workers. 
  Hospital treatment of drug addicts is also one of the 
problems facing the republic health care system. I must report 
with bitterness that the republic lacks the materials, medicines 
and modern equipment to diagnose drug addiction. We do not even 
have the diagnostic tools or centers [diagnostikum]. In western 
countries all policemen and narcotics experts have them. With 
their help one can instantly determine the presence of narcotics 
in the body. We also lack a rehabilitation system for those who 
have undergone treatment, and as a result of remission, 
treatment does not make sense. 
  The fact of the matter is, that nearly all organizations 
involved in the prevention of this terrible disease are 
displaying amazing passivity, and are leaving everything to the 
narcotics experts and to officers of the law-enforcement organs. 
But our experience, and the experience of other countries, shows 
that treatment, and social and medical rehabilitation of those 
suffering from drug addiction, can succeed only when all the 
interested organizations take up the cause in a cooperative 
manner and work out a clear-cut system for joint actions. 
  President of the Azerbaijan International Association 
for Combatting Drug Addiction and the Drug Business Kyamil 
Mamedov: 
  Our association was established by the republic Ministry of 
Internal Affairs and Ministry of Health; we work in direct 
contact with the Administration for Combatting Drug Addiction 
and the Drug Business. The association was established for 
cooperation in combatting drug addiction and the drug business, 
and for prevention of the crime spawned by drug addiction. We 
are striving to do everything possible in order to carry out, 
without delay, a complex program of projects for preventing drug 
addiction, for identifying those suffering from addiction, and 
for their social rehabilitation. Adalyat Ibragimov depicted the 
narcotics situation in the republic, and, as you can see, it is 
quite alarming. The continuing analysis and forecasting of the 
situation which we are conducting with the administration, are 
not providing encouraging results. One thing is 
clear--attempting to combat the "white death" one at a time, and 
trying to prevent it through the efforts of the law enforcement 
organs and Health Ministry alone, is impossible. The combined 
efforts of the state and social organizations are required; and 
our association can, I believe, do a great deal in this plane. 
And here it is not a matter of the amount of confiscated 
narcotic substances or the number of dealers from the narcomafia 
arrested. It is important that every individual case raises an 
alarm both among those invested with power, and among the 
ordinary citizens, summoning them to decisive actions. 
  I have been working in the internal affairs system for 
thirty 
years, starting as a young officer and reaching the post of 
deputy minister of the MVD; I have supervised the criminal 
services and am accustomed to operational actions. When I agreed 
to head the association, I immediately got down to specific 
operations. We have met with the ambassadors of the USA, Great 
Britain, Israel, France, Turkey, Iran and others; and with the 
UN Representative in Azerbaijan, and presented proposals for 
cooperation in accordance with the requirements of the [UN] 
Convention. It is my great pleasure to report that all of them 
readily responded to our proposal, in spite of the short notice, 
and we have already received concrete replies from them. The 
Association has received a letter from T. Young, Great Britain's 
ambassador in Azerbaijan, in which he offered his assistance: he 
has forwarded a package containing documents from state and 
private organizations in Britain occupied with the problems of 
drug addiction. I believe that they can be a great help to us in 
our work. Why re-invent the wheel? For example, in the near 
future, based on the experience of our English colleagues, we 
will be establishing an anonymous "telephone hotline" for 
persons suffering from drug addiction and their relatives. 
Phillip Remler, a representative of the American Embassy, and 
Joseph Shepperd, an officer of the U.S. Drug Enforcement 
Administration, visited the Association. We reached agreement, 
that very soon specialists from the agency will come to 
Azerbaijan to conduct a cycle of classes on the facilities of 
the republic police academy, for raising the skills of 
Azerbaijanian policemen engaged in combatting drug addiction and 
the drug business. Incidentally, the administration and the 
association, together with the Azerbaijan Police Academy, are 
even now re-training their cadres. Israel's diplomatic mission 
in Azerbaijan is preparing for the departure of a group of 
republic police, medical and customs officials for the purpose 
of establishing contacts and exchange of work experiences. Mr. 
Eleizer Jotvat, ad interim Israeli Charge d'Affairs in 
Azerbaijan, informed us of this. 
  We have taken part in three international conferences on 
problems of preventing and combatting drug addiction and the 
drug business--in Belarus, Pakistan and Iran. 
  At a session of the EKO [Economic Cooperation Organization] 
Regional Planning Council in Tehran in January of this year, 
along with other questions, our proposal on establishing 
associations such as ours in the all EKO member states was 
examined. In our view, this is a successful form of association 
for state and social organizations which are not dependent upon 
one another. Our proposal was adopted. It was decided to include 
it in the agenda of the next session of the EKO Committee on 
Combatting Drug Addiction and the Drug Business. 
  In order to attract attention and to ensure the 
participation 
of the state structures and social organizations in the struggle 
with drug addiction and the drug business, we have appealed to 
the heads of the ministries, departments and social 
organizations, on which to a considerable degree the fate of the 
solution of this problem depends. They fully appreciated our 
proposal, and gave their consent to combine efforts within the 
framework of the association. We have received replies from the 
Ministry of Education, the republic customs committee, the 
Academy of Science, the Administration of Caucasian Muslims, the 
Trade-Union Confederation, the Committee on Physical Culture and 
Sport, the Youth League, the Health and Welfare Fund, the 
"Vakinets" Association, the Childrens' Fund, the Sobriety and 
Health Societies, the "Znanie" Society, and the independent 
telecommunication company, BMTI. In their replies, they 
expressed readiness to combine efforts in combatting drug 
addiction, and offered concrete proposals. 
  Azerbaijan Republic Internal Affairs Minister Vagif 
Novruzov: 
  I approve of the idea heard at the round table on the 
necessity for multiplying our efforts in combatting drug 
addiction and the drug business. The time has come to resolve 
this question at the state level, and with the participation of 
social organizations; today we need a systemic approach to 
solution of the problems facing us. 
  Until recently it was thought that we had no problem of drug 
addiction and drug business, and owing to such a comfortable 
"perception," problems piled up, and grew like a snowdrift. And 
incidentally, drug addiction, as a social evil, has greater 
influence than any other factor on the commission of especially 
vicious crimes, undermines the social foundation, and has a 
negative effect on the nation's gene pool. The time has come to 
declare war on this terrible disease, and thereby bring about 
its defeat. 
  The National Assembly of Azerbaijan has adopted a resolution 
on joining the the United Nations Convention on Combatting the 
Illegal Circulation of Narcotic Substances and Psychotropic 
Materials of 1988. The leadership has put this resolution into 
action. We are now preparing documents which meet international 
requirements, and we are seeking ways for solving questions on 
carrying out the conditions of the convention and on making use 
of the rights it has conferred on us. 
  One year ago, the republic Cabinet of Ministers adopted a 
national program for combatting drug addiction and the drug 
business. It stipulated a complex of organizational, legal, 
preventive and other measures. Unfortunately, as of this day 
neither a mechanism, nor a system, nor practical implementation 
has been worked out. 
  Suffice it to say that we are still operating on the basis 
of 
many obsolete normative acts. The National Assembly must, in the 
near future, adopt new legislative acts, and re-examine the 
status of the units carrying on the struggle with drug addiction 
and the drug business. The struggle with this evil envisions 
employing a complex of law-enforcement and preventive measures. 
The internal affairs organs, the procuracy, the customs 
committee and the Ministry of National Security are carrying out 
a defensive operation to preclude the shipment of narcotic 
substances into the republic, and the use of the country as a 
trans-shipment point. The other day our Kazakh colleagues sent 
us a draft of an intergovernmental agreement, to be signed by 
the governments of Afghanistan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Pakistan and Uzbekistan, 
entitled "On Cooperation in the Struggle with the Unlawful 
Circulation of Narcotic Substances and Psychotropic Materials." 
They have introduced this same propsal for the examination of 
the EKO. I believe that our government will give its consent to 
concluding such an agreement. And we have introduced our own 
proposals to the republic Cabinet of Ministers. Having received 
a reply from them, we have sent our own representatives and 
experts to Kazakhstan, and we are introducing our own proposals 
and amendments; and we are preparing a document for signature at 
a high level. We intend to implement contacts of this sort with 
the countries belonging to EKO and with other countries, in the 
area of combatting drug addiction and the drug business. 
International cooperation in this area is taking place at a high 
level; however, within the republic there are still many 
unresolved problems, one of which is--the creation of a powerful 
material and financial base. 
  One could also wish for better preventive measures. We have 
no hospitals for treatment of drug addicts and no rehabilitation 
points for them; television and the press are avoiding the 
problem, and there is no counter-propaganda in the schools and 
institutes. The International Association is taking the first 
steps in uniting the state and social structures. Enough has 
been said on everything here, and I have only to introduce one 
more proposal. 
  Yes, it is impossible to combat drug addiction and the drug 
business by oneself. And I propose getting together in the near 
future, discussing our common problems, and this time adopting 
urgent measures. I express my gratitude to those ministries, 
departments, and social organizations who have readily agreed to 
combine efforts with us in this noble work, which is so 
necessary for our nation today. Today's conversation is an 
invitation to dialogue, in which not only the organizations of 
which I was speaking can take part, but also all interested 
citizens in the republic. 
  Today's meeting will become a stimulus to a solution of our 
problems, and the next one--a lever, and leadership for action. 

