BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aluf Ben and Gid'on Alon] </F>
  [Excerpt] The police have arrested a number of East 
Jerusalem residents who attempted to set up a Palestinian police 
framework in the city. The arrests are among the factors behind 
the PLO's "lowered profile" in Jerusalem. This was the 
assessment given by representatives of the security forces in 
their briefings to the political echelon. 
  On 24 June, Yitzhaq Rabin, prime minister and defense 
minister, held a debate in a limited forum which focused on 
Palestinian nationalistic activity in Jerusalem. At the 
meeting, it was decided to examine the possibility of passing 
legislation empowering the authorities to close PLO governing 
institutions operating in Israel in contravention of the 
Gaza-Jericho First agreement. The agreement stipulates that 
institutions belonging to the Palestinian Authority will only 
operate within the self-government areas. 
  The Justice Ministry is now preparing legislation amendments 
that will tailor the agreement's clauses to Israeli law. 
According to the proposal, this legislation will include a 
clause on the location of the Palestinian institutions. This 
will permit their closure when deemed necessary. The jurists 
proposed legislation that would have a deterrent effect by 
virtue of its very existence. 
  [Tel Aviv 'AL HAMISHMAR in Hebrew on 26 June in a report by 
Pe'erli Shahar on pages 1 and 8 adds that following the 24 June 
debate at the prime minister's office, it was learned that 
"Israel is looking into the possibility of issuing 
administrative orders that will permit it to close down 
Palestinian institutions in Jerusalem." According to the 
proposal, "administrative orders will for the first time be 
issued against institutions rather than people."] 
  The existing law does not permit the closure of Palestinian 
Authority institutions. During the debate, reservations were 
raised about using the Antiterror Act in order to shut down PLO 
institutions. Although the PLO is still defined as a terrorist 
organization, the Antiterror Act is not employed against it. 
  The meeting at the defense minister's bureau was also 
attended by Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres; Police Minister 
Moshe Shahal; Police Commissioner Asaf Hefetz; the director of 
the Shin Bet; Major General Ze'ev Livne, commander of the Home 
Front Command; Attorney General Mikha'el Ben-Ya'ir; and Foreign 
Ministry legal adviser Yo'el Singer. At the session, security 
sources reported that the PLO had recently "lowered the profile" 
of its activities in East Jerusalem. Nevertheless, the 
statistics bureau for the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, which 
works from inside Orient House, is still operating despite 
Israel's demands to relocate the bureau outside the city. 
  Following the discussion, the prime minister said "we shall 
first try to act through a political dialogue; however, we will 
not rule out the possibility of separate legislation in this 
field in the spirit of the Gaza-Jericho First agreement." 
[passage omitted] 

