BFN 

  [Text] During a news conference this morning, the president 
of Iran answered questions raised by correspondents from 50 
countries on domestic issues, the country's economy, Iran's 
foreign relations, and other issues. Our correspondent sent in 
the following report: 
  During this news conference the president, noting that at 
present all the country's resources are being employed for 
reconstruction, stressed that the Islamic revolution's values 
are being maintained and strengthened daily. He added: We raise 
our thoughts in connection with the Islamic revolution, those 
who are interested accept it, but this does not mean 
interference in the affairs of others. 
  Referring to the country's hard currency problems and the 
state's economic readjustment policies, he said: The new 
policies announced are a continuation of the same policy which 
aims to keep a single parity exchange rate for foreign currency. 
We plan to clarify the true rate of foreign exchange in line 
with supply and demand. I think that in future the currency 
exchange rate will be fixed at a level below the present market 
rate. 
  Referring to the country's 8 percent economic growth rate, 
the president added: The economic readjustment policies are 
going ahead well, and at present our markets are saturated with 
domestic products. 
  In reply to a question asked by a Lebanese corespondent on 
relations between the president and the esteemed leader of the 
Islamic revolution ['Ali Khamene'i], the president said: I have 
shared the same trench with the leader of the Islamic revolution 
for the past 40 years, and I regard his eminence as the most 
pious individual to be the country's leader. According to the 
president's remarks, some sort of jealousy by the foreign media 
is observed in this connection. 
  A Japanese correspondent asked a question on the possible 
amendment of the Constitution when President 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani's second four-year term ends. The president 
replied: We are more interested in implementing the 
Constitution. If I performed my duties well during the last 
eight years, there will be no need to seek reelection. 
  About the satellite receivers and the government's plans, 
the 
president referred to the Majles investigation and refused to 
make further comments in order to deflect any prejudgement. 
  In reply to a question raised by the Voice and Vision 
correspondent on future relations between Iran and Britain in 
the wake of exposure of espionage at the Iranian Embassy in 
London, the president drew the correspondent's attention to the 
negative consequences of this action of Britain. He added: This 
evil deed by the British has created an atmosphere of insecurity 
and mistrust in relations which will have negative consequences. 
We do not wish to see the existence of such an atmosphere among 
countries. Nevertheless, the president stressed: I do not see 
any need to take the initiative to sever ties with Britain. 
  Regarding other foreign policy issues, the president 
referred 
to Egypt as an Islamic country, and efforts are under way to 
resume relations. He said the war in Tajikistan is against the 
interests of its people and the government. He described 
Azerbaijan as the victim in the Karabakh conflict. 
  In response to another correspondent's question, he referred 
to the fact that at the moment all the resources of the country 
are being used for reconstruction. Commenting on the export of 
the Islamic revolution the president said: We announce our 
ideology to the world. Anyone who wishes will accept it. This 
does not mean interference in the affairs of others. 
  While condemning Iraqi violations and the record of the 
Ba'thist Party toward Iran, the Iraqi people, and Kuwait, the 
president criticized the measures taken by the Saudi Arabian 
Government toward Iraq, and Saudia Arabia's lack of coordination 
with other countries of the region. 
  In response to a question from the correspondent of the 
Chinese news agency on the presence of the American editors in 
Iran and the effect on relations between the two countries, Mr. 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani said: Their presence will have no effect on 
Iranian-U.S. relations. However, it can clarify some facts for 
the American people. 
  In response to a question from the AFP correspondent on the 
normalization of relations with the United States, the president 
said: We have not cut our commercial ties, but we give priority 
to countries other than the United States. Regarding political 
relations, we really do not trust the United States. It has 
repeatedly announced its readiness to hold talks, but as we do 
not see any good intentions there, we do not believe it is right 
to begin talks. The releasing of our assets, properties, and 
frozen funds in America could be a way of proving their good 
intentions [hosn-e niyyat]. 
  In response to a question from the correspondent of THE 
GUARDIAN from England about whether Iran regards the British 
Government as an obstacle to the establishment of an Islamic 
government in Bosnia, the president said: There are certain 
indications that the British Government has not cooperated in 
repulsing the Serbian aggression. However, we will leave our 
final judgement to the future. 
  Concerning Iran's position toward the developments in Yemen, 
the president of the Islamic Republic of Iran said: We believe 
in the unity of the two Yemens and we are against its 
dissolution. However, if the people of that country adopt a 
different policy we will have no particular views. 
  Concerning the fictitious [vahi] claim of sovereignty over 
the Iranian islands in the Persian Gulf by the United Arab 
Emirates [UAE], he said: The UAE Government has no acceptable 
claims which it can raise in international organizations. If 
anyone wishes to lay hands [dastrasi] on these islands he should 
pass through a sea of blood. 
  Concerning privatization in the national economy and the 
attraction of foreign investment, the president said: 
Privatization is a policy which started in the First Five-Year 
Development Plan and which will continue to the end of the 
Second Plan. We will continue our work in this field on a 
gradual basis in accordance with the Constitution. 
  About attracting foreign capital to the country, he said: 
From a legal point of view, there is no prohibition against 
attracting foreign capital. In accordance with the law, we will 
give a positive response to the request of all those who are 
willing to invest in Iran. 
  Regarding the money which is owed to the Islamic Republic of 
Iran by a number of foreign countries, Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani 
said: The funds owed to us are not such that they could be 
written off against our debts. For instance, we are owed money 
by Germany for building a nuclear reactor in Bushehr, but the 
courts should pass judgement on this. Or, for instance, America 
also owes us a great deal of money which it must repay. 
  Concerning the successes achieved during the First Five-Year 
Plan, the president said: All the details of the plan and the 
policy of economic readjustment have produced positive results. 
If the price of some items rose this was due to economic 
improvement [as heard]. 
  The president added: During the First Five-Year Plan many 
projects were implemented. Their implementation would not have 
been possible without the policy of economic readjustment. Now 
industrial companies have been formed in every part of the 
country and they are active. The president added: Supporting 
the deprived and the oppressed will not necessitate a reduction 
in the country's economic growth. In the First Five-Year Plan 
we took some measures which have paved the way for greater 
attention to be paid to the deprived areas. Now we also have a 
number of projects for providing social welfare which will be 
submitted to the Majles in the near future. He added: On the 
basis of this plan those whose income is below the acceptable 
[ma'qul] level will be covered by social security. We hope that 
this issue will be completely solved by the end of the Second 
Plan. 
  Concerning the press, the president said: Our expectation 
from the press is that they deal more deeply with existing 
problems. They should help to clarify the issues. They should 
understand the general policies of the system and should act 
within that framework. The president listed sloganeering and 
populism [awamzadegi] as the defects of the press in our country. 

