BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 29 KYODO -- Japan, South Korea and the 
United States plan to team up as allies for joint drills in a 
military exercise in June amid international attention focusing 
on how they might deal with North Korea's suspected nuclear arms 
development, Defense Agency [DA] sources said Friday [29 April]. 
  "The new combination is apparently a political message on 
North Korea's suspected nuclear program," one of the sources 
said in an interview with KYODO NEWS SERVICE. 
  "But it is a short-term and secondary purpose (for the U.S.) 
the long-term target is to establish a security system 
throughout the region, including Southeast Asia, China and 
Russia," the source said. 
  The U.S. Navy has sponsored the so-called "Rim of the 
Pacific 
Exercise" (RIMPAC) joint military maneuver in the north Pacific 
near Hawaii once every two years since 1971 and Japan has taken 
part since 1980. 
  However, Japan has paired up only with the U.S. and this 
year 
will be the first time that another country joins the same team. 
  This year, Australia, Canada, Japan, South Korea and the 
U.S. 
will participate in the RIMPAC exercise to be held from the end 
of May to late June. 
  Under the plan, drill participants from Japan's Maritime 
Self-Defense Force, the South Korean navy and the U.S. Navy will 
"fight" against another team consisting of Australian and 
Canadian naval units and some U.S. officers, the sources said. 
  However, the Defense Agency said Japan and South Korea would 
team up separately with the U.S. 
  "There is no possibility that Japan and South Korea, or 
Japan, the U.S. and South Korea, would directly link up and 
drill," a Defense Agency official said. 
  South Korea has joined in RIMPAC since 1990 and this year 
will mark its third participation, but Japan and South Korea 
were on opposite sides in the previous two exercises. 
  The sources said the U.S. drafted this year's team line-up. 
Japan was reluctant to accept the plan, fearing domestic 
criticism, and the U.S. compromised, they said. 
  The compromise allows Japan to explain to the people that 
Japan and South Korea will team up separately with the U.S., 
they said. 
  The exercise has in the past been criticized as a violation 
of Japan's war-renouncing Constitution, which bars Japan from 
resorting to collective security. 
  Defense Agency officials continue to argue that the drill 
aims only at improving defense officers' skills and does not 
violate the Constitution. 

