Russian   Market 

<F P=102> PM2504152394 Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI in Russian 22 Apr 94 p 
4 </F>

<F P=103> PM2504152394 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Vitaliy Tyshkevich article: "Their Drugs Barons Will Not </F>
Turn Up in the Russian Market. We Have Enough of Our Own" -- 
from the "Retsept" section] 
  [Text] We have recently seen in the mass media 
increasingly frequent forecasts that Russia is destined to turn 
more or less into an international market for the sale of drugs 
in the near future. How accurate is this claim? Let us turn 
for comment to criminal specialists engaged in this area and 
doctors specializing in drug abuse, and also see what some 
foreign publications have to say. 
  In the opinion of experts from the Russian MVD [Ministry of 
Internal Affairs] Department for Struggle Against the Spread of 
Drugs, the appearance of international criminal syndicates in 
our country's market in the near future is impossible for two 
reasons. First, the prices for the imported "goods" are so high 
that they will be beyond the domestic "consumer's" reach: For 
example, a gram of cocaine costs about $100. Second, Russia and 
the CIS countries are themselves capable of becoming vendors of 
the raw materials for drugs production and are already doing so: 
For example, Chu and Amur hemp, from which hashish is made, 
differs very little in its properties from the equivalent 
commodity which the international cartels are buying up in the 
countries of the "golden triangle." 
  Apart from this, Russian drugs dealers are not allowing 
their 
foreign competitors to penetrate their market: After all, drug 
dealing is becoming one of the most profitable businesses, 
ranking second after arms dealing. What is more, we are talking 
not just about natural substances but also about synthetic drugs 
used in medicine. 
  There are quite a few confirmations of this. You only have 
to recall the "Olainefarm" affair [editorial note: this is a 
reference to a major seizure of amphetamines produced at the 
Latbiofarm pharmaceutical plant in Olaine, Latvia in December 
1992] which caused a sensation some time ago. Ilmars Penke, 
director of the collapsed pharmaceutical giant, began to produce 
amphetamine, a stimulant which is classified as a narcotic all 
over the world. Then the unlicensed sale of this drug to 
Germany began. As a result Penke was arrested by Interpol's 
German agency. A second example is this: A St. Petersburg 
medicinal compounds plant mastered the industrial production of 
ephedrine -- a drug for asthmatics from which you can make a 
cheap narcotic, the so-called "dzhef" [an ephedrine derivative], 
at home. 
  The following is a very recent example. Not long ago, in the 
settlement of Kupavna (Moscow Oblast), the garage of Ivan 
Tyulyayev, director of the "Akrikhin" Chemical and 
Pharmaceutical Combine, burned down. Before this, several 
attacks had been made on his property, and there are always 
these genuine, imported mafia cars with their zonked young 
drivers parked outside the plant. Ivan Ivanovich himself stated 
to the militia on several occasions that he is being threatened 
and pushed into illegal activities. 
  All these details were received from the MVD. 
  But what are Western journalists writing about this matter 
of 
concern to us? The following details are to be found in the 
journal MEDICINE REVIEW. It emerges that cheap and particularly 
toxic drugs of unknown origin -- hallucinogens as a rule -- have 
recently been appearing on the U.S. and European drugs markets. 
The number of cases of clinical intoxication has increased with 
their appearance. The article also presents figures: The 
number of people poisoned by narcotic substances in the United 
States rose from 1,234 a month (in 1985) to 10,345 people a 
month (in 1992 when, it is believed, a massive expansion of the 
narcotics market began from CIS countries). 
  But their drug addicts are ultimately their own problem. But 
to what degree are the rumors about the spread of their opium to 
our market justified? From a set of figures provided to us by 
the State Drug-Abuse Center, you can clearly discern the group 
of users of this potion in this country. On the whole what we 
have here are examples of multiple drug addiction. Moreover, 
our drug addicts use substances whose narcotic properties are 
simply beyond the imagination of people in the West. So the 
doctors' opinion coincides precisely with that of the law 
enforcement agencies -- the Medellin or any other cartel will 
never break into the Russian market as a vendor. 

