BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a comprehensive review 
of all items in the 3 June issue of the Arabic-language 
newspaper Cairo AL-SHA'B that pertain to political Islamic 
issues. 
<H5>  CONTENTS: </H5>
  1. Detained Lawyers Still in Custody 
  2. Brotherhood Leader, Party Members To Be Questioned 
  3. Journalists Committee To Discuss Detention of Colleagues 
  4. Scholar Refutes Writer's Claims on Fatwa 
  5. Party Leader Supports Muslim Brotherhood 
  6. TV Children's Programs Criticized 
<H5>  DETAINED LAWYERS STILL IN CUSTODY </H5>
  Mu'tazz al-Hadidi, in an approximately 700-word report on 
pages 1 and 7, notes that the Central Cairo Public Attorney will 
decide on 5 June whether or not to continue to hold in custody 
lawyers detained following a demonstration outside the Lawyers's 
Association building in Cairo on 17 May. The lawyers, including 
some members of the Association's Council, were protesting the 
death of lawyer 'Abd-al- Harith Madani while in police custody 
on 26 April. The report notes that outside the Public 
Attorney's office hundreds of lawyers and relatives of the 
detainees gathered in solidarity with the detained lawyers. The 
report adds that at a meeting of the Lawyers Association's 
Council on 31 May, the conferees decided to form a delegation 
led by Association head Ahmad al-Khawajah to meet with President 
Mubarak to hand him a petition requesting the release of all the 
detained lawyers and a "serious investigation" into the causes 
of the death of lawyer 'Abd-al-Harith Madani. Speaking at the 
meeting, al-Khawajah noted that the arrest of three Council 
members is a "serious precedent." Noting that his statements 
published in AKHBAR AL-YAWM and AKHIR SA'AH have been partly 
distorted, he denied having said that he found it difficult to 
deal with the current council, which is controlled by the Muslim 
Brotherhood. For his part, the Association's Secretary General 
Ahmad Sayf-al-Islam al-Banna, who is a Muslim Brotherhood 
figure, complained that some officials are giving the president 
a "bad image" of the Association, adding that the Interior 
Ministry officials failed to calm down the angry lawyers who 
were demanding to see an autopsy report on Madani's death. In 
an attempt to distance the Council from any connection with the 
Muslim Brotherhood, al-Banna concluded that "the Association 
cannot accept leadership by any external group," adding that the 
lawyers are free. 
<H5>  BROTHERHOOD LEADER, PARTY MEMBERS TO BE QUESTIONED </H5>
  An unattributed 70-word report on page 1 notes that the 
Northern al-Jizah Prosecutor has summoned Hamid Abu-al-Nasr, 
Muslim Brotherhood General Guide, to appear before him on 5 June 
to be questioned about a statement bearing his signature that 
was distributed during 'Id al-Adha. The report adds that four 
unnamed "youngsters" have been questioned and remanded in 
custody for 15 days by the Imbabah prosecutor in connection with 
the same statement, which includes a congratulatory message from 
the Brotherhood guide to Muslims on the occasion of 'Id al-Adha. 
  On the same page, another 100-word unattributed report says 
that "members of the Labor Party detained following the 'Id 
al-Adha prayers at the Mustafa Mahmud Mosque will appear before 
the al-Duqqi prosecutor tomorrow following the expiration of the 
term of remand set by the prosecutor to complete the 
investigations." The report names the detainees as Muhsin 
Hashim, member of the Labor Party's Executive Committee; Mahmud 
'Abd-al-Rahman, party secretary in al- Marj area; his secondary 
school student son 'Atif 'Abd-al-Rahman; Tariq Faruq, and Rashad 
Ahmad 'Ali. The report does not specify the charges against the 
members. 
<H5>  JOURNALISTS COMMITTEE TO DISCUSS DETENTION OF COLLEAGUES </H5>
  An unattributed 100-word report on page 1 notes that the 
Freedoms Committee of the Journalists Association will meet at 
the association's headquarters on June 6 to discuss the "latest 
developments" of AL-SHA'B military correspondent 'Abd-al-Sattar 
Abu- Husayn, who is serving a one-year prison term, passed by 
the Higher Military Court for publishing a report without 
obtaining permission from the competent authorities. The 
committee will also discuss the arrest of Ibrahim al-Sayyid 
Muhammad Sa'd, a MENA journalist arrested at his home in 
al-Munib on 1 June. 
<H5>  SCHOLAR REFUTES WRITER'S CLAIMS ON FATWA </H5>
  An approximately 700-word article on page 2 by Mahmud Fayid, 
identified as general secretary of the al-jam'iyat al-shar'iyah 
religious societies, comments on a column by writer Anis Mansur 
published by AL-AHRAM on 4 March 1994. In his column, Mansur 
claimed that in 1928 al-Azhar scholar Shaykh Muhammad 'Abduh was 
asked if checkbook savings are halal, meaning religiously 
permitted, and 'Abduh's answer was yes. Mansur then praised 
'Abduh for being an "enlightened" scholar and lauded Mufti 
Shaykh Sayyid Tantawi, a disciple of Shaykh 'Abduh, for his 
courage, dedication, and sincerity. The writer notes that out 
of his belief that Mansur's words deserved some comments, he 
sent two messages to AL-AHRAM's chief editor about the matter, 
but the paper never published them. Refuting Mansur's claims, 
the writer points out that Shaykh 'Abduh died in 1905, so he 
could not have possibly arisen from the dead 23 years later to 
answer the above question. He further adds that he examined the 
subject matter and found the fatwa to be false. 
<H5>  PARTY LEADER SUPPORTS MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD </H5>
  Commenting on the Government's clampdown on the Muslim 
Brotherhood, Labor Party Secretary General 'Adil Husayn writes 
the following in a boxed commentary below his weekly article on 
page 5: "We hope that the campaign against the Brotherhood will 
not go beyond the current limits. We hope that the arrests will 
not be broadened and that there will be no clampdown on the 
[professional] associations. If it is proved that the current 
campaign is part of a general campaign of onslaughts against 
Islam and the Muslims, it will be a major disaster for the 
Government and will finish off any hope for stability. The 
Labor Party supports the ongoing efforts to contain armed 
political violence, but extending the campaign of repression and 
persecution to include the Brotherhood cannot be within this 
framework. Nobody will believe you if you say that the 
Brotherhood supports or finances the terrorist organizations. 
For our part, we do not distance ourselves from our principled 
stand of cooperating with the Brotherhood and defending their 
right to operate legally. True we are two independent 
organizations and true we have some differences in concepts and 
methods of action, but the points of agreement between us exceed 
the points of disagreement, and both of us have the general goal 
of applying the shari'ah. If striking at the Brotherhood means 
that the moderate and reform-oriented Islamic movements will 
meet the same fate as the revolutionary extremist movements, 
this will not frighten us. Do what you like with us, and our 
party will, God willing, persevere. God is our sole and true 
supporter." 
  Commenting on the lawyers' protests at the death of their 
colleague Madani while in police custody, Husayn, in his 
approximately 4,000-word article on the same page, asks how can 
the lawyers be blamed for being angry in the right cause and in 
the face of the government's reluctance to punish the murderers? 
He adds: "What is so strange about lawyers demanding their 
right to protest to the authorities in an organized march?" He 
notes that the events at the Lawyers Association did not require 
a conspiracy by the "Brotherhood," adding that what happened was 
a natural and spontaneous reaction by lawyers representing 
various political trends, including leftists, Wafdists, and 
Labor Party members. 
<H5>  CHILDREN'S TV PROGRAMS CRITICIZED </H5>
  Writer Nur-al-Huda Sa'd, in an approximately 600-word 
article 
published in the "Women's Voice" feature on page 6, criticizes 
an unnamed television program in which the broadcasters 
reproached some young girls for not having friends of the 
opposite sex. Another child spoke of his dream of becoming a 
police officer to "rid the country of extremism, terrorism, and 
the bad guys who wish to destroy Egypt." The writer adds: 
"Thus, the children''s programs have turned into a way to 
brainwash children with a view to shaping their views in a 
certain way satisfactory to the Government, blessed by the 
United States, and in line with the requirements of the new 
world order. The programs incite girls to befriend boys and to 
write to them and treat those who do not do so as cowardly and 
hesitant. They lead boys to believe that our real enemy is 
terrorism and extremism, not Israel, the Serbs, or the Hindus, 
and that the main job of a police officer is to fight terrorism, 
not track down criminals or protect citizens." The writer adds 
that "youngsters' songs" encourage flirtation between boys and 
girls and brand "decently dressed" women as "reactionary." She 
adds: "A disciplined girl is always blamed and accused of 
suffering from complexes. She is said to wear the veil to 
escape her economic difficulties and resort to religion to 
offset her inability to cope with the developments of this 
dynamic age." 
  On the same page, an unattributed report criticizes the 
television for broadcasting a party marking the fourth birthday 
of the women's magazine HURRIYATI, in which singers danced with 
"short dresses" and belly dangers competed. The report notes 
that sitting among the audience was Samir Rajab, chairman of the 
board and columnist of the religious newspaper 'AQIDATI. The 
report concludes by asking: "Is dancing or pleasure the only 
alternative to extremism and terrorism on the television screen, 
which belongs to the people and must respect their religion and 
feelings?" 

