Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] As negotiations to end the protracted war of more 
than 40 years between the ethnic minorities and the Burmese 
Government were about to bear fruit, news from the Thai-Burmese 
border near Kanchanaburi said that a faction of the New Mon 
State Party led by Lieutenant Colonel Saw and Lieutenant Colonel 
Win Aung -- who control about 5,000 troops -- refused to 
negotiate a cease-fire with the Burmese Government. This is 
despite the fact that Nai Shwe Kyin, leader of the New Mon State 
Party, already agreed to conditions for cease-fire talks with 
the Burmese military junta. 
  A highly-placed source in the New Mon State Party told 
PHUCHATKAN there is a conflict within the party between the new 
generation of leadership led by Nai Thein Aung, which wants a 
cease-fire with the government, and the older generation led by 
Nai Tala Saw Kya. Nai Tala Saw Kya, the group's number three 
leader, does not want to negotiate a cease-fire because he 
thinks it would mean surrender and compromise with the Burmese 
Government. Those who oppose the cease-fire talks are trying to 
gain control of the party's leadership by boosting the role of 
the Mon State Revolutionary Council as the representative of the 
Mon people's struggle. 
  There was a vote on a cease-fire at an earlier meeting of 
the 
party central committee. The majority supported Nai Thein 
Aung's proposal for a cease-fire with Burma because the armed 
struggle has dragged on for decades without any success. To 
them, peaceful negotiations would be a better option. Nai Shwe 
Kyin, chairman of the New Mon State Party, had to accept the 
majority's decision despite the fact that he does not agree with 
a cease-fire. 
  Also according to the source, in mid-February three 
companies 
of Burmese troops launched an attack on the Mon stronghold in 
Daingpu District, in the town of Ye in the south of Burma, close 
to the Thai border at Kanchanaburi. Five Mon soldiers were 
killed and some others were wounded, but the Mon troops were 
able to hold on to the stronghold. There was no report on 
losses among the Burmese troops. 
  The source said the Burmese assault on the Mon stronghold 
could have been an attempt to pressure the Mons because of their 
refusal to negotiate on a cease-fire. Besides, the Burmese 
Government is building a railway from Ye to Tavoy and it has to 
do something to keep the Mons out of its way. 
  Nai Tala Saw Kya, the number three man in the New Mon State 
Party, told PHUCHATKAN that the Mon Revolutionary Council will 
not accept the Burmese Government's cease-fire conditions, 
although it may come under pressure from the Burmese as well as 
the Thai Government, which also wants to see a cease-fire. He 
said a cease- fire with Burma would be a betrayal of the 
national cause. The Mon State Council will pursue the armed 
struggle. He was confident of keeping about 5,000 men under his 
control for the armed struggle. 
  Security officers in Thailand think that the real reason Nai 
Tala Saw Kya rejected a cease-fire with Burma was because he was 
afraid of losing the income he earns from transit fees collected 
from Thai businessmen in logging and fishing deals in Burma. 
This amounts to dozens of millions of baht per year. 

