Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vasiliy Kononenko and Aleksandr Sychev report: "Three </F>
Presidents Close Last Chapter of `Cold War' in Kremlin"] 
  [Text] U.S. President Bill Clinton's visit to Moscow is 
nearing its end, and the results of the meetings, during which 
the head of the Washington administration expressed support for 
the reforms being carried out in Russia, can be summed up. 
  The presidents of the United States, Russia, and Ukraine 
signed a treaty finally defining the fate of the 176 ICBM's and 
their 1,600 nuclear warheads on Ukrainian territory. "The three 
of us," President Yeltsin said, "met to close the last chapter 
[postavit tochku] on the last problem of the 'Cold War.'" 
  Kiev gets a full security guarantee and pledges to dispatch 
its entire arsenal to Russia for dismantling and for the removal 
from the warheads and storage of the highly enriched fissionable 
material. After being processed the uranium from the warheads 
will be sold in the United States for use in nuclear power 
stations, and the money raised -- $1 billion -- will be given by 
Washington to Kiev, and will also be returned to Ukrainian 
nuclear power stations. At the same time, agreement was reached 
on the purchase by America of uranium worth $12 billion removed 
from the Russian nuclear weapons to be destroyed under the START 
II Treaty. The contract covers a 20-year period. 
  The treaty on the nuclear weapons on Ukrainian territory -- 
the third largest nuclear arsenal in the world -- is undoubtedly 
Clinton's most important achievement. But the signing of the 
document was overshadowed by reports of the reaction of deputies 
in the Ukrainian parliament. Sergey Golovatyy, a member of the 
Supreme Council's Foreign Policy Committee in Kiev, said: 
"Kravchuk can sign anything he likes. But if parliament does 
not ratify the treaty, it will remain a piece of paper." 
  The Ukrainian president has waiting for him back at home a 
seriously deteriorating political situation whose outcome hardly 
anyone will venture to predict. The problem of nuclear weapons 
in Ukraine has by no means been settled with the signing of the 
agreement. 
  Another agreement signed during the visit was the document 
on 
the retargeting of Russian and U.S. strategic missiles. Some of 
them will be targeted to empty areas of the high seas, while no 
flight plans at all will be entered into the computers of the 
others. It is virtually impossible to verify compliance with 
this agreement. But, despite its symbolic nature, Thomas 
Pickering, the U.S. ambassador to Russia, said that "it is of 
enormous importance for the strengthening of confidence between 
the two countries." 
  It is said in the U.S. President's entourage that Clinton 
was 
greatly impressed with "Russia's progress along the road to a 
free market." Presumably a definite role in this was played by 
Moscow's numerous booths, stalls, and private stores, as well as 
by his meetings with Muscovites, which illustrated what Clinton 
learned from his talks in the Kremlin and during dinner at 
President Yeltsin's residence near Moscow. Addressing 
Muscovites directly, Clinton said: Everyone earning their daily 
bread in dogged work "should know that ultimately they will be 
rewarded." He also reported that the talks touched on issues 
whose resolution should "make their lives better." 
  Clinton did not propose a new package of aid for Russia -- 
nor had Moscow expected him to, incidentally. The Russian 
leadership had set itself two tasks -- to get Washington to lift 
the restrictions on Russian exports to the United States (it 
remains to be seen how far this problem was solved) and to get 
the money it had already been promised. 
  Russia received the first $1.5 billion from the IMF last 
June. A second package of another $1.5 billion should have 
followed soon after. But it was not transferred to Moscow, 
which was unable to reduce the inflation rate and the budget 
deficit to the agreed level. 
  Moreover, it has been learned that the World Bank is 
prepared 
to grant Russia $500 million out of previously allocated funds 
in order to improve the position of Russian citizens. Michael 
Blumenthal, treasury secretary in the Carter administration, 
will head a ($100-million) program to help privatize major 
Russian companies. Despite the United States' economic 
difficulties, President Clinton hopes, according to his 
entourage, to find another $1 billion for Russia this year. 
  Main attention during the talks was devoted to measures to 
accelerate the reform program and define its goals. The sides 
agreed that it is necessary to make a greater effort to control 
inflation and support the least protected sections of the 
population by saving funds on programs to finance inefficient 
state enterprises. Clinton called for additional measures to be 
taken to encourage Western private investors to invest more in 
the Russian economy. In the meantime, U.S. entrepreneurs are 
known to be among the most cautious. Their investment is 
estimated at just $700 million. 

