BFN 

  [Excerpts] As I mentioned earlier, the sixth regular summit 
of the AMU [Arab Maghreb Union] Presidential Council ended in 
Tunis a few moments ago with the approval of a final communique 
by the leaders and representatives of the AMU member states. 
Before the end of the summit, Liamine Zeroual, the head of 
state, delivered a speech in which he dealt with several issues, 
including the Arab Maghreb Union's march and current 
international matters. Here is the full text of the speech of 
the head of state: 
  [Begin Zeroual recording] In the name of God, the merciful, 
and compassionate, Your Excellency the President, Your 
Excellencies, and Your Excellencies the Ministers, it is a cause 
for happiness and pleasure that my first visit, since I 
undertook the duties of head of state, is to fraternal Tunisia 
in order to participate in this AMU summit. [passage omitted] 
  Our conviction is that the Maghreban unity is, at the same 
time, a wish and a strategic objective for our people. 
  Mr. President, Your Excellencies, Ministers: We came to take 
part in this Maghreban summit at a time when Algeria is entering 
a new phase of its modern history, and because this phase cannot 
leave you indifferent, we consider it our duty to review with 
you the main points of this phase. Our country is experiencing 
an important transformation dictated by our people's aspirations 
and the enormous development it is experiencing, which is aimed 
mainly at establishing political pluralism and bolstering the 
foundations of national development so that it [Algeria] will be 
able to keep, in the best circumstances, abreast of the economic 
transformations in the world. [passage omitted] 
  It is obvious that the qualitative change lived by Algerian 
society cannot be achieved safely, [far removed] from 
conspiracies and secret schemes. It has become apparent to us 
that this leading process started to threaten many interests 
that made some foreign forces, which are known to us, bet on the 
opposite [as received] and on the exploitation of the 
opportunity to hit at the unity and stability of our country, 
hiding behind our true religion and our sacred values. 
  In this context, we believe that our Maghreban union has an 
important role in contributing effectively and seriously to the 
creation of a suitable and positive atmosphere for bolstering 
all the efforts made in order to achieve the comprehensive Arab 
interests. This would allow our Arab nation to obtain a 
position that suits its weight and its enormous resources in an 
international community full of risks and challenges. 
  Today as we monitor, with interest and concern, the events 
taking place on the Middle East arena, and in Palestine in 
particular, where the brave Palestinian people are still making 
sacrifices in order to establish their legitimate rights, we 
could only express our solidarity with it [the Palestinian 
people] in its just struggle and our support for its leadership, 
represented by the Palestine Liberation Organization which is 
fighting a decisive battle within the ongoing peace talks. 
  We also express our support for other Arab parties concerned 
with the Middle East peace process. [passage omitted] Also, we 
will not miss the opportunity to express our deep concern about 
the sufferings of the fraternal Libyan people as a result of the 
continuation of the blockade imposed on it, despite the 
readiness and flexibility expressed by the Libyan leadership in 
order to deal with the problems existing between it and some 
Western states. We have great hopes that the recent Libyan 
initiative would find a positive response that would enable this 
problem to be solved in a peaceful and final manner within the 
aegis of the sovereignty of peoples and the respect for their 
laws. 
  In our African continent, we are on the eve of the first 
legislative elections in South Africa and this constitutes a 
great triumph for a bitter struggle, to which we had the honor 
to contribute, in order to eliminate apartheid and racism. 
  If this great aim in South Africa is a cause for 
satisfaction 
and optimism, the painful events taking place in many states 
foretell political, economic, and social decline. Sources of 
tension and civil wars have become numerous in a large number of 
these states to a point where they began to threaten the fate 
and entities of entire peoples. This constitutes to us a source 
of anxiety and concern. 
  Some problems emerged near us on our borders that began to 
threaten the security and stability of the neighboring friendly 
states. 
  Algeria has worked hard and with all its resources toward 
helping the brother countries in containing their disagreements 
and solving them by suitable peaceful means. 
  In this context, our AMU should give the necessary attention 
to the analysis and recommendations of the Ministerial Council 
of the Sahel countries, held in Algeria at the end of last year. 
This is because the security and stability of our region are 
linked to the security and stability of these countries. 
[passage omitted] 
  The proclamation of our union in Marrakesh [in 1989] was 
followed by a dynamism that made the last five years distinct 
from the previous years of the modern history of our region. 
[passage omitted] 
  Our persistent eagerness to build the edifice of our Arab 
Maghreb requires us to continue the search for the best ways and 
means to speed up the achievement of our common interests. We 
note with great satisfaction the harmony in our opinions in this 
regard, as was obvious from the important results and 
recommendations reached by our foreign ministers that were 
approved yesterday. [passage omitted] 
  Algeria, which now assumes the honor of the AMU Presidency 
for the second time, fully appreciates this noble mission. 
Algeria is fully confident that it can rely on your 
participation and assistance, and also on the cooperation of 
your governments so that this year will be a year of new 
successes that will crown our unification march. 
  In conclusion, allow me to address my deep thanks and 
gratitude to the president, government, and people of fraternal 
Tunisia for the hospitality and warmth with which we, and the 
accompanying delegations, were met since we arrived in this dear 
country. 
  Peace and God's blessings be upon you. [end recording] 

