Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, 24 March (MTI) -- "Nothing is so good that 
it cannot be improved," Polish President Lech Walesa told MTI's 
Warsaw correspondent on Polish-Hungarian links, prior to 
President Arpad Goncz's visit to Poland starting March 28. 
Walesa said he expected the visit to encourage the two 
countries' governments, ministers, and businessmen to boost 
cooperation. 
  The Visegrad cooperation, involving the Czech Republic, 
Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia, forms an integral part of 
Poland's policy of open borders, Walesa said. Regional 
cooperation has a logical, practical gain. "We are doomed to 
cooperate, so -- whatever its name will be in the future -- the 
group will improve almost automatically. The future will prove 
it viable," he said. 
  "Irrespective of what the current Czech leadership thinks, 
Prague and Budapest will always be closer to Warsaw than New 
York," he added. 
  On military cooperation, Walesa said, "We cannot set up a 
separate organization because it would be disapproved by both 
the West and the Russians, and we would get too many enemies. 
The given situation is dangerous, though. 
  "I believe we have to be capable of defending the 
independence and freedom of both Poland and Hungary. 
  "We should state that, for example, if Hungary was 
threatened, Poland would have to defend it. 
  "There is no need for a pact or a bloc: the issue would be a 
solidarity-inspired protection of common values," Walesa 
stressed. 
  Walesa said it was no wonder that the Russians were trying 
to 
win themselves the most advantageous position and take the lead 
of the region. This is not their fault, but that of NATO, which 
left a vacuum here. He also criticized the West for pursuing a 
short-sighted policy and for having misled, in a sense, the 
region's countries. 
  "Russia's attitude can be understood, but the Western 
conduct 
not, all the less as the age of confrontation is over. We could 
have been gradually integrated during a longer period of time, 
which would have been a paying deal for the West, rather than a 
losing one" Walesa said. 

