Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Valeriy Vyzhutovich article: "Viktor Chernomyrdin Seeks </F>
Allies in Parliament. But No Party or Faction Regards the 
Government as 100-Percent `Its Own'"] 
  [Text] At a session of the presidium of the new Cabinet of 
Ministers held Friday [21 January], Viktor Chernomyrdin appealed 
to his colleagues "to learn to work with the Federation Council 
and the Duma, because the government has recently gotten out of 
the habit of working with a parliament and needs to establish 
businesslike ties." All the indications are that this appeal is 
not just a ritual incantation (both Gaydar and, in December 
1992, Chernomyrdin himself started off by promising to cooperate 
with parliament) but an indirect statement of the obvious: The 
new government does not enjoy widespread political support. 
  Contrary to the canons of world democratic practice whereby 
either the parliamentary majority or a parliamentary party 
coalition forms the government, the new Russian cabinet has been 
formed by the premier himself. Viktor Chernomyrdin has, as it 
were, satisfied the program demands of the "agrarians," "Women 
of Russia," the "Travkinites," and the Communists.... This is 
precisely the reason why no one Duma faction can regard the 
Cabinet of Ministers as 100-percent "its own." Taking the 
broader view, the same holds true for all political forces. 
  At the present time the government's most reliable 
parliamentary ally may be the Party of Russian Unity and Accord, 
which, incidentally, has not stopped Sergey Shakhray from 
hedging around his participation in the Cabinet of Ministers 
with a list of basic conditions. 
  Liberal Democratic Party of Russia leader Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy would grace the government with his political 
patronage "on condition that Kozyrev, Chubays, and Shokhin 
quit." However, the removal of these three figures would also 
satisfy the Communist leader Gennadiy Zyuganov, who believed 
that the struggle between Gaydar's men and the pragmatists would 
end up as "a hybrid resolution with a preponderance of 
pragmatists." 
  Support for the government from "Russia's Choice" looks more 
than doubtful. Its intention not to oppose the Cabinet of 
Ministers, "to support all positive undertakings and proposals 
which accord with the reforms course," which was enshrined in a 
statement by this parliamentary faction only a week ago, did not 
look entirely sincere even then. Now, however, with Fedorov's 
resignation and the accession to key posts of sector lobbyists, 
it is becoming far more urgent for "Russia's Choice" to exercise 
the right it has reserved for itself "to criticize, and if 
necessary to mobilize parliamentary, social, political, and 
scientific potential in order to oppose antireformist and 
economically irresponsible steps." Without acting against their 
conscience, the leaders of the "Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin" 
faction will almost certainly subscribe to this declaration, as 
might, with some reservations, members of the "Alliance of 12 
December." 
  Finally, it is doubtful whether the president will tie 
himself to the present government with strong and long-term 
obligations. The head of state's autograph, which sanctifies the 
composition of the new government, has cost Chernomyrdin 
extraordinary effort, whereas for Yeltsin it has meant making 
concessions and compromising his shaky reputation as a reformer. 
And this haggling, which has been most unpleasant and 
exhausting, as well as Yeltsin's inability to resist pressure 
from his premier who has become a strong and independent 
political figure, involuntarily brings us back to a phrase which 
Yeltsin once let slip regarding another matter no less sensitive 
to his self-esteem: "The president will not forget this." 
  If Viktor Chernomyrdin is relying primarily on the 
Federation Council, which has displayed unparalleled 
tractability in electing the premier's favored candidate 
Vladimir Shumeyko to the post of speaker, we do not yet know 
what price the senators will demand for their loyalty, and the 
issue of who will ultimately depend more on whom is still up in 
the air. 
  But the most basic reason that prevents any one of the 
parties or factions from unconditionally approving the 
composition of the government is the duplication of the 
executive branch which a number of observers have noted. With 
what government exactly, following Chernomyrdin's wishes, is the 
parliament supposed to "establish businesslike ties"? There is 
the "president's government" comprising the power structures, 
the Foreign Ministry, and the Federal Television and Radio 
Broadcasting Administration, all of which are directly 
subordinate to Yeltsin.... And there is the "premier's 
government" which is concentrating exclusively on managing the 
"national economy." These "shoots" on the executive branch will 
each bear fruit for both the president and the premier, but 
Yeltsin's "harvest" is guaranteed "come rain or shine," so to 
speak. In the worst-case and, unfortunately, most likely 
scenario (hyperinflation), the political alibi of the head of 
state, who has farmed out management of the economy to the head 
of the government, will be guaranteed. 
  Given this forking of the executive branch, the 
parliamentary 
factions will only want to look after "their own" bit of the 
government, the bit that is geared toward the figures closest to 
them. The Party of Russian Unity and Accord will shelter Viktor 
Chernomyrdin under its party wing, the "agrarians" will protect 
Aleksandr Zaveryukha, "New Regional Policy" will look after the 
sector ministers, and "Women of Russia" will back the whole 
cabinet since it supports the social orientation of the actions 
they are planning. For its part, "Russia's Choice" will rescue 
the "Yeltsin Government" from the firing line of criticism, 
namely Andrey Kozyrev, Anatoliy Chubays, Pavel Grachev, and 
Viktor Yerin.... 
  In light of this prospect, Viktor Chernomyrdin's claim that 
"there is no opposition in the government to parliament, there 
are only common interests" looks highly amusing. And if the 
Duma implements its initiative to compel the government to give 
a weekly account of itself, we will witness a kind of 
parliamentary "bullfight" which we have never seen before. 
  Unity in the Federal Assembly will probably only occur at 
that desperate moment when (forecasters are saying May or June) 
inflation reaches yet another high and deputies of various 
political stripes, so as not to lose face, will jointly raise 
the issue of confidence in the government without bothering to 
divide it into "ours" and "theirs." 

