Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Note of Protest by the Foreign Ministry of the Republic of </F>
Albania, handed over to Greek Embassy Secretary Dimitrios Lopas 
at the Foreign Ministry on 12 January] 
  [Text] The Foreign Ministry spokesman reports that, today, 
Dimitrios Lopas [name as heard], Greek Embassy secretary in 
Tirana, was summoned to this Ministry and was handed over a note 
of protest. 
  The note states that at 1610 on 10 January 1994, a Greek 
patrol ship entered Albanian territorial waters south of Qefal 
Cape. At 1615, after approaching within approximately one mile 
of the Albanian coast, the Greek ship fired a volley in the 
direction of the seashore. The ship left immediately after a 
torpedo-boat of the Albanian Navy Forces of the Sarande military 
district appeared. 
  The Foreign Ministry of the Republic of Albania stresses 
that 
such actions by the Greek Navy Forces have been recurrent. On 5 
November 1993, a Greek ship violated the Albanian territorial 
waters up to eight miles into our territory, while on 4 January 
1994 another Greek ship opened fire on an Albanian motor-boat 
that was fishing within Albanian territorial waters. 
  The Foreign Ministry of the Republic of Albania protests to 
the Embassy of the Greek Republic in Tirana about such flagrant 
actions and asks the Greek competent bodies to give explanations 
of such provocative acts. The Greek Government should take 
immediate measures that such events be no longer repeated 
because they aim at infringing the sovereignty of the Albanian 
state and seriously harming the spirit of good neighborliness 
between the two countries. The note says that these events run 
counter to the efforts to strengthen the cooperation between the 
two states and the friendship between our two peoples. 
  We remind you that the Albanian Navy Forces are engaged and 
ready to energetically act in defense of the inviolability of 
the territorial waters of the Republic of Albania. The Foreign 
Ministry of the Republic of Albania asks the Greek Embassy in 
Tirana to inform the Greek authorities of the above and is 
waiting for the relevant explanations. 

