Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Bal Krishna] </F>
  [Text] New Delhi, Jan. 1: Pakistan has accumulated 
sufficient quantity of weapon grade uranium but its nuclear bomb 
programme is facing serious problems as the country is finding 
it hard to procure or develop command and control mechanism to 
trigger and deliver the nuclear device, according to an 
assessment made by nuclear science experts here. 
  The experts say Pakistan might have several hundred kgs of 
weapon grade uranium against the minimum requirement of 15 kg of 
enriched uranium for a nuclear bomb. But the strategic 
effectiveness of the Pakistan's nuclear weapons will ultimately 
depend not so much upon their explosive power as upon the 
indetectability and accuracy of the delivery system. 
  The experts say since Pakistan has successfully produced 
highly enriched uranium, little would apparently stand in the 
way of its manufacturing nuclear arms except the time that would 
be needed to develop command and control mechanism to trigger 
and deliver the nuclear bomb. 
  They say now Pakistan's efforts to obtain nuclear weapons 
have gone beyond its production of highly enriched uranium. It 
has been actively working on nuclear weapons design problems and 
on the explosive triggering mechanisms and delivery system of 
nuclear weapons. 
  Shortly after Pokhran test by India in 1974, the experts 
say, 
Pakistan launched a separate effort to acquire the capability 
for producing highly enriched uranium, the alternative material 
usable for nuclear weapons. 
  The key to this secret endeavour was Dr. Abdul Qadir Khan, a 
Pakistani metallurgical engineer who later became Chief of 
Pakistan's Atomic Energy Agency. From 1972 to 1975, Mr. Khan 
worked in the metallurgical section of a Dutch engineering firm, 
the Physical Dynamics Research Laboratory whose parent company 
was playing a key role in an ultracentrifuge uranium enrichment 
plant under construction in the town of Almelo in the 
Netherlands. The facility was built by the British Dutch-West 
Germany consortium `URENCO' to produce low enriched nuclear 
power plant fuel. 
  The experts say subsequently it was revealed that Mr. Khan 
had gained access both to secret technical data concerning the 
plant's highly classified uranium enrichment process and to 
detailed lists of equipment used in the facility, all of which 
he transferred to Pakistan. 
  Even before Khan had left his post in the Netherlands in 
1975, Pakistani nuclear scientists were using the information he 
had provided to begin purchasing key components for a Pakistani 
ultracentrifuge pilot plant which was later built in the town of 
Sihala, south west of Islamabad. 
  Later, under Khan's direction, Pakistan initiated 
construction of an industrial scale plant at nearby Kahuta with 
thousands of centrifuge units. The experts say later Pakistan 
was able to obtain as much as 100 metric tonnes of uranium 
concentrate popularly known as yellow cake not subject to 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) monitoring from Libya. 
The material had originally been purchased by Libya from Niger 
and then reexported to Pakistan. 
  They say Pakistan's first nuclear power plant, known as 
Karachi Nuclear Power Project, a 137 megawatt, natural 
uranium/heavy water reactor purchased from Canada, was completed 
in 1972. It was subjected to IAEA inspections and has capacity 
to produce nuclear weapon grade material. 
  After the 1971 Indo-Pak war, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, the chief 
architect of Pakistan's nuclear programme, decided to develop 
atomic weapons. Since 1973, the country has been making efforts 
to acquire reprocessing and uranium enrichment technology both 
overtly and covertly and finally it was able to commission fuel 
fabrication plant at Chashma which is not subject to IAEA 
safeguard, the experts say. 
  The experts say this gave Pakistan a source of 
plutonium-bearing spent fuel from which the plutonium could be 
extracted for weapons in the New Labs reprocessing unit (Near 
Rawalpindi) or the Chashma reprocessing plant. 
  Pakistan's principal nuclear research centre is the 
Institute 
of Nuclear Science and Technology (PINSTECH). It has 
British-designed reprocessing laboratory with plutonium output 
and useful for training the country's technicians in this 
sensitive field. 
  They say information about Pakistan's uranium deposits is 
rather inconsistent and sometimes even contradictory. The 
country has claimed to have discovered uranium resources in 
Ghazi Khan Thalkot, Azad Kashmir and Cholistan, with an 
estimated total of several hundred tonnes. 
  The experts point out that in light of aid from a 
neighbouring country and Pakistan's years of weapons design 
work, a test may not be necessary for the country to have 
confidence that the nuclear arms will work. There are number of 
other reasons which suggest that Pakistan will refrain from 
declaring that it possesses nuclear arms, the experts added. 

