BFN 

  [Text] The U.S. deputy secretary of state, Mr. Strobe 
Talbott, has emphasized the need for strengthening the 
multidimensional relationship between Pakistan and his country. 
Addressing a news conference in Islamabad today, Mr. Strobe 
Talbott, gave detail of his talks with Pakistani leaders. 
  [Begin Talbott recording] Together United States and 
Pakistan finally have a chance to realize the huge human and 
economic potential of our partnership, and that was the essence 
of my message to the Pakistani Government today and it also 
served as the background for everything that we discussed. Now, 
let me say a word or two about the agenda. I suspect that quite 
a few of you are interested in the issue of F-16's and the 
American proposal to cap the Pakistani nuclear program. There 
was obviously a lot of discussion of those (?mostly) 
inter-related subjects in several of the conversations that I 
had today. But our talks was far more wide-ranging than just on 
that subject. In fact, the wide-range of our discussions is 
significant in itself. It is a testament to the number of 
issues on which our governments and our people are committed to 
work together. Ours is a multidimensional relationship and mine 
was a multidimensional agenda. [end recording] 
  The American deputy secretary of state called on the 
president. The president gave a resume of U.S.-Pakistan 
relations over the past few years and of Pakistan's perceptions 
of America and its aspirations. He said the governments of 
Pakistan and the United States have coincidence of interests in 
several areas. He hoped Mr. Talbott's visit will bring the two 
friendly countries nearer and narrow their differences. He 
especially welcomed the friendly vibrations from the United 
States. Mr. Talbott assured the president that the United 
States attach the same importance to Pakistan as it did in the 
pre-Cold War era. He hoped to discuss Pakistan-U.S. relations 
in depth and said he envisaged discussions across a fairly wide 
spectrum which would lead to greater between the two countries. 
Mr. Talbott said the United States noted with satisfaction the 
diligent way in which Pakistan had put its economic matters in 
order and hoped for greater cooperation between the two 
countries. 
  Mr. Strobe Talbott called on the prime minister, Ms. Benazir 
Bhutto, in Islamabad today. Matters relating to mutual 
interests were discussed during the meeting. The prime minister 
also hosted lunch for the visiting U.S. delegation. 
  Mr. Strobe Talbott also met the foreign minister, Sardar 
Asif 
Ahmad Ali, in Islamabad. They discussed bilateral matters, 
including Kashmir, and nuclear nonproliferation in South Asia. 
The foreign minister apprised Mr. Talbott of Pakistan's 
perception of the regional situation. Earlier, Mr. Talbott had 
a meeting with the senior officials of the Foreign office. The 
Kashmir issue, handing over of F-16 fighter planes to Pakistan, 
nuclear nonproliferation and other important matters were 
discussed in the meeting. The Pakistani side was by led by the 
secretary of foreign affairs, Mr. Najmuddin Sheikh, while Mr. 
Talbott was assisted by the assistant secretary of state, Miss 
Robin Raphel. 

