Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed "ps": "Number of Unemployed at New Record </F>
High"] 
  [Text] Unemployment in the Federal Republic showed another 
slight increase in February. At the end of last month, 
4,042,427 people were out of work throughout Germany. The 
president of the Federal Employment Office in Nuremberg, 
Bernhard Jagoda, spoke of a continuing "unfavorable economic 
tendency" in the west of the Federal Republic. In the new 
laender, the development is "more favorable all in all." The 
slight increase in unemployment of some 13,000 in January is 
divided almost equally between western and eastern Germany. In 
the past, February usually saw the first stimulation in the 
labor market. 
  Unemployment has risen by a tenth of 1 percent to 8.9 
percent 
in the old laender and 17.1 percent in the new laender. 
Although this is the first time that comprehensive data on the 
structure of employment in the new laender are available, Jagoda 
does not want to publish any all-German statistics in 1994. He 
admits that unemployment in western and eastern Germany together 
is currently in the double digits. Publishing a total figure 
would underplay the situation in the new laender, Jagoda said. 
On the other hand, the all-German figure would make Germany 
fall back in the European list, where the west German figure is 
usually taken into account. According to Friedrich Buttler, the 
head of the Institute for Labor Market and Job Research 
affiliated to the Employment Office, this would mean an 
intolerable distortion owing to different structures in western 
and eastern Germany. 
  The labor market in the west is still characterized by job 
cuts, which became even worse during the winter months. 
According to the preliminary figures of the Federal Statistical 
Office, there were 28.43 million people gainfully employed in 
January. This is 640,000 fewer than a year ago. The amount of 
short-time work has, however, gone down by 50 percent to 518,700 
in a year. But, in February, it went up again for the first 
time. 
  Jagoda does not consider the fact that the labor exchange 
offices were reporting more vacancies last month as an 
indication that the economy is recovering. The demand is 
restricted exclusively to agriculture and catering. The reports 
were obviously aiming at employing foreigners. Owing to the new 
regulations, employers have to indicate their requirements for 
seasonal workers early because jobs must first be held for 
German workers for a certain period of time. 
  Jagoda thinks that the downward trend in employment in the 
new laender is over. Except for seasonal fluctuations, the 
tendency toward stability is continuing there. This statement 
is based on the decreasing relief by labor market measures such 
as prepension, training, or short-time work. What has increased 
is job-creating measures. 
  Nuremberg now has detailed data on the employment situation 
in eastern Germany; they are, however, valid for the key date of 
31 June 1993. According to these figures, there were only 5.6 
million people liable to pay social insurance contributions. 
Before the collapse of the GDR, some 9 million people had jobs. 
The decline in employment since summer 1992 is reported as 
322,000. Workers in the small trades and women have been 
especially severely hit by job losses. The extent of the 
reduction in the industrial basis becomes obvious from the 
figure of a mere 1.1 million people employed in the processing 
sector. This is a much lower percentage than in the old laender. 
The only expansion taking place in the east was in the 
construction industry, which had 700,000 people employed in June 
1993. 

