BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Reconciliation Endeavors Thwarted by </F>
Prisoners and Terrorism Issues; Iran Postpones Its Official 
Delegation's Visit to Iraq for Second Time"] 
  [Text] Tehran, London, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- It has been 
decided for the second time to postpone the visit scheduled to 
be made to Iraq by a high-level Iranian delegation amid new 
indications of a crisis in relations between Baghdad and Tehran. 
  The Iranian delegation was supposed to go to Iraq on 11 July 
to arrange for Iranian Foreign Minister 'Ali Akbar Velayati's 
visit to the Iraqi capital later the same month. 
  But two questions have emerged to derail reconciliation 
endeavors between the two countries. The first question 
concerns Iran's recent demand to the International Red Cross to 
look for more than 32,000 Iranian POW's believed to be still 
held in Iraqi camps. But Iraq vehemently denies these Iranian 
allegations, pointing out that Tehran raises this issue from 
time to time merely to prevent the normalization of relations 
between them. 
  However, the head of the Iranian committee entrusted with 
looking for missing persons says that he has "a mountain of 
evidence" supporting his claim that Iraq is using Iranians in 
compulsory work camps. 
  The committee's head, Mohammad 'Ali Nazran, said in a 
statement on Thursday [23 June] that the Red Cross "has full 
knowledge" of the Iranian position. 
  Iraq says that Iran fabricated the missing persons story "to 
conceal its lies during the war." 
  The Iraqis also claim that Iran lost in the war far more 
forces than the numbers stated in official statements. And 
that as a result, more than 32,000 killed in the war were 
classified as missing persons, and then later as POW's in Iraq. 
  The two sides have never released complete statistics of all 
their losses in the eight-year war. But some Western circles 
put the number of Iranian casualties at no less than 750,000, 
compared with 300,000 Iraqis. 
  The second question which has so far thwarted endeavors to 
achieve Iranian-Iraqi reconciliation concerns the terrorist 
actions the two sides are carrying out against one another. 
  At least 25 people were involved in the latest incident of 
this kind when a bomb exploded last Monday in Mashhad, the 
second largest Iranian city. 
  The Iranian Government holds the Mojahedi-e Khalq group, an 
armed opposition group supported by Iraq, responsible for the 
incident. 
  For its part, Baghdad accuses opposition Shiite groups of 
carrying out a number of terrorist actions in Iraq with 
financial and logistical support from Iran. 

