Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] 
<H6>  THE STAR </H6>
  Bophuthatswana Rejection of Election Process Baffling -- 
"Who, for example, would ever have imagined General Tienie 
Groenewald coming out on the side of those advocating 
participation in the election?" asks a page-16 editorial in 
Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 8 March. "The thinking 
behind the apparent shift in tactics of Groenewald, Afrikaner 
Volksfront [Afrikaner National Front, AVF] leader General 
Constand Viljoen and a group of dissatisfied Conservative Party 
MPs is driven by pragmatism." In view of this, THE STAR is 
baffled by Bophuthatswana's decision not to participate in the 
election. "Perhaps the crowing from those threatening to bring 
the homeland to its knees played a part in the cabinet decision 
to stay out of the process. Reality is, however, staring the 
homeland leadership in the face. Its administration is 
tottering, its independence is clearly unsustainable without the 
support of its people, and the Freedom Alliance which lent it 
some muscle is in disarray." THE STAR believes Bophuthatswana's 
Lucas Mangope will be "persuaded to see reality" if a 
"face-saving formula can be found." 
  Zimbabwe Land Scandal -- A second editorial on the same page 
notes: "Reports from Harare say many State-owned farms, taken 
away from white tenants ostensibly to resettle black peasant 
families, have been leased to politicians, senior civil servants 
and military officers. Among them is Witness Mangwende, who as 
Agriculture Minister navigated the Land Acquisition Act through 
parliament. Anywhere else in the world this would be considered 
a scandal. But from President Robert Mugabe, not a word. In 
his last recorded speech on the land question late last year, he 
told his ZANU PF [Zimbabwe African National Union Patriotic 
Front] party that the government would not surrender the 
people's right to land to `a greedy band of racist usurpers'. 
Are Zimbabweans to infer that a greedy group of a different hue 
is acceptable?" 
<H6>  SOWETAN </H6>
  Concern of National Peacekeeping Force `Incidents' -- A 
page-8 editorial in Johannesburg SOWETAN in English on 8 March 
refers to the reports from Bloemfontein that members of the 
National Peacekeeping Force (NPKF) "were involved in a brawl at 
the weekend with locals. Police had to use teargas to disperse 
a rowdy group after NPKF members were allegedly robbed." The 
latest in "a string of incidents" is that of "117 members 
quitting in disgust. To think, they haven't even started active 
duties yet. Heaven help us." 
<H6>  CITY PRESS </H6>
  Warning Against ANC Social Programs Promises -- "Among 
innumerable election offerings the ANC has pro6ised to build a 
million houses within five years of taking power," notes a 
page-14 editorial in Johannesburg CITY PRESS in English on 6 
March. The African National Congress (ANC) has also "promised 
to give preference to labour-intensive schemes that will provide 
jobs for millions of unemployed people in South Africa." While 
CITY PRESS doesn't "doubt the ANC's ability to embark on 
extensive social programmes, we have certain reservations. 
Raising hopes to such a fever pitch at this volatile stage may 
not be the right thing to do." CITY PRESS advises the ANC "to 
take a leaf from the experiences of many other African 
governments who swept to power on similar promises only to find 
themselves faced with an angry electorate and no means to 
placate them." 

