SUMMARY 
                                           The Japanese Government appears to be sharply divided over 
whether to support economic sanctions against North Korea if the 
United Nations decides to impose them.  Securing the backing of 
some members of the coalition for sanctions could require 
considerable effort and could divert the coalition's attention 
from other issues, such as easing trade frictions with the United 
States. 
                                  END SUMMARY 
   Prime Minister Hosokawa, perhaps reflecting the tensions within 
his government, has recently sent out increasingly conflicting 
signals about Japan's position on possible economic sanctions 
against North Korea.  Hosokawa most frequently has been reported 
as making somewhat guarded statements that have been interpreted 
in the Japanese press as meaning that Japan would support 
sanctions if the United Nations votes to impose them.  For 
example, during Hosokawa's news conference with President Clinton 
on 11 February, he stated that if the UN imposes sanctions "Japan 
will do as much as it can within the limits of its constitution" 
(NHK Television, 11 February).  At a 20 March news conference in 
Beijing, he made a similar statement, saying that "as a general 
rule . . . Japan for its part will also have to take responsible 
action" if the UN imposes sanctions.  Unnamed Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MOFA) officials quoted Hosokawa as telling Korean 
President Kim Yong-sam on 25 March during Kim's visit to Japan 
that if sanctions were imposed, Japan would take "responsible" 
measures within the limits of its constitution. 
   During his news conference with Kim on 26 March, however, 
Hosokawa appeared to be more non-committal.  He refused to answer 
a South Korean reporter's question about how Japan would react to 
any imposition of sanctions, arguing that it would be pointless 
to answer since the UN Security Council had not yet discussed the 
issue.  While saying that he thought it was "very important" for 
the international community to "indicate its solid attitude 
toward North Korea," he added that it was also "important to 
leave the door open for dialogue with North Korea" --a position 
that is also taken by some members of the ruling coalition who 
oppose sanctions. 
   Hosokawa's ambivalent public stance may represent an effort to 
avoid exacerbating tensions within his government over the 
sanctions issue.  Judging from statements in the Japanese media, 
the ruling coalition is sharply divided over whether Japan should 
support sanctions.  On one side there appears to be a group of 
coalition members around Shinseito Secretary General Ichiro 
Ozawa, who appears to believe that Japan should support sanctions 
as part of an effort to play a larger international political 
role.   The 23 March Nihon Keizai Shimbun quoted Ozawa, widely 
considered as the most influential politician in the coalition, 
as stating that Japan should "cooperate" with the United Nations 
on the issue.  The 23 March Mainichi Shimbun also reported that 
Ozawa strongly backs sanctions, although the quotes it cited were 
more ambivalent.  According to the paper, on 22 March Ozawa said 
that Japan "has to act according to the principles of our 
constitution, which seeks world peace through the United Nations 
and preserves our country's peace, security, and existence."  He 
added that if Japan did not act in accordance with this 
principle, "the international community will not trust Japan." 
   Opposition to Sanctions 
   In contrast to Ozawa's position, there appears to be strong 
opposition to, or reservations about, sanctions within several 
parties in the coalition.  The strongest opposition reportedly 
comes from the Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ), which has 
long been sympathetic to North Korea.  Outlining the party's 
position at a 22 March news conference, SDPJ Chairman Tomiichi 
Murayama reportedly argued that Japan should "do everything we 
can to reach a settlement [of the North Korean nuclear issue] 
through consultations, rather than through immediate sanctions" 
(Mainichi Shimbun, 23 March).  The 28 March Yomiuri Shimbun 
quoted the party's secretary general, Wataru Kubo, as stating 
that the party favored "a policy of dialogue" with North Korea 
because it feared that Pyongyang might respond to sanctions with 
acts of terrorism and because the party did not believe that 
sanctions would be successful in forcing North Korea to accept 
nuclear inspections.  Moreover, in an apparent effort to explore 
all avenues to a negotiated settlement of the DPRK nuclear issue, 
the party, according to the 24 March Mainichi Shimbun, decided on 
24 March to send a mission led by its vice chairman, Issei Inoue, 
to China for 3 days beginning 1 April to press Beijing to use 
China's influence with North Korea to get Pyongyang back to the 
negotiating table. 
   Despite its leadership's public opposition to sanctions, the SDPJ 
itself may in fact be divided over how to respond if the rest of 
the ruling coalition decides to support any possible sanctions. 
Judging by statements the Japanese press has attributed to 
various party leaders, some senior members of the party are 
apparently arguing that the SDPJ should back any government 
decision to support sanctions rather than risk breaking up the 
ruling coalition by continuing to oppose them.  For example, the 
26 March Nihon Keizai Shimbun quoted an unidentified SDPJ leader 
as stating that despite the SDPJ's long relationship with the 
DPRK, "as one of the coalition partners, the SDPJ is in the 
position of shoring up the coalition government." 
In addition to the opposition within the SDPJ, some leaders in 
other coalition parties who were once involved in efforts to 
normalize Japan's relations with the DPRK as members of the 
Liberal Democratic Party appear to have reservations about 
imposing sanctions.  The 23 March issues of both Nihon Keizai 
Shimbun and Mainichi Shimbun reported that some members of the 
Shinseito and the Sakigake--the party headed by Chief Cabinet 
Secretary Masayoshi Takemura--were opposed to sanctions. 
   Wavering Within MOFA 
   Coalition members who argue that Japan should support sanctions 
appear to have some backing within the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MOFA), which evidently fears that Japan will damage its 
international credibility if it fails to support sanctions 
imposed by the United Nations.  MOFA has also been pressing for a 
permanent seat for Japan on the UN Security Council, and may fear 
that failure to support sanctions imposed by the UN would damage 
Japan's chances of attaining this goal.  A 24 March Kyodo report 
quoted MOFA Administrative Vice Minister Kunihiko Saito as 
telling a meeting of defense experts and businessmen that Japan 
would change its laws if necessary in order to support any 
economic sanctions imposed upon North Korea by the UN.  "Japan," 
Kyodo quoted Saito as saying, "will be remembered as an 
irresponsible country in the future" if it fails to support any 
UN sanctions on North Korea. 
   MOFA supporters of sanctions, however, have wavered in their 
public commitment to any UN moves in this direction, suggesting 
that they would prefer initially that the UN take a low-key 
approach to the North Korean nuclear issue.  For example, 
Administrative Vice Minister Saito on 28 March reportedly told a 
news conference that Japan was prepared to back a Chinese 
proposal that the Security Council issue a nonbinding statement 
urging North Korea to accept full nuclear inspections.  Kyodo 
quoted Saito as saying that the international community's "aim is 
to make North Korea change its policy, not to take punitive 
action." 
   Business Community Ambivalence 
   The apparent lack of widespread public--especially business- 
-support for a strong Japanese stance on sanctions may complicate 
the resolution of differences within the coalition.  For example, 
Gaishi Hiraiwa, the chairman of Japan's largest business 
organization the Keidanren [Federation of Economic 
Organizations], reportedly told a news conference on 24 March 
that he believed the international community should exhaust all 
possibilities for a negotiated solution to the North Korean 
nuclear issue before considering sanctions.  "As much as 
possible," the 24 March Mainichi Shimbun quoted him as saying, 
"it is necessary not to carry out sanctions and isolate North 
Korea." 
   Measures to Resolve Differences 
   The coalition and MOFA appear to be taking some tentative 
measures to resolve the differences within the government over 
the sanctions issue and come up with a unified government stance. 
These measures are evidently just in their initial stages, 
however, and progress is likely to be slow.  According to the 28 
March Yomiuri Shimbun, the SDPJ decided at a 24 March meeting of 
its central executive committee to undertake a study of how the 
party should handle the sanctions issue--a move possibly designed 
to help resolve the differences between the SDPJ's policy and 
that of the rest of the coalition.  In addition, according to the 
24 March Nihon Keizai Shimbun, MOFA has established a task force 
to consider how Japan will deal with issues surrounding economic 
sanctions against North Korea if the UN imposes them. 
   The work of this task force, however, will probably be slowed by 
apparent divisions within the government over how to handle some 
of the issues it is considering.  One of these issues is how to 
stop remittances to North Korea from ethnic Koreans living in 
Japan.  According to the 27 March Asahi Shimbun, the Ministry of 
Finance is examining various ways to restrict these remittances. 
The paper reported, however, that some government officials are 
opposed to some of the measures under considerations--such as 
refusing reentry permits to North Korean residents of Japan who 
visit North Korea and limiting the amount of money carried out of 
the country by travellers to the DPRK--because they might be 
perceived as discriminating against and violating the rights of 
Japanese residents of North Korean ancestry.  According to the 23 
March Nihon Keizai Shimbun, some officials are also arguing that 
it will be impossible to stop remittances that are sent to the 
DPRK through third countries such as China. 
   Outlook 
   If the UN imposes sanctions against North Korea, the Japanese 
Government will probably support them in order to preserve its 
relationships with the United States and South Korea and avoid 
damaging its chances of winning a permanent seat on the Security 
Council.  Getting the SDPJ to go along with such a position, 
however, will almost certainly take considerable time and effort, 
which, in turn, would probably divert the attention of the 
government from such pressing issues as resolving the current 
economic tensions with the United States. 
   (AUTHOR:  BOUNDS.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
ASIA DIVISION ANALYSIS TEAM, (703)-733-6096.) 
EAG/HORTON/CB 30/2142z Mar 

