BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Wu Fumin (0702 1788 3046) and Chen Jiming </F>
(7115 4949 2494; first two paragraphs are editor's note)] 
  [Excerpt] Shanghai, 15 May (XINHUA) -- Shanghai 
municipality's decision-making level and deficit-ridden 
enterprises' staff and workers worked with one heart to make up 
deficits. They composed "a stirring song of great Shanghai" 
under the condition of a socialist market economy. 
  An important experience gained by Shanghai's enterprises in 
their efforts to solve thorny problems and make up deficits was 
that it is necessary to get rid of pessimism and to boost 
confidence in striving to become stronger and to stand on one's 
own feet. After we have cultivated such a spirit, we shall be 
able to see the future and hope for state enterprises, to tap 
their potential, and to rejuvenate deficit-ridden state 
enterprises. 
  The decision-making level of Shanghai, which is ambitiously 
building itself into an international economic, banking, and 
trade center, is worried about the problems confronting nearly 
200 deficit-ridden enterprises. This year it is planned to make 
efforts to solve thorny problems encountered in reform. 
Rejuvenating the deficit-ridden state enterprises that once 
generated a large amount of wealth for the state is, no doubt, 
"the most heavy task of all" and has become the focus of 
people's attention. 
  Therefore, a campaign to solve thorny problems and to make 
up 
deficits was launched in great Shanghai. One competent 
entrepreneur after another composed a stirring song for the 
Chinese nation to courageously forge ahead under the burden of 
heavy tasks on the stage of economic reform. 
<H5>  The Leadership and the Rank and File Are of One Mind; They </H5>
Fight To Win or Die 
  Large and medium state enterprises are the backbone of the 
national economy. Shanghai turned approximately 500 billion 
yuan over to the state in the past four decades or so. Of the 
amount, 80 percent was contributed by industrial workers. 
According to statistics, in the past few years, Shanghai's 
total industrial output accounted for 57 percent of its gross 
national product, while large and medium state enterprises 
captured 51 percent of its total industrial added value. It 
will be very difficult for Shanghai to promote economic 
development if its state enterprises are not invigorated. It 
was precisely on the basis of this understanding that the 
Shanghai Municipal CPC Committee and the Shanghai municipal 
government made up their minds to take advantage of the turning 
point to gear their efforts to the needs of the market, to fully 
use Shanghai's strong points, to score splendid achievements 
once again, and to launch a campaign to help state enterprises 
solve thorny problems and make up deficits. 
  On 27 January 1994, Wu Bangguo, member of the CPC Central 
Committee Political Bureau and secretary of the Shanghai party 
committee; Jiang Yiren, vice mayor of Shanghai in charge of 
industry and the economy; and their party arrived at the 
Shanghai Corduroy Factory, an enterprise that had generated a 
large amount of foreign exchange but suffered huge losses, to 
discuss measures for making up deficits. Holding factory 
Director Liu Tianfu's hands, Wu Bangguo said: We must let an 
enterprise like the corduroy factory whose products maintain 
good quality, capture a certain share of the market and 
rejuvenate economic returns. 
  Led by the municipal economic commission, more than 10 
Shanghai municipality departments, including financial, 
planning, labor, environmental protection, and social security 
departments, banks, and the textile industry bureau repeatedly 
visited the corduroy factory to assess plans for solving 
problems and making up deficits. They decided to address its 
problems by looking into both their root cause and symptoms so 
that the enterprise could score splendid achievements once again. 
  This was merely a scene of the determination of Shanghai's 
decision-making level to succeed in launching the campaign to 
solve thorny problems for enterprises and to make up their 
deficits. 
  "Handle the most difficult task and reach the most 
unattainable goal." Shanghai municipality was determined to 
expedite enterprises' "transformation of operating mechanisms 
and establishment of a modern enterprise system" through 
comprehensive and mutually supportive reform measures and by 
combining its overall development program with readjustment of 
industrial structure and distribution in a bid to enable 
deficit-ridden state enterprises which have the hope of being 
revived to invigorate and restore their "make-blood" function 
like the corduroy factory through the "transformation of 
operating mechanisms and establishment of a modern enterprise 
system" and to extricate themselves from difficulties, once and 
for all, within three years. As regards those enterprises 
without the hope of making up deficits, other solutions, such as 
mergers, moving to other locations, changing production lines, 
reorganization, and declaration of bankruptcy, will be found for 
them. A municipal government office meeting presided over by 
Mayor Huang Ju formally decided that the first batch of 43 
deficit-ridden state enterprises must improve their economic 
performances this year. Taking into consideration the fact that 
state enterprise reform is a major systems engineering task, the 
meeting required all functional departments to implement all the 
make-up-deficit plans, targets, measures, schedules, and 
responsibilities. [passage omitted] 

