Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development 
Corporation (PNC), which will carry out R&amp;D aimed at 
completing 
a future plutonium use technological system that will provide 
high resistance to the proliferation of nuclear weapons and work 
harmoniously with the environment, plans to begin a concept 
survey from next fiscal year in order to promote development of 
the ``recycling system experimental fast reactor (tentative 
name),'' which will be the core of R&amp;D on a system for 
recycling 
transuranic elements (TRU), including plutonium. 
  In Japan, which is promoting plutonium recycling as its 
policy, an issue for the future is to develop a system with high 
social acceptance by reducing the burden of radioactive waste 
processing and disposal and raising the degree of 
non-proliferation, and one effective method would be a plutonium 
and TRU recycling system. The advantage of making TRU into fuel 
is not only its effective use as a heat source, but also the 
fact that it will make it possible to avoid recovering highly 
concentrated plutonium in unmixed form, thus heightening 
resistance to proliferation of nuclear weapons. Also, combustion 
of TRU will reduce the accumulation of long half-life nuclides 
and simplify disposal of high-level radioactive waste (HLW). 
  According to PNC, the experimental reactor development 
program will confirm the possibility of establishing 
technologies for the following: 
  (1) system that applies the features of a fast reactor that 
can make quantitative adjustments, from breeding to consumption 
stages; 
  (2) system that is harmonious with the environment because 
it 
minimizes TRU combustion and the amount of generated waste; 
  (3) system that can be easily accepted by society, such as 
one that has safety features that are easy to understand; 
  (4) system that is high in nuclear non-proliferation, from 
fuel fabrication to reprocessing. 
  PNC intends to develop this through international 
cooperation, not just in Japan. 
  Toward this end, PNC wants to use the experimental reactor 
to 
carry out core performance tests, focusing on verification of 
core passive safety features, and make this into an experimental 
reactor with more advanced instrumentation for the core and 
other areas. Also, with a view toward practical use, 
revolutionary technology will be incorporated into the test 
facility for testing and demonstration. After core feature 
tests, the plan is to confirm the TRU recycling system as a 
whole by means of a TRU fuel core structure, with the goal of 
verifying consistent performance of the TRU recycling system. 
  To further the development of TRU annihilation, the 
development of nitride fuel and other new fuels and the 
development of fuel in preparation for the evolvement of the 
current experimental fast breeder reactor (``Joyo'') into a 
practical model, PNC is developing the MK-III project to 
heighten neutron flux, expand irradiation area and upgrade 
irradiation technology. This experimental reactor program is a 
continuation of that project. 
  The experimental reactor program timetable starts with a 
study of technology selection and appropriateness of experiment 
content in FY94. This will be followed by a survey of technology 
outlook and facility concept and a survey study of core 
concepts. The budget for FY94 will be about &yen;100 million. 
Research on conceptual design will start in FY95. 

