Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrey Fadin, under the "Subject of the Week" </F>
rubric: "Who Removed Gaydar"] 
  [Text] Everything in our life is related, at times in a way 
that is not readily apparent. Zhirinovskiy's elevation, 
Clinton's visit, Gaydar's resignation, Kozyrev's by now rather 
imperialistic statements, and the collapse of the ruble rate of 
exchange give an example of exactly such a 
relationship--everything is interrelated. 
  We will try to track some amusing relationships in this 
configuration. 
  The elevation of the Zhirinovskiy supporters frightened more 
than just our neighbors in the post-USSR; the leaders of the 
West also revealed serious fears for the future of the "new 
world order" that began to be visible--some sincerely, and some 
as an argument in favor of maintaining a military potential. 
  However, whatever the real motives of the leaders of the 
West 
were, no one today needs an openly imperial and consistently 
anti-Western Russia. It is precisely for this reason that the 
West saw a serious threat in the prospect of a Zhirinovskiy 
victory (for example, in the presidential elections) not to the 
somewhat abstract "Russian democracy," but to its own rather 
concrete interests. The reaction to the outcome of the elections 
was rather unambiguous. Yeltsin now represented the last 
guarantor against the victory of Nazism and, consequently, an 
unconditional ally. 
  The unconditionality in this case is a literal concept, and 
it means that the West actually removed all of its main 
conditions of support for Yeltsin--demilitarization (reduction 
of the Army, conversion), civilized behavior in the "near 
abroad," and, finally, consistent and rapid market reforms. At 
first, Grachev's pre-New Year statement about the actual halt in 
the reduction of the Army, and afterwards Kozyrev's statement 
about the need for Russia's military presence in the post-Soviet 
republics (that is, in the independent states!) did not evoke 
practically any kind of adequate tough "return" of the West. 
Afterwards, from the lips of American Vice President Al Gore 
came the slogan "More therapy--less shock," which seemed to come 
from a preelection Volskiy poster. 
  It had already become clear at that moment that the official 
West would no longer insist on the continuation of the Gaydar 
line and the retention of Gaydar himself in the government as a 
guarantor of the progress of Russia toward a market. Facing the 
threat of a "Weimar scenario," about whose actuality for Russia 
Aleksandr Yanov had written for a long time, the West abandoned 
unequivocal support of a liberal market and a liberal democracy. 
  It is clear that the coming changes in the government (and 
this means a change in policy also) could not help but be 
discussed at the Yeltsin and Clinton meeting. It is also clear 
that Clinton did not set Gaydar's retention in the government as 
a condition for his support of Yeltsin. As a result, the 
so-promising analogy in the destinies of Yegor Gaydar and Leszek 
Balcerowicz was stopped. 
  (At one time, the West made it clear to the "Polish Yeltsin, 
" Lech Walenca, that the retention of Balcerowicz, the "Polish 
Gaydar," after the next change in the government, was a 
condition for numerous credit-financial benefits to Poland. And 
Balcerowicz remained--up to the completion of his task of "dirty 
work," the most tormenting for society, but absolutely necessary 
to Polish reforms. Balcerowicz left, just as spent steam leaves 
after it has fulfilled its work in a machine....) 
  Gaydar was sent off, it seems, before the country arrived 
"at 
the point of no return," without giving him a chance to execute 
a critical volume of "dirty work." The limitation of the 
analogies revealed itself at this turning point: Yeltsin proved 
not to be Walenca, and Gaydar proved not to be Balcerowicz, but 
the main thing is that Russia did not turn out to be a Poland. 
And only the West proved to be itself: no permanent friends, 
only permanent interests. 
  The profound national-fundamentalist shift in the national 
conscience, which Mr. Zhirinovskiy capitalized on so much, 
confronted the West with a dilemma: Continue to bring pressure 
on the present Russian leadership in the direction of its 
further Westernization (with the risk of a powerful reaction of 
Russia's grass roots), or allow Russia to stew in its own 
authoritarian-statist juice, maintaining for itself only one 
position--but important to itself: a pro-Western orientation. 
Clinton's visit showed that the West chose the second variant. 
What is more, judging by the absence of a reaction to the 
statements of Kozyrev and Grachev, the West actually issued a 
license to the Yeltsin leadership to implement the functions of 
a regional overseer in the post-Soviet space. 
  A similar reorientation of the West matured long ago, but 
Mr. 
Zhirinovskiy's Duma breakthrough gave its formulation a shove. 
Now--and the West, it seems, has accepted this--the Yeltsin 
leadership will be compelled "to run ahead of Zhirinovskiy," in 
part fulfilling his program in order to intercept his audience. 
History is repeating itself. After winning a victory over the 
national-patriots in October, the "collective Yeltsin" is 
beginning to fulfill their program. 
  In this program, Gaydar, deprived of the support of the 
West, 
is superfluous. 
  Thus, Zhirinovskiy, personifying the reaction of the grass 
roots to forced modernization, removed Gaydar through the very 
act of his own electoral victory. 

