BFN 

<F P=106> [By RENMIN RIBAO reporter Xu Hongzhi (6079 1347 3112) and </F>
XINHUA reporter Zhou Shuchun (0719 2885 2504)] 
  [Text] Almaty, 26 Apr (XINHUA) -- Kazakh President 
Nazarbayev hosted a banquet here this evening to give a warm 
welcome to Premier Li Peng on his visit to Kazakhstan. 
  Nazarbayev first proposed an ebullient toast. He said: 
Kazakhstan is located on the border of Europe and Asia, like a 
bridge linking the civilization of the East with the 
civilization of the West. The people of Kazakhstan know very 
well their neighbor China's long history and industrious and 
wise people. The Government of Kazakhstan appreciates China's 
important role in the international arena and its basic 
principles for handling international relations. 
  Quoting a saying shared by both the Kazakh and Chinese 
peoples, he said, "Neighbors are dearer than distant relatives." 
Kazakhstan will develop long-term, stable, good-neighbor, 
friendly, and cooperative relations with China, and this has 
been proven again by the Kazakh-Chinese border agreement signed 
today. 
  Responding to the toast, Premier Li Peng said: President 
Nazarbayev paid a very successful visit to China and held 
fruitful talks with President Jiang Zemin last year. The joint 
statement signed by the two sides then has laid a solid 
foundation for the development of bilateral relations. "Today 
we signed another historic document -- the Chinese-Kazakh border 
agreement. It declares that the more than 1,700-km-long border 
between the two countries will be an area of permanent peace and 
friendship." 
  Li Peng said: "My talks with President Nazarbayev this 
morning had to be extended another hour because we had a great 
deal to discuss. We had an in-depth discussion on a wide range 
of issues, including bilateral relations, regional and 
international issues, as well as political, diplomatic, 
economic, and cultural affairs. Your Excellency's repeated 
emphasis on Kazakhstan's attaching importance to its relations 
with China has left a deep impression on me." 
  Premier Li Peng again expressed his appreciation for the 
Kazakh Government's principled position on adhering to the 
"one-China" policy and opposing national splittism, as well as 
on the Tibet issue. He also expressed his appreciation for 
President Nazarbayev's efforts to promote peace and security in 
Asia. 
  He said: "From as early as ancient times, the great `Silk 
Road' has linked our two countries. Today, China and Kazakhstan 
face the common task of building a new 'Silk Road.' We should 
fully use this road of friendship and cooperation to bring about 
common prosperity and development." 
  Premier Li Peng's entourage also attended the banquet by 
invitation. They included Zhu Lin, Premier Li Peng's wife; 
Ismail Amat, state councillor and minister of the State 
Nationalities Affairs Commission; and Qi Huaiyuan, director of 
the State Council's Foreign Affairs Office. President 
Nazarbayev's wife; Kazakh Prime Minister Tereshchenko, and 
Speaker Kekilbayev also attended the banquet to help entertain 
the guests. 

