BFN 

  [Text] The Copyright (Second Amendment) Bill passed by 
Parliament earlier this month is the most stringent law to be 
ever passed anywhere in the world to check the growing cancer of 
video piracy gripping both developed and developing countries. 
  The bill has been welcomed as a serious attempt to give more 
teeth to the existing laws. Violation of copyright is a 
cognisable offence, but now punishment is sought to be made more 
severe. For the first time, Indian laws will provide for 
performers right covering any visual or accoustic presentation 
made live by performers, such as, actors, singers, dancers, 
acrobats etc. The performers consent is now required by making 
audio or audio-visual recording of the live performances and for 
communicating the performance to the public. 
  Another progressive feature of the bill is that it extends 
the copyright in sale and hire of computer programmes, 
cinematograph films and sound recording. This is in addition to 
all other rights available to other class of creative works such 
as reproduction, communication to the public, translation, 
adaptation etc. A provision has also been made for giving the 
authors of original copies of paintings, sculptures, drawings or 
original manuscripts, a right to a share in subsequent sales of 
copies on the resale price. 
  The Copyright Act hitherto provided only for recognition of 
Performing Rights Societies. The bill now provides for detailed 
provisions for recognition of copyright societies who are 
authorised to engage in collective administration of copyright 
for different classes of creative work. The bill provides for 
promotion of and encouragement of copyright societies for 
administration of the right of its members such as for issuing 
licences and collect licence fees, distribution of such fees 
among its members, etc. This will add to the economic strength 
and status of creative artists. 
  A large number of provisions in the amending bill are 
clarificatory of the terms used in the 1957 Act, e.g. computer 
programme is separately defined and it is clarified that knowing 
use of an infringing copy of a programme would be an offence 
under the Act and musical works are not required to be in the 
form of graphic notations as in the case of Western music, for 
the purpose of enjoying the copyright protection. 
  The legal experts say that special care has been taken in 
the 
bill to ensure that while an author or artist assigns copyright 
for exploitation the agreement should specify the royalty 
payable to the author or legal heirs during the period of 
protection. Similarly, the agreement should clearly spell out 
scope of rights transferred, the duration and the territorial 
extent. These are intended to protect the economic interests of 
the artists and authors. 
  Mr Lowell B. Strong, Vice-President and Director, 
Asia/Pacific Anti-Piracy unit of the Motion Picture Export 
Association of America, says that piracy of video films and 
other intellectual works is an international problem. He says 
it is a phenomenon of the eighties which ushered in a new 
technological era of cable satellite, telecommunications and 
video recorders. 
  With the increasing circulation of intellectual works among 
countries, the ramifications of piracy extend beyond national 
confines and are international in character, Mr Strong said, 
while describing the Indian bill as the "best" and "most 
progressive" copyright laws in the world. He says that the 
association will soon set up an office in Delhi to check piracy 
of Universal and Paramount films. These two American films 
companies have decided to provide in the country original video 
cassettes, through CIC, a Delhi based company. 
  Mr Pradip Chanda, Chief of CIC Video (India) says that the 
latest amendments -- the second major review since the first 
Indian Copyright Act came into effect in 1957 -- will enhance 
India's credibility in the international sphere because it gives 
an assurance to a foreign investor that fair business can be 
conducted in accordance with the declared policy of the 
Government of India. 
  Mr R. K. Jain, President of the National Bar Association, 
says problem in this country is not with the law but its 
enforcement. India does not have effective machinery to deal 
with violations of copyright laws. Police is not trained to 
deal with such kind of offences. Violation of the Copyright Act 
has always been a cognisable offence but since the provisions of 
the act are complex the police have seldom acted to enforce 
these provisions, says Mr Jain. 
  In order to deal with problem of enforcement, the Government 
has asked the States to explore the possibility of constituting 
special cells to check violations of copyright law. The 
official sources say that the formation of copyright enforcement 
cells would ensure the availability of a trained force that 
could prevent the violation of the law. 
  Mr Maxwell Peirera, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Crimes), 
says whenever we receive genuine complaints and orders from the 
Court the police always conduct raids and register cases against 
those who violates the Copyright law. But, he says the problem 
is, people don't come with sufficient evidence and in absence of 
that it is very difficult for law enforcing agencies to act and 
take action. 
  The roots of the Copyright Act 1957 lie firmly embedded in 
the past when the Copyright law of British India was closely 
intertwined with that of Britain. It replaced the Indian 
Copyright Act of 1914, which made applicable to British India 
with additional modification, the Imperial Copyright Act, 1911. 
  Developments which occurred in this field in the 
international arena forced the pace of development of national 
copyright laws. The act does not break away from the past but 
renovates and builds a modern superstructure on the old 
foundation. For the first time, it established a Copyright 
office under the immediate control of the Registrar of 
Copyrights, a civil servant in charge of administrative matters 
pertaining to the act and provided for the maintenance of a 
Registrar of Copyrights. 
  The Act also introduced a quasi-judicial Copyright Board 
under the Chairmanship of a sitting or retired judge of the 
Supreme Court of India or of a High Court or of a person who is 
qualified to be appointed as a judge of the High Court and 
vested the Copyright Board with important power. 
  The original 1957 Act gave recognition for the first time to 
cinematograph films as a distinct class of work eligible for 
copyright protection and to a special right, called `broadcast 
reproduction right', in programmes broadcast by radio and 
television. It also recognised for the first time the `moral 
right of the author.' 

