Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The False Accusation Against the ISI"] </F>
  [Text] A U.S. House committee has charged that Pakistan's 
Inter Service Intelligence -- ISI -- is engaged in terrorist 
activities in Indian Punjab, occupied Kashmir, and Uttar 
Pradesh. In a report, it said that the Pakistani ISI is now 
carrying out terrorist operations in India with groups that were 
organized by Pakistan during the Afghan war. 
  The accusation by the U.S. task force against Pakistan is 
very regrettable. As for India, it has always made such 
allegations against Pakistan, and everyone knows the reason 
behind it. However, the U.S. attempt to extend a helping hand 
to India deserves condemnation. We hope that the Pakistani 
Foreign Office will take note of this accusation and lodge a 
protest with the United States. In fact, the Indian agency, 
Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), is involved in terrorism in 
Pakistan and has already killed a number of innocent people. It 
is well known throughout the world that the U.S. Central 
Intelligence Agency (CIA) is engaged in laying a network of 
conspiracies in other countries. Also, the Israeli secret 
agency called "Mosad" is in collaboration with India's RAW 
engaging in conspiracies against Pakistan. However, the United 
States does not consider the activities of any of these 
organizations objectionable. All its wrath is directed against 
the ISI, which only keeps an eye on foreign agents in Pakistan. 
  We would like to request that Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto 
take note of this accusation. At one time Pakistan used to be 
accused of involvement in disturbances in east Punjab and 
occupied Kashmir only, but attempts are being made now to put 
the blame on Pakistan for the disturbances in Uttar Pradesh, 
too. If we do not take note of this accusation, then the United 
States will start accusing ISI of terrorist acts anywhere in the 
world. We hope that our Foreign Office will not remain silent 
and that it will emphatically reject the blame. 

