BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 18 (XINHUA) -- China and Estonia have 
considered it essential to exchange information and experience 
in the fields of economy, science, technology, culture and law 
through consultations. 
  This was stated in a joint declaration on Estonian President 
Lennart Meri's visit to China issued today. President Meri left 
Shenzhen for home late tonight at the end of his seven-day 
official visit to China. 
  During the visit, Chinese President Jiang Zemin and Premier 
Li Peng had held separate talks with the Estonian president on 
the current state and the prospects of bilateral relations and 
other issues of common interest. 
  "The mutually-beneficial cooperation between the People's 
Republic of China and the Republic of Estonia is progressing 
smoothly," the declaration says. 
  China and Estonia reaffirm their desire to develop relations 
on the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial 
integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each 
other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit and 
peaceful coexistence, the declaration notes. 
  The two parties will promote the activities of the official 
missions accredited to them, in accordance with the provisions 
of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and the Vienna 
Convention on Consular Relations, the declaration says. 
  The Estonian Government "recognizes that the Government of 
the People's Republic of China is the sole legal government of 
China and Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory. 
It affirms that it will not establish government relations of 
any form with Taiwan," it says. 
  China respects the independence, sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of Estonia. 
  China and Estonia also consider it essential to help 
establish relations between social institutions, commercial 
structures and cultural organizations. 
  "In order to promote the continuous development of bilateral 
relations, officials of the two foreign ministries will hold 
political consultations on bilateral relations as well as on 
regional and international issues of mutual interest." 
  The declaration states that China and Estonia are ready to 
strengthen their cooperation within the United Nations and other 
international organizations in accordance with the UN Charter 
and universally-recognized norms of international law. 
  "The two parties express their opposition to every type of 
international terrorism activity and their readiness to 
cooperate in fighting against international terrorism, organized 
crime and the smuggling of arms, narcotics, artifacts of 
historical value and works of art," it says. 
  The two parties point out that each state has the right to 
choose a social and economic system and path of development as 
appropriate to its interests and heritage. "differences in these 
areas should not be an obstacle to maintaining and developing 
normal relations between states." 
  In conclusion, the declaration stresses that the two parties 
affirm that the declaration is not directed against any third 
state and that it does not affect the rights and obligations of 
the parties deriving from the existing bilateral and 
multilateral treaties they have concluded with other states. 

