Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Raja Zulfikar] </F>
  [Text] Islamabad: Foreign Minister Sardar Asif has said 
that Pakistan's vital interest is not Khalistan, nor break-up of 
India "if India breaks up, it will affect us also". 
  While talking to a group of journalists in the Senate hall 
where he had come to cast his vote in the Senate election, the 
foreign minister said: "We do not wish to see break-up of 
India. Pakistan's vital interest is Kashmir and not Khalistan or 
other things like Nagaland and this or that." 
  He deplored that the leader of the opposition thought that 
establishment of Khalistan was in the national interest of 
Pakistan, and not Kashmir. He differed with the idea that a 
strong India was a threat to Pakistan. 
  "Big and small countries do not have a set of relations. If 
the big country begins to live as equal neighbour, it is no 
problem. After all, the USA and Mexico are also living in peace 
like China and Bhutan. Why can't India live in peace with 
neighbours." He said the day they (India) changed the mentality 
of bulldozing the region, the matter will be over. 
  Replying to a question about increase in Indian defence 
expenditure, Sardar Asif said Pakistan could not protest against 
this because it was India's sovereign right to spend whatever it 
liked. However, he said it was very unfortunate and this would 
escalate arms race in the region and would definitely increase 
tension. He said Pakistan was reducing its defence expenditure 
but India was increasing it. 
  "From whom do they fear a threat? There is no country that 
can threaten them in this region. We all feel extremely 
concerned and this is not the concern of Pakistan alone but of 
South Asian countries and all those countries which are in the 
Indian Ocean region." 
  The Foreign Affairs Minister linked the passage of 
Pak-sponsored resolution on Kashmir with the international 
morality and a test of the world moral position. 
  Though not pessimistic yet a rather concerned Sardar Asif 
remarked "a broad trend of events shows that economic interests 
have superseded morality. There is little morality and much 
commercialism everywhere," the minister said during a chat with 
a group of newsmen in the Senate Hall which was declared a 
polling station on Wednesday. 
  He expressed Pakistan's concern over increase in the Indian 
defence expenditure and termed it unfortunate. He further said 
that Pakistan's vital interest was in Kashmir and not in 
Khalistan or breakup of India. 
  Asked if the Pak-sponsored resolution on Kashmir met 
failure, 
would it not demoralise the people? Sardar Asif remarked it 
should not. "We want to find out exactly what are the double 
standards. We want to know how much morality is left in the 
West. We will test them again and again, we want to test them 
now and later in September and we will test them at every 
forum," the minister maintained. 
  He described the Kashmir resolution as an election "and when 
you are into an election, you go with open eyes, knowing fully 
that you can win or lose." According to the Foreign Minister, 
the fate of the resolution did not depend on arithmetics or 
number count, instead it was a question of world conscience. 
  He was satisfied that Pakistan had done every thing 
possible. 
"There is nothing which we could have done that we have not 
done." he did not agree that it would be a diplomatic failure if 
the resolution did not get through. "How can," he said, 
"Pakistan be held responsible if there is no international 
morality left? You cannot blame the victim." But he did say 
that every one agreed the human rights violations must stop in 
the Indian-held Kashmir. 
  Sardar Asif, however, said the world at large had special 
relations with India as it was a market of a billion people. 
The western countries have commercial links with India and mega 
deals with them which they don't want to lose," the minister 
said. [quotation marks as published] 
  Replying to a question about Afghanistan, Sardar Asif 
elaborated that there was a possibility of reopening of 
Pakistan's embassy in Kabul as soon as possible but he made it 
conditional with adequate compensation and return of equipment. 
However, he said relations with Afghanistan were all right. 
  To another question, he said Islamabad had not closed the 
border with Afghanistan but re-established it. "We have to give 
a clear signal to every one that it is international border and 
there must be respect for it." He warned that no illegal entry 
would be allowed. Islamabad, he said, would try to relax 
conditions as much as the situation demanded. He said General 
Ziaul Haq, whom he termed a dictator, had introduced several 
flaws in connection with passport and visa facilities to the 
Afghan nationals and their Pakistani citizenship. 
  About any fresh India-Pak contact, Sardar Asif said Pakistan 
wanted to go forward with the talks and it was keen for a 
dialogue "but let them create conditions for talks to proceed." 
  He described as baseless an allegation by Indian Foreign 
Secretary that Pakistan was creating hurdles in development of 
good relations and said Islamabad was prepared to discuss any 
thing. But he said it was unfortunate that the call for 
improving human rights situation was dubbed as `hurdle'. 

