BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Imre Konya, interior minister and deputy </F>
chairman of the Hungarian Democratic Forum, by Jeno Balasko; 
place and date not given: "With a Free Spirit and an Open 
Heart"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Balasko] What changes do 
you see as necessary in working out the new policy of the 
Hungarian Democratic Forum [MDF]? By this, I mean the modernity 
of Jozsef Antall's views and the presence of possible different 
desires. Can we expect theoretical-principled conflicts within 
the MDF, as well as contradictions regarding the methods? Can 
we also expect possible personal conflicts? 
  [Konya] This is a complex question. Of course, various 
demands for change, realistic or unrealistic endeavors -- 
including individual ambitions -- and a seemingly easy cure-all, 
as well as realistic proposals emerge after such a serious 
defeat. I know that the MDF should feel neither despair nor 
hope in the existence of a cure that will allow us to avoid the 
slow and tough work that is absolutely necessary for victory in 
the next elections. I declare that this is an attainable goal. 
I also declare that the MDF could benefit from its new position 
in opposition because, slowly overcoming the big social shocks, 
the MDF must become a party open to all strata of our society. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Balasko] Where is the MDF heading? 
  [Konya] The voters who probably did not vote in favor of one 
party or another out of conviction are somewhere in the center. 
Most such voters, about 30 percent, constantly fluctuate between 
various parties, depending on which group has a lesser 
aggressive effect on them both economically and rhetorically. 
We must win these people over. So, openness also means the 
widening of our support, but it also means that the the circle 
of MDF members and sympathizers should be based on a wider 
strata if possible. We can achieve all this if we get rid of 
the exaggerated ideological limitations. People who become 
paralyzed from the constant declaration of values also have a 
place among us. [passage omitted] 
  Apart from compromise, there is no other alternative for the 
MDF parliamentary faction. In order to the win the majority, we 
have to become a bourgeois center party that conducts a policy 
along national interests and is also open to every citizen, a 
party that authentically represents those we call the silent 
majority. The members of the expected government coalition have 
already signalled their intention to modify or legislate at 
least 200 laws in Parliament as soon as possible. Most people 
who are members of the MDF parliamentary faction are practical 
experts. Obviously, a pragmatism that brings a concrete 
legislative activity instead of seemingly ideological debates 
will have to be really asserted in Parliament. In the course of 
this activity, we will have to create a steady coordination and 
close daily cooperation with the other opposition factions. We 
should not play a negative role in Parliament; on the contrary: 
With the limited means of the opposition, we must endeavor to 
continue to contribute to Hungary's development and its catching 
up with the developed world. 

