Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bonn (DPA) -- The Federal Government has concluded 
its investigation of the contentious antiterrorism operation in 
Bad Kleinen and, as a result, primarily wants to restructure the 
Federal Office of Criminal Investigations [BKA]. 
  At the Wednesday [9 March] presentation of the final report 
about the 27 June 1993 operation, during which GSG-9 officer 
Michael Newrzella and suspected RAF [Red Army Faction] terrorist 
Wolfgang Grams were killed, Interior Minister Manfred Kanther 
(Christian Democratic Union) expressly stated his trust in BKA 
President Hans-Ludwig Zachert, who has been criticized in 
connection with this operation. Zachert will continue to head 
the BKA in Wiesbaden and will also keep the ultimate authority 
to make decisions in the case of a future "leadership 
characterized by teamwork" with the stronger inclusion of the 
Interior Ministry in Bonn. 
  At a news conference in Bonn, which was attended by Justice 
Minister Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger (Free Democratic 
Party of Germany), Chief Federal Prosecutor Kay Nehm, as well as 
Zachert himself, Interior Minister Kanther stressed that the 
Federal Government is "certain" that the most important 
questions arising from the operation in Bad Kleinen have been 
answered "finally and completely." Kanther said the finding 
that Grams committed suicide after killing Newrzella is 
"absolutely certain." There are no indications supporting the 
version that Grams was "executed." 
  The defects during and after the operation, which had 
already 
been listed in the interim report, have been confirmed, the 
minister added. The mistakes have overshadowed the "many things 
that have been achieved by devoted police work" in the public 
discussion. Bad Kleinen was, however, also a "lesson" for 
everyone involved regarding the need for information by the 
public and by parliament on large-scale police operations. 
  BKA President Zachert stressed his agreement with the 
minister on plans for an organizational reform of the BKA. Many 
measures, which are now to be implemented, had been discussed 
long before the operation. Kanther cited the reduction to nine 
departments, the merging of the departments for left-wing and 
right-wing terrorism in the BKA branch in Meckenheim (near 
Bonn), and a more intensive delegation of the president's 
international obligations to subordinate officials. 
  The justice minister and the chief federal prosecutor 
expressed satisfaction that the report does not accuse the 
authorities in Karlsruhe of any mistakes during the 
investigations. Referring to defects in passing on information, 
Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger once again defended the dismissal of 
then Chief Federal Prosecutor Alexander von Stahl: On the basis 
of how things were seen in July 1993, this was justified. There 
is no reason to revise the assessment. It is not necessary to 
extend the legal powers of the chief federal prosecutor's office 
as a result of Bad Kleinen. 
  Nehm rejected reports that liaison man Klaus Steinmetz, who 
was uncovered during the operation, was a member of the RAF 
command structure. His authority had a corresponding note from 
the BKA, but the suspicion had proved to be incorrect during 
subsequent investigations, the chief federal prosecutor said. 
The questions that had been raised have been "answered in such 
a way that no criminal accusations against Steinmetz were made." 
  Ulla Jelpke, internal affairs spokeswoman of the Party of 
Democratic Socialism Bundestag Group, criticized the fact that 
the government's final report does not eliminate many 
incongruities about Grams's death. She accused the authorities 
of "biased investigations": While statements by witnesses that 
incriminated officers involved in the operation were assessed 
critically, the investigators assessed statements by policemen 
who were "under suspicion of committing murders" in an 
"extremely favorable manner." 

