Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Victoria Macdonald: "Chance To End Hepatitis B </F>
Deaths `Ignored'"] 
  [Text] The Government is resisting expert advice and a 
recommendation from the World Health Organisation to introduce a 
national immunisation programme against hepatitis B, a virus 
1,000 times more infectious than AIDS. 
  Health ministers claim the incidence is too low to be of 
significance, even though it kills one in five carriers and more 
than 600 people a year die of it in Britain. 
  In response to a written question from Dawn Primarolo, 
Labour 
health spokesman, Tom Sackville, junior health minister, said 
last week: "Immunisation strategy is kept under review." 
  But sources at the health department said ministers were 
concerned at the cost of such a programme. 
  The WHO first recommended national immunisation in 1991 and 
this was endorsed by the World Health Assembly the following 
year. 
  Experts in Britain have told the health department that an 
immunisation programme targeting infants or teenagers -- or both 
-- could effectively wipe out the virus. They have also called 
for more effective notification of the disease because they fear 
it is being vastly under-reported. 
  The United States, New Zealand, Hong Kong, Singapore and 
Canada are among countries that have already followed the 
recommendations. 
  Professor Arie Zuckerman, of the Royal Free Hospital, an 
adviser on viral diseases to the health department and the WHO, 
said last week: "This is an infection which is preventable. It 
is also a very important public health issue." 
  Like AIDS, hepatitis B is transmitted sexually or by 
infected 
blood or contaminated medical instruments. The WHO estimates 
that one in 20 people in Europe alone have or have had the 
virus. But Prof. Zuckerman said the problem here was the lack of 
epidemiological data. 
  "The official view is based on the notification rates to the 
Public Health Laboratory Service. But I do not buy that, because 
in most cases the symptoms are not recognised and not all cases 
are reported," he said. 
  It could affect 15 to 20 per cent of the population rather 
than the less than one per cent cited by the health department. 
  "Eradicating hepatitis B by immunisation is an achievable 
target and the UK should participate in the WHO programme," 
Prof. Zuckerman said. 
  "If you compare the costs of treatment with prevention, then 
there is no question about which is cheaper." 

