Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive Interview with Lieutenant General George Ioan </F>
Danescu, Minister of Interior, for TINERETUL LIBER"; place and 
date not given: "Latest Mafia-Type Armed Confrontations in 
Bucharest"] 
  [Excerpts] [TINERETUL LIBER] Mr. Minister, a new 
phenomenon has appeared in Romania today: Mafia-type crime. 
What action are the police and Ministry of Interior taking to 
prevent and fight this social evil? 
  Danescu: When you say that we are facing a new 
phenomenon, you are referring to its novelty for the broad 
public and, maybe, even for you journalists. For us 
professionals, however, Mafia-type crime, that is to say 
organized crime, is neither new nor surprising, because signs of 
it existed in Romania even before December 1989, something which 
I also emphasized a year ago at a news conference. 
  As a matter of fact, it was to be expected that certain 
changes that occurred in Romanian society and its opening-up in 
the post-revolutionary period would offer favorable conditions 
for such developments and for the emergence of negative 
phenomena. [passage omitted] 
  I am mainly referring to illicit organized trafficking in 
drugs, counterfeit money, trade in automobiles stolen abroad and 
sold in Romania and other states, prostitution, the operation of 
international pimps, corruption and smuggling on an unbelievably 
large scale, armed attacks to obtain material gain and maintain 
an atmosphere of civic insecurity, money laundering and hacking 
into banking financial systems, labor-force swindles, illegal 
capital transfers abroad, the introduction into the country of 
large amounts of toxic waste, arms deals, hired killers, and 
blackmail. 
  As far as corruption alone is concerned, I want to mention 
that, in 1990, we uncovered 1,197 such cases; in 1991--4,937; in 
1992--6,043; and in 1993--10,631 cases of offering and taking 
bribes, misuse of one's position, and receipt of undue benefits. 
[passage omitted] 
  The scale of such violations and the increasingly obvious 
tendency of criminals to organize themselves on the basis of 
Mafia-type principles have convinced the Ministry of Interior of 
the necessity to adopt more firm measures to try to control the 
explosion of this phenomenon and stop it from developing. I am 
talking of both creating and perfecting new organizational 
structures and ensuring the appropriate training of our staff 
with special tasks in the area of fighting crime. For example, 
in April 1993, we set up the Brigade for Fighting Organized 
Crime, which has parallel structures at the local level, as well 
as an office for combating corruption with similar departments 
at the level of county police inspectorates and in Bucharest. 
[passage omitted] As expected, the results of these measures 
were not slow in coming; some of them--please forgive my lack of 
modesty--were absolutely spectacular. 
  For example, from April to December last year, employees 
from 
the Brigade for Fighting Organized Crime arrested 67 people from 
whom 11,374,925 [figures as published] kg of drugs were 
confiscated (105,658 kg of cocaine, 93,368 kg of heroin, 11,180 
kg of cannabis, and 1,108 kg of opium). During the same period, 
more exactly in November, we uncovered two operations involving 
the smuggling of stolen automobiles in the counties of Bihor and 
Mures. [passage omitted] I want to specify that investigations 
into 27 counterfeit-money dealers have been finalized; they are 
Romanian and foreign citizens belonging to six groups. 
Investigations have revealed that these people have put into 
circulation counterfeit money amounting to no less than $900,000 
and 35,000 German marks in Romania, the Republic of Moldova, 
Hungary, and Ukraine. 
  It is worth mentioning the action organized by the Romanian 
police, together with the Criminal Police Directorate, in the 
Republic of Moldova, which resulted in the arrest of a network 
of criminals who had been organizing the illegal transit through 
Romania of foreign citizens bound for West European countries. 
[passage omitted] 
  Although these results give us cause for satisfaction, they 
do not make us self-satisfied, because it would be abnormal to 
adopt such an attitude when violent confrontations--admittedly 
rare--are taking place on the streets of Bucharest, some even 
claiming victims. [passage omitted] 
  We are continuing to promote a wide range of measures, 
including increasing the contribution made by other branches of 
the Ministry of Interior, aside from that of the police, which 
are aimed at fighting organized crime, a present-day evil that 
claims human lives and causes tremendous material damage. 

