CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by I. Randers: "A Person Who Has Never Accepted </F>
Lies"] 
  [Text] The administration prepared a bill for 
yesterday's Saeima plenary session on the candidate already 
approved by the ruling coalition for the newly created position 
in the Cabinet of Ministers -- the naming of OLAFS BRUVERS, 
deputy of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) faction, as State 
Minister for Human Rights of the Judicial Ministry. 
  O. Bruvers explained to LAUKU AVIZE that the offer of the 
position of State Minister for Human Rights from the "Latvian 
Way" (LW) side was already presented to him last summer, right 
after the Cabinet of Ministers was established. Thus, it is in 
no way related to his frequent voting, as opposition deputy, for 
projects proposed by the LW, nor is it an attempt by the ruling 
coalition to gain a faithful voter for their side. Since the LW 
offer to become a member of the Cabinet of Ministers was made 
repeatedly to O. Bruvers, after prolonged conversations and 
meetings with the CDU faction deputies, he finally agreed to 
accept. 
  O. Bruvers was born in Riga in 1947 into a family of six 
children. His father was repressed for being a former German 
army legionnaire, and his mother worked as a medical nurse. 
Since childhood, Olafs was raised within the family in a strict 
Christian manner (the parents were Baptists). During his school 
years, he did not join any of the young "Lenin-type" 
organizations of that era. 
  After mandatory service in the army, Olafs wanted to enter 
the Riga Polytechnical Institute in 1973. But just at that time, 
he became interested in human rights in the USSR and abandoned 
his former wishes. He constantly listened to the "Voice of 
America", "BBC", and "Radio Svaboda", and was heavily influenced 
by the ideas of the Russian writer deported from the USSR, 
Solzhenitsyn (for example, passive resistance to the system of 
lies, not carrying flags in demonstrations, not shouting false 
slogans, etc.). He also studied history (there was a vast 
library at home, where he learned about the "Year of Terror"), 
and through self-education, learned a great deal about Latvia as 
an independent nation and its occupation. 
  Filled with the idealism of youth, together with his younger 
brother Pavils, who was studying at the Institute of Medicine, 
the two decided to fight against the USSR system of lies. At 
first, they wanted to write an open letter to "Soviet Youth", 
but to avoid being placed in an insane asylum, they changed 
their minds and, with the help of a questionnaire (in Latvian 
and Russian), they decide to learn the opinions of the 
citizenship of the empire. Out of 600 questionnaires mailed, 370 
were returned. As a result of their "independent activity", the 
Bruvers brothers ended up, not in an insane asylum, but in the 
basement of a KGB prison in the spring of 1974. The KGB agents 
could not believe that the brothers were not being encouraged to 
perform this anti-governmental activity by some Western 
"sponsor". Both were interrogated for three and one half months 
and sat in single-person cells. 
  Even today, O. Bruvers is very thankful to those Latvians 
living in the West who started the visible campaign for the 
"Olafs and Pavils" case, which was waged outside of USSR 
embassies abroad (among the active demonstrators were also the 
present-day Saeima deputies, the Pavlovskis brothers). Western 
politicians carefully followed the case of the Bruvers brothers 
and their court proceedings. Being quite aware of this fact, the 
Soviet Supreme Court gave the brothers an unbelievably "light" 
sentence: Olafs, as the elder, had to spend six months in a hard 
labor camp, while Pavils was expelled for a defined period of 
one year from the university. 
  In 1976, the entire Bruvers family, because it was "unfit to 
live in the USSR", was told by the USSR soviet authorities to 
emigrate. Political asylum was found in Germany and thus, the 
"anti-soviet element", O. Bruvers ended up in Bonn. O. Bruvers 
established a family of his own in Germany, and later moved to 
the United States, where he lived until July of 1993, when he 
returned to his homeland as a deputy of the Saeima. 
  Because of his heroic actions during his youth, O. Bruvers 
is 
now considered to be a dissident*. He believes himself to be a 
centrist in politics. And in his political activities, even 
until the present, he has never agreed with nor has been 
influenced by lies. In the United States, O. Bruvers studied 
English (he is also fluent in conversational Russian and 
German), earning a degree in Doctor of Sciences in diplomatic 
sciences. His occupation in his country of residence was working 
in the experimental laboratory of a semi-conductor plant. 
  O. Bruvers admits that he is not entirely clear as to what 
the job in his new position will involve. The new state minister 
feels that human rights must be guaranteed fully to all 
inhabitants of the nation. Therefore, he first 
intends to listen to the problems of the entire group of 
inhabitants of Latvia, because, until now, the administration 
has not had an intensive conversation nor a serious exchange of 
information with the non-Latvian audience, and 
second, he feels it is essential to immediately 
initiate the defense of Latvian interests in international 
organizations against falsehoods and lies about violation of 
human rights measures in our nation. 
  * Dissident (dissidens, dissidentis in Latin) -- a person 
who 
does not agree with, nor recognizes the ruling points of view, 
is not afraid to state his point of view and to speak out in 
opposition. 
  I. Randers V. Semjonovs photo. 

