Language: <F P=105> Swedish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lars Porne: "Swedish Clearing of Russian </F>
Weapons"] 
  [Text] Before the Soviet occupation, there was a Swedish 
populace on the Estonian islands Stora Rago and Lilla Rago 
(Pakri Saar) off the naval base of Paldiski. Now that the 
Russians have gone home, these islands are not only devastated, 
but after decades as targets for firing and bombing practice, 
they are also strewn with unexploded shells. 
  The Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) in Stockholm is now 
heading a project to clear the islands of all unexploded 
material and to make them safe to live on. 
  Senior research engineer at KTH Bengt Grisell has just 
returned from Tallinn, where he met with Estonia's environment 
minister, the former environment minister, and the defense 
minister. He has brought home a basic agreement that goes beyond 
clearing the two Swedish islands. 
  "Other items include clearing unexploded shells and mines in 
the waters around the islands, finding and clearing mines off 
Tallinn, finding and measuring Soviet radioactive dumping sites, 
disarming and recycling the enormous supply of Russian mines, 
and training Estonians in these fields." 
<H5>  Money Lacking </H5>
  It is only the money that is lacking and Grisell is now 
hoping for help from the Foreign Ministry. 
  "The Estonians see this as part of their democratization 
process," he said. 
  He has established cooperation with FMV [Defense Materiel 
Administration], the SIPRI [Stockholm International Peace 
Research Institute] peace research institute, and the military, 
which can supply the expertise. FMV has agreed to donate surplus 
explosives and the Defense Materiel Inspectorate has granted 
permission to ship these materials to Estonia. 
  The Russians have stockpiled and left behind thousands of 
mines on the island of Nargo (Naissaar) and the Estonian 
authorities fear the possible consequences of a forest fire. 
  "On Stora Rago the Russians have dug up the Swedish cemetery 
and plundered the graves. Bone fragments are lying around on the 
ground," said Grisell, who was there with his research ship 
Altair. 
<H5>  Russians Reveal Dumping </H5>
  Plans are to make this ship base for the major clearing 
project. 
  "I also signed an agreement with the Russians during a visit 
to St. Petersburg. They promise to make available all the 
information they have on the dumping of ammunition in the water, 
for example. The fact is that we have better relations with the 
Russians in this area than the Estonians have," Grisell said. 
  It is urgent that Stora and Lilla Rago be cleared quickly, 
since the islands are attractive to tourists and vacationers, 
now that the Russians have left. 
  Grisell said that the clearing operation would be easier 
because the islands consist of limestone and most of the 
unexploded shells are clearly visible. 
  "The unexploded shells could be of interest to criminals who 
would want to recover the explosives." 
  Consequently, work to explode the unexploded shells must 
begin as soon as possible. 
  The Estonians want to recover the mines. They contain tons 
of 
TNT, an explosive that hardly has any civilian use. It can be 
burned, but that would produce extremely toxic nitrous gases. 
  One method is to melt the TNT out of the mines--it has a 
melting point of about 80 degrees--and then mix it with some 
other substance to render it inactive and to make it useful for 
civilian purposes. 
  "The Estonians want to develop their own expertise in the 
clearance and destruction of old munitions." 
  When the Russians leave Estonia at the beginning of next 
year 
they will leave behind large supplies of previously top-secret 
military equipment near Tallinn. 
  "We will be the first people in the world to enter depots of 
this type," Grisell said. 
  "The Estonians also want us to look at other sites, 
including 
the secret Loksa submarine base near Tallinn." 
<H5>  Radioactivity a Concern </H5>
  One thing that concerns the Estonians deeply is that the 
Russians have dumped radioactive materials into the sea. Some of 
these dumping sites are marked on Russian nautical maps, while 
others are not. 
  As a result, Grisell will try to chart out the radioactive 
areas with the help of his research ship. This will require 
special equipment. 
  "We hope to begin in early spring, but we must come up with 
the money." 
  The Estonians have expressed the hope that this will proceed 
more rapidly that it has to date, since Swedish assistance has 
been bogged down in bureaucracy. 

