BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement issued by Afghan Foreign Ministry on 25 April] </F>
  [Text] In the name of God, the compassionate, the merciful: 
  The savage attacks of the Serbs started against the Muslim 
and meek people of Bosnia in the aftermath of the fall of the 
communist state of Yugoslavia and the establishment of the 
Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina. These crimes, which entailed 
much loss of life and property and destruction and damage, have 
no parallel in the contemporary history of the world. The 
recent ruthless aggression in Gorazde has particularly aroused 
waves of hatred in people around the world. 
  Despite the fact that recent savage Serb aggression against 
the defenseless Muslims of Bosnia has been condemned by the 
Security Council, and some resolutions have been passed in 
connection with the cessation of Serb aggression, unfortunately 
no practical steps or effective measures have been taken. The 
[word indistinct] attitude of the Security Council in these 
issues emboldens the Serbs, who carelessly trample on these 
resolutions and continue their crimes. On the other hand, the 
Security Council still insists on the arms embargo on Bosnia and 
deprives the oppressed people of this country of their natural 
right -- i.e., the right of self-defense -- whereas Muslims of 
the world resolutely demand the lifting of the arms embargo on 
the Muslims of Bosnia. 
  Pursuing the basic lines of its foreign policy, the Islamic 
State of Afghanistan condemns any aggression against the Muslims 
in the world, especially against the Muslim people of Bosnia, 
and resolutely campaigns against it. As a long-standing member 
of the United Nations, Afghanistan once again strongly demands 
and supports the urgent and vigorous implementation of Security 
Council resolutions against the Serbs. As an active member of 
the ICO [Islamic Conference Organization], Afghanistan considers 
the role of this organization, in close and direct cooperation 
with the Security Council, valuable. Afghanistan hopes that by 
taking a united stance at the General Assembly special session, 
which is going to be held in the near future on Bosnian 
problems, this organization of Islamic countries, in active and 
joint participation with the United Nations, will attain such 
resolutions as to end this painful historic catastrophe and 
ensure peace in the afflicted country of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 

