CSO 

    [Editorial Report] Without additional commentary, the 
Belgrade opposition political weekly VREME publishes on pages 12 
and 13 of its 30 May issue "18 Indications of Early Elections." 
Among them are the following: 
  --Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic visited the 
agricultural fair in Novi Sad, where he was welcomed by 
directors of agricultural combines and factories, tasted wine, 
and effusively praised farmers. 
  --In mid-May, for no apparent reason, the Serbian Assembly 
discussed sowing. 
  --The Government of Serbia decided to give one loaf of bread 
each day to the poorest citizens of Serbia for the next two 
months. 
  --City transportation in Belgrade is somewhat improved. 
  --Charges have been brought against a group of delegates of 
the Serbian Radical Party for having prevented an official from 
carrying out his duties in connection with the expulsion of a 
delegate from a session of the Chamber of Citizens of the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) Assembly. 
  --A large group of foreign journalists were guests of the 
Serbian and federal governments, which tried to "sell" the 
journalists the "truth about Serbia" and "flooded" domestic news 
media about their efforts. 
  --Four political parties (the Serbian Renewal Movement, the 
Democratic Party, the Democratic Party of Serbia, and the 
Serbian Radical Party) have announced an initiative to have 
Radoman Bozovic, president of the Chamber of Citizens of the FRY 
Assembly, dismissed. 
  --"Belgrade diplomatic circles" announce the lifting of 
sanctions against the FRY "as early as 30 May" according to a 
TANJUG report. 
  --Zoran Djindjic, leader of the Democratic Party, announced 
that the party will organize a "Week of Struggle Against 
Sanctions." The action started with Djindjic and the party's top 
leaders making voluntary blood donations. "This is apparently 
the first case of the leaders in a national campaign giving 
blood--usually the blood is sought from the people." 
  --G. Kalajic, "ideologist of the Serbian fascists," praised 
Mirjana Markovic, wife of Slobodan Milosevic, and sent her a 
message saying that differences between the rightists and 
communists are much smaller than the chasm that separates those 
two groups from "corrupt European liberals." 
  --The two "kums" (Serbo-Croatian term for baptismal 
godfather 
or best man at a wedding, which denotes a special relationship 
or bond) Vojislav Seselj, leader of the Serbian Radical Party, 
and Vuk Draskovic, leader of the Serbian Renewal Movement, have 
made peace without "cancelling out the programmatic differences" 
between the two parties. 

