BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sofia Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, May 19 (CNA) -- Taiwan should consider 
establishing an independent corporate credit consulting 
organization to help mainland Chinese banks serve the needs of 
Taiwan companies with mainland interests, a senior mainland 
banker suggested here Thursday [19 May]. 
  "The establishment of such an organization may make it 
easier 
for Taiwan-owned companies in Mainland China to obtain loans 
from mainland banks," said Qin Chijiang, director of the Banking 
Research Institute under the People's Bank of China. 
  Qin is part of a 12-person mainland delegation here to 
attend 
a seminar on banking systems and capital market developments on 
both sides of the Taiwan strait. The seminar is being put on by 
the Chunghua Institute for Economic Research and the Taipei 
Banking Development Foundation. 
  Qin said it is not difficult for Mainland China-based Taiwan 
firms to obtain loans from mainland banks, pointing out that the 
Taiwan firms can obtain loans by using their foreign exchange 
revenues as collateral. However, he admitted that Taiwan firms 
still cannot get big loans on the mainland. 
  "Further consultations are needed between mainland banks and 
Taiwan-owned firms to expand such financing services," Qin noted. 
  He also said Mainland China cannot yet allow foreign-owned 
banks on the mainland to handle deposits and loans in mainland 
currency because "our banking management, fiscal, and taxation 
systems [word indistinct] still far different from those in 
foreign countries." 
  A colleague of Qin, Yu Tianyi, said Mainland China still 
faces a host of problems in banking reforms. For one thing, he 
said, commercial banks only play a limited role in the banking 
system. The Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, the 
Agricultural Bank of China, the People's Construction Bank of 
China and the Bank of China -- all state-owned banks -- dominate 
banking services on the mainland, he said. "The priority goal of 
the four banks is to support Beijing's official policy, not to 
serve businesses or make profits." He explained. 
  Yu, a professor at the Banking Institute of China, said the 
mainland is scheduled to unveil a comprehensive draft banking 
law and special regulations governing commercial banks late this 
year. 

