Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow March 12 TASS -- Moscow newspapers focus 
their attention today on the Thursday meeting between President 
Yeltsin and representatives of political parties, parliamentary 
groups and public movements. The president's appeal for civil 
peace and accord was the keynote of the meeting. 
  ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI carries an article by Mikhail Mityukov, 
deputy chairman of the State Duma, who stresses that "the civil 
peace agreement would be a response to the demand of society... 
I am sure the civil peace agreement, which the president 
proposed to sign, has good prospects. To oppose it, to refuse 
to take part in the memorandum on accord would mean to 
demonstrate political ambitions, which are far from the real 
interests of the nation." 
  In the opinion of KRASNAYA ZVEZDA, "civil peace and harmony 
are a vital necessity. They will give Russia the last chance 
today." The newspaper stresses that "civil peace is especially 
important for the army. It would be a kind of a guarantee from 
the temptation to settle political problems by non-political 
means." 
  ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI publishes an interview with Finnish Prime 
Minister Esko Aho in connection with the official visit of 
Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin, which began on Friday. In 
the opinion of Aho, "the time for cardinal decisions" has come 
in Russian-Finnish relations. He stressed, among other things, 
that the Finnish side is "especially interested in problems, 
connected with trade and economic cooperation." 
  Commenting on the murder of Deputy Chairman of the Council 
of 
Ministers of Tajikistan Moyonsho Nazarshoyev on March 11 in 
Dushanbe, NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA writes that "the murder was 
hardly politically motivated. It was hardly the doing of 
`Islamic fundamentalists', as the authorities want to present 
it. Most probably, it was another one in a long chain of 
murders of high-ranking officials, organised by some armed 
group, made up of former members of the Popular Front." 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA carries an interview with Vasiliy Vorobyov, 
head of the main department of military budget and financing at 
the Russian Defence Ministry. He criticised the policy of the 
Russian Ministry of Finance, which reduced by 2.4 times in 1994 
budget allocations for the Defence Ministry. In the opinion of 
Vorobyov, "the Ministry of Finance is approaching the problem of 
the reduction of military spendings in a purely abstract way. 
It does not take into consideration the real situation and the 
tasks that the Russian Army and Navy have to fulfil in 
connection with troop withdrawal, the creation of proper 
conditions for the Army personnel in new areas of deployment and 
peace-keeping missions in the hotbeds of tension." 
  TRUD and RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA write about a new wave of the 
strike movement in the Rostov region, southern Russia, and in 
the southern Urals because the government fails to keep the 
promises, given to the miners, on the timely payment of wages to 
them. 
  Commenting on the resolution of the Presidium of the Russian 
Supreme Court on the resumption of the State Emergency Committee 
trial, PRAVDA writes that the continuation of the trial will be 
a farce and that, in the long run, the defendants will be 
acquitted. 

