This     Foreign Media Note is the first of a series focusing on 
economic reporting from the English-language South African press. 
Issue No. 1 includes information on reactions to the African 
National Congress's (ANC) economic policies, the budget deficit, 
foreign investment prospects, and economic indicators. 

   Mixed Reactions to ANC's Interventionist Economic Policies 

   Addressing thefirst Pretoria/Witwatersrand (PWV) "people's forum" 
at the Johannesburg College of Education, which attracted a mixed 
audience of about 500, including some high-profile business leaders, 
Nelson Mandela appealed for support for the ANC's reconstruction and 
development program.  Mandela indicated that this would require 
greatly increased government expenditure and intervention in the 
economy.  He called upon white businessmen not to emigrate but to 
contribute to economic reconstruction and join the "democratic 
forces in building a new South Africa."  However, his repeated 
message to whites, "Stay, we need you," has not removed skepticism 
over the policies the ANC intends to pursue once in power. 
According to Johannesburg daily THE STAR, "Mandela's acknowledgment 
that there had to be massive growth in government spending also sent 
shivers down many a spine." (Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 26 Nov 93; 
Johannesburg THE STAR 29 Nov 93) 

   BUSINESS DAY Comments on ANC Economic Policies 

   "Nelson Mandela's regular appeals to skilled white South Africans 
not to emigrate, and to business to invest for a better future, 
should be heeded. Most importantly, they should be heeded by ANC 
economic planners, whose policies will have more influence than a 
million fine words or appeals." (29 Nov 93) 

   "If we decide to reinvent the wheel of central planning or of 
excessive government regulation of the economy, foreign investors 
will not only turn their backs on our foolishness but are likely to 
tar our neighbors with the same brush... .Expedient promises by 
representatives of parties likely to hold power could cause immense 
damage to our investment prospects." (2 Dec 93) 

   "At present, economic expectations are high--many underprivileged 
people have been led to believe that April 27 will be followed by 
plentiful jobs, housing and economic opportunities.  It is almost 
inevitable that these expectations will be fueled by political 
speeches in the run-up to election. 

   Growth that will lead to strong consumer spending and the belief 
that the new order is delivering benefits cannot be conjured up that 
quickly ... We should recall that we need an annual real growth rate 
of about 5 percent if the formal sector of the economy is merely to 
find jobs for school leavers, and 8 percent if formal sector 
employment is to reduce unemployment levels. These levels will be 
achieved only through a national economic consensus that there can 
be no room for arcane economic experiments; that we have to be 
conventional and in step with other successful nations. .. .The ANC 
is not so politically naive as to believe the regime of 
nationalization and socialism being proposed by some of its left- 
wing economic advisors can work in today's world."  (19 Nov 93) 

   Opinion Survey Measures Views on Nationalization 

   "Naive" or not, supporters of the ANC/South African Communist 
Party (SACP) and Pan Africanist Congress (PAC) continue to find the 
nationalization of basic goods and services desirable.  An opinion 
survey undertaken between July and mid-October 1993 by the Center 
for International and Comparative Politics at Stellenbosch 
University found 50 percent of ANC/SACP supporters and 80 percent of 
PAC supporters in favor of such nationalization. Furthermore: 

   The majority of PAC (64 percent) and ANC (62 percent) supporters 
agreed companies had a duty to fill top positions with blacks. 

   46 percent of ANC/SACP supporters and 63 percent of PAC 
supporters were against limiting the state's role in the economy. 

   100 percent of PAC supporters, 64 percent of ANC/SACP supporters 
and 57 percent of Inkatha Freedom Party supporters were in favor of 
price controls.  Conservative Party (CP) supporters were equally 
divided, while the majority of Democratic Party (DP) and National 
Party (NP) supporters were opposed. 

   The majority of ANC/SACP and PAC supporters were against limiting 
the power of trade unions but CP, NP, and Inkatha supporters were 
for it. 

   The majority of DP, NP, and CP supporters found minimum wages 
undesirable, while ANC/SACP supporters (74 percent) and PAC 
supporters (72 percent) were in favor. Inkatha supporters were 
divided. 

   The majority of respondents of all parties supported linking 
wage and productivity increases, and maximum business, labor and 
state consensus. 

   Supporters of the PAC (72 percent), Inkatha (66 percent) and 
ANC/SACP (58 percent) expected an increase in free enterprise.  CP 
supporters anticipated a decrease, NP supporters were ambivalent, 
and DP supporters undecided. (Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 16 Nov 93) 

   Merg Report on The Reserve Bank 

   The coordinator of the ANC's Macroeconomic Research Group (Merg), 
Velly Pillay, gave notice that Merg would call for the political 
control of the Reserve Bank.  Kevin Davie, in the 28 November 
edition of the SUNDAY TIMES-BUSINESS TIMES, reported the following 
Chapter Eight of the final draft of the Merg report, a chapter on 
banking and finance: 

   "Here we shudder as we read that 'instead of becoming 
increasingly independent, the Reserve Bank should be more firmly 
under political control.'  Having sweated blood to get the inflation 
rate below 10 percent, we take note that 'a target band around 12 
percent a year should be considered initially.'  There may be 
grounds for nationalizing some banks, 'but normal regulation of 
banking activities (which should be increased) can often be obtained 
without it.'  While elsewhere in the report it is recommended that 
the new Government should not introduce a wealth tax, chapter eight 
says a general wealth tax should be introduced.  A changed JSE 
(Johannesburg Stock Exchange) is also envisaged.  'The JSE 
illustrates that the market-orientation approach to meeting capital 
needs is inappropriate.'  There is no case for abolishing marketable 
securities tax (partly responsible for the JSE's poor liquidity): 
'Indeed there are grounds for increasing it.'  Measures will be 
taken to establish compulsory funds that are able to purchase 
majority or controlling stakes in quoted companies including mining 
finance houses, mine and financial institutions.  The development 
and venture capital boards should be strengthened along with 
measures to encourage 'the issue of new securities (with minimum 
returns partly guaranteed).'  A Capital Issues Commission will be 
established under the Ministry of Finance to consider company plans 
for new issues and to authorize them, to 'prevent excess demand for 
capital creating disorderly market conditions and generating 
excessive interest charges.' The commission will also 'ensure that 
companies raising capital conform with national policy on ethnic and 
gender employment practice and other policies.  Capital institutions 
should be subject to prescribed asset requirements under which a 
percentage of their assets have to be placed in eligible 
securities.'  This 'will enable the government to raise funds 
through domestic bond issues at relatively low interest rates.' 
Chapter eight has all the hallmarks of an author who thinks the 
authorities know better than markets.  Could it be that Mr. Pillay, 
an advisor to Beijing's Bank of China, is too schooled in 
authoritarianism to trust democratic market forces?"  (Johannesburg 
SUNDAY TIMES-BUSINESS TIMES 20 Nov 93) 

   Budget Deficit:  Below Year-End Forecast 

   According to a report in BUSINESS DAY, the "government looks set 
to end the fiscal year with the deficit below budget, after final 
spending figures were tabled in Parliament.  The small overrun on 
budgeted spending--less than 1 billion Rand (R1bn)--would be offset 
by the extra R1bn in revenue, officials said.  This suggested the 
deficit would be lower than the budgeted R25.3bn.  Earlier this year 
economists predicted a deficit of R30bn.  The total estimated 
expenditure in the Budget was R114.2bn while the revised expenditure 
would be R115.2bn.  The increase in expenditure was due to funds 
being made available for capital projects associated with the sale 
of state land (R50mn), the sale of strategic oil reserves to finance 
drought relief and job creation (R724mn), and R451 mm in 
overexpenditure.  From this total of R1.2bn should be subtracted 
expenditure which had not materialized, mainly the R224mn in 
unrealized retrenchment costs.  The R451 mm overexpenditure was 
mainly the result of the South African Police increasing staff by 
7,500 members to combat violence (R249mn) and the re-employment of 
health service personnel (R144mn)."  (Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 1 
Dec 93) 

   Debt to Increase Next Year 

   "Government's debt will be pushed closer to the danger level of 
60 percent of GDP next year when homeland debts are taken onto the 
books and pension funds are topped up by issuing stock.  In terms of 
the interim constitution, all debts and liabilities other than those 
linked to property "shall vest in the national government."  This 
means that the state debt will rise by billions at a stroke--with 
the last estimate of homelands' (including Transkei, Bophuthatswana, 
Venda, and Ciskei states) debt put at R14bn.  Adding to the debt 
mountain will be stock issued to address pension fund deficits.  It 
is understood that almost R7bn in stock will be issued to state 
pension funds to bring funding to a more acceptable level.  Sources 
said government had placed a limit of R8bn for its guarantees on the 
homeland overdrafts, and speculation was that the level was fast 
being approached.  Government's interest bill, at R22bn for the 
present fiscal year, amounted to more than 26 percent of the Budget 
from about 15 percent in 1992/93.  By contrast, total capital 
expenditure was less than 8 percent of the Budget."  (Johannesburg 
BUSINESS DAY 29 Nov 93) 

   Foreign Investment: Number of Western Firms Up 

   According to the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC) 
based in Washington, there are now 28 more American and 70 non- 
American multinational companies with direct investment or employees 
in South Africa than a year ago.  The IRRC counts a total of 717 
multinationals with direct investment or employees in South Africa, 
168 of them German and 164 British.  The IRRC distinguishes between 
these companies which have a direct investment in South Africa and 
those which have "non-equity" links, such as licensing and 
distribution agreements, with South African companies.  The increase 
in U.S. companies with equity links has been much greater over the 
last year, 189 more companies bring the present total to 445.  Among 
non-U.S. companies, the net increase has been 126 over the last 
year, bringing the total to 429.  The greater increase in non-equity 
involvement reflects "wariness" about South Africa.  The IRRC notes 
that many U.S. companies not in South Africa have shown an interest 
in the country but remain wary because of the political situation. 
(Johannesburg THE STAR 1 Dec 93) 

   U.S. Trade Visit 'One of Many' 

   BUSINESS DAY reports a "rush of trade visits to South Africa." 
It tops the list with a report on the visit of the 50-strong 
American mission under U.S. Commerce Secretary Ron Brown, which 
included representatives from IBM, Apple, Lehman Brothers, Arco 
Chemical Company, Time Warner, Africa Electrification Foundation, 
Alliance Corporate Finance, Bridge Housing Corporation, the Export- 
Import Bank, the Trade and Development Agency, and government 
representatives dealing with trade, development, and foreign 
affairs.  Trade delegations from Malta and Australia were expected 
the following week along with a 30-man delegation from the Russian 
Federation whose focus on joint ventures between Eskom and Russian 
companies will follow up on the trade agreement recently signed 
between Russia and South Africa.  (Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 29 Nov 
93) 

   U.S. Investment Initiatives 

   THE STAR reported that "the United States will classify South 
Africa as one of the world's top 10 emerging markets, bringing 
incalculable benefits in investment trade." According to THE STAR, 
U.S. Commerce Secretary Ron Brown declared that it is the 
Administration's intention "particularly to support black 
entrepreneurs and black leaders."  Brown listed 11 developments that 
would begin the process of revitalizing South Africa's economy and 
speeding up black economic empowerment: 

   The signing of an Overseas Private Investment Corporation 
agreement to encourage and support US investment in South Africa. 

   An Economic Cooperation Initiative focusing on South Africa. 

   Work by Exim Bank on a Nedcor Bank request for $63 million to 
purchase Boeing aircraft, which if approved would bring Exim's total 
investment in South Africa since February 1992 to $253 million. 

   The opening of an International Business Advocacy Center. 

   A U.S. National Export strategy to reduce controls in key high- 
tech sectors, plus the creation of one-stop shops to house key 
government agencies under one roof whose expertise would be 
available to South Africa. 

   A promise to review tax and tariff barriers to U.S. goods. 

   A promise to match up U.S. and South African companies eager to 
do business with each other. 

   A promise to discuss a bilateral tax treaty with the South 
African government. 

   A promise to encourage emerging black-owned businesses. 

   The announcement that New Africa Advisors, a black asset 
management firm, had created a $2 billion investment fund and that 
others among the US delegation had similar plans to direct 
investment towards South Africa. 

   The appointment of a senior economic diplomat to signal Clinton's 
strong commitment to South Africa.  (Johannesburg THE STAR 29 Nov 
93) 

   Economic Indicators Reported: 

   Manufacturing 

   "Stronger signs of recovery have emerged in the manufacturing 
sector in the second half of the year.  Central Statistical Service 
figures show the index of physical manufacturing production up 3.6 
percent on a seasonally adjusted basis in the three months to August 
compared to the same period last year.  This was an improvement on 
the second quarter when output volumes eased 1.9 percent. 
Economists said production in most of the 28 major manufacturing 
groups appeared to be returning to more normal levels after output 
was hampered in the previous quarter by stayaways in the wake of the 
assassination of SACP leader Chris Hani.  The strongest recovery 
occurred in wood and wood products; printing and publishing; 
petroleum and coal; electrical machinery; motor vehicles, parts and 
accessories and professional and scientific equipment Econometrix 
economist Tony Twine said a turnaround in manufacturing in the 
second half was expected due to an improvement in third quarter GDP 
figures.  The GDP data indicated the manufacturing sector grew at a 
seasonally adjusted annualized rate of 5.5 percent in the three 
months to September after slumping 0.2 percent in the second 
quarter.  He warned the current recovery was weaker than it appeared 
since it was coming off a very low 1992 base where second-half 
production had fallen after the breakdown in Codesa and the 
Boipatong massacre."  (Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 29 Nov 93) 

   Inflation 

   "The improved fiscal deficit, lower long-term interest rates and 
the stabilization of the rand exchange rate could help reduce 
inflation further next year.  The Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut 
inflation barometer reading for the fourth quarter of 1993 said a 
CPI inflation rate close to 7 percent was on the cards for mid-1994. 
Inflation for the fourth quarter of this year was 7.4 percent 
compared with 9.1 percent in the previous quarter." (Johannesburg 
BUSINESS DAY 29 Nov 93) 

   Retail Sales 

   "In mid-November, the 100 top retail groups told the Central 
Statistical Service that they expected the month's sales to be 
around 12 percent higher than in the same month last year.  Factors 
cited for the improvement in retail sales included reductions in 
interest rates on mortgages; the upsurge in the gold price, which 
had restored confidence in the gold mining industry and made people 
more willing to spend; and the good rains, which have put the 
agricultural sector back on its feet."  (Johannesburg THE STAR 2 Dec 
93) 

   Fixed Investment 

   "Economists said there would be a small real increase of 0.5 
percent for the year as a whole after a pickup in the second half 
neutralized declines in the first half.  Expectations were that real 
fixed investment would rise to more than R11.2bn in the first six 
months of 1994.  Finance Department director general Estian Calitz 
said real gross domestic investment had increased in the third 
quarter for the first time in three and a half years.  Econometrix 
economist Azar Jammine said it was unlikely a recovery in investment 
had occurred in the building, mining and construction industries.  A 
good indicator of investment in these sectors was heavy commercial 
vehicle sales which were still weak, he said.  Jammine added that 
private sector investment in capital goods would remain fairly flat 
until there was more certainty about the new government's policies." 
(Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY 2 Dec 93) 

   Tourism 

   "Overseas arrival figures from January to August reflected a 
significant growth of 11 percent compared with last year, with the 
business market contributing slightly more to the growth than the 
holiday market The South African Tourism Board said the industry is 
now bracing itself for a 15 percent increase in the number of 
overseas visitors this holiday season."  (Johannesburg THE STAR 26 
Nov 93) 

   To request additional information on these articles or to offer 
suggestions/comments, please call (703) 733-6414. 

   (QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, AFRICA/LEVANT 
BRANCH AT (703) 733-6408) 
ENEAG/13 Jan/ECONF/NEASA Division JEG 13/2102Z JAN 

