Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Aroosa Alam] </F>
  [Text] Islamabad, Jan 13: the wheeler dealers and official 
teams of European countries are in Islamabad to strike lucrative 
defence deals with the Government of Pakistan. 
  This is in the backdrop of the decision of the Defence 
Committee of the Cabinet to diversify defence acquisition and at 
the same time allocating a huge amount for defences purchases. 
  While the Swedish Assistant Secretary of Foreign Affairs is 
already in Islamabad, French Defence Minister Leotard Francois 
is due in the Capital on Saturday to discuss the sale of heavy 
defence equipment to Islamabad. Both are equipped with the 
assurance that their respective governments would ensure the 
uninterrupted supply of weapons even during the times of 
hostilities. 
  French Defence Minister Leotard Francois will discuss the 
sale of Mirage 2000-5 and the French Submarine Agosta-90. He is 
reportedly carrying a confidential letter from his Prime 
Minister to Ms Benazir Bhutto. 
  Described as a hurriedly arranged tour this is the first 
high 
level visit from Paris to Islamabad after the induction of the 
new government is Pakistan. During his two-day stay in the 
Capital, the visiting French Minister, a close confidante of the 
French Prime Minister Baladour, will hold talks with Prime 
Minister Benazir Bhutto and Foreign and Defence Ministers. 
  Though the visit of the French Defence Minister, handled by 
the Ministry of Defence, is being kept in a low key, it is 
believed the French are desperately trying to conclude deals on 
Mirage -- 2000-5 for PAF [Pakistan Air Force] and submarine for 
the Navy. 
  France is also believed to be offering AMX -- its main 
battle 
tank to the Pakistan Army. 
  Meanwhile, Sweden's Assistant Secretary of State for Foreign 
Affairs is currently visiting Pakistan to offer Pakistan the 
best State of Art defence equipment for its armed forces. 
  The Assistant Secretary of State will be meeting Prime 
Minister Benazir Bhutto to reaffirm Sweden's irrevocable 
assurances already provided to the Ministry of Defence and the 
navy a few months ago that the Swedish government will honour 
the commitment of any defence contract with Pakistan even during 
a war. He also brought a confidential letter from the Swedish 
Prime Minister for Premier Bhutto, assuring that the Swedish 
decision is fully guaranteed through a political consensus of 
the ruling party as well as the opposition. The Swedes are 
offering A-19 Gotlond submarine with transfer of technology 
besides other sophisticated defence equipment. 
  After carrying out an extensive and objective technical 
evaluation of the Chinese, French and Swedish submarines, 
Pakistan navy has reportedly shown its inclination to go for the 
Swedish submarine, which is considered to be the best. 
  The defence sources in the capital maintain that due to 
political pressures, the Pakistan navy may not be able to 
acquire the Swedish submarine. The sources said that all is set 
to purchase new type of submarine. Agosta-90 which will be 
tailor-made for Pakistan since France itself is shifting to 
nuclear submarine from the conventional submarine. 
  The second item on French Defence Minister's agenda is 
shoving down the expensive Mirage-2000-5 on Pakistan. 
Notwithstanding the apprehensions expressed by the experts time 
and again, PAF leadership is reported to be all set for 
Mirage-2000-5. 
  According to today's BBC broadcast, a contract between 
Taiwan 
and France for the sale of Mirage-2000-5 has been cancelled due 
to some political expediency. Earlier PAF bosses have been 
arguing that Pakistan would not be the sole buyer of 
Mirage-2000-5 and Taiwan was also acquiring the same aircraft. 
  Apparently the French Defence Minister is arriving in 
Pakistan alone. However, there are reports that the agents and 
representatives of M/s DCNI of Agosta-90 submarine, Marcel 
Dassauk of Mirages and OGA have already landed in Islamabad for 
pulling strings with political and defence heavy-weights. 
  During the meeting of the Defence Committee of the Cabinet, 
the Prime Minister informed that the army, navy and air force 
have been given a go ahead to build a viable deterrence by 
restructuring and diversifying their defence capabilities. 
  She instructed the Ministry that the selection of the 
weapons 
should be strictly made on merit of operational performance with 
a clear qualitative edge over enemy's fighting platforms. 
  The Prime Minister directed that in the selection of the 
equipment, maximum weightage must be given to the fact that 
selection must be current and of recent induction in the country 
of origin's armed forces from where the equipment is ordered. 
  She directed that the equipment ordered from abroad must 
have 
life cycle comparable to its country of origin so that the armed 
forces of the selected manufacturer's country must guarantee 
that the equipment selected by the Pakistan's armed forces will 
remain operational for 20 years in their own armed forces as 
primary fighting platforms. 
  The Prime Minister further instructed that the transfer of 
technology must not be a mere lip service but the country 
offering their equipment must have experience and proof of such 
transfer of technology to another country. 
  She emphasised that because of our bad experience during 
conflicts and wars, the seller must have evidence in irrevocable 
terms of their government's written approval assuring that they 
will continue the supply, support and in-country production 
commitment during the time of hostilities. 
  Prime Minister further directed that the selection of 
equipment must be left to the professionals. 

