Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Manki Ponomarev report: "U.S. President Leaves for Europe"] </F>
  [Text] U.S. President Bill Clinton left Washington late 
Saturday evening for a 10-day tour of European countries. He 
intends to visit the Belgian capital, where a meeting of NATO 
heads of state and government will be held 10-11 January. A 
meeting will then take place in Prague with the leaders of the 
Czech and Slovak Republics, Poland, and Hungary. The president 
will pay a state visit to Russia 12-15 January, after which he 
goes to Belarus. The U.S. Administration head's tour will end 
in Geneva, where he will hold talks with the president of Syria. 
  Setting out the aims of his trip to journalists, Bill 
Clinton 
stressed: "I hope that we will be able to work out a policy in 
relation to Europe which will not lead to the formation of new 
`lines' dividing up the continent but will further its 
political, economic, and strategic integration." 
  Three basic tasks face the White House head during his trip, 
according to top figures in the Washington administration. The 
first is to submit for ratification by America's North Atlantic 
alliance partners the U.S. Partnership for Peace concept, which 
envisages the establishment of close cooperation in the defense 
sphere between the bloc and the former socialist states of 
Europe. The second is to demonstrate support for the democratic 
processes in those states. The third is to to help reduce the 
threat from weapons of mass destruction. In this regard Vice 
President Al Gore stated firmly in a radio broadcast to the 
American people devoted to the trip now under way: "One nuclear 
power alone should be the successor to the USSR." 
  Discussion of the Partnership for Peace concept will indeed 
be one of the the main topics of the Brussels meeting. However, 
according to Clinton himself, it is not possible to admit the 
East European countries to NATO as full members because this 
would exclude Russia from the new security alliance and cause 
alarm in Ukraine and other new independent states. The 
president added here that the West is proposing that Russia also 
take part in implementing the Partnership for Peace concept and 
that Russia will thus obtain the opportunity to demonstrate its 
desire for a new future. 
  As far as the state visit to Moscow is concerned, Bill 
Clinton described it as his main task to show support for 
democratic and market reforms in Russia as well as to show 
support for the creation of social mechanisms to reduce the 
impact of the economic "shock" on people. In Moscow, according 
to Strobe Talbott, special envoy and special adviser [sovetnik] 
to the U.S. secretary of state on the new independent states, 
the U.S. President will also declare that "Russia should have 
its own powerful voice" in determining how the "post-Cold War 
situation in the security sphere in Europe and Eurasia" will 
look. The adviser to the secretary of state also noted that, in 
Washington's opinion, "all states formed since the collapse of 
the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact will have the right to join 
the North Atlantic alliance in the future." 
  So the U.S. President's European trip is now under way. One 
can only express the hope that it will bring beneficial results 
not just to the United States but to the other states and 
peoples too. 

