Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by former Defense Minister Audrius Butkevicius to </F>
Lithuanian Prosecutor General A. Paulauskas, issued 21 March; 
under the "Opinions" rubric] 
  [Text] To Lithuanian Prosecutor General A. Paulauskas 
  I have found out that seeking to conduct a search in my 
apartment, authorities twice searched the home of my 
sister-in-law in Vilnius, Ciurlionis Str. 86-92. Currently, I 
keep some of my personal things there while away for my studies 
in Great Britain. I am surprised and indignant that both 
searches were carried out with the following aims: "To find and 
retrieve documents linked with the purchase of military 
facilities, as well as arms, notes, and so on, and to find and 
retrieve documents bearing importance to the case, as well as 
arms, ammunition, and explosives." 
  These motives for searches surprise me and cause my 
justified 
indignation. You, as prosecutor general of the Republic of 
Lithuania, should know as well as myself that I did not commit 
any crimes as defense minister. These are not my speculations 
or wishes to you, but demands of Lithuanian laws to those 
officials who must institute criminal proceedings and conduct 
the investigation if there is a sufficient legal basis for this. 
Before bringing the action No. 09-02-005-94 against me on the 
abuse and negligence of my duties in acquiring arms, you had to 
make certain whether there had really been any proof of crime in 
my actions as national defense minister, and whether there was 
enough evidence to justify such a conviction. Therefore, before 
undertaking the investigation, you had to conduct a thorough 
examination and begin proceedings only after that. Without 
performing this, but by conducting searches, you insulted my 
honor and dignity as a Lithuanian citizen and a former 
responsible state official. You did not even talk to me. 
  Instituting ungrounded proceedings, you have completely lost 
the feeling of legal responsibility and your behavior follows 
the rules of the recent party elite and nomenklatura -- give us 
a person and we will find a law to punish him. Do you need to 
be reminded, Mr. Prosecutor, that those times have passed? 
Unfortunately, all events in this case have shown that you do 
not follow the legal requirements of the Republic of Lithuania 
in your work. Therefore, by ordering the conduct of searches, 
you had no legal justification to think that the aforementioned 
apartments contained the evidence of the crime unknown to you, 
but which is already under way, and things received or acquired 
in a criminal manner or documents that could be important for 
the criminal proceedings instituted by you. 
  I state openly and publicly that your actions against me are 
unlawful. Since the current institutions of supreme power in 
the Republic of Lithuania, which appointed you prosecutor 
general, are clearly indulgent to you and do not react to my 
requests, I will be forced to defend myself from your arbitrary 
moves as from criminal actions by all legal means, including 
extreme ones. At the same time, I warn you that it is you who 
will have to bear the responsibility for all consequences, as 
well as those who tolerate your self-will which I qualify as 
directed against the Lithuanian state and its interests rather 
than me. 
  To prevent such actions, I request that you immediately stop 
the proceedings and all persecutions linked with them, and 
return all my things confiscated during the illegal searches. 
  I am ready to give explanations in a legal manner, comment 
on 
documents, and explain the complicated procedure of acquiring 
arms not as a criminal but as former national defense minister 
of the Republic of Lithuania. 
  At the same time, I reserve the right to comment publicly on 
the actions of officials sent by you, who, in defiance of the 
law, also did everything to justify your arbitrary behavior 
under the cover of legal proceedings. 
  [Signed] Audrius Butkevicius, former Lithuanian national 
defense minister and signatory of the Declaration on the 
Restoration of Lithuania's Independence. 
  [Dated] 21 March 1994 

