BFN 

  [Excerpt] Members of the contact group -- consisting of 
representatives of the United States, Russia, the United 
Nations, and the European Union -- held the first round of talks 
in Sarajevo this afternoon. The members of the group were 
received by Alija Izetbegovic, president of the Presidency of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Prime Minister Haris Silajdzic. Mladen 
Bosnjak reports on what they told journalists after the talks: 
  [Bosnjak] After the talks, which lasted quite a long time, 
Alija Izetbegovic, France's Jean-Pierre Masset, and Charles 
Redman, the U.S. representative in the contact group, addressed 
journalists. 
  What Jean-Pierre Masset said could be summed up as follows: 
The main task of the group is to find ways to restart the 
diplomatic and negotiation process. 
  Alija Izetbegovic, president of the Presidency, was 
considerably more specific and clearer: 
  [Begin Izetbegovic recording] Of course, the question of a 
cessation of hostilities was raised. We said here that [words 
indistinct] Gorazde. We told the contact group that we had just 
received a report that Serbian forces had not left the 3-km 
zone. There is also a lot of Serbian artillery and Serbian arms 
inside the 20-km radius. We said that under these conditions we 
cannot negotiate. They (?told us that) they are going to Pale 
tomorrow and will return from Pale sometime in the afternoon. 
We will continue the talks then. 
  We took this opportunity to raise objections, to draw 
attention to the fact that the machine for murdering and 
destroying towns, this big, massive machine, the (?Serbian) 
artillery that the Serbian side has near Gorazde, is, according 
to our information, now being deployed in other locations with 
the task of (?destroying). We fear a new Gorazde in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  We expressed our regret that the opportunity had been missed 
finally to remove and destroy this war machine. In our view, 
this would have created the conditions not only for peace in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and the immediate removal of a great danger 
of new conflicts, but also for a future of peace in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. As long as this machinery exists, there are 
no conditions for stable peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina or in the 
wider region. 
  We said that we favor talks. To put it in the simplest 
terms, there are two conditions for the negotiations to end 
successfully. These consist of respect for the sovereignty and 
integrity of Bosnia-Herzegovina. We do not want the country to 
be divided. This is the first condition. The second is that the 
Chetniks withdraw from occupied Muslim and Croatian regions. 
These are the two conditions that we are setting. In this 
context, we will provide the group with maps drawn in the way we 
see them, and we will present them to the group in the near 
future, perhaps even next week, when they come here again. 
  We also stressed our view that peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
cannot be separated, that a solution for Bosnia-Herzegovina 
cannot be separated from the overall solution in the former 
Yugoslavia. It cannot be separated from the situation in 
Croatia, Serbia, Kosovo, or Macedonia [the Former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM], and from our point of view, it 
cannot be separated from the situation in Sandzak in particular. 
We [words indistinct] Sandzak. We found out here that two 
working groups are operating. One is the contact group working 
on Bosnia-Herzegovina, and another is working on the rest of 
Yugoslavia. 
  We pointed out that we did not think that this was the most 
ideal solution, and that it would be good if these problems were 
unified since the problems are impossible to separate. As 
regards the cessation of hostilities, of course, it must only be 
temporary. I am thinking in terms of two or three months during 
which a political solution should be found. After all these 
attempts so far, one cannot be an optimist. However, I must say 
that this is currently the strongest group that has become 
involved thus far. Virtually all the relevant bodies in the 
world are represented here, first the United States, then the 
European Union, the United Nations, and finally, which is very 
important, the Russian Federation. This is very important. We 
think that it can play (?an important) role. It has so far been 
absent from these negotiations and this was perhaps [word 
indistinct] the way to solve this issue. Its involvement can 
help in (?finding) a political solution. [end recording] 
[passage omitted] 

