BFN 

  [Text] In the last three years, part of the fortune of the 
Valle drug lords has been invested in giving financial support 
to a number of Colombian political leaders. 
  This affirmation is contained in a report on Colombian drug 
trafficking given to Italian authorities by Fernando Brito, 
director of the Administrative Department of Security [DAS], two 
weeks ago. The report claims that after the dismembering of the 
Medellin Cartel, the Valle mafia has consolidated its power to 
such an extent that it controls 75 percent of all drugs shipped 
from Colombia to the U.S. and European markets. 
  The report says that in the last decade other organizations 
have created veritable industries in which departmentalized 
networks are involved in the process of obtaining raw materials, 
processing, internal transportation, and international drug 
trafficking. The fortunes of these organizations have 
infiltrated the construction industry, drugstore chains, radio 
stations, automobile dealerships, department stores, factories, 
banks, sports clubs, and even investment firms. 
  The report claims that the drug trafficking organizations 
run 
a large number of offices in the United States and Europe that 
handle hard currency derived from drug trafficking. However, 
the Valle mafia is outstanding because of a "managerial 
organization with business criteria and decentralization." The 
report states that at present the Valle drug lords are not 
participating in cocaine exports but that they receive a 
percentage of the shipments of other drug traffickers for the 
use of distribution routes and networks under their control. 
The analysis indicates that complementing the support of 
political leaders, a large part of drug trafficking money is 
invested in real estate; another part is exchanged into pesos; 
and another large part is deposited in international banks 
abroad. Following that order, the report says, the money sent 
abroad is funneled toward the creation of new front companies 
for drug trafficking operations or into high yield investments 
in the stock market. 
  Other organizations have a marked tendency to launder money 
through fictitious exports using official documents and dummy 
corporations that act as customs agents in the transfer of money 
to Colombia. Currently the organizations have expanded their 
drug trafficking networks abroad and are investing capital in 
casinos, real estate firms, travel agencies, and night clubs in 
various countries in Europe. Thus, drug money has been detected 
in Spain, Luxembourg, Italy, Germany, Belgium, Holland, and even 
in Russia. 
  Other drug cartels send money orders and money transfers 
through agencies in charge of cashing foreign checks and 
receiving foreign payments. It is difficult to trace money 
derived from drug trafficking in these types of operations. In 
internal drug trafficking, the cartels use eight departments to 
ship drugs to the drug distribution centers abroad. 

