Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with German Foreign Minister Klaus </F>
Kinkel by an unidentified correspondent; place not specified -- 
live] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Correspondent] What do you 
consider the most important result of yesterday's high-level 
meeting in Bonn? 
  [Kinkel] The most important result was that all of those 
with 
an interest in resolving this conflict were pulling 
together--Europeans, Russians, the United States, Canada, and 
the United Nations. We are using the momentum, and yesterday's 
talks gave a useful boost toward consolidating the position in 
and around Sarajevo, toward continuing deliveries of 
humanitarian aid to the people in need. Above all, we 
decided--and this will be implemented--to try and find solutions 
similar to what has been done for Sarajevo, in the form of a 
mosaic, for the other main trouble spots--such as in Bihac, 
Srebrenica, Mostar, Zepa, and Gorazde. There is still much to be 
done--too much. 
  [Correspondent] It has been possible to more or less lift 
the 
Bosnian Serbs' siege around Sarajevo with the undisguised threat 
of force, using NATO fighter aircraft in agreement with the 
United Nations. Is this necessary to stop the fighting around 
all the places you just named? 
  [Kinkel] Well, a political solution still has to come, first 
and foremost, as President Clinton said again yesterday. The 
conditions have been met for a peaceful political solution. I 
would not want to rule out that a similar approach could be 
adopted in individual cases in future, as has been the case 
here. This, however, must be considered very carefully. You 
have to be clear that what you threaten to do can actually be 
done in practice. For this reason, I would want to continue not 
with further threats but with looking for a political solution. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Kinkel, several observers urge that 
Sarajevo--the successful NATO ultimatum to the Bosnian 
Serbs--could be a model for the solution of other regional 
conflicts in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Do you agree with that? 
  [Kinkel] Yes, it can be a recipe for success if you mean--as 
was demonstrated here--that the people who address this issue 
mean the combination of firmness and at the same time 
flexibility. It does not mean in the sense that I would 
automatically transfer the situation in Sarajevo to all the 
other places mentioned, to the six peace zones that were 
determined by the United Nations. I also spoke to Secretary 
General Woerner for a long time last night. We must not lose 
sight of the political process now, but we [words indistinct] so 
that it can and perhaps must be said loud and clear: this far 
and no further. We should not flog it to death unnecessarily, 
however, and give it too [word indistinct] in advance. 
  [Correspondent] You were just highlighting the agreement of 
the participants of the conference yesterday in the interest of 
peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina. However, one [words indistinct] 
was Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Churkin, who said that 
successes of the Sarajevo experiment, as he called it, were not 
a model case and that a repeat of the NATO ultimatum for other 
areas was not an option. Is that not a setback for your efforts? 
  [Kinkel] No. You cannot say that. I had a long 
conversation with Mr. Churkin yesterday morning. He was quite 
decisively jointly responsible for the fact that the Serbian 
side could be won over for the withdrawal. The Russians never 
made a secret of the fact that they would not have liked to have 
seen the NATO ultimatum carried out, that they would not like to 
see it repeated, but that alone cannot be the deciding factor 
for NATO and the United Nations. I will say it again: We have 
to have the Russians on board, and we have the Russians on 
board. This is very, very important. As we have a certain 
influence on the Croats, for example, and a certain influence on 
the Muslims, the Serbs also have a specially good relationship 
with the Russian side. We have to use that. Russia is also a 
dimension, without which peace in former Yugoslavia will not be 
possible. It should not be the case, however, that someone from 
one side says certain things are ruled out or that a veto is 
imposed from the start. Nor do I think that this is Churkin's 
view or the view he expressed during the talks. He explained 
the Russian position, which is a little different from ours. As 
I said, however, the Russians are on board with us and are on 
board to a decisive degree. 
  [Correspondent] You mentioned at the start that your 
Croatian counterpart, Mate Granic, is coming to Bonn today. What 
will you be discussing with him? 
  [Kinkel] I will be discussing current developments with him, 
in order to advance the political process of finding a solution. 
The talks are under way and are based, as I said, on the 
European plan of action, which is [Alain] Juppe's and my own 
idea. The Americans have now become involved very actively in 
every respect. That was one of the reasons why the conditions 
for a solution have improved somewhat. We have to use the 
momentum. I will be discussing the state of the peace efforts 
with Mr. Granic, whereby it is particularly important to close 
the extremely wide gap between the Muslims and Croats because 
things have become bogged down given the hostile positions 
caused, in particular, after the attacks by the Muslims in 
central Bosnia against the Croats. This has to be overcome 
first. In addition, there are a host of questions that have to 
be discussed, such as Mostar, a question addressed particularly 
to the Croats and Muslims.... 
  [Correspondent, interrupting] And where the Croats are the 
aggressors? 
  [Kinkel] I do not think you can say that at the moment. We 
have reached a situation where you cannot say in each case who 
attacked whom. I will put it this way, however: None of them 
are angels. The original act of aggression--and this should not 
be forgotten--came from the Serbs. 
  [Correspondent] The government in Zagreb is being accused of 
still supporting the Bosnian Croats with regular troops. Do you 
have any knowledge of this? 
  [Kinkel] I have been trying for weeks to verify this. I have 
not had any great success in this so far, and I am not the only 
one. I have asked the United Nations and our partners [words 
indistinct] for information. We know that a not inconsiderable 
number of volunteers are there. There are also reasonable 
grounds, however, for believing that at least Croatian troops 
were there. I have also--particularly in the light of our 
relatively good relationship with the Croatians--repeatedly 
called on them to withdraw their troops if they have any there. 
They say this is not the case. 
  They are aware of the Security Council resolution calling on 
them to withdraw their troops, but little has been heard of this 
recently because there is apparently no evidence of it. You also 
have to remember that if troops were there, they would not be 
wearing the uniform of the official Croatian Army and would not 
be easily recognizable or identifiable. I will ask Mr. Granic 
about this again, however, and I will call on him in the 
clearest possible terms to withdraw the troops if this is the 
case. 
  [Correspondent] Last question, Mr. Kinkel. As the 
high-ranking officials were discussing the situation in Bosnia 
yesterday, the Society for Threatened Peoples accused you--or 
rather the Foreign Ministry--of encouraging war crimes and mass 
deaths. I quote, [word indistinct] a type of euthanasia in 
Bosnia. They were referring among other things to the fact that 
there are evidently a number of Croat and Serb war criminals in 
Germany whose names are known. What is the Foreign Ministry 
doing in this regard? 
  [Kinkel] Well, this is an absurd accusation that I, of 
course, reject. Anyone should try and show me what documents we 
have in our possession, or what we have failed to pass on, or 
what we have suppressed. It is just absurd to accuse me, as a 
long-standing state secretary at the Justice Ministry and 
ex-justice minister, of not operating extremely precisely and 
painstakingly in every respect. It is repeatedly alleged that 
we received lists containing the whereabouts of Serbs who have 
committed crimes in Germany. I would like to see proof of this, 
and I would ask proof to be furnished when absurd claims such as 
this are made. I consider it so absurd that I do not want to go 
into it. By the way, all of the lists we have received--which 
do not refer to the residence in Germany of Serbs or other 
possible criminals--have, of course, been passed on to the 
international organizations that are responsible for 
investigating these matters. I was one of those who called 
loudest--successfully it now seems--for an international court 
of criminal justice to deal with these things. I will 
personally make sure we in Germany do everything possible. 

