Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Muhammad 'Abd-al-Salam: "In an All-Inclusive </F>
AL-SHARQ Interview, Yemeni Foreign Minister: I 
Confess...Disagreement Exists Within the Governing Coalition in 
Yemen, but It Is Exaggerated by the Media'"] 
  [Text] Sanaa--Yemeni Foreign Minister Muhammad Salim 
Basindwah accused certain news media of deliberately 
exaggerating the events in Yemen for the purpose of distorting 
the image of its internal state of affairs before both Arab and 
European public opinion. He said that what was taking place in 
the Yemeni arena is no more than mere differences of opinion 
between sides of the governing coalition. The preceding took 
place in an interview conducted by AL-SHARQ with His Excellency 
in Sanaa, in which Arab-Arab reconciliation, need for 
establishment of a level of joint Arab action that ensures the 
provision of necessary safeguards allowing that no country be 
exposed to harm or aggression from any other country, were dealt 
with. The interview also touched on Yemen's stance with regard 
to the Gaza-Jericho agreement, its readiness to host a 
conference on Palestinian-Palestinian reconciliation, and its 
stance with regard to the crisis in Somalia, especially as the 
country accommodates 700,000 Somali refugees, in addition to the 
issue of redrawing the borders between Yemen and the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia (KSA). The text of the interview follows: 
  [AL-SHARQ] On the occasion of the visit by [Qatari] Minister 
of Information and Culture, Dr. Hamad 'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari, 
could you point out the extent of development of Yemeni-Qatari 
relations, and will a new informational protocol be signed 
during the visit? 
  [Basindwah] I would like to welcome the visit of His 
Excellency brother Dr. Hamad 'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari, Minister 
of Information and Culture in the sister state of Qatar, to the 
capital of his second homeland, the Republic of Yemen. He is a 
dear friend, as we enjoyed several years of fellowship when 
either of us headed his respective country's delegation to the 
United Nations. With regard to Yemeni-Qatari relations, I am in 
the position to state that they have become more enduring than 
what they were prior to August 1990, and that they undergo 
continuous improvement, by the token of His Excellency brother 
Foreign Affairs Minister Shaykh Hamad Bin-Jasim Bin-Jabbur Al 
Thani's, visit three months ago, and His Excelleny brother Dr. 
Hamad 'Abd-al-'Aziz's visit. For our part, we are keen on 
cementing the bonds of cooperation and coordination with our 
brothers in Doha in the interest of our two countries, 
especially our Arab and Islamic peoples in general. 
  [AL-SHARQ] The Gulf crisis had negative repercussions on 
Arab-Arab relations: To what extent have some of these negatives 
been rid of to date, and how do you perceive the future of 
achieving Arab reconciliation, currently an important issue in 
view of recent international transformations? 
  [Basindwah] Undoubtedly that Arab-Arab relations have 
experienced a measure of improvement after the calming of 
nerves. However, developments in the Arab region compel 
reconsideration of our positions, as Arab countries, with one 
another. That is, how may we become reconciled to our historical 
foe--Israel--but reject reconciliation between ourselves? 
Reconciliation does not imply that we allow repetition of 
anything that had expired; rather, it is essential that what 
must follow is the planning and execution of a new level of 
joint Arab activity that ensures the provision of necessary 
safeguards allowing that no country be exposed to any harm or 
aggression from one or more states, whether sisterly or 
otherwise, and avoidance of all past negatives and dangers. 
Should we, as Arabs, seek not to mend our fences, consolidate 
our ranks and reestablish our bonds before it is too late, then 
I fear that we shall be worse off than we are now. We perceive 
nations everywhere entering into blocs for their own protection 
and those of their interests. Any lasting and harmonious Arab 
action must be based on the unity of economic interests. 
  [AL-SHARQ] The current political crisis in Yemen occupies 
much Arab and international public interest. Does this crisis 
have repercussions for current Yemeni foreign policy, and is 
there any Arab mediation to reconcile perspectives within the 
governing coalition in an effort to resolve the crisis? 
  [Basindwah] Perhaps it has come to your attention that 
certain news media deliberately exaggerate events in Yemen for 
the purpose of distorting our internal affairs before both Arab 
and international public opinion. In truth, differences do exist 
among the three parties--the Congress, Socialist and 
Reformist--of the governing coalition; however, these 
differences are not irremediable. Such differences occur from 
time to time in democratic countries. Naturally, such 
differences will have their negative consequences on the actual 
performance of our foreign policy; however, such repercussions 
disappear with the mere resolution of these differences. While 
we appreciate all efforts expended by our brethren to help us 
overcome our differences, we are supremely confident that these 
differences are mere summer clouds that will disperse before 
long. The wisdom that brother Lieutenant General 'Ali 'Abdallah 
Salih, presidential council chairman, is endowed with, in 
particular, and all national leaders, in general, is capable of 
attaining solutions that would shield Yemen from all dangers and 
perils. As uttered by the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, 
"Wisdom is Yemenite." Thus there is no reason to fear for unity, 
democracy or the stability of our nation. 
  [AL-SHARQ] Following signatory of the Gaza-Jericho agreement 
between the PLO and Israel, many Palestinian organizations, 
including Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement], announced their 
rejection of this agreement. At the time it was announced that a 
reconciliation agreement between Hamas and the PLO would be held 
in Sanaa. What are the reasons for such meeting not being held 
to date, and does the invitation still stand? 
  [Basindwah] We remain prepared to host a conference on 
reconciliation between Palestinian brothers of all factions 
should they wish to have one. Yemen will spare no effort to 
achieve harmony between Palestinians in order that dissension 
among themselves not dissolve into armed conflict, because the 
beneficiary of such would be Israel, not the Arab Palestinian 
people. 
  It is acceptable that there be agreement on differences, 
such 
that refusal becomes a source of strength in the position of the 
Palestinian negotiator, and on condition that disagreement not 
lead to infighting. Since Yemen respects the right of all 
peoples to choose what they want, it did not oppose the 
Gaza-Jericho agreement. We know that the Palestinian people are 
capable of imposing their will and choosing their own path. As I 
have said during meetings of the last Arab Foreign Ministers 
Council, which was held in Cairo the 19th and 20th of last 
September, this agreement is undeserving of our glorification 
into a victory, lest Israel believe that it had given to the 
Palestinians more than they deserved. Moreover, we must not deem 
those who have accepted the agreement as traitors or mercenaries 
because they sought to wreck the negotiation path, agree with 
them should they succeed in achieving the limited national 
aspirations, specifically the establishment of an independent 
Palestinian state and renewed control of Gaza and the entire 
West Bank, including Jerusalem, and demand that they retreat 
from their ways should they fail. 
  [AL-SHARQ] There exists some inclination to end the Arab 
boycott of Israel. What is Yemen's current position on this 
matter, and will Yemen agree on establishment of diplomatic 
relations with Israel at the end of the peace process? 
  [Basindwah] The Republic of Yemen is not among the 
[encircling] countries; rather, it is a supporting country, and 
it abides by what is agreed upon by the countries directly 
involved in the struggle against Israel, including our brethren 
Palestinian people. We will not proceed with anything before 
then, and before an Arab consensus and the achievement of a just 
and comprehensive peace in the region, or at the least one we 
are certain of. 
  [AL-SHARQ] What is Yemen's stance towards the struggle in 
Somalia between the forces of General Muhammad Farih Aidid, and 
the U.S.-led UN forces? How do you view resolution of this 
crisis? 
  [Basindwah] Yemen's point of view is summed up in that the 
sisterly Somali people's tragedy cannot come to an end 
militarily; rather, [such tragedy] must necessarily be resolved 
politically. We did not wish the United Nations to be party to 
the conflict, especially since the motive for its involvement 
was the lending of assistance to Somalis in the restoration of 
order, peace, and stability in a land ravaged by civil war, 
famine and disease, and inhabited by a people dispelled by fear. 
Our country could have played a role, along with other African 
Horn countries, in consolidating the ranks of the various Somali 
factions and inducing them to agree among themselves, especially 
since Yemen is host to more than 700,000 Somali refugees. 
However, we did not demand such, despite our participation in 
the effort to unite Somali forces, which took place in Djibouti. 
Despite the worsening conditions in Somalia, it would have been 
possible to overcome the problem through collaborative efforts 
of Arab and African nations, especially since the suffering of 
the Somalis has reached its zenith, prodding the realization of 
a solution that is acceptable to all. 
  [AL-SHARQ] A final question: Do you perceive in the process 
of redrawing thr borders between Yemen and the Sultanate of Oman 
a model for resolution of border problems between Arab 
countries, and could the process of redrawing of the borders 
between Yemen and the KSA follow such a model? 
  [Basindwah] Unquestionably, the Yemeni-Omani agreement on 
redrawing borders could serve as a model to be followed for the 
resolution of border problems between sister states and for the 
border issue between Yemen and its sister and neighbor, the KSA. 
We are eager to resolve them at once, God willing, rather than 
at a later date. Moreover, we have not the least doubt that 
KSA's leadership has the same desires. As such, I am confident 
of our ability to overcome all difficulties and to reach, God 
willing, an acceptable agreement. I am spurred by the hope that 
we are close at hand to the realization of tangible improvement 
on the path to a comprehensive and complete solution, if it be 
God's will. 

