Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Yichang, January 25 (XINHUA) -- Aid has come from 
all over the country to the Three Gorges Water Control Dam area 
to help the local people to emigrate from the area. 
  According to officials from the Migration Development Bureau 
of the Three Gorges Project Construction Committee under the 
State Council, during the past year, 20 provinces and 
municipalities and 60 central government departments have 
offered 133 million yuan in support of dam area activities. 
  The Three Gorges Water Control Dam is expected to take 17 
years to finish. As the project progresses, a large area along 
the Chang Jiang River will be flooded, including the sites of 
two cities, 11 counties, 114 towns and 1,711 villages. The 
people in the area will have to be moved out to free up land for 
the project's construction. 
  A span of over 600 kilometers from Yichang to Chongqing is 
to 
become the migration front. The migration work will be 
extremely arduous, an official from the bureau said. 
  The Chinese Government has instituted preferential policies 
to aid the economic development of the dam area and create a 
favorable environment for the migration work. 
  Support is offered through various means, such as technical 
assistance, capital investment, job training, information 
consultation and labor service export. 
  Beijing, Shanghai and some coastal cities and provinces have 
provided thousands of jobs for the migrants, and Shenzhen, a 
special economic zone in south China's Guangdong Province, has 
allocated 500,000 yuan to train migration administrative 
personnel. 
  As residents of Yichang City in central China's Hubei 
Province should be moved out first to make room for the 
preparatory stage of the project, 50 million yuan of assistance 
has been rushed to the city from all over the country. 
  By the end of last year, more than 5,300 people have been 
relocated from the Three Gorges Dam area so as to clear over 
70,000 hectares for construction work. 
  The migration project has already started. At present, an 
area of more than 1,800 hectares has been cleared for project 
construction and 25 factories are now being moved. 

