BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed "G.P.": "Strengthening Franco-German </F>
Industrial Cooperation"] 
  [Text] From bilateral summits to conferences, it is always 
good form to welcome the perspectives of Franco-German 
industrial cooperation. Even so, these perspectives still have 
to be more clearly defined and both sides need to find the means 
of strengthening this cooperation. This was the subject of the 
report drawn up by [former president of Credit National] Paul 
Mentre at the request of Foreign Trade and Industry Minister 
Gerard Longuet and European Affairs Minister Alain Lamassoure, 
and which should lead to "the making of operational decisions by 
the end of the year." 
  Whether in studies produced by the European Commission in 
Brussels, the French national planning office, or in the German 
study on "Standort Deutschland," [Germany as a Business 
Location] the conclusion is the same: For the last 10 years, 
Europe's export competitiveness has dropped compared with that 
of the United States and newly industrialized countries. Paul 
Mentre's report states: "On the basis of a comparison of wage 
costs in the manufacturing sector, the Commission in Brussels 
noted in 1993 that Europe's competitiveness has fallen globally 
by 5.2 percent, and by 11.4 percent compared with the United 
States." Neither France nor Germany have escaped this trend. 
  Thus, moving straight on to make proposals, Mentre suggested 
three avenues of approach. 
<H5>  Encourage Investment </H5>
  In this area, it is true, we would not be starting from 
scratch. Where the French are concerned, the privatization of 
companies in eastern Germany has given investment opportunities 
to a number of large groups including L'Air Liquide, 
Lafarge-Coppee, Saint-Gobain, and Elf which, in association with 
Thyssen, has bought the Leuna and Zeist refineries. However, we 
need to go further along this road and in particular develop 
cooperation between the major national operators. France 
Telecom and Deutsche Telekom have already established ties (with 
the joint subsidiaries of Eucom and Eurocom in the Atlas 
project), and the report recognizes that they will have the 
opportunity of pushing further in this direction with the 
three-phase privatization of the German operator. Nevertheless, 
the report admits, industrialists think that there are also some 
opportunities left for vertical integration (e.g., Siemens' 
stake in DT [Deutsche Telekom], or Alcatel-Alsthom's 
participation in the capital of France Telecom). 
<H5>  Dynamize Industrial Research </H5>
  In this area, the structures are different and France could 
use German practices as a model. 
  In Germany, applied research is heavily centralized in 
essentially professional institutes favoring the dissemination 
of research, notably to small- and medium-sized companies. The 
shared concerns of both countries should, for example, make it 
possible to create a Franco-German fund for the dissemination of 
industrial research, with independent means gradually rising to 
amount to 1 billion French francs. 
<H5>  Cooperation With Third Countries </H5>
  The idea whereby France and Germany would go into 
partnership 
with the establishment of a consultancy group for privatization 
has fallen through. However, Paul Mentre suggests that this 
same path could be reopened in the direction of certain eastern 
European countries (Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldavia), or in 
specific sectors (energy, transportation, and distribution). 

