BFN 

  [Text] Kiev [no dateline as received] -- A UNIAN 
correspondent learned on 27 May that Ukrainian Interior Minister 
Andriy Vasylyshyn has sent a letter addressed to President 
Kravchuk, Acting Prime Minister Zvyahilskyy, and Supreme Council 
chairman Oleksandr Moroz. The letter particularly notes that in 
connection with the complex crime situation on the peninsula, 
Ukraine's Interior Ministry is taking additional measures 
towards stabilizing it. In particular, the ministry has 
instructed the heads of interior bodies in the Crimea to adhere 
strictly to the law of Ukraine "on the militia" and not to allow 
illegal actions, which inexperienced politicians and Valeriy 
Kuznetsov can depend on. Ukraine's interior minister has 
consulted with Russian Interior Minister Yerin on these issues. 
  The letter also notes that Kuznetsov is intensifying the 
atmosphere of confrontation. In particular, he banned the heads 
of the Crimea's interior bodies from giving permission for a 
meeting between Ukraine's Interior Ministry employees with the 
personnel [presumably of the Crimea's interior bodies]. "The 
complexity of the crime situation in the Crimea and the adoption 
by Valeriy Kuznetsov of unprofessional decisions compels 
Ukraine's Interior Ministry to keep a small number (30 persons) 
of unarmed employees from the apparatus of Ukraine's Interior 
Ministry directly in the Crimea," the letter notes. 
  On 28 May a senior official in Ukraine's Interior Ministry, 
who wished to remain anonymous, commented on the situation at 
the request of a UNIAN correspondent, noting that "after the 
election of Yuriy Meshkov as president of the Crimea, it was 
expected that a conflict would emerge between him and Oleksandr 
Plyuta, Crimea's interior minister, who refused to implement a 
decree by Yuriy Meshkov that ran counter to Ukraine's current 
legislation. But the arrival of Valeriy Kuznetsov, a person 
from Yuriy Meshkov's entourage, on the scene as well as his 
attempt to resubordinate to himself a Berkut detachment, made 
the situation more complicated. Understanding that the situation 
was becoming more acute, Andriy Vasylyshyn has been trying to 
contact Yuriy Meshkov, but he has left his telephone calls and 
letters unanswered. 
  "Ukraine's Interior Ministry, while striving to avoid an 
escalation of tension, contemplated the possibility of 
confirming Valeriy Kuznetsov as Crimea's interior minister. But 
by his actions, he has proved himself not only unprofessional 
but also dangerous. He has himself ended up as a hostage to the 
situation. 
  "Having exhausted all possibilities, Ukraine's Interior 
Ministry has appealed to President Kravchuk with a request that 
he make use of his right as commander in chief and resubordinate 
the Crimea's armed militia detachment to Ukraine's Interior 
Ministry. As a result, the main interior directorate of Crimea 
of Ukraine's Ministry Interior was formed, which was headed by 
Valeriy Chernyshov. The events in the Crimea have shown that 
Valeriy Kuznetsov and the people who direct him are trying to 
play the Crimean card according to this very scenario, but we 
have managed to achieve a certain improvement of the situation 
through personal contacts and explanations too." 

