Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ankara, Feb. 3, IRNA -- Turkey is ready to 
compensate for the losses inflicted on the Iranian borders as a 
result of the air raid last Friday, Turkish Foreign Minister 
Hikmet Cetin said here today. 
  "Unfortunately we were informed that some mistake had 
occurred during the operation of the Turkish fighters in 
northern Iraq last Friday, and resulted in losses in man and 
material on Iran. We are deeply sorry for the incident," Cetin 
told IRNA in an interview here. 
  He said relations between the two countries are so strong 
and 
friendly which can settle all the difficulties. No issue can 
affect the two countries' relations, he added, stressing "there 
was no intention behind the incident." 
  Peoples of Iran and Turkey have been living together without 
any unpleasant problems for centuries, besides, expansion of 
Tehran-Ankara cooperation not only would serve the interests of 
the two nations, but would have very positive impacts on the 
regional developments, Cetin said. 
  Turkish warplanes attacked bases of the opposition 
guerrillas 
110 kms. deep inside Iraq last Friday, during which rural areas 
in Sardasht border region were also bombed, and 28 Iranians were 
killed and wounded. 
  In addition to the two countries cooperation within the 
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), Cetin said 
implementation of the gas transfer projects from Central Asia to 
Turkey and Europe via Iran, as well as transfer of the Iranian 
gas to the world markets via Turkey would play a major role in 
the expansion of ties and cooperation between the two countries. 
  Iranian Ambassador to Turkey Mohammad Reza Baqeri met with 
Cetin earlier in the day and conveyed a message from Iranian 
Foreign Minister 'Ali Akbar Velayati on the issue. 
  Velayati in his message stressed that Iran really expects 
the 
Turkish Government to compensate for the losses in addition to 
making a formal apology over the incident. 

