BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by intern reporter Chang Chun (1728 </F>
6511): "How Beijing Regulates and Controls Commodity Prices"] 
  [Text] As the number of marketization elements of the 
price formation mechanism continuously increases, 95 percent of 
the prices of commodities and charges for business services on 
the Chinese mainland have been liberalized and subjected to 
regulation by market mechanism. Since the second half of last 
year, prices of agricultural and sideline products, which have a 
bearing on residents' immediate interests, have been on the 
rise. In March this year, the prices of vegetables rose by 31 
percent over the same period last year. The top echelons of 
central leadership and local governments were very much 
concerned about residents' "shopping baskets." In an interview 
with this reporter, an official from the Beijing Municipal 
Commodity Price Bureau stressed: In the socialist market 
economy, the government interferes in market prices by 
comprehensively using economic and legal means as well as 
necessary administrative fiats. At the same time, he pointed 
out: The upward spiral of the prices of agricultural and 
sideline products is now slowing down. 
<H5>  Price Rises in the South Are Spreading to the North </H5>
  The prices of meat (pork, beef, and mutton), eggs, 
vegetables, grain, and edible oils were liberalized at the end 
of 1992 and on 5 March 1993. Overall price reform has promoted 
production growth, market circulation, and relative market 
stability. The masses of people are comparatively satisfied 
with the reform. Regulation of prices of agricultural and 
sideline products by the market is, in fact, the inevitable 
outcome of the price reform which has been introduced since 1979. 
  In late November and early December last year, prices of 
agricultural and sideline products represented by grain suddenly 
went up as a bumper grain harvest was reaped and grain in stock 
was abundant. This phenomenon, which started in the coastal 
areas of south China, spread to the northern regions of the 
country. In the first ten-day period of December, prices of 
grain and edible oils in Beijing were as follows: The price of 
high-quality wheat flour rose from seven jiao [one jiao=1/10 of 
a yuan] to more than 0.9 yuan or an increase of 30 percent, and 
that of edible oils rose from 3 yuan to 4.5 yuan a jin. The 
prices of pork and eggs saw relatively stable rises. 
  Zhao Chongjie, head of the Comprehensive Management Section 
under the Beijing Municipal Commodity Price Bureau and senior 
economist, maintained: There are three reasons behind the 
current price rises: 1) In November, grain-producing provinces 
gave advance warning that purchase prices of grain and edible 
oils would increase, with a view to guiding peasant enthusiasm 
for grain cultivation. However, as a result, grain and edible 
oils were sold grudgingly. 2) Departments engaged in the 
circulation sector lacked adaptive measures and necessary mental 
preparation for the readjustment of purchasing prices. 3) 
Consumers were apprehensive of the reform measures to be taken 
in the new year. For example, they thought that the additional 
collection of consumption tax would lead to a big rise in 
commodity prices. 
<H5>  The Municipal Government Strengthens Macroregulation and </H5>
Control 
  In view of this situation, the municipal government set up a 
market price monitoring and control system to forecast trends of 
price changes and promptly study measures to cope with the 
changed situation. On 19 December last year, after the 
government exercised macro-regulation and control on the 
limited-price management of 21 varieties of grain, edible oils, 
meat, eggs, and vegetables, market prices dropped quickly. The 
price of high-quality wheat flour dropped to 0.78 yuan per jin 
while that of edible oils steadied below the four-yuan level. 
Thanks to the imposition of price limits on the sale of grain, 
edible oils, meat, eggs, and vegetables, prices of agricultural 
and sideline products were brought under control, and the 
residents' inflation expectation mentality was alleviated 
considerably. Later on, after summing up the current management 
based on limited prices, the municipal government held: This 
was a successful practical exercise for the government to 
regulate and control prices by using economic means. 
  Mr. Zhao Chongjie said: It is believed that in the socialist 
market economy, commodity price departments are not essential. 
Through the imposition in December last year of management based 
on limited prices, importance was attached to the work of the 
commodity price bureau. It was universally held that even in 
market economy, the government also could not abandon an 
intervention role in prices. 

<H5>    Three Funds Function as Expected </H5>
  To coordinate with price reform, stabilize production, 
enliven circulation, and protect consumption, the municipal 
government set up three funds: Agricultural production, market 
risk, and commodity reserve funds. The agricultural production 
fund is used to protect agricultural production. When prices of 
agricultural products are on the low side and agriculture is 
beset with difficulties, the government will use the fund to 
reduce producers' losses. The market risk fund is used to curb 
commodity prices when prices undergo a sudden change. Last 
year, the Beijing municipal government used the market risk fund 
three times. One occasion was to ensure supplies during the 
Spring Festival holidays; another occasion were in August and 
September when vegetables were in the off season; the third 
occasion was the 15 million yuan used to cope with the sudden 
rise in grain prices. The third fund is a commodity reserve 
fund under which the government entrusts operating departments 
with responsibility for building up supplies of commodities to 
ensure them for the Beijing municipal population of 10 million 
people for a certain period. 
<H5>  This Year's Price Rises Are Expected Not to Exceed Last </H5>
Year's Levels 
  Mr. Zhao remarked: On the question of commodity prices, all 
sides concerned and opinion makers have basically reached a 
consensus on three aspects: 1) In the socialist market 
economy, price fluctuations are normal. As such, one should not 
be surprised so long as they are kept within a rational scope 
and are conducive to production, enhancement of national 
strength, and improvement of the national economy and the 
people's livelihood. 2) Government regulation and control of 
market prices is necessary. 3) So long as the relationship 
between price rises and improvement of the people's living 
standards is handled well and the residents' income growth is 
kept higher than the price rise levels, this will help stimulate 
the economy. He contended: The main reason prices of 
agricultural and sideline products rose significantly last year 
was that the previous base figures were relatively low. Now 
prices have been stabilizing. 
  Commodity prices in Beijing went up by 16.9 percent last 
year. This growth rate was higher than the nation's 16.4 percent 
level, but was considered low compared with that of the 35 large 
cities. As for the residents' consumption index and retail price 
index last month, they rose by 25 percent and 21 percent 
respectively. According to the estimate of the official from the 
commodity price bureau, this year's price-rise rate is not 
expected to exceed last year's level. 

