Region 

<F P=102>   94WE0052A Moscow KLINICHESKAYA LABORATORNAYA DIAGNOSTIKA in 
Russian No 2, Mar-Apr 93 (manuscript received 23 Mar 92) pp </F>

67-68 -- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94WE0052A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KLINICHESKAYA LABORATORNAYA DIAGNOSTIKA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V.V. Bogach, O.Ye. Trotsenko, N.P. Kuzhman, L.A. </F>
Balakhontseva, L.I. Yuzhakov, I.S. Startostina, A.V. Astakhova, 
and O.Yu. Bagayeva, Far Eastern Regional Center for the 
Prevention of and Fight Against AIDS, Khabarovsk Scientific 
Research Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology under the 
``Organization of the Laboratory Service'' rubric: ``Status of 
Laboratory Diagnosis of HIV Infection in Far Eastern Region''; 
UDC 616.98:578.828.6]-078.33[571.6]] 
  [Text] Ten years ago, the first cases of AIDS were recorded 
in the United States. Today, the infection has been recorded in 
more than 160 countries throughout the world. As of 1 March 
1992, 533 HIV-infected individuals, including 267 children, had 
been discovered in the Russian Federation. Sixty-one persons, 
including 45 children, were infected with AIDS. 
  A system of special medical institutions for preventing and 
fighting AIDS has been formed and is now operating in Russia. 
They diagnose and coordinate efforts to prevent the spread of 
HIV infection. 
  The Far Eastern Regional Center for the Prevention of and 
Fight Against AIDS serves as curator for the following eight 
territories in which territorial centers operate: the Republic 
of Sakha (Yakutiya); the Khabarovsk and Primorski krays; and the 
Amursk, Kamchatka, Magadan, Sakhalin, and Chita oblasts. 
  Since 1990, the epidemiologic situation with respect to HIV 
infection in the Far Eastern region has remained unchanged. 
Three cases of HIV infection have been recorded here: Two were 
recorded in the Primorski kray (one was a foreigner deported 
from our country, and the other was a young man who is now under 
clinical observation), and one case of AIDS was recorded in a 
1.5-year-old little girl who lives in a village in the Kamchatka 
Oblast who was infected during hospitalization in the city of 
Shakhty in the Rostov Oblast. 
  Laboratory diagnosis of HIV infection in the region's 
territory is performed by 98 diagnostic laboratories. There were 
40 at the beginning of 1990 and 73 by the beginning of 1991. 
During the 1989-1991 period, 4,090,469 blood samples were 
analyzed for HIV infection in the Far Eastern region. A general 
trend toward an increase in the number of persons examined 
throughout the region's territories has been noted. This 
indicator equaled 10.3 percent in 1989, 15.85 percent in 1990, 
and 19.78 percent in 1991. 
  Among those examined in the past 3 years, the groups with 
the 
highest percent decrease in the number of persons examined were 
pregnant women (41.5, 40.0, and 27.9 percent) and donors (33.5, 
25.2, and 19.4 percent). The absolute number of persons examined 
by year increased somewhat. 
  The number of at-risk persons examined decreased in 1991 as 
compared with 1990: The number of drug addicts examined 
decreased from 5,402 to 4,403, and the number of homosexuals and 
bisexuals examined decreased from 521 to 432. 
  Laboratories primarily screen the public for the presence of 
HIV antibodies. The average load on one equivalent state unit in 
the region fluctuates from 15 to 39 studies daily. The 
laboratories are small and have inadequate equipment, test 
systems, and disinfection agents. Many diagnostic laboratories 
lack multilumen pipettes and have a limited number of single-use 
tips and plotting sheets for serologic reactions. The 
instruments obtained from cooperatives do not always undergo 
metrological inspection. 
  Laboratories diagnosing HIV infection should have at least 
two types of test systems based on a cell culture lysate and on 
recombinant proteins. They generally have a recombinant test 
system of two different series at best. No test systems based on 
a cell culture lysate have entered the region since 1991 because 
the Vektor Scientific Production Association [NPO] has stopped 
producing them. Orders for antigen-lysate test systems from the 
Antigen NPO have not been filled despite multiple appeals. An 
analysis of the distribution and use of test systems to detect 
HIV antibodies in 1990-1991 established significant 
shortcomings: manufacturing enterprises are failing to adhere to 
the quarterly plan for shipping test systems, which limits their 
shelf life and write-off period; the design features of test 
systems (lysate, recombinant, synthetic) are not specified on 
requests from territories; the need for simultaneous tests for 
HIV-1 and HIV-2 is not given full consideration when screenings 
are conducted; and there is a trend toward an unsubstantiated, 
inflated number of test systems shipped. 
  To date, test systems for HBsAg have not reached the 
territorial centers in a centralized fashion. The inadequate 
supply of equipment of materials has affected the quality of the 
studies performed and the speed at which results are obtained. 
The Primorski Kray center acquired the Serodiya 
[transliteration] HIV test system for foreign exchange provided 
by sponsors, which has significantly improved diagnosis in stage 
1. 
  The diagnostic capabilities of oblast and rayon laboratories 
are not being adequately used to diagnose opportunistic 
infections. The operation of the laboratories affiliated with 
the Kamchatka and Primorski kray centers is an exception. 
Serodiagnosis of the following are performed there: viral 
hepatitis; staphylococcal, pneumococcal, and herpetic infection; 
diptheria, pertussis, rubella, and echinococcosis; and 
immunodeficiency conditions. Determination of immune status and 
examinations for HBsAg are performed in the laboratories 
affiliated with the Khabarovsk, Sakhalin, and Chita territorial 
centers. 
  Staff members at the Yakutsk Republic Center have developed 
a 
program to observe morbidity due to viral hepatitis and the 
status of the sanitary-epidemiological regimen at 
treatment-and-prophylactic institutions, and development of a 
program to prevent HIV infection is being completed. 
  The directors of the Far Eastern region's health care 
agencies are paying a great deal of attention to training 
specialists. About 90 percent of their staff members and many 
physicians at infectious disease hospitals and 
sanitary-epidemiological stations have completed advanced 
training in the laboratory and clinical diagnosis of HIV 
infection and AIDS-related diseases at central bases in Moscow 
and Saint Petersburg. Seminars on the diagnosis of HIV infection 
to which specialists from institutes providing advanced training 
to physicians, scientific research institutes, and the Far 
Eastern Regional Center for the Prevention of and Fight Against 
AIDS are invited have been held in practically all territorial 
centers. 
  Training cycles that are systematically jointly conducted 
with the Khabarovsk Medical Institute at the Far Eastern 
regional center are playing a big role in training specialists 
in the diagnosis of viral hepatitis, HIV infection, and 
AIDS-related and AIDS-indicating infections, as well as in 
methods of detecting immunodeficiency conditions. Specialists 
from different territories throughout the Far East are trained 
for 2-4 weeks. The training courses are as close as possible to 
the actual work performed by physicians and laboratory 
assistants. After having completed the training, the course 
attendees receive certification and begin working independently. 
  The Far Eastern Regional Center for the Prevention of AIDS 
coordinates work related to diagnosis and prevention in the 
region. Work on the scientific topic "Study of the Epidemiology 
of and Development of Epidemiological Oversight and Prevention 
of AIDS (Carriage and Morbidity) Under the Extreme Conditions of 
the Far Eastern Region" has been under way since October 1989. 
The regional center confirms diagnoses and detects HIV 
antibodies in blood serum sent from the territories treated by 
it, including by the immunoblot method. 
  In 1989, serum came mainly fram the Primorski Kray (88.4 
percent), but after the Japanese test system Serodiya was used 
in the operation, the number of serum samples sent for 
confirmation of diagnosis decreased sharply and amounted to 0.08 
percent in 1991. In 1990, most serum samples (80.9 percent) came 
from the Khabarovsk Kray and Sakhalin Oblast. The same pattern 
was maintained in 1991, although the percentage of serum samples 
from these territories decreased somewhat (65.82). 
  Most of the serum samples sent from the territories for 
confirmation of diagnosis in 1989, 1990, and 1991 were obtained 
during examinations of pregnant women (code 109) and accounted 
for 528 of 2,086 serum samples, i.e., 25.3 percent. Of the 2,086 
samples, 431 (20.66 percent) were sent under code 113 (clinical 
indications), and 235 (11.27 percent) were sent under code 108 
(donors). 
  The regional center performs immunologic studies of cellular 
(14 indicators) and humoral (13 indicators) immunity, including 
determination of class A, M, and G antibodies, immune complexes, 
total protein, ceruloplasmin, transferrin, haptoglobin, 
medium-weight molecules, properdin, pathological macroglobulins, 
C-reactive protein, lysozyme, _b_-lysine, and 
_b_-lipoproteins. 
  The staff members of the Far Eastern Regional Center for the 
Prevention of AIDS provide consultations and methodological 
assistance related to AIDS diagnosis to physicians in different 
specialists. Forty-seven specialists have been trained in modern 
diagnosis of HIV infection and viral hepatitis (28 in 1991) at 
workstations at the regional center's laboratories. 
  Specialists from the Far Eastern regional center 
systematically travel to diagnostic laboratories throughout the 
region for consultations and to participate in territorial 
seminars on the diagnosis and prevention of AIDS and to control 
the quality of the studies being performed. 
  The laboratory service for diagnosing HIV infection in the 
Far Eastern region is now basically organized. The staff members 
of most of the 98 laboratories are involved in diagnosing HIV 
infection but are not yet paying the necessary attention to 
isolated viral hepatitis markers, determining immune status, or 
detecting AIDS-indicator and AIDS-related infections. 
  The Far Eastern regional center has assimilated and is using 
methods of laboratory confirmation of the diagnosis of HIV 
infection. The experience that has been accrued in laboratory, 
training methodology, and organizational work related to 
training specialists has enabled the associates of the Far 
Eastern Regional Center for the Prevention of and Fight Against 
AIDS to work jointly with the Khabarovsk Medical Institute to 
train physicians and midlevel medical personnel on the problem. 
  COPYRIGHT: Izdatelstvo ``Meditsina'', 1993 

