Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Petr Belov: "About Missiles, Their </F>
Uranium, and Targeting Information"] 
  [Text] As an independent expert on systems safety 
engineering I cannot fail to share my fears at the latest "gift" 
to the Russian people from the munificence of the presidents who 
gathered in Moscow at the start of the year. Let me remind you 
that a year previously there was a similar "gift" in the form of 
the hasty signing of the treaty on the reduction of strategic 
offensive arms -- START II -- which, even before it was 
ratified, had played a pernicious role for us. Here I shall 
dwell only on the latest new "partnership" initiatives which 
develop this treaty: the nontargeting of strategic missiles 
against each other, Ukraine's complete elimination of all 
nuclear weapons, and the United States' purchase of Russian 
weapons-grade uranium. 
  I think there is no better guarantee of stability under 
present conditions than the certainty of our potential for not 
leaving an aggressor unpunished. The correctness of my thoughts 
is confirmed not only by the lessons of history but also by the 
recent conclusions of the international conference in Rio de 
Janeiro, the statements by U.S. Vice President A. Gore, and the 
research of Academician N. Amosov. In that light you cannot 
help concluding that the agreements concluded in Moscow recently 
on the military-economic aspects of cooperation are similar in 
form and anti-Russian in content. Their danger lies in 
definitively depriving Russia of the potential for deterrence, 
in selling off for a song what belongs to its future generations. 
<H5>  Retargeting of Missiles </H5>
  Perhaps this is the most effective confirmation (for the 
uninitiated) of partnership relations between the former 
adversaries. Here there is a political dividend for all 
presidents at the same time and (although extremely implausible) 
a reduction in the gravity of the consequences of the 
unsanctioned launch of any missile: Its lethal charge will 
merely fall into the ocean or onto an uninhabited island. It is 
emphasized, it is true, that it is hardly possible to control 
the targeting information of modern strategic missiles and 
consequently this initiative is allegedly utterly "innocuous." 
  In reality everything will depend on the energy of the 
"partners'" political leadership and the degree of resistance to 
that initiative from military professionals. After all, only 
they know the other side: the loss of combat readiness is more 
dangerous to the victim than to the aggressor; mistakes and 
disruptions during retargeting are fraught with an excessive 
risk of accidents; the computing of missiles' new targeting 
information and the replacement of old ones give rise to 
colossal expenditure; the vigilance and responsibility of the 
combat crew on duty with "untargeted" missiles are reduced; and 
the actions of these crews when they receive a combat order 
becomes drastically more complicated. All this as a whole casts 
doubt on certainty as regards our combat readiness. 
  If this initiative is implemented Russia loses in the combat 
readiness of its multiple-warhead silo-based missiles 
considerable more than the United States. At least several 
minutes essential to re-record the "cancelled" targeting 
information. With our missiles' more radical "retargeting," 
which is indicated by the quite protracted deadline for its 
implementation (nearly five months) tens of minutes, if not 
hours, will be required to restore their combat readiness. In 
all cases our strategic nuclear forces could be deprived of 
their deterrent role in a retaliatory counter-strike, the only 
kind of strike acceptable to us, and will then be destroyed if 
necessary by high-precision, diversionary or other weapons. 
  In contrast to us, the U.S. side remains in a more 
advantageous position. After all, its combat might is based on 
high-precision cruise missiles and submarine-launched ballistic 
missiles. To all appearances it is not proposed to retarget the 
former and it is pointless to retarget the latter: They are 
already continuously and automatically retargeted in the process 
of combat patrol. It is virtually impossible to deprive them of 
this potential, still less to monitor the removal of targeting 
information from naval missiles. 
  You ask: Why was the United States previously skeptical 
about our statement on the nontargeting of Russian missiles on 
U.S. territory but is now itself coming out with a similar 
initiative? I think the reason here lies in the sincere 
readiness of present-day Russia's top political echelons to 
undertake unilateral disarmament. Nor is there any doubt that a 
gamble is being taken on the military's impotence: After all, 
it was the Russian Federation Defense Ministry leaders and above 
all the Strategic Rocket Forces who unconditionally agreed to 
the "destabilizing" role of our multiple-warhead silo-based 
missiles in favor of single-warhead mobile missiles. 
<H5>  Ukraine's Disarmament </H5>
  The surprising attention paid toward the problem of 
"Ukrainian" nuclear weapons, including by the new U.S. 
President, is generated by the same overtly expressed U.S. 
desire for absolute military superiority but not through its own 
arms upgrading but through the weakening of potential 
adversaries. It is Ukraine's obstinacy over adopting 
nuclear-free status and, worse, its intention to keep 46 of the 
most modern multiple-warhead silo-based SS-24 missiles with 460 
warheads which are not only preventing the destruction of 
similar Russian SS-18 missiles under START II but are also 
casting doubt on the U.S. THAAD antimissile program (a cheap 
SDI). 
  With the United States' present unconditional supremacy in 
offensive arms both conventional and nuclear, it also wants to 
have a guaranteed antimissile defense. The multiple-warhead 
silo-based missiles are an obstacle. Even the full-scale SDI, 
never mind its truncated version, cannot intercept their 
numerous warheads. The missiles on our submarines and the 
single-warhead SS-25 missiles are another matter: They have a 
minimal chance even of flying since as a result of their lack of 
defense they could easily be destroyed beforehand on their 
patrol routes or at the points of permanent deployment. If some 
of them do survive they will be able to take off only one after 
another and there will be very few of them (no more than 100) so 
the United States needs only a relatively cheap ground-based ABM 
system -- in other words the last stage of SDI geared to the 
destruction of up to 200 nuclear missiles. 
  Those are the reasons for B. Clinton's entirely natural 
interest in Ukrainian nuclear status and the United States' as 
yet unrealized wish to review the two first articles of the 1972 
ABM treaty formally banning the creation of even a restricted 
territorial ABM system. Thus very few obstacles are left on the 
path toward undivided rule and absolute impunity for any actions. 
  America's position can be understood but is unacceptable, 
not 
only to Russia and Ukraine, but also to the rest of the world. 
There are at least two reasons for this: The satisfaction of 
U.S. ambitions will not increase stability in the world and, if 
it does not immediately plunge the world into fresh anarchy, 
will at any rate make it violent. The U.S. pragmatists' 
cynicism is striking: After all, they intend to implement the 
United States' attainment of absolute military supremacy and its 
own safety at other people's expenses, primarily at Russian 
expense. 
  What lies behind their impudent treatment of "sovereign 
Ukraine?" The removal of its natural right to choose the 
minimum necessary and effective strategic deterrent means will 
hardly be compensated for by illusory economic and military 
guarantees. The billion promised for weapons-grade uranium plus 
the further two billion in the form of possible IMF credits will 
hardly resurrect its economy. Expectations for an even greater 
reduction by the Russian side of prices for energy carriers 
exported for the Ukrainians are also obviously naive: Prices on 
the world market have already been made as cheap as possible 
through the zeal of the Americans. 
<H5>  Uranium Deal </H5>
  But however paradoxical it may seem, the most destructive 
thing for Russia will be its "breakthrough" to the market in 
enriched uranium, where the Americans have always ruled. Nor 
will they lose our this time. If Russia received 12 billion for 
500 tonnes of uranium sold to the United States, the Americans 
as a result will pocket at least 300 billion -- such is the 
profitability of this "deal of the century." After all, the 
main second-hand dealer under the contract is the "Enrichment 
Corporation" firm, which has retained the right to review the 
terms of the deal annually, naturally in the direction of 
reducing the purchase price. 
  Most striking of all was official Moscow's agreement to the 
long term nature of this contract. After all, it is already 
known that at present world extraction rates the stocks of 
natural uranium, oil, and gas are sufficient for 50 years. Nor 
do we have guarantees of the development of thermonuclear energy 
and plutonium reactors. Having lost two thirds of its uranium 
sources with the collapse of the USSR, Russia is now selling 
nearly all its released weapons-grade uranium?! Without uranium 
nuclear electric power stations you will not get far with coal, 
logs, and hydroelectric power stations. 
  The actual atmosphere in which the "uranium deal" was 
prepared and the interpretation of this agreement for the public 
are also interesting. Nuclear Power Minister V. Mikhaylov, who 
explained to the Americans the figures for the quantity of 
weapons-great uranium we have and the number of nuclear 
warheads, took a most active part in creating a halo of "dire 
necessity" around this step. Since the revised figures exceeded 
estimates so far available by approximately 50 percent, this was 
reflected in a reduction of purchase prices for uranium. Having 
bought it the Americans will be able right now to resell the 
uranium at three to five times the price, and what will the 
price be in 20 years? 
  Nor can we fail to note one more aspect of this affair -- 
its 
link with our unilateral disarmament under START II. Russia's 
selling off of its uranium will have a deplorable effect on 
international stability. After all, even potentially Russia 
will be deprived of the opportunity to play a deterrent role 
since it will be unable to step up its nuclear potential in the 
event of a drastic aggravation of the situation. And who will 
guarantee that the need for this step will not be provoked by 
Washington itself, for instance, as a result of its unilateral 
rejection of ABM restrictions? In contrast to us, the United 
States retains its weapons-grade plutonium together with nuclear 
warheads and the platforms for them. 
  As a result the "uranium deal" will deprive our heirs of 
fuel 
for nuclear power engineering, no alternative to which can yet 
be seen, leaving in exchange mountains of radioactive waste. 
  I am sure that Russia does not need such bilateral and 
trilateral agreements. Their time passed with the collapse of 
the USSR, when it was possible and necessary to agree with the 
United States "as equals." With present realities, with the 
existence of only one superpower, all the others must be 
concerned for their own self-preservation autonomously or by 
cooperating. Russia and Ukraine need an independent military 
technology policy: We cannot do without the minimum necessary 
number of multiple-warhead silo-based missiles. We must 
preserve and modernize the existing 50 Ukrainian SS-24 missiles 
and 200 Russian SS-18 missiles together, helping each other. 
  I should like our parliaments to find the time to 
investigate 
and look into the results promised to us by the results of the 
Moscow meeting of presidents. I think the way out of the 
situation which is taking shape lies in the unification of the 
fraternal Slav and other peoples who have lived together since 
time immemorial in the face of the now real threat of their 
"depersonalization" and extinction and the "Europeanization" and 
"Americanization" of their natural resources. Instead of 
fueling passions over the nuclear weapons on Ukrainian territory 
we must render Ukraine aid in ensuring their safeguarding and, 
if we are asked, in preserving some part of them. After all, we 
are also in extreme need of Ukraine's assistance in maintaining 
the combat readiness of the heavy Russian SS-18 missiles. 
  Russia's all-around cooperation with Ukraine in the military 
and economic fields is mutually advantageous. Our countries 
will become richer and stronger as a result. And with the 
good-neighborliness of powers like ours things will be more 
peaceful for others too -- the peoples know that. 

