CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gautam Mehta: "ISI-aided Drug Cartel Busted"] </F>
  [Text] Ahmedabad, March 13. One of the biggest drug cartels 
operating in the western region along the Gujarat border, 
involving the trafficking of narcotics worth over Rs 150 crores 
and with the active support of Pakistan's Field Intelligence 
Unit (FIU), a branch of ISI [Inter-Services Intelligence], 
during the past several years, has been busted by the Kutch 
police. 
  According to the DSP [Deputy Superintendent of Police], Mr. 
Pramod Kumar, a call-girl, and two Pak nationals from Bombay and 
seven persons including three Pak nationals from Kutch, who were 
allegedly involved in the cartel, have been arrested by the 
police. 
  Suleman Hamid Hingolja, the kingpin of the cartel and his 
associates had during the interrogation named a major and a 
subedar of the Pakistan army, as agents of the FIU who were 
funding the smuggling of narcotics, motivating the accused for 
indulging in drug-trafficking and espionage activities, and 
sending information and photographs to Pakistan about the vital 
army and the BSF [Border Security Force] installations in Kutch. 
The cartel was supplying the drugs to prospective peddlers in 
Gujarat, Bombay and Rajasthan. 
  However, the busting of the cartel has also indirectly 
exposed the lapses on the part of the security agencies, 
guarding the vast land border in Kutch. These lapses are evident 
from the fact that Suleman had stated to the police that he was 
operating through the Kutch border for the past 15 years and had 
crossed the border to Pakistan along with his aides carrying 
huge quantities of narcotics more than 27 times. 
  Suleman also revealed to the police that he was never given 
the reward for drug-trafficking in cash, it was always in kind. 
According to the Kutch police, during each trip, Suleman used to 
get more than 30 kg of either brown sugar, charas or heroin from 
the FIU agents as a "commission." After finalising the deal, the 
narcotics were packed into small plastic bags. 
  Later, Suleman sold the drugs at the rate of RS 1,600 per kg 
to the drug-peddlers in Gujarat, Bombay and Rajasthan. Out of 
the total earnings from the sale of the drugs, Suleman used to 
send at least Rs 22,000 to the FIU agents in Pakistan towards 
the hawala transactions. 
  The FIU agents were also supplying imported pistols and 
revolvers for sale to gun-runners. The police have so far 
recovered one imported revolver from the accused. 
  However, the exact quantity of narcotics procured by Suleman 
and his associates from Pakistan and supplied to the 
drug-peddlers during the past 15 years is not known. The police 
have received information that Suleman and his gang had so far 
carried narcotics worth over Rs 150 crores. 
  The Kutch DSP, Mr. Pramod Kumar, who had carried out the 
interrogation of the accused Suleman, Dawood Kasam, Yunus Dosal, 
Hasan Junus, said that police records reveal that Dawood Kasam 
was nabbed by the police in 1987 and three kg of narcotics 
seized from him. 
  Mr. Kumar also said that the accused had close links with a 
call-girl, Rabia Ibrahim Patni, in Bombay and two Pak nationals, 
Abdul Latif Abdul Gani and Nurmohammed Ibrahim. All three have 
been nabbed by the police. 

