CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yu.M. Gerasimov, Russian Federation deputy </F>
minister of Railways: "A Program To Increase Traffic Safety"] 
  [Text] Railroad transport today, as at all times, remains 
the main arterial system of the country's economy. Under the 
conditions that have formed, the economic aspects are 
increasingly coming to the foreground of its activity. We need 
funds to maintain and up-date the technical devices, retain 
skilled personnel, develop scientific research and support the 
infrastructure. In the light of the new requirements, the 
criteria for evaluating losses due to traffic safety violations 
are also changing. Whereas before, the time of the interruption 
in traffic was counted, the economic loss now becomes the most 
important indicator. 
  Meanwhile, in just 11 months of 1993, direct losses to the 
state from wrecks and accidents constituted about 790 million 
rubles [R]. Fourteen locomotives and 778 railcars were smashed 
and damaged. Six people died in wrecks and 15 were injured. 
These figures alone indicate that the situation in the sphere of 
traffic safety requires careful analysis, study and realization 
of effective measures to stabilize it. 
  In the course of the last few years, all the activity 
directed toward ensuring train traffic safety was based on MPS 
Order No 10Ts of 1991, which played a decisive role in the 
implementation of organizational and technical measures to 
prevent accidents. Because of the changed situation in the 
country and in transport, however, a tendency has been noted to 
relax attention to traffic safety problems. As a result, in 1992 
there was a wreck with serious consequences at the Podsosenka 
Station on the October Railroad, and several other accidents 
also took place. A number of decisions were made that were new 
in principle, directed toward eliminating the causes giving rise 
to transport accidents. 
  In May 1992, the MPS issued Directive No 93-u, which more 
precisely defined the allocation of duty and responsibility to 
the directors of the MPS and the railroads for organizing 
accident-free operation. In August of the same year, the 
problems of ensuring traffic safety were discussed at a meeting 
of the collegium, which resolved to carry out special tests of 
railroad workers' knowledge of PTE [Regulations for Technical 
Operation of Railroads] and instructions, as well as special 
certification of supervisory and engineering-technical personnel 
involved in organizing the ensurance of traffic safety. The 
necessary measures were determined to increase the level of 
technical training for railroad workers and make more active use 
of economic incentive methods to increase safety. It was decided 
to carry out general checks on the use of safety instruments and 
to eliminate the operation of locomotives with faulty ALSN 
[continuous automatic locomotive signaling] devices. 
  In conjunction with the railroads, MPS administrations and 
concerned departments drew up a government-approved State 
Program To Increase Train Traffic Safety in RF Railroad 
Transport in the period 1993-2000. It specifies working out, 
developing and introducing technical devices to prevent 
accidents. Plants of the MPS and defense industry complex were 
called on to participate in its realization. 
  In 1993, the Statute on Material Remuneration for Ensuring 
Accident-Free Work for a Year was drawn up and approved by 
agreement with the Central Committee of the Independent Trade 
Union of Railroad Workers and Transport Construction Workers. A 
resolution was passed on improving the analysis of the causes of 
accidents, drawing in the scientific-research institute. A 
number of documents on ensuring safety when transporting 
hazardous freight were sent to the railroads. An MPS Directive 
on increasing the role and responsibility of inspectors for 
traffic safety in the matter of preventing accidents was drawn 
up and issued. 
  It must be emphasized that the appearance of each of these 
normative acts was dictated by practical experience, and their 
principal aim was to reduce the recurrence of errors, violations 
and causes of wrecks, accidents and cases of sub-standard work 
in train and shunting operations. The success of these documents 
and measures, however, depends entirely on their being put into 
practice at the sites. 
  At present there are 6,500 stations, 289 locomotive and 214 
railcar depots, 453 track subdivisions and 282 STsB [Signaling, 
Centralization and Blocking] and communications subdivisions in 
operation on the railroads of Russia. Some 1,216,000 people are 
engaged in operations activity. The absolute majority of the 
railroad men work conscientiously, ensuring train traffic 
safety. There have been no wrecks or accidents on the Ivanovo 
Division (V.A. Shofin, chief inspector for traffic safety) or on 
the Salsk Division (V.M. Shofin) in 20 years, on the 
Moscow-Circle Line Division (A.V. Osvaldo) in 8 years, and on 
the Bryansk (A.A. Tkachev), Solvychegodsk (P.Ye. Khokhlov), the 
Likhovskoye (V.A. Turin), Yelets (O.K. Dzhioyev), Ulyanovosk 
(A.A. Kostyuk), Penza (V.G. Kazantsev), Arkhangelsk (V.I. 
Pukanov), Voronezh (I.D. Kashkin) and Ryazan (V.A. Lechkin) 
divisions in the last 3 years. 
  This prolonged period of accident-free work is the result of 
the quite high level of organization. At the same time, there is 
a group of road divisions on which the traffic safety situation 
is unfavorable. For example, in just the past 3 years there have 
been 12 wrecks and accidents on the Petrozavodsk Division, 8 on 
the Kazan, 7 on the Volgograd, 6 on the Ruzayevka and 4 on the 
Rtishchevo. At the same time, three roads -- the October, Moscow 
and Gorkiy -- accounted for almost half of all the wrecks and 
accidents. 
  In 11 months of 1993, there were three wrecks involving 
passenger trains, with loss of life, on the Moscow, Kemerovo and 
East Siberian railroads. Workers of the Moscow, Gorkiy, North 
Caucasus, Kuybyshev, Baykal-Amur, Far Eastern, Sverdlovsk, West 
Siberian and Sakhalin railroads were to blame for passenger 
train accidents. 
  On the whole, the number of wrecks and accidents dropped by 
14 percent as compared with the same period last year (33 wrecks 
as against 41 and 28 accidents as against 30). The number of 
wrecks and accidents increased, however, on the Moscow, North 
Caucasus, Volga, Kuybyshev, South Urals, Sverdlovsk, Krasnoyarsk 
and Far Eastern railroads. An unfavorable situation has formed 
on the Caucasus, Mineralnyye Vody, Volgograd, Saratov, Perm, 
Tayga, Mogocha, Khabarovsk and Novosibirsk divisions, where 
there were several wrecks and accidents each. 
  Despite a certain reduction in cases of sub-standard work in 
train and shunting operations, the number of them is still 
large. Dangerous violations of traffic safety, such as running 
through stop signals, rolling stock drifting from stations and 
cracks in the axle journals of the wheelpairs and bogie side 
walls of freight cars, have not been eliminated. The number of 
cases of cars becoming uncoupled from passenger trains en route 
has risen. A number of roads, particularly the October, Moscow, 
Gorkiy, Kuybyshev and Southeastern, have recorded many cases of 
derailment of freight trains, some of which were on the verge of 
being wrecks or accidents. 
  The largest number of wrecks and accidents (50 percent), as 
before, fall to the track service. The reason -- unsatisfactory 
routine maintenance of the track, failure to adhere to the 
regular intervals for its inspection, delay in replacing 
critically defective rails, violation of the rules for doing the 
work, unsatisfactory maintenance of the switch assemblies and 
curved crossings, and poor quality of the track repair. This 
stems mainly from the low level of discipline and technical 
knowledge of the track brigade leaders and road foremen, and the 
disorganization and irresponsibility of the directors of the 
track subdivisions, departments and services. On 11 railroads, 
and particularly -- the Moscow, Volga and North Caucasus -- the 
track workers were to blame for wrecks and accidents. 
  The situation continues to be alarming at railroad level 
crossings. In 11 months of 1993, there were 324 collisions 
between trains and motor vehicle transport, as a result of which 
84 people were killed and 109 injured. Collisions with tour 
buses had very serious consequences on the Moscow, October, West 
Siberian and Far Eastern railroads, as well as collisions of 
means of transport with suburban and high-speed trains on the 
Volga and North Caucasus mainlines. It should be noted that the 
motor vehicle drivers are to blame for the overwhelming majority 
of collisions. The railroad workers should not be cleared of all 
responsibility, though. We all know the arsenal of means of 
combating this evil -- close interaction between the organs of 
GAI [State Motor Vehicle Inspectorate] and the local 
authorities, including interaction in building overpasses. At 
the same time, we should ensure that level crossings are kept in 
good working condition and modern technical devices to regulate 
traffic are introduced. 
  The railcar service situation remains difficult. Here, the 
number of wrecks has increased, and constitutes over 40 percent 
of the total number on the network. Things are worst of all in 
the railcar service of the Northern, North Caucasus and 
Kuybyshev roads. All the violations stem mainly from violation 
of the rules for inspecting and repairing railcars and failure 
to adhere to the technology of preparing consists for the 
journey. The incomplete provision of the work places with the 
necessary tools and devices, spare parts and materials has an 
adverse effect on the level of traffic safety provision. Some 
depots have no modern instruments for non-destructive monitoring 
of the state of the units and parts of the railcars, and the 
available ones are often in poor condition. The state of the 
axle units of freight cars on rolling bearings, the repair and 
technical service of which are carried out in extremely gross 
violation of the established technology, is particularly 
alarming. 
  The data listed show that 90 percent of the accidents and 
wrecks occur in two services -- track and railcar. It is here 
that the lack of discipline, irresponsibility and negligence of 
the workers appears to the greatest extent. There are, of 
course, also serious shortcomings in the other subsectors. For 
example, in the locomotive service, there are still cases of 
running stop signals, which attests to the lack of discipline 
and criminally negligent attitude of some of the engineers 
toward the job which has been entrusted to them. With modern 
equipment, even if it is not quite perfect, and with the 
existing regulations, there should be no discussion of running 
through signals. The collectives of many locomotive depots 
confirm this. In the last five years, for example, the engineers 
of the Moscow-Kursk, Novomoskovskoye, Moscow-Kiev, Khovrino, 
Novgorod, Kalinin, Leningrad-Sorting, Gorkiy-Moskovskoye, 
Gorkiy-Sorting, Kirov, Morshansk, Penza-1, Ulyanovskoye and many 
other depots have not run through a single stop signal. 
  In the transport industry, particular danger lurks in 
incidents of rolling stock drifting from stations because of the 
violation of the procedure for securing this stock, and also in 
freight-train defects, which in the past have ended in serious 
wrecks. The worst offenders in this subsector are the North 
Caucasus, October, Moscow and Gorkiy railroads. The shortcomings 
in ensuring traffic safety stem from the activity of other 
services as well, in particular, the signals, communications and 
computer technology, freight and commercial operations services. 
  As the tragedies of Sverdlovsk, Arzamas, Alma-Ata, Annay and 
other places, which stem from the transport of hazardous 
freight, recede farther and farther into the past, many 
executives, directors of all ranks and inspectors lessen their 
attention to this problem. As a result, in 11 months of 1993, 
the network had 13 wrecks, 6 accidents and 23 derailments 
involving cars with hazardous freight. Ninety-four derailments 
and 35 collisions involving cars with this type of freight took 
place at sorting humps and during shunting operations. In 
addition, emergency situations involving hazardous freight en 
route arose 740 times. They were caused mainly by leakage 
through faulty drain instruments, cracks, corroded openings and 
the welds of boilers. In this case there is a complete or 
partial loss of the freight, and human life and health are 
threatened. 
  At the beginning of 1993, the railroads were sent an 
analysis 
of the state of safety in the transport of hazardous freight, as 
well as recommendations on preventing emergency situations. 
Particular attention should be paid to monitoring adherence to 
the procedure for shunting cars loaded with hazardous freight, 
to training workers involved in its transport and also to 
monitoring the technical condition of rolling stock intended for 
the transport of hazardous freight. 
  Wrecks, accidents and cases of sub-standard work take place 
despite the fact that a precise system of accident-prevention 
measures has been drawn up for railroad transport. The actions 
of responsible officials were noted down and regulated in order 
to ensure coordinated and accident-free work, and the duty of 
the directors was clearly defined. The arsenal of these measures 
is constantly supplemented on the basis of analyzing the 
situation that has formed at the sites. This system is in 
operation in the absolute majority of work collectives. 
  As the analysis shows, wrecks, accidents and cases of 
sub-standard work take place mainly because the rules and 
instructions are violated. On the whole for the network, there 
are about 60,000 of these violators. This means that 
undisciplined or poorly trained workers, the proportion of which 
does not exceed 3 percent of the operations personnel, threaten 
train traffic safety. The number of slip-shod workers can be 
reduced and traffic safety increased accordingly only by 
painstaking and general work with the people and strict 
fulfillment of the accident-prevention measures. This is what 
production commanders and specialists of the 
inspector-instructor staff are called upon to do. 
  The system to ensure train traffic safety is made up of many 
components. These include personnel training, instruction, 
periodic checks of the actual fulfillment of instructions and 
monitoring the state of the technical devices, adherence to the 
procedure for examining each case, analysis of the results of 
checks and inspections, purposeful realization of preventive 
measures and the main thing -- keen organizational work with the 
people. The fundamental requirements for inspectors are 
formulated on the basis of the following points: be in the thick 
of events, know how to see what is essential, be principled, 
persistent and uncompromising, critically evaluate a situation 
and consider the future. 
  As checks and inspections show, a number of railroads have 
serious shortcomings in organizing ensurance of traffic safety. 
Their causes, however, are not being eliminated, because of the 
lack of principles and the policy of compromising with workers 
of the inspectorial staff who have these shortcomings. As a 
result, cases of sub-standard work, accidents and wrecks are 
repeated. 
  It is appropriate to remember, in this connection, the wreck 
of Elista-Moscow passenger train No 251, which occurred on 5 May 
1993 on the Kashira Division of the Moscow Railroad. 
  In October 1992, the road division's chief inspector for 
traffic safety inspected the Kashira subdivision of the line. In 
November, the chief of the subdivision examined the materials, 
but issued no order. In December, the division chief made an 
investigation and also came to no conclusions. This was not 
inadvertent, because the inspection was carried out on an 
extremely low level and many serious shortcomings were not 
revealed. In January 1993, the division inspector for the track 
service made out an inspector's directive for the chief of the 
subdivision, but it was not fulfilled. 
  On 1 March, 21 cars derailed at the Kashira Station. It was 
established that this kilometer had been unsatisfactorily 
evaluated for 12 months running, and on 18 February, with the 
passage of a track-recording car, the speed was restricted to 15 
km/hr because of 4th-5th class defects. The defects were not 
eliminated -- the road foreman noted the warning. The workers of 
the inspectorial staff could not help but have known about all 
this, but took no measures. Moreover, they did not monitor the 
carrying out of the spring inspection on this subdivision or 
elimination of the defects revealed in the course of it. 
  On 23 April at the 8th picket of the 121st kilometer (where 
the wreck of passenger train No 251 occurred two weeks later), 
the chief of the section, upon inspection, discovered that the 
spaces between the ties had not been filled up with ballast, the 
spikes had not been finished off, the rails were coming out of 
the sole plate rims, the joints were suspended and there were no 
gaps. They must either close it to traffic or restrict the 
speed. Neither was done, but the deadline established for 
eliminating the defects was before 26 April. They did not manage 
to put the track into good condition, though -- the wreck 
occurred. 
  Inspections and checks are given a considerable role in 
preventive work. This can be realized in full measure, however, 
only when the inspections are carried out with the appropriate 
quality, the results are examined promptly and the measures 
aimed at eliminating the shortcomings revealed are worked out 
and put into practice. 
  At the same time, railroad inspectors do not do enough 
target-oriented checking which would contribute to decisions 
aimed at preventing particularly dangerous violations, as for 
example, running stop signals. The inspectors have the 
opportunity and obligation to go through the entire chain of 
preventive work, through all its links. These, above all, are 
the organization of technical training and instruction, the 
quality of interpreting the speedometer tapes and using the 
results in working with engineers, the activity of the 
instructing engineers, systems of surprise checks, a command 
staff train escort, familiarization of the locomotive crews with 
documents on traffic safety, high-quality elaboration of the 
classified charts for driving the trains, adherence to labor 
legislation by the staff of dispatchers and duty attendants for 
the depots, etc. Behind this arsenal of measures stand people 
called upon for constant support of the vitality and efficiency 
of the system, each element of which also has its own chain of 
components. The inspector should therefore make a thorough study 
of the efficacy of this system, not only at one depot, but on 
the road as a whole, make the necessary decisions, specifying 
the responsible executors and periods, and strive for their 
fulfillment. This work must be organized so that each person 
feels his own personal responsibility for eradicating the 
existing shortcomings. 
  One of the forms of efficient influence over directors of 
all 
ranks who are involved in ensuring traffic safety is the Book of 
Inspectors' Instructions. As checks show, inspectors do not use 
this book enough. For example, the chief of the Ramenskiy track 
subdivision had a disdainful attitude toward ensuring traffic 
safety, and in the course of 1992, not a single entry was made 
in his Book of Inspectors' Instructions. On the Petrozavodsk 
Division, no entries were made in the Inspector's Instructions 
books of the locomotive depot chiefs for five to seven months. 
At the Suyevka Railcar Depot, this division's inspector for 
railcar service did not make any checks for one-and-a-half 
years. Very poor use is made of the Book of Inspectors' 
Instructions in working with the directors of the road 
administrations, services and divisions. A lack of proper 
monitoring of appropriate measures taken in accordance with the 
instructions entered in the Book and in formal inspection and 
checking documents is a general shortcoming. This attitude 
toward this document has an adverse effect on the authority of 
the inspectors themselves. 
  Planning work, making inspections and using the Book of 
Inspectors' Instructions are all different forms of influence on 
directors engaged in organizing traffic safety. After all, it is 
impossible for the inspectors to carry out the entire complex of 
anti-accident measures on their own. With his personal 
participation in carrying out preventive work, checks and 
inspections, combined with exactingness and adherence to 
principles, the inspector should arouse commanders of all ranks 
to adhere strictly to the system of accident protection, so that 
it may ultimately have a positive effect on the work of those 
directly involved in the performance of transport work. Each 
worker on the inspection staff must at the same time have a good 
knowledge of his own depot, surround himself with an active 
group of specialists of the services, and on its basis build 
interrelations with the directors, while critically assessing 
his own place in the work. 
  Increasing traffic safety, along with activating the 
organizational activity of the command and inspector-instructor 
staff in reinforcing discipline and increasing the 
responsibility of the railroad workers for the job entrusted 
them, is also achieved by developing and introducing up-to-date 
safety instruments, devices and systems, specified by the State 
Program for 1993-2000. Powerful design and productive forces, 
including the defense industry complex, are engaged in carrying 
out this program, and the necessary amount of funds has been 
allotted. The work is being given priority financing. 
  The state program outlines the development and introduction 
of devices to prevent trains running stop signals and colliding, 
based on the latest modifications of the SAUT-Ts [automatic 
brake control system], which ensures a train stopping before a 
stop signal if the engineer is distracted from driving the 
locomotive. The system continuously monitors the state of the 
main brake line, prevents the train from spontaneously rolling 
back, and also, at places requiring increased attention (speed 
restriction sections, bridges, tunnels, etc.), checks the 
alertness of the engineer by means of a voice informant. 
  To increase the reliability of the action of automatic 
locomotive signals and prevent running through stop signals at 
sections not equipped with SAUT, provision is made to introduce 
the ALSN [automatic locomotive signaling] microprocessor 
decoder, with the functions of a complete locomotive safety 
device, which is being developed, and the Dozor instrument, 
which makes it possible to remove from the engineer's cab the 
instruments (UKBM, L143, R1117) for periodic alertness checking 
and the unreliable (L168, R1103, R1104, etc.) equipment to 
prevent the train from spontaneously rolling back. A 
telemechanical system, which makes it possible to stop the train 
when the engineer falls asleep, is being introduced for 
continuous monitoring of the physiological (functional) state of 
the engineer. The program also specifies developing and 
introducing technical devices which make it possible for the 
engineer to control the tightness of the brake line and promptly 
ascertain possible cases of its closure or increased air leak. 
This device will be used on freight locomotives not equipped 
with SAUT. 
  In accordance with the State Program, the newest automation 
and communication devices are to be developed and introduced, 
including centralized traffic control, which makes it possible 
to record the train's position, the work of the STsB devices and 
the action of the station duty attendant. Automatic blocking 
with voice-frequency track circuits, possessing increased noise 
immunity, and permitting track work to be done with low ballast 
resistance and without insulating the joints, is slated to be 
put into operation. Being introduced for the first time are 
duplex train radio communications, which ensure mutual calling 
and conversations between locomotive engineers and the train 
dispatcher, using individual, group and circular calling; 
transmission of commands from the dispatcher and reports from 
the engineer, displayed on indicator boards, and in emergencies 
-- transmission of a command by the train dispatcher to stop the 
train and the engineer's calling the dispatcher; automatic 
transmission of an emergency signal warning that the train must 
make a stop on the line. 
  Devices to prevent railcars from arbitrarily leaving the 
station, particularly higher-power parking brake stops, with 
verification of the position and remote control, as well as 
blocking devices in sorting yards, which make it possible to 
hold back the consists and railcars safely on the maximum 
permissible slopes, must be developed and put into operation. It 
is planned to increase the safety of passenger car operation 
through the use of non-combustible and combustion-resistant 
lining materials, as well as fire signal systems. 
  An important direction of the State Program is working out 
and introducing devices for non-destructive checking of the 
diagnosis of the basic elements and parts of rolling stock and 
the tracks. Locomotive and railcar depots are to be equipped 
with portable supersonic defectoscopes to monitor the wheelpair 
tires and solid rolled wheel rims, as well as devices for 
technical diagnosis and measurements when railcars are repaired. 
The track service will have high-speed track-measuring cars with 
solid-state readout of information and its processing by 
computer. The existing track-measuring cars will get an 
automatic reading-interpretation system. Traffic safety will be 
achieved at railroad crossings through their further equipment 
with automatic signaling and the introduction of 
photo-monitoring devices to record violations of the travel 
rules, as well as through developing a set of technical devices 
to rule out the possibility of trains colliding with motor 
vehicles. 
  The Program outlines the development of technical devices 
for 
vocational selection, training and skill-improving of the 
workers in the basic railroad transport vocations. New machines 
and mechanisms will be developed for emergency reconstruction 
subdivisions of the railroads, including hoisting cranes and 
equipment to put derailed cars back on the track. It used to be 
necessary to procure this kind of equipment abroad. In addition, 
the State Program specifies carrying out priority scientific 
research and development for the purpose of creating a new 
generation of transport equipment and technology in the sphere 
of ensuring traffic safety, as well as working out a set of 
measures to improve the transport of hazardous freight, and 
legislative and normative acts on traffic safety. 
  Unfortunately, some of the assignments of the State Program 
are being carried out at a slow pace. For example, in 11 months 
of 1993, only 658 locomotives, out of the assigned 765, were 
equipped with SAUT devices, which are considered the basic means 
of preventing running through stop signals. The Southeastern, 
which equipped only 57 locomotives out of the assigned 100 with 
these devices, the East Siberian (29 locomotives out of 55) and 
the Far Eastern (49 out of 65) railroads lagged behind. The 
assignment to equip locomotives with electronic speedometers and 
duplex train radio communication was threatened with disruption, 
as were a number of other assignments. 
  The Main Administration is now working out measures to 
ensure 
traffic safety in railroad transport. These measures are based 
on the need for a stricter, more purposeful and constantly 
functioning system of carrying out preventive measures against 
accidents. The main thrust was made in organizing work with the 
people, increasing their knowledge and reinforcing production 
and technological discipline. Special importance is attributed 
to the use of all forms of incentive for railroad workers who 
perform their duties conscientiously, as well as to material 
responsibility for damage caused due to sub-standard work, 
accidents and wrecks. There must be a radical improvement in the 
organization of technical training of personnel and transition 
by stages to their vocational selection. 
  Top attention should be paid to ensuring traffic safety for 
passenger trains. The task of improving technical devices, and 
particularly tracks, railcars and locomotives, is to be achieved 
by the sectorial administrations and railroads. The existing 
shortcomings in repairing and maintaining the track, 
transporting hazardous freight and ensuring traffic safety at 
crossings should be eliminated. In connection with the approval 
of the new Regulations for Technical Operation of Russian 
Federation Railroads, services are to be introduced by stages, 
in accordance with these regulations. 
  Along with putting the State Program into effect, a great 
deal of work is to be done for widescale introduction of devices 
and instruments developed at the sites and showing a high degree 
of efficiency in their work. VNIIZhT [All-Union Railroad 
Transport Scientific-Research Institute] must work out the 
organizational structure and basic points of a system of 
certification for enterprises and technological processes, as 
well as the basic sectorial standards for traffic safety. 
Systems of preventive measures to prevent accidents, and basic 
norms for the personal participation of the supervising 
personnel in this work must also be put into practice everywhere. 
  The problem of high-quality evaluation of the inspectorial 
staff is no less urgent. The activity of each inspector must be 
attentively and critically examined and his potentials 
determined, and the correct decisions made on this basis. Each 
inspector, on his section, must know not only how to evaluate 
the state of the technical devices or safety as a whole, but 
also how to determine the reasons for what happens and the poor 
workmanship of the commander responsible for it, how to find 
ways to normalize the situation and achieve their realization. 
It is also important for each inspector to be able to foresee in 
time the focal points of danger and to react promptly. The work 
of the inspectors should in future be evaluated, not for the 
quantity and comparison of the number of cases of sub-standard 
work, but for accident prevention and the adherence to 
principle, exactingness and objectivity displayed. Any attempts 
to smooth over a situation, or lack of objectivity in 
classifying safety violations and recording them must be 
stopped. In difficult and multi-dimensional inspectorial work, 
he must, above all, be self-organized. He must think about 
improving the style of his work in order not to get bogged down 
in trifles, and think about keeping under control himself, his 
subordinates and those of his commanders who are inclined to 
oversimplification in problems of ensuring traffic safety. 
  The work of the public inspectors has been increasingly less 
often remembered recently -- this true form of control has died 
out. At the same time, it is hard to solve safety problems 
without drawing a broad circle of railroad workers into the 
struggle against accidents. We must seek new forms and at the 
same time make use of what we have at our disposal: increase the 
prestige of the Book of Engineers' Comments, promote to the 
utmost material incentive for the railroad workers who alertly 
support the service, and also the directors of enterprises which 
have long ensured the proper level of traffic safety 
organization, and support and guide the activity of the 
assistant chiefs of the enterprises to traffic safety. 
  "Zheleznodorozhnyy transport", 1993 

