BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 8 Apr (PL)--Osmany Cienfuegos Gorriaran, 
vice president of the Cuban Council of Ministers, announced 
today that the Cuban tourism industry this month has undertaken 
a new system for making this activity more efficient and 
profitable. 
  He said that in the near future a Ministry of Tourism will 
be 
officially created to replace the existing National Institute of 
Tourism (INTUR). The ministry will have a more compact 
organization, with 50 or 60 people, and will not be affected by 
the administration. 
  Cienfuegos stated that the ministry will draft the country's 
policies on developing tourism, control the activities of 
existing or new tourism institutions, participate in 
price-drafting policies, and be tasked with initial training. 
  He said that as a result of INTUR's shutting down, three 
hotel chains have been created, each with 6,000 or 7,000 rooms: 
Gran Caribe, Horizonte, and Islazul. The first two will be 
primarily for international tourists and the third for local 
vacationers. 
  Gran Caribe will control four- and five-star installations 
and be led by Javier Ardizones, former Cuban ambassador to 
Italy. Another former diplomat, Jose Fernandez de Cosio (until 
recently Cuba's ambassador to Mexico), will head the Horizonte 
group, and INTUR Director Rafael Sed Perez will take over as 
Islazul director. 
  Likewise, Cienfuegos added, Marinas Puerto Sol has been 
created, the Cubatur tour company, plus the territorial 
recreation and tourism enterprises, which will operate under the 
name Rumbos. 
  These last ones will be tasked with increasing, organizing, 
promoting, and selling products from the areas where they 
operate and like the hotel chains or cruise lines, will operate 
under the principle of competition and efficiency. 
  In every case, he stressed, the newly created institutions 
will enter the market to compete with the product offered by the 
Cubanacan Corporation or the Gaviota Corporation tourist group 
-- both also subject to structural improvement processes, but to 
a lesser extent. 
  Asked about future mergers with foreign firms, Cienfuegos 
said that each enterprise will determine their particular needs. 
  Due to the old structure under which the tourism industry 
operated, lately there had been sale problems, Cienfuegos said, 
which resulted in fewer holiday makers than originally estimated. 
  Some of the figures were not as good as they should have 
been, Cienfuegos said, and added that Cuba received 560,000 
tourists during 1993. 
  Gross income increased 30 percent compared to 1993 [as 
published] and increased to $700-$720 million. During the 
current year this figure should increase similarly, Cienfuegos 
estimated. 
  He added that at any rate tourism will earn for the Cuban 
economy more than $1 billion in 1995, even if the actual number 
of tourists does not reach 1 million. 

