Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 16 Mar (NA) -- President Carlos Menem 
said today that the United States "wants the patents rights bill 
to be approved but is not exerting any kind of pressure" on the 
Argentine Government. He again exhorted Congress to discuss the 
bill because "it will open the possibility for us to join NAFTA." 
  Menem recalled that Argentine officials "discussed the issue 
with the Bush administration" and that the bill has been in the 
Argentine Congress "for more than two years," so there should be 
some news about it during the current congressional period. 
  The Argentine president denied there is "concern in the 
United States" over the declaration of free zones approved last 
night by the Argentine Senate. He attributed "the pressure" on 
this subject "to the provinces, which urgently need to 
reactivate some zones within their territories." 
  Menem also mentioned the possibility of sending a new group 
of Argentine military men to the former Yugoslavia. He said: "A 
decision has yet to be made. Only conversations have been held 
for the time being." 
  Menem said: "Argentina cannot be absent, considering the 
petition by the United Nations to preserve peace in places where 
our `Blue Helmets' may be useful. We are speaking of 
professionals, officers, and non-commissioned officers, who 
voluntarily accept the call." 
  The president told a radio station that he is aware that the 
place where the confrontation between Serbs and Croats is taking 
place "is a high risk zone," but pointed out that "Argentine 
military men are prepared for a situation of this kind and do 
not go there by obligation, as it happens with other `Blue 
Helmets' from other parts of the world." 
  Regarding the Argentine proposal to create a "White Helmets" 
force to combat hunger in the world, Menem said U.N. Secretary 
General Butrus Butrus-Ghali may officially present the project 
to the U.N. General Assembly. 
  Menem added that he has "spoken to practically every" 
president on this subject, "even with the pope who expressed 
great interest." 
  Regarding his decision to shorten the sentence of former 
Deputy Norberto Imbelloni -- who is serving a sentence in the 
Villa Devoto penitentiary for simple homicide -- Menem said: 
"This is normal whenever a convict shows good conduct." 
  "It is applied at a national level, including the provinces. 
It is the reduction of a sentence, not a pardon, owed to the 
good conduct and work demonstrated by the convict so that he may 
rejoin society," Menem said. 

