Language: <F P=105> Hungarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Arpad Goencz in Szeged on the occasion </F>
of the anniversary of the 1848 war of independence -- live] 
  [Excerpts] Citizens of Szeged, my dear friends: The date 
of 15 March is the festival of spring, our country's spring. 
[passage omitted] 
  Today we are in a different situation than that of Petoefi 
[poet-hero of the 1848 revolution] and his revolutionary 
friends. Today we live in an independent country and nobody is 
forcing our homeland to struggle for survival. No threatening 
great power looms over us to trample on our freedom with their 
jackboots. We have created our system of democratic 
institutions and it is only up to us to learn the unwritten 
rules of democracy. Today we are obligated not by force but by 
the Constitution of our country to realize what the number one 
point of the March youth [reference to the March Declaration of 
the revolutionaries in 1848] was demanding: freedom of the 
press, and its freedom from the shackles of either economic or 
political group interests. 
  Our Constitution states clearly that in Hungary everyone has 
the right to express his opinion freely and to obtain 
information and disseminate facts and figures of public 
interest. The Hungarian Republic recognizes and protects the 
freedom of the press; this is what the quotation from the 
Constitution says. 
  I am obliged by the Constitution to voice the unity of the 
nation and to guard the democratic operation of the state 
organization. [passage omitted] 
  We know that radio and television today are forced to 
operate 
under the supervision of the government until the laws 
considered by the Constitutional Court as necessary for their 
operation are adopted, thereby bringing about the supervision of 
these two institutions by society. Thus, today it is the 
government's duty to enforce the Constitutional Court's 
stipulations regarding radio and television. This is how it can 
provide real evidence that it respects the statutes of the 
Constitution. [applause] 
  To close this subject let me add that no matter how 
important 
-- right now in the middle of the election struggle -- the state 
of radio and television and the proper enforcement of the 
Constitution's stipulations, this is only a symptom. What 
really is important today, the real subject and stake of the 
election struggle, is the democratic operation of the whole 
country. This has to be evaluated freely by every citizen of 
this country, without any biased influence. This is their moral 
right and duty, and last but not least, their important 
self-interest. [passage omitted] 
  I know that you here in Szeged, and others elsewhere in the 
country, look about yourselves hesitantly. You read in the 
papers daily that billions disappear gradually as they are 
passed from hand to hand, that your children are approached by 
drug dealers, and that guns are sold alongside cheap T-shirts at 
the flea markets. 
  During this sunny spring people are groping in the slimy fog 
of suspicion and feel the tip of some sort of iceberg, but they 
do not know what kind of iceberg it is. They do not know what 
is under the surface, and they feel that our society is 
intertwined by alliances of criminal interest. The country is 
buzzing with hearsay and demands names -- and rightly so. Let 
us hope that our police will overcome this horrible situation. 
[passage omitted] 
  All this, of course, is also up to us. First, we have to 
find peace in ourselves. To do this, we must not believe the 
constant shower of slander that splatters mud on everything and 
everybody. We must not join the ranks of those following 
murderous ideas beckoning from the past, and we must guard our 
sanity with great care. We must not believe that the world is 
resolutely out to get us, and only us. 
  Let us accept that we Hungarians are all Hungarians, and 
that 
the Hungarian flag is beautiful as it is: red, white, and 
green. It is not worthwhile exchanging it with either the red 
flag of Stalin, the white flag of the aristocracy, or the green 
flag of the Arrow Cross party. [applause] 
  These colors are rather faded by now, and it is difficult to 
distinguish between them. Let us proclaim that to be Hungarian 
is no virtue, no prerogative, but not condemnation to exile 
either. It is a state originating from our language and our 
traditions. It is such a natural and everyday state that one 
does not even have to think about it. However, most of us could 
not even imagine living somewhere else and some other way. 
[passage omitted] 
  I wanted to say to you today, on the ides of March 1994, 146 
years after Petoefi and his young friends proclaimed freedom, 
equality, and fraternity in our country. Let us be honest: In 
this part of the world all three leave something to be desired 
even today. It is up to us to remedy this. Thank you for your 
attention. 

