BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel Dzhemal Dzhanashiya, head of the </F>
National Bureau for Combating Drug Addiction and the Drugs 
Business, by Nina Abgarova; place and date not given: "Dzhemal 
Dzhanashiya: `The Main Thing Is That We've Got 
Started....'"--introduction and all questions published in 
boldface] 
  [Text] The wave of drug addiction that has hit the whole 
world has not spared Georgia, either. According to the most 
modest calculations, the number of drug addicts in the republic 
has exceeded 200,000. Approximately 10 percent of these are 
women and teenagers. In addition to the fact that Georgia is of 
interest to the drugs mafia as a country that is advantageously 
located for the transit of drugs, there is one more alarming 
fact: An internal market is springing up in the republic for 
the manufacture and sale of plant-based drugs. 
  In order to implement comprehensive measures aimed at 
preventing drug addiction and also further strengthen the fight 
against drug addiction and the drugs business, by a decree of 
the head of state, the National Bureau for Combating Drug 
Addiction and the Drugs Business has been created on the basis 
of a similar department in the republic's Ministry of Internal 
Affairs. By order of the minister of internal affairs, Colonel 
Dzhemal Dzhanashiya has been appointed head of the bureau. We 
direct the reader's attention to a conversation that we had with 
him. 
  Abgarova: Batono [Georgian polite form of 
address] Dzhemal, how do you explain the unprecedented increase 
in drug addiction in Georgia? 
  Dzhanashiya: The surge in drug addiction can be 
observed not only in Georgia. The whole world has been infected 
with this illness. This is a matter of constant concern for all 
the CIS countries. The representatives of the law enforcement 
agencies of the former Soviet republics have become convinced 
that illegal drug dealing has reached a menacing scale. In 
Russia alone, 15 tonnes of various drugs were confiscated during 
the last year. Unfortunately, we are also confronted with some 
sad statistics: The number of drug addicts that have been 
officially registered is 4,000, but in reality there are far 
more. At the last conference of representatives from the CIS 
countries, which was held in Moscow, it was decided to combine 
efforts in the fight against drug addiction, establish ties with 
one another, and, what is most important, combat this evil 
professionally. However, here in Georgia, virtually nothing has 
been done in this direction of late. Furthermore, we have even 
lost those positive things that we had. People used to come to 
Georgia to hold consultations and exchange experience: Our 
system of controlling drug addiction and the interaction between 
our health protection and law enforcement bodies served as an 
example to many. However, the main thing now is to get started. 
The National Bureau will also serve these aims. 
  Abgarova: What are the immediate tasks that you 
are setting your bureau? 
  Dzhanashiya: The creation of special subunits 
that will combat illegal drug dealing. In principle, the tasks 
of these subunits have already been determined as groups engaged 
in the drugs business have already been formed and are 
functioning here in Georgia. These are, first and foremost, 
those that are dealing in plant-based drugs such as poppy stems 
(crack) [koknar] and marijuana that arrive here from Azerbaijan, 
Central Asia, the North Caucasus, and Krasnodarskiy Kray and 
also from the countries forming the "golden 
crescent"--Afghanistan, India, and Pakistan. These types of 
drugs present a big problem for Georgia and the CIS countries, 
even though the cost of these drugs is 250 times higher in 
Georgia than abroad. In view of the fact that these drugs need 
to be processed, underground laboratories have appeared in 
Georgia and also in Central Asia. The second group, which is 
composed in the main of tourists, is engaged in bringing into 
Georgia medical preparations and powerful drugs from India, 
Pakistan, and Singapore. 
  Those people who are occupied in producing plant-based drugs 
on the territory of Georgia present no less of a threat. Such 
people "work" in Svanetiya, Lagodekhi, the mountainous part of 
Samegrelo, Dusheti, Marneuli, Dmanisi, Bolnisi, and so forth. 
It is possible, for example, to buy without any problem hashish 
that comes from Mestiya or Khashy [khashiyskiy] in the market in 
Zugdidi. 
  Naturally, it is necessary to combat drug addiction at a 
high 
professional level. Unfortunately, a primitive approach is 
often adopted to this problem here: Capture the dealers and 
that's the end of it. However, the dealers are by no means the 
only ones responsible for bringing misfortune. While there is a 
demand, there will also be a market. This is common knowledge. 
In order to deal with the, let us say, "kings" of the drugs 
mafia, it is necessary to have the corresponding knowledge and 
be prepared. Therefore, one of the most important tasks for us 
now is to train our employees. The UN is allocating specific 
sums of money to all the CIS states in order to combat the drugs 
mafia and is also financing international seminars at which 
experts in this field can exchange experience and establish 
ties. For example, the department responsible for combating 
drug addiction in the United States has held such seminars, 
which I have attended. Our employees will shortly be going to 
Egypt, where a seminar is to be held, but this time it will 
involve practical work. Those attending will receive 
international certificates. It is essential for us to have at 
our disposal specialists who have been trained at the 
international level; in other words, we have to have the 
potential regarding personnel and then those organizations 
engaged in combating drug addiction throughout the world and, in 
particular, the UN program in this sphere will actively render 
us practical assistance. 
  Abgarova: What is the most important thing 
regarding cooperation between specialists and their mutual 
assistance in the struggle against the drugs business? 
  Dzhanashiya: Of course, the exchange of 
information on people involved in the drugs mafia. We in the 
CIS countries are planning to create a single bank of 
information on those involved in smuggling drugs. The exchange 
of such information will make everyone's work easier. Ties are 
being established with Interpol. In the future, we will be 
establishing ties with the employees of special services 
involved in combating drug addiction in other countries. I 
repeat that the supply and exchange of the latest information is 
very important for all countries in the world. An international 
center for training employees in the struggle against the drugs 
business will soon begin to function in Moscow. The center will 
operate under the aegis of the UN. Between 10 and 15 of our 
employees will be trained in this center every year. 
  Abgarova: Could you tell us in which Georgian 
towns drug addiction is most widespread? 
  Dzhanashiya: Tbilisi and then Gori, which was 
previously virtually unaffected by such a phenomenon. Drugs 
arrive here from Tskhinvali, where the situation is basically 
out of control. We are receiving the same information from 
Sukhumi. In general, however sad it may be, it is often being 
observed that Georgians are supplying Russia with drugs. In 
1993, in the Russian Federation alone, some 300 kg of drugs were 
confiscated from 250 residents of Georgia. One can imagine how 
large this figure will be on the scale of the CIS. Morphine is 
being brought into Moscow principally by our compatriots. Our 
bureau recently conducted an operation in which we unmasked a 
criminal group that also included women and was smuggling 
morphine from Tbilisi to Moscow. In the Mtatsminda rayon of 
Tbilisi, we also seized 60 so-called hashish pencils from a 
criminal group. 
  Abgarova: Can one say that state structures are 
involved in the drugs business here in Georgia? 
  Dzhanashiya: I do not possess such information. 
However, officials are fairly often involved with criminal 
groups and, what is most unpleasant, these include employees of 
the law enforcement agencies. 
  Abgarova: Nevertheless, one quite often hears the 
view that the drugs business cannot be defeated.... 
  Dzhanashiya: I do not agree with this view. One 
can and should fight against the drugs business. Drug addicts 
need to be treated--this is also a part of the struggle against 
the drugs business. The efficiency factor regarding the 
treatment of drug addicts here in Georgia is, as yet, equivalent 
to zero. This is all the more significant given that one cannot 
observe a trend toward a decline in the demand for drugs. 
Rather the reverse is true. Therefore, one has to combat demand 
as well. In the United States, for example, it is being brought 
home to children still in kindergarten that drugs mean death. 
Here, a new stage in the struggle against drug addiction is 
only just beginning. Therefore, we must all unite to achieve 
the common aim. Let me give you an example: This year, the 
U.S. Senate has allocated $18 billion for the needs of the 
special services engaged in combating drug addiction. I 
understand full well that our state is not in a position to 
allocate such sums. However, we do deserve basic assistance. 
Up to now, there has not even been any coordination with the 
customs service. There is no need to mention how important this 
service is for controlling the smuggling of drugs at customs 
points. Of no less significance is the problem of legally 
importing drugs into Georgia. I have in mind medical 
preparations that are being sent as humanitarian aid from 
different countries in the world. An inspectorate created 
within the Georgian Ministry of Health is working in this 
direction. Nevertheless, the support of leaders at the local 
level is needed; everyone has to work equally hard in this 
direction and then the drugs business in Georgia will not 
flourish. We are today working for the future. The main thing 
is that we've made a start and this is, as they say, the hardest 
part. 

