Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jia Chunfeng (6328 2504 1496): "Market Economy and </F>
Cultural Development"] 
  [Text] With the approach of the 21st century, culture has 
become an increasing concern and a hot topic in domestic and 
international academic circles, indicating a strong interest in 
the trend of development in contemporary culture. This 
situation did not arise without cause. 
  Internationally speaking, as people are crossing into the 
next century, they cannot help looking back at the roads they 
have traversed in this century and ahead at the next one. This 
prompts them to reflect on the problem of culture, particularly 
when the extension and deepening of the market economy has given 
rise to many new trends of development. Comparative studies of 
several market economic models invariably point to the 
increasing importance of cultural backgrounds and value 
concepts. Some people have gone even further by claiming that 
the economic race on the international market and the tug of war 
between the several market economic models in the next century 
will very much be a contest of "cultural strength." 
  Domestically speaking, reform and opening up and the 
development of the socialist market economic system have 
provided an opportunity for cultural undertakings to achieve a 
new level of prosperity and has injected enormous vitality into 
them. On the other hand, achieving a new level of prosperity 
for Chinese socialist culture under a market economy calls for 
enormous effort, sophisticated planning, and a range of 
practical and creative work. Even judging from what has 
happened so far, the impact on the existing cultural pattern, 
cultural management system, and traditional cultural concepts 
has been nothing short of unprecedented. In the realm of social 
culture, whole spectrums of thought and great varieties of 
schools are competing for attention, forever and constantly 
confronting people with new situations, problems, and 
contradictions and demanding that we approach and reflect on the 
great subject of cultural development from a new angle, in the 
context of the changing objective reality, and under the 
guidance of the theory of socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
<H3>  Beginning with International Market Competition and Combined 
National Strength </H3>
  Studies and works on the relationship between the economy 
and 
culture around the world have put forward a valuable concept, 
"cultural power," in analyzing "cultural market mechanisms" and 
"economic and cultural values." As the intelligence 
factor in economic and social development, "cultural power," 
which embraces science and education, is becoming increasingly 
important both in status and its role in economic development 
and modernization and has attracted serious attention. 
  Comrade Deng Xiaoping pointed out: Take China for instance. 
In the 1950's its technological gap with Japan was not that 
wide. But in the following 20 years we closed ourselves to the 
outside world, competition on the international markets being 
the least on our agenda, while in the same period Japan became 
an economic power. In the long term, the focus is on education, 
science, and technology. We have wasted 20 years and our 
development is 20 years behind. I could not imagine what the 
consequences would be if we wasted another 20 years. 
  The concept of "cultural power" was raised during the 20 
years when Japan became an economic power. Since, with great 
foresight, Comrade Deng Xiaoping approached the problems of 
developing education, science, and technology against the 
background of international market competition, his exposition 
carries profound strategic significance. Current international 
competition is ultimately a contest of combined national 
strength, which is founded on economic and technological power 
as well as on spiritual civilization, including "cultural 
power." Spiritual civilization and "cultural power," as two of 
the elements making up combined national strength, have 
enormously cohesive, mobilizing, encouraging, and promotive 
power. Therefore, to heighten combined national strength, it is 
necessary not only to develop economic and scientific and 
technological power, but also to tap into our spiritual 
civilization and develop "cultural power." Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping has made profound an exposition on this: "The 
strength of our nation and the reserve strength for economic 
development depend increasingly on the quality of our labor 
force and the quantity and quality of our intellectuals. The 
human resources of a country of 1 billion population will be so 
enormous that no country can be a match if it can get its 
education on track. With the advantage of human resources and 
an advanced socialist system, we can be confident of attaining 
our goals." Comrade Deng Xiaoping also said: "The children in 
primary one classes today will become members of the main 
pioneering force in the 21st century after undergoing decades of 
education. The central authorities must make tremendous efforts 
to grasp education, beginning such efforts with the primary and 
secondary school levels. This is a move of great strategic 
insight. We will ruin the whole enterprise and stand guilty in 
front of history if we do not propose such a mission to the 
whole party." (Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng 
Xiaoping, pp 120-121) These sayings show a deep historical 
insight into contemporary international economic competition and 
China's way toward development. Only when we approach "cultural 
power" from the perspective of increasing combined national 
strength, attaining the goal of development, and launching 21st 
century enterprises can we appreciate the extreme importance of 
developing "cultural power." 
<H3>  The Inner Requirements of the Development of a Modern Market 
Economy </H3>
  Developing "cultural power," with emphasis on the important 
status and role of education, science, and technology is the 
fundamental trend and requirement of a modern market economy. 
  One of the fundamental trends in the development of a 
modern market economy is the growing "integration" of the 
economy and culture. From the 1970's onward, modern 
commodities have carried an increasingly higher proportion of 
cultural input and value, and science and technology and culture 
have figured ever more prominently in economic development. For 
modern enterprises to keep developing and stay competitive, and 
also for the whole society to sustain economic growth, the goals 
to achieve in modern commodity production are to reduce visible 
resource, energy, and financial input, that is "tangible 
inputs," and raise invisible -- that is "intangible" -- inputs 
such as science and technology and culture. The conclusion to be 
drawn from this trend of development is that we must pay great 
attention to the development of the intelligence factor, talent 
training, and education, and to growth of science and technology 
and "cultural power." The second fundamental trend in 
the development of the modern market economy is the replacement 
of traditional elements by intelligence in economic 
development. Rolls Theroux, a contemporary American 
economist, says: The green revolution and revolutions in 
material science have lowered the importance of natural 
resources in economic development. Possessing natural resources 
is no more a guarantee for wealth than the lack of them is an 
obstacle to getting rich. Revolutions in telecommunications, 
computers, transportation, and logistics and backup system have 
formed for us a global resource network, from which may evolve a 
global capital market. In other words, computers and 
telecommunications have ended the domination obtained through 
capital accumulation. Genuine advantage in the future lies in 
talent and acquisition of technology. Microelectronics, 
biotechnology, new material industries, civil aviation, 
telecommunications, robotic machine tools, and computers and 
computer software are the seven key industries for coming 
decades. All of them can be described as brain industries which 
can be located anywhere on the globe. One can pick anywhere to 
develop these industries as long as enough intelligence 
resources can be marshalled there. Since science and technology 
now lend a relative advantage to human resources, the race to 
benefit from this development demands that enterprises equip 
their management staff and workers with skills. The key weapon 
with which to compete in the 21st century will be workers' 
skill. The analysis of the trend of development in the market 
economy leads to the same conclusion: We must set great store by 
the development of the intelligence factor, talent training, and 
education, and by the growth of science and technology and 
"cultural power." 
  The third fundamental trend of development in the 
modern market economy is that modern production flows demand 
workers of an increasingly higher quality. International 
market economic studies and economists are paying great 
attention to this fact: All three major new products on mass 
consumer markets -- videocameras and recorders, facsimiles, and 
laser-disc players -- were invented by Americans and Europeans 
(the Dutch). In terms of sales volumes, employments, and 
profits, however, all three have become Japanese products. This 
prominent fact shows that whoever can reduce product costs takes 
the prize away from the hands of the inventor and dominates the 
market. In today's market competition, if the inventor of a new 
product is not at the same time its manufacturer at the lowest 
cost, he can hardly expect to benefit from his own invention. 
And to become a lowest cost-manufacturer, the average quality 
of workers is of great importance, and to raise their quality, 
requires education and on-the-job training. The conclusion 
drawn from this trend of development again is: We must set 
great store by educational development and the growth of science 
and technology and "cultural power." 
<H3>  The General Cultural Development Strategy Must Match the 
Specific Modes in Which Various Cultural Undertakings Proceed </H3>
  The problem of cultural development strategy was postulated 
in answer to the call for development of the socialist market 
economic system. Cultural development is a key integral 
part of the entire socialist spiritual civilization. In the 
pursuit of spiritual civilization, cultural and ideological 
undertakings and wisdom and morality permeate each other. Under 
development of a market economy, ideological undertakings 
include moral education and an education in discipline and 
ideals. Instead of allowing them to be weakened, these have to 
be strengthened and expanded into new dimensions in order to 
ensure that the spiritual and moral state of the Chinese race 
improves along with extension of the market economy. 
Similarly, cultural undertakings must also lend an ear to the 
call of practice, base themselves on the basic requirement of 
developing a socialist market economic system, open up new 
paths, and achieve new levels of prosperity. All these require 
us to study cultural development strategies seriously. A few 
years ago, some localities held seminars on cultural development 
strategy. We may get some useful hints from them. The study of 
cultural development strategies today is based on this reality: 
One, the development of a market economy; two, fierce 
international competition, in both concrete competition for 
market shares and the contest of "cultural power" around the end 
of this century and in the 21st century. A book on the history 
of world civilizations overseas names four factors in explaining 
why the Renaissance happened in Italy: "Italian cities were the 
chief beneficiaries of the resurgence of trade with the Orient. 
For many years, Venice, Naples, Genoa, and Pisa actually 
controlled the Mediterranean trade. Merchants in Florence, 
Palermo, Piacenza, and cities in the Lombardy Plain were the 
main intermediaries of trade between southern and northern 
Europe. Economic prosperity resulting from commerce was the 
main foundation for intellectual and artistic progress." This 
argument is well-founded. The book also says: "The Renaissance 
and Reformation inevitably occurred simultaneously with 
fundamental economic changes. Without radical changes in the 
medieval economy, there would not have been such enormous 
changes in thought and religion." The mercantile revolution 
marked the transition from the "semi-stagnant, localized, 
non-profitmaking Middle Ages" to the capitalist economy. What 
we are pursuing today -- the development of a market economy -- 
is an extensive, dynamic, and creative practice in our country's 
vast area. Our cultural study must be founded on this practice, 
guided by Marxist historical materialism, and directed toward 
fashioning a strategy for cultural development. The general 
cultural development strategy must match and be united with the 
specific modes and practices of various cultural undertakings. 
Here the specific mode and practices of cultural undertakings 
in various sectors refer to corporate, community, township and 
town, and campus cultures. Cultural undertakings in a certain 
sector appeal more strongly to the hearts and minds of people 
holding positions and working in that sector. Only individual 
and separate studies of these cultures in these different 
sectors and energetically putting them into practice can give a 
general cultural development strategy realistic expression and 
render the entire cultural enterprise solid and rigorous. We 
should see that as the market economy develops, cultural 
undertakings in these different sectors are becoming 
increasingly important and new trends of development are 
emerging. Take corporate culture as an instance. More and more 
entrepreneurs are coming to be aware of the increasingly bigger 
role of cultural factors in company and market expansion, and 
are beginning to approach corporate culture with a new 
perspective. In our country, a few books on corporate culture 
were published a few years ago. But on the whole, they were 
written under the planned economic system and have their limits. 
Corporate culture is appearing in some enterprises, though with 
emphasis more on sports and entertainment, and obviously not 
effective enough to tap whatever inner factors there are to 
generate a drive toward the market within the enterprises. 
Areas calling for improvement in the pursuit of corporate 
culture are being taken seriously by entrepreneurs. We can say 
that as the objective of developing a socialist market economic 
system gets defined, the corporate culture and its studies are 
also coming to a new starting point. 
<H5>  An Important Trend in Current Cultural Development </H5>
  There is a trend for modern market economic culture to graft 
onto and unify with the traditional culture in current cultural 
development in China. This is a new topic worth studying. The 
study of Qi culture by Zibo City, Shandong, in the context of 
its push for a market economy, illustrates it well. The city 
experienced rapid economic growth recently. And it was the 
rapid development of the township and town market economy that 
prompted Zibo people to appreciate anew and study again the 
value of Qi culture. They have just shot a five-episode 
television documentary series, "Today as Embraced by History," 
probing the relationship between Qi and today's culture. The 
fifth episode, entitled "Simple Truth," quotes from Guan Zi: 
"Enrich the people first -- therein lies the way of ruling a 
nation; for government becomes as easy when the people are rich 
as it is hard when they are poor." "Rites will be observed when 
people's granaries are full and dignity comes with adequate food 
and clothes." The special stresses the mercantile tradition of 
Qi culture, showing that Qi people wanted nothing more than 
"trading and the accumulation of wealth" and all agreed that the 
"absence of trade will impoverish the people." Most 
interestingly, Qi people valued production as well as 
management. Once the king of Qi asked his councillor: "Why are 
the bows made in government workshops so poor in quality, their 
arrows never travel far?" The councillor answered: "Because, 
your majesty, the pay and condition for government craft masters 
stays the same whether or not he is doing a good job. They do 
not think of improving their work. The quality naturally never 
improves. On the other hand, most of the nongovernment craft 
masters are hunters, their livelihood depends on solid bows and 
sharp arrows. They are the ones who hunt animals with their 
tools and of course they will not fool themselves -- hence the 
good quality." The television series narrative chimed in: A 
joke here: Does this not sound like a criticism of the 
government-run enterprises with their "eating from the same pot" 
system? People converged on the Qi to do business "like water 
running its natural course." What was attracting these 
businessmen? "Bold reforms, good service, and profitability," 
says the special, "Come and take a look at the Qi's preferential 
policies and better commercial services. Put down tariff 
barriers, refrain from setting up regional barriers, lower duty 
rates; `charging one percent for every 50 units,' which comes to 
a two percent tax rate today; moreover there were no other taxes 
once the tariff was paid. The Qi provided free meals for 
businessmen arriving in a four horse-drawn carriage; free meals 
and fodder for those arriving with four; and five waiters, apart 
from all the rest, to those with five. To develop commerce, the 
Qi set up a depot every 30 li as rest points for foreign 
merchants. The Qi saw perfecting the market and market 
management as important means for developing commerce, and 
honesty and fair trade as the fundamental way to develop 
markets. Anyone who tries deception here will be liable to be 
fined up to 100 times of the amount in question." The narrative 
then made this comment: "Such a valuable mecantile tradition -- 
and how wise is Qi culture -- buried for a thousand years 
without ever being discovered by anybody. Why are there people 
viewing the mercantile spirit of our ancestors as something 
foreign and imported? Tradition is not antiques, much less 
luxury decoration, but wisdom waiting to be exhumed." The 
special was serious about exhuming the wisdom of Qi culture. It 
quotes Guan Zi saying: "If planting crops is the move for the 
year ahead and trees for the coming decade, then educating 
people is the move for a lifetime" This shows talent is the 
most valuable thing and the linchpin for success. 
  Why did the Zibo people shoot such a special at this time? 
Why were they so serious about tapping the mercantile spirit 
and talent concepts of Qi culture? Obviously this was driven by 
the need of developing the market economy. They approached and 
studied Qi culture from a new angle. What they tried was to 
graft an excellent traditional culture onto the modern market 
economy. This enterprise shows that the exploration for a 
modern market economy requires the assistance of "cultural 
power"; on other hand, culture also needs to locate a tremendous 
force within the market economy for development. In 
modernization, culture and the economy can never develop in 
parallel, never touching each other. The two interpenetrate and 
interact, "benefit from coordination and are impaired if split 
from each other." In studying the cultural trends of 
contemporary China, it pays to monitor closely the actual joints 
where the traditional culture is grafted onto and combined with 
the market economy, to care about, support, and study this 
process. 
  Such a "joining" can be seen in Singapore. Lu Shaochang, 
professor at Singapore National University, said: "In 
Singapore, apart from Chinese, there are Malays, Indians, and 
other ethnic people. Chinese account for three-fourths of the 
population, with Chinese culture as the dominant culture. But 
this Chinese culture is far away from the Chinese mainland. 
Perhaps because we are a migrant society and live in a 
community of different cultures, we are made to detect more 
easily the differences between ours and other cultures and we 
learn to treasure, value, and preserve this traditional culture, 
which in my mind means, of course, politeness, goodness, 
helpfulness, self-cultivation, patriotism, familial love, and 
other beauties of the Chinese race. This is what the world 
calls the soul of the Singaporean spiritual civilization." 
  Such a combination between traditional culture and market 
economy can also be seen in the development of modern Japanese 
capitalism. Tsuzumita Yoichi, dubbed "king of entrepreneurs," 
"financial lord" and founder of the Japanese-style organization 
of firms, has a pet formula, "Dialects plus abacus," which is 
also called the theory of "the unity of economics and ethics." 
  I am in great favor of such a view in traditional Chinese 
philosophy: Everything is born from genuine needs, so is 
development thereafter. These are the widest and most 
representative of human needs. The grafting and 
combination of traditional culture with the market economy 
taking place in the real life of contemporary China represents a 
genuine two-way need: The market economy needs the traditional 
culture, which needs to locate a new source of development in 
the market economy. Today, entrepreneurs and men of letters are 
becoming aware of, realizing, and going after this need, which 
of necessity will take culture to a new dimension and stage. 

