Cultivation,   Drug Trafficking 

<F P=102> 94WD0402A Paris LE MONDE in French 25 May 94 p 11 </F>
<F P=103> 94WD0402A </F>
<F P=104>  Paris LE MONDE </F>
<F P=105>  French </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Cannabis Cultivation Grows Despite Efforts of </F>
Moroccan Government"] 
  [Text] In October 1992, Morocco--France's largest supplier 
of hashish and the world's largest exporter of the 
drug--launched a campaign to suppress trafficking in this 
traditional local cash crop. In its soon-to-be-published annual 
report ("Etat des drogues, drogues des Etats", Collection 
Pluriel, Hachette, 120 French francs, 1994), the Geopolitical 
Drugs Observatory (OGD) concludes the monarchy's drug policy has 
shown little in the way of results. 
  It came as quite a surprise in October 1992 when King Hassan 
II announced, in a meeting with his principal ministers, the 
launching of a "relentless" war against drugs. Since then, the 
"surprise" has taken a long time to materialize, according to 
the OGD: "More surface area is devoted to cannabis cultivation 
than ever before, and the trafficking rings, which continue to 
enjoy protection from high-level officials, seem little affected 
by enforcement efforts that have focused mainly on low-level 
traffickers," notes the OGD, which works for various 
international institutions, in its annual report. 
  As successor to the Kif and Tobacco Authority established by 
the French colonial regime in 1926, Morocco's Agriculture 
Ministry each year reports the acreage devoted to each crop. 
Including "kif," as cannabis is called locally. Based on the 
ministry's official statistics, the regime disclosed in autumn 
1992 that the illicit crops were grown on some 50,000 hectares 
[ha]. 
  Despite Rabat's pronouncements, those crops are still there. 
In 1993, "cannabis covers at least 65,000 ha in northern 
Morocco," says the OGD, which was given access to data acquired 
by the ministry's Economic Statistics Service. Moreover, the 
total does not even take into account the increase in greenhouse 
cultivation of the illicit crops in the Agadir region which the 
U.S. State Department claims to have detected. The growth in kif 
cultivation far exceeds any increase that could be attributed to 
traditional usage, since in 1980 illicit plots covered only 
5-10,000 ha. 
<H5>  Short-Lived Zeal </H5>
  In their "relentless war" on drugs, Moroccan authorities 
have shown little staying power. Admittedly, some 5,000 soldiers 
were deployed between the Algerian border and Tangier, and 
corrupt high-level officials were dismissed or transferred. The 
first half of 1993 also saw a significant increase in highway 
checkpoints in the northern part of the country. And there were 
a handful of spectacular enforcement operations, mostly against 
Europeans found in possession of small quantities of the drug. 
  "But zeal for enforcement disappeared with the onset of 
summer and harvest time," notes the OGD, which also points out 
that "enforcement efforts mostly targeted small-time trafficking 
rings... At the same time, a number of notorious traffickers 
were haled into court only to be acquitted, a development that 
surprised almost everyone." The conclusion: Not only do 
"increasing well-organized Moroccan rings engage in 
international marketing of derivatives of cannabis produced in 
Morocco," but "this increase in trafficking would not have been 
possible without pervasive corruption at all levels of the 
bureaucracy." 
  Breaking with the habitual passivity of Moroccan authorities 
in this domain, the royal promises of autumn 1992 were meant to 
impress the international community, especially the European 
Union. Rabat expected its commitment would lead to large 
assistance inflows both to fight the drug rings and to stimulate 
development in the northern provinces, where kif as a 
monoculture had undeniably improved the peasants' standard of 
living. But it seems that Morocco, reverting to its traditional 
position in the matter, has decided for now to remain the 
world's largest cannabis exporter. The interior minister has 
told his European interlocutors that if present trends 
persist--with Italy and Germany apparently inclined to follow 
Netherlands' lead and decriminalize hashish--it would be a 
mistake for Morocco to eradicate crops that may sometime be 
legal in Europe. 

