Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [ITAR-TASS correspondent Mikhail Shevtsov report: "Combat </F>
Readiness of Volga Military District Troops Is High"] 
  [Text] Moscow, 10 Feb -- According to Russian Defense 
Minister Pavel Grachev, satisfaction with the troops' high state 
of combat readiness was what emerged from his three-day tour of 
five Volga Military District troop units. 
  Before flying back to Moscow Wednesday evening Pavel Grachev 
spoke positively during a conversation with your ITAR-TASS 
correspondent of the progress made in looking after subunits 
withdrawn from abroad in the region. According to the minister, 
housing is being built for servicemen at a tremendous pace. 
Pavel Grachev visited three oblasts and one republic in the 
course of the trip and expressed his satisfaction with the local 
leadership's attitude to servicemen's problems. 
  During the trip the minister was acquainted with the troops 
stationed in Ulyanovsk Oblast, visited defense enterprises, and 
met the oblast and city leadership. During a visit to 
Ulyanovsk's "Aviastar" Joint-Stock Company, the largest aviation 
enterprise in Europe, Pavel Grachev said that in the near future 
priority in defense aviation will be given to military 
transporters, whose task is to redeploy forces and weapons to 
any region. This task stems from Russia's military doctrine, 
which places emphasis on mobile rapid response forces. 
  The An-124 "Ruslan" transporter produced by the aviation 
industry with a load capacity of 100 tonnes can replace three or 
four Il-76's in military transport movements. 
  Viktor Mikhaylov, general director of "Aviastar," pointed 
out 
that two new-generation Tu-204's were acquired for the Russian 
president recently. The enterprise also received a government 
order to build three aircraft for the command post of the 
supreme commander in chief of the Russian Armed Forces -- the 
president. In the opinion of military experts, around 100 An-124 
and Il-86 military transporters are needed for the Russian Army 
since the bulk of these types of aircraft remained in the former 
Union republics following the breakup of the USSR. However, it 
will be no easy matter to carry out these projects. Problems 
have arisen with receipt of spare parts owing to the severing of 
economic ties. In particular, the "Aviastar" Joint-Stock 
Company depends on Ukraine, Latvia, and Uzbekistan for supplies 
of engines and electronics. At present the Ulyanovsk aviation 
enterprise is manufacturing four or five An-124's a year and it 
will be extremely difficult to rapidly attain full capacity, 
even with good funding. 
  Pavel Grachev also inspected the Ulyanovsk Electromechanical 
Plant, which manufactures antiaircraft artillery systems and 
antiaircraft missile systems, and met with the command and 
personnel of the 104th Airborne Division, which was withdrawn 
from Azerbaijan to Ulyanovsk last year. 

