Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Madrid, 14 Jan (EFE) -- Cuban Vice Foreign Minister 
Isabel Allende admitted in Madrid today that her country needs 
to make changes to resolve its economic crisis, as long as there 
is a consensus by the people. Allende emphasized the need to 
safeguard Cuba's independence. She pointed out "We need to make 
those changes but the first thing that has to be taken into 
account is the people's opinions." 
  The Cuban vice minister for European affairs arrived in 
Spain 
on Tuesday and will visit until 21 January. Among other 
matters, Allende will make preparations for Cuban Foreign 
Minister Roberto Robaina's visit to Spain scheduled for the end 
of March. 
  In Madrid, Isabel Allende met with Yago Pico de Coana, 
general director for Ibero-America, and with Jose Luis Dicenta, 
state secretary for International Cooperation, with whom she 
discussed the follow-up work of the joint scientific-technical, 
cultural, and educational commission. 
  Allende, who said that Cuba has heard opinions on how to 
deal 
with the economic crisis, described the document published 
yesterday in Madrid's EL MUNDO newspaper as "fictitious" 
[apocrifo]. It stated that Cuban President Fidel Castro 
rejected the application of reforms proposed by former Spanish 
Economy Minister Carlos Solchaga. According to the newspaper, 
described by Allende as "a series of ridiculous things," 
Solchaga, in a secret report drafted after a trip to Havana, 
proposed a rapid transition to capitalism, which Castro rejected. 
  Allende also denied that Yago Pico de Coana handed her, as 
EL 
PAIS published yesterday, a list of prisoners of conscience that 
the Spanish Government would like freed before Robaina's visit. 
"We discussed Robaina's visit; there is no new list," Allende 
stated. He stressed that this question (the alleged list of 
prisoners) did not occupy even one moment of our conversation." 
[no opening quotation marks as received] 
  "The Cuban foreign minister was invited by his Spanish 
colleague Javier Solana. The government has not set any 
conditions for Robaina's visit," she said. "I believe the visit 
is important, but it is not something extraordinary; it will be 
a working visit and bilateral relations, among other things, 
will be discussed," Allende said. 
  Regarding the departure from Cuba of Alina Fernandez, Fidel 
Castro's illegitimate daughter, the Cuban diplomat said that "it 
has not had any special repercussions; we do not normally 
prevent people from leaving. Many people depart Cuba and Cuban 
migration is a topic that is manipulated extraordinarily," 
Allende added and admitted that "there are many people who 
migrate from Cuba in search of better living and working 
conditions." 
  The vice minister announced that Cuba is preparing for a 
meeting with the Cuban community abroad that wants to cooperate 
with the government's current project. 
  On the topic of the U.S. blockade, Allende pointed out that 
the Cuban Government has never offered anything in exchange for 
an end to the blockade, "because it is illegal." Nevertheless, 
she added, right now there is a "less aggressive language" 
between the two countries. 
  Regarding the peasant and Indian uprising in the Mexican 
State of Chiapas, the diplomat stated that "we are interested in 
a strong Mexico, without social conflicts, and we want 
everything to work the best possible way." 

