BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ferdos Forudastan and Eckart Spoo: "Kanther </F>
Denies Plan for Kurds"] 
  [Text] Bonn/Hannover, 30 Mar -- The FRG Interior Ministry 
has denied that Minister Manfred Kanther (Christian Democratic 
Union) is considering an agreement with Turkey that would permit 
imprisoning deported Kurds in a special prison that would be 
made accessible to human rights organizations at regular 
intervals. Thus, Kanther's spokesman, Detlef Dauke, refuted a 
report by FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU on Wednesday [30 March]. Dauke 
stated that the interior minister has neither suggested special 
prisons nor does he have any plans of this kind. 
  However, Bonn government circles confirmed to FRANKFURTER 
RUNDSCHAU that Interior Ministry officials have introduced a 
corresponding proposal into the internal discussion about 
possibilities of deporting violent Kurds more quickly. The idea 
was also broached at a meeting of representatives of the 
Foreign, Justice, and Interior Ministries on Tuesday, where the 
Kurdish problem was discussed. It may be that the proposal did 
not come from Kanther himself. However, it remains a fact that 
the officials, who were assigned by the minister to the Kurdish 
problem, have, it was said, considered such an agreement with 
Turkey. 
  Kanther had demanded a general agreement with Ankara in 
which 
Turkey affirms that deported Kurds are not threatened with the 
death penalty. The aliens' law and international conventions 
ban deportations to a country where torture and the death 
penalty are actually threatening. Turkey is considered a state 
where imprisoned Kurds are regularly mistreated. 
  Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul, deputy chairwoman of the Social 
Democratic Party of Germany [SPD], demanded that if the Turkish 
military continues to act against the Kurdish People, the 
European Union (EU) should demand that civilian UN observers be 
sent to Turkey "to protect the lives of endangered people." In 
addition, the EU should "use all instruments of its foreign and 
foreign trade policy" to "prevent the further oppression of the 
Kurdish people in Turkey." 
  As members of the Executive Committee of the International 
Association for Human rights in Kurdistan, Lower Saxony's 
Justice Minister Heidi Alm-Merk and Hannover Mayor Herbert 
Schmalstieg (both SPD) demanded that a Kurdish conference be 
held on neutral territory, possibly in Norway. The goal must be 
to commit Ankara to the fact that the protection of minorities, 
which has been guaranteed by Turkey, also applies to the Kurds. 
The situation in Kurdistan endangers Europe, the Middle East, 
and NATO, the two politicians said. They criticized the course 
of the local elections in Turkey. "It is a farce to speak of 
free elections when in the southeast of the country candidates 
were prevented from running for the elections by formidable 
obstacles and violence," Schmalstieg said. By claiming in the 
election campaign that each vote for her party would mean a 
bullet against the Workers Party of Kurdistan, Prime Minister 
Tansu Ciller has not contributed to easing tensions. Schmalstieg 
rejected the mass deportation of Kurds. 

