BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Alvaro Alvarado from the "RPC Television News" </F>
newscast] 
  [Text] Dr. Jorge Illueca will be Panama's ambassador to the 
United Nations during the Perez Balladares administration. 
Press spokesman Mario Velasquez told RPC that former President 
Jorge Illueca accepted Dr. Perez Balladares' offer to occupy the 
Panamanian post at the United Nations. 
  In addition, Carlos Sousa Lennox, executive secretary of 
Anagan [National Association of Cattlemen), announced his 
decision to accept the post of agriculture development minister 
in Perez Balladares' administration. Sousa Lennox reached his 
decision after resigning from the Arnulfist Party before the 
Electoral Tribunal. 
  [Begin Sousa Lennox recording] In view of the request that 
we 
serve the country and in light of the clamor of Panamanian 
agricultural-livestock producers for this ministry to be in the 
hands of a producer and a professional in the sector, I have 
decided to accept the post of agriculture development minister 
offered to me by President-elect Ernesto Perez Balladares. I am 
sure I will receive total support and cooperation from 
President-elect Perez Balladares and from the producers so I can 
carry out my tasks as minister of the agricultural-livestock 
sector to achieve the hopes and objectives they have expressed 
to me. [end recording] 
  Sousa Lennox said he was satisfied with the support from 
various representatives of the agricultural-livestock sector and 
from professional organizations. He also announced his 
commitment, and that of all those officials who will accompany 
him in his office, to see that all institutions will truly be at 
the service of the man in the countryside. 
  [Begin Sousa Lennox recording] We will draft a national plan 
for the agricultural-livestock sector to establish the economic 
and social policies, the fundamental purpose of which will be to 
chart the course for all agriculture-livestock producers. 
Short-term economic changes are made by both positive and 
negative forces. That is why we must have programs that will 
allow us to carry out the agricultural-livestock policies. [end 
recording]. 

