May 

<F P=102>   PA2305224594 Managua Radio Sandino in Spanish 1445 GMT 23 
May 94 </F>

<F P=103> PA2305224594 </F>
<F P=104>  Managua Radio Sandino </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Daniel Ortega, secretary general of the Sandinist </F>
National Liberation Front, FSLN, at the FSLN Special Congress 
closing session at the Olof Palme Convention Center in Managua; 
broadcast in progress -- live] 
  [Text] ...crisis. The struggle for stability, peace, the 
strengthening of democracy in our country -- that is our 
objective. It is our objective to get the government to change 
its economic policy, solve the property problem once and for 
all, give financing to producers in terms that will truly 
increase production in our country, thus creating jobs in the 
production sector. These are among the efforts that we must 
make throughout our country to promote a broad national 
movement, with workers, producers, and cooperative members -- 
with all the Nicaraguans who are truly interested in stability 
and who seriously feel affected by the neoliberal policies of 
the current administration. 
  We must prepare ourselves to win the November 1996 
elections. 
To win the elections, our contact with the people, our 
commitment to the people, and our [word indistinct] with the 
various sectors of Nicaraguan society become vital to attaining 
that goal. 
  This special FSLN congress session is a new experience 
within 
the party because in the 1970's, in 1976, at that moment, the 
Sandinists were unable to accept their differences, discuss 
them, and channel them into actions and practical tasks in the 
serious confrontation with General Somoza. This led the FSLN to 
a division. It was the struggle against Somoza that reunited us 
until we triumphed on 19 July 1979. 
  Now we have gone through four years in which new 
contradictions have appeared within the FSLN. They are not the 
same contradictions we experienced when we were fighting Somoza, 
because we all had to cooperate against the Somoza dictatorship 
which involved the eradication of imperialist domination in our 
country. We had differing views on that. 
  It is not a matter of defeating the Somoza dictatorship now. 
It is a matter of defending revolutionary achievements and we 
have had differences on that. The new economic situation in 
Nicaragua imposed by the government's neoliberal policies affect 
society. These policies continue to cause increased 
unemployment, poverty, homelessness, hunger, and desperation for 
the Nicaraguan people. 
  We must fight that. It is no longer a matter of ousting a 
government with weapons, it is a matter of fighting [12-second 
break in reception] new forms or struggle and organization. 
  In these past four years, we also struggled to defend the 
institutions that are pillars of the country's stability. They 
are institutions whose missions contradict our views and the 
sectors and people we defend. [sentence as heard] These 
contradictions occur under certain circumstances. I am 
referring, of course, to the National Police and the Sandinist 
People's Army. These are two institutions that were created by 
the revolution. These are institutions that the FSLN and the 
revolution bequeathed to the nation and the Nicaraguan people. 
These are institutions that according to the Constitution and 
our country's laws, and the Constitution that was approved in 
1987, are subordinate to the government that is in office. 
There is a big contradiction there. The Armed Forces are 
subordinate to the government that is in office. However, the 
government that is in office is implementing policies that 
involve depriving people of their property, sending workers to 
the unemployment lines, lowering the workers' salaries, and 
denying basic services to the people. 
  The people, rightfully so, make their demands, protest, and 
take to the streets to make their voices heard. The government 
sends the police, and sometimes the Army, to repress the people. 
  The extreme rightist forces in the United States and 
Nicaragua are plotting to destroy the Army and the police that 
are clearly identified as offspring of the revolution and not of 
the counterrevolution. So, this is another contradiction we 
have been experiencing throughout these past years. It has 
prompted differing reactions and positions within the Sandinist 
family. 
  There is also the National Assembly. It is no longer the 
Assembly in which we held a majority. It is the National 
Assembly where we are the main political force but without a 
majority. We have 39 deputies. It is a new experience, but one 
that has also resulted in contradictions. There is also our 
work at the municipal level done by councilmen at mayoralties 
where the FSLN won. 
  This new context creates new types of contradictions: the 
privatization of state-owned enterprises. Because of the 
struggle we headed, in which workers and peasants courageously 
defended their enterprises, we advocated the transfer of these 
enterprises to the workers. However, problems arose later with 
regard to the fulfillment of duties. 
  As has been mentioned on several occasions, the struggle is 
being carried out by one sector, not the majority sector. Most 
Nicaraguans are not participating in the struggle directly. The 
struggle is being carried out by the peasants, the workers of 
enterprises, the companeros, the tobacco factory workers, the 
coffee and rice workers, and the workers at agricultural 
enterprises. They are not [words indistinct] Nicaraguan people 
but they are defending basic achievements for the 
democratization of the country's economy which is aimed at a 
better distribution of Nicaragua's wealth and achieving 
stability for the benefit of the nation. 
  Thus, if [words indistinct], if we want to gather a certain 
sector so that the struggle will be for the benefit of 
Nicaraguan society, we must defend an economic model that is 
truly democratic and must include a better distribution of 
property. 
  The defense of the workers' property is a struggle that has 
resulted in contradictions. But after the enterprises were 
privatized and put in the workers' hands, new contradictions 
appeared among the workers. The enterprises (?went broke) and 
the workers became unemployed. [Words indistinct] these 
enterprises privatized for the benefit of workers have left 
workers without any benefits. 
  There are very clear explanations with regard to this but 
this has created new contradictions in the great Sandinist 
family, contradictions among the workers. 
  We could [words indistinct] many contradictions caused by 
the 
new situation. These contradictions have become evident 
throughout the country; that is why it was so important to hold 
this coordinated congress session. Why? To hear the questions 
of the FSLN and to achieve FSLN unity. Simply, the leadership 
organizations, as we said in the first FSLN Congress in 1991, 
could no longer provide answers to all these problems. In this 
way, with this special congress session, jointly with the 
debates on the economic problems and the situation in the rural 
sector, we have discussed organizational problems. We also 
chose new authorities. We mainly chose new leadership 
organizations. 
  Yesterday, you issued a call for unity. We came to this 
special congress session for the sake of unity and, precisely, 
to achieve unity, we had to discuss the topics that have been 
the source of contradictions. 
  We would not have accomplished much by having each one of us 
explain our views; they are well known. The members of the 
previous National Directorate have voiced their views in the 
media many times. You know them. You have drawn our attention 
to the fact that we have been voicing our opinion in a way that 
does not help to better guide and unite the Sandinist population. 
  Imagine, then, if the members of the previous National 
Directorate had spent all day explaining our views and arguing, 
we would have gotten nowhere. The right path was to convoke the 
special congress session. Based on the discussions in this 
special session, we had to seek agreements on the issues that 
have separated us. 
  What is our stand in the face of the government? This is a 
separate issue. Consequently, it is a determining factor if the 
FSLN leaders were to abide by what the congress members say, 
which is the voice of unity. We must abide by what they say 
with regard to what? To problems that have been [words 
indistinct] voted democratically. 
  Another issue we must not hide is [words indistinct] 
methods. 
Then, this topic [words indistinct] Sandinist Assembly [words 
indistinct] contradictions continued. Thus, to solve this 
problem there was no other way than to begin discussions, but 
not among eight companeros of the National Directorate or among 
70 members of the Sandinist Assembly. We had to go beyond that, 
we had to go to the territories, the assemblies in the 
departments and municipalities, and, finally, this special 
congress session to [words indistinct] last word, and in any 
case [words indistinct] leaders. The leaders have to be 
disciplined. With regard to what? With regard to the agreements 
that are made in this special congress session and this is how 
we will strengthen unity. [applause] 
  This has been a democratic process. Any companero who says 
that this was not a democratic process because things did not 
turn out the way he wanted, will not be doing the FSLN any good. 
  In this very same place, a little over four years ago, on 25 
February, better yet, on the dawn of 26 February, we accepted 
the decision of the Nicaraguan people who voted against us. We 
accepted that decision here. We must also learn to be 
democratic within the Sandinist family. Being democratic 
involves accepting the vote cast by members of congress with 
regard to topics discussed in the statutes, the program, the 
topics that were incorporated in the session, and the 
authorities who were elected to the Sandinist Assembly, the 
National Directorate, and other commissions. 
  It would be bad for a companero to go out and say that this 
is not democracy, because I would ask him: What is democracy 
then? People cannot be democratic from an anti-democratic 
position. That would be a position one would assume if things 
do not come out the way one thinks they should. If they do not, 
then one gets upset and rejects the vote. Thus, one would be 
disregarding the capacity, the intelligence, and wisdom of the 
companeros who discussed the issue. One cannot go around saying 
that it was not worth it, simply because things did not work out 
the way someone felt they should have. 
  We must strengthen the Sandinist family's democracy with 
deeds more than words. Of course, [words indistinct] perhaps it 
is hard for us to be consistent with democracy. We all say we 
favor democracy but when the time comes, not all of us keep our 
commitment with democracy. 
  In the elections here, we must emphasize that the will of 
the 
assembly held in the territories and in this congress with 
regard to the quotas given to women has been respected. 
  But it must further be stressed that the five companeras who 
became members of the National Directorate got their positions 
without the need for a quota. According to a report by the 
companeros in the Electoral Committee, the companeras received 
enough votes for membership in the National Directorate. 
[applause] 
  Seventy-five percent of the Sandinist Assembly was renewed, 
and this will inject new strength and energy into the FSLN. They 
included two mayors, 12 deputies, and 10 departmental political 
secretaries. Thirty percent of the Sandinist Assembly, as 
agreed, is made up of women whom, we are sure, will strengthen 
the work of our organization. 
  The candidates who received the most votes in these 
elections 
were women. Gladys Baez got 365 votes and Carmen Villanueva had 
345 votes. [applause] In the Sandinist Assembly, there are at 
least 15 companeros who come from the ranks of Sandinist youth. 
The youngest is Maria Esther Solis, who is 22 years old. 
[applause] Also in the Sandinist Assembly is a mother of heroes 
and martyrs, Gloria Martinez, who lost three sons. [applause] 
  Three companeros from the Atlantic coast have joined the 
National Directorate: companera Dorotea [Wilson], companera 
Mirna [Cunningham], and companero Lumberto [Campbell]. Las 
Minas, Bluefields, and Puerto El Rio are represented here. 
  When the special session began, there were 487 or 488 
congress members. In the last vote, the Electoral Committee 
companeras just told me, there were 447. In total, 447 
companeras and companeros voted. This shows true discipline, 
true commitment. 
  All the brothers, companero and companera congress members 
who have been meeting and participating in the debates and 
decisionmaking process in this special session show the high 
spirit [words indistinct] sleepless and tired to the last minute 
of this special congress session. 
  But, well, we are going to begin working. There is a 
transitional provision that was approved. It was the last 
provision approved here in the Congress, and it states: By the 
powers vested in the Special Congress session, the Sandinist 
Assembly is to hold elections for the members who will make up 
the National Electoral Committee. This election must be held 
during the first regular session of the Sandinist Assembly to be 
held within 15 days of the closing of the Special Congress 
session. 
  I want to propose here to the brothers and sisters of the 
National Directorate not to wait 15 days. Let us convoke the 
Sandinist Assembly this week, on Thursday. It will not be to 
discuss this topic but to draft a work agenda so that we can 
begin complying with the decisions made by the companeros who 
participated in this special congress session. 
  We are closing this special session in the hope that it 
will yield positive results for FSLN unity. We must report that 
some companeros who have been members of our leadership are now 
members of the Sandinist Assembly. Nevertheless, we are sure 
that the companeros and companeras who have held specific posts 
will continue to work in and for the FSLN. We must make an 
effort so these companeros and companeros do not feel hurt or 
mistreated by the democratic decisions made in this special 
congress session. We must continue to defend the participation 
of Nicaraguan people, who come from various economic and social 
sectors, in work with the FSLN. We are not saying we favor an 
FSLN that excludes those who possess more and retain those who 
possess less or nothing. We will continue to struggle with an 
FSLN that opens its arms to all Nicaraguans who love this 
homeland, this people, and this revolution. Our brother Gerty 
Lewites, who has not left and we are sure will not leave, is 
here with us. [applause] 
  The time has come to act with great maturity and calm. Above 
all else, it is time to appeal to humility because all this will 
contribute so that unpleasant actions, such as decisions [words 
indistinct] and debates on subjects that have been voted and 
approved, with their corresponding reactions, perhaps have not 
been presented as we would have desired. 
  We have to wait, then, for that attitude [sentimiento] that 
I 
mentioned to ensure that our FSLN is indeed strengthened, that 
unity is indeed strengthened, and that we defend it every day 
with words and deeds. Long live FSLN unity! [Audience responds 
"Viva!"] Long live the unity of all the people! [Audience 
responds "Viva!"] Sandino lives! [Audiens responds "Sandino 
lives!"] Free homeland! [Audience responds "Or death!"] 
[applause] 

