Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tapio Mainio: ``Clear-Cutting Forests Continues </F>
in the North''] 
  [Text] Clear-cutting and deep ploughing have not vanished 
from the forests of northern Finland. There is no limit on the 
size of clear-cut tracts in privately owned forests. In state 
owned forests, on the other hand, 30 hectares is the maximum 
size of any single clear-cut tract. 
  ``Every year a few clear-cut tracts exceeding 30 hectares 
are 
cut. The size of the clearing is ultimately for the landowner to 
decide, although we do recommend smaller clearings,'' says Tommi 
Lohi of Kemijarvi, the director of the Forestry Board of 
Northeast Finland. 
  Deep ploughing, also called rim ploughing is still a 
commonly 
used way to turn over the soil surface in northern forests. 
  ``About 60 percent of the harvested areas within the 
Forestry 
Board of Northeast Finland region is ploughed. The remainder is 
treated with milder operations such as either spot treatment or 
harrowing,'' Lohi adds. 
  The Forest Service will be ploughing forests yet this year 
and only in the far north. The methods used are either the deep 
ploughing or edge ploughing. Deep ploughing creates a trench 
even 1 meter in depth. The trench from edge ploughing is 20 to 
30 cm deep. 
  The Forest Service will replace the practice of ploughing 
with ditch tussocking, in which the stones dug up by the 
ploughing will be replaced into the trench. Additionally sticks 
and stumps can also be placed in the trenches to prevent the 
excessive leaching of nutrients from the forest. 
  In ditch tussocking the trenches are left 15 meters apart, 
whereas in normal forest ditching they are about 6 meters apart. 
  ``We are not inclined to start ditch tussocking, for it is 
twice as expensive as ditching. These modernizations seem to be 
jumping from the frying pan into the fire. Ditch tussocking just 
might make the harvest clearings into brush jungles,'' Martti 
Rautiainen, operations chief of the Kuusamo Common Forest, says 
skeptically. 
<H5>  Committee Debating Methods </H5>
  Just a few years ago the Kuusamo Common Forest made 
clear-cuttings of over 100 hectares but now, according to 
Rautiainen, each harvest area is, at most, 30 hectares in size. 
  ``Now the importance of forest borders for forest 
regeneration has been noted,'' adds Rautiainen. 
  At the current time the broad-based, environmental program 
committee of the Ministry of the Environment is debating, among 
other things, forest soil turning methods and the size of the 
clearing. 
  ``The maximum size or soil-turning method could either be 
recommended or stipulated as a condition for support or 
financing,'' says Juhani Viitala, the chairman of the committee 
and head director of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. 
  In 1950, the Forest Service harvested, in Pudasjarvi for 
example, from clear-cuttings as large as 230 hectares, whereas 
the current maximum clearing size is 10 hectares. 
  ``The dramatic change took place in 1969, when a maximum 
size 
of a clearing was established at 30 hectares. That was when we 
could see the problems created for forest regeneration by 
harvest clearings of even thousands of hectares,'' relates Heino. 
  In 1978 the Forest Service increased the maximum size of a 
clearing to 50 hectares, and in 1985 reestablished it at 30 
hectares. 
  Now the size of the clearing in northern Finland is 10-30 
hectares, depending on site growth conditions, and at high 
elevations the size is even smaller than this. ``The same 
applies to recommendations to privately owned forest management 
also,'' adds Heino. 
  There are differences in the way harvests are conducted on 
privately owned forests, depending on the attitude of the forest 
landowner or forest products corporation. 

