Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By So Lai-Fun] </F>
  [Text] Secretary for Economic Services Gordon Siu 
Kwing-chue, who went "missing" for three days in Beijing, told 
yesterday how he spent his own money on a private trip to China 
to witness the signing of an air traffic controllers' training 
accord. When his secretive manner was challenged, he said: "I 
didn't go to Beijing on taxpayers' money. I paid for the ticket 
with my own money, thanks." 
  Mr Siu avoided all outside contacts while in the Chinese 
capital and even changed hotels to evade journalists. Even Sir 
Robin McLaren, British Ambassador to China, was not informed of 
his trip. 
  Contrary to government statements which said the secretary 
was on an official visit to Beijing, Mr Siu said that he went to 
Beijing in his personal capacity because he was advised by China 
to do so just before he left. Mr Siu said he only drew money 
from his own pocket after the last-minute notice from the 
Chinese side. "At first I wanted to go in my capacity as 
Secretary for Economic Services but on the day I left I was 
asked to go in a private capacity, so I bought my own ticket." 
  He said he had paid for his hotel fees, food and drinks. 
"But I haven't counted how much I have spent yet, I don't 
know," he said. But Director of Civil Aviation, Peter Lok 
Kung-nam, who was there to sign the accord with his counterpart 
in the Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC), he had 
gone in his official capacity and all the expenses were paid 
from public coffers. 
  Mr Siu said he also deliberately kept a low profile during 
the visit because he respected the request to do so by his host, 
the CAAC. "In Beijing, we were asked to treat it as a technical 
issue and to keep as low a profile as possible. And so we 
respected our host's wishes." He said the Chinese side did not 
give any reason for that but that he accepted it. "I thought of 
briefing the press in the Beijing hotel but as the authority 
there had requested me to keep a low profile, I decided to tell 
the public only when I returned." 
  Mr Siu denied he had been in touch with any Chinese 
officials 
about the airport proposal. "I only had one working day which I 
spent with my friends at CAAC." He said the airport financial 
package should be discussed through diplomatic channels. Asked 
if he was aware of public worries that there would be secret 
deals with China, Mr Siu said: "I have no secrets. I went 
because I promised CAAC that I would go." 

