Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Francesco Verderami report: "D'Alema Calls the State of </F>
the Entente `Catastrophic'"] 
  [Text] Rome -- Passed over in Tuscany, ruined in Sicily, 
broken in Piedmont, not even open in Calabria: The progressive 
table is like a sports bar, where someone sitting down to 
discuss is certain to leave with his ideas unchanged. In this 
way, on the left, they talk and meet, without achieving an 
agreement, in a babel of angry declarations and accusations of 
bribery and of using methods typical of "Manuale Cencelli" 
[Christian Democrat powersharing method]. For Massimo D'Alema 
one word was enough to comment on the current state of the 
alliance of the left: "Catastrophic." Yes, of course, the PDS 
[Democratic Party of the Left] floor leader is certain that "in 
the end the progressives will go united to the ballot box," and 
that "it is the right which has the problems," with the "deadly 
tangle" between [Forza Italia leader] Berlusconi, [Northern 
League Secretary] Bossi, and [National Alliance Secretary] Fini. 
But a man of the left like Diego Novelli cannot remain unmoved 
by the fact that the "glorious war machine" has become stranded. 
"In Piedmont the AD [Democratic Alliance] has put forward three 
candidates, two of whom have drastically changed their political 
views. And then there are the `parachuted candidates,' the 
`disguised' PDS candidates. What a sad situation. We are in a 
political pharmacopoeia." Novelli's accusations are directed 
"at everyone, including the Rete." Which in Sicily has blown 
the negotiations into the air, wanting the majority of the 
uninominal seats for itself. Oscar Giannino, the AD's major 
republican representative, is convinced that "[Rete Secretary] 
Orlando is aiming for a split, in order to repropose the 
two-party agreement with the Greens," advanced a few weeks back 
by [Greens coordinator] Ripa di Meana. "And if the Greens are 
smart, they will agree." "Rather than split," comments Petro 
Folena, "the Rete is tending progressively to exclude the 
allies, a strategy which risks being a losing one, while 
Berlusconi has already landed in Sicily and is making agreements 
with the Mafia families." A weighty denunciation from the PDS 
deputy, which basically sums up how the PDS intends to respond 
to the offensive from the right. A tactic which does not at all 
please [AD deputy] Giorgio Bogi: "Let us have done with this lie 
of the democratic emergency. The fact is that for the first 
time in Italy the right has a credible government proposal. 
Berlusconi is the Italian Thatcher of the nineties and one 
cannot reply to such a challenge with an alliance of numbers. 
Right now, to win, the progressives need to put up [Prime 
Minister] Ciampi against Berlusconi." 
  Nominating Ciampi in the progressive pole is like lighting a 
match in an arsenal. "But are the AD's people on the moon?" 
communist Crucianelli smiles. "Perhaps we can consider a 
transitional government with Ciampi as prime minister and 
D'Alema as minister of the interior, given that, as far as I 
know, this means a lot to Massimo. But they will do this after 
the elections and without us." That is, without the Communist 
Renewal, Rete, and the Greens. These are already playing with 
blocking possible legislative moves in the next parliament. 
Indeed Ripa di Meana has asked the allies to sign an 
"anticorruption pact," in order to pledge to block any law in 
the coming parliament which would look like it was "wiping the 
slate" for people involved in bribery and corruption scandals. 
This is someone who, in the progressive pole, is looking to the 
day after tomorrow. But tomorrow is already uncertain. To 
blame: quarrels about seats. An example: At Livorno, the 
Greens wanted to put up Paissan, only the AD has requested the 
constituency for Passigli. Paissan ought then to stand at Pisa, 
except that Pisa has become a difficult seat, because the 
progressives could find themselves running against [Forza Italia 
candidate] Tiziana Parenti. In the meantime the Socialist 
Renewal is asking for 12 seats and the Rome-Tiburtino 
constituency, a PDS fief already assigned to pro-Occhetto Famoli. 
  And then there is the question of the "independents." In 
Sicily the Rete does not want to know about considering the 
Oscar producer Giuseppe Tornatore, an independent: "He is in 
the PDS quota," they say. In Rome, precisely in order to 
overcome the problem, the Renewal took it on itself to consider 
former USI [Independent Socialist Union] Giuseppe Giulietti as 
being in the Renewal quota. But at Pescara, the Abruzzi 
communists, it appears, want nothing to do with Miriam Mafai, 
whom the AD is proposing as an "independent" candidate. 

