Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 5 Jan (PL) -- In spite of all the efforts to 
fight and silence it, a strong trend in favor of developing 
links with the Cuban Government of the island is growing among 
the Cuban population in the United States, a member of that 
community said today. 
  In statements to the local press, Andres Gomez, director of 
the magazine Areito and national coordinator (in the 
United States) of the Antonio Maceo Brigade, pointed out that 
the persons supporting that trend also favor a normalization of 
the relations between Washington and Havana. 
  This theory, Gomez added, is essentially based on 
nonpolitical reasons and its main concern is the lifting of the 
economic blockade against the island, particularly because of 
the island's critical economic situation. 
  "The shortages and sacrifices that our people are enduring 
have moved this large sector to mobilize against the blockade," 
pointed out Gomez, who has been living in the United States 
since 1960 when his family decided to emigrate there, one year 
after the victory of the revolution on the island. 
  The Areito director emphasized that there are very 
dissimilar elements involved in this endeavor. The left is not 
very large, but it has a firm determination. Then, there are 
others who, although not defined as being in favor of the 
revolutionary process -- as the first group -- recognize it as 
legitimate. 
  Then, there are those who decided to support lifting the 
blockade for humanitarian reasons with regard to their families 
and their people, even though the vast majority of them have 
differences -- even serious ones -- with the Cuban Government, 
Gomez added. 
  A growing number of those who migrate, he added, are 
reluctant to obey the orders of the ultrarightists in Miami 
despite the occasional use of violence against anything that 
favors an understanding on Cuba. 
  "Until yesterday the counterrevolution managed to impose in 
Miami the parameters of what is politically permissible," said 
Gomez. As for the Cuban Government's call for a dialogue with 
the community abroad, Gomez feels that "it is necessary and 
prudent to advance in a cautious but firm manner in establishing 
the necessary links between Cuba and its emigrants." 
  The Areito director adds that this should be done 
step by step, binding all those forces that are respected abroad 
as a necessary factor for guaranteeing the well-being of the 
people and national independence, and the legitimacy of the 
revolutionary process, even though there are some who maintain 
their own viewpoints or differences. 

