BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by President Carlos Roberto Reina with </F>
domestic and foreign reporters and hosted by an unidentified 
moderator; at the Presidency in Tegucigalpa; broadcast in 
progress -- live] 
  [Excerpts] [Reina] ...social sectors. For me it is always 
a pleasure to meet with you to discuss every aspect of the 
nation's problems. From the beginning, I have said this is a 
government that needs to constantly communicate. I do not 
consider this a news conference but, rather, a regular meeting 
with you -- a friendly gathering of reporters -- to review some 
of the issues of interest and to answer the questions you may 
have. I think the Tegucigalpa summit with the U.S. vice 
president was a total success. Its repercussions have been 
great. In the United States, the vice president referred to it 
in very eloquent and praiseworthy terms. In the OAS, he referred 
to Honduras with the highest esteem. 
  Another issue I should mention is the tourism industry -- a 
sector in which we are, to a certain extent, facing an impasse, 
because of a discrepancy with the labor unions. This situation 
is being studied; it is under control; and the manager has been 
dismissed. [sentence as heard] 
  The situation at COHDEFOR [Honduran Corporation for Forest 
Development] is very simple to me. I did not personally 
intervene in COHDEFOR for a simple reason that agrees with our 
moral revolution. If a friend is involved in a particular 
matter, an appropriate and suitable institution should judge 
him. In this case, this institution was the commission that 
oversees COHDEFOR. The manager did not obtain one vote in his 
favor; seven votes were cast against him; and there were two 
abstentions. This was the final verdict, and, in this way, the 
matter was settled. 
  In terms of the Liberal Party deputies' letter, according to 
Santiago David Amador, leader of the wing that drafted the 
letter, there were several versions -- several drafts -- of this 
letter. If a commission reviews one of these drafts and removes 
two or three words -- appropriate words -- I consider the letter 
to be very proper. What is improper in politics is to provide 
tools to combat the government [words indistinct] the same party 
members. A reply will be made on each and every point presented 
by the deputies. In some cases they are right, while others 
must be debated. I will soon meet with all of the deputies, the 
whole cabinet, and all of my advisers -- obviously, this is a 
considerable number of people -- to completely review this 
government's policy. 
  In terms of the supply of cement, if this situation 
continues, we will be forced to take into consideration the 
opening of the borders to stabilize prices. We cannot continue 
to permit the flight of cement overseas, which greatly damages 
the nation's economy. We are going to take this into 
consideration within the appropriate government agencies. 
  The energy crisis is under control. What has occurred is 
that this was a very difficult situation, and we have said this 
from the beginning. A commission has been established to take 
charge of the energy crisis. We have received a letter from 
Jose Pozensa. I am going to ask him to meet with me, because at 
the end of his letter he offers his cooperation with the 
government. He wants this commission to be turned into an 
executive commission. This will have to be discussed in our 
efforts to confront and resolve the crisis. There are several 
ways to resolve this, particularly in cooperation with friendly 
governments, such as the governments of Mexico and China, which 
have offered us all of the support required by these 
circumstances. If this problem is resolved... [pauses] I 
believe that we can adequately resolve this problem -- a problem 
the government has inherited from previous administrations. 
  Another sticky issue is that of the DNI [Department of 
National Investigation]. An impasse of sorts exists in terms of 
what the DNI represented and what the DIC [Department of 
Criminal Investigations] will be. There is a time period 
between June and December in which we will have to make a 
decision. There are two possibilities: The DIC can be placed 
under FUSEP [Public Security Forces], or we will have to find 
another alternative. 
  We must pay compensation to those who have worked in the 
DNI. 
The situation that brought about the appointment of the ad hoc 
commission was a national need, considering the irregularities 
that took place there. Now we are clearing up this situation. 
In general terms, these are the issues that are being widely 
discussed at this point in time. 
  The day before yesterday, I returned from Ceiba where I held 
important meetings. One of them was an open discussion on 
issues such as the aid the central government will give to the 
municipalities. We are very enthusiastic about the support and, 
above all else, about the joyfulness and great hope with which 
the people of Ceiba received this highly ethical government. 
  Another matter I discussed in Ceiba was the announcement 
that 
several departments have been freed from the scourge of the 
parasitic torsalo worm that attacks cattle. This has been a 
serious problem. This positive fact has generally gone by 
unnoticed, much like the positive fact that there is no more 
polio. I believe this fact is good news that should be 
mentioned. It is good to give the people positive news, because 
this helps all Hondurans have a brighter image of the nation. 
  On these and other issues, I am at your disposal for 
discussion. 
  [Moderator] Francisco Jiron, from Voz de Honduras. 
  [Jiron] A number of people are going around carrying heavy 
caliber weapons. Every day, the media report details of 
horrible crimes that take place throughout our territory. Do 
you not believe that, by doing away with the DNI, crime will 
increase, especially considering that there will be a period of 
time in which there are no security corps. While the new corps 
is being trained, this situation will continue. 
  How do you intend to combat this criminal wave sweeping the 
nation, and how are you going to confront the DNI situation, 
even though you have noted that former DNI officials will be 
paid compensation and that they will be integrated to another 
corps. What is going to be done in the meantime? 
  [Reina] Francisco, the crime rate worldwide is dreadful. One 
of the most violent cities in the world is Washington, and all 
of the federal machinery in the United States has not been able 
to control this situation. In San Antonio, Texas, little boys 
go out and test their weapons on people sitting in coffee shops. 
The world is sick with violence. This problem has several 
roots, and one of them is drugs. What must be fought is the use 
of drugs, and this can only be fought by making an about face, 
strengthening families, restoring traditional values, and having 
parents and children engage in dialogue. This sounds like a 
sermon, but, in terms of the drug problem, it is the only 
conclusion that the forum could arrive at. 
  Another problem is the culture of violence. All youngsters 
want to be Rambo. They want to play out violence, and, in turn, 
they copy the worst aspects of other societies. How can we 
fight this? This can be done by taking up these issues as a 
whole. This is what the government is for. This is what the 
institutions are for. 
  We used to criticize the DNI because it practiced torture, 
and we are being critical again because there will no longer be 
a DNI. We must create an adequate corps in the interim. We 
must sit down with all state organizations to finds ways to 
control, prevent, and punish such offenses. I do not think we 
can afford to have no security corps during any given period of 
time. We must find a solution. We must avoid having any period 
in which the absence of authority could cause us further damage. 
There are people who say: Let's return to the time of hoods and 
torture. This is very dangerous. It represents a cry of 
desperation that must be wiped out. 
  The social and ethical progress of a nation is always 
difficult. Why is this? This is because societies get used to 
the vices found in the cultures and counter-cultures they have 
nurtured. If we want to do away with human rights violations 
and with torture, we cannot declare that we have been defeated 
and that we are going to return to the past. What we must do is 
continue progressing. We must learn our lessons from history 
and strike a balance through constructive and sensible dialogue. 
We will not allow this period to pass without adequate security 
forces, because this would be very dangerous. 
  [Unidentified reporter] I want to take this opportunity to 
ask two questions. What really happened at COHDEFOR? The 
former manager claims he made he made a transaction or a legal 
transfer from a state bank to a private bank, earning more 
interest. How much of his dismissal was politically motivated? 
If it was not political, what really happened? In addition, 
what topics did you discuss with former President Rafael 
Callejas, with whom you met last week? 
  [Reina] [Words indistinct] to COHDEFOR's Board of Directors, 
which is the highest authority. I have already said this, and I 
will reiterate it: The case was discussed and analyzed in this 
forum, which is a higher authority than COHDEFOR's general 
manager. There was not one vote in his favor, because he never 
consulted the Board of Directors in implementing those 
transactions, those deposit transfers. I did not want to 
interfere. We are friends, and if I let our friendship 
interfere with the decision made by the relevant organization, I 
would be committing an abuse of power. I left the matter in 
their hands. They made a decision. We already have a new 
COHDEFOR general manager, Sandoval Corea, who is as capable and 
a very prestigious person. 
  Regarding my meeting with former President Callejas, we 
discussed the overall situation in the country and in the 
Central American region. He is a member of the Central American 
Parliament. We discussed all of those topics. I have wanted to 
prove with deeds that I do not see any Honduran as my enemy. 
People do not like sectarianism, but it also appears they 
dislike openness. Now, people are criticizing me for talking 
with Callejas. I believe this criticism is unfair. I believe 
that two men who have had at different times directed the 
country should and must talk. Dr. Suazo Cordova was also 
invited to the dinner held before the meeting, but he was unable 
to attend because of reasons related to his work. I invited the 
former presidents in general, and my meeting with Callejas took 
place within that context. 
  [Reporter] [Words indistinct] the World Bank and the 
Inter-American Development Bank of increasing electricity fees 
by 90 percent. Second, teachers are asking for a salary 
increase estimated at 400 million lempiras. Will the government 
be able to respond to this demand? They are calling for strikes 
within the coming days in public schools. Third, during the 
last meeting you held with members of the Chamber of Commerce 
and Industries in Comayagua, they requested that Palmerola be 
made an international airport. 
  [Reina] Regarding an increase in electricity fees, we are 
amid a crisis that could become very serious for the country. 
It has already caused considerable damage. A special crisis 
commission has been appointed to address the energy issue. If 
this commission decides that the fees must be raised, we must 
accept this, because this would be part of resolving the crisis. 
Otherwise, we would be putting the government between the devil 
and the deep blue sea. 
  [Reporter] You have been charged with failing to solve 
problems and make decisions. When you do make decisions, you 
are accused of making the wrong ones. 
  [Reina] I do not think they are the wrong decisions. If it 
is necessary to make sacrifices, we all have to make them. As 
for the teachers, one bright spot is that the strike scheduled 
for today was temporarily suspended. What does this mean? That 
negotiations are being conducted with willingness to find 
correct, feasible solutions. 
  Where are we going to get the money to increase their 
salaries by 100 percent, as they have demanded? This salary 
hike requires some 800 million lempiras. I have faith that open 
and calm negotiations, without any closed-mindedness, will reach 
a compromise and permit the government to work for the 
teachers's good, which would be the right thing to do. We have 
to revise the salaries of the Honduran people in general. This 
will make it possible to face the crisis in a gradual, sustained 
manner. 
  As for Palmerola, the Comayagua Chamber of Commerce wants an 
international airport located there. The Tegucigalpa Chamber of 
Commerce wants the international airport built in Tegucigalpa. 
It is necessary to study the pros and cons to decide where the 
country's international airport should be located. While we do 
not have a good airport in the capital, we do have five 
international airports. We have to reshuffle all of this. 
  Frankly speaking, the problem has not been one of making 
decisions. Decisions must always be made within the context of 
knowing that someone will disagree. There are no ideal places 
or Utopias. What has been ruled out, however, is that people 
will illicitly profit from these decisions. This is where 
corruption has been at work and has prevented decisions from 
being made. This has been ruled out. We will soon meet with 
the Chambers of Commerce and all of the experts who have worked 
on this in order that the country can make a clear decision. 
There are pros and cons. The goal is to make the best decision 
that will benefit the country most. 
  [Moderator] This is President Reina's answer. Hernan Reyes 
Pineda of the "Opening a Breach" newscast. 
  [Reyes Pineda] I work for the "Opening a Breach" newscast. 
Few people, especially government officials, would admit that 
cement is being smuggled to other Central American countries. 
But you very plainly made this admission this morning. I 
wonder whether or not there will be a way to stop this. I 
understand that the smuggling of cement is controlled by the 
Armed Forces through the IPM [Military Social Security 
Institute]. Moreover, are you planning to open the border for 
the buying and selling of cement? What effect would such an 
opening have on the price of cement? 
  [Reina] You are correct in your question. Cement is being 
illegally sold to other countries, and our construction industry 
is grinding to a halt because of the cement shortage. We cannot 
go on like this. Whoever is doing this is doing great harm to 
the country. 
  There is a good chance that the border will be opened. If 
there is no other way to control such smuggling operations, we 
will have to do this. We can buy cement at lower prices outside 
the country. Nevertheless, such a dramatic measure would require 
the people's complete support. 
  [Moderator] What else would you like to ask? 
  [Reyes Pineda] I referred to the possibility of stopping 
this 
smuggling. I understand that the sale of cement is mostly 
controlled by the Armed Forces. 
  [Reina] We must find the source. If it is not stopped, we 
will open the border to lower the price of cement. 
  [Moderator] President Reina has just discussed the shortage 
of cement in the country and the possible solutions. 
  [Reporter] Do you think that, as the result of the moral 
revolution, the attorney general will have to determine in his 
investigation whether or not ministers, directors of autonomous 
institutions, and other officials in your government have filed 
their personal property and administrative integrity statements? 
It has been said that an investigation will be conducted, but 
only on former governments, not this one. 
  Also, I would like to hear your views on one other issue. A 
few days ago, a group of high-ranking Armed Forces officers said 
events of an unpredictable nature are about to happen in the 
country. Finally, public employee union leaders told the media 
today that they have tried to talk with you in an effort to 
reach an understanding between the executive and state workers, 
but they said they have encountered a series of obstacles. What 
can you say about this? 
  [Reina] I think our demands for administrative honesty must 
cover everyone. There cannot be justice for one group only, or 
persecution through the state institutions. The administrative 
honesty principle must apply to previous governments, and it 
applies to this one as well. 
  As for the statements by a member of the Armed Forces, I 
think he should not have made them because such things are the 
cause of great anxiety. A bunch of nervous people could sink 
the entire country. I think this does not do the institution any 
good and it does not reflect the true situation. The current 
government is legitimate and enjoys great international 
prestige. In addition, the government is open to dialogue, 
seeks unity, and is handling everything honestly. 
  As for the state workers unions, I have not heard union 
members complain. The doors are open to resuming the dialogue. 
Sometimes it is impossible to please everyone, however. 
  The U.S. vice president's visit to Honduras was almost 
prevented because relatives of the Pronor [expansion unknown] 
owners began to leave the country as if a disaster was about to 
occur, and simply because of a conversation that would take 
place among a few people. In the name of the office I have 
assumed for the people, I have asked people not to exaggerate 
situations, because this could do great harm to the nation. 
[passage omitted including indistinct portions] 
  [Reporter] [Words indistinct] the institution is bankrupt. 
Will it get the 3 million lempiras it has requested? In 
addition, I understand you will fly to El Salvador tomorrow to 
attend the new president's installation. Are any bilateral 
meetings planned? 
  [Reina] [passage omitted] The previous government's 
employees 
in the National Social Welfare Board should not be removed, but 
you are right: There is not much money. Nevertheless, we have 
given instructions for sufficient funds to be transferred to 
this institution. I think this operation is already under way 
in an effort to avoid shutting down the institution, which has a 
proud background of working for the Honduran children and the 
Honduran people in general. 
  I will attend the transfer of government from President 
Cristiani to President Calderon Sol. Central American 
presidents always take advantage of such opportunities to talk. 
I think I will meet with UN Secretary General Butrus 
Butrus-Ghali, whom I met in Paris a number of years ago. He was 
my professor at the Sorbonne. This puts me close to this great 
jurist, who also wants to talk about the upcoming regional 
American summits, which are very important. An Ibero-American 
summit is to be held in Colombia this month. Then there will be 
a meeting in Nicaragua, and another in Tegucigalpa in October. 
The year concludes with the Miami summit, where we will 
establish an agenda that will put us in harmony with the current 
situation. In that agenda, and you are familiar with its 
topics, we have to fight drug trafficking, defend human rights 
and the environment, create sustainable development, put a human 
face on measures taken, and make the moral revolution -- 
something they call the good government [preceding two words in 
English] over there. Languages are odd that way. That is the 
way they refer to something we call the moral revolution here. 

