CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jeremy Laurance, health services correspondent: </F>
"Britain Faces Skin Cancer Epidemic"] 
  [Text] Skin cancer has become Britain's fastest growing 
cancer, with more than 25 per cent more cases last year than in 
1992, according to the latest figures. 
  More than 40,000 people in the UK were diagnosed as 
suffering 
from skin cancer in 1993, up from 30,000 in 1992, because of 
increased exposure to the sun. 
  A leading cancer expert warned yesterday that babies and 
small children must be protected against the sun this summer. 
Professor Gordon McVie, scientific director of the Cancer 
Research Campaign said that without adequate sunscreens, 
youngsters risked damage from ultraviolet light which could 
cause lasting harm in adult life. 
  A nationwide survey commissioned by the Cancer Research 
Campaign and Boots the Chemist shows that parents use sun 
protection creams on their children, but few keep them covered 
up in T-shirts, hats and sunglasses, or keep them out of the 
treacherous midday sun. 
  Professor McVie said: "The increased number of skin cancer 
cases we are witnessing is a legacy of the 1960's and 1970's, 
when the advent of the cheap package holiday brought the 
Mediterranean sun within the reach of most people's pockets. 
  "This is one cancer which is entirely preventable, but 
unless 
we can get people -- particularly parents -- to follow simple 
sun protection guidelines, I fear we will be facing a skin 
cancer epidemic by 2014." 
  The most dangerous form of skin cancer, malignant melanoma, 
is still considered rare but accounts for about 5,000 new cases 
a year in the UK. It is more common in women than men. 
  There were 1,265 deaths from the disease in the UK in 1992, 
split equally between men and women. Survival rates for women 
seem to be improving, which may be due to earlier diagnosis. 
  Malignant melanoma appears usually as a black or dark mole 
with irregular edges which can itch and bleed. Benign moles are 
more regular in shape and have a lighter pigmentation. Most 
people develop moles on their body before the age of 30, but any 
which appear suddenly should be treated with suspicion. 
  In England and Wales between 1968 and 1985, there was an 80 
per cent greater chance of women developing the disease in 
Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Dorset, Isle of Wight, East Sussex 
and Cambridgeshire. 
  Men had a 100 per cent increased risk of developing the 
disease in Cornwall and were also more vulnerable in Devon, 
Somerset, Dorset, Isle of Wight, Hampshire, West and East Sussex. 
  COPYRIGHT: TIMES NEWSPAPERS LIMITED, 1994 

