BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 5 Apr (MENA)--Sources from the Palestinian 
and Israeli delegations have agreed that substantial differences 
are impeding the current negotiations in Cairo to implement the 
Gaza-Jericho agreement. 
  The sources said that these negotiations are going through 
"a 
crisis," despite some positive statements. 
  The Palestinian sources told MENA that the Israeli side 
continues to refuse to draw up a definite timetable for the 
withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Gaza Strip and Jericho. 
They added that the Israeli side is also refusing to draw up a 
timetable for the entry of the Palestinian police and 
specifications for the type of weapons to be used by this force. 
  The Palestinian sources went on to say that the Israeli 
side, 
which has mainly used civilian negotiators with the exception of 
Brigadier General 'Abd-al-Razzaq al-Yahya, wants to ignore the 
Palestinian military commanders' view of the security and 
military situation in Gaza and Jericho. They added that these 
commanders are demanding a definite timetable for the entry of 
their main forces into the Palestinian self-rule area in the 
Gaza Strip and Jericho area. They are also demanding an 
agreement on the type of weapons needed for these forces to 
achieve security in the areas from which Israel will withdraw. 
  The Palestinian sources said the Israeli side is offering 
the following measures in "a general and nonspecific working 
paper," which it called "a timetable" for withdrawal from the 
Gaza Strip and Jericho and for the entry of the Palestinian 
police force: 
  1. Setting up a temporary Palestinian-Israeli coordinating 
team and the entry of Palestinian commanders. 
  2. Setting up liaison offices for officers from both 
sides. 
  3. The entry of additional Palestinian commanders, 
between 20 and 30, and an early entry of a basic force of 
Palestinian forces, 300 people, within a week of signing the 
agreement. 
  4. Completing the withdrawal from the Gaza area. 
  5. Completing the withdrawal from the Khan Yunus area. 
  6. Completing the withdrawal from the Jericho area. 
  7. Establishing the Palestinian authority and the start 
of the Israeli withdrawal from the city of Jericho and Gaza. 
  8. The entry of the main body of the Palestinian police, 
between 1,000 and 1,500. 
  The Palestinian sources added that according to this general 
and nonspecific Israeli paper, agreement is to be reached on the 
timetable for starting the work of the Joint Coordination 
Committee and the group of commanders and several additional 
commanders will then enter. But the Israeli paper explains that 
this measure might not be necessary. 
  The paper believes that the implementation of these steps 
will start two days after the signing of the executive agreement 
covering the Gaza-Jericho First Agreement and that the process 
of implementing its steps will take between one week and 21 days. 
  The Palestinian sources said the paper makes it clear that 
there is no indication either of a specific timetable for the 
entry of the remaining Palestinian police force, which, it was 
agreed on in principle will consist of 10,000 people, or of its 
weaponry. 
  According to Israeli delegation sources, the Palestinian 
side retreated from the Cairo Accord signed in early February by 
PLO Executive Committee member Mahmud 'Abbas, alias Abu-Mazin, 
and Israeli Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres in the presence of 
Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat under the sponsorship of 
President Husni Mubarak. 
  The Israeli delegation sources told MENA: Had we pursued the 
negotiations on the basis of the Cairo Accord and the outcome of 
subsequent meetings, we could have reached agreement in two 
weeks. The sources noted that no such problems existed 
previously. The same sources say an agreement for the entry of 
300 Palestinian policemen was supposed to take effect today. 
  The Israeli sources said talk of a timetable "blocks" the 
negotiations from the Israeli point of view. The same sources 
noted that Israel is committed to implementing the Cairo Accord 
and that Israel has indeed begun to dismantle camps in the Gaza 
Strip and Jericho, adding: But we do not see the Palestinian 
side serious about the negotiations. 
  The sources pointed out that no agreement has been reached 
on 
the Palestinian forces' deployment in Gaza and Jericho and that 
the Israeli withdrawal will not take place unless such an 
agreement is reached. The same sources referred to chief 
Israeli negotiator General Amnon Shahaq's threat to walk out. 
  Palestinian and Israeli sources said the other committees at 
the negotiations continued their work but that the water issue 
was not discussed because the experts from the Palestinian side 
who are concerned with this issue did not show up. 
  The Civil Affairs Committee continued working until 0100 
today. 
  Hasan 'Asfur, a member of the Palestinian delegation to the 
Security Affairs Committee, summarized the situation for MENA, 
saying that the negotiations were difficult because they dealt 
with sensitive issues concerning security arrangements. He 
added that the two sides will continue discussing these issues 
to work out a solution. He affirmed that the Palestinian side 
is serious in its efforts to reach an agreement and noted that 
the delay in the talks is due to the delay in issues concerning 
security. 'Asfur said: We hope we will not reach a situation 
where the negotiations will be threatened. 
  MENA has learned that the Palestinian side held a meeting 
this morning to coordinate positions and discuss the current 
stage of the talks. 

