CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kevin Drew: "Meciar Has Been on the Mat Before"] </F>
  [Text] Bratislava -- An elderly couple wagged their fingers 
and scolded a pair of teenage boys standing in front of the 
Slovak parliament last Friday. 
  An hour earlier, parliament had passed a motion of no 
confidence against Vladimir Meciar's government, but a crowd of 
nearly 100 still lingered outside talking politics. 
  "You don't know what you're talking about," the old man said 
to the boys, who had been making jokes about the ousted prime 
minister. 
  "Meciar is for Slovakia, he stands up for us." 
  Such is the power Meciar still holds over many Slovaks. With 
his charisma, uncanny political instincts and penchant for 
prevailing against the odds, it would be difficult to bet that 
he has been sidelined permanently. 
  After all, Meciar was ousted from the prime minister's job 
before. He burst into the public spotlight during the 1989 
revolution and in 1990 was elected premier of the Slovak 
republic. In April 1991, the presidium of the Slovak parliament 
removed him from office after an emotionally pitched power 
struggle. 
  But 14 months later, he was back, winning a solid election 
victory with the newly formed Movement for a Democratic Slovakia 
(HZDS). That victory, coupled with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav 
Klaus' rise, sealed the dissolution of Czechoslovakia. 
  Observers then said Meciar's absence from government had 
worked to his advantage because he couldn't be blamed for the 
myriad of new problems that plagued Slovakia before the election. 
  He might have the same opportunity now. The new government 
will have to preside over fiscal and political chaos--which may 
soon be exacerbated by a 20- or 30-percent devaluation of the 
Slovak currency. An earlier move devalued the currency 15 
percent. 
  What's more, his party, the HZDS, remains the largest one in 
parliament. Meciar, who will take a deputy's seat, has already 
promised "emphatic" opposition to the new government. 
  Throughout 1993, polls consistently showed that only 25 
percent of Slovaks supported him. 
  But the opposition has always fared worse. 
  Throughout his various political tribulations, Meciar has 
retained his ability to communicate with the average 
Slovak--particularly pensioners in Bratislava and people in the 
countryside. Now that he finds himself down once again, 
observers are reluctant to count him out. 
  "Slovaks believe Meciar really understands their problems," 
said journalist Tibor Repta. "This is still new to us, to have a 
leader able to convince us that they care about Slovakia." 

