Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ian Graham, PRESS ASSOCIATION] </F>
  [Excerpts] The extraordinary skill and courage of an Army 
helicopter crew shot down by the IRA in Northern Ireland came in 
for high praise today. The Lynx helicopter was hit in the tail 
and disabled by a Mark 15 mortar bomb as it hovered 100-feet 
above the security force base at Crossmaglen in south Armagh. 
Yet with supreme skill the crew managed to crash land the 
aircraft inside the base -- avoiding private housing nearby. 
They baled out in the dark during the terrifying incident on 
Saturday night -- then went back to the helicopter as it began 
to turn into a fireball. Despite their own injuries, they 
rescued a seriously injured policeman who had been travelling 
with them. Seconds later the helicopter exploded, sending a 
fireball shooting into the sky. 
  At a press conference in Co Armagh today, RUC [Royal Ulster 
Constabulary] Deputy Assistant Chief Constable Bill McCreesh 
said that but for the skill and professionalism displayed by the 
pilot and helicopter crew there could have been a major tragedy. 
And he furiously condemned the IRA mortar attack on the 
helicopter, launched over a residential area, as "lunacy". 
  Although the helicopter was badly damaged, the pilot managed 
to land it within the security force base. "Had it come down in 
the town itself many lives would have been put at risk," he 
said. The mortar had been fired from the town square 150 yards 
across local property into the base, he added. 
  It was the first time a mortar had been used to down a 
helicopter and investigating officers were uncertain whether it 
or the base was the target. There have a series of mortar bomb 
attacks on the heavily-fortified joint Army and police border 
station. 
  He slammed the IRA for an indiscrimate, reckless and 
ruthless 
attack which could have had horrendous consequences and again 
displayed the terrorists' utter lack of human and Christian 
feeling. 
  "This mortar attack was not just an attack on an Army 
helicopter but on the complete community of Crossmaglen. For 
any bomber to launch a mortar from, and over, a residential 
area, is a complete act of lunacy," said Mr McCreesh. [passage 
omitted] 
  Local MP Seamus Mallon (Newry and Armagh) launched a verbal 
broadside on Sinn Fein and the IRA for carrying out the attack 
when they were spending their time talking about peace. The 
Social and Democratic Party deputy leader said: "I am very 
angry. God knows how many people could have been killed in that 
attack -- thankfully they weren't." He said Northern Ireland 
had gone back to the syndrome "where we have Sinn Fein and their 
spokesmen talking peace in the morning and carrying out these 
murderous attacks through the IRA in the evening". 
  "I think that is what is revolting many people within this 
country," Mr Mallon declared. [passage omitted] 

