BFN 

  [Text] Baghdad, 24 May (INA) -- BABIL has asserted that the 
only way for America and its allied reactionary forces to 
promote regionalism is by crushing the innocent masses through 
destructive crises, such as civil wars, armed rebellions, 
starvation, disruption of security, and lack of justice. 
  In an article today, the paper wonders: Why do the United 
States, Saudi Arabia, and the Egyptian regime want a cease-fire 
in Yemen, although they are fanning the flames of crises, wars, 
and divisions and are trying to partition Sudan and Iraq? Why 
did they sow the seeds of rebellion and nurture them until they 
grew in certain quarters in southern Yemen and are now trying to 
stop the fighting? 
  The paper asserts that anyone who thinks that America and 
its 
agents in Riyadh and Cairo think about preventing Arab bloodshed 
is deluded and influenced by the hostile, misleading media. It 
is enough to see how the United States provides weapons to, and 
protects the separatists in southern Sudan, northern Iraq, and 
southern Yemen, to ascertain that the United States has 
sanctioned the spilling of Arab blood and made it cheaper than 
water and oil. 
  The paper adds that America's major interest lies in 
perpetuating the Yemeni crisis in the form of various continuing 
bloody conflicts that extend over a long period of time so as to 
destroy the basic ideals in the citizens' minds and make them 
harbor personal grudges against each other. 
  The paper notes that the Yemeni unionist forces' adoption of 
military action to decide the situation and their rejection of 
any settlement is a direct blow to the U.S. scheme because this 
checks the other steps aimed at pushing the masses toward an 
inferno of regional grudges and revenge. Thus, regionalism will 
be limited to the separatist faction in Aden. 
  The paper adds that Yemen's step is in the right direction 
and complements the Mother of Battles when the Iraq of Saddam 
Husayn denied America and the Zionists the chance to partition 
Iraq. 
  BABIL concludes that the appeal for a cease-fire in Yemen is 
merely a U.S.-Zionist-reactionary attempt to save the forces of 
apostasy and prolong the suffering in order to remold the 
psychology of the masses to accept the reality of secession as 
the best of all the bad choices. 

