BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin by Nahum </F>
Barne'a at Rabin's office in Jerusalem on 23 June] 
  [Text] [Barne'a] Mr. Prime Minister, will you invite 
'Arafat to visit Jerusalem? 
  [Rabin] Jerusalem should remain united, under Israeli 
sovereignty, and Israel's capital. I consider this issue to be 
of primary importance in view of the permanent solution. At the 
same time, I consider it our primary duty to allow freedom of 
worship and free access to the Muslim and Christian holy sites. 
I believe it is impossible to insist on Jerusalem's being 
united and Israel's capital without allowing free access to the 
followers of other religions. 
  If tomorrow al-Qadhdhafi should ask to make a pilgrimage to 
Jerusalem to pray at the holy sites, I would consider this a 
positive development. 
  There is one restriction: the security consideration. Being 
a Muslim, 'Arafat is entitled to visit Jerusalem, just like any 
other Muslim. If he wishes to pray, that would be his right. 
There would be a problem of timing and arrangements, but in 
principle our reply would be positive. To me, this stems from 
the commitment undertaken by every Israeli Government, including 
the current one, to allow free access to the holy sites. 
  [Barne'a] Are you concerned by the statements Jerusalem 
Mayor Ehud Olmert has made in this regard? 
  [Rabin] I am surprised at the Jerusalem mayor, if he is 
indeed involved in the various things that have been reported. 
Anyone who says he would prevent a Muslim from praying in 
Jerusalem -- be it al-Qadhdhafi, the Saudi king, President 
al-Asad, or 'Arafat -- is causing damage to Israel. I consider 
this a Jewish and an Israeli obligation. 
  [Barne'a] You do not invite Olmert to take part in 
discussions about Jerusalem. 
  [Rabin] One discussion -- an internal discussion -- was held 
at my place with defense and legal officials, and it was not 
about the 'Arafat visit. We discussed ways to make sure that 
what was stipulated in the Gaza and Jericho agreement -- that 
all the bodies connected with the Palestinian Authority are to 
be located in Gaza or Jericho -- is observed and that no 
authoritative body of the Palestinian Authority is located in 
Jerusalem. 
  [Barne'a] Nabil Sha'th's visit here ended with what seemed 
to him like a humiliation: You did not allow him to visit 
Jerusalem. Was this done deliberately? 
  [Rabin] We recommended that on his first visit, he focus 
more on civilian matters, which today are not running as 
smoothly as the police and other security forces. We 
recommended that he not deal with symbolic matters. At the same 
time, I see no reason to prevent him from visiting Jerusalem, 
whether for religious reasons or to meet with friends. There 
was an understanding between him and the deputy chief of staff 
that the visit not take place at this time. In the future, 
everything is open. 
  I believe that the extreme right wing's attempts to portray 
such visits as casting doubt over Israel's sovereignty over 
Jerusalem are a grave mistake. In doing so, the right is in 
fact showing that it is nervous and uncertain that we are indeed 
sovereign in Jerusalem. We are both the majority and sovereign. 
As Jews, we should treat others as we expect to be treated in 
places where we are not sovereign. 
  [Barne'a] The Israeli right is active with regard to the 
Golan Heights issue as well. As you well know, Israel is 
currently engaged in a struggle in Washington against the 
presentation of an amendment at the U.S. Senate that would ban 
the administration from sending U.S. troops to the Golan. 
  [Rabin] I believe this is simply silly. This is a twisted 
misrepresentation of the facts by the Israeli and U.S. Jewish 
right wing. The man who thought up the idea of placing a U.S. 
force here was Menahem Begin, and I want to give him credit for 
this. The attempt to intimidate the American people by drawing 
a similarity between Somalia or Vietnam and supervising the 
implementation of military clauses in a peace treaty is stupid. 
Their hatred for the government, their wish to place obstacles 
on the way to peace, has driven the extreme right mad. 
  [Barne'a] Are we on the verge of launching secret talks with 
Syria? 
  [Rabin] Unfortunately, not yet. The Syrian attitude is 
wrong. They are conducting the negotiations under the assumption 
that the United States should deliver Israel to them and bring 
about the signing of a peace agreement on Syrian terms. This is 
not the United States' intention; neither is it conceivable that 
we would agree to this. 
  I believe that Warren Christopher will pay another visit in 
July. I hope the Syrians will come to their senses and realize 
that the time has come for a direct dialogue. 
  [Barne'a] Have you and Peres agreed that he will take over 
the negotiations with the Syrians? 
  [Rabin] The negotiations will continue in their current 
form. It is only natural for the foreign minister to be a full 
partner. He is doing his job as foreign minister. 
  [Barne'a] On 19 June, after the stormy meeting in Bet Berl 
[in which Rabin and Labor Central Committee members exchanged 
accusations over the failure in the Histadrut elections], you 
held a secret, lengthy, late night meeting with Peres. Can you 
say that nothing has changed in Peres' status after the meeting? 
  [Rabin] I will not comment on private meetings. I will not 
go into details. 
  [Barne'a] But you are not denying that something has 
changed? 
  [Rabin] We mainly discussed the current situation in the 
party as well as in the country. We hold private meetings 
frequently. It is quite natural. 
  [Barne'a] These meetings are always required when one of you 
returns from abroad.... 
  [Rabin] You said that. 
  [Barne'a] King Husayn met with President Clinton on 22 June. 
It seems that the meetings follow a pattern: Husayn says he 
wants peace very much, and then, when the President utters a 
kind word, everything vanishes. 
  [Rabin] We have reached an agreement with Jordan that the 
talks between us will be moved from Washington to our region. 
This is in line with our concept that it is better to hold 
separate, bilateral talks and not talk to all the partners at 
the same time. The location of the talks has not been determined 
yet. 
  It is clear to me that Syria does not view the progress with 
Jordan positively. I even heard that Syria complained to the 
Americans that they lent a hand to breaking the joint framework. 
  [Barne'a] Does Husayn want to start with an agreement on 
borders? 
  [Rabin] There will be no peace if the borderline is not 
determined. This will come in addition to normalization, the 
establishment of ties, security arrangements, and so on. The 
problem with Jordan is relatively less complex. We will start 
by discussing everything; we will conclude nothing before we 
attain a peace treaty. 
  [Barne'a] After he met with you on 21 June, Hayim 
Haberfeld, the Histadrut labor federation secretary general, 
looked very happy. This seems a bit odd, after you called on 
him on 19 June to draw the necessary conclusions and go home. 
  [Rabin] We suffered a blow in the Histadrut elections. 
There is no point in hiding it. We decided to accept the 
voters' verdict. Ramon and his list will head the Histadrut. We 
want to be their partners, not their tail end. The Histadrut 
conference will be held on 5 July. Ramon will be elected 
secretary general on the same or the following day. 
  [Barne'a] Ramon says he cannot work with Haberfeld. Can you 
understand this? 
  [Rabin] I do not accept disqualifying people on a personal 
basis. I believe that Ramon's demand, anchored in such 
disqualification, is out of place. I am familiar with many 
historical examples of politicians who said they could not work 
together. In a democracy, one has to accept the majority's 
decision, but the man who came in second should also learn how 
to live with the results. Rivalries may exist before elections 
take place. After they are held, conclusions must be drawn. 
  [Barne'a] Were you Ramon, would you go hand in hand with 
Haberfeld? 
  [Rabin] If you look for love, do not turn to politics to 
find it. 
  [Barne'a] A recently published poll shows Ramon is more 
popular than you are. What do you think about this? 
  [Rabin] The Knesset elections were held exactly two years 
ago. I believe that the fact that I headed the list contributed 
to our victory. I also believe that we are fulfilling that 
which the government pledged in its guidelines. I want the 
public to judge me at the end of my four-year term. I am not 
affected by last week's or last month's polls. We have two more 
years. The yardstick by which to measure my success will be the 
government's achievements. 
  [Barne'a] Will you run again in 1996? 
  [Rabin] Presently, I am busy with implementing government 
policy. You may take your guesses as to what I will do in two 
years, but I will not make the announcement today. It would not 
be good for Labor. 
  [Barne'a] Sarid and Ramon said they will run for the 
premiership in 1996 only if you do not. Are you pleased with 
such statements? 
  [Rabin] I do not concern myself with such statements at this 
time. We are halfway through our term. 
  [Barne'a] You said that 1994 will be the year of peace. It 
does not seem like you will sign another agreement in 1994. 
  [Rabin] I believe that the implementation of the Gaza and 
Jericho agreement creates a good atmosphere for peace. It would 
be a positive thing if the process with Jordan developed, and I 
still see a chance for a dialogue with Syria. On our part, we 
will work to reach a breakthrough this year, and if not in 1994, 
then in 1995. 
  [Barne'a] That would be the year before the elections. 
  [Rabin] I do not believe the elections will make a 
difference. 
  [Barne'a] Hayim Ramon believes that parties are 
disappearing, that today a leader does not need a party to reach 
the voters. Do you also feel that Israel's party system has 
become superfluous? 
  [Rabin] Whether we will legislate direct elections or 
continue to vote according to the old system, today in Israel 
the vote is cast for the "who" as well as the "what." The 
"what" is expressed by the party. I do not believe the era of 
parties is over. I believe there is room for adjustments. 
Today, the media is the people's main source of information. 
You reach more people through it than through any party 
conference. At the same time, parties are needed; a nucleus of 
men is needed. 
  [Barne'a] Then why do you hate them so much? 
  [Rabin] I never said I hate them. 
  [Barne'a] It was very interesting to watch you at the party 
Central Committee meeting on 19 June. Whenever you see the 
committee members, something burns inside you, does it not? 
  [Rabin] Not true. I believe the time has come to build 
these institutions in a different manner. For example, I am not 
sure that primaries should apply in all cases. Those directly 
elected by the public -- a prime minister, a city mayor -- 
should be elected through primaries. The situation of Knesset 
members, however, who are not directly elected, is different. 
They are not elected directly at this time. To a large extent, 
they are elected thanks to the man who heads the list. There is 
room to examine canceling primaries for Knesset members. 
  [Barne'a] A lot has been said about your style, about the 
expressions you use. On the other hand, many on the street like 
it. Is it calculated? 
  [Rabin] As prime minister I am the target for expressions of 
support and a primary target of attacks. If you do not 
understand this, do not be a prime minister. I say what I 
think. Sometimes, I want to make a point by using harsh terms. 
  [Barne'a] Is it deliberate? 
  [Rabin] Certainly. 
  [Barne'a] Speaking on 19 June, were you absolutely cool? 
  [Rabin] It was calculated. I was convinced that committee 
members, many of whom work for the Histadrut, feel that their 
source of income is being threatened. This is a humanitarian 
problem, and I hope we will find a solution for it. At the same 
time, contrary to what they shouted there, I do not believe that 
the government governs while the Histadrut serves as its soul. 
With all due respect for the Histadrut, the soul is the state, 
the future of the people of Israel. I had to put things in 
proportion. 
  [Barne'a] Do you plan to replace ministers in your 
government, what is called a political reshuffle? 
  [Rabin] I do not reshuffle. You must remember that most of 
the ministers were not ministers in the past. There are stages 
for assuming a post. I believe it is my duty to back them up. 
Let each go on in his field and stand corrected if necessary. 
This is not a mutual admiration society. 
  [Barne'a] You seem more comfortable with men in uniform, 
whom you have deeply involved in the negotiations. 
  [Rabin] My decision to bring in IDF [Israel Defense Forces] 
officers was based on essential needs. First priority was given 
to personal security. This entailed dealing with the details. 
I saw it vital for those who are tasked with implementing the 
agreement to be involved with its fine details. They did not 
make the political decisions. I was attacked for not involving 
military men in the secret negotiations in Oslo, and at the same 
time the opposite charge was leveled at me. I believe my 
decision was correct. 
  The chief of staff, his deputy and the regional command 
commanders performed excellently. I am happy that IDF soldiers 
no longer cruise Gaza. There was a drop in the number of riots 
and terror attacks in Gaza, for now. In Judaea and Samaria, 
where we are in control, the drop was very slight. 
  [Barne'a] Are you concerned with regard to the expected 26 
June publication of the report by the mission of inquiry into 
the Hebron massacre? 
  [Rabin] I am sure we will receive no compliments. An 
appalling incident took place: A loathsome Jewish murderer shot 
worshipers in the back in a holy place. There is no doubt that 
law enforcement on extremist Jews in the territories or those 
who joined them was far from being perfect. 
  [Barne'a] Did the establishment you are heading draw lessons 
from the incident? 
  [Rabin] Not enough. The problem is more complex. I saw the 
negative reactions to my decision to place several Jewish 
extremists under administrative detention. Even the Human 
Rights Association was opposed. I could at the same time place 
hundreds of Palestinians or more under administrative detention 
and no one would have said a word. 
  Large segments of the public have cultivated a forgiving 
attitude toward the extreme right in the territories. Our 
judiciary has also not treated them with the utmost severity 
stipulated by law, and not quickly enough. There are cases that 
have not come to trial for three to four years. The entire 
method of law enforcement on Jews in the territories requires a 
thorough reexamination. 
  [Barne'a] Do you watch the world soccer championship games? 
  [Rabin] Yes, when I get home from work at night. 
  [Barne'a] What did you see so far? 
  [Rabin] Naturally, I saw the opening game. I saw the 
Bulgaria-Nigeria and Switzerland-Romania games. I could not 
always find the time to see all the games. I enjoy it very 
much. This is how I enjoy myself and rejuvenate from not always 
pleasurable things. 

