Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Four-part article by Sulayman Nimr: "Riyadh's Gulf Summit </F>
Files; Regional Dangers and How To Deal With Them; `Defense and 
Deterrence' Summit; Arab Situation and Peace Process 
Developments; Bilateral Meetings and Border Issues"] 
<H5>  [19 Dec pp 1, 4] </H5>
  [Text] Riyadh--When leaders of the GCC [Gulf Cooperation 
Council] member states meet to discuss Gulf cooperation in 
Riyadh tomorrow, they will find that the titles of the files 
that they will peruse and discuss are not different from the 
titles of files of summits past. The issues, which will be 
discussed by the six leaders, are the same old issues that are 
discussed ordinarily in all important Gulf meetings. These 
issues are: regional conditions, relations with Iran and Iraq, 
Arab conditions in light of the latest peace process 
developments, and economic, defense, and security cooperation 
issues. 
  Regarding regional conditions, the Gulf continues to be 
worried by its two big neighbors, Iraq and Iran. Problems with 
these two countries remain unresolved. With the continued 
presence of Saddam Husayn's regime, Iraq will continue to 
represent to Gulf people a source of danger, which they have not 
yet found out how to repel. The Gulf is more worried by the fact 
that the Iraqi regime has not fallen and that it has survived 
despite the economic and political embargo and despite the 
destruction of whatever remaining sophisticated armament 
capabilities it had than by the border incidents Iraq fabricates 
with Kuwait from time to time. 
  What escalates this worry is the fact that this year, which 
will end in a few days, has seen political and economic breaches 
of the embargo imposed on Iraq, as in the case of the return of 
Turkish diplomats to Iraq and of Turkey's call for lifting the 
economic embargo imposed on Iraq. What is more important is that 
despite the unified Gulf policy and position vis-a-vis Iraq and 
its regime, the State of Qatar has held separate contacts with 
Iraq. The latest such contact was the visit paid by the Qatari 
deputy chief of staff to Baghdad and his meeting with President 
Saddam Husayn at the beginning of this month. This visit has 
enraged Kuwait which, it has been learned, threatened not to 
hold any meetings with Qatar's leadership during the summit. But 
Gulf contacts have managed to pacify matters and Qatar has 
issued an official statement characterizing the Qatar deputy 
chief of staff's visit to Baghdad as "private." 
  The fact that Saddam Husayn's regime has not fallen despite 
the embargo, failure of the wager that Iraqi opposition would 
succeed in toppling the regime, and political and economic 
breaches of the embargo against Iraq will undoubtedly motivate 
the Gulf states to consider future conditions vis-a-vis Iraq. 
Even though the Gulf states are not expected to reconsider the 
Iraq boycott resolutions, a fait accompli exists and the Gulf 
states cannot ignore the effect of its continued presence on 
their security. Neither can they ignore the dangers this fait 
accompli poses nor the fact that they must learn how to confront 
and deal with it. 
  There is no doubt that the Gulf leaders will review these 
developments in the Iraqi issue and will exchange views on 
future conditions in Iraq, without offering any concession on 
the continued boycott against the current regime. 
  It seems that Iran, the other fundamental part of the Gulf 
formula, will continue to be one of the concerns that worry the 
region, even though some Gulf states are tied to it by good 
bilateral relations that have developed this year. But neither 
developed bilateral relations between Iran on the one hand and 
Qatar and Kuwait on the other nor the tour Iranian Foreign 
Minister 'Ali Akbar Velayati made to the region last May have 
alleviated the Gulf's general concern about Iran and its policy 
in the region. The main reason is the continued Iranian-UAE 
[United Arab Emirates] crisis over the three UAE islands (the 
Greater Tunb, the Lesser Tunb, and Abu-Musa islands) and Iran's 
intensification of this crisis by appointing a governor for 
Abu-Musa island and by refusing to enter into direct 
negotiations with Abu Dhabi to resolve the islands' issue. 
  Riyadh's Gulf summit will deliberate on and discuss the 
Iranian-UAE crisis to explore the possibilities and likelihood 
of developing a solution to this crisis, which has reflected in 
turn on the Iranian-Gulf relations generally. 
  In this regard, it is not expected that one or more Gulf 
states will mediate between between Abu Dhabi and Tehran because 
the UAE rejects such mediation in order to assert that the 
position taken toward its three islands is a collective Gulf 
position. 
  Informed Gulf sources have said that the UAE insists on 
direct negotiations with Iran to resolve the islands issue and 
that it wants absolutely no Gulf mediation. 
  In view of the Gulf's continued concern about the two big 
neighbors, Iraq and Iran, the GCC states find that they have to 
agree on a political and security plan to deal with this 
security and defense concern. 
  At the security and defense levels, the Gulf states launched 
in the past two years plans to bolster their military 
capabilities and they have concluded weapons deals valued at 
several billion dollars. Some states, like Kuwait, have 
concluded military treaties with major powers in the new world 
order to underline their responsibility to protect Kuwait from 
any military adventure. There is no doubt that the GCC states 
will carry on with their policy to bolster their military 
capabilities while focusing on joint defense cooperation. But 
how will the regional dangers be tackled politically? 
  Observers expect that Gulf leaders will present their 
visions 
and ideas in this regard so that their foreign ministers will 
implement these ideas and visions. Within the context of the 
discussion on the region's situation, Gulf diplomatic sources 
expect that the Gulf summit will discuss the developments in 
Yemen and their impact on the region. Observers believe that the 
Sultanate of Oman, which strengthened its relations with Yemen 
this year through the visit Sultan Qabus Ibn Sa'id made to Sanaa 
last October, will have its own opinion on what is going on in 
Yemen and on how to deal with it. The Omani viewpoint is founded 
on the basis that in the Gulf formula, Yemen, Iran, and Iraq are 
significant figures that cannot be ignored or not dealt with and 
that one cannot deal with one of them at the expense of another. 
<H5>  [20 Dec pp 1,4] </H5>
  [Text] If 'Abdullah Bisharah, who is well-known for his 
proverbial monikers, were still the GCC [Gulf Cooperation 
Council] secretary general, he would call the 14th Gulf summit 
the "defense and deterrence summit." Military and defense 
aspects will occupy an important place in the Riyadh summit in 
light of the accord reached by the defense ministers to bolster 
military cooperation among their armies, to develop the 
Peninsula Shield capabilities, and to reinforce the joint 
military capabilities in order to develop the joint Gulf 
capability. 
  At meetings held in Abu Dhabi from 8-9 November 1993, the 
GCC 
defense ministers agreed on plans to develop joint defense 
cooperation and to start implementing a long-term plan to 
develop the Peninsula Shield forces and to establish a security 
belt around the six Gulf states. 
  Official Gulf sources have disclosed that the plans to 
develop joint Gulf defense cooperation include the following: 
  A. Establish around the GCC states a defensive security belt 
that calls for setting up an air defense network and an early 
air warning system--created by tying all of the six states' air 
defense networks and radars to each other--and for establishing 
new warning points and linking them to each other so they will 
be under the control of a single command that is linked to the 
Saudi-owned AWACS [Airborne Warning and Control Systems] planes. 
  B. Develop the Peninsula Shield forces, bolster their weapon 
capabilities, and increase their numbers so they will become 
25,000-strong in the next three years, as stated by GCC 
Secretary General Shaykh Fahim al-Qasimi. 
  In the first phase of this plan, military units from the 
various corps of the armies of the GCC states will be selected 
to join the Peninsula Shield forces and their command at their 
main location in the town of Hafr al-Batin, northeastern Saudi 
Arabia. Units from the air and naval forces of the GCC armies 
will be tied to the Peninsula Shield command. Perhaps the most 
significant point in the plan to develop the Peninsula Shield 
forces is the creation of a unified armored Gulf division under 
the command of these forces. 
  There is no doubt that approval of these plans by the six 
leaders will give the go-ahead signal for immediate 
implementation. Thus, the GCC will enter a new phase during 
which the emphasis is put on the endeavor to achieve a principle 
the GCC has already raised, namely that the "region's security 
and stability are the responsibility of its citizens." This is 
not enough for the GCC states to safeguard the region's security 
by themselves in the presence of two regional powers, namely 
Iraq and Iran. The objective of this step is, according to a 
Gulf official, to "create a force that will deter any party that 
contemplates embarking on an adventure similar to Saddam 
Husayn's adventure, for which Kuwait has paid a dear price. This 
means that the region's states will not just trust the 
protection of their security to the major powers but will also 
assume their responsibilities in this regard." 
  The fact is that the plan to create an early air warning 
system in the region is not new, considering that it was 
presented to the seventh summit in Abu Dhabi in 1988. But the 
debate on financing this system, on its command, and on the 
headquarters of this command, as well as on the locations of the 
warning centers, caused the Gulf states to delay agreement on 
the system until the Kuwait catastrophe occurred. In the wake of 
that catastrophe, Sultan Qabus Bin-Sa'id of Oman, assigned by 
the GCC states, presented his plan to create a unified Gulf army 
to the 12th Gulf summit in Kuwait. Because of some 
sensitivities, it was agreed to amend the plan and to proceed 
with drafting plans to develop the Peninsula Shield forces so 
they would constitute the nucleus of a unified Gulf force. 
  When the political will materialized, the Gulf chiefs of 
staff were able to overcome the obstacles and sensitivities that 
had obstructed approval of the joint Gulf defense cooperation 
plans in accordance with the strategy embraced by the GCC states 
in the 1985 Muscat summit. The defense ministers then approved 
the plans drafted by the chiefs of staff to establish a security 
belt and to develop all particulars of the Peninsula Shield 
forces, especially those particulars connected with establishing 
a joint command system that provides for the periodic 
alternation of chiefs of staffs of these forces and with the 
method of financing creation of the air [defense] system and the 
expenditures required for the Peninsula Shield forces. 
  While defense and military cooperation accomplished a 
significant step through what has been agreed, Gulf security 
cooperation also took a considerable step toward reaching a 
unified Gulf agreement when Kuwait dropped its former 
reservations about some of the clauses in the security agreement 
during the meeting of the interior ministers held last month in 
Abu Dhabi. These reservations are connected with the subject of 
pursuit of criminals and smugglers across borders and capturing 
suspects and trying them. 
  Kuwait's withdrawal of its reservations raised hopes that 
this agreement would be signed. Prince Nayif Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz, 
the Saudi interior minister, thinks of it as "the tool and 
fundamental instrument to implement the joint security strategy" 
which the GCC countries agreed upon in 1987. Prince Nayif 
expressed these hopes when he announced in Abu Dhabi last month 
that "the interior ministers have taken the necessary steps to 
put the security agreement in the final format to be signed 
within the next year." 
  The summit working papers which the leaders will study 
include the joint security agreement and a number of 
recommendations which are related to unification of other 
security and legal measures. 
<H5>  [21 Dec pp 1, 4] </H5>
  [Text] The Arab file presented to the 14th Gulf summit in 
Riyadh includes three reports drafted by the Gulf foreign 
ministers for their leaders to debate when the discussion deals 
with the Arab issue. These reports are: 
  First, the rapid developments in the Middle East peace 
process, their impact on the Gulf states since the 
Palestinian-Israeli declaration of principles was concluded, and 
the talk about endeavors to establish a new Mideastern order to 
replace the Arab order that has been toppled by the consequences 
of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. 
  There is no doubt that the region's entry into the peaceful 
settlement phase has created new given facts and that the Arab 
Gulf states are required to deal with these developments and to 
participate in them, either by supporting and aiding the 
settlement process and the peace negotiations between the Arab 
parties and Israel or by participating in the multilateral 
Middle East talks that seek to underline Israel's participation 
in the region's issues. From the outset, the GCC states 
supported the peaceful settlement talks and contributed to the 
contacts that were held in the initial phases to get to the 
negotiations. Moreover, the GCC states have supported the 
Palestinian-Israeli declaration of principles as a first step 
toward a "just and comprehensive peace that accomplishes Israeli 
withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories." 
  When asked to finance the World Bank plan to provide 
economic 
aid to self-rule, the Gulf states did contribute. Saudi Arabia 
announced a contribution of $100 million and the UAE a 
contribution of $50 million for the first year. 
  The report prepared for the Gulf summit on the peace process 
developments focuses on two main issues, namely: 
  A. The Arab boycott of Israel: The report asserts that the 
position of the GCC states agrees with the Arab League 
resolution that emphasizes the continued Arab boycott of Israel. 
  B. Multinational negotiations: The report believes that 
there 
is no objection to achieving progress in the negotiations in 
which the GCC states participate parallel to the progress made 
in the peace process. 
  It is to be noted that Qatar and Oman will host next year 
the 
meetings of two committees of the multi-national negotiation 
committees. 
  As for providing Gulf aid to the Palestinian self-rule, it 
is 
not expected that the Gulf summit will issue a unanimous 
resolution on this issue. Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Sa'ud 
al-Faysal has noted that the "GCC states have declared in their 
turn, each state separately, that they will aid the 
Palestinians." 
  It is to be noted that Kuwait wanted a collective resolution 
on Gulf participation in this aid. It seems from the emphasis, 
which the report submitted to the Gulf summi,t puts on the 
issues of the Arab boycott of Israel and the multinational 
negotiations that the GCC states believe that these are the dues 
required of them currently in connection with the peaceful 
settlement process. 
  As for other dues, such as the status of Palestinians 
residing in the GCC states, the Gulf capitals see that they are 
not required to resettle these Palestinians in their own 
countries and that these Palestinians will continue to be 
treated the same as residents from other Arab nationalities. 
<H5>  Damascus Proclamation </H5>
  Second, the second report in the Arab file presented to the 
summit concerns the Damascus proclamation. Even though the 
foreign ministers of the Damascus proclamation signatory states 
held a meeting in Abu Dhabi last June in an attempt to revive 
this proclamation on new bases and to draft a new protocol to 
implement it, it is noticed that talk about the proclamation has 
diminished and disappeared. Even the experts committee, which 
was formed of the eight states that signed the proclamation in 
March 1991 and was supposed to meet at the beginning of this 
month to draft a protocol on the mechanism for implementing the 
proclamation--even this committee has not met. Consequently, the 
meeting scheduled to be held this month in the Syrian capital by 
the proclamation foreign ministers has not been held either. 
  Gulf sources said that the GCC states have been waiting for 
Egypt to take the initiative and call for holding the experts 
committee meeting and waiting for news from Syria, in its 
capacity as the host state, on convocation of the foreign 
ministers meeting. But nothing has been determined to date. 
  Observers believe that all this indicates that the Damascus 
proclamation has ended up being no more than just another Arab 
joint action document. In this regard, observers note what Yusuf 
Bin-'Alawi, the Omani minister of state for foreign affairs, 
said in Cairo last July, namely that "results of the Damascus 
proclamation will appear in five centuries." 
  But official Gulf sources assert that the Damascus 
proclamation continues to exist and that all efforts seek to 
transform it into a formula for inter-Arab relations within the 
framework of the Arab League. 
  AL-HAYAH has learned that a recommendation included in the 
report the foreign ministers have submitted the summit calls for 
entrusting the State of Qatar to contact Egypt in order to set a 
date for a meeting of the protocol-drafting experts committee in 
preparation for setting a date for the next meeting of the 
Damascus proclamation foreign ministers. 
<H5>  Inter-Arab Relations </H5>
  Third, the third report in the Arab file concerns the status 
of inter-Arab relations, especially the Gulf relations with the 
other Arab countries. Even though three years have passed since 
the liberation of Kuwait, Arab relations continue to be the 
captive of the conditions and consequences generated by this 
war. Generally, the GCC countries' relations with some Arab 
countries (Jordan, Sudan, Yemen, Palestine) have not experienced 
any significant positive developments, even though Oman has 
opened up to all these countries and even though Qatar has had 
good contacts and relations with these countries, including Iraq 
itself. 
  This year, some relaxation developed in the relations of a 
number of Gulf states with the PLO when Chairman Yasir 'Arafat 
visited Muscat last September and had a one-hour stopover at Abu 
Dhabi airport. But what is more important than this is the 
visits made by Palestinian officials (Mahmud 'Abbas and others) 
to some Gulf capitals. 
  Observers believe that the peace process developments have 
been the main motive behind the relaxation in the Gulf relations 
with the PLO. But Arab Gulf states continue to have their 
reservations on 'Arafat, even though the U.S. administration has 
urged them to deal with 'Arafat in wake of his approval of the 
Oslo accord. It seems that these reservations are what is 
slowing the restoration of fully normal Gulf relations with the 
PLO. 
  What emerges from the course of the Gulf relations with the 
Arab countries is that it is left up to each Gulf state to 
determine its relations with the other Arab countries according 
to its interest, even though Kuwait continues to refuse to 
establish relations with those whom it calls the "adversary 
states." However, observers believe that in wake of the latest 
peace process developments, future conditions in the Middle East 
region will dictate enacting the concept of "joint interests." 
This concept requires the presence of a strong Arab role in the 
Gulf region because the GCC states, which seek to become a 
regional power in the area in order to make up for the 
imbalance, cannot play this role without an Arab wall on which 
to lean. There is no doubt that the leaders of the GCC states 
will make the decision on such strategic resolutions. 
<H5>  [22 Dec pp 1, 4] </H5>
  [Text] Even though border issues and problems between some 
Gulf states are not ordinarily presented on the Gulf summit 
agendas, bilateral meetings held on the summit sidelines provide 
an opportunity to discuss endless and problematic border issues. 
At times, and especially when raised in the media, these issues 
almost cause the GCC states' relations with each other to be 
stormy, as in the case of the Saudi-Qatari border dispute, which 
erupted more than a year ago. If it had not been settled two 
days before convocation of the Abu Dhabi summit, this dispute 
would have nearly blocked the GCC march. 
  Most GCC states, especially Saudi Arabia, believe that 
common 
border problems are easier to solve if they are kept out of the 
media limelights and provocation. This is what happened nearly 
two months ago between the UAE and Saudi Arabia when Abu Dhabi 
issued on 24 October 1993 a federal decree delineating the UAE 
maritime borders in the Arab Gulf and in the Sea of Oman, 
including both UAE internal and territorial waters. The law 
[decree] defines the UAE territorial sea as a water strip 
extending 12 nautical miles beyond the UAE internal and 
territorial waters. The law imposes certain conditions, which 
require that merchant ships and military boats and submarines 
vessels acquire an advance permit from the UAE authorities 
before they sail into and cross the UAE territorial waters. 
  Because Saudi Arabian and UAE sea and land borders overlap 
in 
the Khawr al- 'Adid area, southeast of Qatar and close to the 
Saudi-Qatari-UAE border triangle, this meant that the 
territorial border delineated by the new law, which extends the 
UAE territorial zones, would cross into the Saudi coastline in 
the Khawr al-'Adid area. The law would have caused tension to 
prevail in the region's relations if it had not been for the 
quiet contacts held between the two countries far from the 
limelights, including the meeting Saudi Interior Minister Prince 
Nayif Bin-'Abd-al- 'Aziz had with Shaykh Bin-Zayid Sultan and 
the subsequent visit by Hamdan Bin-Zayid, the UAE minister of 
state for foreign affairs; and Ahmad Khalifah al-Suwaydi, Shaykh 
Zayid's chief adviser and the expert on all of the region's 
borders; to Jeddah and their meeting with King Fahd 
Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz, custodian of the two holy mosques. It was 
emphasized at that meeting that the law delineating the UAE 
territorial waters and zones was not intended to violate the 
Saudi rights to the territories and coastline agreed upon in 
1974. Thus, a page of border problems, which were tackled 
quietly and with utter confidentiality, was turned over. This 
confirms that the Saudi approach to deal with border problems 
quietly is a sound approach. 
  There is no doubt that the peripheral meetings, which will 
be 
held on the sidelines of the Gulf summit in Riyadh, will include 
a meeting between the Saudi monarch and Shaykh Khalifah 
Bin-Hamad Al Thani, the ruler of Qatar, to follow-up on the 
solution to the border problems between the two countries. An 
agreement has been reached on these problems and it calls for 
forming a technical committee to oversee demarcation of the 
borders. It was agreed on this committee at a meeting held one 
year ago in al-Madinah between King Fahd, Shaykh Khalifah, and 
President Husni Mubarak. 
  It has been learned from Gulf diplomatic sources that the 
technical committee has held one meeting. There is no doubt that 
King Fahd and Qatar's ruler will emerge with an understanding on 
how to continue implementing their agreement. 
  Political circles view peripheral and bilateral meetings 
between Gulf leaders with great interest because these meetings 
determine features of the Gulf understanding on various issues, 
especially bilateral issues between the six states. These issues 
are not, of course, confined to border problems but also include 
other issues, especially disagreement in opinions on certain 
relations or contacts made by one state and viewed with 
sensitivity by another, such as the misunderstanding that has 
developed between Kuwait and Qatar over growing Qatari relations 
with Iraq. There is no doubt that the Kuwaitis do not view what 
they call Qatari opening up to Baghdad with satisfaction. This 
is particularly true of the visit made by the Qatari deputy 
chief of staff to Baghdad at the beginning of this month. This 
visit provoked greater Kuwaiti resentment and could have created 
tension in the relations with Doha had not Saudi Arabia 
intervened promptly and pacified matters and had not Doha issued 
a statement asserting that the deputy chief of staff's visit to 
Baghdad was a private visit. 
  During the Gulf ministerial meeting last Saturday, Kuwaiti 
Foreign Minister Shaykh Sabah al-Ahmad proceeded to meet with 
his Qatari counterpart, Shaykh Hamad Bin-Jasim Al Thani, in an 
endeavor to settle the misunderstanding between their two 
countries and to pave the way for a meeting between their two 
leaders. In fact, Shaykh Jabir al-Ahmad al-Sabah and Shaykh 
Khalifah Bin-Hamad Al Thani did meet in Riyadh on the first day 
of the summit. There is no doubt that this meeting has 
contributed to settling the misunderstanding. 
<H5>  Economic File </H5>
  In addition to the important peripheral and bilateral 
meetings between the Gulf states' leaders, another important 
file on the summit agenda is the economic file. 
  Whereas the 14th Gulf summit will see positive and important 
progress achieved in joint defense and security cooperation, 
Gulf circles have been "disappointed" by the failure to reach 
agreement to date on the unified customs tariff which, according 
to Dr. 'Abdullah al-Quwayz, GCC assistant secretary general for 
economic affairs, was supposed to be reached during this year 
which will end in a few days. 
  A Gulf agreement to unify customs fees on foreign imports 
has, according to a statement by Dr. al-Quwayz, faced the 
following disagreements of viewpoints: 
  "1. Some states believe that unifying the customs tariff by 
raising it above the reduced tariff levels they apply currently 
will negatively affect their reexport trade, which occupies big 
place in their economic activity. 
  "2. Other states believe that unifying the customs tariff at 
levels below the levels they apply currently will reduce their 
revenues and will affect their budgets negatively, unless this 
unification is coupled with a rewarding compensation for these 
states. 
  "3. A third group of states believe that reducing customs 
fees below a certain level will, in addition to reducing general 
treasury revenues, affect negatively the GCC states' negotiating 
power vis-a-vis their main trade partners. Such a reduction will 
also lead to unequal competition between national products and 
foreign products, thus reducing the GCC states' chances of real 
industrial growth at a time when these states seek to diversify 
their income sources." 
  Therefore, the economic papers submitted to the summit 
include a request from the GCC states' finance ministers to 
their leaders to give them more time to complete consultations 
on unifying the customs tariff. These papers also include 
another request for approval of the recommendations to improve 
the rules governing real estate ownership by Gulf states' 
citizens and recommendations to permit Gulf airlines to operate, 
to market services, and to make sales without the need for a 
local agent or a general guarantor. The papers further include a 
request to approve establishing a trade arbitration center for 
the GCC states in Bahrain and to pass its constitution. 
  It is indubitable that the failure to reach agreement on a 
unified customs tariff will delay the GCC states' objective of 
creating a common Gulf market to bolster the economic unity of 
the six Gulf states. This issue has been submitted constantly to 
all the Gulf summits since the first summit was convened in Abu 
Dhabi in 1981. 

