BFN 

  [Text] Bonn -- Economics Minister Guenter Rexrodt (Free 
Democratic Party of Germany) considers east German small- and 
medium-sized companies with some 440,000 self-employed people 
and some 3 million employees the "pillars" of economic 
development in the new laender. Speaking to the press in Bonn 
on Wednesday [30 March], Rexrodt said that he wants to examine 
the various possibilities of subsidies and programs, from 
research promotion to write-downs and investment subsidies. A 
package that is to be valid until 1997 is to be worked out to 
give companies security in planning. 
  Referring to the dispute with the European Commission on the 
use of 27 billion German marks to be provided from the European 
Union [EU] structural funds over the next five years, the 
economics minister confirmed his position. He wants the money 
to be invested directly in the labor market within the joint 
task of regional economic policy. Financing sewage plants, 
research companies, or other technologies is also important, but 
they should be paid from different funds, Rexrodt demanded. The 
funds are frozen. A decision must be made in Brussels before 
the end of this month. 
  Rexrodt contradicted the Social Democratic Party of 
Germany's 
belief that the policy conducted by the government and the Trust 
Agency is leading to a deindustrialization in the new laender. 
The industrial centers are maintained, with a million jobs in 
industry. At the same time, the foundations have been laid for 
new companies. He sees particular progress within the small and 
medium-sized businesses, especially in the fields of trade, 
commerce, and services. What often creates problems is a lack 
of capital resources. The minister, therefore, called upon 
banks not to demand too much security for credits. 
  The Federation of German Industries (BDI) on the other hand, 
considers the situation of small and medium-sized industries in 
the new laender rather "unstable." The framework for subsidies 
needs to be improved. Funds have to be used more efficiently. 
The BDI once again demanded tax privileges for net product in 
the new laender (net product preference). This is verified by 
the fact that, together with the small capital resources, the 
opening of new markets is still a priority, [the BDI said]. 

