BFN 

<F P=106> [By Michael Smith and Jim Cheung] </F>
  [Text] Anger over China's sentencing of a local reporter 
to 12 years' imprisonment mounted yesterday with more than 80 
journalists demonstrating outside the Xinhua News Agency to call 
for their colleague's release. The protest came 24 hours after 
China confirmed Ming Pao reporter Xi Yang had been imprisoned 
for spying and stealing state secrets. 
  Hong Kong journalists were joined by the international media 
yesterday who condemned the sentence as too severe and a breach 
of human rights. The Hong Kong Journalists Association (HKJA) 
will launch an investigation into the events that led to Xi's 
arrest. They want to discover why he returned to China after 
saying he feared for his safety there. 
  Close friends and colleagues of Xi told The HONGKONG 
STANDARD 
that months before his arrest he had pleaded with his editors to 
be allowed to return to Hong Kong. They said Xi was being 
constantly followed by four Public Security officers but his 
concern went unheeded by Ming Pao's editors. 
  The newspaper denied the claims on Monday but yesterday a 
senior Ming Pao source confirmed Xi had expressed his concerns 
to the paper in June or July last year. The source added that 
Xi was only sent back to China after receiving official 
permission to join a delegation covering economic development in 
the northeast of the country. "He went through all the proper 
application procedures and followed all the rules applying to 
Hong Kong journalists," the source said. 
  The vice-chairman of the HKJA, Kevin Lau, said the events 
surrounding Xi's return to China were still unclear. "What we 
want to find out objectively is if there were any signals that 
he was in danger before the arrest," Mr Lau said. "That is an 
important mystery. We have been trying but no one has been able 
to talk to Xi Yang direct... only he will be able to provide 
truthful information." 
  Journalists outside the Xinhua building yesterday accused 
the 
Chinese authorities of jeopardising the future of press freedom 
in the territory after 1997. 
  HKJA chairman Daisy Li said Mr Xi's sentence had shocked 
Hong 
Kong and Taiwanese journalists working in China. She said 
China's state secret laws were too vague. 
  Journalists have written a letter to China's Premier Li Peng 
demanding an open and fair trial for Xi's appeal. They have 
also launched a three-day signature campaign calling for his 
release. 
  Journalists plan to lobby the Chinese-appointed Hong Kong 
affairs advisers and local deputies to the mainland's 
legislature in a bid to get a full account of Xi's case. The 
chairman of the 123 Democratic Alliance, Lawrence Yum, said 
China had violated human rights and its own legal system. 
  And lecturer in journalism at the Hong Kong Baptist College, 
To Yiu-ming, warned the laws that led to Xi's arrest could be 
extended to Hong Kong after 1997. 

