Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Russian Ambassador to Poland Yuri Kashlev by </F>
Ryszard Malik; place and date not given: "Democratic Russia 
Does Not Pose a Threat to Poland"] 
  [Text] [Malik] Mr. Ambassador, has the "war of words," 
waged by our two countries for a few months now, ended yet or 
has it merely calmed down for a while? 
  [Kashlev] Now I will ask you a question: Has there been any 
"war of words"? There is a war when two sides shoot, when there 
are two enemies. In my opinion, it was merely artillery fire, 
and a shot by only one side at that. Our press has recently not 
published anything that would be leveled against Poland. 
However, Polish newspapers were abundant in remarks on the 
Russian bear, about the Kremlin's dictate... Our newspapers did 
not write about Poland in such an inhospitable manner. It is 
true that there were official statements on our part, as far as 
the issue of expanding NATO to include new member states was 
concerned; we took a stance on many issues related to the Polish 
efforts. Nevertheless, we understand that there is a difference 
between articles in mass media and the stance of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs [MSZ], the office of the president, or the 
government. 
  Ambassador Stanislaw Ciosek was summoned to our MSZ and he 
was informed about the anti-Russian overtones in the Polish mass 
media. That is all. 
  [Malik] However, was there any reason for such articles to 
appear in the Polish press? 
  [Kashlev] I know from where these articles came. Polish 
diplomacy fell into the trap of its own intentions which had not 
been thoroughly thought over. The reasoning behind that was 
probably something like this: within several weeks or months 
Poland will be admitted to NATO. I do not want to meddle with 
the internal affairs of Poland; I must, however, stress that in 
all my interviews with the Polish press I keep saying: this is 
impossible, this is not realistic for the time being. 
  [Malik] Why is it not realistic? 
  [Kashlev] At this moment at least. And it will not be 
possible very soon. This is because at the very beginning, after 
the release of information that Russia had withdrew its 
objection to Poland's joining NATO, which was during Boris 
Yeltsin's visit to Poland, the information was distorted. The 
intention of the Russian president, as well as the joint 
declaration that was then signed, was misunderstood. 
Incidentally, it was not really President Yeltsin, but General 
John Shalikashvili who said that we are not ready to shift the 
borders of NATO from the Oder to the Bug river. As it soon 
turned out, the West did not plan to admit Poland to NATO very 
soon, anyway. 
  [Malik] Why, then, did Polish, and not only Polish, 
journalists understand the Russian president in such a way? 
  [Kashlev] This is because none of the Polish papers 
published 
the full text of the declaration. It was clearly written: the 
stand of the Polish side was accepted with understanding. Both 
parties agree that, first of all, this concerns a certain amount 
of time; second, this will be done within the framework of 
building an all-European security system; third, that it will 
not conflict with the interests of the other party. I know this 
because I drafted the text myself. Now, everything that appeared 
later on in the press was shallow and simplified. In addition, 
at the press conference the president did not say what the 
newspapers later reported: Poles, you may enter NATO. Yeltsin 
said that the times when the Kremlin gave orders to Warsaw would 
not return. 
  [Malik] I heard what he said; I was there. 
  [Kashlev] Yes, there was also the statement that Poland is 
sovereign and that it can do whatever it likes. 
  [Malik] This means that we misunderstood the president? 
  [Kashlev] Reverting to the "war of words" in the recent 
months, there has not been such a war. For us, whatever is said 
by President Lech Walesa or Minister Andrzej Olechowski is more 
important than the articles of some journalists. The dispute was 
over the difference in understanding our stances. We understood 
it this way, you understood it differently. It was just 
bantering which did not in any way negatively affect our 
relations. 
  [Malik] Russia saw first of all its own interest, whereas 
Poland defended its own... 
  [Kashlev] Yes, this is exactly it. However, I believe that 
this, this difference of opinions, will have to be discussed and 
spoken about. For this reason, among others, Minister Andrey 
Kozyrev will soon visit Warsaw. 
  However, I must point to one thing that hurts me. There is a 
conviction, right or wrong, in Poland that this country belongs 
to the West. This is just like getting on a high horse, 
stressing that the border of Europe is at the Bug river. What 
about Russia? Does Russia not lie in Europe? Are Dostoyevski, 
Chaikovski, Chekhov, and Gercen not Europeans? Russia is in 
Europe and no one can change that. We do not want any 
separating, any new divisions. There must be one Europe. Now, 
you think that to be in NATO means to be in this "good" Europe 
and be against someone, against Russia? We emphasize that there 
must be one all-European security system that would comprise all 
the states. Such is our ideal for the future. 
  [Malik] Your ideal? 
  [Kashlev] Yes, this is an ideal, but it is difficult to 
implement. This will not happen very soon; however, the first 
steps have already been taken. I am now referring to the CSCE, 
the Council of North-Atlantic Cooperation, the European Union 
[EU], with which Poland has been associated since 1 February. 
Thus, there are already some mechanisms. We support these Polish 
efforts and we will watch this process with no ill feelings. We 
will do this thinking about our future and thinking that we will 
one day be in the EU as well. Now, as far as military 
cooperation is concerned, there is no such cooperation as yet. 
The 16 states that comprise NATO constitute a club of the rich, 
a club which remains closed to others. NATO was established when 
the Warsaw Pact was in place and it had a clear goal. Now that 
the pact has ceased to exist, the arrows on NATO's war maps are 
still directed in the same direction. NATO has not made an 
adequate transformation; the member states are still watching 
and waiting. The alliance, as a military pact, must have an 
enemy; it must be directed against someone. I am asking: against 
whom? 
  [Malik] That is right. Against whom, do you think? 
  [Kashlev] Ask Brussels about this; then you will understand 
our fears concerning the extension of NATO. The alliance is such 
as it is. In Warsaw they tell you this, and we are told that. 
Our concept is based on building a collective security system, 
comprising Russia and the former Soviet republics, on CSCE. We 
do not want a situation where some states are in NATO whereas 
others are outside of it. Thinking like the following: I will be 
in NATO and I do not care about anything else, I am safe and 
that means support for a divided Europe. Russia wants to go to 
Europe along with the Poles, Hungarians, Czechs, Bulgarians, and 
other nations. This is our concept. Now, saying: I am better, I 
will be first in NATO. What does this achieve, what does this 
achieve? 
  How many times has there been such a situation in history; 
even guarantees were given. We know how all this ended. 
  [Malik] Poland did not want any guarantees. As you know, 
recently there has been the concept of joint Russian-American 
guarantees... 
  [Kashlev] It was an attempt to respond to the suggestions 
made by the Visegrad Group, which wanted to fill the vacuum that 
had developed in Central-East Europe after all the changes. 
  [Malik] I understand the stand of the Russian Federation; 
however, you should understand the Polish stance, our fears. 
Poland has its own vision of security. Asked about their 
attitude toward their neighbors, Poles evaluate Russia as a 
hostile country... 
  [Kashlev] I know this and regret it. However, this should be 
laid at the door of the Polish press. 
  [Malik] The press? 
  [Kashlev] Exactly. It is some papers that create myths about 
various kinds of threats on the part of Russia, such as the 20 
million Russians who were supposed to roll through Poland. Who 
wrote about that and advertised it? Right now we are witnessing 
press hysteria with regard to Zhirinovskiy. Who is Zhirinovskiy? 
You have similar people as well. He is one of many politicians 
who say a lot, but who do not exert very much influence on our 
foreign policy. Why is so much written about him? 
  Believe me that today the democratic Russian does not pose 
any threat to Poland. 
  [Malik] Judging by the statements of Minister Andrey Kozyrev 
and Minister Pavel Grachev, Russia is not a state that would 
like to return to the role of a superpower which would want to 
shape the relations not only in its immediate surroundings. Are, 
then, people unnecessarily worried by the style and overtone of 
the statements of Russian politicians? 
  [Kashlev] Kozyrev has never spoken about the rebuilding of 
the Soviet Union in the old form or the Czarist Russia. He 
stressed, however, that there are many states around Russia 
where wars are being waged. There are borders on fire. Russian 
troops were often asked for help. They fulfill the role of a 
mediator. 
  [Malik] Did they fill this role when they supported the 
Abkhazians in the war with Georgia? 
  [Kashlev] The Russian troops did not back up any of the 
parties in this conflict. Both Eduard Shevardnadze and Vladislav 
Arjinba called us for help. 
  [Malik] Some wrote that Russia helped the present Georgian 
president defeat Zviad Gamsakhurdia, who was the democratically 
elected head of state. 
  [Kashlev] Has anyone found any evidence that would bear out 
such actions of the Russian troops? During the civil war, the 
Russians protected communication routes that are important from 
our point of view; that is all. Our troops settle conflicts by 
simply being there; they fulfill the role of peacekeeping 
[preceding word in English] units. What would have happened in 
Tajikistan, where the Muslim fundamentalists came onto the 
scene, had it not been for our soldiers? We must bear in mind 
that this country is inhabited by 300,000 Russians. The threat 
of Muslim fundamentalism also worries Uzbekistan and other 
Center Asian states. Therefore, cooperation is both in the 
interest of our country as well as these states. 
  [Malik] What about your troops in Armenia, Azerbaijan... 
  [Kashlev] We do not have any combat units there. They are 
fighting against each other. We want UN peacekeeping units to be 
sent there. Please remember that we must put out the fire on our 
southern borders. This is the only thing in which we are 
interested. We have no imperial ambitions. 
  [Malik] What is the role of Russia today? 
  [Kashlev] Russia is a large country. However, the most 
important task of the state and the government is to rebuild the 
economy. Unless we do this, the government will be obliterated 
from the face of the earth. The "Solidarity" demonstration in 
Warsaw stretched 5 km; ours will extend as many as 500 km. Can 
you imagine that? We would really like to deal only with the 
economy today; we are interested in developments abroad just as 
much as is necessary. We do not want the conflict in the 
Caucasus or Tajikistan to spread to us. In Russia there are 
millions of Tatars, Bashkirs, and people of other nations. We do 
not want to experience the Yugoslav conflict on our soil. These 
are the only things that we are worried about. Foreign policy is 
subordinated to our internal goals. 
  [Malik] However, Bill Clinton's America wants Russia as a 
superpower, does it not? 
  [Kashlev] Russia is a superpower; that is an objective fact. 
As far as our military potential is concerned, it equals the 
American potential; as for natural resources, Russia comes 
first. Russia is the largest country on earth. No one is going 
to take these advantages away from us. Washington has understood 
that it cannot take on everything. We are not a superpower 
because we are going through a crisis. However, we have a role 
to play. 
  Whoever forgets this and teases us, does the wrong thing. 
For 
example, the attempts of some of our neighbors to join NATO 
already today, shifting the borders of NATO--all this is playing 
into the hands of all the opponents of reforms, conservative 
forces, nationalists who are trying to block our reforms and 
impede our fight against the crisis. 
  [Malik] The role of Russia is appreciated today; however, 
Moscow's opinions on many issues are different. Will there not 
be a conflict with the West over the planned air strikes against 
Serbs in Bosnia? 
  [Kashlev] Russia's policy toward Yugoslavia is nothing new. 
Our view is different. All the wars, which in recent years 
resembled the Yugoslav conflict, such as the Afghan and Vietnam 
wars, were caused by the ignorance of politicians. They all 
started with small steps, with the intervention of units, and 
ended up in the tragedies of entire armies. One must know the 
history; one must know how to draw conclusions. If our generals 
had known about the defeats of the English in Afghanistan, they 
would never have gone there. If the Americans had paid proper 
attention to the experiences of the French in Vietnam, they 
would not have gone into the jungle. The Germans did not manage 
to cope with the Yugoslav guerrillas throughout all of World War 
II. Do you think that the West will cope with the Serbs today? 
Apart from that, bombs in Bosnia will be dropped on innocent 
people as well; the area is not the same as the hundreds of 
kilometers of desert in Kuwait or Iraq, where U.S. and French 
soldiers have recently fought. This is why Russia can see the 
danger of an armed intervention in Yugoslavia and fears that 
this local conflict may turn into a global one. One war has 
already started in Sarajevo. 
  [Malik] I understand that Russia has its own view on this 
issue. However, why is it so that, despite earlier enthusiasm 
for this concept, Russia is not hurrying to sign the 
"Partnership for Peace?" 
  [Kashlev] We will not have a race. We consider the 
"Partnership for Peace" to be the optimum solution today--for 
NATO, for you, and for us; it resolves the difficult problem of 
filling the vacuum left after the collapse of the communist 
system. Russia has good relations with the United States, also 
in the military area. In July, large-scale Russian-American 
military maneuvers will take place. Our military potential just 
cannot be compared to the military potential of the Central and 
East European states. We really have power at our disposal and 
this is why the scale of our cooperation with NATO, including 
cooperation in the military sphere, is different. If we want, we 
will sign the "Partnership for Peace" program; I emphasize, 
however, that we are not really in a hurry. Maybe we will settle 
for our relations with the United States and NATO which we 
already have and which are quite good. 
  Now, go and listen to Polish politicians. Some say that we 
are already prepared to join NATO; others laugh and say where 
the money for new equipment and modern communications systems 
for the Army should be taken from. For the time being, the 
Polish Army is dependent on deliveries from Russia and other 
states of the former Soviet Union. We are also buying some parts 
and components for our equipment in your country. This will last 
for quite some time. This is what I often emphasize in my talks 
with the Polish partners: Be realistic. Do you know how much 
money you will need to adjust to the military structures of NATO? 
  [Malik] From the point of view of not only Poland, Russian 
democracy is a great experiment. In the last elections, 
reformers were elected to the parliament; however, almost 
one-fourth of the voters supported Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, who 
quite openly advertised the program of an imperial Russia. His 
statements, as well as the maps that he draws, upset a great 
many people. 
  [Kashlev] We cannot deny this fact. We realize this. 
Zhirinovskiy was supported by people who were taken in by his 
rhetoric. He attacked quite clearly and simply; he did not spare 
any sharp words. He condemned the condition of the economy, the 
crisis. He promised that he would help the poor and the patient. 
Other politicians did not say such things--they rather avoided 
any criticism. This is why Zhirinovskiy became popular. He won 
because he played on the people's emotions. Still, 25 percent of 
the people supported him, which is quite a lot. His victory 
showed the danger that Russia might find itself in if people 
such as himself come to power. I emphasize, however, that, 
fortunately, for the time being his words cannot be turned into 
action. Zhirinovskiy has no such possibilities or such powers. 
  [Malik] Thus, we can evaluate this situation objectively and 
say that Zhirinovskiy is playing into the hands of Yeltsin? 
  [Kashlev] You can say that, I suppose. It has gotten across 
to the world that Russia must be helped in overcoming the 
economic crisis. Then there will be no such people as 
Zhirinovskiy. However, do not forget that out of the sum of $40 
billion, we really received only a few billion... All the time I 
can hear the same old thing: Russia must be helped; however, 
these are only words, only blah, blah, blah. To ensure that 
Russia will overcome the crisis, this must be done efficiently. 
  [Malik] Reverting to the fears of Poles and Poland. Why do 
you think Russia is today perceived as our adversary? 
  [Kashlev] I understand Poles' fears. There was a time when 
Czarist Russia, along with Prussia and Austria-Hungary, caused 
the partition of Poland. Poland had really bad luck to have such 
neighbors as it had. Then, for over 40 years, the Soviet fist 
hung over the world. Again, you were unlucky to be closest to 
this fist. There were orders from Moscow. They say that there 
was also friendship between us. The Soviet Union was a 
militaristic state--its goal was to build communism around the 
world. Fortunately, there is no longer a Soviet Union, but a 
democratic Russia. I must say that over the last three years a 
breakthrough was made in our relations. I am now referring to 
our political contacts; economic relations are not so good at 
all. 
  [Malik] What do you think Polish-Russian relations should be 
like now that both states have found themselves on the road of 
reforms, when they are looking for their own niche in the new 
reality? 
  [Kashlev] Our old problems have fortunately been resolved. 
The Katyn issue has been explained; Russian troops are no longer 
stationed in your country; there is a treaty of cooperation 
signed by both presidents. We have as many as 35 agreements 
based on partnership. I am an optimist; however, all these 
agreements must be translated into the language of the practice 
of everyday life. Today is the age of pragmatists, not 
ideologists. That is good. 
  Our embassy has declared this year to be a year of economy 
in 
Polish-Russian relations. I advertise economics because I 
believe that a satiated man will not want conflict or war. He 
will not really feel like fighting. 
  I hope that many issues will be explained during the visit 
of 
our foreign affairs minister to Poland in late February. 

