Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Pressclub" program--live] </F>
  [Excerpts] [Announcer] Good evening, esteemed television 
viewers. As usual on Tuesday, you can watch a live relay of the 
Pressclub roundtable about topical issues discussed by the 
Cabinet. I welcome the Cabinet members who are here to brief us 
on the 86th Session of the Cabinet--Prime Minister Vladimir 
Meciar, Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Julius Toth, 
and Deputy Prime Minister Jozef Prokes. [passage omitted] 
  Mr. Minister, the Cabinet's original agenda for its session 
about two weeks ago included the issue of [word indistinct] a 
memorandum to the IMF. Could you explain what this document is, 
what the issue is? 
  [Toth] I cannot tell you much detail because the document 
has 
not been discussed. [passage omitted] It is not so much the 
issue of making stricter some criteria we agreed upon in 
December. As you know, the deficit of our state budget has been 
a bit higher than what we agreed on. A certain responsibility 
is felt, a certain fear has emerged that we might fail to keep 
this year's budget within the planned framework, though we have 
explained that our criteria are totally different from those of 
last year. As you all remember, in March 1993 our budget 
deficit had already reached 11 billion korunas; we do not expect 
such a dynamic development this year. Our economy has become, 
to a certain extent, clear, and we know its outlines. We are 
not engaged any more in drafting a new tax system, and I hope we 
will not have to do so in the next 50 years. This means that 
our macroeconomic conditions are different. 
  However, IMF experts, like all good bankers, always have 
worse times in mind. This is why our views on this issue were 
controversial, that two of us held different views. 
  We believe that, provided we keep the budget criteria 
according to our original agreement, we will not have to take 
any further, more serious, measures. [passage omitted] 
  [Unidentified journalist] Prime Minister, a report by the 
Slovak-Czech border commission was heard by the government 
today. It emerges from this that the only controversial point, 
in fact, is Kasarnie. It would appear that this question should 
be discussed by the Czech and Slovak prime ministers. I talked 
about it today with Minister Tuchyna, who said that there was 
nothing controversial, that everything was but Czech conjecture 
and everything was in fact all right. What would you say about 
the situation that exists on the Czech-Slovak border? 
  [Meciar] It is about setting frontiers. A border line is 
being sought so it may run along natural features--for example, 
waterways: along the center of a waterway, or along mountain 
tops. Since the Morava River has been canalized, the flow of 
the river has been somewhat simplified and Slovakia lost 120 
hectares. We are asking the Czech side to compensate for this 
loss by increasing the territory from the Czech Republic in 
other places that have been discussed and proposed, as 
compensation of territory in the interests of balance. If this 
is not the case, naturally, the river would in some places flow 
only on the territory of the Slovak Republic. 
  Another demand that came from the Czech side was aimed at a 
part of the Sidonia settlement, specifically 11 houses in the 
village of Horne Srnie in the district of Trencin, belonging to 
the Czech Republic. We had a petition of citizen inhabitants, 
the majority of whom asked to be citizens of the Czech Republic 
and for the territory to belong to the Czech Republic. There 
has been a proposal of compensation for this territory by 
another part of Sidonia, which has not been accepted by the 
government. 
  So, the situation is a little more complicated here in that 
Sidonia should also have been the subject of compensation, but 
it will not be. 
  The third aspect concerns Kasarnie, where the original talks 
had led to a proposal being made to the government for the prime 
ministers to talk about the settlement of Makov, a part of 
Kasarnie, where there is a shortage of 60-500 hectares. The 
government has accepted the viewpoint that there was nothing to 
discuss. It is the territory of the Slovak Republic, the state 
border is clear, the Czech tourists who do not want to go there 
[changes thought], it is their property, but it does not belong 
to the Czech Republic just because they have holiday houses and 
territory there. We will not talk about it. 
  So, this in fact simplified compensation down to only 120 
hectares of territory as a result of the canalization of the 
Morava River. [passage omitted] 

