BFN 

  [Excerpts] The IDF [Israel Defense Forces] is to withdraw 
completely from Jericho tomorrow, and more Palestinian police 
are moving into the Gaza Strip. Details from Tzvi Pantanowitz: 
  The pace is quickening. Last night hundreds of Palestinian 
police were poised to move into the Gaza Strip and the Jericho 
enclave, which are to form the start of autonomy for the 
Palestinians in the territories. 
  In Jericho, the advanced guard of the Palestinian police 
units -- about 20 security men -- will arrive to check control 
points and to study the routes of joint patrols with Israeli 
border policemen today. Another 40 Palestinian security 
personnel are due tomorrow. They are to take over the Jericho 
police station, the ancient Jewish synagogue, and a military 
base. And, in a more than symbolic gesture, the Israel Civil 
Administration will hand over to the Palestinians the keys to 
their offices. 
  IDF forces will then begin pulling back, and by the 
afternoon 
it is expected that the entire enclave will come under 
Palestinian control. Once this is settled, the force of some 
350 policemen poised on the Jordanian side of the Allenby Bridge 
will arrive to assume their duties. [passage omitted] 
  Due to cross the Allenby Bridge tonight are another 350 
policemen and security personnel. They will be transported by 
bus and trucks to the Gaza Strip via Israel. 
  In Gaza, the takeover is beginning to pick up, working from 
the south northwards. The celebrations in Dayr al-Balah town 
and the adjacent refugee camp have not abated. And, there was 
some tension again last night. The long lines of policemen 
moving northwards from the Rafah border terminal at one stage 
blocked access to Israeli settlers trying to reach their homes 
in the Qatif area. Angry and frustrated by the long delays, some 
of them set out on foot to their homes after the Army decided to 
close the road to prevent friction between the two groups. 
  The IDF is reported to be satisfied with the pace of 
withdrawal from facilities in Gaza and Jericho, and says from 
its point of view the pullout will be completed by next week. 
In any event, the Israeli Government believes the hand-over can 
proceed in an accelerated fashion over the next few days, and by 
Friday next week -- as Cabinet Minister Yosi Sarid said 
yesterday -- the Gaza Strip, except for the Jewish settlements, 
and the Jericho enclave will be in Palestinian hands and a new 
phase on the road to autonomy will begin. 
  [A report by Eytan Rabin and 'Amira Hess on page A5 of Tel 
Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew on 12 May quotes a senior IDF source as 
saying yesterday that "according to our estimates, many weeks 
will pass before the Palestinian policemen are able to operate 
in the Gaza Strip. We fear it will not be able to take control 
of the area or operate against wanted men. We may have to 
continue operating in the area, leaving behind troops to perform 
their missions." 
  [The IDF source "expressed concern about the lack of 
professionalism of the Palestinian policemen" and possible 
"internal killings in the Gaza Strip" due to the disputes and 
disagreements within the local leadership. The source went on 
to say that "there is uncertainty about the performance of the 
Palestinian police in the joint patrols with the Israeli Border 
Police" scheduled to start within a few days.] 

