BFN 

    [Editorial report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on developments related to the elections scheduled for 8 
May 1994. 
  A Marketing Ideas poll taken in Panama City for EL SIGLO 
puts 
Ernesto Perez Balladares, presidential candidate of the 
Democratic Revolutionary Party [PRD], in the lead with the 
support of 26.1 percent of respondents. Following closely is 
Change 94 Coalition candidate Ruben Carles with 24 percent. 
Papa Egoro Movement candidate Ruben Blades has remained stable 
with 13.2 percent; the rating of Arnulfista Party candidate 
Mireya Moscoso de Gruber has increased to 11.2 percent, and 
Christian Democratic Party [PDC] candidate Eduardo Vallarino's 
rating increased to 9.2 percent. The ratings of candidates 
Samuel Lewis and Salvador Munoz have not changed significantly. 
(Panama City EL SIGLO in Spanish (supplement) 17 March 94 p 8) 
  Electoral Tribunal President Eduardo Valdes has confirmed 
candidacies contested at the tribunal over the next few days 
will not delay the elections. Valdes has said the tribunal has 
already hired almost all of the 42,000 people who will work as 
voting officers, voting board members, supervisors, inspectors 
and coordinators during the 8 May elections. (Panama City 
Telemetro Television Network in Spanish 1730 GMT 19 March 94) 
  Ruben Blades says his popularity is still increasing. 
Blades, who has campaigned in various sectors of Panama City, 
said his campaign is going well, and he refused to comment on 
the other candidates, saying it would be in poor taste to do so. 
Blades has said: "Now that the campaign is in full swing, the 
people are reacting positively. As I have said before, the 
other candidates began their campaigns much earlier, but I have 
taken to the streets now, and the people have greeted me 
warmly." (Panama City Telemetro Television Network in Spanish 
1730 GMT 19 March 94) 
  During a tour of Rio Abajo Corregimiento, Ruben Carles urged 
Panamanians to preserve democracy He said the Torrijos-Carter 
Treaties legalize the presence of U.S. bases in Panama. Carles 
said: "I will make every effort to maintain certain U.S. Army 
bases, which have been legally authorized to remain in Panama by 
the neutrality treaty, particularly by the de Concini clause, 
which Omar Torrijos accepted, confirmed, and approved when he 
signed the treaty at a ceremony in Washington, saying he was 
placing Panama under the Pentagon's umbrella." (Panama City 
Circuito RPC Television in Spanish 2300 GMT 22 March 94) 
  Ruben Carles has campaigned in the neighborhood of La Boca 
Town, Rio Abajo, Panama City, where he suffered a slight injury 
inside an old building that caved in under the weight of the 
crowd. Carles responded to the situation by saying: "The 
accident occurred due to the building's poor condition. The 
floor caved in, and approximately 12 people fell; fortunately, 
nothing happened." (Panama City Circuito RPC Television in 
Spanish 2300 GMT 22 March 94) 
  Approximately 21,000 workers from the National Central 
Organization of Panamanian Workers, CNTP, have announced their 
decision to support the presidential candidacy of Ernesto Perez 
Balladares and oppose Carles, whom they characterize as a 
supporter of the U.S. December 1989 invasion of Panama. CNTP 
Secretary General Elberto Luis Cobos stated in a communique that 
the working classes identify with Perez' ideology and 
background, adding he represents hope and an opportunity for 
thousands of Panamanians who have been deceived by the current 
government. Cobos has said "a victory by Perez Balladares would 
mean a return to Torrijismo and a rejection of the neoliberal 
policies promoted by the international financial institutions 
that will foster great struggles." (Panama City LA PRENSA in 
Spanish 25 March 94 p 13A) 
  The Justice and Peace Commission has released a communique 
regarding the political ads shown on television. The document 
says "political propaganda should not exploit fear, induce any 
form of violence, or contain general accusations." One of the 
ads, sponsored by an alleged "Never Again" committee, shows 
clips of military repression and suggests viewers should never 
forget the dark past. Meanwhile, Gilberto Pitti, media director 
at the Government and Justice Ministry, says anonymous 
propaganda is not illegal and that there is no law that demands 
these ads be signed. (Panama City LA PRENSA in Spanish 25 March 
94 p 3A) 
  Perez Balladares says the latest polls show Change 94 
candidate Ruben Carles has reached a plateau, the beginning of 
his decline. LA PRENSA's latest poll puts Perez Balladares in 
the lead with 39 percent of respondents' votes, followed by 
Carles with 20.5 percent. Aurelio Barria from Carles' camp 
reacted to Perez' remarks by saying the polls show a 
polarization and that Carles' popularity will increase in March. 
(Panama City LA PRENSA in Spanish 25 March 94 p 2A) 
  Yesterday, Legislative Assembly President Arturo Vallarino 
asked the government to increase protection for presidential 
candidates. Vallarino's request was prompted by the murder in 
Mexico of Luis Donaldo Colosio, presidential candidate of the 
Institutional Revolutionary Party. Vallarino said: "The 
electoral campaign has been peaceful thus far, but times have 
changed, and it would be good for the government and its 
security bodies to provide greater protection for the 
presidential candidates." In response, Carlos Bares, 
Institutional Protection Service [SPI] director, said increased 
protection for each candidate has not yet been considered and 
that President Guillermo Endara would have to make such a 
decision. (Panama City LA PRENSA in Spanish 25 March 94 p 1A) 
  President Endara has told LA PRENSA, the SPI will provide 
greater security for the seven presidential candidates to 
guarantee their physical safety. Endara will discuss this 
decision, prompted by the assassination of Luis Donaldo Colosio, 
with the Electoral Tribunal. President Endara said certain 
candidates have accepted the additional protection, but others 
have turned it down. (Panama City LA PRENSA in Spanish 26 March 
94 p 3A) 
  Yesterday, Electoral Tribunal magistrates asked the 
political 
parties, candidates to public office, and news media to ensure 
political ads fill the requirements of the Santa Maria La 
Antigua electoral ethical pledge. In a "public exhortation," 
the magistrates said past events are important, but they can be 
presented in a "positive and lofty" manner to avoid upsetting 
the parties participating in the race. (Panama City EL SIGLO in 
Spanish 26 March 94 p 37) 
  President Endara says as long as political campaign ads do 
not contain personal insults or incite people to violence there 
is no reason why they should not be shown. Endara has said: 
"We must remember the things that happened during certain 
periods of our history, be it during my administration or 
previous administrations." In response to a question on the 
subject, Endara also denied having received calls from various 
ambassadors asking him to press for a decision in favor of 
former Mayor Mayin Correa, who stood trial on charges of misuse 
of government funds, and he also said he has offered the 
presidential candidates greater protection by the police. 
(Panama City Circuito RPC Television in Spanish 1730 GMT 26 
March 94) 
  National Consensus Alliance candidate Samuel Lewis Galindo 
has campaigned in Anton, Cocle Province, with his running mate. 
Residents warmly greeted him. (Panama City Circuito RPC 
Television in Spanish 1730 GMT 26 March 94) 
  Candidates Perez Balladares and Carles, both of whom 
campaigned recently in Cocle Province on the same day, mutually 
accused each other of demagoguery. Perez suggested Carles 
remain in "his little rocking chair" until election day. "We 
have not forgotten your cruelty, arbitrariness, and prepotency, 
Chinchorro," Perez said. Meanwhile, Carles asked his supporters 
to compare his career as a public official to Perez', saying "no 
wealthy aristocrat is going to give me lessons in social 
sensibility." (Panama City LA PRENSA in Spanish 27 March 94 p 
1A) 
  Arnulfista candidate Mireya Gruber has told Kuna Indians in 
Kuna Yala: "At 2000 on 8 May, she will be elected president of 
Panama." Gruber invited the Indians to walk up the steps of the 
Palace of the Herons on 1 September. She spoke of the coup in 
1968, which toppled her late husband and promised to provide 
doctors and medicine for the Kunas, improve their education and 
farming systems, and provide scholarships for them. (Panama 
City LA PRENSA in Spanish 27 March 94 p 9A) 
  Papa Egoro candidate Ruben Blades has proposed the 
decentralization of power, which is centered in the province of 
Panama. He advocates giving the provinces the economic power 
and freedom to make their own decisions. Blades, who visited 
the Azuero region last week, reiterated he has no political 
debts and owes himself entirely to the Panamanian people. 
(Panama City LA PRENSA in Spanish 27 March 94 p 11A) 
  During a campaign stop in Cocle Province, Mireya Gruber has 
said Carles' fall has affected him. Gruber answered Carles' 
assertions that she is tired and wants to give up and form an 
alliance with him. "I believe the fall he suffered from that 
balcony has hurt his head," she said, adding: "If he needs my 
votes, he can join forces with me." (Panama City Circuito RPC 
Television in Spanish 2300 GMT 28 March 94) 
  Perez Balladares has asked his supporters to remain calm as 
he predicted the campaign of insults will become increasingly 
intense during the remaining six weeks before the elections. 
During a tour of several areas of Panama City, Perez said: 
"During the remaining six weeks we are going to be the targets 
of all types of provocations, starting with insults and 
anonymous television ads that we wish were signed by the 
candidate who is financing them." (Panama City Circuito RPC 
Television in Spanish 2300 GMT 28 March 94) 
  Carlos Valle, assistant secretary general of the Papa Egoro 
Movement, says his party has nominated candidates to 77 percent 
of the public posts in contention nationwide. Valle, who is 
also one of Ruben Blades' campaign managers, has said his party 
is widely recognized in the provinces, even though "just a few 
months ago Blades and the founders of the party were virtually 
unheard of in remote areas." His personal view is Blades appeals 
to the people because they want their questions answered in 
simple, not technical, terms. (Panama City LA ESTRELLA DE 
PANAMA in Spanish 31 March 94 p 1A) 

