Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Konstantin Eggert report: "Moscow Continues Fight for </F>
Baykonur"] 
  [Text] Baykonur-Moscow -- Baykonur, the world's biggest 
space rocket complex, still remains the subject of disagreements 
between Moscow and Almaty. The visit to the cosmodrome and the 
satellite city of Leninsk by Russian Foreign Minister Andrey 
Kozyrev and his Kazakhstani counterpart Tuleutay Suleymenov, 
which was the final item on the program of the Russian 
diplomatic head's visit to Kazakhstan, confirmed yet again that 
only Presidents Yeltsin and Nazarbayev will be able to secure a 
definitive solution of the Baykonur problem. 
  In 1993 the Russian Defense Ministry spent 47 billion rubles 
[R] on Baykonur. According to the military, at least R259 
billion will be required this year, but only R6 billion have 
been received so far. Almaty, which according to the interstate 
agreements assumes 6 percent of the estimated costs, has not 
paid a ruble so far this year. 
  Two militias and two judicial systems operate in Leninsk. 
There is no Russian security service at the military facilities 
-- all the special personnel are under the command of Almaty. 
Senior Lieutenant Chugunov, a representative of the special 
department, rather unceremoniously threw the press out of the 
building where "Soyuz" and "Progress" complexes are prepared for 
flights. Mentioning Kozyrev's name was no help. 
  Baykonur has become the object of a sharp struggle not only 
between Russia and Kazakhstan but also between various 
departments in Moscow. Until recently there was the idea of 
transferring the cosmodrome to an international consortium with 
the participation of Western investors. However, at a session 
of the Russian Government Presidium in December it was decided 
to concentrate on the proposals of the Defense Ministry, which 
advocates leasing Baykonur and turning it formally into a 
facility run under bilateral cooperation arrangements but 
effectively into a Russian military base. The principle of 
leasing was enshrined in a special protocol by the prime 
ministers of Russia and Kazakhstan. 
  The arguments of Pavel Grachev's department are as follows: 
The lion's share of work under Russia's military space program 
is carried out at Baykonur, and commercialization of the 
cosmodrome would be a painful blow to it. Moreover, Russian and 
Western technologies in this sphere are often incompatible. 
  However, there is also an alternative opinion which holds 
that the "internationalization" of Baykonur could be carried out 
without detriment to Russian strategic interests, but the 
Military Space Forces command is opposed to this since in this 
situation, unlike ordinary military specialists, it would 
essentially be out of a job. If it lost control of Baykonur, it 
would be forced to content itself with running the small 
Plesetsk cosmodrome on the Kola Peninsula and the moribund 
Kapustin Yar test site. "General Ivanov, commander of the 
Russian Military Space Forces, and his subordinates want to 
reduce the cosmodrome to such a state that the Kazakhs will 
themselves say: 'Take it.' Then it will be possible to obtain 
from Moscow credits whose use it will be very difficult to 
monitor," one civilian resident of Leninsk believes. He claimed 
that the servicemen were instructed to show Kozyrev the blackest 
picture, to lay it on thick, and to complain about the civilian 
administration of Leninsk. 
  Be that as it may, the Russian-Kazakhstani talks about the 
future of Baykonur will proceed with particular intensity over 
the next few weeks. According to information from diplomatic 
sources, Moscow is intending to propose that a 30-year term be 
set for the lease contract. Fundamental disagreements remain 
over the question of the rental. Unofficially Kazakhstani 
experts have mentioned to their Russian colleagues a sum of $3.5 
billion this year, plus compensation for environmental damage 
over the previous two years. Unquestionably the main task of 
Almaty, which is incapable of implementing an independent 
aerospace program today, is to make a lot of money out of 
Baykonur. Smolenskaya Square believes such terms to be 
unacceptable, stating that there can be no question of payments 
in hard currency. 

