Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentator's article: "A Rich Fruit of Reform and Opening </F>
Up -- Congratulating the Start of Commercial Operations by the 
No. 1 Generating Unit of the Daya Bay Nuclear Power Station"] 
  [Text] The Spring Festival is just around the corner, and 
inspiring good news has come from the Daya Bay nuclear station 
in the south of the motherland: The No. 1 generating unit has 
officially been put into commercial operation, the commissioning 
of the No. 2 generating unit is progressing smoothly, and the 
entire project will be completed and put into operation this 
year. This is an important achievement in the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy and nuclear technology in our country, and is a 
rich fruit of our reform and opening up. It will have an 
important and far-reaching impact, not only on promoting the 
economic prosperity of Guangdong and Hong Kong, but also on the 
further development of nuclear undertakings in our country. 
  The Daya Bay nuclear power station is the product of reform 
and opening up. With the direct concern of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping and the CPC Central Committee, with Comrade Jiang Zemin 
as its core, the construction of the Daya Bay nuclear power 
station has adhered to the policy of reform and opening up, has 
opened up a new path for making use of foreign funds to build 
large basic industrial projects, and also has made useful 
attempts at the establishment of a modern enterprise system. At 
each crucial moment, leading comrades of the CPC Central 
Committee and the State Council have given it concern and 
support, and have solved a series of important problems so that 
the entire project could progress smoothly. Local governments 
and departments concerned have done a great deal of work and 
have supported all aspects of the construction of the nuclear 
power plant. The successful construction of the Daya Bay 
nuclear power station is the result of giving play to the 
enthusiasm of the central authorities and of the local 
governments, as well as the result of the concerted efforts of 
all quarters concerned across the country. 
  In the entire course of the construction of the Daya Bay 
nuclear power station, the principles of "quality first and 
safety first" have been adhered to. Over one thousand nuclear 
power specialists and engineering technical personnel from more 
than 20 countries and regions have cooperated closely. The 
plant has absorbed the experience of, and has drawn lessons from 
nuclear power construction projects abroad. It has followed 
international safety standards and codes, and has established 
strict quality supervision and guarantee systems. It also has 
undergone safety assessments and examinations by state and 
international atomic energy organizations and specialists. 
Therefore, the project quality and operational safety of the 
nuclear power station is ensured. 
  Nuclear power is a safe, clean, and economical energy 
source. 
China's energy resources are abundant, but they are not evenly 
distributed. In particular, the comparative shortage of energy 
resources in the economically developed southeast coastal areas 
has constituted a "bottleneck" that is constraining economic 
development. Therefore, while making great efforts to develop 
thermal and hydropower, the appropriate development of nuclear 
power in accordance with local conditions is an important way to 
solve the energy-shortage problem in these areas. At present, 
China has made a good start in developing nuclear power. The 
300,000 kW Qinshan nuclear power station has been operating 
safely and steadily for more than one year and has reached the 
design load factor index two years ahead of schedule. After the 
Nos. 1 and 2 generating units of the Daya Bay nuclear power 
station are all completed and put into operation, together with 
the pumped-storage hydroelectric power stations, about 12.6 
billion kwh -- equal to the consumption of about 6 million 
tonnes of coal -- can be generated each year. This will ease 
much of the pressure on long-distance transportation and reduce 
environmental pollution, and the economic results and benefits 
to the society will be rather considerable. 
  Comrade Deng Xiaoping once explicitly pointed out: "We still 
have to develop nuclear power stations." Through the practice 
of constructing the Daya Bay and Qinshan nuclear power stations, 
we have accumulated experience, trained personnel, and created 
favorable conditions for the development of nuclear power. The 
broad masses of cadres and workers on the nuclear power front 
should seriously sum up experience, make persistent efforts, 
further implement the spirit of the 14th CPC National Congress 
and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, 
seize the opportunity, deepen reform, open up wider to the 
outside world, and make greater contributions to further the 
development of nuclear undertakings in China [zhua zhu ji yu, 
shen hua gai ge, kuo da kai fang, wei jin yi bu fa zhan wo guo 
de he dian shi ye zuo chu geng da gong xian 2119 0145 2623 6657, 
3234 0553 2395 7245, 2368 1129 7030 2397, 3634 6651 0001 2975 
4099 1455 2053 0948 4104 2702 7193 0057 2814 0254 0427 2577 1129 
6300 3759]. 

