BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 17 KYODO -- Japan and the United States 
on Friday [17 June] confirmed progress in working out 
qualitative criteria in telecommunications trade talks but did 
not discuss in depth the thorniest issue of setting quantitative 
yardsticks, officials said. 
  "In a cordial and positive atmosphere, there was a 
considerable progress to narrow difference on qualitative 
criteria," a U.S. trade official said, briefing reporters on two 
days of working-level talks on ways to enhance American access 
to the Japanese telecommunications market. 
  Telecom trade, covered under government procurement along 
with medical equipment, is one of three priority fields under 
the bilateral trade "Framework" negotiations launched in July 
last year. 
  A Japanese Foreign Ministry spokesman said U.S. 
understanding 
has been deepened on a set of measures to open the Japanese 
telecom market, which were contained in a market-opening package 
released in March. 
  The U.S. official, who requested anonymity, said the talks 
focused on procedural problems and that the quantitative aspect 
of "objective criteria" as a tool to assess openness of the 
Japanese telecom market will be put on hold until higher-level 
talks expected in Tokyo next week. 
  But the official said that a specific time schedule for a 
meeting between Japan's Deputy Foreign Minister Sadayuki Hayashi 
and Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky has yet 
to be fixed. 
  The expected subcabinet-level meeting will be shortly 
followed by further working-level negotiations, the official 
said. 
  The Japanese spokesman acknowledged that differences remain 
between the two parties over the Japanese-proposed "overall 
evaluation method" for selecting winners in tenders for 
government-sponsored projects. 
  The method, proposed in the March market-opening package, is 
designed to evaluate not only bid prices but product 
performances and functions. 
  "U.S. concerns are evident when looking at a number of 
exceptions and discretions attached," the U.S. trade official 
said. 
  The Japanese spokesman said, "It would not be correct to say 
Washington has given Japan 120 points on the latest evaluation 
proposal." 
  On another sticking point of whether or not Nippon Telegraph 
and Telephone Corp. (NTT) should be covered by government 
procurement talks, the U.S. official said, "The two sides have 
not been able to narrow differences on the area." 
  The U.S. official reiterated Washington's preparedness to 
review Japan's government procurement practices by the end of 
June in line with the 1988 bilateral agreement on government 
procurement. 
  "June 30 is one of a series of important dates for 
Japan-U.S. 
trade ties," the official said, quoting the recent remark by 
U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor. 

