BFN 

  [Text] Manila, May 16 (YONHAP) -- South Korea proposed 
Monday to form a "special partnership" with the Philippines 
accenting economic cooperation. Philippine President Fidel 
Ramos, meanwhile, has invited South Korean President Kim 
Yong-sam to visit Manila. 
  Manila pledged to support Seoul's bid for a non-permanent 
seat on the UN Security Council in 1996-97 and said it will not 
seek diplomatic normalization with North Korea before resolution 
of the nuclear problem. 
  Starting the first working day of his Asian tour here, 
visiting South Korean Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu made the 
offer in talks with his Philippine counterpart Roberto Romulo 
and President Fidel Ramos, the director-general for Asian 
affairs at the Foreign Ministry, Yu Pyong-u, said after the 
meeting. 
  Both Ramos and Romulo responded positively but the two sides 
will need to discuss the format, Yu said. Ramos expressed his 
wish to invite President Kim to his country. 
  "The Philippines is the closest country to South Korea in 
the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)," Han told 
reporters Sunday. "We share similar experiences in recent 
political development, specifically in the democratization 
process, and there is much we can offer to the Philippines in 
terms of economic growth experience." 
  He said Seoul is thinking of a civilian forum that would be 
assisted by the government to guarantee a two-tier cooperation 
channel at both the official and unofficial levels. 
  Romulo and Ramos, on the other hand, suggested that the two 
countries form an "eminent persons group" or a think tank, Yu 
said. 
  The "special partnership" would be the first of its kind 
involving South Korea and a member of ASEAN. 
  Bilateral trade is increasing steadily and hit 1.25 billion 
U.S. dollars last year, with Seoul posting 934 million dollars 
in exports for a 617-million-dollar surplus. 
  Filipino soldiers, including President Ramos, fought for the 
Seoul side during the fratricidal 1950-53 Korean War. 
  Romulo, recalling his country's past cooperation in trying 
to 
defuse the North Korean nuclear crisis, pledged continued 
support, Yu said. 
  He sought better conditions for the estimated 8,000 
"undocumented" Filipino workers, asking that they be allowed to 
stay longer or that the quota of 3,000 who are officially 
accepted as foreign trainees be increased. 
  Han said he will review the issue at inter-ministerial 
talks, 
Yu said. 
  Han requested that South Korean banks be included in the 
list 
of foreign banks that will be given operating permits in the 
Philippines. 
  Manila revises its banking laws Tuesday, when it will give 
operating permits to 10 foreign banks chosen from different 
regions of the world. 
  Romulo and Ramos said they will "take note" of South Korea's 
request. 

