BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by King Husayn with unidentified </F>
correspondents in Amman on 16 April -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Husayn] I am happy to have this opportunity to meet 
with all the brothers here. Proceed please. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, from the beginning of the 
peace 
process, you have repeatedly warned that any delay in the peace 
process would lead to frustration in the region and that 
extremism in the region will increase. Yesterday, Israel tried 
to hold Jordan responsible for some acts of violence in the West 
Bank. How do you explain the situation, in light of the 
conditions at which the peace process has arrived? 
  [Husayn] Concerning the peace process, I said at the 
beginning of this process that it would need time, that it 
required concentrated, sincere, serious, and objective efforts 
to reach its goals. In fact, even by my own standards, I 
noticed that there are pitfalls, procrastinations, and wastes of 
time. In fact, the beginnings were different from the present 
reality, now, in terms of the fact that, in my view, the vast 
majority of the people concerned in the entire region were 
optimistic that there would be serious progress toward tangible 
results. Regrettably, as time went by and with the pitfalls and 
confusion, these hopes or this zeal [hamas] -- please forgive me 
for this expression, I mean, by the zeal, the zeal for peace -- 
has dropped. 
  Many sides perhaps share the responsibility for all of this, 
be they the sponsors of the process or the parties concerned. I 
can frankly say that Israel bears the major part in terms of 
time that was lost. We in Jordan have reiterated our position 
in terms of our readiness and determination to work seriously to 
implement the provisions of the agenda, which was approved after 
the signing of the Palestinian-Israeli agreement in Washington, 
and to deal with all the important problems at the time in a way 
that would ensure that the end result would be the state of 
peace, the peace agreement and not the opposite. 
  We have time and again called for movement on all tracks 
pursuing a comprehensive settlement, under which future 
generations in the entire region enjoy completely different 
living conditions in terms of peace, stability, tranquility, and 
chances to bring about a state of affairs under which all 
parties can join hands and preserve peace for the benefit of 
future generations. 
  As for the issue of terror, our record testifies to a 
consistent condemnation of all acts of terrorism. We have 
suffered many casualties who fell victim to terror here and 
there around the world. We are against terrorism wherever and 
whenever it targets innocents. We condemn, denounce, and combat 
terror. The feelings of frustration have, recently, been 
running high in this region. However, one incident--the 
al-Ibrahimi Mosque massacre--stands out as undeniably the 
ultimate in savagery. 
  To be fair, we cannot single out one party as the target for 
accusations of extremism. Extremism is as much a reality there 
as it is on the Arab side. 
  In all cases, it may be that the goal is to kill the 
chances of a just, durable, and decent and viable peace. We are 
saddened on account of the victims and their relatives of an 
incident here or anywhere else in the world irrespective of 
their place in this or that state or in this or that position. 
As I have said, we believe that terrorism aims at assassinating 
peace and the chances to realize peace. This requires a degree 
of awareness for those who want to realize or contribute to 
realizing a just, permanent, and honorable peace. 
  I believe that Israel should also appraise its own 
contributions on the path of peace so far. We hope that 
everyone will reconsider their calculations and move seriously 
before it is too late, because the alternative, God forbid, will 
be a disaster for all, not only on the level of officials but on 
the level of everybody in the entire region. 
  Concerning us -- and this issue concerns us, in fact, and 
perhaps we talked about it with the brother officials before the 
recent developments and media escalation -- after 1974 and after 
a prolonged and frank discussion at the Rabat summit conference, 
we adopted the Palestinian and Arab approach. We all accepted 
the PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian 
Arab people. When we went to Madrid, we provided an umbrella 
for the Palestinian moves so that the Palestinian Arab people 
would exercise their right in representing the Palestinian 
dimension under their recognized and accredited leadership. 
When things developed concerning the Oslo agreement, we took a 
position supporting the Palestinian brothers in terms of what 
they had chosen and we overcame the factor of shock in order to 
be in harmony with ourselves. Moreover, we went and signed the 
joint agenda immediately after the Israeli-Palestinian agreement 
in Washington. 
  Consistent with our stand and at this critical phase, the 
only organization that has our recognition as representative of 
the Palestinian people here is the PLO, which maintains a 
mission and related institutions in Jordan. We are not dealing 
with any other Palestinian or non-Palestinian organizations. We 
will not accept any practices carried out in their name on this 
land. 
  If we are talking about Jordanian nationals, they will be 
regarded as such -- Jordanians belonging to a large family 
hailing from various stocks. We will do our utmost on behalf of 
national unity in Jordan, until such time as a change becomes 
necessary. 
  We do not want this country to become a battleground, God 
forbid, between this or that faction of the people of Palestine 
or the people of Jordan. We will not, under any circumstances, 
permit any excesses that will put us in a position in which we 
would not be able to be consistent with our constant stand that 
the PLO is the only legitimate representative of the Palestinian 
Arab people. They can debate their affairs among themselves, 
and whether they agree or disagree among themselves is their 
business. We support the PLO and do not recognize any other 
organization. This is how things stand. 
  It seems, though, that there have been, of late, different 
quarters that want this country to take on greater burdens than 
it has already unjustly borne. This is not strange. The whole 
issue is one of conflict and adherence to rights and principle. 
When it comes to rights, we will speak out, no matter what 
critics may think. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty: The Israeli prime minister 
has issued a clear and direct threat to Jordan at a news 
conference. Israel is now in crisis due to the two operations. 
It is also disrupting the peace process. What is Jordan's 
response to the threat? Will Jordan take action against Hamas? 
  [Husayn] As I have told you, we do not recognize any 
organization other than the PLO -- the sole and legitimate 
representative of the Palestinian Arab people -- and its 
official, recognized organs in this country. We are not dealing 
with any other group. Nor will we recognize it or allow it to 
have any activities in this arena. That was our position before 
the Israeli prime minister, or any other Israeli officials, 
spoke at his news conference. This is because this is an affair 
of ours here in Jordan. 
  [Correspondent] You have mentioned pressures being applied 
on Jordan in relation to the issue of the Gulf of Aqaba. What is 
Jordan required to do? Why this pressure? 
  [Husayn] Help me find the answer. It seems that what is 
required of Jordan is something vague that I cannot put my 
finger on. It may be one of a number of objectives or a 
combination of objectives. The blockade of the Port of 
al-'Aqabah, in my opinion, was, from the beginning, meant to 
damage Jordan's credibility. Else, why single out Jordan, which 
is not the only neighboring state of Iraq? Jordan has complied 
with Security Council resolutions with regard to brotherly Iraq. 
Then, the aim is to continually discredit Jordan's image and 
damage the country's credibility around the world. This is 
something that we regard as unacceptably demeaning to this 
country. 
  The recent accusations that Jordan has relations with or 
harbors terror must be seen in the same context. I don't think 
that many people in the world can say they have been victims of 
terror and have resisted terror in the manner Jordan has. Our 
policy in this regard is clear and unambiguous. 
  I sometimes wonder whether democracy in this country is also 
being targeted as a source of apprehension for some. In this 
country, we believe in democracy and will continue to strive to 
make this country a model for others in the region and beyond. 
Are these policies aiming to get Jordan to give in to these 
pressures? Our heads will remain held high and will only bow to 
God. 
  I am not saying this only as one human being among you. I 
say this based on the absolute trust I have in my mind and heart 
in the large Jordanian family, its truthfulness, and its ability 
to be patient until the conditions improve. 
  [Correspondent] The U.S. secretary of state will begin a new 
tour of the region soon. What are your hopes? Will the U.S. 
official carry any new proposals to promote the peace process? 
  [Husayn] That is what we hope for. I do not know when he 
will visit the region, but I hope that this will be very soon. 
Concerning the al-'Aqabah issue, we have raised this and we are 
awaiting something that reassures us that it is going to be 
resolved. We raised this issue after we felt that we could no 
longer remain silent about the practices against this country 
and the blockade imposed on it for years. 
  [Correspondent] Al-Sharif Zayd Bin-Shakir [chief of the 
Royal 
court] left for Yemen today as part of His Majesty King Husayn's 
good efforts to resolve the political crisis in Yemen. Are you 
optimistic, sir, on the subject of the Yemeni crisis? 
  [Husayn] I always have to be optimistic, sir. In fact, we 
have been exerting our sincere efforts for the past seven 
months. We felt that we were responding to the Yemeni desire to 
help them overcome the problems and difficulties that threatened 
their great achievement of realizing Yemeni unity. Then there 
was the agreement and the accord document. We were happy to 
welcome all the representatives in Yemen here in Amman, where 
they signed the document, which deals with all problems and 
paves the way for building the strong, modern Yemen that we 
wish. Regrettably, only hours after the signing of the 
agreement, bloody clashes occurred which took us by surprise and 
pained us. We were asked to move again. A high-ranking 
military group left here. We met with our brothers in the 
Sultanate of Oman, as part of a joint mission that worked as one 
team. This mission stopped the fighting and was able to restore 
some of the formations to their original places and has been 
contributing to calming the situation so far. However, this 
mission cannot continue. Our Omani brothers have ended their 
mission, and we are considering ending ours, too. We will have 
a presence like any state represented in Yemen, through a 
military attache's office. This is because if we consider the 
document, there are many problems that must be tackled by our 
brothers in Yemen. They must bear their full responsibilities 
until the Armed Forces are reorganized and reunited. Then, we 
will be able to make moves, if they wish, and acquiesce to their 
wishes. We are prepared to serve them in any field in which we 
can help in order to promote the unity and the aims enshrined in 
the document. But, they have to bear their responsibilities. 
All the sons of beloved Yemen should bear this responsibility. 
  Now, there are so many parties in the picture. We feel that 
our presence will not offer the service we offered in the past. 
This is the message a Jordanian delegation is bearing to the 
brothers in Yemen right now. We are awaiting the notes this 
delegation will bring us from there. We only hope that Yemen 
will remain united and that we will not be party to partitioning 
Yemen or fragmenting it, God forbid, in any way. 

