Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by C. Raja Mohan: "Clinton's Letter Reflects `U.S. </F>
Stand on Kashmir'"; quotation marks as published] 
  [Text] Washington, Jan. 7. The U.S. State Department today 
sought to dispel the impression of any change in the current 
American approach towards Kashmir. 
  Responding to questions on the letter that the U.S. 
President, Mr. Bill Clinton, had written to an activist on 
Kashmir, the State Department said the letter "reflects the 
consistent stand that the administration has taken on Kashmir, 
namely that the U.S. wishes to see a peaceful resolution of all 
issues between India and Pakistan, including Kashmir." 
  In a letter to Dr. Ghulam Nabi Fai, Executive Director of 
the 
Kashmir American Council, Mr. Clinton had said, "I look forward 
to working with you and others to help bring peace to Kashmir, 
and I appreciate your input." 
  When questioned on the letter yesterday by the reporters, 
the 
spokesman of the State Department, Mr. Mike McCurry, denied any 
change in policy and directed the questions to the White House. 
Today the State Department provided a comprehensive reiteration 
of its now standard formulations on Kashmir. 
  Stating that the U.S. did not see itself in a "mediator's 
role," the Clinton Administration said that it was "willing to 
assist India and Pakistan to reach and implement agreements if 
they both so desire." In response to the question whether the 
letter reflected a heightened concern for human rights, the 
Administration said it had been raising its concerns with the 
Indian Government "regularly, frankly, and in the spirit of 
friendship." Washington has been urging that the rights 
enshrined in the Indian Constitution be protected fully in 
practice, including in those areas where security forces are 
engaged in counter-insurgency activities." The administration 
has welcomed the recent Indian initiatives on human rights and 
hopes that they will lead to "further progress in Indian human 
rights practices." 
  Stating categorically that the letter from Mr. Clinton to 
Dr. 
Fai did not reflect a change in the U.S. approach to the status 
of Kashmir, the State Department noted its consistent stand 
since 1947 that the "U.S. believes the entire geographic area of 
the former princely State of Jammu and Kashmir is disputed 
territory." The Administration reiterated its belief that the 
"best way" to resolve the dispute over Kashmir was through 
"direct discussions between the Governments of India and 
Pakistan as envisaged in the Shimla agreement, taking into 
account the wishes of the people of Kashmir." 
  On the question of ascertaining the wishes of the Kashmiri 
people, the administration said: "We do not favour any 
particular procedure, nor do we advocate direct Kashmiri 
participation in bilateral Indo-Pakistani talks. However, to be 
workable, a solution to the Kashmiri dispute will have to take 
into account the wishes of Kashmiris. How this is determined 
would best be established in the negotiation process. 
  "The administration appears to suggest that taking into 
account the wishes of the Kashmiri people is a practical 
necessity and not a commitment to the principal of 
self-determination. But India obviously cannot agree to the 
formulation that this needs to be decided in the Indo-Pakistan 
negotiation process." 


