Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Political Forces Dialogue Committee [PFDC] has 
approved a statement and a decision was made to broadcast it 
yesterday, 14 Ramadan [24 February]. Regrettably, however, the 
PFDC rapporteur was informed that it would not be broadcast. 
The PFDC, which regrets this, hopes that this will not be 
repeated. Following is the text of the statement: 
  In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. 
Statement issued by the PFDC: 
  The PFDC's meeting last night continued until a later hour. 
The committee continued its meeting this morning to review the 
developments in the national arena, particularly the serious 
political and media deterioration. The continuation of such 
deterioration will expose the homeland to serious dangers. 
  The PFDC had hoped that with the final signing of the 
document in Amman all parties would move ahead to implement its 
provisions and that the committee would then embark on its tasks 
represented by following up and supervising the implementation. 
However, it was surprised to see the continuous military and 
media escalation. 
  As the PFDC condemns these irresponsible acts, it appeals to 
the political and military leaders in the state to shoulder 
their national responsibilities, to take firm and swift measures 
to contain the situation, and to stop the escalation. It also 
asks the competent quarters to expeditiously hold investigations 
into what took place, to name those responsible, to reveal this 
to the people, and to return the military situation to normal. 
  All parties must shoulder this historic responsibility 
before 
God, the people, and our Arab and Islamic nation and be equal to 
it unaffected by narrow considerations. 
  The PFDC appeals to the people from all walks of life to 
stand against any action that threatens the homeland's unity and 
safety and to foil the attempts of the advocates of sedition who 
aim at harming the homeland. 
  The PFDC decided to form follow-up committees as follows: 
  1. To set up a military-political committee to follow up the 
efforts aimed at halting the deterioration. The committee 
comprises: Shaykh Sinan Abu-Luhum, Brigadier General Mujahid 
Abu- Shawarib, 'Abd-al-Wahhab al-Anisi, Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim 
al-Iryani, Jarallah 'Umar, Dr. Qasim Sallam, Colonel Husayn 
Sharaf (?al-Kifri), and Ahmad Jabir 'Afif. 
  2. To set up a media committee which comprises: 
'Abd-al-Malik Mansur, Abu-Bakr Badhib, 'Abd-al-Qadir 
(?al-Qiyari), Dr. Muhammad 'Abd-al-Malik al-Mutawwakil, and 
Muhammad Rawah Sa'id. 
  3. To set up a security committee which comprises: 
Brigadier General Ghalib (?Mutahhir) al-Qamashya, Colonel Ahmad 
al-Himsi, Colonel Ahmad Salim 'Ubayd, Colonel 'Ali Qasim 
al-Mansur, Colonel 'Ali Ahmad al-Hubaysi, and Colonel 'Abdallah 
Ahmad al-Kibsi. 
  The PFDC also decided to hold its next meeting in the Abyan 
Governorate on Saturday and to address a message to the prime 
minister to remind him of the dates fixed in the accord document 
which begin immediately after its signing in accordance with the 
provisions of the document. 
  We ask Almighty God to preserve Yemen -- land and people -- 
and to protect us from harm. God is our best supporter. 
  [Signed] The Popular Forces Dialogue Committee, Sanaa 
  [Dated] 24 February 1994 

