BFN 

  [Text] Brussels, 24 May (AFP-NA) -- On 24 May, the European 
Union (EU) and Argentina signed a fishing agreement pursuant to 
which a certain number of ships sailing under the EU flag are 
authorized to fish in Argentine territorial waters, while 
shipowners from both signatories will undertake joint ventures. 
  This is the first fishing agreement ever signed between the 
EU and a Latin American country. It will be initially effective 
for five years, and may possibly be automatically renewed for 
two more years. 
  The agreement was officially signed in Brussels after it had 
been accepted by the fishing ministers of the 12 EU member 
countries in October 1993 and ratified by the European and 
Argentine parliaments. The UK had abstained from voting last 
October due to its controversy with Argentina over the Malvinas 
islands. 
  The agreement provides that the EU is allowed to fish a 
quota 
of 120,000 tonnes of hake and 130,000 tonnes of other species 
(including squid and codfish) in Argentine territorial waters. 
  The number of fishing boats from the EU that will be able to 
operate in Argentine territorial waters amounts to 70, 20 of 
which will sail under the flag of one of the EU member 
countries, which will have rights to one-third of the quota 
granted by the Argentines. 
  The other 50 boats, which will be able to catch the 
remaining 
two-thirds of the quota, will sail under the Argentine flag, but 
will belong to joint ventures between EU and Argentine shipping 
companies or to Argentine companies funded by foreign capital. 
  The EU commits itself to reducing its customs duties (from 
15 
percent at present to 5 percent) on fishing products through 
annual import quotas. 
  The EU is to contribute 162.5 million ECU's ($187 million), 
of which 28 million ECU's ($32.2 million) will be earmarked for 
streamlining Argentina's port facilities, the funding of 
research programs, and professional and technical formation of 
Argentine fishermen. 
  EU sources have reported that by signing these agreements, 
the EU seeks to diminish fishing activities in its own 
territorial waters to stave off possible depletion and intensify 
exploitation in those territorial waters that are underexploited. 

