Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr. Ion Dediu, minister of the environment </F>
of the Republic of Moldova, by Mihai Diac; place and date not 
given: "The Russians Exploited Our Chernozem Soil"] 
  [Text] On the occasion of the third national 
colloquy, organized by the Romanian Society for the Protection 
of the Atmosphere (SOROPA), Professor Ion Dediu, the minister of 
the environment of the Republic of Moldova, was kind enough to 
grant us a short interview. 
  Diac: How do you evaluate this symposium? 
  Dediu: In contrast to other ecological 
associations and movements, SOROPA is composed of specialists 
and technicians who are not motivated by profit. Currently, many 
see the problems of the environment as an opening for business. 
I would like to mention the professionalism of these 
nongovernmental movements, whose activities could be greatly 
assisted by the Ministries of the Environment and of Public 
Works and Land Improvement. If the ministers had been smarter 
and had exploited--in a positive manner--this initiative, which 
is benevolent and perhaps more sincere and honest than many 
others, even some in academic circles, I believe that the entire 
society would profit, not only the respective ministries. We, 
from the Republic of Moldova, are getting ready to pursue 
precisely this approach of the movements and ecological 
associations, which are geared toward the professionals. We have 
finally arrived at the stage of direct action, of uniting the 
activities of the ecological movements with those of the public 
organizations. I believe that the ministers do not have to 
direct these organizations, but can collaborate with them, and 
this would be mutually advantageous. Activity of this kind was a 
pleasant surprise for us; we discussed concrete questions, not 
demogogical ones. This is the way we need to have discussions, 
at the level of a board of directors or ministerial collegium. 
Romania is one of the first countries in Europe that has entered 
into the phase of concrete activities. It is a pity that other 
organizations, both here and in Moldova, have remained until now 
in a phase of strictly theoretical discussion. 
  Diac: In this respect, how do you see the 
collaboration between the governments of the Republic of Moldova 
and the Republic of Romania? 
  Dediu: I see it as an absolute and indisputable 
necessity. Since we announced a gradual strategy of economic, 
spiritual, and cultural integration two years ago, we must bring 
it about through concrete activities, starting with the 
juridical level and the harmonization of legislation, as, for 
example, in the domain of protection of the environment and the 
utilization of natural resources in the framework of some 
programs. We must not merely say from a podium that we want 
unity and that we want integration, because unity does not come 
from podiums or through words. We share this sacred work of 
integrating in a number of stages, and I believe that we should 
pass from the phase of commercial promises and arrive at 
concrete deeds concerning economic, cultural, and spiritual 
integration. I assure you that we will do that regardless of 
whether or not some people want it.... I believe that "H-hour" 
will arrive. There are some historical steps that cannot be 
stopped. 
  Diac: What is the situation in the Republic of 
Moldova from the environmental point of view? 
  Dediu: Compared to the other countries of the 
former Soviet Union, we have inherited the most degraded 
environment, with the possible exception of Tajikistan. And, 
overnight, we find ourselves "returning to Europe" -- I do not 
care for that expression. And we have the most degraded soil in 
Europe and the most polluted waters. Why? Because the former 
Soviet Union knew very well the significance of the Bessarabian 
chernozem, so they exploited it barbarously. At the beginning of 
the 1970's, when it was recognized that the "supply was running 
out," we began using fertilizers and pesticides.... And since 
the quality of the environment is tied to the quality of life, I 
can tell you that for these reasons, the average life expectancy 
in Bessarabia is 68, while the world's average is 72. The birth 
rate is the lowest of the past 50 years; the rate of occurrence 
of diseases directly influenced by the quality of the 
environment, such as cancer, gastrointestinal ulcers, cirrhosis, 
even cardiovascular problems, is twice as high as in other 
countries. And this when we have one of the oldest ecological 
cultures, a culture as refined as possible. Certainly, the 
communist, totalitarian regime bears the principal guilt, but 
where were we, where was our civic and national resistance? 

