BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Parkin and Ian Graham, PRESS ASSOCIATION News] </F>
  [Text] The implications of the most serious Ulster loyalist 
cross-border terrorist attack in 20 years will be assessed by 
British and Irish government ministers tomorrow. 
  Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew and deputy 
Dublin premier Dick Spring are to meet near the Irish Republic's 
border with Ulster in Co Cavan at the formal opening of a 
restored canal. 
  The pair had already agreed on a two-hour exchange of views 
on the progress of their two governments' current push for a 
Northern Ireland settlement in the light of Britain's reply last 
week to questions posed by Sinn Fein -- the IRA's political wing 
-- about the five-month-old Downing Street peace declaration. 
  But the gun and bomb attack on a Dublin pub as Sinn Fein 
staged a fund-raising event on the premises has sharpened the 
agenda for the discussions. The loyalist Ulster Volunteer Force 
[UVF] tonight claimed responsibility for the attack which left 
one man dead and a second wounded. 
  In a statement released in Belfast today, the outlawed 
terror 
group boasted that it had "struck at the very heart of the 
republican movement in its own back yard." 
  Mr Spring tonight said he was disturbed about what happened, 
and confirmed the bombing would be high on the agenda when he 
saw Sir Patrick. 
  One doorman was shot dead and another seriously wounded when 
they blocked the entry of the gang of bombers. 
  The intruders fled after the shooting, leaving their holdall 
bomb. Its failure to ignite prevented certain carnage, police 
said. 
  Both Mr Spring and Prime Minister Albert Reynolds -- who is 
due to have talks on peace of his own in London later this week 
with John Major -- had already signalled their growing concern 
about loyalist attacks in Belfast and other parts of Northern 
Ireland. 
  The spread of the violence across the border -- and deep 
into 
the centre of Dublin -- has rung security alarm bells in both 
the Irish capital and Belfast. The fear was that the incident 
at the Widow Scallan's bar could herald the opening of a new 
campaign in the Irish Republic. Until now the assumption had 
been that loyalist paramilitaries lacked the expertise and the 
neccessary network of escape routes to strike so far south. 
  Yet the signs were that not only had their raid been 
executed, even though the 18lb commercial mix bomb failed to go 
off, but the three-man gang had either got back safely into 
Ulster, or gone to ground at a "safe-house". The belief among 
Dublin police tonight was that the gang had carefully laid plans 
to escape from the Republic before road checkpoints were in 
operation at around midnight on Saturday night. 
  The UVF assault was the most menacing by Ulster loyalists 
south of the border since 1974, when bombs in Dublin and the 
frontier town of Monaghan claimed 33 lives. 
  Suspicions have persisted among relatives of the dead that 
loyalists were aided then by Northern Ireland-based security 
personnel. No arrests were ever made in connection with those 
bombings. 
  Since that time, most loyalist activity in the south has 
been 
restricted to firebombings and incidents around the border. 
Eight years ago, audacious gunmen fired on the Dublin 
headquarters of Sinn Fein, and earlier this year, incendiary 
devices were mailed to the same address. 

