Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [State of the Nation Address by Panamanian President </F>
Guillermo Endara at the Legislative Palace in Panama City--live] 
  [Excerpts] Your Excellencies Arturo Vallarino, president of 
the Legislative Assembly; Dr. Arturo Hoyos, president of the 
Supreme Court of Justice; Vice President Guillermo Ford Boyd; 
Mr. Ministers and Deputy Ministers; Mr. Comptroller General and 
Deputy Comptroller General; Reverend Oscar Brown, auxiliary 
bishop of Panama; honorable Attorney General and Solicitor 
General; honorable Supreme Court of Justice Magistrates; 
honorable Electoral Tribunal Magistrates; Governors; Mayors of 
Panama City and San Miguelito Districts; directors, managers, 
deputy directors, and assistant managers of decentralized 
agencies; special guests; members of the local and foreign 
media; ladies and gentlemen: 
  This is the ninth and last time I will appear before you to 
fulfill my constitutional obligation of addressing you at the 
beginning of each legislative period to deliver a message on 
administrative matters. The next time I come to this arena, in 
six months, I will be doing it to deliver the presidential sash 
to the president the people will freely elect in May. At that 
time, the Legislative Assembly will comprise citizens who enjoy 
the approval of the majority of their voters. Because of this, 
the legislative period that begins today provides the current 
Legislative Assembly with a final opportunity to discuss the 
important bills it still has to discuss. Whatever is not done 
within the next four months will be left as unconcluded work by 
the representatives who were elected in 1989. [passage omitted] 
  Today I want to stress a bill that is on your legislative 
agenda. This bill is inspired by the legal duties that officials 
charged with enforcing and interpreting the law fulfill on a 
daily basis. In addition, various social sectors directly 
affected by related crimes have made recommendations. With this 
bill, an attempt is being made to amend Law 23 of 1986 and some 
provisions of the penal code. All of this is being made to make 
more effective the struggle against the scourge of drug abuse 
and narcotics trafficking. 
  This topic is very important. It is, unfortunately, a very 
current issue. During the last legislative period, you ratified 
the Vienna Convention on drugs and money laundering. This was 
another important step to establish, once more, Panama's 
commitment in the international struggle against these evils. 
The 1988 Vienna Convention--the name used to identify the 
convention against the illegal trafficking of drugs and 
psychotropic substances approved by the United Nations--is one 
aspect of our country's commitment within international 
cooperation. To this we must add the agreements signed with the 
United States of America, the United Kingdom and Northern 
Ireland, Colombia, and all the Central American republics to 
collaborate in the eradication of the illegal trafficking of 
drugs and psychotropic substances to prevent the shipment of 
chemicals and basic substances and, in general, to provide legal 
assistance in connection with drug trafficking and other crimes. 
  Currently, we are extending this network of international 
agreements on this same matter through negotiations that have 
gotten under way with Canada, Mexico, and the Russian Federation. 
  On this occasion, we have to make further progress with the 
approval of new internal regulations against drug trafficking 
and money laundering. For several years, we have discussed a 
possible review of existing legislation on this topic. 
  The Legislative Assembly's Drug Commission began this 
process 
in 1991. The Attorney General's Office presented a bill during 
the previous legislative period. If changes proposed to 
existing laws are approved, we will have comprehensive 
guidelines to modernize and consolidate the legal basis needed 
for this struggle. 
  We cannot deny this reality: Panama is threatened by drug 
trafficking, drug abuse, and money laundering. We are not the 
only ones to suffer the dangers and consequences of these evils, 
but we cannot find consolation in this fact. The Panamanian 
people have repeatedly expressed their concern over the fact 
that drugs could be undermining the foundations of our society. 
  The Panamanian Government also has expressed this same 
concern several times at various international forums. The 
health and welfare of a generation of young Panamanians is at 
stake. The future of this nation rests on the shoulders of 
these Panamanians. In addition, we are witnessing, with great 
surprise, a new wave of murder, kidnapping, and other crimes 
that are characterized by a special kind of cruelty and savagery. 
  Without a doubt, these crimes are directly linked to this 
imported scourge. Legitimate economic and financial activities 
in our country are overshadowed by money-laundering activities. 
Drug traffickers act against our sovereignty when they make a 
mockery of our borders and economic institutions and try to buy 
people and influence with their dirty money. 
  My words are not exaggerated one bit. Quite the contrary, I 
am understating the situation. This is a sad and dangerous 
reality, and we cannot allow this to happen. The people demand 
that you--men and women who have been elected to serve 
society--take action on this matter. Mothers in Santiago, Bocas 
del Toro, and Penonome; teachers in Chitre and David; honest 
bankers in Panama City; policemen in Colon, Darien, and Los 
Santos--all of them demand action against this evil of our times 
and demand the approval of the necessary tools to fight it. 
These legal instruments will not by themselves solve the 
problem completely. They must be enforced by able, devoted, 
honest, and well-paid officials. Ample economic resources are 
also required. Nevertheless, strict and effective legislation 
is essential to avert an unfair fight. 
  The country is in the middle of an important election 
campaign. The new legislation that you deputies are to debate 
does not entail political purposes. This legislation has not 
originated in any political party and favors no special 
interests. Quite the contrary, it benefits all Panamanians. 
Our fellow citizens demand and deserve the approval of this 
legislation. 
  I wish to refer briefly to some of the items that may be 
good 
to introduce into legislation extant. These items are included 
in the recommendations presented by the Attorney General's 
Office and supported by various sectors of society. 
  In the first place, to investigate these crimes it is 
necessary for our legislation to include canons on two settings 
that it currently does not envisage: the undercover agent and 
controlled deliveries. Both are necessary to be able to 
infiltrate international mafia bands and to destroy them with 
overwhelming evidence obtained from within the criminal 
organizations themselves. 
  Next, it is necessary to apply stiffer measures, other than 
preventive detention, on those found guilty of drug trafficking 
or related crimes. We cannot deceive ourselves. We must admit 
that this business moves plenty of dirty money. This money 
starts to move as soon as a drug trafficker is apprehended and 
sent to prison. He starts to make his tempting moves 
immediately, determined to buy any weak consciences available to 
him or which succumb to his dishonest approaches. For this 
reason, it is necessary that only magistrates may lift 
preliminary measures, such as preventive detention. The 
magistrates will be made fully responsible for their actions. 
  Third, we must admit that profits can be made in this 
business, not only in cash, but in other assets, negotiable 
certificates, securities, or goods. All of these can be 
laundered and, in turn, must be confiscated. 
  Fourth, it is necessary to revise the structure of the 
agency 
that conducts investigations on drug trafficking cases. 
Presently, the Drug Secretariat through a single office 
investigates all drug- and money-laundering related crimes. The 
accumulation of files and the bottleneck are evident. It is 
necessary to decentralize functions to make the punishment of 
criminals more expeditious and effective. Also, the situation 
of drug addicts has not been overlooked in the project. 
  We must offer alternatives for their rehabilitation and, 
later, for their rejoining of society. To this effect, we have 
been planning that all of these goods, instruments, or valuables 
that have been seized in these cases be turned over to the 
National Commission for the Study and Prevention of Drug-Related 
Crimes. This commission would then assign them to the government 
or nongovernmental institutions that form part of it, or will 
put them up for public bidding in order to create a common fund 
for campaigns and programs for the prevention, rehabilitation, 
and repression of these crimes. 
  Last, I want to specifically point out a new measure in our 
penal code. Not only is it new, but in addition it is needed 
immediately. I am referring to the new measure that will 
establish penalties for using money or any illegal financial 
resources coming from drug trafficking to finance political 
campaigns. This measure, which would be new in terms of 
legislation of this kind, would be designed to alert us against 
the temptation of willingly ruining the exercise of free 
democracy. Such links would be shameful and denigrating. Let it 
be clearly understood by narcotics traffickers that in times of 
democracy their shameful money is never welcome, and much less 
welcome in Panamanian political campaigns. Let the drug barons 
know that in Panama there is a definite political determination 
that rejects their activities and their money. [passage omitted] 

