BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel at the Bundestag </F>
session in Bonn on 13 April] 
  [Text] Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen. In his 
eulogy for the victims of the terrible act of arson in Solingen 
on 3 June 1993, President von Weizsaecker correctly described 
German-Turkish relations as friendship between peoples. This 
friendship has a long and exemplary tradition. It is an 
important commodity for us, in foreign policy terms and in human 
terms. The Federal Government has a firm desire to care for 
this commodity also in difficult times. 
  Close cooperation with Turkey is no special interest of 
Germany's. Rather, it is a common objective of NATO and the 
European Union [EU]. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union and 
the transformations in Central and East Europe, Turkey has 
gained even greater significance as a bridgehead between Europe 
and Asia and as a stabilizing factor within the Muslim world, 
and it requires solidarity particularly now. 
  Prime Minister Ciller has just announced an economic 
stabilization program that calls for harsh measures and 
sacrifices. At the same time, the country is being put to the 
test by the strengthening of Islam. The Iraqi Kurd leader 
Talabani, with whom I am due to hold talks this evening, has 
just said that he considers the "growing fundamentalism" in 
Turkey "a common threat both to the Kurds and to the Turkish 
Government." 
  But, Ladies and Gentlemen, friendly relations, such as the 
ones we maintain vis-a-vis Turkey, also involve the need for 
each side to inform the other side as friend and partner about 
any problems that exist. In this context, it must be said that 
the situation with human rights and that of the Kurdish 
population in Turkey is not satisfactory. On the contrary, the 
situation has deteriorated. The EU admitted the same thing in a 
31 March 1994 declaration on the subject of human rights in 
Turkey. 
  This declaration was brought on by lifting parliamentary 
immunity and arresting Kurdish deputies in the Turkish 
Parliament at the beginning of March. Immediately after 
receiving confirmation of the first reports on this subject, the 
Federal Government pointed out that measures against freely 
elected members of the Turkish Parliament create the impression 
that the voice of the Kurdish population in Turkey is being 
suppressed. 
  Both bilaterally and on an EU level, we have expressed our 
expectations that the Kurdish deputies will be permitted to 
avail themselves of their constitutional rights. In this 
connection, the Federal Government trusts in the impartiality of 
Turkish justice. 
  With Douglas Hurd, my British colleague, on 20 January I 
held 
a frank discussion with my colleague Cetin, who is himself a 
Kurd, and with whom I happen to have been in touch over the past 
few days, and still am. A recurrent subject of our talks is the 
situation with the Christians and Yezidis, torture during police 
custody, and restrictions on the freedom of speech and opinion. 
  So that there are no misunderstandings, Ladies and 
Gentlemen: 
The Federal Government naturally considers combating the 
terrorist Kurdish Workers Party to be legitimate. But even 
combating terrorism must adhere to the framework of the rule of 
law and the norms of human rights that Turkey has also 
recognized. 
  The Federal Government believes, and we have said so again 
and again in our talks, that the Kurdish issue, which is a 
problem not only in Turkey, can only be resolved by peaceful 
means and in mutual agreement between the Turkish Government and 
the Kurds. Such a solution must respect and guarantee the 
cultural identity of the Kurdish population. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen. In response to the accusation that 
the Federal Government is permitting German-supplied weapons to 
be used against the Kurdish population, the following has to be 
said. Turkey has been receiving defense aid from Germany since 
1964. This was and is based on a NATO Council recommendation. 
In this way, Germany fulfilled and still fulfills its allied 
commitment and has contributed and is still contributing to a 
consolidation of the NATO southern flank for the sake of the 
security of all of us. The aid I have just mentioned expires in 
1994. 
  In addition to defense aid, Turkey is receiving material 
aid, 
in other words supplies of surplus goods, mainly from the stocks 
of the former National People's Army. Because of the Gulf war, 
supplies worth a total of 1.5 billion marks [DM] were foreseen, 
out of which DM290.9 million worth of goods are still to be 
delivered in 1994. No further supplies are envisaged after that. 
  Special aid for armaments was agreed upon in 1988. It has 
been implemented, with the exception of a delivery of DM5.1 
million. 
  In all these agreements and deliveries, Turkey committed 
itself to use the supplied weapons and other materiel solely in 
accordance with Article 5 of the NATO treaty, i.e. in defense 
against an armed attack. Following the deliveries embargo 
introduced by the Federal Government on 26 March 1992, and after 
my visit to Turkey on 2 June 1992, the Turkish Government 
affirmed this commitment in an exchange of correspondence. 
  Turkey has vehemently rejected the latest accusations about 
a 
use of German weapons that is in breach of the treaty. It did 
so, for instance, in a letter from Foreign Minister Cetin dated 
7 April, after I had reminded him yet again, orally and in 
writing, to adhere to previous Turkish pledges. At the same 
time, the Federal Government decided to postpone a delivery 
scheduled for 15 April until such time as an investigation into 
these accusations had been completed. 
  The Federal Government has adopted this line because it 
takes 
its responsibility seriously. The political director of the 
Foreign Ministry held an exhaustive conversation with a 
representation of various German human rights organizations 
yesterday. The photographic material and other evidence that he 
was given will now be carefully examined by experts, just as in 
every single alleged case of violations until now. 
  Since 1992, since the exchange of correspondence I mentioned 
earlier, I have contacted my Turkish colleague four or five 
times following reports about violations of agreements, and I 
have discussed this whole subject matter with him dozens of 
times, at every single meeting with him. However, we have never 
been presented with any conclusive evidence. 
  Let me repeat that the photographic material and 
instructions 
that we were given yesterday are going to be carefully checked. 
However, for the time being I do not dispose of any material 
that could in any way confirm what has been alleged. Obviously, 
I cannot issue any final statement before the material has been 
analyzed. I will wait for this analysis, and act with care and 
restraint. 
  Nevertheless, as foreign minister of this country, I insist 
on the following. As long as the accusations are not proven, 
the Federal Government has no reason to doubt the detailed 
assurances of a friendly allied partner about adherence to the 
treaty. 
  Turkey points out to us, via its foreign minister and 
defense 
minister, also orally and in writing, and in several telephone 
calls, that materiel formerly belonging to the National People's 
Army is indeed deployed in southeast Turkey, but is merely used 
to secure the borders, especially the borders with Iraq and 
Syria. At the same time, Turkey tells us that similar materiel 
has also been supplied by Russia, and in increased quantities. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, on 10 November 1993 I appealed from 
this rostrum to all the Kurds living in Germany: "Do not spread 
your conflict to Germany. Do not think that violence is the way 
to achieve legitimate goals, such as the protection of human 
rights in your country!" For the sake of the Federal Republic, 
I repeat this appeal here and now with all due seriousness and 
emphasis. 
  Just like all the approximately 2 million Turkish citizens 
living here in Germany, the several hundred thousand Kurds are 
welcome guests and joint citizens in this country. They can be 
assured of our care. 
  But obviously, one of the basic principles of hospitality 
that applies in every country on earth also applies here: He 
who takes advantage of this hospitality must respect the law and 
order of his host country. The Federal Government will not 
tolerate violations of the law and violence in Germany, from 
whatever quarter and for whatever motives. We reject violent 
clashes in our country with as much determination as we support 
the protection of human and ethnic minority rights worldwide. 
  He who abuses the right of abode in Germany and becomes 
punishable must expect to feel the full force of our laws and be 
deported. Of course, every single case will be examined to make 
sure that the person concerned is not in danger of a death 
sentence or torture or other illegitimate treatment. Germany is 
and remains a law-governed country. We are proud of that. 
  Turkey has signed the Geneva Refugee Convention, the 
European 
Human Rights Convention, and the UN Torture Convention. We are 
making an effort concerning further such legal instruments. On 
the other hand, we have not forgotten Moelln and Solingen. I 
said so at the open graves of the dead in Turkey. This must 
also be reiterated today, the day of the commencement of the 
trial of the people allegedly responsible. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, German relations with Turkey have 
possessed and continue to possess great value for us. Therefore 
it is all the more important that we intensify our critical, but 
also partner-like, dialogue with our Turkish friends. 
  I ask everyone to whom the fate of all men, in Turkey and in 
Germany, is dear, to remember that friendship between peoples is 
not automatic. It is a valuable commodity. In the future too, 
the Federal Government's policies, especially our relations with 
Turkey, will be geared to this fact. 

