Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on developments related to the Mexican elections, 
scheduled for 21 August 1994. Today, Luis Donaldo Colosio, 
presidential candidate for the Institutional Revolutionary 
Party, PRI, visited the Benito Juarez and Ixtapalapa 
neighborhoods in Mexico City as part of his political campaign. 
In both neighborhoods, several people asked him to adopt 
measures to prevent police abuse and to increase security. 
Colosio said he will not let Mexican children, women, and youths 
live with the threat of assault, robbery, abuse, or violence. He 
added that PRI is the party of peace and tranquility. (Mexico 
City XEW Television Network in Spanish 0430 GMT 29 Jan 94) 
  Upon returning from Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Diego Fernandez 
de 
Cevallos, presidential candidate for the National Action Party, 
PAN, was interviewed at the International Airport in Mexico 
City. He referred to the agreements signed on 28 January at the 
Federal Electoral Institute, saying they are the result of a 
serious effort by all political parties and electoral 
authorities. He said Mexico can have honest elections, as 
demanded by the people, and stressed no fraud can overcome the 
will of a people determined to have a certified government. 
(Mexico City XEW Television Network in Spanish 0430 GMT 29 Jan 
94) 
  Cuauhtemoc Cardenas Solorzano, presidential candidate for 
the 
Party of the Democratic Revolution, PRD, was in San Luis, Rio 
Colorado, Sonora on 28 January, where he attended a meeting with 
party members. He said agricultural policy for efficient 
production must be based on large investments and credits for 
crops and commercialization. He noted that it is necessary to 
recover the right to demand land from landowners and eliminate 
constitutional reforms that prevent peasants from demanding 
land. (Mexico City XEW Television Network in Spanish 0430 GMT 29 
Jan 94) 
  Jorge Gonzalez Torres, presidential candidate for the 
Mexican 
Ecologist Party, PEM, ended a two-day campaign tour in 
Chihuahua. Gonzalez Torres said he is not seeking votes from the 
Indians, as most of them do not have the credentials to vote. He 
rejected any possible participation of foreign observers at the 
Mexican presidential elections. (Mexico City XEW Television 
Network in Spanish 0430 GMT 29 Jan 94) 
  On 31 January, PRD presidential candidate Cuauhtemoc 
Cardenas 
signed a document entitled Twenty Commitments for Democracy. He 
said this document represents progress in the transition to 
democracy and power by peaceful means. He proposed that all 
presidential candidates ratify this document on 5 February, the 
occasion of the 77th anniversary of the promulgation of the 1917 
Constitution. (Mexico City Canal 13 Television Azteca Network in 
Spanish 1300 GMT 1 Feb 94) 
  PEM Presidential candidate Jorge Gonzalez Torres toured 
Mexico State. He said Diego Fernandez de Zevallos' attitude and 
the attitude of the system encourages a sterile bipartisan 
system that gives the impression of an apparent democracy, which 
only contributes to making Mexicans lose faith in political 
parties. He added that the proposal to the rebels by Camacho 
Solis, commissioner for peace in Chiapas, should have different 
conditions, guaranteeing democracy in Mexico with prior steps 
allowing for their incorporation into the country's political 
life. Finally, he said the government has totally failed to take 
care of social needs, and he added that corruption, dishonesty, 
and bureaucracy do not permit social justice. (Mexico City Canal 
13 Television Azteca Network in Spanish 1300 GMT 1 Feb 94) 
  PRI National Leader Fernando Ortiz Arana said PRI 
presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio is a man desirous of 
making changes, with a solid PRI background, and the clear 
vision to carry out profound social reform. (Mexico City Canal 
13 Television Azteca Network in Spanish 1300 GMT 1 Feb 94) 
  PRI Presidential Candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio visited the 
House of Emiliano Zapata in Morelos State. He addressed 
thousands of peasants, who asked for his support. He recognized 
the cry for freedom and liberty is still a demand for justice. 
Colosio said if he won the presidency, he would work to 
incorporate the poorest Mexicans into a life of democracy and 
liberty. He added he will not tolerate corrupt government 
officials from poor communities, who arrive poor and leave rich. 
He recognized there have been offenses against the Indians' 
dignity. (Mexico City XEW Television Network in Spanish 0435 GMT 
2 Feb 94) 
  Marcela Lombardo, presidential candidate for the Popular 
Socialist Party, visited Veracruz on 1 February. She expressed 
opposition to the presence of foreign observers at the 21 August 
elections. She said Mexicans are prepared to carry out peaceful 
and honest elections. (Mexico City XEW Television Network in 
Spanish 0435 GMT 2 Feb 94) 
  PEM Presidential candidate Jorge Gonzalez Torres signed the 
Twenty Commitments for Democracy document, which was prepared 
based on proposals made by more than 300 citizens and presented 
by PRI member Demetrio Sodi. Gonzalez Torres recommended 
appointing national observers to the upcoming elections. (Mexico 
City XEW Television Network in Spanish 0435 GMT 2 Feb 94) 

