BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 29 (XINHUA) -- Gertrude Mongella, 
visiting secretary-general of the Fourth World Conference on 
Women, said here today that she was very pleased to see that 
"China is really determined to make the conference a success." 
  She made these remarks in an interview here this afternoon 
with a group of Chinese journalists while talking about her 
impressions from her study tour of China. 
  Mongella said that as with the three previous world women's 
meetings, "the main focus of the fourth conference has been on 
the advancement of women in the areas of equality, development, 
and peace." 
  She noted that the Third World Women's Conference in 1985 
adopted the Nairobi forward-looking strategies for the 
advancement of women to the year 2000, covering almost all 
problems in society. 
  The fourth conference, to be held here next year in Beijing, 
will focus on limited critical issues such as the the impact of 
growing poverty on women, equal chances for women's education, 
women and problems related to their health, violence against 
women, the effects of armed conflict and other conflicts on 
women, and equal women's participation in the definition of 
economic structures, policies and productive forces. 
  She told the journalists that in making preparations for the 
conference, each member state "should write a report" on its 
achievements and obstacles in implementing the nairobi 
strategies and suggesting actions as well. 
  She said she also expects the member states to conduct a 
wide 
discussion of these concerned areas among men and women and in 
government and non-government circles. 
  Mongella announced five regional conferences to be held in 
the Asia-Pacific region, Latin America, West Asia, Europe and 
Africa in preparation for the fourth conference. 
  She expressed the hope that Chinese journalists will do more 
promotion of the conference to work for its smooth staging and 
to inform the 1.2 billion Chinese people about it. 
  It is imperative for Chinese journalists to popularize 
Chinese women's achievements so that more people in the world 
will understand China and Chinese women, she said. 
  This is also one of the major aims of the fourth world 
conference, she added. 
  Mongella said she was "very impressed" by the women, 
particularly the strength of women in China, adding that she 
believed that very few people in the world know the truth about 
women in China. 
  But, she said, when they come to recognize how much the 
women 
of China have achieved, especially in their work and managing 
capabilities and rights for equal work, they will feel surprised. 
  During the interview Mongella also answered a series of 
questions, including her comments on working women in China. 

