Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Marco Magrini: "The Clean Engine Race Begins. </F>
Italy and Japan in Pole Position"] 
  [Text] Pisa. By the end of the century motor vehicles will 
have to pay more attention to the environment. Partly because 
legislation in individual countries will become more stringent. 
Partly because the environment is acquiring more importance in 
the priorities of consumers. Companies in the sector are 
already getting their weapons ready: The "clean" engine will 
become an extra card to play on the table of world competition. 
And as Mazda Motor Corporation Senior Managing Director 
Michinori Yamanouchi states: "Running the risk of not meeting 
this appointment could lead to being excluded from the market." 
  According to many, the revolution will not occur in the 
immediate future: It will take a few years before the market 
starts discriminating automobiles or scooters because of their 
excessive polluting emissions. However, those in the sector who 
met over the past few days at the third "Small Engine Technology 
Conference", held in Pisa to commemorate the 650th anniversary 
of the university, but primarily because of its vicinity to 
Piaggio headquarters, assure that they have no doubts: With the 
demographic explosion and the growing industrialization of 
developing countries, the 550 million vehicles currently in 
circulation on the planet are destined to become 2.5 billion 50 
years from now. 
  Piaggio European Vehicles President Alberto Agnelli, who 
opened the conference, stated: "We all have the task of 
satisfying consumer demands: understanding their needs but also 
making a contribution to the quality of life by performing 
research for safety, reliability, and primarily for the ecology 
of vehicles." And in this area Piaggio -- which is aware of the 
growing importance that two-wheeled transport will have in urban 
areas -- is about to wage a bet. "We are already well ahead in 
the design of a new vehicle: the `bimodal' vehicle," explained 
Piaggio VE Director General Matteo Roberto Pagliano, "that 
combines both an electric and a combustion engine." Briefly, 
the pilot will be able to use the electric engine in town but 
will also be able to change over to tradition gasoline outside 
the urban area. 
  The major issue is the cost, both production and sales 
costs. 
"At the moment," said Yamanouchi, " consumers do not seem ready 
to pay more for a `green' vehicle. But once this was also the 
case for safety features such as the ABS [anti-block system]. 
And then things changed. Therefore a change in direction is 
easily foreseeable even on the environmental front." Mazda 
invests approximately 1.5 trillion lire in research and 
development and 40 percent of its 5,000 researchers are working 
for the environment. 
  Piaggio has other cards up its sleeve however. "By the end 
of 
1994," explained Luca Masut, technical director and the 
Pontedera-based company, "we will present a new range of 
products which, without any considerable increase in costs, will 
be capable of reducing emissions by more than 50 percent thanks 
to combustion and post-treatment systems that have already been 
patented or for which a patent has been requested." 
  On this front, international regulations are still very 
divergent: The strictness of the Clean Air Act in the United 
States can be compared only to Japanese regulations. However, 
according to forecasts, the European Union will also begin to 
align itself by 1996. "In some fields such as small marine 
engines," said Lawrence Toriello from Mercury, a division of the 
Brunswick group, "excessive legislation has created some 
problems. In my opinion industries should be involved in the 
legislative process to be able to move with more flexibility in 
the design phase." In reality, while the rest of the world 
stands with the limited petroleum resources sword of Damocles 
hanging over their heads, there are those that also hope for 
more cooperation among industries. "It would be nice," 
confessed Yamanouchi, "but I do not think this will be possible. 
Competition is competition. Even when it means meeting the 
needs of the Planet Earth." 

