Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Seoul YONHAP in English at 0942 GMT on 7 January transmits </F>
the following item together with a note stating that it is to 
replace a previously transmitted version; the earlier replaced 
version was published in the South Korea section of the 7 
January East Asia DAILY REPORT, page 17, under the headline 
"NNSC Official Warns Against Pressing DPRK"] 
  [Text] Panmunjom, Korea, Jan. 7 (YONHAP) -- An official of 
the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission (NNSC) agrees with 
those who think it is not the interest of any nation to see 
problems arising in the Korean peninsula because of the North 
Korean nuclear issue. 
  "There could be a danger of having something that no one 
wants to see happening," Maj. Gen. Bernard Sandoz, chief Swiss 
member on the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission (NNSC), 
said Friday, warning of tremendous repercussions in case 
concerned parties try to carry the nuclear issue to extremes. 
  "Be patient," Sandoz, asked about prospects of Korean 
reunification, said in an exclusive interview with YONHAP 
reporters at the Swiss Club inside the truce village of 
Panmunjom. 
  "It is not in the interest of South Korea, China, Japan or 
the United States to see a failed reunification taking place in 
Korea," he said. 
  While hailing the progress in Pyongyang-Washington dialogue 
in solving the nuclear situation, the major general noted that 
North Korea and the United States must build mutual confidence. 
  By 1996 North Korea claimed it has come close to meeting 
U.S. 
terms only to see Washington move away by attaching more 
conditions to better relations, and so North Korea is now 
demanding a package deal to resolve the nuclear question, he 
said. 
  "Yongbyon seems to be the only card in their (North Korean) 
game," he said, referring to the site of suspected nuclear 
facilities involved in secretive arms development. 
  U.S. concern for peace and stability in Northeast Asia is 
well understood, Sandoz said, but it is also important for North 
Korea to obtain something in return. 
  The 58-year-old general, a diplomat by profession, has been 
at his post since August 1990 and witnessed changes in 
inter-Korean relations and the status of the commission, 
established in 1953 at the end of a three-year Korean war to 
oversee the Armistice Agreement. 
  All official contact between North Korea and the NNSC was 
broken off in May 1991 by Pyongyang, a result of North Korea's 
protest against the appointment of the first South Korean chief 
of the Military Armistice Commission in March that year. 
  "It's very frustrating to be here and not be able to fulfill 
the mission completely because of the boycott," he told YONHAP. 
  He said they had to accept other channels of dialogue such 
as 
the ongoing working-level talks between North Korea and the 
United States in New York. 
  Despite North Korea's insistence on dissolving the NNSC, 
Sandoz said, the commission will stay until the Armistice 
Agreement is replaced by a peace treaty. 
  The Armistice Agreement is the only legal base, he said, and 
the NNSC is part of this legal base. 
  "We will stay until both sides (South and North Korea) agree 
we should leave," he said. "This is the official position of the 
NNSC and members' governments." 

