CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by VESTNIK KAZAKHSTANA correspondent Aleksandr </F>
Kuzennyy under the rubric "The Man and Law": "When Rogues Are in 
Office"] 
  [Text] Kokshetau Oblast--The well-known Decree of the 
President of the Republic "On Increasing the Responsibility of 
Officials of State Government Organs for the Status of 
Discipline, Public Order, and Security" was issued on 4 December 
1992. However, its urgency is tremendously significant at 
present, too. How are those to whom leadership positions have 
been entrusted complying with the decree? Not everything is 
favorable in Kokshetau Oblast in this regard.... 
  Reports on compliance with the president's decree in rayons 
and cities are filed with the oblast prosecutor's office on a 
monthly basis. This instills discipline and enhances the 
responsibility of leaders. Nonetheless, some are tempted to 
cross the line of the permissible and circumvent the law: 
Perhaps they can get away with it.... 
  Logvinenko, UPTK [Directorate for Production and Technical 
Supply] director at the Borovoye agro-industrial combine, 
certainly thought this way. He headed the collective of the 
administration for many years and was highly regarded by his 
subordinates and the leadership of Shchuchinskiy Rayon. On one 
occasion Viktor Grigoryevich devised what in principle was a 
good endeavor: to bring in timber from Tyumen Oblast. He went 
away to do reconnaissance and make arrangements. The oblast 
administration issued him a license to export from Shchuchinsk 
R90 million worth of meat and R48 million worth of 
butter--naturally, at the request of the rayon administration. 
The director set out for Tyumen with this hard-to-find 
merchandise. They waited for him at home for a week, then for a 
month, but he did not return. Coworkers went to find out what 
had happened. This was what they learned. Logvinenko sold the 
meat and the butter, received 22 million Russian rubles for them 
and R6 million worth of merchandise, and subsequently 
disappeared in a direction unknown. He is still being sought. 
  K. Ibrayev, the rayon prosecutor, said: "Some of the losses 
have been recovered by the state. Two cottages of the UPTK chief 
have been sequestered; three cars of the VAZ-2199 make acquired 
by him have been attached. He took the rest with him. Criminal 
proceedings have been instituted against him." 
  Angibaryan, director of the Golden Ear sovkhoz, also decided 
to "push" butter, circumventing the law. As the saying goes, he 
was caught red-handed. He was held liable under an 
administrative statute; the court assessed as much as...R10,000 
against the director, while a R10 million fine was imposed on 
the sovkhoz. With such arrangements, one can safely go on 
trading in butter in contravention of the law. 
  The position of chief of the rayon tax inspectorate is a 
respectable position. In Shchuchinsk it was filled by a certain 
Yergusayev. On one occasion he was summoned to the prosecutor's 
office. He was outraged: "How dare you? Over what?" He was told 
that an audit had found one peasant farm that was not paying 
taxes. Yergusayev argued: "It is on the right side of the law; 
all peasant farms are exempted from payment of taxes during the 
first three years." They objected: "It has already been four 
years...." 
  The chief of the tax inspectorate was surprised: "Really? 
Excuse me, I did not know...." 
  A sum of R17 million was collected from this peasant farm on 
the demand of the prosecutor's office. However, after this case, 
the already mentioned Yergusayev once again got caught with 
"small stuff." A commercial store not registered anywhere at all 
was uncovered in the rayon; its owners were not paying taxes. 
  We always refer to our budget, which is "full of holes." How 
can it be otherwise if the attitude of some leaders toward their 
official duties is so irresponsible? The rayon prosecutor's 
office has filed a lawsuit seeking R48 million from 
undisciplined bosses--this is for 1993 only. The court refunded 
R40 million to the state. How many more millions are retained by 
shadow economy structures without entering the field of vision 
of that same prosecutor's office?... 
  G. Fedorov, head of the Shchuchinsk City Administration 
(albeit currently the former head) did not think that a cash 
bonus he issued to himself would come out. K. Akhmetov, chief of 
staff of the same administration, decided to build a "business" 
on the illegal issuance of licenses. A fine for spoilage of 
construction materials has been assessed against the management 
of a furniture factory. 
  Facts, facts, and more facts.... So, we wanted to meet with 
officials who have allowed particular violations to occur and 
hear their explanations from the horse's mouth. Acting manager 
of Agrobank Vrublevskaya entered the office of the city of 
Shchuchinsk prosecutor. At present, this bank is widely known in 
the oblast on account of its unseemly deeds rather than its 
operations. 
  The bank's former manager, Azhikenov, has been sentenced to 
nine years' imprisonment. 
  I addressed the banker: "Elvira Yakovlevna, what do you 
think 
about the sad lot of your boss?" 
  Without embarrassment she began to recount the history of 
the 
event, referring continuously to the management of the oblast 
National Bank. 
  "We extended R200 million in credit to the 
Agropromkomplektatsiya joint-stock company." 
  Prosecutor R. Ashibayev asked: "How did credit end up in the 
hands of a commercial company?" 
  "This was a directive from the management of the oblast 
National Bank." 
  "Specifically whose?" 
  "There was a verbal directive." 
  "But it was not valid, was it?" 
  Elvira Yakovlevna did not want to fail her highly placed 
bosses and still would not name the one who had "called her 
personally." 
  The prosecutor continued to ask questions: "Fine, you 
extended credit, but why did you not flag the commercial company 
as a defaulter at the time indicated in the contract? The 
joint-stock company failed to pay the money back to the bank for 
two months. This is a direct violation of the law on banks." 
  Vrublevskaya repeated: "There was a verbal instruction from 
the management of the National Bank to that effect." 
  The prosecutor's office of the city recovered 53,500 tenge 
for the state. 
  "How can you explain what you did?" 
  After a certain pause, she said: "Perhaps it was 
irresponsible...." 
  A great many questions arose as soon as the conversation 
turned to the Agropromkomplektatsiya joint-stock company. As one 
begins to search for answers, the trail leads to the oblast 
seat. They issued a directive from there, they checked on it 
from there.... The enterprise was headed by S. Novikov. He has 
now received Russian citizenship and moved to Russia for 
permanent residence. For the most part, Agropromkomplektatsiya 
engaged in purchasing cable products in Uzbekistan and 
subsequently selling them in Kokshetau Oblast. A 
hard-to-figure-out commercial company suddenly acquired 
respectable protectors and a solid reputation together with them. 
  They say money talks. It may have done its part in this 
case, 
too. It is just that the going was made too smooth for this 
joint-stock company by many officials. 
<H5>  Commentary by Senior Justice Counselor Kasymbek Omarov, </H5>
Deputy Oblast Prosecutor: 
  We are trying as hard as we can to make our young state a 
law-abiding one. Nonetheless, so far we have not been 
necessarily successful in inculcating respect for the law. After 
instituting prosecutorial monitoring of the President's Decree 
"On Increasing the Responsibility of Officials of State 
Government Organs for the Status of Discipline, Public Order, 
and Security," we uncovered 1,320 violations of the law in the 
oblast in 1993 alone. Some 231 officials were disciplined; 
statutory penalties were meted out to 130 officials, and 147 
officials were held financially liable. Some 189 lawsuits were 
referred to the courts, of which 170 have been adjudicated and 
satisfied. Ninety-two criminal cases were instituted. Here is a 
fact which makes one think hard: More than R1 billion was 
recovered for the revenue part of the budget through the tax 
inspectorate on prosecutors' referrals! I repeat--solely on 
prosecutors' referrals. 
  An especially large number of violations were detected in 
the 
area of external economic operations. As a rule, these 
violations are associated with the illegal issuance of licenses 
and customs declarations for exporting products out of the 
republic. Almost R410 million were recovered from the guilty 
parties for these violations, and three criminal cases were 
instituted. For example, O. Yevtyukhov, deputy director of the 
Dipol company, who entered false information on a license for 
porcelain products in an attempt to illegally export 70 tonnes 
of steel sheets, got a suspended sentence of three years' 
imprisonment. A criminal case has been instituted against S. 
Kasymov, former chairman of the Oblast Committee for External 
Economic Relations. The reason was the same--egregious 
violations in the issuance of licenses. 
  On a referral from the Kokshetau prosecutor for the 
transportation sector, a fine was collected, as budget revenue, 
from the Gelios limited-liability company for exporting grain 
without a license. The Leninskiy, Bostandykskiy, and Sunrise 
sovkhozes in Leningradskiy Rayon illegally exported agricultural 
products to Omsk. A fine in the amount of R7.3 million was 
assessed against them. Ye. Zhantasov, chief of the Kuybyshevskiy 
Rayon Agricultural Administration, Ye. Kobzeva, chief 
accountant, and V. Kunitskiy, chief agronomist, decided to join 
the market economy in one fell swoop. The Chongar private small 
enterprise put them on its staff as "scientific consultants," 
paying them respectable monetary remunerations. M. Sobar, 
director of the Kazdorproekt design institute, and A. Shvets, 
director of Lobanovskiy sovkhoz (currently the former director), 
also combined positions. They "moonlighted" for commercial 
structures. 
  The law enforcement organs have instituted a criminal case 
against K. Tonkayev, deputy manager of a branch of Igilik-Bank. 
This official extended loans in the amount of R223 million in 
exchange for a bribe. Without any legal authority from the 
Ministry of Defense, the former chief of the Borovoye military 
health resort sold one of the boarding hotels to the 
Kokchetavglavsnab Administration for...R39,798. The purchase and 
sale contract was pronounced invalid by a ruling of the court of 
arbitration. 
  Prosecutorial organs have increasingly often begun to 
uncover 
violations of law in the tax inspectorates. Here is just one 
fact. The Kokshetausskiy Rayon Administration registered some 
small enterprises without a statutory fund, and the local 
revenuers turned a blind eye to it. Worse yet, eight commercial 
enterprises did not remit even the profit tax to the budget. 
  Hundreds and thousands of officials of various kinds, 
including those in executive jobs, hold various state positions. 
They should set an example, enforce respect for the law, and 
live and work by constitutional norms. Yet many of them act as 
violators of order themselves. Well, they will have to answer 
for these violations to the fullest extent of the law. 

