Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Japan Will Never Be Safe, Either" -- KCNA headline] </F>
  [Text] Pyongyang, March 26 (KCNA) -- NODONG SINMUN today 
comments on the Japanese authorities' persistent obstruction to 
the settlement of the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula. 
  The news analyst says: 
  Recently, Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa said 
"suspected nuclear programme of North Korea causes great concern 
in the international community." And Japanese Foreign Minister 
Tsutomu Hata blared that "if North Korea refuses inspection or 
takes an irresolute attitude, Japan will show a stern response." 
  This is a reversed logic defending the criminal posing a 
nuclear threat. 
  The Japanese reactionaries' false propaganda and pressure 
campaign against the DPRK are dangerous acts aggravating the 
tensions on the Korean peninsula and bringing the situation to a 
more acute phase. 
  In crying over "threat" from the DPRK, they intend to invent 
a pretext to justify their armament expansion and Japan's 
conversion into a military power and openly promote Japan's 
nuclear armament which has reached the danger line. 
  What is grave is that the Japanese ruling quarters are 
revealing their scheme to take a military action against the 
DPRK while working to isolate and stifle it in collusion with 
imperialist reactionaries. 
  The Japanese authorities' phraseology about "sanctions" and 
"stern response" to the DPRK shows that they are looking for a 
chance to launch an anti-DPRK military action with the nuclear 
issue as a pretext. 
  The Japanese reactionaries, dreaming of repeating the 
history 
of aggression, regard the Korean peninsula as the first target 
in their overseas expansion. 
  If the situation on the Korean peninsula goes worse and a 
war 
breaks out, Japan will never be safe, either. 
  The reckless military action of the Japanese reactionaries 
against the Korean people will result in digging their own grave. 

