Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" report No. 11 of 24 March] </F>
  [Text] Career officers in Russia are currently quite 
concerned by the absence of prescribed strength of army units 
and by what many believe to be insufficient financing of the 
Armed Forces. Sergey Safronov of INTERFAX discussed the problems 
of the Russian navy with Deputy Supreme Commander of the Navy 
Admiral Igor Kasatonov. 
  INTERFAX: The economic decline in Russia continues. How 
will it effect the combat capability of the navy? 
  KASATONOV: The navy as an operational-strategic formation 
guaranteeing the defence capability of the country is extremely 
dependent on the state of the national economy, primarily on 
industrial production and the many-tier cooperation between 
numerous Russian companies. It so happens that components for 
many goods, including high tech, were manufactured in different 
parts of the former USSR. Therefore the collapse of the Soviet 
Union largely influenced the navy. 
  During the first two years after the disintegration of the 
country the navy remained afloat following its old strategic 
doctrine, even though some changes had to be made in it. The 
maintenance of the strong Northern and Pacific fleets performing 
oceanic tasks was the main concern while the Baltic and Black 
Sea Fleets were meant for regional purposes. 
  INTERFAX:What political consequences did the disappearance 
of 
the USSR have for the navy? 
  KASATONOV: The collapse of the Soviet Union resulted in the 
loss of the strategic space, the appearance of local naval 
formations. Thus in the Baltic Russia now has two isolated areas 
of deployment. The situation on the Black sea is even more 
complicated. There a significant share of the fleet -- an 
exceptional gain of the Russian people -- has been divided 
between Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova (in the latter case the 
admiral meant the Black Sea-Danube flotilla. - INTERFAX). 
  For centuries the Russian navy worked to conquer an 
appropriate strategic space which allowed to guarantee the 
security of the state. The goal was achieved and the strategic 
space used to include what now constitutes the newly-independent 
countries. And they do not seem to need our navy... 
  Russia has been left with only a small part of its old 
strategic space which does not guarantee the necessary security 
of the country. I think that from this viewpoint the interests 
of our great power were damaged, because most of our closest 
neighbors resist agreements on joint defence. In others, like 
Georgia for example, the political situation is not sufficiently 
stable. 
  In my opinion, in this respect Russia is facing considerable 
difficulties with organizing defence. Such problems must be 
resolved diplomatically on the basis of international law. In 
case compromise is impossible and old ties cannot be restored, 
Russia will have to act proceeding only from its own interests. 
To resolve these questions the Russian leadership should 
demonstrate wisdom and realize who is our true friend. I think 
the problem will be resolved, but not today. 
  INTERFAX: Which of the Russian fleets is the strongest 
today? 
  KASATONOV: The North Fleet is the closest to the prescribed 
strength. It forms the bulk of the strategic naval force which 
is an element the Russian nuclear triad. To a considerable 
extent it guarantees the defence of Russian interests in the 
northern direction. The fleet is an important deterrent for the 
possible aggressor. 
  Even though Russia and the USA have become partners in 
principle, regular contacts and even collisions with American 
submarines off the coast of North Russia indicate that the 
American navy has not left our waters. The fact that foreign 
subs move near the Russian coast, the Kola peninsula, for 
example, while Russian subs are not moving near Florida or 
California cannot help worrying us military people. 
  Foreign nuclear submarines regularly appear off the Russian 
coast in the Far East as well. We are keeping statistics of 
these instances. An analysis of the information shows that 
unfortunately foreign navies have kept their combat means and 
combat formations. 
  INTERFAX: There was a time when this country renounced the 
construction of aircraft-carriers and concentrated on nuclear 
submarines. Now Russia is building aircraft-carrying ships. 
What is the strategy of the Russian navy for the future? 
  KASATONOV: The Soviet leadership proceeded from the 
principle of balanced development of the navy believing that the 
force should be ready to carry out any task. However, the 
approach to the future was quite subjective and depended on the 
person who headed the state, the Defence Ministry or navy. As a 
result, in my opinion, the navy was weakened from the viewpoint 
of combat means. The situation was even worse in auxiliary 
forces. 
  It is true that the USSR gave preference to submarines even 
though national interests also required the construction of 
aircarft-carriers. Most countries do not make such giants, 
actually only the USA can afford such a luxury. Many countries 
prefer making ships of the intermediate class that can take on 
jump jets and helicopters. 
  Only in the late 80s the Soviet Union recognized the need to 
have aircraft-carriers. The Admiral Kuznetsov has been built, 
the Varyag is 85ready and launched. However, the situation 
with the latter is complicated as the Varyag is in foreign 
territory - Ukraine. There are many Russians in that country as 
well as those who truly love Russia and find the split between 
our two nations a mistake. Nevertheless, no one can tell whether 
the Varyag will be completed or not. 
  As for strategy, I can say that in the future the Russian 
Federation will make ships of the same class with the 
displacement of 10 to 12 thousand tons as well as 4 to 5 
thousand ton ships. The submarine fleet will also develop. But 
all that is going to happen in keeping with international 
agreements. 
  INTERFAX: Let's return to the Black Sea Fleet. We would 
want to know your opinion of the recent statement by the Supreme 
Commander of the Ukrainian Navy Admiral Beskaravainy about the 
need to divide the fleet. 
  KASATONOV: The Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk signed a 
document stating that Kiev is surrendering its part of the fleet 
to Russia as payment for its debts. Therefore the declarations 
of other persons contradicting this document are empty rhetoric, 
as the political decision has been made already. 
  The saddest thing about it is that the main base of the 
fleet, Sevastopol, is degrading. Like in besieged Leningrad 
people carry water in buckets and sit in the light of oil lamps 
in the evenings. 
  INTERFAX: But can the statement of the Ukrainian admiral 
indicate a change in the official attitude of Kiev to the fleet? 
  KASATONOV: Plenty of declarations can be made, but the 
people of the Crimea have expressed their will: the 
overwhelming majority voted for Yuri Meshkov in the elections of 
the Crimean president. (Yuri Meshkov is a supporter of stronger 
ties between the Crimea and Russia. - Interfax). Ukraine is 
also heading for elections, therefore one should be more careful 
with political declarations and heed the opinion of women 
standing in lines at food stores. 
  INTERFAX: In the Soviet Union it was not customary to admit 
the existence of naval bases abroad even though we had them at 
least in Vietnam and Cuba. Does Russia have overseas naval 
bases? 
  KASATONOV: I would like to stress that Russia does not have 
overseas naval bases as such. There are only so-called 
logistical points. One of them is in Camranh, Vietnam. By the 
way we are keeping it largely at the insistence of the 
Vietnamese side. In general the Russian military doctrine 
abroad does not provide for the formation of any overseas bases. 
  You probably know that the USA, Britain and other countries 
are also cutting on bases abroad. The situation in the world is 
such that there is no need for them. Hopefully other NATO 
countries will give up military bases too. 
  INTERFAX: Why is Vietnam interested in keeping Russian 
presence in Camranh? 
  KASATONOV: Vietnam as well as many other countries realizes 
the importance of Russia in world politics, in resolving 
economic matters. A number of countries relies on Russian 
machinery and technology in their economies and these ties 
cannot be severed just like that. This also applies to former 
Soviet republics. 
  INTERFAX: Does the Russian navy intend to cooperate with the 
navies of NATO countries? 
  KASATONOV: Such cooperation is a reality already. Between 
March 23 and 25 the United States, Britain, Netherlands, Norway 
and the Russian Federation conducted joint naval exercises in 
the Barents sea. Norway was in charge of overall command. The 
purpose was to exercise joint actions to search and rescue 
people out at sea, joint maneuvering and communications. 
  INTERFAX: Recently ships of the Black Sea Fleet carried out 
a combat mission on the coast of Georgia when hostilities were 
under way in West Georgia between government troops and 
supporters of the former president Zviad Gamsakhurdia. The 
question of opening a Russian naval base in Poti, Georgia was 
raised then. 
  KASATONOV: The question can be decided only when the 
situation in Georgia stabilizes. At the moment political and 
economic conditions in Georgia are such, that the presence of 
the Black Sea Fleet there would not meet the interests of 
Russia. No one is working in the city, there is no food, only 
large-scale looting. What interests can Russia have there? 

