Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Richard Savill report from Belfast: "Major and Reynolds To </F>
Meet in London"] 
  [Text] Mr Major and Mr Albert Reynolds, Irish Prime 
Minister, will meet in London this month to redouble their 
efforts to achieve peace in Northern Ireland following the 
Downing Street declaration on the future of the province. 
  The meeting, the first between the two Prime Ministers since 
the signing of the declaration on Dec 15, will take place on the 
day they attend an England-lreland rugby international at 
Twickenham. 
  Senior sources in Dublin said the two Prime Ministers had 
been invited by the Rugby Football Union to attend the match on 
Feb 19. 
  It was likely they would hold a separate meeting either 
before or after the match to review progress in Northern Ireland. 
  Neither Prime Minister has set a deadline for Sinn Fein's 
acceptance of the declaration, but officials in London and 
Dublin are becoming increasingly irritated at the lack of a 
response from the Provisionals. 
  In a speech to his Fianna Fail party activists in Dublin, Mr 
Reynolds said that two months after the declaration was signed, 
it was time for a decision to enable everyone to take the first 
step in the peace process. 
  Mr Reynolds also voiced irritation with Sinn Fein's repeated 
calls for clarification from Britain alone. 
  He said: "I do not expect to encounter from people with a 
republican viewpoint the attitude that it is only the British 
Government and their clarification that counts. The role and 
influence of the Irish Government is central to the peace 
process." 
  ln an attempt to win back the initiative from Sinn Fein, the 
Irish government is expected to propose to Britain that 
all-party talks on the basis of the joint declaration should 
begin soon. 
  Mr Dick Spring, Irish Foreign Minister, has said his 
government favours negotiations involving London and Dublin, and 
the Constitutional parties in Northern Ireland, as long as they 
are anchored in the joint declaration. 
  He told Dublin's Sunday Press newspaper: "By talks we mean 
genuine negotiations which will build on what has been achieved 
in the declaration and will address all aspects of the problem 
and lead to a deep and lasting settlement." 

