BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by correspondent Karen Markaryan: "Criminal Oil </F>
Pipeline"] 
  [Text] In the course of the investigation into the case of 
Ivan Kharitonov, one of the leaders of Latvia's criminal world, 
staffers involved in the struggle against organized crime 
uncovered the far from fictitious tentacles of the international 
mafia, which moves hundreds of thousands of tonnes of contraband 
petroleum products from Russia to the West. According to 
Latvian police estimates, Russia has lost as much as half a 
billion U.S. dolalrs in this way in the past 18 months. 
Latvia's losses resulting from illegal shipments of gasoline 
and diesel fuel through its territory are on a scale comparable 
to the republic's annual budget. 
  One of the main intermediaries is the Swedish-Latvian firm 
TESS Petroleum. During an investigation of this joint venture, 
a criminal business plan was uncovered. The mechanism is 
brilliantly simple. For example, the chief of a Kaliningrad 
trawler fleet base or the leader of a certain enterprise in that 
oblast suddenly rejects petroleum products that are in transit, 
using any excuse you like, and asks that the goods be 
readdressed to TESS Petroleum in Riga or some other front firm. 
Meanwhile a firm in Tallinn belonging to the TESS conglomerate 
has already paid for the petroleum products on the 
Kaliningraders' behalf. An order then comes down the Lithuanian 
Railroad, and the cargo turns around in mid-journey and goes to 
Latvia, from where it is most convenient to send the oil onward 
to the West by way of well equipped terminals. Naturally, nobody 
pays any dues for this devious transit route. And all the time 
Kaliningrad Oblast is suffering a constant fuel shortage. 
  The Latvian police alone do not have the resources for a 
detailed analysis of this "black-market bookkeeping." However, 
it is now quite clear that the roots should be sought in Moscow, 
at the highest government level. It was only from there that 
huge deliveries of petroleum products from various regions of 
Russia could have been organized and authorized. 
  The staffers of the Latvian MVD [Ministry of Internal 
Affairs] directorate for combating organized crime approached 
their Russian colleagues and provided them with copies of bank 
documents in which various Russian figures appear. However, 
nobody from Moscow has turned up. 
  "It seems our colleagues are simply afraid to take it on," a 
Latvian MVD staffer told me. "We know what a bombshell we have 
in our hands. And the criminals know it very well, too. I 
would not be surprised if they try to put a stop to the whole 
thing at the outset, and they will stop at nothing." 

