Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed FSS: "Von Roll's Business in Iraq -- </F>
Investigation Nearly Concluded -- Three-Year Inquiry Into 
Illegal Export of Military Hardware"; as released by Bern 
ATSA/SDAA database] 
  [Text] Bern, 11 Mar (ATS) -- The investigation undertaken 
against Von Roll SA for the suspected illegal export of military 
hardware to Iraq is about to end, said the president of the 
Court of Criminal Appeal of the Federal Tribunal, Karl Spuehler, 
to ATS on Friday [11 March]. If there had not been a hint of 
illegal intrigue, then we would have noticed it a long time ago, 
said the examining magistrate with regard to a possible 
indictment. 
  On 18 March 1991, the Federal Council ordered an inquiry 
into 
Von Roll SA in Bern, as well as a Vaud-based company. The 
federal examining magistrate, Monique Saudan, has been following 
the case for three years. The inquiry is concentrating on a 
number of deliveries to Iraq of what were said to be materials 
for building presses. These deliveries were made between 1989 
and 1990. 
<H5>  Iraqi Supergun </H5>
  An inquiry opened in May 1990 by the Swiss public 
prosecutor's office concluded that there was a suspicion of the 
manufacture and illegal delivery of weaponry, which is said to 
have been used in the manufacture of the Iraqi "supergun." 
  Although the inquiry has taken a particularly long time, 
Federal Judge Karl Spuehler said that it is not a question of 
being delayed. The president of the Court of Criminal Appeal, to 
whom Judge Monique Saudan must make a monthly report, explained 
that there were three reasons for the long duration. 
  First of all, the matter is extremely complex. The case has 
international ramifications, and is therefore linked to requests 
for judicial cooperation, which take a lot of time. Moreover, 
certain interim decisions were attacked by defense. 
<H5>  No Specific Date </H5>
  On the basis of the most recent interim reports from Judge 
Saudan, Judge Spuehler predicts that the final report will be 
submitted within the "foreseeable" future. Mrs. Saudan herself 
did not wish to communicate the specific date for the submission 
of her final report. Nor did she want to say if she will 
recommend an indictment. She limited herself to stressing that 
if there had been no hint of guilty intrigues, then this would 
have been noticed a long time ago. 
  Judge Saudan will have to forward her report to Appenzell 
public prosecutor Felix Baenziger in Trogen [Aargau canton]. 
Mr. Baenziger was appointed as extraordinary federal public 
prosecutor for this case. He is the one who will decide, if 
necessary, whether a complaint should be filed against the 
management of Von Roll, and on what grounds. 
  Under the presidency of Karl Spuehler, the Court of Criminal 
Appeal of the Federal Tribunal will then decide what action 
should be taken. If it approves the complaint, the file will be 
forwarded to the Penal Chamber of the Federal Tribunal. 
  Von Roll is first waiting for the publication of the 
preliminary inquiry report. The Solothurn-based group still 
feels that it has not "knowingly or willingly" committed any 
crime, said its spokesman Victor Bader. 

