Article   Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] In the past year, we opened 12 general hospitals 
and 215 first aid clinics. This means that during my 
administration we inaugurated a new hospital every three weeks 
and a first aid clinic every day during my five years in 
government. Following the expansion and refurbishment of the 
20 de Noviembre Regional Hospital in Liste, it has become a high 
specialty hospital center, which will have the most modern 
medical equipment. 
  Last year I reported that the vaccine program was able to 
inoculate 95 percent of the Mexican children under the age of 
five with all vaccinations. To maintain the high coverage 
levels attained, we applied more than 88 million doses in 1993. 
During National Health Week, last October, a total of 22 
million children received the measles vaccine. Some 8 million 
children received treatment against parasites, and vitamins were 
given to 1 million children under the age of five, which is a 
very important step for their physical development. Since 
October 1990, we have not had a single case of poliomyelitis. 
We will shortly obtain international recognition for the 
eradication of this disease. 
  The last case of diphtheria was recorded in 1991. Measles 
and whooping cough are showing significant reductions of 80 and 
75 percent, respectively, when compared to 1988 levels. I 
reiterate that these results are unprecedented in Mexico's 
public health history. We also have been able to make progress 
in the achievement of the goals set for the year 2000 at the 
World Children's Summit. All of this is the result of the work 
and coverage achieved by our health institutions, as well as by 
the great sense of responsibility shown by Mexican families. 
  AIDS has become one of the primary causes of death among the 
male population between the ages of 25 and 34. It is necessary 
to insist that there is no vaccine against AIDS or treatment to 
cure it. He who contracts AIDS is condemned to death. This 
dramatic fact forces us to intensify even more our education 
campaigns, the dissemination of messages, and the verification 
of blood banks to prevent it from spreading. I reiterate we are 
going to double our prevention campaigns. 
  In 1993, less than 8,000 cases of malaria were reported as 
compared to the more than 16,000 cases the previous year. No 
deaths for this cause have been reported. The new National 
Council for the Prevention and Control of Diarrhea conducted 
educational campaigns in the media, a total of 40 million oral 
rehydration doses were distributed, and efforts in the clean 
water program were intensified. Some 94 percent of drinking 
water was chlorinated. In addition, a total of 150,000 health 
facilities were built. 
  All of these actions have helped reduce the rate of 
mortality 
from diarrhea in children under the age of five by more than 30 
percent since 1990. We have been able to get cholera under 
control, even though we still have to periodically treat 
isolated outbreaks. 

