BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 11 KYODO -- A leader of Myanmar's 
[Burma] suppressed National League for Democracy (NLD) has urged 
Japan not to renew Official Development Assistance (ODA) to his 
country until democracy has been fully restored. 
  "We call on our friends to help us bring real change to 
Burma 
by sustaining the pressure. We especially call on our host 
country, Japan, not to renew ODA assistance at this time," said 
Win Khet, chairman of the NLD in the "liberated area" along the 
Thai-Myanmar border which is held by anti-government forces. 
  Win Khet made the remarks Tuesday [10 May] in a speech at 
the 
congress of the Socialist International in Tokyo, of which KYODO 
NEWS SERVICE obtained a copy Wednesday. 
  The manuscript quoted Win Khet as saying, "1994 is a very 
critical year for Burma. We may be on the verge of bringing 
about real political change in Burma or we may see the 
dictatorship succeed in legitimizing and consolidating its 
power." 
  Following almost three decades of military rule, the NLD, 
led 
by prominent dissident and Nobel Peace Price winner Aung San Suu 
Kyi, won a landslide victory in the 1990 general elections. 
  But Myanmar's junta, the State Law and Order Restoration 
Council (SLORC), defied the public vote, put Aung San Suu Kyi 
under house arrest in Yangon [Rangoon] and announced that it 
would remain in power for a further five to 10 years. 
  Japan, Myanmar's long, largest benefactor, joined other 
major 
donor nations in suspending economic assistance in 1988 after 
the Army killed hundreds of pro-democracy demonstrators. But 
early the following year it broke ranks and decided to continue 
with economic assistance already pledged. 
  Win Khet, though, dismissed recent concessions by the 
military government such as cease-fire talks with ethnic rebel 
groups or allowing a U.S. congressman to meet with Aung San Suu 
Kyi as merely "cosmetic" and aiming at legitimizing the junta's 
regime. 
  At the same time Myanmar's military is building up its 
strength by purchasing arms from China worth 1 billion U.S. 
dollars, he said. 
  He warned against taking "token democratic reforms" as 
justification for cooperation with Myanmar's military 
government, and said that while SLORC maintains to have sought 
dialogue with "a negative and counterproductive" Aung San Suu 
Kyi, nobody actually went to see her. "If SLORC does not 
recognize Aung San Suu Kyi's leadership, if it will not talk to 
her or allow her to participate in Burma's future, there can be 
no real change -- economic or political -- in Burma," he said. 
  "Those who advocate `constructive engagement' should be 
really constructive to the Burmese people and not to the 
military, by acknowledging the right of the Burmese people to 
choose their own government," Win Khet said. 

