Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Foreign Ministry Memorandum: "The True Picture Concerning </F>
the Production of Plutonium From PHWRs in South Korea"] 
  [Text] The DPRK Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 18 February 
issued a memorandum exposing the true picture of secret nuclear 
development in South Korea where plutonium output from 
pressurized heavy water reactors [PHWR's] [chungsuro] has been 
increasing recently. 
  The memorandum reads in full: 
  It is a fact known worldwide that the successive rulers in 
South Korea have long carried forward their clandestine program 
for the development of nuclear weapons under the U.S. nuclear 
umbrella. 
  The DPRK Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued its memorandum 
early last year, disclosing South Korea's premeditated maneuver 
[kyehoekchokin chaektong] for the development of nuclear weapons. 
  Many governments, political parties, public organizations 
and 
the world community at large have expressed great concern over 
the South Korean authorities' machinations for nuclear weapons 
development and demanded their immediate discontinuation. This 
notwithstanding, the South Korean authorities have refused to 
comply with this demand and stepped up their nuclear weapons 
development at an accelerated pace. 
  In connection with another revelation of the fact that the 
South Korean authorities have recently increased plutonium 
output from their pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) for the 
development of nuclear weapons, the DPRK Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs is issuing this memorandum, considering it necessary to 
disclose the true picture thereof. 
<H3>  I. The South Korean Authorities' Nuclear Weapons 
Development Policy and Introduction of PHWR </H3>
  South Korea's nuclear weapons development policy was shaped 
in the early 1970s. The 1960s witnessed a rapid collapse of the 
imperialists' colonial system in different parts of the world, 
that gave way to a chain of the declaration of independence by 
countries under colonial domination. In the 1970s, the suzerain 
states moved toward withdrawing their troops from their former 
colonies. 
  Critically ill at ease over these moves, the former dictator 
Pak Chong-hui tried to find a way out in developing nuclear 
weapons. 
  A former aide close to the Chongwadae [presidential office] 
testified that Pak Chong-hui concluded that the last resort for 
self-reliant national defence capability is the acquisition of 
nuclear weapons. -- South Korean monthly magazine SINDONG-A, 
April issue of 1989. 
  Recalling this period, a South Korean newspaper reported 
that 
with all testimonies pieced together, Pak Chong-hui seemed to 
have taken a shortcut toward the acquisition of nuclear weapons 
by the mid-1970s. -- South Korean newspaper CHUNGANG ILBO, 6 
August 1992. 
  As Pak Chong-hui committed himself to the nuclear 
development 
policy, his primary preoccupation was to obtain access to the 
nuclear explosive substances [haekpokpal muljil hoektuk] and 
introduce the PHWR to this end. 
  The South Korean monthly magazine WOLGAN CHOSON in its 
August 
issue of 1988 commented that Pak Chong-hui forcefully suppressed 
the anti-PHWR voice within his government and ordered Chairman 
Mun Chung-sik of the Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO) to 
resolutely push forward the introduction of the PHWR. This 
seemed to reflect his preoccupation with nuclear arms 
development. The same magazine in its October issue of 1991 
wrote that a person, once deeply engaged in the nuclear 
development program, admitted that the introduction of the 
Wolsong PHWR from Canada was aimed at manufacturing nuclear 
weapons. Even a physicist who remembers the PHWR introduction 
asserted that the PHWR introduction was apparently related to 
the nuclear weapons development. -- South Korean monthly 
magazine SINDONG-A, April issue of 1989. 
  South Korea embarked on pilot-production of nuclear weapons 
through the PHWR as early as in the late 1970s. These attempts 
by South Korea to develop nuclear weapons escalated during the 
years of the Chon Tu-hwan regime. 
  On 19 December 1980, Chon Tu-hwan took the measure of 
merging 
and dissolving the government-subsidized agencies, a camouflage 
effort to feign the abandonment of the nuclear weapons 
development scheme, but which in fact maximized their research 
capability. -- South Korean YONHAP yearbook, 1981 edition. 
  In September 1983, Yi Ki-paek, the then chairman of the 
Joint 
Chiefs of Staff of the South Korean Army, submitted his verbal 
report on the nuclear policy of South Korea to Chon Tu-hwan, and 
this was the occasion for the evolution of the secretly planned 
strategy for nuclear arms option [pimil kihoek haengmujang 
sontaekkwon chollyak], which has since been vigorously promoted. 
-- South Korean monthly magazine WOLGAN CHOSON, October issue of 
1991. 
  Under the cloak of the localization of nuclear fuel, the 
Chon 
Tu-hwan military regime succeeded in developing the PHWR nuclear 
fuel in 1986 and completed its experimental facilities for 
processing the PHWR nuclear fuel in 1987. This process has 
enabled the regime to move toward the goal of an independent 
capability of producing the total amount of nuclear fuel needed 
for the Wolsong PHWR and at the same time toward the stage of 
perfecting the technology of reprocessing the spent fuel. The 
No Tae-u military regime stepped into a full-scale stage of 
achieving a greater practicability [silyonghwa] of the 
industrial foundation of its nuclear weapons development program 
by completing this foundation. 
  Stressing the need to actively meet the fast-changing 
situation, No Tae-u had the Taedok Declaration adopted pledging 
to complete by 1992 the project of the Taedok science town, 
general headquarters of the nuclear weapons development program, 
4 or 5 years ahead of schedule, and on 27 November 1992 he 
officiated at the dedication ceremony of the town project. -- 
South Korean DONG-A yearbook, 1991 edition, MBC television, 27 
November 1992. 
  Throughout the process of their nuclear weapons development, 
the present South Korean authorities attempted to divert the 
world public attention from their telltale nuclear arms program 
under the cloak of the light water reactors (LWR) system. 
  In face of the mounting international public opinion against 
South Korea's increasing moves toward nuclear weapons 
development, Kim Yong-sam tried to whitewash such moves, saying 
that they have no intention at all to go ahead with any 
independent nuclear weapons development program. -- South Korean 
Radio No. 1, 14 November 1993. 
  South Korean authorities' decision to introduce the PHWR was 
motivated by the analysis which indicates a higher purity of 
plutonium from the reprocessed natural uranium as compared with 
the spent enriched uranium. -- South Korean monthly magazine 
WOLGAN CHOSON, April issue of 1992. 
  The South Korean monthly magazine WOLGAN CHOSON in its 
November issue of 1989 quoted the chairman of South Korea's 
non-governmental Council for Atomic Power Development and Safety 
as saying in the early 1970s that the Canadian Deuterium-Uranium 
(CANDU)-type PHWR is fuelled by natural uranium, which we can 
supply on our own. The PHWR introduction is also aimed at 
circumventing supervision by the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA). 
  A South Korean physicist who remembers the period of the 
PHWR 
introduction confessed that the IAEA's supervision is almost 
difficult, because the PHWR leaves room for random fuel 
discharge [susiro yollyorul ppaenaelsu isso]. -- South Korean 
monthly magazine SINDONG-A, April issue of 1989. 
  As seen above, the Wolsong PHWR is a pile geared to 
plutonium 
production which the South Korean authorities have commissioned 
into operation in pursuit of their policy intention to develop 
nuclear weapons. 
<H3>  II. The Stockpiling of Plutonium Through the PHWR and the 
Completion of a System for Full-Scale Nuclear Weapons Development </H3>
  The Wolsong PHWR plays a pivotal role in the South Korean 
authorities' nuclear weapons development program. Under a 
South Korean-Canadian December 1974 contract, the Wolsong PHWR 
project began in January 1976 and went into operation in April 
1983. At present, South Korea has the Wolsong PHWR, the 
multi-purpose research reactors (K-NRR) and post irradiation 
test facilities in operation as an integral centre of the 
plutonium production. 
  The amount of nuclear material from a 1,000 MWe [megawatts 
electric] PHWR after one year operation is enough to manufacture 
around 50 atomic bombs of Nagasaki type. Therefore, it follows 
that the 678.7 MWe PHWR operating in South Korea since 1983 has 
by now produced potential plutonium enough to manufacture over 
370 atomic bombs. 
  The U.S. newspaper INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE on 2 
November 1993 said that South Korea is speeding up its ambitious 
nuclear program under IAEA safeguards, and further wrote that 
experts estimate that its accumulated spent fuel would yield 
about 10 tons of plutonium if reprocessed. This stockpile of 
potential plutonium will increase to an estimated 24 tons by the 
year 2000. 
  This was pointed out also by the Japanese magazine SEKAI in 
its December 1992 issue, which reported that South Korea has 
stockpiled about 10 tons of plutonium extracted from the spent 
fuel. Quite obvious is how much the stockpile of plutonium will 
bulk up, when another PHWR now under construction is 
commissioned into operation. 
  South Korea is speeding up its projects to build more PHWR's 
in an effort to extract more plutonium under the pretext of 
reprocessing 300 tons of spent fuel annually discharged from 
eight LWR's currently in operation plus 1,140 tons of spent fuel 
contained in underwater storage to be recycled back into these 
PHWR's. 
  Commenting on this, the South Korean newspaper HANGYORE 
SINMUN reported on 15 March 1990 that the South Korean 
authorities were planning to recycle the LWR spent fuel into 
low-enriched PHWR fuel blended with other uranium waste, a move 
implicative of their military consideration [kunsajok uido] 
reflected by their intention to build more PHWR power plants 
that allow an easier extraction of plutonium. 
  Peter Hayes, an anti-nuclear activist, wrote in his essay 
entitled: The Republic of Korea and the Nuclear Issue, that it 
is evident that the South Koreans have not abandoned the idea of 
reprocessing their spent fuel. In October 1989, South Korea 
began informal discussions to organize a trilateral arrangement 
involving South Korea, the United States, and Canada, whereby 
coprocessing would be established in South Korea. 
  Also in October 1989 an IAEA seminar in Vienna was told by a 
KEPCO official that South Korea wanted to install more PHWR's. 
A South Korean official added at the same meeting that South 
Korea would like to reprocess LWR spent fuel for recycling 
plutonium back into these PHWR's. The point at issue is that 
the spent nuclear fuel from the PHWR is diverted directly into 
manufacturing nuclear weapons after its conversion into 
plutonium through the undisclosed reprocessing facility at the 
Taedok science town. 
<H5>  III. The PHWR's Must Be Replaced By LWR's </H5>
  The South Korean authorities have given the United States 
carte blanche to deploy numerous nuclear weapons in South Korea 
and meanwhile, on their part, actively pushed ahead with their 
own nuclear weapons development program, and they are planning 
these days to introduce even Patriot missiles. This graphically 
testifies to a sheer incongruity of their words and deeds, 
allegedly devoted to the implementation of the joint declaration 
on the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. 
  Now, South Korea is practically moving toward invalidating 
[paekchihwa] the joint declaration on the denuclearization of 
the Korean peninsula. 
  In this regard, an American scholar Selig S. Harrison wrote 
in his comment that criticism of the agreement has intensified 
in South Korea since Mr. No left office. One of the key 
advisers to President Kim Yong-sam, Chong Chae-mun, chairman of 
the National Assembly's Foreign Affairs and Unification 
Committee has called for a review of the 1991 agreement. We know 
that we could generate nuclear power at a lower cost if we have 
reprocessing facilities, Mr. Chong said last May, and we cannot 
continue to depend on foreign countries for nuclear fuel. -- 
U.S. newspaper INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE, 2 November 1993. 
  The increasingly undisguised efforts on the part of the 
South 
Korean authorities to invalidate [muhohwa] the joint declaration 
on the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula have further 
intensified recently, simultaneously with the on-going ruckus 
over the DPRK's so-called suspected nuclear program. 
  South Korea's former Minister of National Unification Yi 
Se-ki said in April 1993 that the North-South joint declaration 
on the denuclearization has been invalidated in principle, and 
went to the length of insisting that it is high time we have to 
acquire nuclear weapons capability [haengnungnyok], and the 
so-called National Assembly should raise voice calling for this. 
-- South Korean newspaper TONG-A ILBO, 11 April 1993. 
  South Korean MBC Television reported on 9 October 1993 that 
some observers speculated that Kim Yong-sam called a 
security-related ministers' meeting, unusually attended by the 
minister of science and technology, and the meeting discussed 
matters related to the acquisition of nuclear fuel reprocessing 
facilities and to the review of the declaration on the 
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. 
  It has become a stark fact that the persistent dustup by the 
South Korean authorities over the DPRK's so-called suspected 
nuclear program is, after all, intended to justify their 
attempts to develop nuclear weapons. 
  Commenting on this, the Romanian weekly EUROPA in its 
edition 
No. 152 disclosed that the South Korean authorities' kickup over 
the North's suspected nuclear program is part of their 
propaganda offensive to legalize their own nuclear weapons 
development. 
  The Canada-based overseas Koreans' newspaper NEW KOREA TIMES 
commented on 23 October 1993 that in particular, the voice of 
the new right-wing forces in South Korea calling for the 
possession of nuclear weapons was high in intensity and the 
opposition response was no less tough. As if reflecting such 
pros and cons, South Korea's nuclear independence turned out to 
be a favorite topic in the so-called National Assembly as well. 
  These facts alone suffice to show that the South Korean 
authorities are dashing headlong toward nuclear weapons 
development, unconcerned with the joint declaration on the 
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, which they have now 
rendered worthless. 
  The South Korean authorities must renounce their nuclear 
weapons development policy, which severely threatens our 
nation's right of existence and the peace and security of 
Northeast Asia, remove plutonium for nuclear weapons 
development, and take urgent measures either to dismantle their 
PHWR's -- both in operation or under construction -- or to 
replace them with LWR's. 
  [Issued] 18 February, Pyongyang 

