BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Today, 9th April, coincides with the anniversary of 
severance of Iran's ties with America. Severance of Iran-U.S. 
ties 15 years ago on this day is one of those events which took 
place after the lapse of just a few months following the victory 
of the Islamic revolution in Iran. 
  Hence the events which occurred in that juncture and also 
with the years following the severance of Tehran-Washington ties 
are indicative of an open opposition in the two countries 
relations. This opposition which clearly emerged following the 
victory of the Islamic revolution in Iran due to the 
anti-arrogant character of the Islamic Republic of Iran and 
termination of US intervention in Iran's internal affairs, in 
fact is viewed as the main reason for the severance of ties 
between Tehran and Washington. 
  At present too when these severance of ties have entered the 
16th year, it seems that the statesmen in Washington are still 
faced with doubt in accepting the reality of the Islamic 
revolution and improperly [word indistinct] the present status 
of Iran on the international and regional scenes. 
  A glance at the record of the statesmen in Washington 
vis-a-vis Iran, during more than a decade, specially in the 
recent years show that the U.S. statesmen have constantly tried 
to force their demands on Iran. 
  Hence it must be said that it is the mode of thinking of 
U.S. 
statesmen and also their unrealistic approach towards bilateral 
relations which has taken the Iran-U.S. ties out of a rational 
and principled course. 
  It is however indisputable that Washington's insistence on 
continuing this trend has entailed the removal of favourable 
grounds for establishment of ties between the two countries. 
  It is clear that as long as the US insists on continuing 
such 
a policy no positive change in the two countries' ties can be 
expected. 
  On the other hand the hostile performance of the U.S. 
leaders 
during the recent months also showed that the U.S. continues to 
pursue its desire for isolating the Islamic Republic of Iran on 
the international scene and that the US officials have made 
great efforts in this connection in order to prevent Iran from 
expanding its ties with the European governments including those 
of Germany, France as well as Japan. 
  The U.S. has put its European allies under pressure to 
achieve its goal. 
  But these efforts which were primarily aimed at putting 
economic pressure did not reach anywhere and as political 
analysts say the U.S. policy in this connection has failed. 
  At any rate according to political analysts the Islamic 
republic of Iran is considered as a powerful country which is 
playing a vital role in the trend of the regional developments. 
  This role is being assessed as significant by the U.S. 
leaders in so far as the central Asia and the security of the 
Persian Gulf are concerned. 
  And this is the reality which the U.S. leaders are forced to 
accept. 
  Any how during the past fifteen years the Islamic Iran has 
proved that it wants peaceful coexistence in the international 
community and will never compromise the principles of the 
revolution with any country including the U.S. 

