BFN 

<F P=106> [Gilles Bresson report: "European Elections: Chirac's </F>
Battle To Have Rally for the Republic Accept Dominique Baudis"] 
  [Excerpt] Following the RPR's [Rally for the Republic] 
parliamentary group and urged to do so by Jacques Chirac, senior 
RPR offcials yesterday "took note" of the choice of Dominique 
Baudis, the CDS [Social Democratic Center] mayor of Toulouse, to 
head the majority's list for the European elections. Only 
Etienne Pinte, the representative for Yvelines and supporter of 
Philippe Seguin [Assembly speaker], and Robert Schumann, a 
northern senator and historic Gaullist, refused to sign the 
movement's statement as the mayor of Paris [Chirac] was urging 
them to do. As soon as the news became known, Valery Giscard 
d'Estaing said how happy he was "with the swift, sympathetic 
reaction of the RPR." Moreover, after a meeting of the 
leadership of the UDF [French Democratic Union], he said that he 
was "ready to help his partners put the finishing touches to the 
list in a spirit of union and harmony." 
  This being the case, the consecration of Dominique Baudis is 
going ahead, provoking serious gnashing of teeth among the 
Gaullists. Moreover, although it was not turbulent, yesterday 
morning's meeting of senior RPR officials, which took place 
behind closed doors, was certainly lively. First of all, 
Philippe Seguin, president of the National Assembly and leader 
of the anti-Maastricht lobby, switched his telephone to an 
answering service after having expressed his disagreement with 
Jacques Chirac, with whom he had spoken on the telephone. 
Interior Minister Charles Pasqua, who was away on business with 
the DST [Directorate of Territorial Surveillance], had also sent 
his apologies. Meanwhile, Foreign Minister Alain Juppe, who is 
the general secretary of the RPR, was prevented from attending 
because he is on a visit to China. Straight away, Jacques Chirac 
sought to set the parameters of the debate. 
  "The French," he started explaining, "laugh at political 
quarrels, and are preoccupied with other problems. They are 
hostile to splits, and they would not understand why the 
majority had split over Europe. The European Parliament does 
not have any great power. Moreover, there is no need to start a 
confrontation over Europe with our partners. The prime minister 
would like to have a joint list. Anyway, the platform signed 
with the UDF does not tally with our vision of Europe. We are 
simply giving a five-year mandate to our members of Parliament." 
The RPR leader then proceeded to touch on the question coming 
at the top of the list: "We wanted Alain Juppe, but the prime 
minister's opposition to his name led us to assume that the UDF 
was choosing its candidate on the pretext that we had the prime 
ministership and the presidency of the National Assembly. The 
nomination of Dominique Baudis caused a stir within the UDF. We 
should not seek to involve ourselves in the business of the UDF. 
The leadership of the RPR's parliamentary group was right to 
accept this choice. The same goes for Charles Pasqua. Seguin 
explained to me that this did not tally with his vision of the 
way things should be, and that he wanted to remain on the 
sidelines of this particular debate." [passage omitted] 

