CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Liga Laizane: "9,000 Discipline Violations in </F>
the Armed Forces."] 
  [Text] Riga, May 6. Last year, 9,000 discipline violations 
were found in the Armed Forces, as reported on Friday by Valdis 
Petersons, Chief of the Mobile Department and Personnel 
Department of the Armed Forces (AF), at the meeting of AF unit 
and subdivision commanders. 
  AF Commander Dainis Turlais stated at the meeting that the 
Army units are artificial creations, where interrelationships 
are regulated only by laws and regulations, not by personal 
sympathies or antipathies. The duties of the Army do not include 
the re-education, within 18 months, of hooligans into decent 
citizens. 
  Fifty-six percent of all violations, as mentioned by V. 
Petersons, were related to carelessness in the fulfillment of 
duties, involving violations during guard duty and internal 
service, 20 percent of violations -- drinking, 16 percent -- 
unauthorized departure from the post and not returning from 
leave on time, as well as 3 percent of cases of callous 
harassment of fellow servicemen. V. Liepins stated that the 
latter are difficult to identify because they are being covered 
up, and it could be assumed that there have been many more such 
cases. Specifically, those with the least education are the ones 
harassing their fellow servicemen. 
  Overall, regulations were mostly violated by soldiers in 
obligatory service, although 17 percent of these 9,000 
violations were incurred by instructors, 3 percent by officers 
and 0.8 percent by deputy officers. Thirty new officers and 200 
re-enlisted servicemen have been retired from duty because of 
drinking. 
  Last year, 16 servicemen lost their lives in the Armed 
Forces. Two of these were by suicide, and there were also 12 
attempted suicides by servicemen. The remainder died in 
accidents. As stressed by Ivars Grava, Chief of the Legal 
Department of the Armed Forces, in the Army last year, not a 
single serviceman intentionally murdered another servicemen. 
Nevertheless, V. Liepins confirmed the facts that the body of 
one serviceman was found with knife wounds in a courtyard of one 
of the houses on Marijas Street, and the body of one serviceman 
-- by the railroad tracks. The causes of death for the others 
were drowning, traffic accidents while on leave, heart disease, 
and also two cases where the servicemen had not used care when 
handling their firearms. 
  The Chief of the Medical Service of the Armed Forces stated 
that a very serious problem in the Army is the development of 
psychological problems -- pathological personality changes, 
which, especially in the first three months of duty, create a 
poor relationship with fellow servicemen, and the commanders are 
unable to deflect conflict situations. Because of this reason, 
many servicemen have been retired. 

