BFN 

  [Text] On the morning of 2 April, Sun Weiben, secretary of 
the provincial party committee, and some other leading comrades 
inspected the work sites of nine roads and nine bridges under 
construction in Harbin city. They fully affirmed the 
achievements scored by Harbin city in urban construction. 
  On the morning of 2 April, accompanied by Tian Fengshan and 
Suo Changyou, principal leaders of Harbin city, some leading 
comrades of the provincial party committee, including Sun 
Weiben, Ma Guoliang, Shan Rongfan, and Wang Xianmin, inspected 
by car (Nanji) Street, (Dafangli) Street, (Didao) Bridge, 
(Dacheng) Bridge, (Hongshi) Grand Street, and (Chunyang) 
Overpass. When dwelling on the tremendous changes taken place 
in Harbin city over the past few years, Sun Weiben, from the 
position of being a former resident of Harbin, said: Harbin is 
really getting more and more beautiful, and this makes Harbin 
people feel a sense of pride. The eight roads and five bridges 
built last year and the nine roads and nine bridges whose 
construction just begun are greatly significant in rapidly 
enhancing Harbin's function as a carrier, in promoting the 
common prosperity of both urban and rural areas, in improving 
the tense communications situation, in meeting the demands of 
the Asian Winter Games, and in building Harbin into an important 
international commercial and trade city of Northeast Asia. At 
the same time, the construction of these projects has provided 
enlightenment to the construction of other cities. In building 
these nine roads and nine bridges, Harbin has followed the 
guiding principles of acting according to its capability, doing 
its best, considering long-term interest, and persisting in 
standards. To gradually form a modernized communications 
pattern of embracing two axes, four rings, and ten lines, this 
year Harbin city will complete the building of nine roads and 
nine bridges with a total length of 45 km. The nine bridges 
will cover a total length of 1.5 km. These nine bridges will be 
completed and open to traffic by the end of October this year. 
  During the inspection, Secretary Sun Weiben also suggested: 
In urban construction, Harbin city should combine rebuilding 
with the development of production. In building small 
districts, the city should pay attention to the building of 
subsidiary facilities, kindergartens and primary schools in 
particular. Secretary Sun Weiben specially mentioned about the 
control of Majiagou He. He pointed out: The situation of 
Majiagou He discords with the modernization of the city. 
Therefore, Harbin city should try its best to rebuild it. 
  Ma Guoliang and Shan Rongfan, leaders of the provincial 
party 
committee, also fully affirmed the urban construction of Harbin 
city and offered opinions. 

