Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Moscow Ostankino Television First 
Channel Network in Russian at 1545 GMT on 29 March carries the 
"At First Hand" program featuring a nine-minute recorded 
interview with head of the presidential administration Sergey 
Filatov by an unidentified correspondent. The date and location 
of the interview is not given. 
  Asked about the poor turnout at the local elections, Filatov 
attributes it to the current hardship, antipathy, and 
disorientation of voters after Zhirinovskiy's success in the 
last elections and also to the apolitical mood in the cities and 
oblast capitals where the representative bodies of power tend to 
consist of representatives from the more politically active 
rural localities. Filatov points out the need for the president 
to define more precisely the powers of the bodies of local 
self-government, which are established in the constitution as 
separate from bodies of state power. He says that there were 
many meetings with city mayors regarding the local elections, 
and that "Yeltsin met halfway the numerous requests not to be 
rigid in fixing the dates for holding these elections, as was 
the case earlier in the spring of this year, to give the 
opportunity -- as the ground work is done, as the awareness is 
awakened as to what kind of power the local level want to have 
-- to complete this in the autumn. This is what he has done 
with this edict." 
  Filatov states that they have set themselves an April 
deadline to draw up the legislation and May for submitting to 
the State Duma the fundamentals for structuring local 
self-government. 
  Asked about the rumors of early presidential elections and 
the grounds for the rumors, Filatov says, "I can only see one 
reason: Many different candidates have appeared who very much 
want to try their strength and be elected president. There is 
absolutely no juridical basis for that." Filatov then goes on 
to list the various clauses of the constitution that support the 
president remaining in office for his full term. 
  Filatov then goes on to the presidential edict of 21 March 
appointing Yuriy Yarov as the coordinator of the Russian 
tripartite commission for regulating socio-economic relations. 
He stresses the importance of the commission's functions as a 
general mediator. 
  Asked about Yeltsin's intentions, Filatov says he is working 
intensively on agreements, preparing for his trip to Spain, and 
is set to deal with current problems. He adds that the 
president is in a good mood. 

