Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [New conference by Prime Minister Joseph Koffigoh with </F>
unidentified reporters on 7 January in Lome -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Koffigoh] I would like to tell the Togolese 
people that normal activities will resume soon in Lome in a few 
hours or days. As for the attacks themselves, all Togolese are 
deeply shocked -- the head of state, my government and myself -- 
we are all indignant at what happened, and we believe that the 
attacks are absurd and antidemocratic because we are on the way 
to the legislative elections that will complete the democratic 
process in Togo. 
  [Unidentified reporter] Concerning these attacks, there is a 
neighboring country that is being accused of the attacks. What 
can you say about Togo's relations with that country? 
  [Koffigoh] Togo wants to live in peace with all the 
countries of the subregion. You know that Togo has signed a 
nonaggression pact with three countries in the subregion: 
Ghana, Benin and Nigeria. Moreover, we are united within the 
Economic Community of West African States. We want to live in 
peace with all the countries of the subregion -- and this should 
be clear once and for all. As for the head of state and the 
Togolese Government, every effort will be made to preserve this 
peaceful atmosphere. 
  It is true that on 6 January, at the border post at Aflao, 
our security forces fired upon from Ghana. The government 
lodged complaints and during the night, we obtained from the 
Ghanaian Government a statement assuring us that Ghana has no 
intention of attacking Togo -- we have taken note of that. But 
we believe that words alone are not enough, and that attitudes 
should be similar to declarations of intention. Once again: 
Togo wants to live in peace with all the countries in the 
subregion. 
  [Unidentified reporter] Mr. Prime Minister, you were in 
discussions with the head of state when the attacks took place. 
This did not prevent you from rounding up your discussions and 
deciding to postpone by two weeks the date of the legislative 
election. What are the reasons behind this postponement? 
  [Koffigoh] There are two reasons for this postponement. 
First, there are technical reasons. You know that it is the 
National Electoral Commission that is in charge of personalizing 
the voter's cards and their distribution. There was a slight 
delay in that process. [passage omitted] The second reason is 
political. We want to lead our people on the path to democracy, 
and the government and the head of state remain open and 
attentive to all suggestions, regardless of where they come 
from, so that together and within the framework of the policy of 
democratic integration we promised to initiate -- right from the 
beginning -- we will get to the finishing line of the democratic 
process. 
  [Unidentified reporter] Mr. Prime Minister, with regard to 
the other politicians, do you think, do you believe that this 
two week-delay will win over the total and final commitment of 
the opposition parties? 
  [Koffigoh] You know, the role of the opposition is not to 
always agree with the choice of the government. Therefore, 
there will always be some people who say no to all decisions we 
make. [passage omitted] But we think that some candidates and 
political groups engaged in this electoral process will approve 
of our decision. There will always be some people who say no. 
But this is part of the nature and essence of democracy, to 
accept and to tolerate the word no. 
  [Unidentified reporter] Mr. Prime Minister, what message do 
you have for the Togolese people? 
  [Koffigoh] My message is always a message of hope and peace. 
The situation prevailing in Togo -- though serious -- is not 
desperate. All the signs for hope are there to see. We have 
elected a head of state. We are now going to a legislative 
election that will enable us to clear the Togolese political 
scene. We will soon have a parliament. All elements will be 
gathered to set up new institutions. Our law-abiding state will 
therefore be better guaranteed and we shall commit ourselves to 
succeed in what constitutes the challenge of this end of 
century, both for Togo and the other African countries -- that 
is, the challenge of economic reconstruction. 
  We have succeeded in preserving our country from falling 
apart by preventing Togo from waging a civil war; we have 
succeeded in preserving the economic infrastructure of our 
country; and we have our two hands to work with. We have our 
heads to think with; we have common objectives; we have common 
interests to defend; we have our national unity to safeguard; we 
have peace to restore, our economy to revamp, and an integral 
democratic process to achieve. We finally have -- and it is 
always useful to stress this -- a platform for consultation. 
Currently, we have the International Monitoring Commission -- 
we all agreed to its creation and it is there to bring together 
different points of view. We have the National Electoral 
Commission and a Parity Commission that are expected to fulfill 
their tasks. The government has agreed to initiate dialogue 
with all political parties, and I can assure you that things 
will get moving because government delegates have already met 
with opposition delegates. 
  Therefore, the situation prevailing in Togo is difficult but 
it is not desperate. You know that the government has made the 
necessary efforts to begin the payment of salary arrears. The 
Togolese have celebrated the end of the year 1993 in joy and 
they are beginning 1994 in happiness. Despite all this some 
marginal citizens do not share the ideals of democracy we 
initiated and that we have striven to implement since the start. 
But to them also, and because they are our brothers, we say 
come on in, come to join us in the train of democracy for the 
best interest of all. 

