BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Lima EL PERUANO in Spanish on 18 May, 
pages A6-A7, carries an approximately 1,300 word unattributed 
report on the results of the "Aries" antiterrorist operation 
against Shining Path [SL] groups that began on 5 April in 
Huanuco, Leoncio Prado Province, which had become a 
narcoterrorist center. 
  The Huallaga Front command and the Armed Forces Joint 
command 
stepped up actions to destroy the most radical and bloodthirsty 
Shining Path groups, namely the Peoples Guerrilla Army which 
basically comprises the "Mar Rojo"--which has 300 members 
divided into three or more companies--and the "Fuerza Local" 
battalions. 
  At the start of the operation there were 250 "terrorists" 
hiding in Huallaga, armed with North Korean AKM machine guns and 
RPG grenade launchers supplied by drug traffickers. Some 
repentant SL members said the "terrorists" had occupied some 
villages and formed "defense committees" using peasants as 
guides and shields. 
  Troops were dropped by helicopter a few kilometers from the 
SL groups so as to take them by surprise. The theater of 
operations includes the rural areas of Jose Crespo y Castillo 
and Rupa Rupa in Leoncio Prado. Pamphlets persuading named 
"terrorists" to surrender were distributed in nearby villages. 
Although this initiative did not persuade any SL leaders to 
surrender it encouraged civilians who for years have been forced 
to cooperate with the "terrorists" to hand themselves in. 
  Operations in the Huallaga Front this year have so far 
encouraged 500 "terrorists" to benefit from the repentance law, 
while another 2,500 are currently in the process of doing so. 
  The controversy stirred up by the Aries operation due to 
alleged human rights violations hindered the operation for six 
days, thus allowing the "terrorists" to regroup and escape the 
security forces cordon. One of the main leaders to flee was Jose 
Picon Hilario, aka El Manco, who recently murdered two 
government officials in Pucayacu. 
  The Army has recovered many zones that were under SL 
dominance. For example the town of Bella, which was under SL 
dominance for the past 10 years, was recovered by security 
forces in September 1992. Since January, following the last SL 
attack that resulted in the death of 25 of its 300 inhabitants, 
Bella has not experienced any acts of violence. The same goes 
for Aucayacu, Naranjillo, Madre Mia, Uchiza, and Cueva de las 
Lechuzas, etc. 
  The SL has lost the corridor through Chiquian, the capital 
of 
Bolognesi Province, that was used by the "terrorists" to go from 
Huanuco to Pativilca. 
  Some 80 percent of the "terrorists" have been "eradicated" 
from Huallaga and the days are numbered for the remaining 20 
percent in the Cuchara, Primavera, and Yanajanca regions, and a 
new region that includes the Quillaymarca River bank and Santa 
Marta in Maranon Province. 

