BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS] </F>
  [TYext] Moscow May 19 TASS -- Finnish President Martti 
Ahtisaari was on an official visit to Moscow on May 18-19 at the 
invitation of Russian President Boris Yeltsin. During the visit 
an intensive dialogue on bilateral and other important regional 
and international problems was held. 
  The Russian president's press service reported that the two 
presidents noted with satisfaction the succession of 
good-neighborly relations and the absence of problems of 
political character in the relations between the two neighboring 
countries. The talks showed a high degree of confidence 
characteristic of Russo-Finnish relations and confirmed that the 
relations between the two countries are stable and are not 
subject to any political fluctuations. 
  During the talks and meetings problems of trade and economic 
cooperation between the two countries were discussed. The sides 
pointed out a common desire to look for mutually acceptable 
solutions of problems which appeared in this field -- the 
diversification of trade and the Russian debt to Finland. 
  The soonest solution of these problems should be promoted by 
stepping up the work of intergovernment mechanisms of bilateral 
cooperation -- the Russo-Finnish intergovernment commission for 
economic cooperation, the group for promoting the development of 
cooperation between adjoining regions and commissions for 
technical, scientific and ecological cooperation. 
  While discussing the situation in the north-European region 
the Russian and Finnish sides pointed out a high level of 
stability in this part of the continent and confirmed their 
mutual desire to strengthen stability by stepping up the 
activities of structures for regional cooperation -- the Council 
of the Baltic Sea States and the Council of the Barents and 
Euro-Arctic Region. 
  The Finnish side was thoroughly informed about the state of 
Russo-Baltic relations and prospects for their development. 
  The sides exchanged opinions on prospects for the European 
economic integration. It was pointed out that it is necessary 
to take steps to adapt a mechanism of Russo-Finnish interaction 
to new conditions in light of preparations of a Russo-EC 
agreement on partnership and cooperation and a possibility of 
Finland's membership in the European Union. 
  Separate discussions were devoted to the progress of reforms 
in Russia. The high-ranking Finnish guest was informed about 
the present stage of economic transformations in the country and 
difficulties encountered by the Russian people in the process of 
renewal. The Finnish side expressed support to the course aimed 
at democratisation and the development of the market economy and 
its readiness to render practical assistance to the solution of 
existing problems. 
  During the visit to Moscow President Ahtisaari met with 
Chairman of the Russian Government Viktor Chernomyrdin and 
chairmen of the two chambers of the Federal Assembly of the 
Russian Federation, Vladimir Shumeyko and Ivan Rybkin. 
  Finnish Foreign Minister Haavisto who accompanied the 
Finnish 
president during the visit had substantial talks with his 
Russian counterpart Andrey Kozyrev. 

