Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "NATO Faces Tough Challenge"] </F>
  [Text] Manfred Worner, secretary general of NATO, has 
enunciated four good reasons for the existence of the alliance: 
to project stability; to keep the United States committed to 
Europe; to provide a forum for co-operation; and to insure 
against any remaining military risks. 
  The question lurking behind today's summit in Brussels is 
whether NATO can perform any of these functions well enough. It 
has already proved unable to project stability in former 
Yugoslavia, and is shying away from doing so in Eastern Europe. 
The French, although more co-operative, are still not fully 
reconciled to the U.S. role in Europe. Co-operation is 
undermined by the above problems, among others. And the 
run-down of forces is proceeding towards a point at which the 
alliance may no longer be able to insure even its existing 
members against military risk. 
  Worse still, there are no easy answers. If NATO sticks with 
its present membership it leaves Central and East Europeans in 
the cold, inviting instability or Russian hegemony. If it 
invites in new members, it provides ammunition for the Russian 
military and appears to write off non-members, notably the 
Baltic states. If it stops the run-down of forces, it will also 
alarm Moscow. And if it pretends, as the French wish, that 
Europe can act independently of the U.S., it will condemn itself 
to discord and irrelevance. 
  The way out of these dilemmas chosen by President Clinton is 
Partnership for Peace, which offers the alliance's eastern 
neighbours military co-operation but no security guarantee. 
This is essentially a fudge to buy time, and time is necessary, 
largely because of uncertainty about which way Russia is 
heading. If the emergence of Vladimir Zhirinovskiy signals the 
inexorable approach of militant nationalism, NATO needs to 
polish its weapons and define exactly how far its commitments 
extend. But if it does this too eagerly and too soon, it will 
accelerate fulfillment of the prophecy. 
  The beginnings of an answer can be found by dusting off the 
Harmel Report adopted by NATO in 1967. This states that 
"military security and a policy of detente are not contradictory 
but complementary." In other words, meet the threat while 
trying to reduce it; prepare for the worst while working for the 
best. Translated for today it means not appeasing the Russians 
but working for maximum contact, dialogue, assistance, 
reassurance and access to the closed areas of their minds while 
not neglecting defence. This is the way to allay their fears, 
not by giving them a veto over Western security policy. Indeed, 
the worst favour the West can do for Russian democrats is to 
convey the impression that it is half-hearted in its commitment 
to the defence and expansion of democracy. Clinton, in his 
speech yesterday, seemed to acknowledge this. 
  East Europeans will be watching Brussels anxiously this week 
for signs that the superpowers are once again colluding in the 
division of Europe. It is important that their fears should not 
be confirmed. 

