BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio interview with Interior Minister Manfred Kanther by </F>
Gerhardt Pelletier; place and date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Pelletier] Minister Kanther, according to the 
latest reports, two more SPD [Social Democratic Party of 
Germany]-governed laender, in other words Lower Saxony and 
Saarland, want to join the ban on deporting Kurds. You have 
spoken out vehemently against this. Why? 
  [Kanther] Because one of the features of the German asylum 
compromise is that when an asylum review procedure is completed 
and it is established that the person in question does not 
qualify for asylum, the answer is deportation. In the case of 
deportation, it is necessary to be able to deport the persons 
involved to a country where they are safe from persecution, and 
the Kurds are safe in most of Turkey. Most of the Kurds do not 
live in those areas where the civil war is taking place, but in 
other parts of Turkey, therefore we can also deport them. 
  [Pelletier] But the SPD interior ministers who wish to do 
this are saying that the return of the Kurds to southeast Turkey 
is not safe at all, and situation reports by the Foreign 
Ministry indicate that they would be subject to further 
persecution and might expect punishment, torture, and even 
death. Do you accept this possibility? 
  [Kanther] That is completely wrong. I neither accept it, 
nor does the Foreign Ministry situation report say anything 
about it. We must differentiate between Kurdistan, where there 
is civil war, and the rest of Turkey, the larger part, and we 
deport people back to Turkey, not to Kurdistan. We deport them 
to a country where most of the Kurds live peacefully and fully 
undisturbed. Whoever abandons the so-called principle of 
internal state escape possibility aimed at finding a safer 
locality in his country of origin, whoever abandons this 
principle in Germany, invites all those wanting to come to 
Germany to stay here forever. That cannot possibly be the right 
policy. 
  [Pelletier] According to the media, you told Schaefer today 
that he is perforating the asylum compromise. Can the SPD 
laender that would prefer to see a Germanwide solution not 
postpone the deportation of Kurds for the time being, in 
accordance with the asylum compromise? 
  [Kanther] The asylum law in force provides a clear answer to 
that. A land can postpone deportation for six months, as a 
result of its own decision. If it wants to postpone deportation 
for longer than six months, it needs to coordinate with the 
remaining laender and obtain permission from the federal 
interior minister. To this extent, there is a responsible 
political decision by the laender. But the issue is so important 
that as federal interior minister, I not only have a legal 
opinion on this matter, which is obvious, but also a political 
opinion, and I consider that a great error, and I insist that 
the SPD laender governments also adopt a uniform interpretation 
of our asylum law and law on foreigners. 

