BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Yosi Torpstein] </F>
  [Excerpt] TIPH [Temporary International Presence in 
Hebron] commanders two days ago decided to change the force's 
mode of deployment when there are clashes in the city between 
Palestinian youths and the Israeli security forces. 
  TIPH commanders decided that during future clashes its teams 
will deploy far away from the confrontation sites while 
preserving their ability to monitor events in order to avoid 
involvement in the incidents and to prevent damage to their cars. 
  Based on the agreement between Israel and the PLO, TIPH 
teams 
so far deployed near incidents sites in order to follow events 
closely and report on them. 
  It often happened, however, that TIPH presence caused the 
Palestinian youths to exacerbate the confrontation with the IDF 
[Israel Defense Forces] in order to prove to the international 
observers and world public opinion that the Israelis are 
behaving brutally. 
  TIPH spokesman (Bjarno Sorensson) denied that TIPH commander 
Kjell Johannesson is about to ask the Norwegian, Italian, and 
Danish governments -- who supplied the manpower to the force -- 
to withdraw the force from Hebron. "Our situation is difficult, 
but nobody promised us an easy life here, and we will remain. 
If we leave, one side will suffer, and this is the weak side -- 
the Palestinians whom we came to help. We will not turn our 
backs on them just because we have failed to attain our 
objective more quickly," Sorensson said. 
  Palestinian sources in Hebron claim that TIPH's presence in 
the city contributes nothing toward improving the Palestinians' 
situation and protecting them from IDF forces. They claim that 
the observers are obeying the IDF's orders banning them from 
patrolling the city when it is under curfew. 
  The observers are greatly frustrated by the Palestinians' 
claims and by entering situations in which they could be stoned 
or wounded by IDF gunfire. The observers claim that the 
Palestinians are using them for propaganda purposes, whereas the 
IDF is limiting their movement. [passage omitted] 

