Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "The Forecast Is For Foul Weather </F>
(From the Theses Prepared for the Criminology Association 
Seminar)"] 
  [Text] The past few years have been characterized by an 
unprecedented growth in crime, changes in its characteristics, 
and for all practical purposes the loss of state and public 
control over the crime situation. 
  During 1990-1992 the absolute increase in the number of 
recorded crimes more than doubled annually: In 1990 it increased 
by 14 percent; in 1991--by 34 percent; and in 1992--by 17 
percent. This trend continued in 1993. Of special notice is the 
increase in aggravated crime (34 percent). 
  There has been a sharp increase in the number of crimes 
committed with firearms and in drug-related crimes. 
  Crime has acquired new qualitative characteristics: It is 
now 
better armed, and its organized nature and criminal 
professionalism have increased. According to MVD [Ministry of 
Internal Affairs] operational data, 4,352 organized criminal 
groups were identified in 1992 (5.5 times more than in 1990), 15 
percent of which had corrupt and 23 percent interregional 
connections. More than 800 organized crime groups were watched 
by units for combating contraband and corruption of the Russian 
Ministry of Security. More than 40 international smuggling crime 
groups have been identified. More than 130 "Russian" stores 
selling Russian antiques have been found abroad. 
  Organized crime families operate in the sphere of 
privatization, conversion to joint-stock holding, financial and 
credit relations, and exchange activities. The drug business is 
actively developing in Russia. Officials--including those with 
responsibility for developing the state's political and economic 
ties and implementing long-term programs of international 
cooperation--working in Russian organizations abroad are being 
actively drawn into smuggling and other criminal activities. 
  Criminological research shows that official crime data 
reflect less and less the real criminal situation in Russia. 
Even grave crimes endangering life and health are reported 
increasingly less to law enforcement bodies--both by victims and 
medical facilities. 
  A decline in economic crime also is associated to a 
considerable degree with less information flowing to law 
enforcement organs. In the past they received a considerable 
amount of material from the system of people's control, the 
construction bank, trade inspection, and other control organs 
which now have either been liquidated or substantially 
reorganized. In addition, a considerable number of criminal 
actions in the economic sphere involves the private sector, 
which prefers not to let state organs meddle in it. As a result, 
there has been a steady decrease in recorded abuse of position, 
economic operations, and other crimes in the economic sphere: 
150,972 in 1991, 141,271 in 1991, and 127,085 in 1992. 
  Increasingly crimes remain unsolved. As compared to 1989 the 
number increased by 37 percent in 1990, by 74 percent in 1991, 
and by 101 percent in 1992. This indicates that the law 
enforcement system is working at the limit of its capacity. Many 
crimes will never be solved. The growing remainder of unsolved 
crimes as of 1 January 1993 amounted to more than 3 million. 
  Over the period 1989-1992 the number of staff members of 
internal affairs organs charged with crimes increased by a 
factor of 2.2, including those charged with abuse of official 
position and crimes against the law system--by a factor of 3.7. 
There were 3.4 times more crimes unmasked involving 
bribe-taking. In 1992, 1,641 members of internal affairs organs 
were charged with commission of general crimes (murder, theft, 
robbery, and so on), which is almost twice as many as in 1989. 
  Many criminals, even when identified, practically do not 
incur the penalty envisaged by law. With respect to identified 
thieves who have committed crimes through embezzlement, 
misappropriation of funds, or abuse of official position, 
charges have been brought against only about 30 percent; 5-6 
percent were sentenced to prison terms, and with respect to the 
overwhelming majority of bribe-takers the sentence that is 
handed down is below the lowest minimum. Such impunity 
contributes to a blossoming of corruption. 
  Many crimes and criminals end up out of bounds for law 
enforcement also because of the lower social-legal activism of 
the population, intimidation or bribery of victims and 
witnesses, unclear policy with respect to crime (for a long time 
a moratorium was advocated on combating economic crime during 
the period of transition to the market), extremely poor 
organization of inspection (audit) control, and the fact that 
the legal base for combating crime lags behind the changes in 
crime itself. Numerous forms of corrupt behavior (acceptance of 
invitations to foreign trips, receiving preferential credit, 
etc.) are far from always covered by provisions of current 
legislation. Criminal liability for organizing and running an 
organized crime family still has not been put in effect; there 
is no proper legal treatment for professional crime carried out 
in the form of unlicensed enterprise, and a number of other 
socially dangerous forms of behavior--financial transgressions, 
brokerage machinations of exchange dealers, setting up false 
enterprises, false bankruptcy, improper use of targeted credits, 
and other actions. 
  The real state of affairs with respect to crime and other no 
less socially dangerous phenomena is in reality worse by several 
orders of magnitude than that recorded by crime statistics. With 
the loss of control over crime, the state itself practically 
becomes criminal. It permits further enrichment of the criminal 
world. According to calculations of the Analytical Center of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, 55 percent of capital and 80 
percent of voting stock are shifting into the hands of criminal 
and foreign capital; in rare cases when charges of embezzlement 
of state and public property are prosecuted, only two-thirds of 
material damage is reimbursed. A considerable number of state 
and municipal employees are corrupt. 
  In the next few years we may expect a further increase in 
crime because of the increasing criminalization of juveniles and 
members of social groups of the population that were considered 
safe until the end of 1980's--researchers, military servicemen, 
and so on. 

