Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Guy Ellis] </F>
  [Text] Castries, St. Lucia, 10 Jan, CANA -- The bankrupt 
St. Lucia Banana Growers Association (SLBGA) is being replaced 
by a new organisation to manage the affairs of the banana 
industry, Prime Minister John Compton has announced here. 
  Compton, in a nationwide radio and television broadcast at 
the weekend, said the board was bankrupt, owing "practically 
every creditor," and was beyond restructuring. 
  He said a government-appointed committee was currently 
working on designing a structure for the organisation. The 
committee's proposal would be presented to the government before 
month-end, he added. 
  Further, he said government would also meet with banana 
farmers as soon as possible, to discuss the proposal and get 
their views on creating the new organisation. 
  The banana industry has been facing problems in recent 
months 
with low market prices and the declining value of the British 
pound sterling. This has severely reduced farmers' returns on 
their production. 
  These problems acted as a catalyst for a three-day strike by 
farmers here last October. The farmers were calling for 
increased prices for their fruit and the disbandment of the 
slbga board, among others grouses. 
  After the strike, the board was dissolved by government and 
replaced by another interim board. 
  Since then, the SLBGA, has been supporting prices to the 
tune 
of hundreds of thousands of dollars (one EC dollar - 37 cents 
US) weekly, but SLBGA officials says the support cannot continue 
indefinitely. 
  The prime minister also indicated that government had made 
arrangements with the St Lucia Agriculturists Association, to 
import fertilisers and other inputs to facilitate the production 
of bananas here. 
  Referring to the strike, Compton called for "peace and 
order" 
in the industry, saying: "We will not survive if we fight 
amongst ourselves". 
  "Our battle is not in the banana fields or on the roads of 
St 
Lucia but in the external market and in this battle all our 
resources must be directed," Compton said. 
  He called for a concerted effort to revitalise the industry, 
noting that farmers must become more efficient and increase 
output, while banana workers needed to give farmers an honest 
day's work. 
  And he called on geest industries, which markets the 
island's 
fruit overseas, to reduce its costs both here and in the UK to 
enable farmers to get better returns on their investments. 
  He noted that since last September, the value of the pound 
sterling had dropped by about 25 per cent. 
  In addition, with the opening up of the European market to 
allow more Latin American bananas onto the market, St Lucia and 
the other Windward Islands banana-producing countries have lost 
much of the protection which the British government had given 
them since they started producing bananas in the mid 1950s. 
  Compton reported that the SLBGA's total debt was in excess 
of 
EC33 million dollars (one EC dollar; 37 cents US) and was 
spending EC1 million every week more than it received. "Its 
major creditors are threatening to put it into liquidation. 
This cannot go on," he said. 
  If the government failed, he said, in acting to restructure 
the industry, it would be destroyed and the economy of St Lucia 
would also collapse. "We must therefore work to create a 
completely new organisation which is capable of responding to 
the needs of farmers in the efficient marketing of their fruit," 
he said. 

