BFN 

  [Text] The Turkish Secret Services have targeted 35 
politicians, military, shipowners, and others from both Greece 
and Cyprus. The Turkish Secret Services (MIT) [National 
Intelligence Organization] list of immediate targets includes 
three Greek Cypriots among these 35 people. 
  The three Greek Cypriots targeted by MIT are Khristodhoulos 
Veniamin, a longtime former minister; Nikolaos Sampson, a 
fighter during the Liberation Struggle of EOKA [National 
Organization of Cypriot Fighters] and founder of I MAKHI and TO 
THARROS newspapers; and Vasos Lissaridhis, chairman of the 
Socialist Party EDEK [United Democratic Union of Cyprus]. 
  Specifically, the Turkish Secret Services (MIT) in their hit 
lists for each of the aforementioned Greek Cypriots note the 
following: 

  -  Veniamin Khristodhoulos: "Former minister of 
interior and defense of South Cyprus. Veniamin dragged south 
Cyprus into the mire of international terrorism. He has a close 
relationship with the KGB (Russian Secret Services) and the 
Syrian Secret Service." 
  -  Sampson Nikos: "He is a south Cypriot 
who is known as the `Butcher of EOKA.' He is responsible for 
murdering and torturing Turkish Cypriots. He was sentenced to 
life imprisonment for his involvement in the attempt to 
overthrow Makarios. He also came into contact with the Armenian 
terrorist organization `ASALA [Armenian Secret Army for the 
Liberation of Armenia].'" 
  -  Lissaridhis Vasos: "A former Marxist, 
he is the Leader of the South Cypriot party EDEK. In the period 
after '74 he was Makarios' adviser and played a significant role 
in south Cyprus becoming a base for terrorists against Turkey. 
He is one of the south Cypriot politicians who are involved in 
international terrorism." 
  This is not the first time that this information has 
appeared 
in the press. However, after the upsurge of Islamists in both 
Turkey and the occupied Cyprus, this information leads to the 
definite conclusion that Theofilos Yeoryiadhis [pro-Kurdish 
Cypriot activist killed in March] was the first victim on the 
hit list of the Turkish Secret Services but not the last. 
According to the Turkish Secret Services, in addition to the 
Greek Cypriots Veniamin, Sampson, and Lissaridhis, the following 
Greek politicians, among others, are also considered as 
dangerous to Turkey and are on the hit list: Karamanlis, 
Papandreou, Maroudhas, Alavanos, Kapsis, Viryinia Tsoudherou, 
Papathemelis, Kaklamanis, and others. The list also includes 
Greek military people such as generals Moustaklis, Opropoulos, 
Zervos, Pappas, Konstandinidhis, Kalamakis, as well as Retired 
Admiral Andonios Nazakis and the well-known ship owner Andreas 
Potamianos. According to the Turkish Secret Services, all the 
above mentioned are considered "founders of terrorism" and must 
be eliminated at all costs. At the same time, another MIT goal 
is to consolidate in the international sphere and primarily in 
Europe the concept that the Greeks of Cyprus and Greece have 
direct relations with international terrorist networks as well 
as with the leaders of people who are struggling for their 
independence. Of course, all this is just an attempt by Turkey 
to gag all those who raise their voices against Turkey and 
reveal the Ankara military's illegal plans to impose Islamists 
on the European and, by extension, the world scenes. 

