Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Kiev UT-1 Television Network in 
Ukrainian at 1710 GMT on 24 January carries a 20-minute 
pre-election program with people's deputy Stepan Khmara, leader 
of the Ukrainian Conservative Republican Party, followed by Mr. 
Bazelyuk, cochairman of the Civic Congress of Ukraine. 
  Khmara starts by saying that the Ukrainian people have 
achieved their long-time aim of independence but unfortunately, 
in the two years of independence, Ukraine has experienced 
poverty while a small group of "swindlers" and "criminals" has 
become rich very quickly. He adds that these criminals have even 
succeeded in penetrating the power structures. He blames the 
present difficulties on the people in power and outlines the 
reasons why this occurred: "The basic political issue, the issue 
of power, was not resolved. The old and most corrupt members of 
the nomenklatura remained in power. Its behavior is impudent. 
They quickly plundered the national wealth." To prove his point 
he says: "Even ministers and those like former Minister of 
Energy Sklyarov, who is now abroad and also a minister of the 
Cabinet of Ministers and personal friend of former premier 
Kuchma has left state employment and is living in France on 
plundered funds. The list is endless." Khmara goes on to say 
that it is only through a change in power that effective 
economic reforms may be introduced. These could give the people 
an opportunity to live off the wealth which it creates. He 
speaks out in favor of private property saying that 
privatization should be a means of giving people the opportunity 
to realize their right to private property and not simply an end 
in itself. "We support widespread reforms in the agricultural 
sector of the economy that is of strategic value to Ukraine, but 
we are categorically against selling land to foreigners. We 
support the creation of real cooperatives and also of conditions 
for private farming. We support the revival of historical and 
social justice, that is, so that peasants have the right to own 
land, that there should be a market in land. They should be 
able to either bequeath it or sell it." 
  Stepan Khmara also dwells on the problems of Ukraine's 
security focusing chiefly on the joint statement signed by the 
presidents of Ukraine, America and Russia on 14 January in 
Moscow. By signing the statement, President Kravchuk "in effect 
carried out an act of capitulation, acted in contravention of 
Ukraine's national interests, inflicted significant losses to 
the national security and violated those legislative acts which 
Ukraine's Supreme Council had approved, in particular the 
resolution of 18 November 1993, according to which Ukraine would 
nevertheless remain a nuclear state but would not contravene the 
treaty on reducing nuclear weapons," says Khmara. He goes on to 
accuse President Kravchuk of "committing a state crime" 
according to the article 56 of the criminal code. This, he says, 
is state treason. It is possible, he adds, for Ukraine to 
develop its own system of controlling nuclear weapons and it 
could be done in a short space of time. Failure to possess 
nuclear weapons could lead to a "loss of statehood and authority 
in the international arena." It is not necessary to wait for 
the elections to change things, says Stepan Khmara. Ukrainians 
could try to impeach the president, demand the dismissal of his 
entourage, and put the president on trial. For this reason, 
says Khmara, "I call on Kievites to go to the Supreme Council 
tomorrow, to express your resolute will because tomorrow this 
issue will be examined by the Supreme Council and you should 
say, yes to a nuclear status for Ukraine and say away with 
Leonid Kravchuk and his criminal entourage." 
  The second part of pre-election broadcast program features 
10-minutes of remarks by Mr. Bazelyuk, cochairman of the Civic 
Congress of Ukraine. 
  Sharply critical of the independence of Ukraine, its results 
after two years, and the mere need for it, the speaker says that 
the Ukrainian people's living standards after two years of 
independence have gone down ten-fold, being now threatened by 
"famine, poverty and cold," aggravated by the general decline in 
the economy, hard hit by the energy crisis, growing 
unemployment, delays in paying wages, and deterioration of 
educational, cultural, and scientifical standards. 
  On the subject of the nuclear disarmament deal, signed by 
the 
Ukrainian, Russian, and U.S. presidents in Moscow on 14 January, 
he proclaims that Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk is a "man 
of no consequence summoned up to Moscow" to sign the deal and is 
-- together with President Boris Yeltsin -- totally subordinate 
to President Clinton, "something like a general secretary to 
them, except that the Central Committee is now in Washington". 
  Regretful about the grandeur of the former USSR in general 
and on the arms trade market as a major source of state revenue 
in particular, he denounces "the bureaucracy" as "a traitor" to 
the Motherland, that disintegrated the Soviet Union "as the 
result of a criminal conspiracy." Saying that the collapse of 
the Soviet Union puts Western democracies at advantage, he 
points out that "it is much easier to deal with leprechaun 
states that merely have an appearance of being independent but 
can in reality be oppressed and colonized." He once again 
suggests that "it is now after all the bureaucracy that is the 
adversary of Ukrainian independence. The bureaucracy was strong 
in the USSR and is equally strong here in Ukraine. The same 
applies to Russia. It is the bureaucracy, rather than the 
Muscovites or Russians, that is the adversary of Ukrainian 
independence." It is "totally unaccountable to its own people, 
robbing them with every round of inflation, with the state 
having neither the helm nor the sails and lacking its own 
ideology, unless it is screaming nationalism that is this 
ideology", he says. 
  He concludes by congratulating the audience "on the glorious 
340th anniversary of the Pereyaslav Council" that took the 
decision to unite Ukraine and Russia, and appeals: "With Russia 
for ever!" 

