Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata by newscasters </F>
Yuji Kuroiwa and Kaori Matsuyama, Keio University Professor 
Yoshiaki Kobayashi, and commentator Kenichi Takemura at the FNN 
Studio in Tokyo; from the "News 2001" program -- live] 
  [Excerpt] [Video shows DPRK declaration to secede from the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, followed by comments from 
Yasuhiko Yoshida, former chief of the IAEA's public relations 
department, and Hisakatsu Okazaki, former Japanese ambassador to 
Thailand, on North Korean development of nuclear weapons] 
[Matsuyama] We will now begin our interview with Tsutomu Hata 
who is deputy prime minister and foreign minister. 
  [Kuroiwa] Good morning. Deputy Prime Minister Hata, there 
are many things we would like to ask you about, such as the 
cabinet reshuffle and Japan-U.S. relations. However, first I 
would like to ask you about the issue of North Korea's suspected 
nuclear arms development, which was explained in the video we 
just saw. Ichiro Ozawa said earlier in this program that North 
Korea possesses nuclear weapons. What do you think? 
  [Hata] There are three suspicions regarding the North Korean 
nuclear issue: first, that it is planning to make nuclear 
weapons; second, that it has tried before to make nuclear 
weapons; or third, it already has one or two atomic bombs in its 
possession which are the same size as those dropped on Hiroshina 
and Nagasaki. Amid such suspicions, the International Atomic 
Energy Agency [IAEA] has begun inspections of North Korea's 
nuclear facilities. It was difficult to persuade North Korea to 
accept inspections of the seven facilities included in the list 
they submitted. The IAEA has begun the inspections thanks to 
persistent negotiations by the United States. However, the 
inspections have only just begun; their outcome is yet to be 
determined. Also, we are still faced with the issue of 
inspecting the other two facilities not included on the list. 
The United States has been saying it will not conduct the Team 
Spirit joint military exercises if North Korea accepts the 
inspections, followed by discussions between the North and 
South. Actually, South Korea proposed calling off the exercises, 
and the United States accepted. Under such circumstances, the 
IAEA has begun its inspections. The international community is 
still worried about the other two facilities, and is wondering 
whether or not the current inspections of the seven facilities 
will be carried out thoroughly. 
  [Kuroiwa] As foreign minister, what do you think about all 
this? Do you think North Korea has nuclear weapons? 
  [Hata] Well, under the current circumstances I would like to 
refrain from commenting on whether or not North Korea possesses 
nuclear weapons. 
  [Kuroiwa] What will be the basis of your decisionmaking? 
What kind of information are you going to use to determine 
whether or not North Korea possesses nuclear weapons? Will it 
be information provided by the United States? 
  [Hata] The IAEA is conducting its inspections as an official 
organization of the international community. We will make our 
decision on the basis of the outcome of those inspections. Of 
course, we will also obtain information from the United States, 
China, and other countries, not to mention the ROK. 
  [Matsuyama] As we discussed earlier, inspections will not be 
carried out this time on the other two facilities. As we saw in 
the video, many feel the effect of the current inspections will 
be minimal. In this regard, we received answers to our 
questions from the General Association of Korean Residents in 
Japan [Chongnyon]. According to them, the two facilities are 
military bases. Chongnyon adds that any claims about the two 
sites being nuclear facilities is intentionally fostering 
suspicion. They feel the possibility exists that all other 
North Korean military facilities will be stripped of their veils 
if inspections of these two facilities are accepted. Therefore, 
North Korea refused to accept inspections of the two facilities. 
What do you think of this response? 
  [Hata] Of course, this was discussed between the United 
States and the ROK. However, the inspections of the seven 
facilities which are included on the list will give us some idea 
of whether or not the material required for making nuclear bombs 
was removed. Therefore, the United States and the ROK agreed to 
inspect these facilities first. Moreover, they also agreed to 
call off the Team Spirit exercises. The inspections have just 
begun. On the basis of the outcome of the inspections, the 
United States and the DPRK will hold discussions again. They 
are scheduled to hold the third meeting on 21 March. We will 
make our decision on the basis of these procedures. 
  [Takemura] It is regrettable that Japan cannot take the 
leadership. This is an extremely important issue for Japan. 
Nevertheless, Japan has to rely on the United States after all. 
As I recall, former President Reagan took a very strong stance 
toward the Soviet Union about ten years ago. The Soviet Union 
deployed its SS-20 medium-range missiles. In response, the 
United States decided to deploy medium-range missiles in Europe. 
President Reagan maintained this hard stance for a long time; 
the strategy worked well, and finally the Soviet Union gave up 
the arms race in 1985, and Gorbachev eventually dismantled the 
Soviet Union. It would be nice if North Korea gave in like the 
Soviet Union did. However, the cases of the Soviet Union and 
North Korea are quite different. The United States is not 
taking any aggressive attitude toward North Korea for the fear 
North Korea may go haywire. However, American newspapers are 
saying President Clinton is a man of indecision or is weak in 
comparison to former President Reagan. I wonder what kind of 
attitude the Japanese Foreign Ministry will adopt if President 
Clinton begins to take a strong stance as Reagan did. 
  [Hata] In the meeting with Mr. Clinton or in my talks 
with the U.S. secretary of defense, we said that even though 
inspections had not started, negotiations were still underway to 
that end, and so it was best not to do anything that would 
incite North Korea. 
  As a matter of principle, if the DPRK decides to reject 
inspections or to use its negotiating position in a strange way, 
Japan should do what it can under its Constitution. 
  [Takemura] We all know there are big limitations under the 
Constitution. Besides, if North Korea becomes willing to start 
war, its nuclear warheads cannot be sent as far as the United 
States because it does not have the missiles to carry them that 
far; its missiles can, though, reach Japan and South Korea. 
That is what is decisively different from the situation that 
existed at the time of tension between Europe and the Soviet 
Union. Are we prepared to face this situation, though? 
  [Kobayashi] This is no ordinary situation for Japan. If 
North Korea continues to reject inspection of two other 
facilities, there is the possibility of U.S.-DPRK negotiations 
breaking down. 
  [Hata] It is not just the U.S.-DPRK negotiations that are 
jeopardized. The whole international community is very much 
concerned. Once North Korea is permitted to get away with it, 
the many other nations which want nuclear arms of their own will 
do the same. As such, the international community is very wary. 
In other words, everyone is watching patiently. 
  [Kobayashi] As far as the possibility of U.S.-DPRK 
negotiations breaking down is concerned, Ms. Hisahiko Okabe said 
a rift in the talks could come as early as April. As far as 
Japan is concerned, there is no other choice but to wait and see 
what will happen in U.S.-DRPK negotiations. Is that right? 
  [Hata] We are not exactly waiting only for the outcome of 
the U.S.-DPRK negotiations. As the IAEA is now conducting 
inspections, it is only natural Japan should consider its next 
moves after monitoring the progress of the inspections. 
However, we must remember that Japan's Constitution tells us 
what the country can and cannot do, so we ourselves know along 
what guidelines we can act and we can tell others as well. 
  [Matsuyama] Please look at this video footage. [video shows 
Prime Minister Hosokawa at a post-U.S.-Japan summit news 
conference saying Japan will do what it can if the UN Security 
Council adopts economic sanctions against North Korea; other 
people speak about Pyongyang's foreign money sources] 
  [Kuroiwa] North Korea thinks enforcing economic sanctions is 
tantamount to declaring a war. This means that if Japan 
participates in economic sanctions, Japan will be party to 
declaring a state of war, right? 
  [Hata] North Korea did make a remark like that. 
  [Kuroiwa] Will Japan, despite this statement, turn its 
promises into actions? 
  [Hata] It is the North Koreans who made that statement. If 
it decided to enforce sanctions and we are asked to cooperate, 
then we must play our part. 
  [Kuroiwa] Prime Minister Hosokawa said clearly that Japan 
would cooperate if the United Nations asked countries to take 
economic sanctions against the DPRK. But such action might be 
taken suddenly, so has the matter been discussed within the 
government and ruling coalition parties? 
  [Hata] Does Japan, which has for so long talked about the 
importance of the United Nations in world affairs and about the 
importance of UN-centered diplomacy, want to hear the charge 
that it has run away from its responsibilities when the time to 
play its part comes? Above all, this is a matter that concerns 
its closest neighboring country. Japan cannot do that. That is 
why Prime Minister Hosokawa said Japan will act -- within the 
limits allowed under the Constitution. 
  [Kuroiwa] So, if it is decided to adopt economic sanctions, 
Japan will cooperate? 
  [Hata] This whole matter is continuing. I do not think it 
appropriate to discuss it when inspections of the North Korean 
nuclear facilities have just started. 
  [Takemura] There is nothing wrong with Mr. Kuroiwa 
wanting to pursue this matter in depth. This is different from 
a question such as whether or not Sakigake [Harbinger] and the 
Japan New Party will merge. That kind of thing really does not 
mean much. But the topic of North Korea concerns the lives of 
our people and I think everyone watching this program has a keen 
interest in it. I believe television programs should take this 
topic seriously, so I am pleased it is one of the topics for 
discussion today. 
  Other countries see that although this is an issue about 
which the Japanese people should be most concerned, they do not 
seem to show much interest about it. That is what a foreign 
newspaper wrote -- half in derision. I want everyone to be 
aware of this. Mr. Hata was almost late for the program. He is 
busy every day, but has he been busy with the North Korean 
issue? He has been occupied by the cabinet reshuffle and other 
worthless things. 
  [Hata] I have been busy, but not as you have described. 
There are things that cannot be made public. Like information 
on... [sentence incomplete as Takemura interrupts] 
  [Takemura, interrupting] Foreign Minister Hata, you are the 
number-one man on this question. I certainly hope you will deal 
with it. It is, I think, the first most serious crisis Japan 
has faced in the 50 years since the end of World War II. It is 
about the country which lies right next to us. 
  [Matsuyama] There is another thing that worries us. Will 
you please show that video, Mr. Nakamura? This is a report 
carried by the MAINICHI DAILY NEWS late last year. According to 
this, Mr. Hata said he had heard that the Cabinet Information 
Research Office estimated the amount of money sent to North 
Korea from Japan amounts to almost 200 billion yen a year. 
  [Hata] The Cabinet Information Research Office said that? I 
think there is something wrong here. I have never said anything 
of the kind. 
  [Matsuyama] Well, that is the way the report was written, 
and we have obtained a comment from the General Association of 
Korean Residents in Japan [Chongnyon] on the subject. It said 
that claims of figures as high as tens or hundreds of billions 
of yen are without foundation. What do you have to say about 
that? 
  [Hata] What I want to say is that various sources of 
information allege that large amounts of money have flowed into 
North Korea from Japan -- some of them making reference to tens 
or hundreds of billions of yen. Some say the money has been 
carried by travelers in person or in their luggage, or has been 
sent via Hong Kong or China. While there has been much talk 
about the matter, to our regret we have not been able to 
accurately assess the amounts involved. 
  [Matsuyama] Is the government doing anything to discover how 
much is involved? 
  [Hata] Even though there are no diplomatic relations between 
Japan and North Korea, we have to consider human rights and 
those people whose fatherland is North Korea or who were born 
there. 
  [Kuroiwa] As Katsumi Sato said earlier, as long as these 
people cannot be stopped from reentering Japan, the money flow 
cannot be stemmed. 
  [Hata] I am talking only in terms of general principle. 
  [Kuroiwa] The problem of money transfer will remain to be 
tackled in the future. 
  [Hata] North Korea is at present isolated. Being isolated 
means that there is no information coming out of there. 
Besides, the country has a very strong power structure, and the 
nation can be moved easily by its leaders. The country has a 
very strong power structure, but is dangerous. It is for this 
reason I have been saying it is very important that the people 
of North Korea join the international community or that an 
atmosphere can be created in which true dialogue can be held. 
  [Kuroiwa] I never meant to pose the question out of 
unnecessary fear. I presented the question in the belief that 
issues related to security and diplomacy should be dealt with on 
the assumption that the worse could happen. 
  [Maysuyama] Now, we would like to ask you about relations 
between Japan and the United States. But, first, we must beg 
your pardon for saying earlier that you came late because of 
your tight schedule. It was due to our failure to contact you 
and confirm arrangements. We are very sorry. [laughter] 
  [Kuroiwa] We would like to have your comments on 
Japan-U.S. relations. When you consider the DPRK issue, you 
once again recognize the importance of Japan-U.S. relations. We 
feel the controversial Super 301 provision of the 1988 Omnibus 
Trade Act strongly suggests Japan is being threatened. However, 
now that Tokyo has declared Japan-U.S. relations have matured, 
we believe Japan will not yield to U.S. threats and make 
concessions. What are your views? 
  [Hata] The fact is that Mr. Clinton has stated since the 
presidential election campaign that he would revive the Super 
301 provision. There were many arguments about the wisdom of 
this before the recent negotiations started. Some said it was 
inevitable that the United States would have to revive it. I 
think by showing its intention to revive the Super 301, the 
United States is urging Japan to give matters serious 
consideration. We have no intention, however, of holding 
negotiations under threat of the Super 301 provision. In recent 
GATT talks, we reached an agreement on the need to hold 
multilateral negotiations. Moreover, a new trade body, the 
World Trade Organization [WTO] is to be created. It has been 
agreed that disputes should not be settled through bilateral 
talks but through multilateral talks, and that procedures for 
settling disputes should be taken more quickly and more fully 
than before. I deeply regret that, under such circumstances, 
the U.S. Government has announced it is to revive the Super 301 
provision which will enable it to take unilateral action in 
bilateral talks. I am not saying this because it happens to 
concern Japan. 
  [Takemura] I understand the foreign minister is in a 
difficult position. The government is inevitably urged to take 
a hard-line stance. 
  [Hata] Yes, yes. 
  [Takemura] Jutaro Komura, a Meiji era diplomat, was almost 
assassinated for signing the Portsmouth Treaty after the 1904 
Japan-Russia War. And, Foreign Minister Yosuke Matsuoka 
declared Japan was withdrawing from the League of Nations by 
saying: "Japan will leave. Sayonara, Sayonara." At the time, 
the Japanese people applauded loudly. 
  [Hata] That is right. The people applauded him. 
  [Takemura] If Mr. Matsuoka had been weak and yielded to the 
demands of other nations he would have been severely criticized 
on his return to Japan. With that in mind, I am concerned that 
Japanese politicians, including Mr. Hata, will think that 
hard-line remarks are smart and become increasingly aggressive 
in their comments. The other day, I told the story of how 
Carthage was destroyed by Rome. When Carthage's negotiators 
returned from the last negotiations in Rome, the people of 
Carthage blamed them for being weak and killed them. Then the 
people rose up and the ancient nation was destroyed. I hope 
this will not... 
  [Hata, interrupting] What Mr. Takemura said now is very 
important. The fact is, during talks between me and Mr. Kantor, 
he said: Mr. Hata, the United States has experienced many 
breakdowns in trade talks with European nations and Canada. He 
also said: Although it is regrettable, we may need a break in 
the trade talks for a while because we are having difficulties 
reaching agreement on even basic points. At that time, I told 
Mr. Kantor the stories you told now. And I told him that it was 
such bitter experiences in Japan that led to World War II in 
which Japan caused much trouble. I also told him: Bearing 
history in mind, I find it a shame that the trade talks, which 
have almost been concluded, are being broken off only because of 
an argument about the results. Mr. Kantor and I were discussing 
this until early in the morning of that day. After the talks 
ended then, I summoned representatives from each ministry and 
agency to tell them they should not be optimistic. I said: 
Despite the breakdown of the talks, the point at issue in the 
talks is that Japan has a $60 billion trade surplus with the 
United States, and it is natural that the United States is 
irritated by that. I added: In that sense, we should 
voluntarily tackle this issue immediately after we return to 
Japan. I later briefed a cabinet meeting. 
  [Takemura] In that case, it is very good that Mr. Toyoda -- 
Toyota Motor Corporation chief and due to become chairman of 
Keidanren [Federation of Economic Organizations of Japan] -- 
recently said that Toyota, Nissan Motor Co., and Mitsubishi 
Motors Corporation need to voluntarily cut exports. The 
government cannot say that, so Mr. Toyoda's announcement was 
very nice. It is also good that Mr. Toyoda is to become the 
next Keidanren chairman because, he is the chief of a leading 
automaker and will now become the most responsible person in the 
economic sector. 
  [Kuroiwa] I think the timing of this announcement was 
possibly a little too good. Voluntary actions by Toyota and IDO 
or Nippon Idou Tsushin Corp. are all very well, but I suspect 
that, behind the scenes, the Ministry of International Trade and 
Industry or somebody else issued administrative instructions to 
them, and they arranged not to contradict each other. I can see 
such a conspiracy. 
  [Hata] This is not true. The maturing of relations between 
Japan and the United States has been mentioned, but Japanese 
economists and the general public are adopting a maturer 
outlook. They were not cowed by the threatened revival of the 
Super 301, but they also recognized that Japan's trade surplus 
is too big. One or two days after I returned to Japan from the 
United States, I met by chance the Keidanren leader at a hotel. 
He said: Mr. Hata, I think we have to voluntarily do what we 
must to deal with this issue. We clearly understand that. 
  [Kobayashi] Some people stress Japan must not make 
concessions to the United States. I think the worst aspect of 
bilateral negotiations is that it causes agitation in both 
countries. As Mr. Kantor has recently urged Japan to buy more 
Motorola phones, I personally feel that questionable ties among 
political, business, and bureaucratic circles are even stronger 
in the United States, but it is not an appropriate opportunity 
to raise the question. The United States will have off-year 
elections this fall, and preliminary election campaigns have 
already started in some states. In a way, the United States is 
overreacting to the trade issue as part of an election campaign. 
In such circumstances, the situation may become worse if Japan 
reacts emotionally to U.S. moves. So, I would like to ask Mr. 
Foreign Minister what we should do to settle the issue. On auto 
trade, for example, Japan's possible choices are to cut exports 
to narrow the export-import gap, or to further liberalize the 
Japanese market and so continue to sell Japanese cars without 
causing trade friction. Which do way would you take? 
  [Hata] Please let me say one thing about that. As Professor 
Kobayashi just noted, it seemed the negotiations were becoming a 
verbal war when I had talks with Mr. Kantor. Moreover, they are 
becoming media wars in the sense that the mass media of both 
countries stoking public frustrations on this issue through 
agitation. Since these are making the bilateral relations even 
worse, we must take corrective action somehow. As far as 
Japan's course of action is concerned, one of the rules of thumb 
is that the Japanese private sector should voluntarily settle 
its own problems -- auto and auto part imports, for example. In 
this field, it is important to seek balanced expansion of auto 
trade between Japan and the United States, rather than cutting 
exports from one side. Another point is, in such areas as 
government procurement and insurance, imports are disturbed by 
Japanese Government regulations. In these areas, the government 
must positively promote deregulation. 
  [Kuroiwa] To settle the economic framework talks, you have 
been saying that it may be possible for Japan to accept 
numerical targets related to such macroeconomic fields as gross 
national product [GNP], instead of those on individual sectors. 
Do you intend to formally propose this to Prime Minister 
Hosokawa? 
  [Hata] The numerical target issue has been the biggest point 
of conflict in the negotiations, and the United States said it 
would impose economic sanctions if the framework talks bore no 
fruit. But it is not what Mr. Kantor really wanted. Similarly, 
both sides did not want to worsen bilateral ties through the 
talks. In such a case, it is very important for Japan to 
positively improve the current situation. Also, Japan should 
expand its domestic market through promotion of a deregulation 
policy. When better foreign-made products become available at 
cheaper prices, it will enrich the livelihood of consumers. We 
must focus on that point, rather than unwillingly responding to 
foreign pressures. 
  [Kuroiwa] Now, we would like to question Mr. Hata as the 
leader of Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party]. Prime Minister 
Hosokawa said it was his decision not to reshuffle the cabinet, 
and not the result of pressure from somebody else. Obviously he 
could not do so. I think the issue clarified discord in the 
coalition government. Do you think the coalition parties can 
maintain their unity now? 
  [Hata] On the day the prime minister made that announcement, 
I said we should go back to the starting point when the 
coalition government was formed last August. I also said we 
should remind ourselves that the most important point is that we 
are the ones who have changed the political framework of the 
last 38 years. When I said this everybody looked relieved, and 
I felt we were ready to restart. Every coalition party chairman 
and secretary general was there. 
  [Matsuyama] Yet, when we recently had Komeito Secretary 
General Ichikawa as a guest, he accused Chief Cabinet Secretary 
Takemura of behaving like a second prime minister. And Mr. 
Ozawa has been urging that Mr. Takemura be fired. It seemed to 
me their feelings against Mr. Takemura were at the heart of the 
problem. 
  [Takemura] In a recent television interview, Mr. Takemura 
said he was in a difficult position, saying there was nothing to 
be gained by discussing the matter yet again because it would 
only make things worse. In fact, however, it was an awkward 
question. One newspaper later carried a weird report that I was 
going to replace Mr. Takemura, but that is nonsense. My opinion 
is that the chief cabinet secretary should serve as the closest 
associate the prime minister and, as the spokesman, he or she 
should speak out on behalf of the prime minister. On the other 
hand, a party head should represent the views of his or her 
party. It is very difficult to reconcile the two conflicting 
positions. In this sense, I said it would be difficult for Mr. 
Takemura to fulfill his duties under the current circumstances. 
This has nothing to do with his personal capability. On those 
grounds, however, everyone concerned, including Mr. Takemura, 
agreed to let him restart. And he said he would pay more 
attention to the intentions of the prime minister. 
  [Matsuyama] Do you mean it is difficult for party heads 
to serve as chief cabinet secretary? 
  [Hata] Yes, it is difficult. But he acknowledged the 
difficulties, and all of us had discussed that. He is going to 
start again on those grounds. So, I think he is ready to 
fulfill the duties of chief cabinet secretary. 
  [Kuroiwa] Do you mean he feels sorry about his past 
behavior? 
  [Hata] It is not like that. When he was appointed as chief 
cabinet secretary, there was nobody else to fill the position. 
  [Matsuyama] It is said Mr. Ozawa went underground in protest 
against the prime minister's decision. Is he angry now? 
  [Hata] I do not think so. I talked with him on the phone 
yesterday. 
  [Matsuyama] Did you talk about the issue? 
  [Hata] No, we did not. Since we enacted political reform 
and the new election system, we talked about our future course 
of action. 
  [Kuroiwa] In connection with this, Prime Minister Hosokawa 
said the cabinet reshuffle is needed to organize the 
administration to grapple with economic reform. But he gave up 
the cabinet reshuffle. Then, what would happen to economic 
reform? 
  [Hata] It appears Mr. Hosokawa planned to provide a new 
cabinet lineup with more stress on economic reform. Yet, as 
seen in the government's deregulation efforts, economic reform 
has already started. Mr. Hosokawa actually wanted a new lineup, 
but I think the current cabinet is good enough. 
  [Kuroiwa] The current cabinet was designed as a political 
reform cabinet, and it has a minister in charge of political 
reform. So, we expected something new in the lineup for economic 
reform. 
  [Hata] Concerning political reform, we only revised the 
electoral and fiscal control systems for the lower house, we 
must work next on upper house reform. We should reorganize the 
political parties under the new political reform laws, and 
reform the entire Diet. So, political reform has not yet ended, 
we have just taken the first step. 
  [Kuroiwa] Yet, the next largest subject for Japan's politics 
is economic reform. So, I have a proposal. The cabinet 
reshuffle will take place sooner or later -- probably after the 
enactment of the fiscal 1994 budget in May or June. At that 
time, I think Mr. Ichiro Ozawa is supposed to play positive 
roles. As the Shinseito head, what is your opinion of using Mr. 
Ozawa in the cabinet? 
  [Hata] I have been telling him he should play positive 
roles. But there are some problems, too. Our party is organized 
with only 62 Diet members, but currently plays the leading role 
in the coalition government since we are the most experienced 
group in the coalition. Therefore, we are expected to locate 
capable people both in the party and the cabinet. The Shinseito 
is occupying five seats in the cabinet. Under such 
circumstances, I think it is impossible for both of us to be 
cabinet members. But, his participation in the cabinet may be 
possible when I return to the party when the occasion demands it. 
  [Matsuyama] Do you mean Mr. Ozawa may join the cabinet when 
the occasion demands it? 
  [Hata] I think that is possible. 
  [Kuroiwa] You mean either you or Mr. Ozawa should take 
charge of the party, don't you? 
  [Hata] Right. But, Mr. Ozawa always says he prefers party 
management. 
  [Kobayashi] In connection with the importance of the party, 
you have just mentioned a sensitive point. What did you mean by 
reorganization of parties under the political reform laws? 
Under the single-seat constituency system, it is impossible for 
the coalition parties to beat the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] 
if they deal separately with elections. Does reorganization of 
parties under the political reform laws mean formation of party 
mergers among the coalition parties? 
  [Hata] In a sense, political parties have been bodies for 
politicians. We are trying to create genuine mass parties for 
the people. This principle should be implemented even in local 
politics, and political parties must be organizations which 
accept ordinary citizens. Taking into account the next election 
and the future of Japanese politics, it is also important to 
think about the merger of such reformed parties. Both Ozawa and 
I believe a strong party is needed to cope with the LDP, or we 
would be smashed by them. If we allow the revival of the 
38-year ruling by the LDP again, genuine changes will never 
happen in Japan's politics. 
  [Takemura] The presence of the Japan New Party [JNP] is 
very weak because no bigshot is left in the party. Ruling 
parties should keep some prominent leaders in party 
organizations. 
  [Hata] I agree with you. The individual Diet members of the 
JNP are very capable people, but few of them have the experience 
to manage political affairs. I think this is big trouble for 
Mr. Hosokawa. 
  [Matsuyama] Our time is up now. This program is posing one 
question to all our guests. In your opinion, how great is the 
probability of another political party realignment within this 
year? 
  [Hata] I think the probability of that taking place is about 
60 percent, maybe a little higher. 
  [Kuroiwa] You have been nicknamed Mr. Political Reform. Now 
that the issue has been settled for the time being, could you 
tell me your new catch phrase? 
  [Hata] That would be to aim at genuine politics. Since we 
started working on political reform, we have been saying that 
another party realignment will certainly take place after the 
enactment of the political reform bills, or political circles 
would fail to catch up with the dynamism of politics. 
  [Matsuyama] What about your attitude toward being Mr. 
Hosokawa's successor? 
  [Hata, laughing] That is another story. 
  [Kuroiwa] I see. Thank you very much for joining us today. 
As the foreign minister, the deputy prime minister, and the 
party head, you gave us answers to various questions. Given the 
severe circumstances surrounding Japan, I think we have to try 
our best not to send our children to the battlefields. 
  [Hata, interrupting] Absolutely right. 
  [Kuroiwa] So, we must have an eye on developments in 
political circles. Thank you again. 

