BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Gentlemen: Israel continues to tighten its iron 
grip on south Lebanon and commit further acts of aggression on 
the area's defenseless villages and towns and issue ever more 
serious threats with a view to blackmailing Lebanon and putting 
pressure on Syria. On the other hand, Israeli officials have 
been hinting at progress in the talks with Syria and adverse 
consequences for those who may fall behind in the peace process. 
Israel's strategy seems to be that the Arabs must compete with 
each other to conclude peace. By such competition, the Israeli 
argument goes, the Arabs are likely to forgo some, if not the 
substance, of their rights, as happened with the Palestinian 
side. By thus falling into the trap one by one, the Arabs would 
find they had been sucked into lame and lopsided settlements 
that are nothing like the kind of true, universal peace craved 
by the Arab masses. 
  To advance that end, Israel goes out of its way to give the 
impression that the talks with Syria have made substantial 
headway, and that the upcoming tour of Warren Christopher will 
see a qualitative change, when in fact no progress to speak of 
has been made and in his previous tours Christopher did not 
raise any ideas promoting the implementation of UN Security 
Council resolutions. Christopher has thus far confined himself 
to the role of mailman. All the clamor whipped up by Israel is 
designed to entice the Arab parties into the trap of separate 
and unfair settlements and negate the underlying foundations of 
the Madrid conference. 
  From day one of the peace process, Syria has warned against 
such Israeli tactics and repeatedly pressed home to the Arabs 
the need to coordinate their moves and stick to the bases of a 
just and comprehensive peace so that all the Arab parties 
negotiate from a position of strength and guard against a 
forfeiture of their rights. Syria has often enough emphasized 
that Arab coordination ranks high on its agenda, and that it 
will never relinquish any of the Arab rights or a grain of Arab 
soil. Syria regards the Middle East conflict and the peace 
process from a pan-Arab perspective. The kind of peace 
settlement we want is one that meets Arab rights and aspirations 
and removes Israeli occupation from all Arab territory. Beyond 
that, Syria has made it plain that Warren Christopher's contacts 
have yet to register any progress and that a yawning gap 
separates the Syrian and Israeli positions. Syria has also 
made it clear that it adheres to all the principles agreed upon 
at the conferences of the Arab foreign ministers. Syria has let 
it be known that Israel does not want peace and that its sinful 
and savage acts of aggression against Lebanon are calculated 
extortion of the Lebanese Government and an attempt sour 
Syrian-Lebanese relations and drag Lebanon into a separate deal. 
  It is indeed laughable and preposterous that Uri Lubrani 
should appoint himself as a trustee over Lebanon and shed tears 
over Lebanon's sovereignty. Isn't it Israel that is occupying 
Lebanese territory and killing Lebanese civilians and 
perpetrating daily acts of devastating aggression? Lubrani has 
stated unequivocally that only once it severs its ties with 
Syria and sets up ties with Israel at the expense of Syria, can 
Lebanon be a sovereign country. Lubrani ignores the catastrophes 
that have hit the Lebanese at the hands of Israel and the fact 
that if it were not for Syria and its firm stand against the 
Zionist partitionist scheme, Lebanon would have been little more 
than limbs stinking with the odor of death, devastation, and 
fire. 
  Lebanon has recuperated and regained its unity and the 
Zionist scenario of partition has collapsed, as have all 
Israel's plans. The Tel Aviv rulers, nonetheless, will not admit 
defeat. They seem to think that they may keep playing the same 
dirty trick of blackmailing Lebanon and pressuring Syria and 
splitting Arab ranks. They have never been interested in a true 
and decent peace in the Middle East. They do not look beyond 
lame settlements that perpetuate occupation and give them a free 
hand to control the region's resources. It is enough to look at 
the Palestinian arena to understand what Israel is after. 
  The Israeli officials had been wooing the Palestinians away 
from the glare of publicity, and no sooner had they lured them 
into the Oslo and Cairo agreements than they uncovered their 
expansionist, aggressive designs; namely to slice off Jerusalem 
and important sections of the West Bank. They were even at 
pains to humiliate the Palestinians. What Syria had warned 
would happen materialized, and the chances are we are in for 
more of the same if the Arab parties fail to adhere to the 
foundations of peace and coordinate their moves. Hardly a day 
passes without the Israelis urging separate and secret talks to 
promote the same lame agreements that they know will not achieve 
peace. Peace is not a cheap deal; it is a package deal grounded 
in right, justice, and international law. Peace cannot take 
root in the Middle East short of a fair and universal settlement 
providing for a total Israeli pullout from the occupied Arab 
territories. That has been and will continue to be Syria's 
position. 

