BFN 

  [Text] Nairobi, June 5 (AFP) -- Kenyan opposition parties 
have formed a new alliance to fight future elections against 
President Daniel arap Moi's ruling Kenya African National Union 
(KANU) party. 
  The alliance, to be known as the United National Democratic 
Alliance (UNDA), was formed during a huge rally held at the 
historical Kamukunji grounds here Saturday [4 June], which was 
attended by 50 opposition members of parliament and their 
leaders. 
  During the rally, the first to be licenced by Moi's 
administration since the December 1992 first multi-party general 
elections in Kenya in 26 years, the opposition parties agreed to 
field one candidate against KANU in each of the seven 
constituencies in the forthcoming June 27 by-elections. 
  The seven by-elections follow recent defections to KANU of 
four opposition MPs, the death of two others, including father 
of the opposition and FORD [Forum for the Restoration of 
Democracy]-Kenya leader Oginga Odinga and former vice-president 
Josephat Karanja, and a court petition. 
  The rally was addressed by, among others, official 
opposition 
leader in parliament Michael Kijana Wamalwa of FORD-Kenya, 
Democratic Party chairman Mwai Kibaki, Kenya National Democratic 
Alliance (KENDA) chairman Mukaru Ng'ang'a and FORD-Asili vice- 
chairman George Nthenge. 
  Licences granted by administration to members of the 
opposition to hold political rallies throughout the country had 
hitherto been cancelled at the last minute and armed police 
ordered to break them up if organisers insisted on holding them. 
  There was, however, no sign of uniformed police at the rally 
on Saturday, as speaker after speaker attacked Moi's 
administration record and expressed unanimity about the need for 
a national convention to change the Constitution which they said 
was tailored for a one-party state, but was allowed to slip 
through by the 1992 multi-party euphoria. 
  The speakers said they were determined to see the current 
Electoral Commission replaced with an independent one on the 
line of those in South Africa and Malawi to serve all parties. 
In the event of failure they vowed to boycott the 1997 general 
elections. 
  But as the rally was being held in the capital, police were 
violently breaking up another rally at Nyamira in western Kenya, 
addressed by Kenya Social Congress (KSC) leader George Anyona, 
the Kenyan press reported here on Sunday. 
  At least seven people were injured as police stormed the 
rally, beating people on sight, the reports said. 

