Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Xiao Yong (2556 0737): "U.S. Intelligence Work </F>
Focuses on Protecting Economic and Practical Interests"] 
  [Text] Following the end of the Cold War and the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union, major changes have taken 
place in the global security strategy of the United States. In 
order to deal with the Soviet threat during the Cold War, the 
United States had to throw large amount of human and material 
resources into security and defense, of which the essential 
point was to collect intelligence related to the Soviet 
political, military, diplomatic, economic, scientific, and 
technological fields. Like the country's strategy as a whole, 
the CIA is undergoing a period of major readjustment. 
  However, it is no easy job to reform an intelligence system 
which has taken shape over the past 50 years. The question was 
raised as early as 1990, when David Boren, then chairman of the 
Senate's Intelligence Committee, proposed that the United States 
must have a new intelligence strategy to meet the changes in the 
world situation. In view of the relaxation in tense U.S.-Soviet 
ties, the Soviet Union had not yet disintegrated, and there were 
no indication of any relaxation of regional conflicts, Boren 
proposed that U.S. intelligence agencies must have the capacity 
to verify new and complicated agreements on arms control while 
continuously keeping watch on Soviet military deployments and 
the activities of the Soviet leadership. At the same time, 
Boren insisted on information supplied by human beings, 
infiltrating terrorist and drug organizations, and following 
trends in weapons proliferation; paying attention to economic 
information; and having comprehensive and early forecasts of 
"enemy" intentions. In a word, the shift in U.S. intelligence 
must start as quickly as possible. 
  From then on, there were numerous analyses and debates on 
intelligence reform in the United States. The basic orientation 
was to adapt to the post-Cold War changes; reduce surveillance 
of Soviet military activities; collect more economic 
information, strategic trade information, and trends in 
financial markets; and offer services which could help maintain 
global U.S. economic superiority. 
  After deliberations by relevant quarters for around two 
years, CIA Director Gates officially submitted to President Bush 
a plan for CIA reform in April 1992. The plan has yet to be 
made public. Viewed from information disclosed by various 
quarters, a number of readjustments were quietly made in U.S. 
intelligence work. 
  The readjustments were mainly changes in the focus of 
intelligence work. First, viewed from the angle of states, the 
United States still regarded the CIS as its "main" target for 
intelligence collection, particularly the political and economic 
situation in the CIS and the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction. Second, collection of intelligence on arms 
proliferation, and international drugs and terrorist 
organizations in other countries. Moreover, the United States 
also attached great importance to international financial, 
trade, and technological information and paid close attention to 
intelligence on environmental protection, natural resources, and 
public health. 
  U.S. intelligence collection relies heavily on the economic 
field. To prepare the current reform plan, it is said that the 
White House asked more than 20 government departments to submit 
the foci of their intelligence work to the year 2005. The 
results indicated that around half of the reports were focused 
on economic areas. Most U.S. officials believe that by the end 
of the century, the most serious challenge to the country would 
come from the international economic field. After analyses, 
selection, and summaries of these reports, a new scheme proposed 
three major tasks for U.S. intelligence agencies to collect 
international economic information: First, keep abreast of 
global economic trends and opportunities, take note of their 
influence on a stable international situation which includes the 
economies of "allies" and "potential enemies," and track 
economic activities and unusual financial relations and 
commercial transactions. Second, track trends in international 
science and technology, particularly advanced technological 
trends, such as the development and application of 
supercomputers and the development of semiconductors and 
information technology, and judge the impact these developments 
could have on U.S. security. Third, strengthen economic 
monitoring work. In the intelligence sphere, the United States 
discovered that many countries, including its allies, had 
shifted the focus of their attention from politics to the 
economy, taken North America as their target, and had vigorously 
collected U.S. economic and commercial information. 
  According to the U.S. media, the CIA holds that the country 
must guard against more than 20 countries which are involved in 
gathering "industrial information" from U.S. companies. More 
attention was given to this matter after Clinton assumed office. 
At his approval by Congress earlier this year, CIA Director R. 
James Woolsey said that the gathering of economic information is 
"the hottest topic in current intelligence policy" and that the 
Clinton administration will carry out "comprehensive research" 
on the matter. In the coming year, the Clinton administration 
will adopt a series of measures to ensure the gathering of 
economic information and anti-espionage work. Statistics show 
that the proportion of spending on gathering information in the 
former Soviet Union dropped from 58 percent in the 1980's to 
under 20 percent, while spending on the economic and other 
fields continues to rise, amounting to two- thirds. By the end 
of 1993, Woolsey stressed that the CIA had already played an 
"essential role" in hitting at foreign intelligence agencies, 
which were trying to gather industrial information in U.S. 
companies through bribery. He also disclosed that the CIA's 
anti-espionage work saved the country billions of dollars in 
losses each year. 
  In order to adapt to the above changes, the U.S. 
administration also correspondingly readjusted its management 
and coordination of all kinds of intelligence work, as well as 
the intelligence analysis mechanism. For example, the Defense 
Department assigned special personnel to help exercise 
management over planning and budgets for the nation's 
intelligence agencies in order to eliminate malpractices by 
different departments in formulating variant policies for 
intelligence work and outlays during the Cold War. The 
administration also made the CIA's "National Intelligence 
Committee," which is responsible for evaluating information, 
independent, allowing it to merge the "Joint Intelligence 
Committee on Atomic Energy"; the "Intelligence Committee on 
Science and Technology"; and the "Intelligence Committee on 
Space Systems and Weapons"; attached importance to a series of 
existing special intelligence organs; and strengthened unified 
management. At the same time, the United States stressed the 
role of agents and changed the Cold War trend, which relied 
excessively on satellites, aerial reconnaissance, and other 
technical means. On one hand, some people say that this was a 
lesson learned from the Gulf war. Prior to Iraq's invasion of 
Kuwait, the United States took satellite photographs of Iraq's 
military deployments. However, there was a lack of verification 
by agents on the ground and in sounding out Iraq's intentions. 
For this reason, the United States has emphasized the necessity 
of better training for its agents, particularly those proficient 
in the languages and cultures of Third World nations, who should 
appear more in the capacity of nongovernmental officials to 
reduce dependence on satellite information. On the other hand, 
as most regional and limited conflicts have taken place in Third 
World nations, and the United States has a shortage of relevant 
experts and agents, the United States has shifted its security 
attention to these regions. Because of the large amount of 
economic information "software" and the fact that a lot of 
"information" is in the media or even inside people's minds, 
which does not appear like weapons and other hardware as in the 
security and defense fields, the problem can only be solved by 
relying on large numbers of people. Despite the major 
readjustments in U.S. intelligence work, it is noteworthy that 
spending has not decreased. Since the Cold War has ended, some 
congressmen proposed that the intelligence budget should be cut 
by 7 percent each year, just like the defense budget. However, 
actual spending in 1993 could still reach $30 billion, the same 
as prior to the disintegration of the Soviet Union. Some U.S. 
administration officials hold that intelligence is the first 
line of defense for U.S. security, which should be strengthened 
rather than weakened. 
  Reform of the U.S. intelligence system is still under way 
and 
the difficult problems cannot be easily resolved overnight. 
Outstanding problems include: Economic activities are mainly 
regulated by market factors. If the government interferes in 
economic activities, it will be a difficult question to allow 
economic circles to share the information, manifest the 
principles of the market, and avoid agents from getting involved 
in economic activities, which could result in corruption. For 
this reason, it is said that U.S. economic information work is 
focused on combating espionage, rather than taking the 
initiative to launch offensive operations. Moreover, targets 
for the collection of economic information are mainly developed 
nations, many of whom are U.S. allies. Because of the 
intelligence wars arising from this, it has become even more 
difficult to coordinate relations among the western countries, 
which are full of frictions and which have further aggravated 
the lack of trust between them. Shortages of funds have also 
become increasingly prominent. As for its national security 
strategy as a whole, the U.S. intelligence system is still in a 
transitional period and is undergoing major readjustments, which 
will focus on safeguarding the United States' economic and 
practical interests. 

