BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Francisca Stella Fraga from Sao Paulo] </F>
  [Text] As of June 1992, when the UN Conference on 
Environment and Development -- Rio '92 -- approved Agenda 21 
that establishes that the rich countries must supply new 
resources in favorable conditions to developing countries so 
they can protect the environment, the Brazilian Government's 
strategy for negotiating external financing in this sector 
became based on that principle. Meanwhile, organizations such as 
the World Bank continue to insist on traditional financing 
criteria for releasing resources for environmental projects. 
  This criteria has been one of the most serious obstacles to 
implementing projects that follow the Rio '92 objectives to open 
the way for sustainable development, according to Pedro Mota 
Coelho, chief of Itamaraty's Environment Division. The demand 
that Brazil put up matching funds for the financing of 
environmental projects that is systematically imposed by the 
World Bank is an evident example that the bank is using 
traditional credit mechanisms. According to Mota Coelho, the 
demand goes against the guidelines contained in Agenda 21, 
especially in the cases in which the World Bank acts as an 
intermediary in obtaining resources from the rich countries, 
such as the case of resources for the Ozone Fund, which was 
created to finance projects for preventing the destruction of 
the earth's ozone layer. 
  "The release of resources must have a better flow," Mota 
Coelho said. "It is clear that we must do our lessons at home, 
and that is what we are doing." 
  And it is this effort that is being incorporated into the 
task of a group being coordinated by the Planning Secretariat of 
the presidency, in other words, Seplan [Secretariat of Planning 
and Coordination of the Presidency of the Republic] -- which 
involves the Environment, Finance, and Foreign Ministries, among 
others -- was created in order to specifically simplify the 
forms and mechanisms for the reception of external resources. 
"At this stage, even the reception of donations is very 
difficult," Mota Coelho said. 
<H5>  Denmark </H5>
  This is why Environment Minister Rubens Ricupero frequently 
has repeated during financing negotiations that Brazil is not 
Denmark. If it was, then its institutions would function 
magnificently and the public organizations involved in the 
environmental field would be perfectly structured to comply with 
their functions. But even if this was true, financing would not 
be necessary either. Among its numerous shortcomings, Brazil 
needs resources in order to improve its organizations. 
<H5>  Guideline Changes </H5>
  Environment Ministry executive secretary Sergio Silva do 
Amaral stressed that Brazil's environmental sector has had 
considerable changes in guidelines during the past few years and 
this has caused a major lack of stability. The Ibama [Brazilian 
Institute for the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources], 
which was created in 1989, has had nine presidents in a 
four-year period; and the Environment Secretariat and the 
Environment Ministry also have changed chiefs fives times since 
1992. In addition, Ibama does not have the resources to handle 
complex international negotiations. Four hundred technicians 
were trained recently to handle this, he stated. 
  Amaral also stated that the federal government's budget 
restrictions do not help in releasing matching funds for 
financing. This even affected the National Environment Program, 
the PNMA, which was instituted precisely in order to improve the 
public administration's efficiency in the environmental field. 
The PNMA is now 36 months old but has only received regular 
budgetary resources for the past 17 months. According to the 
PNMA, the government is restructuring in order to improve its 
evaluation of the specific situation of each project in order to 
prevent this from continuing. 
<H5>  Simplifying Problems </H5>
  According to Amaral, another effort that has been made is 
that of seeking an understanding with the government's economic 
sector in order to simplify the procedures for the release of 
external resources. He states that there has been progress 
regarding the mechanisms of the National Environment Fund 
(FNMA), which is financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 
(IDB). The economic sector's green light for the use of 
resources was so delayed that at times it passed from one fiscal 
year to the next year and this demanded new agreements, within 
an infinite process of bureaucratic actions, for the use of the 
resources. 
  Amaral now says it is possible to use the balance from one 
fiscal year to the next year without signing new agreements. 
  He also stresses that the World Bank itself is contributing 
to the delay in approving projects. It has the habit of 
delaying in order to evaluate and name consultants. In 
addition, the projects are revised very frequently. This why 
the Brazilian Government has suggested that the World Bank also 
should adopt more rapid measures where it is concerned. 
  The external resources the Brazilian Government has 
negotiated for the environmental field are divided into four 
areas: 
  Amazon Pilot Project. To be financed by the seven richest 
nations in the World -- the Group of 7 -- for the preservation 
of Brazil's tropical forests. The initial provision made in 
1990, when the project was approved by the member countries in 
Houston, amounted to $1.6 billion. During the 1991 Geneva 
meeting it was agreed that the first part of the resources -- 
$250 million -- would be released and 12 projects were approved. 
Of the 12 projects, seven are very well advanced in their 
drafting. But the resources have not been released yet. 
  Projects for biodiversity preservation that are to be 
financed with a fund of $18 million from the resources of the 
Global Environment Facility [title published in English] (GEF), 
which was created in 1991 and is supported by the World Bank, in 
addition to the $18 million Brazil will have to put up in 
matching funds. The GEF also has promised to release $30 
million for other environmental projects and the Brazilian 
Government promised $12 million in matching funds. 
  The restructuring of Brazilian organizations involved in the 
environmental sector. The PNMA has contracted financing of $117 
million with the World Bank in order to strengthen the country's 
environmental institutions and organizations, to implement 
projects to protect natural resources, and to support projects 
for the decentralization of environmental activities. 
  The FNMA was created with capital of $22 million from the 
IDB 
and $8 million in government matching funds for the financing of 
low-cost projects -- up to $200,000 -- for the preservation of 
environmental areas, research, biodiversity, and activities 
pertaining to environmental preservation. This is a 
little-known program that can be used by municipalities and 
nongovernmental organizations. Some of the funds already are 
being used. 

