Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Leydur Rannamets: "The Mechanism for Protecting </F>
the Environment Works"] 
  [Text] Clean air, water and soil have become luxuries 
for which we must pay -- that is how we may summarize the 
statements made by the vice-chancellor of the ER [Estonian 
Republic] Department of the Environment, Eva Kraav, and other 
specialists at a press conference held on Monday. 
  The Environmental Protection Fund was created in Estonia 
already 10 years ago, but only quite recently, after the 
adoption of laws on the protection of natural resources and on 
the environmental protection fund, has the money begun to go 
into the treasury as it should. For the right to use natural 
resources, our enterprises last year paid out over million kron, 
and for pollution of the environment -- another 19 million kron. 
The GAO [joint-stock company] "Eesti pylevkivi" paid 8 million 
kron into the state budget, and half of this sum returned to the 
budget of Ida-Virusskiy district. The largest polluters of the 
air basin in the Northwest -- the Narva power plants -- paid 2 
million kron each for their "smoke trains." Yes, the rates of 
pay for the right to use natural resources and the sums of 
compensation for pollution of the environment are currently 
growing, but only within the limits of inflation, emphasized Eva 
Kraav. 
  The payment for natural resource utilization comprises 1.5 
percent in the price of shale, 0.3 percent in the price of 
electricity, and 0.1 percent in the price of the others. The 
World Bank is indignant and is demanding an increase in the 
stated rate in order to attract more money to the budget. 
However, Estonia, in the words of Eva Kraav, is resisting this, 
clearly foreseeing the consequences of this step for the 
population. 
  Where is the money of the Environmental Protection Fund 
going? 
  Half goes to the central fund, while the other half remains 
in the districts. The utilization of monies from the central 
fund is the perogative of its council, in which all the 
districts and cities are also represented. The money goes 
primarily for the construction of purification structures and 
for the development of the environmental protection 
infrastructure. Last year, more was allocated for facilities 
which were in their stages of completion. Among them were 
purification structures in Tyuri, Otepya, Tammsalu, Vyaymela, 
and Vyru, the construction of sewers in Yykhvi, Voka, and others. 
  That village, city or enterprise which has effective 
purification structures pays significantly less for pollution of 
the environment. That is how interest in developing a normally 
operating purification system is encouraged. After the 
installations for biological purification of sewage waters were 
placed into operation in Tallinn in October of last year, the 
city began to pay significantly less to this fund. Yet Tartu, 
which sends its sewer water along the Emayyga to Lake Chudskoye 
in an almost unpurified state, must pay a hefty price. 
  The most unfavorable situation, as before, is in the 
northwest. It is true that because of the decline in production 
Narva has begun to consume less water, and the project capacity 
of the facilities makes it possible now to keep up with the 
purification of the water which is used. However, problems 
remain. 
  In Tallinn the main culprit in pollution of the air basin is 
auto transport. 
  Economic mechanisms for protecting the environment have 
begun 
to work. We may expect an improvement in the situation, but only 
if all the money collected for environmental protection purposes 
is used for its designated purpose, and not "rechanneled" to 
other needs. Sometimes that happens too. 

