Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava March 3 (CTK) -- In the process of the 
division of the former federal property the Czech Republic 
"robbed Slovakia of tens, or hundreds of billions of crowns," 
Jan Slota, recently elected as chairman of the Slovak National 
Party (SNS), said at a press conference on Thursday [3 March]. 
  The division of the Czechoslovak Airlines was also 
controversial, as the privatisation was "more than strange", and 
led to the airlines falling extremely easily to the Czech 
Republic. Slota pointed to the problematic division of federal 
immovables, for which Slovakia got nothing. The situation was 
similar with the property of the federal sea shipping company 
and the army. Slota said he was surprised about the Czech 
Defence Ministry's present offering military airports for 
commercial purposes. 
  SNS Deputy Chairman Juraj Molnar added that "Slovakia was 
less harmed during the property division process than during the 
existence of the Czechoslovak Federative Republic" (from March 
1990 until December 31, 1992). However, he appreciated the 
civilised manner of the two republics split apart, and expressed 
the hope that the future relations between the two countries 
would be civilised as well. "Many wrongs have been done, but we 
prefer to forgive them," Molnar noted. 
  Referring to the SNS's cooperation with its senior 
government 
coalition partner, the Premier Vladimir Meciar-led Movement for 
a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), Slota confirmed that the SNS would 
support the HZDS's efforts to solve the current crisis through 
early elections. Asked if cooperation was possible between such 
two strong personalities as himself and Meciar, Slota said he 
saw no reason for doubting this cooperation in advance. He and 
Meciar always reached agreement in basic questions, and Meciar 
always "did what he promised", Slota said. 
  He stated he accepted the decision by President Michal Kovac 
not to appoint SNS Honorary Chairman Jozef Prokes Foreign 
Minister as a decision made by the head of the state. However, 
he stressed that he insisted on Prokes's being the suitable 
candidate. 
  Slota dismissed speculations that he could invite Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy, leader of the Russia's Liberal Democratic Party, 
to visit Slovakia. 

