BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Justice Minister Sabine </F>
Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger by Cornelia von Wrangel; place and 
date not given: "One Cannot Put Everyone Into Detention Pending 
Trial"] 
  [Excerpts] [Von Wrangel] In Magdeburg about 40 young 
people hunted down foreigners. Is it not finally time for the 
judiciary to act more strictly against young criminals? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] It is very alarming that in 
Germany foreigners are hunted down in the streets while many 
people look on indifferently. Particularly in the new laender 
the judiciary is reacting with great consistency and is fully 
applying the valid laws. In contrast to repeated demands, it is 
not necessary to change the youth penal code. However, it is 
very important that, in order to combat right-wing extremist and 
xenophobic crimes, we quickly implement the changes envisaged in 
the anticrime law: that instigators can be punished more 
easily, that the use of Nazi-like symbols is banned, and that 
carrying these symbols is a punishable offense. In our penal 
code there are still certain gray zones, which we must eliminate 
by making clear changes to the valid laws. 
  [Von Wrangel] Is it another such change that it will be 
punishable by law to say that Auschwitz is a lie? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] Yes. It is very important 
that the denial of the holocaust must be punished as incitement 
in any case. The coalition round has followed my proposal. 
Next week it will also be included in the discussions about the 
anticrime law. 
  [Von Wrangel] However, adolescent criminals between 18 and 
21 are still being punished in line with the criminal law 
relating to young offenders. Do you call this deterrence? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] This is not automatically so. 
In about 70 percent of the cases adolescents are punished in 
line with the youth penal code and in 30 percent in line with 
the adult penal code. In the trial of the attack in Moelln one 
adolescent criminal was punished in line with the adult penal 
code, and the young perpetrators were given the highest sentence 
-- 10 years in prison. This shows that these possibilities of 
punishment, that is, prison terms even in the first instance of 
violent acts, do indeed have a deterrent effect on young people 
and adolescents. The important thing is that the trials be held 
quickly and that years are not allowed to pass before a decision 
is made, because then threats of punishment hardly have a 
deterring effect. 
  [Von Wrangel] Is it deterrence that the morning after the 
Magdeburg riots the only two young people who were still in 
detention were those for whom previous arrest warrants had been 
issued for similar offenses? All the others were released. 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] This does not mean that no 
criminal proceedings will be initiated against these young 
people. One cannot put everybody into detention pending trial. 
However, the anti-crime law now envisages easier arrest in case 
of recidivism, which has no precondition of a previous sentence 
in the past five years. The Free Democratic Party of Germany 
also insisted that a system of public prosecutors' 
investigations be established. This makes it possible to find 
out whether proceedings are pending in any other town. This is 
a far better basis for deciding whether the danger of recidivism 
exists and whether an arrest warrant must be issued for that 
reason. [passage omitted] 
  [Von Wrangler] Apropos young people: Does the so-called 
hashish ruling pave the way for a more liberal drug policy? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] The ruling of the Federal 
Constitutional Court on soft drugs has been completely 
misunderstood by the public, because the Federal Constitutional 
Court just confirmed our law, according to which the possession 
of small amounts of drugs for one's own consumption is also 
punishable. Then the Federal Constitutional Court said that 
punishment may be unnecessary if small amounts are involved. 
Actually, this is precisely the situation that we have at the 
moment. Among the justice ministers of the laender we have 
dealt with the question of what is to be defined as a small 
amount. The Federal Constitutional Court has not answered this 
question. There are very different ideas, ranging from 2-30 
grams. So far, we have not been able to agree on a uniform line 
and, therefore, we will meet again this year. 
  [Von Wrangler] Will you agree on an amount below 10 grams? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] Yes, I think so. 
  [Von Wrangler] Thus, the next political step will not be the 
complete release of hashish? Or the release of heroin, as North 
Rhine-Westphalia Justice Minister Krumsiek advocates? 
  [Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger] No, the legislature will not 
legalize soft drugs in the foreseeable future. What applies to 
soft drugs must also apply to heroin and other hard drugs. The 
ruling of the Federal Constitutional Court does not apply to the 
latter, which means that there is no suspension of punishment 
for the possession of small amounts of hard drugs. [passage 
omitted] 

