BFN 

  [Text] Simferopol [no dateline as received] -- At the 
morning sitting of the Crimean Supreme Council session on 3 
June, people's deputies approved the law "On introducing 
amendments and additions to the law `On the structure of the 
state executive power.'" In accordance with it, eight 
ministries are to be set up and the government is charged with 
considering and submitting, within 14 days, additional proposals 
to the Supreme Council about the structure of the government, 
i.e. about setting up several more ministries: A ministry of 
culture, a ministry of education, and a ministry in charge of 
nationalities and deported nations. In accordance with this law 
the appointment of the minister of finance, the minister of 
agriculture and food, the minister of economy, and the minister 
in charge of control over state enterprises will be confirmed. 
The minister of justice, the minister of internal affairs, and 
the chief of the Security Service, whose appointments have 
already been confirmed, are within the composition of the 
government. 
  During a break there was a news conference by the group 
"Respublika" of the Supreme Council of Crimea, which was 
registered on 2 June and which consists of 10 people. Volodymyr 
Klychnykov, chairman of the Crimean Union of the Afghanistan war 
veterans was elected its leader. According to the leaders of 
the "Respublika" group, which comprises part of the deputies who 
were running in the election to the Crimean Parliament on behalf 
of the "Rosiya" bloc, the setting up of the group does not mean 
a split of this bloc. The above deputies could not join the 
"Rosiya" group due to certain disagreements, above all, those 
concerning that provision of the statute according to which a 
decision of a majority is mandatory for all its members. 
Besides, said Klychnykov, there were personal conflicts between 
the leaders of the "Rosiya" group. He also emphasized: "We 
will work for the consolidation of the Crimean Republic's 
statehood." 
  As far as the future of Crimea is concerned, deputy chairman 
of the "Respublika" group pointed out that he favored Crimea's 
independence, however, it should be achieved by peaceful means, 
and it can be achieved, in his opinion, only after the people of 
Crimea become aware of themselves as a nation. 
  An appeal by Russia's State Duma has been sent to the 
Supreme 
Council of Crimea. It, in particular, expresses the hope that 
"the deputies to the Supreme Councils of Ukraine and Crimea will 
not allow irresponsible politicians to endanger peace and 
people's safety for the sake of reaching their selfish goals and 
taking advantage of the current moment." The Russian State Duma 
offered itself as a mediator in solving the conflict between 
Crimea and the authorities of Ukraine, so as to reach 
constructive compromises on the basis of a Ukrainian-Russian 
dialogue. 
  President of Crimea Yuriy Meshkov reported at the session 
that the commission of the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe is also ready to become a mediator in this 
issue. 

