BFN 

<F P=106> [Question-and-answer session by Chief Cabinet Secretary </F>
Hiroshi Kumagai with unidentified domestic reporters at the 
prime minister's official residence in Tokyo -- live] 
  [Text] [Reporter] Well, now I would like to ask a question 
of the new chief cabinet minister. First of all, as for the new 
cabinet lineup -- well, I will probably ask Prime Minister 
Tsutomu Hata about this later on -- but it seems that you all 
have indicated that the new chief cabinet secretary should be 
chosen from Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] and that you all 
consider yourselves to be loyal to Mr. Ichiro Ozawa. Well, in 
the former administration, there has been much said about the 
relationship between the prime minister and the chief cabinet 
secretary. This time, how do you intend to carry out your 
duties as chief cabinet secretary, which is a key post in the 
cabinet? 
  [Kumagai] Well, considering my own abilities, I feel I have 
been given a very tough job. Considering the current 
circumstances in which the new cabinet is being formed under a 
minority government, I am well aware of the importance of the 
job. I myself joined Shinseito under Mr. Hata, who is the head 
of the party. Even before then, I respected him highly, and I 
have learned very much under his guidance. It is an honor for 
me to be chosen to take on important duties as Prime Minister 
Hata's right-hand man. When it comes to becoming a chief 
cabinet minister, I, in having been a member of the previous 
cabinet, keenly believe that I must fulfill the important duties 
as the coordinator of the cabinet. Nevertheless, I now feel that 
I must do my utmost to bring about changes by having Hata 
politics reflected heavily in the new administration's policies 
and by establishing harmony, even though the current situation 
is very tough. 
  [Reporter] It seems to have been suddenly decided that the 
post of state minister for political reform would be dropped in 
the formation of the latest cabinet. Have you been informed of 
the circumstances leading to this decision? 
  [Kumagai] Well, just as political reform was the task of the 
former administration, I feel it is necessary to keep the flame 
of political reform from going out. However, in reality, the 
actual process of carrying out reform will now be left in the 
hands of the home affairs minister and the Political Reform 
Council. The decision to drop the post does not at all mean 
that political reform issues will be neglected. It merely means 
that we have judged that the chariot of political reform can now 
be pulled by one horse rather than two. 
  [Reporter] I now would like to question you as chief cabinet 
secretary regarding your position as chief adviser on the 
formation of the cabinet. Looking at the new cabinet lineup, it 
seems that it has a lot of members from Shinseito. How do you 
feel about this? 
  [Kumagai] Well, this does not mean that Shinseito dominates 
the cabinet. Because the Social Democratic Party of Japan 
[SDPJ] has pulled out from the coalition alliance, I must 
frankly say that it was very difficult to come up with a new 
cabinet lineup. It was done in a manner in which the 
appropriate people were appointed to the appropriate posts. I 
feel that these people were picked from each party to fill 
important posts. 
  [Unidentified moderator] Go ahead if you have a question. 
  [Reporter] May I? There are some who feel strongly that the 
new administration will be shortlived because the ruling parties 
have become a minority. How do you, as chief cabinet secretary, 
feel about this? 
  [Kumagai] Well, frankly speaking, I feel that it was 
desirable to continue to spend more time trying to persuade the 
SDPJ to remain in the coalition to maintain a strong majority. 
On the other hand, however, as indicated by the recent airliner 
accident, conditions in the nation are continually changing. In 
particular, important issues such as the state of the domestic 
economy and Japanese-U.S. trade negotiations have been piling 
up, as a matter of fact. For the Japanese people, there must no 
longer be any more delay in conducting the affairs of 
government. We made our decision under such pressing 
circumstances. We now plan to make our utmost efforts in 
tackling the affairs of government, including the enactment of 
the budget bill. At the same time, however, we plan to continue 
to make sincere efforts to persuade the members of the SDPJ and 
other parties to join us in forming a strong majority coalition 
government. Next person; go ahead. 
  [Reporter] Glancing at the cabinet lineup, it seems that a 
majority of the cabinet ministers used to be members of the 
Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] only a year ago. This includes 
the prime minister himself. I feel that this is not very 
different from past LDP administrations. How do you feel about 
this? 
  Well, I do not think these people account for a majority 
of the new cabinet lineup, but this has happened because the 
SDPJ has left the coalition. However, everyone of them have, in 
a sense, staked their lives on political reform and acted in 
accordance. Therefore, even though they were formerly members 
of the LDP -- I myself was one of them -- we feel it is not 
correct to say the new lineup is not very different from past 
LDP administrations. Instead, we hope that each of them will 
serve their respective roles in helping to bring about reforms. 
Go ahead. 
  [Reporter] I would like to question you as a minister in 
charge of issues relating to women. Yesterday, Shinseito 
Secretary General Ichiro Ozawa told reporters in the Diet 
building that -- although it is difficult for me to say this -- 
regarding the issue of which parties should join forces, 
something to the effect that "it does not matter which women you 
sleep with." That drew heavy criticism yesterday from female 
Diet members from a number of parties and [words indistinct]. 
How do you feel about this as a minister in charge of issues 
relating to women, and also as a fellow member of Shinseito? 
  [Kumagai] Frankly speaking, I do not have all the facts. I 
also want to refrain from making any remarks that might create a 
misunderstanding. Generally speaking, however, my job as 
minister in charge of issues relating to women implies 
establishing a society in which both men and women participate 
in cooperative planning. Speaking for all of us on the basis of 
our self-examination, we feel men and women are equal, and they 
should work together in harmony. Actually, I feel Japanese women 
nowadays have become much stronger than men in sports and other 
fields. In that sense, I feel comments should be made in line 
with the principle of equality between the sexes. 
  [Reporter] Do you not feel Ozawa's comments were 
inappropriate? 
  [Kumagai] Well, I do not know all the facts. To be honest 
with you, if I make any comment on his remarks, it would cause a 
misunderstanding. Generally speaking, men and women are equal. 
  [Reporter] The former Management and Coordination Agency 
director general has spoken of the dual structure of power. What 
will happen to the relationship between the cabinet, the ruling 
coalition parties, and the meeting of representatives of the 
ruling coalition parties? 
  [Kumagai] It goes without saying that the top leader of the 
cabinet is the prime minister, and I think the prime minister is 
the one who should make the final decision. Since Japan adopts 
the parliamentary government system, the prime minister cannot 
be a dictator. Our ruling coalition parties have the process of 
seeking areas of agreement among them. I believe it is important 
for our ruling coalition parties to hold debates openly and 
heatedly. From that sense, our ruling coalition parties should 
seek a soul-searching when they need to do so. Before and after 
I joined Shinseito, I have acted according to principles and 
stated my view without hesitation. 
  [Reporter] Looking at the lineup of the Hata cabinet, unlike 
the Hosokawa cabinet that listed the position titles of its 
members like Koshiro Ishida, chairman of Komeito, and Keigo 
Ouchi, chairman of the Democratic Socialist Party, the Hata 
cabinet does not list their position titles, but lists only 
their parliamentary affiliations like members of the lower house 
or the upper house. 
  [Kumagai] That is not true. The Hata cabinet correctly lists 
their position titles like this [holds up several sheets of 
paper]. 

