Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 23 Jan (NA) -- Foreign Ministry 
Secretary General Andres Cisneros has said that if Argentina 
continues with its present policies over the Malvinas Islands, 
"inevitably, some day, it will discuss the issue of sovereignty 
with Great Britain in a nontraumatic way." 
  Cisneros justified Argentina's policy of approach to the 
Malvinas Islanders saying: "The better the Malvinas Islanders 
get along, the more they exploit their own resources, the 
quicker they will realize that they can only do it with us. 
They will realize they can grow economically and as a society 
associating themselves with the only neighbor God gave them on 
earth, that is, us." 
  He flatly denied to Radio Continental that such approach 
policy showed government "weakness," adding that he is convinced 
the policy "will inevitably lead to a discussion of the 
sovereignty issue in a nontraumatic way." 
  Cisneros praised the Argentine Government decision to 
propose 
to the British Government the removal of the mine fields buried 
on the islands during the 1982 war. 
  "When offering to cooperate in the removal of the mines that 
we planted we are not just fulfilling international norms that 
almost no one else respects, but we are giving an example to the 
world about the civilized behavior of a country that has been at 
war with another but which does not want to kill civilians 
unwillingly after the war ended," Cisneros said. 
  "The work of removing mines is not easy, but neither is it 
impossible," Cisneros said, adding that "Argentine technology is 
good to manufacture and to clean a mine field and we are well 
prepared for the job." 
  The official said: "The lesson Argentina and Great Britain 
are giving the world on the civilized way to proceed after a war 
is exceptional." 
  Cisneros said: "Although international treaties mention it, 
very few countries do what Great Britain is doing in the 
Malvinas Islands; investigating their own alleged war crimes." 
  Cisneros confirmed that U.S. President Bill Clinton is 
intent 
on organizing a summit with the presidents of all the Americas, 
except Cuba and Haiti, adding that "U.S. foreign policies during 
the past five years have tended to include guidelines on the 
entire region." 
  "They are integrating proposals that seek to create links 
with the rest of the Americas to determine consistent policies 
for the entire continent," Cisneros said, adding that 
"corruption and poverty are two issues that concern U.S. and 
Argentine foreign policy the most." 
  Regarding the negotiation between Argentina and the United 
States for the purchase of Skyhawk planes equipped with state of 
the art radar, Cisneros admitted that negotiations will remain 
"deadlocked" until a new defense minister is designated in the 
United States. 
  "The issue will probably be delayed until the U.S. 
Government 
appoints a new defense minister, but Foreign Minister Guido Di 
Tella and Defense Minister Oscar Camilion are quite optimistic 
about obtaining a good result," the official said. 
  Regarding the free trade treaty (NAFTA) between the United 
States, Mexico, and Canada became effective on 1 January, 
Cisneros said we still do not know "if the treaty will remain 
with just those three countries or if it will incorporate" other 
nations in the continent. 
  Cisneros said that Argentina "must now give priority to our 
own economic regionalization process -- Mercosur [Common Market 
of the South]" -- which "does not exclude NAFTA." 

