BFN 

  [Text] Japanese companies will launch this year many new 
development projects for oil and natural gas resources in China 
and Vietnam, which are shifting from the planned economy to the 
market economy, and also in Russia where the socialist system 
has collapsed. Most projects are handled by general trading 
firms or oil companies. If they succeed in striking such 
resources, Japan will not only be able to reduce its dependence 
on the Middle East for energy supply, but will also profit from 
these projects. Interests of Japanese companies coincide with 
those of the countries concerned, which aim to develop their 
economy by introducing foreign capital after the end of the Cold 
War. On the other hand, some people point out the danger of the 
enormous amount of investment involved and the possibility of 
projects being unprofitable. 
<H5>  Sakhalin </H5>
  Mitsui &amp; Co. Ltd. has been engaged in the development 
of oil 
and natural gas off the coast of northeastern Sakhalin. 
Executive Director Naomichi Suzuki said, "We may be able to 
sign the contract in May." He is now waiting for correspondence 
on the schedule for signing the contract. Mitsui, U.S. 
companies Marathon Oil and McDermott, multinational Royal 
Dutch/Shell, and Mitsubishi Co. Ltd. formed a consortium, and 
initialed the contract for the project "Sakhalin II" with Russia 
in March. About 100 million tons of crude oil deposits and 
about 400 billion cubic meters of natural gas deposits are 
potentially extractable. 
  The total budget for this big project is over 1 trillion 
yen. 
<H5>  Vietnam </H5>
  Last fall, Sumitomo Co. Ltd. was greatly excited at the news 
that "production of 6,640 barrels of oil per day has been 
confirmed." Many international consortia obtained concessions 
and are engaged in oil drilling off the coast of Vietnam. 
Sumitomo's Dai Hung (Big Bear) oil field was the first to 
produce oil. Sumitomo will launch a joint project with the 
Australian Broken Hill Proprietary Company and the Malaysian 
Petronas Company to start production this fall. The total budget 
of this project is expected to be 200 billion yen. 
  Nissho Iwai Corporation signed a contract in mid-April for 
development of Thanh Long (Blue Dragon) oil field neighboring 
the Dai Hung oil field. It will begin drilling this summer in 
cooperation with the U.S. Mobile Corporation and other 
companies. Nissho Iwai President Tetsu Nishio expressed his 
pleasure, saying, "Removal of U.S. economic sanctions against 
Vietnam in February facilitated this project." 
  Profits of trading firms from crude oil dealings have 
dropped 
because of cheap crude oil prices. Trading firms now seek to 
survive through oil field development and other operations. 
The Dai Hung oil field alone off the coast of Vietnam is 
estimated to have 400 million to 1 billion barrels of oil 
deposits. Itochu Corporation, Idemitsu Kosan Corporation, 
Marubeni Corporation, Mitsubishi Oil Co., and Arabia Oil 
Corporation have also started their own drilling operations this 
year. 
<H5>  Tarim Basin </H5>
  The Tarim basin in the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region is 
located about 4,500 km away from the Chinese coastal region. A 
consortium formed by Japanese companies obtained concessions for 
three oil fields in this desert area late last year or in 1994. 
  The Sumitomo group plans to prospect oil deposits and 
conduct 
experimental drilling possibly for as long as eight years. The 
Japan Energy group signed a contract in February, and the 
Mitsubishi Corporation group, in March. It is said that there 
are over 10 billion barrels of deposits here, and that the Tarim 
basin has the greatest undeveloped deposits in the world. 
China, which has become an oil importing country, also hopes to 
secure new energy sources indispensable for economic development 
in the future. 

