Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, 5 Jan -- On Wednesday, President Lech Walesa 
accused the West of having its caution interpreted by Russia as 
a weakness, which virtually invites attempts to test its extent. 
In a statement for PAP on 5 January, the president also 
rejected the view, which is popular in the West, that Poland and 
other countries of the Visegrad group want to join NATO because 
they fear Russia. 
  Here is the full text of President Walesa's statement: 
  "A summit of NATO states is approaching. We will be watching 
it with particular attention and hope. It creates a chance that 
decisions made there will shape a new model of European security 
and contribute toward stimulating the rate of integration of the 
new continent. These have to be decisions which are considered 
but also bold. If the West avoids binding and forward-looking 
solutions, threats to European security will intensify. 
Idleness is a poor medicine against problems. 
  "Europe is wasting time. It is not making use of its 
historic opportunity. It is now four years since the `Autumn of 
the Nations,' since the great breakthrough in the postwar 
history of Europe, which was started by the Polish in August. 
Bloodless revolutions brought freedom to the peoples of central 
Europe. The Berlin Wall fell. The Warsaw Pact ceased to exist. 
The imperial Soviet Union fell apart, while on the ruins of the 
totalitarian system the previously enslaved peoples could 
rebuild their sovereignty. In the East new, independent states 
came into existence and democratization processes began. No 
more is there a confrontational system of opposing 
politico-military blocs which divided the continent and decided 
the shape of global politics. 
  "These are all victories of freedom and democracy. But they 
have not been utilized or cultivated. There has been no 
development or widening of security structures in Europe nor of 
economic structures. NATO and the European Community persist in 
the old shape and old habits, as if nothing significant has 
happened in east-central Europe, as if the collapse of communism 
changed nothing in the international configuration, as if the 
idea of the integration of the continent flagged as soon as it 
became possible to go over from words to deeds. 
  "Poland and other Visegrad Group states are applying for 
NATO 
and European Community membership -- not merely in their own 
interests -- because at stake is the prosperity of the whole of 
Europe, the gradual expansion of a stability and security zone 
on our continent. Our efforts are answered, for the time being, 
with vague promises. The West, however, should understand that 
by postponing the integration it is creating barriers for its 
own development and weakening its own security. He who stands 
still, moves backward. Meanwhile, the future is full of 
political, economic, migratory, and ecological challenges. You 
have to meet them half-way, broaden the scope for action, expand 
the possibilities. 
  "The view that the acceptance of new members to Western 
structures will weaken those structures is erroneous because it 
is shortsighted. It will be just the opposite: The final effect 
will be to strengthen these structures, and at the same a new 
stage in European integration will be opened. Legal standards, 
systemic norms, political culture, technological achievements 
must proceed across Europe from West to East, so that the zone 
of stability and prosperity can expand. This is the only recipe 
for a united and secure Europe. Other recipes, and especially 
egoistic idleness of the West, are leading to the East beginning 
to force its own solutions, which the West will not necessarily 
like. 
  "Life abhorrs a vacuum. It feels it spontaneously and this 
cannot be controlled. So let us not create a political and 
economic vacuum in the center of Europe, as it could turn out 
that its existence becomes a provocation for reestablishing the 
confrontational configuration from the past. 
  "I want to say clearly that we are not treating NATO and 
European Community membership as a panacea for our social and 
economic ills. We have no illusions of that kind. We also 
understand the need to begin adjustment activities and spread 
them in time. That is why we welcome with interest the U.S. 
Partnership for Peace initiative, with the reservation that the 
initiative, as a proposal for detailed and technical operations, 
should be preceded by the outlining of a specific vision of 
security in Europe. 
  "The West should not avoid outlining a vision of that kind 
and defining the role of NATO in the new international 
situation, as well as specifying political and military criteria 
for membership in the North Atlantic alliance, even if Russia 
opposes it. 
  "We understand the reasons why the West, and especially the 
United States, listens attentively to Russia's voice. We do not 
ignore it either, and we respect Russian concern for the 
integrity and nonconfrontational nature of the system of 
security in Europe. We are not so naive as to fail to 
understand that from the U.S. point of view the world looks 
somewhat different than it does from the Polish or even central 
European point of view. The United States is pursuing global 
policies and the Russian stake is one of the most important 
elements of those policies. Russia cannot fail to impress as a 
potential enemy, while at the same time giving rise to great 
hopes as a future -- free-market and democratic -- partner. 
  "We cannot, however, understand the conviction that is 
growing in the West, that an expansion of the stability zone in 
Europe, including decisive steps to expand NATO, would weaken 
democratic tendencies in Russia and strengthen imperial 
tendencies. I think that the demons which Zhirinovskiy 
personifies are growing in strength not because the West is 
pursuing a policy which is too active and too decisive but 
because it is not pursuing such a policy. Zhirinovskiy is 
indirectly a product of the West's idleness, the result of a 
lack of ideas, solutions, and visions. It is precisely because 
they are not there, or because they are unclear and unconvincing 
that Zhirinovskiy can spin his own terrifying visions, and the 
Russians are beginning to listen to him. 
  "The West wants to be cautious and does not want to bait the 
bear. Meanwhile, this caution is interpreted as weakness. From 
here it is but a step to a temptation to test its extent, to a 
policy of more or less refined extortion of more and more 
concessions. 
  "By the way, I would like to reject the view, which is 
popular in the West, that Poland and other Visegrad Group 
countries want to join NATO because they fear Russia. Poland is 
not afraid of Russia, neither in the sense of wanting to erect 
barriers against Russia, nor in the sense that Moscow could 
impose anything on or dictate anything to our homeland. We see 
Russia as a partner and expect partnerlike treatment. And it is 
in the new and mutually beneficial cooperation of Central Europe 
with Russia that we see one of the pillars of the European 
order. 
  "I believe that Russia, like the West, should think whether 
it perceives the issue of expanding NATO in the right 
perspective. Moscow believes that the acceptance of the Visegrad 
Group states to NATO will be a hostile step toward it, the step 
which isolates Russia with a cordon sanitaire. Maybe we should 
look at it differently -- NATO would come closer to the Russian 
borders not as an anti-Russian alliance, but as a zone of 
stability. NATO was created as a defensive alliance against the 
eastern bloc created by the USSR. There is no Soviet Union 
today, there is no Warsaw Pact. Could it be that Russia sees 
itself as a successor and a continuation of the USSR, since it 
perceives NATO as a structure unequivocally set against it? 
  "I profoundly hope that all these issues will be thoroughly 
analyzed at the NATO summit and that proper decisions will be 
made -- decisions outlining a concrete shape of security and 
prosperity for Europe and not half-measure decisions mainly 
calculated for biding time. I express this hope not just as 
president of the Polish Republic but also as a resident of a 
Europe that has already wasted enough time. Let us remember 
that history will not give us the same opportunity twice.'' 

