Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Second 'Id al-Fitr prayer sermon by Ayatollah 'Ali </F>
Khamene'i, leader of the Islamic revolution, in Tehran on 13 
March -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] In the name of God, the compassionate, the 
merciful. [passage omitted] 
  These days, in the political arena of the governments and 
powers of the world on the one hand, and the mass upon mass of 
the people of nations on the other, there exist beautiful things 
as well ugly ones. The awakening of the nations is a beautiful 
thing; the leaning toward Islam by the Muslim nations is a 
beautiful thing; the nontolerance of tyranny by the innocent 
ones is a beautiful thing. The ugly things are the tyranny of 
the tyrants, the bullying of the bullies, and the plotting, 
evil-heartedness, and malevolence toward nations. 
  Among the undesirable and ugly points in the world arena, in 
my view, there is one that is most ugly. Today I wish to 
emphasize that point so that the view of the Iranian nation 
becomes clear for all to see. The point is that we do not 
expect the bullies and thugs of the world to be good and not to 
behave like tyrants. We do, however, expect fairness and 
independence from the forums of the world. The United Nations 
is so called because it is a place which belongs to nations. It 
does not belong to governments, let alone to certain bullying, 
greedy governments of the world. Unfortunately the reality is 
something else today, and that is the very ugly point. 
  Of course we had already seen how the Security Council acts 
-- the Security Council which is the principal decisionmaking 
body and the heart of the United Nations. We had realized how 
much that organization was in the hands of the superpowers in 
crucial moments, becoming theirs, rather than belonging to the 
nations. That was during the imposed war. When the imposed war 
came and Iraq violated our borders and entered several of our 
country's provinces we took our protest to the United Nations, 
as is usual. As usual, the Security Council should have issued 
a resolution condemning Iraq as the aggressor. It failed to do 
so. I waited several days. The Iraqi Army, taking advantage of 
our unsettled situation at that time, settled itself on our 
beloved country's soil, our beloved Islamic Iran -- it seized 
several thousand kilometers -- and then, and only then did the 
Security Council lift its head to utter a word. It issued a 
resolution. What was the resolution? Did it say that the 
aggressor must leave Iranian soil? Not at all. It issued a 
resolution to the effect that Iran and Iraq should declare a 
cease-fire. What does that mean? It means that the Iraqi Army 
has entered Iranian soil and now that it is the Iranian nation's 
turn for a heroic defense its hands must be tied; no one is to 
defend the country and the Iraqis should not be thrown out. 
That was the Security Council's resolution! 
  You know that for several years they said the same thing 
without condemning the aggressor. Of course our combatants, in 
not too long a period, within almost one and a half years, took 
back most of the land themselves. That was the precedent for us 
then. 
  A few years later Iraq's invasion of Kuwait took place. 
When Iraq invaded Kuwait there was no oppressed nation involved 
there: it was a question of the interests of America and the 
superpowers. You all saw how a first resolution was issued in a 
matter of hours, saying Iraq must get out of Kuwait. For years 
we had asked the Security Council to issue such a resolution 
against [as heard] us in the imposed war, but it would not do 
so. But within hours it issued that resolution on Kuwait. 
  Then the Security Council issued several resolutions, one 
immediately following the other, permitting the Americans to 
enter the Persian Gulf, wreck Iraq, and do what they liked. The 
Security Council resolutions on the Kuwaiti war are still in 
effect and still being implemented. We have seen that. 
  In recent months -- once in the case of Bosnia -- the 
Security Council should have been fair; we saw that it was not. 
Another time was in the case of the holy shrine of Abraham in 
occupied Palestine. The Muslim nations said they were prepared 
to send soldiers as UN troops, as a buffer between the Serbs and 
Bosnian Muslims. The Security Council said Muslims cannot go, 
because they are Muslims and may support one side. Of course, 
it was a wrong thing to say. The Muslims were going to mediate 
and act as a buffer, not to fight. Anyway, they said that, but 
at the same time they allowed Russian soldiers, who are 
obviously on friendly terms with the Serbs, to go as UN troops 
and act as a buffer. 
  What happened? Why did they not consider that the Russian 
soldiers are connected to the Serbs from a standpoint of 
religion and other ties? The world's magazines printed 
photographs of Russian tanks bearing the UN insignia entering 
the region, while the Serbs were shouting slogans, cheering, and 
clapping for them. That was one case. 
  Bosnian Muslims are still being sacrificed; the United 
Nations does not care a bit and the Security Council does not do 
its duty. 
  The second issue concerns this bloody tragedy at the shrine 
of Abraham. Israel should have been categorically condemned. 
It should have been punished, it should have been put on trial, 
it should have been forced to accept punishment. The United 
Nations should have done this, but it did not. The Security 
Council has not taken on its responsibility at all. What is the 
reason for this? The reason is the influence of big powers, led 
by America, in the Security Council and their influence on the 
secretary general himself. Let them know that this is the view 
of the Islamic Republic and the people of Iran. The secretary 
general himself....[pauses; crowd chants "God is great," 
"Khamene'i is the leader," "Death to those who oppose the 
supreme jurisconsult," "Death to America," "Death to Israel"] 
  We do not have a particular enmity toward anyone. We respect 
world figures based on their dignity and position. The former 
UN secretary general came to Iran time after time. At that 
time, the president, the Majles speaker, and Foreign Ministry 
officials all welcomed and respected him. If the secretary 
general carries out his duties, we will respect him. However, 
in our opinion, and in the opinion of the Iranian people, this 
present secretary general has not carried out his duties. 
  The future of these Iranian people is bright. The power of 
these people will increase day by day. The roots of these 
people will go deeper; their word will be more widely accepted 
in the world. Today you can see that this is true. Compared to 
10 years ago, we are stronger today, we have more honor in the 
world. The people are more forthright, brave, and ready to 
follow the great path to the lofty aim, because of the blessings 
of Islam and the Koran. 
  I have one more point to raise at the end of my talk. 
Unfortunately, the issue of the hajj has not followed its proper 
course so far this year. The Saudi Government is placing 
obstacles in the way. And I do not know why. The Foreign 
Ministry, the Hajj Organization, the representative of the 
leader, the leader's mosque in Medina have made great efforts. 
Most of the work of the hajj should have ended by now, by the 
end of Ramadan. The Saudis are causing problems. 
  I don't know why they are doing this. Of course, we are 
assuming the best. We hope the Saudi authorities, God forbid, 
will not do anything to incur the wrath of the Iranian people. 
We hope they will not do anything to make the Muslims of the 
world feel that the hajj is another tool in the hands of America 
and the big powers. This must not occur, and we hope it will not. 
  I hereby announce: Hajj is the right of Muslims. The house 
of God belongs to Muslims. [passage omitted] The house of God 
does not belong to anyone in particular. If anyone has the 
honor to manage the house of God, he should thank God and 
provide facilities for the peoples to make their trip to Mecca 
and not place obstacles in their path. These great and faithful 
people, with the interest and enthusiasm that they have to visit 
the house of God, the pure grave of the great prophet, and the 
graves of the great imams [a'emmeh-ye baqih], peace be upon 
them, deserve to be placed at the head of the queue of other 
peoples in order to perform the hajj and visit the house of God. 
  We ask God....[pauses] The hajj issue is an Islamic issue; 
it should remain Islamic. It should not be sacrificed for the 
international political games of arrogance. [passage omitted] 

