Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Janis Lagzdins, chairman of the Saeima </F>
Commission for State Government and Self-Government Affairs, by 
an unidentified interviewer; place and date not given: "What 
Will Our Self-Government Be? Janis Lagzdins, Chairman of the 
Saeima Commission for State Government and Self-Government 
Affairs, Comments on the Law `On Elections of City Dumas, Rayon 
Councils, and Volost Councils'"] 
  [Text] 
  [DIYENA] First, tell us please how this self-government 
election will be different from the previous one. 
  [Lagzdins] Numerically, the membership of dumas and councils 
elected during this election will be much smaller than before. 
In previous elections of councils, between 50 and 120 deputies 
were elected to the councils in large cities (for example, there 
were 117 deputies in Liepaja), whereas now their number will be 
up to 15, and in Riga--60. As a rule, rural councils will have 
seven to nine members. 
  Previously, elections were held on the basis of a majority 
electoral system. In each city, rayon, or volost, there were 
several electoral districts within which a few candidates for 
deputy competed. One deputy was elected from each district. In 
turn, the election expected to be held on 22 May will be 
proportional, whereby each administrative-territorial unit will 
form a single electoral district. The difference also is in the 
fact that a citizen of the Republic of Latvia may be a candidate 
for duma or council deputy, and only the citizens of the 
Republic of Latvia will be able to take part in the election. 
All residents of Latvia could take part in previous elections. 
  The requirements for candidates for deputy are much 
stricter. 
For example, Article 8 envisions that a candidate for deputy 
must have had a residence permit in the self-governing 
administrative territory of the respective for at least 12 
months prior to the election day. Article 9 establishes that 
individuals serving sentences in incarceration facilities, 
individuals who have been found to be legally incompetent 
through procedures established by law, individuals who have 
convictions for premeditated grave crimes, and individuals who 
have served in the USSR or Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic KGB 
[Committee for State Security] or other similar organs 
enumerated in subpoint 4, Article 9, cannot be candidate for 
deputy. The requirement to be fluent in the state language at 
the level of the third (highest) category is significant. 
  Previously, there were no restrictions covering deputies, 
members of the government, procurators, judges, and career 
servicemen (Article 10). Such restrictions have been introduced 
so that these popular individuals will not be used in the 
interest of various political groups. How could this be done? 
These people who are popular in society may consent to run in an 
election, thus boosting the popularity of their political group. 
Once they "drag in" a second echelon of candidates for deputies 
into dumas or councils in this manner, they may give up the 
deputy credentials received, and continue to discharge their 
previous responsibilities. For this reason, Article 10 provides 
that in the event of their election, they lose either the 
credentials of Saeima deputies or the positions they hold. 
  Ballots are an interesting nuance of these elections. 
Article 
29 envisions that a space for voter marks will be available on 
the ballot opposite the name of each list of candidates and the 
last name of each candidate. The voter will have two 
possibilities or alternatives. 
  If he wishes to vote for one list of candidates in its 
entirety, he will place the "+" sign next to the name of the 
relevant list of candidates. This means that the voter supports 
the election of all candidates for deputy appearing on this list. 
  If the voter decides to vote for candidates included on 
various lists of candidates, he will place the relevant "+" sign 
next to the last names of the candidates for whom he has decided 
to vote. However, the voter should remember that the number of 
"+" signs placed in this manner should not exceed the number of 
deputy seats in the duma or council in question. 
  The voter can select only one of these two variants--either 
vote for a list of candidates as a whole (Variant 1) or vote for 
individual candidates for deputy separately (Variant 2). I would 
like to bring to your attention Article 46, which grants the 
filers of candidate lists the right to lodge a complaint with a 
court about the conduct of the election within seven days after 
the decree of the electoral commission is passed. If the court 
rules that violations were allowed to occur in the course of the 
election which influenced the distribution of the seats of duma 
or council deputies among political organizations or their 
associations, or the associations of voters, the Central 
Electoral Commission will declare repeat elections through 
procedures established in the law. 
  Previously, in self-government elections there was no ban 
either on financing the election campaigns of various political 
organizations and associations out of state funds. It is also 
forbidden to finance election campaigns out of anonymous 
donations. Article 51 envisions arrangements for monitoring 
execution. 
  This self-government election will still be financed out of 
state funds, namely: The state will pay for the manufacturing of 
ballots, the publication of candidate lists in the press, and 
the work of the members of electoral commissions. 
  In the future, self-government elections will be paid for 
from self-government budgets. 
  These are the main differences between the new law and the 
law on elections to old self-government bodies or councils. 
  The election will last one day. Servicemen will be able to 
vote for three days before the established date of the general 
election. As usual, one will have to carry a passport of the 
citizen of the Republic of Latvia, or the so-called old passport 
with an entry concerning the citizenship of the Republic of 
Latvia. All citizens of the Republic of Latvia who have reached 
the age of 18 by election day take part in the elections, unless 
restrictions established by Article 6 apply to them. 
  [DIYENA] Tell us, please, in what cases elections may be 
considered to have been held? 
  [Lagzdins] An election will have been held if even one voter 
participates in it. This single voter votes for a list of 
candidates for deputy, and all of these candidates become 
members of the duma or authority. This condition influences the 
activity of all other citizens and their responsibility for the 
future development of their administrative rayon, so that one 
voter will not decide the fate of the composition of the duma or 
council. Western experience shows that a sufficiently large 
number of citizens always participate in elections. 
  [DIYENA] Article 15 ordains that the number of candidates 
included on a list may not exceed the number of deputies elected 
to a duma (council). Does this not restrict my right, the 
voter's right to choose? 
  [Lagzdins] By no means. This is the number of candidates on 
just one list. However, several lists are provided, and you may 
vote either for individual candidates or for one of the lists of 
candidates as a whole. 
  If only one list exists in a specific electoral district, 
then there is indeed no choice. However, who should be blamed 
for this? The political passivity of the residents themselves is 
to blame in this instance. Since it is possible to form several 
lists, this opportunity is, as a rule, taken advantage of. 
  [DIYENA] Only citizens elect, and only citizens can get 
elected. Could a situation emerge in a rayon or volost in which 
elections will be a formality because of a small number of 
citizens? 
  [Lagzdins] There is not a city in Latvia, not a rayon, and 
not a volost, with the exception of Sedskaya Volost (15 
percent), in which the number of citizens does not exceed 50 
percent. For example, in Daugavpils, 62 percent of the residents 
are citizens, in Riga--54 percent, and in Liepaja--50 percent. 
In Latgale, this is no problem. This problem does not exist in 
Latvia at all. 
  [DIYENA] Point 4, Article 9 of the law specifies that 
individuals who have operated within the structures of the USSR 
or Latvian SSR KGB or the intelligence service, and former 
undercover operatives or keepers of the safe houses of these 
establishments, may not be nominated as candidates in elections 
to dumas or councils. How will the electoral commissions be able 
to ensure compliance with this article of the law? 
  [Lagzdins] Unlike the law on elections to the Saeima, the 
law 
in question already envisions a certain control mechanism. 
First, there is Article 17, which provides that all candidates 
for deputy fill out and sign declarations of compliance with 
point 4, Article 9. Otherwise, the deputy credentials shall be 
annulled, and the deputy himself shall be held accountable under 
Article 151-3 of the Criminal Code, which envisions 
incarceration for a period of up to three years. If a member of 
the government, a deputy, or another executive official has 
provided false information, he will be threatened with 
incarceration for a period of two to five years. 
  Article 20 of the law specifies that, within the limits of 
their opportunities, electoral commissions shall verify 
compliance with the requirements of Articles 8 and 9. 
  Besides, let us hope that political organizations will 
intensively monitor one another in the course of the election 
struggle. 
  Our commission intends to approach relevant institutions 
involved in the investigation of the crimes of the totalitarian 
regime with a request to publish in the official newspaper of 
the country a staff list of the employees of the former KGB, so 
that these people will be known and will not be able to be 
nominated as candidates for deputy in a self-government 
election. However, a special decree of the Saeima is necessary 
for this measure to be taken. Besides, it should be passed 
before the nomination of candidates for deputy. 
  [DIYENA] Are there plans to pass any more laws associated 
with self-government elections before the beginning of the 
election campaign? 
  [Lagzdins] The notion of "voter association" was not defined 
in the course of the previous Saeima election. Article 15 now 
states that such associations are formed by individuals who have 
signed lists of candidates plus individuals announced on 
candidate lists. Consequently, voter associations in volosts 
will not be numerically smaller than 20 people, in large 
cities--about 50 people, and in Riga--about 110 people. We are 
planning to endow these voter associations with greater rights 
in the future. At present, I am developing a draft law that 
calls for granting individuals who sign lists of candidates for 
deputy the right to propose a recall of so-called undisciplined 
deputies. For example, a deputy elected to a duma or council 
decides to switch from his faction to another faction. What is 
to be done about him? To date, there has not been a law that 
granted us the right to recall this deputy. The developed draft 
provides that two-thirds of the persons who have signed the 
candidate list are entitled to approach the relevant city, 
rayon, or volost electoral commission with a proposal to recall 
the deputy in question. The electoral commission will consider 
the petition, verify documentation associated with the election, 
and put the issue of recall to a vote within one month through 
procedures envisaged in the law. If no fewer than one-half of 
the voters who previously voted for the list in question in the 
electoral district in question vote in favor of the recall, the 
deputy will be considered recalled. 
  This draft should also become law before the beginning of 
the 
election campaign. 

