BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Ernesto Paz by anchorman </F>
Edgardo Melgar and journalist Mayra Navarro at network studios 
in Tegucigalpa and by Carlos Ridel at network studios in San 
Pedro Sula; from the "This Very Day" newscast -- live] 
  [Text] [Melgar] I am accompanied by Foreign Minister 
Ernesto Paz Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Foreign Minister, for being 
with us on "This Very Day" newscast. What is your opinion on the 
summit among Central American presidents and the U.S. Vice 
President?. 
  [Paz] I firmly believe this summit marks the beginning of a 
new relationship between Central America and the United States 
in the framework of a new phase, the post-Cold War period, with 
a new democratic leadership that will show the way for Central 
America to follow in the next few years. 
  [Melgar] Was this summit a success? 
  [Paz] It was a success. 
  [Melgar] For whom? 
  [Paz] For Central America and the United States. I think it 
represents significant support for the Honduran Government and 
for President Reina as a leader. This is an event that speaks 
for itself and responds to some foreign publications that claim 
there is no credibility or stability in Honduras. Vice 
President Gore's presence here has strengthened the regional 
leadership of President Reina. 
  [Melgar] Let us quickly review the agreements celebrated 
this 
afternoon by the presidents of Central America and Vice 
President Al Gore. Let us begin with Carlos Ridel, at the main 
studio. 
  [Ridel] Welcome, Foreign Minister Paz, for being with us. We 
understand there will be a hemispheric summit in Miami in 
November. What significance will the resolutions drafted here 
today have for the Miami summit? 
  [Paz] I think the summit scheduled to take place in December 
will allow the United States to outline its foreign policy for 
Latin America. I think it is positive for Latin America that 
the United States is outlining its policy for the next few years. 
  [Melgar] Mayra, I believe you want to ask the foreign 
minister about commercial relations. 
  [Navarro] Yes. Today, Vice President Gore announced Central 
America will be granted some benefits similar to those Mexico 
receives through NAFTA, but in exchange for some conditions. 
Perhaps you can give us more detail on these conditions and on 
how the integration will take place. 
  [Paz] Central America has reiterated its desire to join 
NAFTA. Central America has requested to be granted benefits 
similar to those Mexico receives within the framework of NAFTA. 
  In the next few months, President Clinton will present to 
the 
U.S. Congress a bill to extend the benefits of the Caribbean 
Basin Agreement. Central America will have to make efforts to 
improve the capabilities of Central American workers. It will 
have to make substantial changes to the copyright law. This is 
a demand of the United States. 
  [Melgar] Mr. Foreign Minister and listeners, I have in my 
hands a copy of the joint communique signed by the presidents of 
Central America and the U.S. Vice President. Here is a part 
that speaks of a common project involving Central America and 
the United States. The communique speaks of sustainable 
development. We have characterized it as a framework for 
creative cooperation within which we can jointly tackle priority 
objectives of common interest, such as fighting poverty and 
strengthening democracy. How will this common U.S.-Central 
American project of sustainable development be carried out? 
  [Paz] Sustainable development has to be based on a new kind 
of alliance between Central America and the United States. 
Sustainable development is a new concept that takes into 
consideration the interest this and future generations have in 
combining development and the struggle against poverty in 
harmony with nature. 
  [Ridel] Mr. Foreign Minister, excuse me for stepping out of 
the economic and social arena, but today, the presidents of 
Central America stated their solidarity with former Venezuelan 
President Carlos Andres Perez. The Venezuelan Foreign Ministry 
immediately told them not to meddle in the domestic affairs of 
Venezuela. What can you tell us about this? 
  [Paz] I think the statement by the Central American 
presidents was a gesture of gratitude toward an important person 
who decisively supported Central America when it was going 
through its most difficult period in the 1980's. We think we 
should not take the feathers off a wingless bird. We Central 
Americans believe in gratitude and think this is good news for a 
man who is going through his most difficult moment and is in 
prison. 
  [Melgar] Thank you, Mr. Foreign Minister, for participating 
in this mini-news conference. Any final statement for our 
television audience? 
  [Paz] I thank "This Very Day." I am certain we have embarked 
on a new phase that will reorient U.S.-Central American 
relations based on mutual respect and common interests between 
the two regions. 
  [Melgar] Thank you, Mr. Foreign Minister. 

