BFN 

<F P=106> [By Munjid al-Namirat] </F>
  [Excerpt] The chief U.S. diplomat has begun his tour of the 
region by meeting in London with His Majesty King Husayn. This 
meeting ended the debate over a final solution of the blockade 
enforced against al-'Aqabah, from which Jordan has suffered for 
the past four years. 
  The Jordanian side, through King Husayn, and the U.S. side, 
through Warren Christopher, announced the blockade problem will 
be resolved soon, and that sea-based inspections will be 
replaced by land-based inspections at the Port of al-'Aqabah to 
be conducted by the British company, Lloyds Register. . 
  The U.S. secretary of state has solved one of the crises his 
Middle East tour is designed to resolve as part of his efforts 
to reactivate the Middle East multilateral peace talks. 
  Christopher will continue his tour of the region by heading 
to Riyadh, Cairo, and Tel Aviv. It is possible he might visit 
Lebanon, as several news agencies have reported. But, he will 
not stop in Amman. 
  An authorized Jordanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs source 
has told AKHIR KHABAR that Christopher's plan not to visit 
Jordan can in no way create any difficulties, because the 
meeting between him and his majesty the king in London achieved 
the purpose of any visit to Jordan he might make. Meanwhile, 
several parliamentarians have reiterated that political factors 
were behind Christopher's decision not to visit Jordan. They 
ruled out the possibility that the U.S. secretary of state's 
plan not to visit Jordan came about at Jordan's request. 
  For his part, Muhammad Dawudiyah, member of the House of 
Representatives, said it is good that Christopher is not 
visiting Jordan. He argued that the United States, given its 
sponsorship of the Middle East peace talks, must demonstrate 
impartiality. But, it is not doing so. He added: I believe 
demonstrations would be staged in the country if Christopher 
stopped in Jordan. He did not rule out the possibility that a 
Jordanian request might have been behind Christopher's decision 
not to visit Amman. 
  Fawzi Tu'aymah [member of the Jordanian House of 
Representatives], said: Some reasons pertaining to the peace 
process might have been behind Christopher's decision not to 
visit Amman. I cannot determine these reasons. Nonetheless, 
Christopher's recent statements have underscored the good 
Jordanian- U.S. ties. [passage omitted] 

