Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Honolulu -- The 17-nation Asia-Pacific Economic 
Co-operation (APEC) forum took a major step toward increasing 
its influence over the region's economic growth yesterday, 
calling on regional finance-sector leaders to identify capital 
market development issues and set up a permanent alliance. 
  Finance ministers meeting in Honolulu agreed on four 
non-binding action plans to help mobilize needed capital for 
infrastructure development in the Asia-Pacific region. 
  Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and China were the most vocal 
in stressing their need for private financing in infrastructure 
development. 
  The ministers also agreed to meet again next year in 
Indonesia. Their meetings will be preceded by separate meetings 
of senior finance officials, central bankers and stock market 
regulatory authorities. 
  They are to identify macro-economic and capital flow issues 
that can help sustain growth in the region. 
  The moves were announced in a joint statement issued at the 
conclusion of the precedent-setting one day meeting, which was 
lauded as a diplomatic triumph by US Treasury Secretary Lloyd 
Bentsen. 
  Apec was "pioneering a model of consensus-building", he 
announced. 
  The US, the host of the Honolulu meeting, set the tone by 
agreeing at the onset not to raise the thorny issue of financial 
services market access -- an issue Asean does not want to 
discuss under the Apec forum. 
  Thai Finance Minister Tharin Nimmanhemin expressed 
satisfaction with the outcome of the meeting, which he said is 
part of the Apec process of finding its own future. 
  Asean does not favour the institutionalization of Apec as 
proposed by the US. 
  The ministers who attended the meeting were from Australia, 
Brunei, Canada, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, 
Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the 
Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, the US and Chile, 
which will be admitted as a full member at the end of the year. 
  In order to mobilize financing to the region, the joint 
statement said the International Monetary Fund (IMF), working 
with existing databases with the World Bank, the International 
Finance Corporation and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), will 
be asked to prepared a cross-border [as published] portfolio 
flow into and within the region. 
  ADB will be asked to host a symposium on issues and problems 
in infrastructure financing, with an emphasis on the role of the 
private sector. Apec will also encourage more contact between 
regional regulatory authorities to discuss supervisory and 
regulatory issues of common interest. 
  The finance ministers called on private finance sector 
leaders to meet to identify issues related to capital market 
development and to consider establishing a more permanent 
private sector structure. 
  Tharin said bankers and financiers of each country will be 
invited by Indonesia and the United States to meet and submit 
recommendations in 1995. 
  This private sector involvement was initiated by the US. 

