BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, March 19 (YONHAP) -- China will not agree to 
UN sanctions or any other stringent action against North Korea 
despite the current nuclear row, Chinese Ambassador to Seoul 
Zhang Tingyan said Saturday. 
  The envoy's comments come a week before South Korean 
President Kim Yong-sam goes to China, where seeking Beijing's 
support for any decision the international community makes, 
including sanctions, is a top priority. 
  Beijing supports North Korea-U.S. diplomatic normalization 
because it would enhance peace and stability on the Korean 
peninsula, just as China-South Korea relations did, he said. 
  "It's an international rule now to solve all issues through 
dialogue," Zhang said in an exclusive interview with YONHAP News 
Agency. "Why should the North Korean nuclear problem be an 
exception?" 
  Some countries are demanding hard-line action instead of 
dialogue, hurrying to take the matter to the UN Security Council 
and impose sanctions, he said. 
  "The security council, the sanctions or any other stringent 
measures, China cannot agree to," he told YONHAP. 
  "Such measures are not only ineffective, they would only 
complicate matters, aggravate the situation," Zhang said. 
  The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the UN 
nuclear 
watchdog, resumed inspections in North Korea early this month 
after a one-year break. But the agency announced this week that 
North Korea denied its inspectors access to critical sites, and 
thus they could not verify whether the stalinist state had 
diverted nuclear material for non-peaceful purposes. 
  Seoul and Washington's reaction was immediate and strong, 
with both saying they are becoming more convinced that dialogue 
may not be the right solution. 
  The 35-member IAEA Board of Governors convenes on March 21, 
and its final verdict on the inspection results will decide 
whether the matter goes to the security council. 
  "But one cannot say that the inspections were useless," the 
Chinese envoy said. "The fact that the IAEA insepctors went to 
North Korea was progress: Inspection itself was progress." 
  He strongly implied that this was the message President 
Jiang 
Zemin will deliver to South Korean President Kim Yong-sam, 
saying, "I don't know what President Jiang will say. But he is 
certain to make Beijing's position sufficiently clear." 
  Zhang emphasized dialogue among the parties directly 
involved, namely South and North Korea and Pyongyang and 
Washington. 
  He went further to state that Beijing wants to see Pyongyang 
and Washington normalize relations. "North Korea-U.S. diplomatic 
normalization will contribute to peace and stability on the 
Korean peninsula. China-South Korea diplomatic normalization 
did," he said. 
  Zhang called President Kim's visit timely because Seoul and 
Beijing are at a juncture where they must discuss elevating 
their relations to a new level. 
  "People-to-people exchanges are important, but the most 
important thing is for heads of state to meet directly. In this 
sense, the summit opens at a most crucial time," he said. 
  He foresaw no chance of Chinese leader Jiang making 
simultaneous visits to Seoul and Pyongyang as was recently 
reported in the press. 
  As to Jiang's South Korean visit, he said the agenda will be 
settled at the summit with President Kim. 
  Beijing is ready to discuss regional and global political 
developments with Seoul and engage in multilateral security 
dialogue within the framework of the Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC), the envoy said. 
  On bilateral military cooperation, Zhang said such links may 
well begin when Chinese military attaches arrive in Seoul 
sometime in mid-April. 

