BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, June 20 -- The Democratic Left Alliance 
(SLD) won Sunday's local elections in most cities, according to 
preliminary results collected by the Polish press agency PAP. 
The SLD won most local council seats in 17 provincial capitals: 
Lodz, Kalisz, Czestochowa, Olsztyn, Radom, Kielce, Szczecin, 
Koszalin, Slupsk, Bydgoszcz, Suwalki, Ciechanow, Zielona Gora, 
Plock, Ostroleka, Legnica, and Sieradz. Centre-right coalitions 
won in Bialystok, Lomza, Rzeszow, Krosno, Siedlce, and Lublin, 
while the Freedom Union and related coalitions came first in 
Warsaw, Gdansk, Poznan, Wroclaw, Krakow and Bielsko-Biala. The 
Polish Peasant Party (PSL) won single seats in several cities 
but it is expected to win more seats in the countryside. 
By-elections to the Senate brought victory to candidates of the 
SLD and PSL. The election turnout has been estimated at 35.8 per 
cent, head of the State Electoral Commission Wojciech Laczkowski 
announced. This estimate is based on data from 36 provinces. 
Official results are expected at the end of this week. 
  The turnout was higher in the countryside (38.5 per cent) 
than in towns (29.2 per cent). The highest turnout was recorded 
in the Leszno and Poznan Provinces, 43 and 42 per cent 
respectively. The lowest turnout occurred in Lomza (23 per 
cent) and Gorzow (24 per cent). "Low turnout does not mean a 
crisis of the local government idea. A conflict with a village 
head may be a reason for people not to go to the polls. At the 
same time, turnout may be very high in a neighbouring commune," 
said head of the National Election Bureau Kazimierz Czaplicki. 
Czaplicki added said that the 36 per cent turnout was low but 
not discrediting. He said that local elections in other 
countries often attract moderate attention among the electorate, 
for example, 25 per cent in the United States, 39 in Hungary, 
and 40 in Britain. 
  Secretary-general of the Social Democracy of the Republic of 
Poland (SDRP) Jerzy Szmajdzinski told Mondays press conference 
that according to the estimates of the SLD it has increased ten 
times the number of local council members. He contended the 
result was satisfactory, which indicates that the SLD was the 
main leftist force. He said that the election results mean that 
society favours the implementation of a normal political 
timetable, with no accelerations. In Szmajdzinski's opinion, the 
SLD won 30 per cent of votes in 29 cities, following up their 
September 19 parliamentary election result. 

