Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Sami Kohen: "All Right, But a Disadvantage </F>
Exists" -- punctuation as published] 
  [Text] As far as Turkey is concerned, President Clinton's 
decision to include the Workers Party of Kurdistan [PKK] problem 
in his talks with President Hafiz al-Asad in Geneva and to urge 
Syria to adopt a clear approach on that terrorist organization 
is a favorable development. The matter indicates that Ankara's 
contacts with Washington and the views Prime Minister Tansu 
Ciller conveyed to President Clinton when they met some time ago 
have been effective. It is meaningful that President Clinton 
placed the PKK at the top of the list of terrorist organizations 
during the joint news conference he held with his Syrian 
counterpart. 
  President Clinton's initiative has not yet yielded concrete 
results, however. As he himself has said, the United States and 
Syria continue to differ on the activities of organizations such 
as the PKK and Hizballah. So, Syria has continued to remain on 
the U.S. list of terrorist countries. Nevertheless, Clinton and 
al-Asad have decided to establish a mechanism to remove their 
differences of opinion. The U.S. secretary of state and the 
Syrian foreign minister will hold talks on the matter from time 
to time. 
  President al-Asad, who has successfully played on the Middle 
East chessboard for 25 years, obviously intends to use his pawns 
slowly and very carefully. He has apparently scored favorable 
points in his lengthy meeting with President Clinton on the 
question of peace in the Middle East.... 
  President Clinton's talks with President al-Asad on the PKK 
problem and the support he has given to the Turkish viewpoint on 
the matter are undoubtedly an advantage for Turkey. That the 
U.S. suggestions or pressure have not yet yielded results must 
not be taken to mean that they will not be effective in the 
future. 
  Nevertheless, the other side of the coin also has to be 
considered. President Clinton and President al-Asad held talks 
on the PKK problem within the framework of the effort that is 
being made to establish peace in the Middle East. One aspect of 
the problem between Syria and Israel is terrorism. As far as 
Israel is concerned, one of the preconditions for peace is that 
Syria end its support of the activities of Hizballah and other 
organizations in the occupied areas, southern Lebanon, and even 
in Israel itself. In view of the fact that Clinton also 
supports that view, he allocated a significant part of his 
meeting with al-Asad to the "question of terrorism." That is 
how the PKK problem was discussed by the two presidents... 
However, that placed the PKK's terrorist activities in Turkey 
within the wide-ranging and complex context of the Middle East 
problem. In other words, the problem has gained an 
international aspect. 
  As we have already mentioned, the advantage in that is that 
Syria has come under international pressure, particularly from a 
superpower like the United States. The disadvantage, however, 
is the possibility that the matter may become a part of the 
Middle East problem in the long run. In return for the steps he 
may be asked to take in the future, President al-Asad may ask 
for more serious concessions. To enhance his position, he may 
link that matter to the other terrorist organizations or even to 
regional problems such as the question of transnational water. 
In other words, he may strengthen his bargaining position. In 
view of that, although President Clinton's move to draw 
al-Asad's attention to the PKK problem is a favorable 
development, care should be taken to prevent the matter from 
becoming an international issue. The new aspect of the problem 
must not overshadow the dialogue between Turkey and Syria and 
the effort made to have it resolved through direct talks. 
  We shall discuss in another commentary the effect the 
rendezvous in Geneva will have on the efforts being made to 
establish peace in the Middle East and the rapprochement between 
Israel and the Arab countries. 
  As far as President Clinton's talks with President al-Asad 
on 
terrorism are concerned, we are convinced the latter has gained 
strength and esteem in Geneva. Syria found itself in a state of 
isolation after the Soviet Union collapsed and the PLO signed an 
agreement with Israel. Obviously, the United States is the only 
country that can provide the foreign support Damascus now needs. 
President al-Asad, who is 63, is aware of that state of 
affairs. Meanwhile, Washington is convinced Syria is a key 
country in the Middle East and that true peace cannot be 
achieved in the region without it. 
  The Geneva meeting took place when the two countries 
realized 
that a rapprochement had to be established. It is a fact that 
President al-Asad, who regards himself as a leader who cannot be 
ignored in the region, has gained from his talks in Geneva and 
become stronger. That will give him an opportunity to feel more 
relaxed when playing his cards on various issues, including the 
PKK problem. 

