BFN 

<F P=106> [By Xu Ximin, Hong Kong delegate to the Chinese People's </F>
Political Consultative Conference, Preliminary Working Committee 
member, and publisher of MIRROR magazine: "Urgent Need To 
Reform China's Legal System"] 
  [Text] I am shocked and frustrated, especially as a 
publisher and one who always thought Xi Yang would be released 
soon. Certainly, he does not deserve such a harsh punishment. 
  I am not saying he did not breach Chinese law, but what he 
did do was fully in keeping with his role as a responsible 
reporter. His wrongdoing, which included the disclosure of the 
unpublished interest rate adjustment by the People's Bank of 
China as well as information about the bank's international gold 
transactions, did bring some adverse effects to the Chinese 
economy. 
  And that was the reason why he was charged with "spying and 
stealing state secrets". But gathering information through 
personal contacts is important, especially in Hong Kong where 
the media is highly advanced. 
  Every year Hong Kong reporters reveal the Budget in advance. 
The Government may face economic losses since this news allows 
people to prepare for its new measures. But no reporter has 
been punished for such disclosures. The idea in reporters' 
minds is they will be the best journalist if they reveal 
accurate and exclusive information. 
  In addition, the "damage" Xi did was very little when 
compared with some unscrupulous mainland bank officials, who 
illegally lent money to others and disrupted the economic order 
in China. Chinese Vice Premier Zhu Rongji still gave lenient 
treatment to them by letting them off without any criminal 
charges. 
  So why should the authorities sentence Xi to such a heavy 
jail term? I explained these points to officials of the Beijing 
Municipal People's Procuratorate and they agreed. They also 
told me Xi had not spied for any foreign country or used the 
unpublished information for business purposes. 
  These were the reasons why I was previously optimistic Xi 
would be released or, at least, only receive a light sentence. 
  Twelve years in jail is too heavy a penalty. What we must do 
is hope for a lighter sentence after the appeal. 
  The case itself shows the backwardness of the Chinese legal 
system, which is in urgent need of reform. The Chinese 
judiciary has failed to comply with the basic principle of a 
fair trial that justice should not only be done, but seen to be 
done. 
  I believe the case was dealt in accordance with Chinese law 
but people may doubt that. The trial was not open to the 
public, even Xi's family and his employer Ming Pao were not 
allowed to listen, and no details about the hearing have been 
released. 
  Although authorities defended this because the case related 
to state secrets, they should have at least announced the start 
and end of the trial and its result. 
  The Chinese Government should be able to release more 
details 
on the Xi Yang case without breaching the principle of not 
disclosing state secrets. And it should allow Xi's family to 
visit him, and let some Hong Kong representatives, like the 
local delegates to the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference or National People's Congress, to be present. That 
would also help restore Hong Kong people's confidence in the 
mainland legal system. 
  Now it is inevitable local journalists will be 
psychologically affected by the case, worrying they may one day 
be arrested and jailed when covering news in China. 
  In the long term, Xinhua or the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs 
Office, should give some guidelines to Hong Kong journalists 
working in China. 
  But this is only wishful thinking. The reality is China has 
not yet drafted any specific law on journalism, even though the 
issue has been discussed for more than 10 years. Existing 
Chinese laws were drafted more than 15 years ago, some even 
before the Cultural Revolution, and have failed to keep up with 
the pace of economic reform. 

