CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Marcelo Pontes: "Bornhausen Throws First </F>
Stones"] 
  [Text] Jorge Bornhausen, president of the PFL [Liberal 
Front Party], feels like a wounded animal in the party alliance 
supporting Fernando Henrique Cardoso's candidacy for president 
of the republic. He is ready to fight and attack after shaking 
off the dust from the double defeat of his own candidate--in the 
choice of someone from Alagoas to run for vice president and in 
the campaign polls. 
  A digression before talking about the first blows to be 
struck by Bornhausen: strictly speaking, it cannot be said that 
one defeat is directly related to the other. The latest poll by 
IBOPE [Brazilian Public Opinion and Statistics Institute] was 
conducted between 27 April and 2 May. The name of the candidate 
for vice president was announced afterward--on 3 May--although 
it was already known that someone from the PFL would be chosen. 
Specifically, when the fieldwork for the poll ended, not even 
the leaders of the PSDB [Brazilian Social Democracy Party] and 
the PFL knew for sure that the vice president would be Guilherme 
Palmeira. 
  It is more probable, then, that what the poll captured was a 
moment of retreat, withdrawal, or strategic error on the part of 
Fernando Henrique rather than the first fallout from the 
skirmishes among party leaders during the negotiations for 
formalizing the alliance between the PSDB and the PFL, an 
alliance that became official on 2 May. 
  If actions at the top had an immediate effect lower down in 
poll results, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva would have been weakened 
by the recent squabbling by the radical groups on the PT 
[Workers Party] Excecutive Committee, which went so far as to 
support slogans apparently more daring than the return of PFL 
members to the administration: the legalization of abortion and 
marriage between homosexuals, for example. 
  Actually, Fernando Henrique dropped in the polls because 
when 
he resigned as minister of finance, he vanished from the media 
and no longer appeared on television during prime time every 
day. Moreover, upon his return to the Senate, he did not assume 
the role of defender of constitutional revision or the 
structural reforms considered essential to the success of the 
economic plan left in the hands of Minister Rubens Ricupero. It 
even seemed that he had washed his hands of his plan. There have 
been no speeches by Fernando Henrique defending his plan. At the 
same time, being hamstrung by party problems, he has also failed 
to adopt the firm posture of a presidential candidate who knows 
what he wants and, even more important, knows how to lead. 
  Getting back to our subject, Bornhausen has gotten tired of 
taking a beating and is ready to hit back. He is striking at 
anyone who tries to disrupt Fernando Henrique's candidacy, 
starting at the bottom: "This Candido Mendes, a 13th alternate 
deputy, went along on one of Lula's campaign trips to beg for a 
job as a minister," he says, referring to the professor who was 
suddenly said to be influential as a political 
coordinator--something denied in party decisionmaking circles. 
And he attacks higher up: if President Itamar Franco interferes 
too much and also disrupts things, he will get what is coming to 
him. 
  Bornhausen's remarks on that subject are more reserved. But 
nonetheless revealing. He is convinced, first of all, that the 
PSDB made an unpardonable mistake by leaving the PFL's preferred 
vice presidential candidate, Luis Eduardo Magalhaes, alone and 
exposed to stone-throwing for a month. 
  That is one way of looking at it. Ceara Governor Ciro Gomes 
(PSDB) sees things differently. He feels that the biggest 
mistake, after deciding to form a coalition, was the failure to 
make former Governor Antonio Carlos Magalhaes, who is the real 
boss in the PFL, Fernando Henrique's running mate. 
  Before revealing the second thing he is convinced of, 
Bornhausen stoops down to pick up some rocks: he has no doubt 
that the person responsible for all the confusion leading to a 
month's delay in choosing the vice president was President 
Itamar Franco. The president's most innocent gesture in that 
process is said to have been his attempt to give the vice 
presidential spot to Minas Gerais Governor Helio Garcia. 
  According to Bornhausen, Itamar cannot stomach the influence 
that Antonio Carlos Magalhaes may have on the campaign and on 
the administration if Fernando Henrique Cardoso is elected. 
After all, Magalhaes stayed at Collor's side until the last 
minute and has always been merciless in his criticism of Itamar. 
  Bornhausen is keeping a few rocks set aside for use in the 
near future. He is already unhappy with Fernando Henrique's 
dependence on President Itamar. No matter what he is going to 
do, Fernando Henrique first runs to tell Itamar or discuss it 
with him. Bornhausen views that with suspicion, but he is 
remaining very quiet about it while waiting for this new week to 
pass. 
  He reasons that whatever Itamar had to disrupt in the 
political arena, he has already done it by interfering in the 
choice of a vice presidential candidate. Bornhausen says that 
after tomorrow, when he announces the date for introducing the 
new currency--the real--the president will stop interfering in 
the economic plan. Once the PSDB and the PFL have concluded 
their convention, there will no longer be a Candido Mendes or 
anyone like Jutahy to torment the alliance. From then on, they 
will be out of the way, he says. 

