BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Luiza Kowalska: "Walesa Maneuvered KOK To Gain </F>
Time?"] 
  [Text]Where will the president look for support for 
his vision of subordinating the chief of the General Staff? The 
biggest political parties refuse to accept the solution being 
proposed by Walesa, by saying they will not succumb to bribery 
attempts. 
  The government has failed to decide whether the chief of the 
General Staff should be subordinate to the president or to the 
national defense minister. 
  President Walesa, who is in favor of the former option, has 
suggested that the government postpone a decision on the issue 
and give the National Defense Committee [KOK] a chance to speak. 
"There were no conflicts between us" -- Walesa explained to 
journalists and left the Council of Ministers' Office after 12 
minutes. 
  KOK (which is not defined by the Constitution but only by 
the 
law on popular defense obligation) will most probably meet next 
Wednesday. On the committee are: the president, the prime 
minister, Sejm and Senate speakers, chiefs of the Defense 
Ministry [MON], the Foreign Ministry, and the Internal Affairs 
Ministry, the finance minister, chief of the National Security 
Bureau, and chief of the President's Office. KOK's decisions 
are not binding on the government. 
  It is not clear whether supporting the president's idea 
would 
require an amendment to the Small Constitution. According to 
the Constitution, the president is the supreme commander of the 
Armed Forces. He also appoints and recalls the chief of the 
General Staff, in agreement with MON's chief. It is only the 
law that provides specific rules on the General Staff chief's 
subordination to the national defense minister. 
  "There are no obstacles against providing in the law that 
the 
chief of the General Staff should be subordinate to the 
president. Such a change does not require a constitutional 
amendment" -- says Lech Falandysz, deputy chief of the 
President's Office. 
  Whether it is going to be a change of the law or of the 
Small 
Constitution, it is not very likely that the Sejm would support 
the president's proposal. A majority of parties support the 
other option, under which the president oversees the Army 
through the national defense minister. 
  So it cannot be ruled out that by making a motion for a KOK 
meeting, the president wanted to delay the government's ultimate 
decision and, in the meantime, gain support for his proposal. 
ZYCIE WARSZAWY asked some Sejm deputies what president could 
use to bribe the Polish Peasant Party [PSL] and the Democratic 
Left Alliance [SLD]: 
  "I cannot see anything in return for which we would be 
willing to support the president's idea. This issue is 
non-negotiable" -- stated SLD's Zbigniew Siemiatkowski. 
"Perhaps the president will try to tempt us, but with what? I 
really have no idea." 
  A Sejm deputy for PSL holds a similar view. "I do not think 
that there is anything that one could offer in exchange for our 
support for the president's proposal. At any rate, no such 
offer has been made to us. Defense policies are not the best 
area for making deals" -- says Janusz Piechocinski. 

