CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Richard Savill, in Belfast: "Third Member of </F>
Family Killed by IRA"] 
  [Text] The body of a Royal Irish Regiment soldier was found 
dumped in a field in Northern Ireland yesterday hours after the 
IRA said it had carried out another murder. 
  An Army helicopter spotted the body of Private Reginald 
McCollum, 19, from Cookstown, Co Tyrone, on land between two 
housing estates on the outskirts of Armagh. Security forces were 
not immediately able to recover the body for fear that it had 
been booby-trapped. Pte McCollum, a single man, had been in the 
RIR for 16 months and was based in Armagh. He was last seen at a 
chip shop in the city at 2.30am after attending a stag night. 
  It was the third time his family have mourned a member 
killed 
at the hands of the IRA. 
  A year ago his brother Nigel, 25, was killed by an IRA 
mortar 
bomb fired at a police station in Keady, Co Armagh. He was a 
civilian contractor operating a crane for renovation work on the 
station when it was attacked. 
  Ten years ago Pte McCollum's grandmother was killed by a 
booby-trap bomb meant for someone else. 
  Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland Secretary, challenged 
the Sinn Fein president, Gerry Adams, to condemn the killing as 
well as the recent murder by the IRA of Fred Anthony, a police 
cleaner, and the injuring of his three-year-old daughter, Emma. 
  He said: "The IRA is killing again, this time after 
interrogating their victim. Is Mr Adams, who calls for peace, 
now going to condemn these crimes?" 
  "The IRA besmirch all they touch including the cause of 
Irish 
nationalism, just as the UVF, the UFF, and their like, besmirch 
the cause of Unionism." 
  The murder is the first by the IRA since the Government's 
response on Thursday to Sinn Fein's demands for clarification of 
the Downing Street Declaration. 
  The killing would suggest that some activists are intent on 
ignoring calls by Dublin and the mainly nationalist SDLP for the 
terrorists to suspend their violence while the Government's 
reply is considered. 

