Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Talal al-Hasan, minister of state </F>
for foreign affairs, in Amman, by Fawzi al-Jundi in Cairo, on 
the "Dialogue From Afar" program; date not given--recorded] 
  [Text] [Al-Jundi] Your Excellency, let us begin this 
interview with the outcome of the visit to Amman by Egyptian 
Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa and the importance of coordinating 
stands, particularly the Jordanian-Palestinian stand, now as 
well as in coming days. 
  [Al-Hasan] You know that Jordanian-Egyptian coordination is 
constant. His Majesty King Husayn and his brother President 
Husni Mubarak have always been very careful to maintain that 
coordination with a view to serving bilateral ties and, 
accordingly, the peace process and the common stands that 
constitute the proper framework for strengthening the all-Arab 
stand to serve the higher common interests of all Arabs. His 
Majesty King Husayn received Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa in 
Amman. They held an extensive discussion in a cordial and 
fraternal climate on ways to enhance bilateral ties. They also 
reviewed the peace process' progress along the various tracks. 
They agreed to continue coordination to achieve the desired 
results. 
  [Al-Jundi] Since we are talking about coordination, a 
meeting 
is currently being held between the Palestinian and Jordanian 
brothers in the Jordanian capital, Amman, to coordinate stands 
between Jordan and the PLO and to prepare an economic agreement 
between the Palestinian and Jordanian sides. Will you shed 
light on the importance of developing the Palestinian-Jordanian 
dialogue? 
  [Al-Hasan] You know that Jordan has always called for such 
comprehensive coordination. We have always called for 
supporting every effort that would strengthen the position of 
the Arab negotiators and enhance coordination at the bilateral 
and collective levels. We were keen to offer every assistance 
to the Palestinians to support their position during the peace 
process and on other issues. We started coordinating with the 
Palestinian brothers long before the peace process. Now, on the 
eve of the coordination meetings, we hope that a climate of 
clarity and frankness will prevail during the meetings. We hope 
these meetings produce the desired results that will truly 
support the Palestinian brothers and, accordingly, the 
collective Arab stand. 
  [Al-Jundi] King Husayn has warned President 'Arafat not to 
talk about a confederation between Jordan and the Palestinians. 
Is there a specific Jordanian stand on the issue of 
confederation? 
  [Al-Hasan] His Majesty King Husayn was very clear in the 
second speech he made a few days ago about the issue of 
confederation and other issues. We have explained Jordan's 
stand on confederation on several occasions. This issue is not 
under consideration at present, hence it cannot be discussed; it 
should be left until the brother Palestinians obtain and 
exercise self-determination and express their views freely. We 
are leaving this matter up to the Jordanian and Palestinian 
peoples. The issue of confederation is not under discussion 
right now. What we are doing at present is coordinating stands 
during the peace process and negotiations so that our stands can 
be clarified and our collective interests served. 
  [Al-Jundi] King Husayn will visit the U.S. capital, 
Washington, in the next few days. What can we say about 
Jordan's expectations of a direct and clear U.S. role in pushing 
the Middle East peace march ahead, particularly along the 
Jordanian-Israeli track? 
  [Al-Hasan] As far as the role of the U.S. sponsor in the 
Middle East peace process is concerned, it is clear that the 
U.S. is determined to give the peace process all the support and 
impetus it needs. This was emphasized by U.S. Secretary of 
State Warren Christopher during his recent visit to Amman and 
the region. He affirmed that the Arab-Israeli conflict has top 
priority in U.S. foreign policy. Hence, we trust that the U.S. 
Administration will perform its role as a full partner and 
honest mediator in the peace process. This will give the 
process the impetus it needs and will serve as one of the main 
instruments for progress on the various Arab tracks. 

