Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Regulations Governing Support for Rural Households </F>
Enjoying the Five Guarantees"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 27 Jan (XINHUA) -- Chapter One: General 
Principles 
  Article 1. These regulations are drawn up for the sake of 
performing good services in support of rural households enjoying 
the five guarantees, ensuring the normal life of recipients of 
the five guarantees in rural areas, and perfecting the social 
security system in rural areas. 
  Article 2. The five-guarantee support mentioned in these 
regulations refers to the care provided in terms of food, 
clothing, housing, medical care, and burial for villagers as 
prescribed in Article 6 of these regulations. 
  Article 3. Five-guarantee support is a collective welfare 
service in rural areas. Collective economic organizations in 
rural areas shall be responsible for providing the resources in 
cash and in kind needed for households enjoying the five 
guarantees. The people's governments in townships, minority 
townships, and towns shall be responsible for rendering the 
support. 
  Article 4. Local people's governments shall commend and 
award those who have performed outstanding five-guarantee 
support services. 
  Article 5. Civil affairs authorities under the State Council 
shall be in charge of five-guarantee support services throughout 
the country. 
  Civil affairs authorities of people's governments at and 
above the county level shall be in charge of the five-guarantee 
support services in areas under their jurisdiction. 
  Chapter Two: Recipients of Five-Guarantee Support 
  Article 6. Recipients of five-guarantee support (hereafter 
referred to as five-guarantee recipients, for short) refer to 
elderly, disabled, and juvenile villagers who meet the following 
conditions: 
  1. Those who do not have lawful obligatory supporters, or 
those who have lawful obligatory supporters who are unable to 
support them; 
  2. Those who are incapacitated for work; and 
  3. Those who do not have resources for living. 
  Lawful obligatory supporters refers to those who, in 
accordance with the Marriage Law, are obligated to provide 
support. 
  Article 7. Before a five-guarantee recipient can be 
determined, the villager shall submit a request, or he shall be 
nominated by a panel of villagers. After the villagers' 
committee has reviewed the request or the nomination, it shall 
report the case to the people's government of the township, 
minority township, or town for approval, and a "certificate of 
five-guarantee support" shall be issued. 
  The "certificate of five-guarantee support" shall be 
designed 
by civil affairs authorities under the State Council; and it 
shall be printed collectively by the civil affairs authorities 
of people's governments of provinces, autonomous regions, and 
municipalities directly under the central government. 
  Article 8. When one of the following conditions arises, the 
villagers' committee shall review the cases of five-guarantee 
support recipients and report them to the people's governments 
of townships, minority townships, or towns. With their 
approval, their five-guarantee support shall be discontinued and 
their "certificates of five-guarantee support" shall be revoked: 
  1. When they have lawful obligatory supporters, and these 
supporters are able to support them; 
  2. When they obtain new resources for living; or 
  3. When they reach 16 years of age and are able to work. 
Chapter Three: Specific Means of Five-Guarantee Support 
  Article 9. The specific means of five-guarnatee support are: 
  1. Food grain, cooking oil, and fuel; 
  2. Clothing, comforters, quilts, and pocket money; 
  3. Living quarters that meet basic requirements; 
  4. Timely medical services, and care for people who cannot 
care for themselves; and 
  5. Proper handling of burial affairs. 
  When the recipient of the five-guarantee support is a 
juvenile, he or she shall also receive compulsory education 
according to law. 
  Article 10. The actual standards for the five- guarantee 
support shall not be lower than the ordinary living standards of 
the local villagers. Specific standards shall be set by the 
people's governments of townships, minority townships, and towns. 
  Article 11. The resources, in cash or in kind, needed for 
financing five-guarantee support programs shall be funded either 
by the money a village has retained or by a township's budget 
for general expenses. There shall be no double budgets. In 
places with collective businesses, resources may be funded by 
the incomes from the collective businesses or by the profits 
that have to be delivered to the state. 
  Article 12. While alloting relief goods or money, people's 
governments at all levels in disaster- or poverty-stricken areas 
shall give preferential treatment to five-guarantee recipients 
to ensure their needs. 
Chapter Four: Forms of Five-Guarantee Support 
  Article 13. In accordance with local economic conditions, 
five- guarantee recipients may be supported collectively or 
individually. 
  Article 14. People's governments of townships, minority 
townships, and towns that have the resources shall build 
retirement homes and collectively support five-guarantee 
recipients. 
  Article 15. Retirement homes shall be managed democratically 
and in a civil manner. They shall have sound services and a 
good managerial system. 
  Five-guarantee recipients become members of retirement homes 
on a voluntary basis, and they can leave these homes freely. 
  Article 16. Retirement homes may undertake agricultural and 
nonstaple food production. Income shall be used to improve the 
five-guarantee recipients' living conditions. Local people's 
governments and relevant departments shall support and attend to 
the retirement homes' agricultural and nonstaple food production. 
  Article 17. In areas where five-guarantee recipients are 
supported individually, the three parties -- people's 
governments of townships, minority townships, towns, or 
collective economic organizations in rural areas; the 
commissioned supporters; and the recipients of the 
five-guarantee support -- shall sign an agreement about 
five-guarantee support services. 
Chapter Five: Handling Property 
  Article 18. While five-guarantee recipients may continue to 
use their personal property, they may not dispose of it on their 
own accord. The collective economic organizations may manage 
the property on their behalf in case they need caretakers. 
  Article 19. After a five-guarantee recipient has died, his 
legacy shall belong to the local collective economic 
organizations. If an agreement on five-guarantee support has 
been signed, the property shall be handled accordingly. 
  Article 20. After a juvenile recipient of five-guarantee 
support reaches 16 years of age and his support is discontinued 
in accordance with Article 8 of these regulations, any of his 
property that is being taken care of by others shall be returned 
to him. 
Chapter Six: Supervision and Management 
  Article 21. Civil affairs authorities of people's 
governments at and above the county level shall draw up 
regulations for supervising and managing affairs relevant to 
five-guarantee support, and these authorities shall also be 
responsible for supervising implementation of the regulations. 
  Article 22. If the collective economic organizations in 
rural areas fail to support five-guarantee recipients, the 
latter have the right to demand this support, and the civil 
affairs authorities of the county-level people's government 
shall guarantee that the collective economic organizations 
correct the situation by a specific deadline. 
  Article 23. When persons who are obligated to support five- 
guarantee recipients according to agreements refuse to do so, 
their criminal responsibilities shall be investigated if their 
cases are serious and constitute a crime. 
  Article 24. If personnel in charge of five-guarantee support 
commit graft and embezzle cash or in-kind resources meant for 
five- guarantee recipients, the civil affairs authorities of the 
county- level people's government shall instruct them to 
reimburse the full amounts and shall discipline them; and if 
their acts constitute a crime, their criminal responsibilities 
shall be investigated according to law. 
Chapter Seven: Appendix 
  Article 25. These regulations take effect upon promulgation. 

