Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Expectations Are That 100 Persons </F>
Will Appear Before Tehran's Courts on Charges of `Economic 
Sabotage'"] 
  [Text] Official sources in Tehran stated yesterday that it 
is expected that more than 100 persons will soon appear before 
the revolution courts on charges dealing with "economic 
sabotage." These persons were arrested during two consecutive 
arrest campaigns that included the capital city of Tehran as 
well as six other main cities. At least 50 persons who work in 
private currency exchange establishments are among those who 
were arrested by the Revolution Guard. 
  Informed sources in Tehran mentioned that a number of 
prominent mullahs [clergymen] may be among those arrested on 
charges dealing with "misuse of foreign currencies." It has been 
mentioned that numerous mullahs had established their own 
private funds, claiming that their purpose was to subsidize the 
propagation of the ideas of the late Iranian leader Ayatollah 
Khomeyni in foreign countries. Permission had been given for 
these funds to maintain accounts in foreign currencies. However, 
the Iranian Government recently stated that these accounts had 
been used for purposes of currency speculation and illegal 
transactions involving the importing of merchandise instead of 
being used to subsidize Khomeyni movements abroad. 
  Among the persons arrested was the director of the Foreign 
Exchange Division of the Bank Tejarat [Commerce], the 
third-largest government bank in Iran, which administers more 
than 60 percent of the currency transactions in the private 
sector. It is believed that two prominent deputies of the 
above-mentioned director were also arrested. The revolution 
judge had issued warrants for the arrest of a number of bank 
officials who work in various foreign capitals. However, it is 
not yet clear how many of these officials have actually agreed 
to return to Tehran to appear before the revolution courts. 
  These arrests are part of an emergency plan established by 
the Iranian Government for the purpose of putting a stop to the 
sharp decline in the value of the Iranian rial[R] vis-a-vis the 
U.S. dollar and other foreign currencies. It should be mentioned 
that the value of the Iranian rial, at the present time, is only 
one-thirtieth of what its value was before the mullahs came to 
power in 1979. Furthermore, Iran's currency has lost about 10 
percent of its value during the past three weeks. 
  One of the reasons for the rapid decline in the value of the 
Iranian rial is the fact that many Iranian merchants are 
scrambling to purchase as much foreign merchandise as they can 
before the coming into effect of the new restrictions on imports 
at the beginning of next March. Recently long convoys of trucks 
have been seen heading south where Iranians can buy foreign 
goods in the "free-trade areas" on the islands of Kish and Qeshm 
and in the Bishin [name as transliterated] area near the border 
with Pakistan. The Iranian Government has permitted each person 
to purchase $2,000 worth of goods manufactured abroad, which are 
exempt from import taxes, provided that the purchase transaction 
takes place in foreign currency. 
  However, the Iranian Government has recently undertaken to 
lower this limit to $200 and to impose more severe restrictions 
for the purpose of preventing organized gangs from buying 
foreign merchandise offered wholesale. 
  One of the plans being studied by the government at the 
present time is the imposition of a total ban on numerous 
imported items, especially electrical and electronic equipment, 
for a period of at least three years, as a means to alleviate 
the crisis of the deficit in the balance of payments which Iran 
is suffering from right now. 
  Iran needs at least $18 billion a year to service its 
foreign 
debts, which total $30 billion, to purchase half of the food 
supplies it needs and to pay for the spare parts and technical 
equipment it needs to maintain its industries that are now being 
operated at reduced production capacity. But because of the 
decline in oil revenues, the nation's total income is not 
expected to total more than $13 billion during the next 12 
months, according to official estimates. 

