Molecules' 

<F P=102>   94WS0285B Paris L'USINE NOUVELLE in French 17 Mar 94 p 43 </F>
<F P=103> 94WS0285B </F>
<F P=104>  Paris L'USINE NOUVELLE </F>
<F P=105>  French </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jean-Michel Meyer: "Toxic Waste: Cannibalistic </F>
Supermolecules"] 
  [Text] Supermolecular chemical laboratories are creating 
"cage molecules" capable of recognizing and capturing toxic 
atoms or molecules. They can help reduce the volume of dangerous 
waste products. 
  Is antipollution technology going to be revolutionized by 
microscopically small creations? Within the space of only a few 
weeks, two supermolecular chemical laboratories, in Strasbourg 
and Lyons, have produced several decagrams of two types of "cage 
molecules," veritable "chemical prisons"! 
  Their respective shapes (a "cup" for the calycinals, a 
"Chinese hat" for the cryptophanes) express their mission: to 
recognize and trap certain toxic atoms or molecules in 
made-to-order cavities. A reversible process: Once separated 
from other less harmful waste products, the trapped molecules 
may be released for processing. 
<H5>  High Precision </H5>
  The highly selective molecular traps are in greatest demand 
by the nuclear and chemical industries. Calycinals attract atoms 
of cesium-135 and cesium-137 into their cavity, while the 
cryptophanes trap hydrocarbon and chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) 
molecules. 
  "A world first," says Professor Alain Collet, head of the 
stereochemistry and molecular interaction laboratory at the 
Ecole Normale Superieure, in Lyons. Manufactured from the 
vanillin molecule, the fifty-some-odd members of the cryptophane 
family already come in a variety of sizes. But this is the first 
time any laboratory has synthesized cryptophanes able to capture 
highly volatile molecules of very small size. 
  Work on this scale must be ultra-precise: The cage molecule, 
whose volume is 160 to 180 cubic angstroms, must capture a 
methane molecule whose volume is only 28 cubic angstroms! 
Identical results have been obtained with ethane and propane. 
Also with two CFCs, freon-12 and freon-22, "but less 
efficiently," says Andre Collet. 
  Meanwhile, three researchers with the Laboratory of Analytic 
and Mineral Chemistry, a unit associated with the CNRS [National 
Scientific Research Center] and Strasbourg's European Advanced 
Chemical Industries College, have developed a gamut of 
calycinals that can extract 99.9 percent of the cesium from a 
solution. The results were obtained as part of the "Spin" 
(separation-incineration) program under the direction of the 
Atomic Energy Commission's Cadarache Research Center, in 
partnership with five European universities. "The calycinals 
behave like chemical clamps," explains Jean-Yves Barre, the 
Commission's fuel cycle director. And with formidable 
efficiency: The molecule can pick out one cesium atom from 
45,000 sodium atoms in an acidic decontamination solution! 
<H5>  Shrinking the Volume </H5>
  The objective: "To reduce the volume of slow-decaying waste, 
in order to cut the storage volume by a factor of three or 
four," he explains. Extracting the irradiated fuel from fission 
products such as cesium-137 and cesium-135 (which have 
radioactive lives of 30 and 2,300,000 years respectively) and 
the minor actinides (americium, neptunium, etc.) would remove 
some of the current constraints on storage of radioactive waste. 
Once purged of the most highly radioactive elements, nuclear 
waste could be stored on the surface instead of buried deep 
underground. But that is 10 or 15 years into the future. That's 
how long it will take for fabrication of calycinals to get from 
the laboratory to commercial production. 
  Already, however, the Electrochemistry Laboratory at the 
University of Rennes has made an important advance in treatment 
of primary circuit effluents at nuclear generating stations. 
Using electrochemical techniques, researchers there have 
synthesized ion-transporting polyether resins attached to carbon 
molecules, to trap radioactive ions (silver of atomic weight 
110, cobalt-60, cesium-137, and potassium-40) in water solution 
at concentrations lower than 1 microgram per liter. Larger-scale 
tests of this technology are under way at the EDF [French Power 
Company] research center at Tricastin. 
  Initial successes in applying supermolecular chemistry to 
the 
antipollution domain are promising. In Strasbourg, efforts are 
under way to synthesize new calycinals to capture other 
radioactive elements (americium, etc.). And still other 
calycinals to imprison aromatic molecules (benzene, 
methylbenzene). These could be used to purify water or organic 
solvents by removing aromatic nuclei. 
  In Lyons, researchers are designing complex structures "that 
will not only recognize and capture but also transform," 
explains Alain Collet. By inducing catalysis, these new cage 
molecules should make it possible to transform methane into 
methanol, which is much more easily transportable. 
  But the industrial future of the cryptophanes rests on their 
potential as "captors." Elf hopes to employ them in systems to 
detect leakage of natural gas and other hydrocarbons. 


