Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ricardo Alarcon de Quesada, president of the </F>
National Assembly of the People's Government, on "special 
Straight Talk" program by Straight Talk host Carlos Santana 
Ojeda and reporters Luis Sexto from BOHEMIA; Renato Recio from 
TRABAJADORES; and Radio Rebelde reporters Gisela Bel Heredia and 
Roberto Cabada -- live] 
  [Text] [Santana] The second session of the National 
Assembly of the People's Government [ANPP], which was recently 
held analyzed and left pending many important economic issues 
related to the situation the country is going through, 
especially those related to the internal financial situation. 
This special "Straight Talk" program will center its debate on 
these issues, the experience of the ANPP in 1993, and its goals 
for 1994 with the participation of Ricardo Alarcon de Quesada, 
member of the Politburo and president of the ANPP. 
  We will begin with Luis Sexto. Luis, how do you think we 
should begin this analysis? 
  [Sexto] Perhaps the listeners are waiting for me to ask Dr. 
Ricardo Alarcon the first question on what today is the center 
or the focus of the national debate: the measures that are being 
studied and drafted to achieve a financial balance in our 
country. Violating a journalistic rule, I want to leave the most 
interesting topic for last. On this occasion, I will take that 
liberty. I want to ask Dr. Ricardo Alarcon about democracy. 
History shows that generally times of crisis are not appropriate 
for the exercise of democracy. Nevertheless, in our country, 
despite our problems, there is a will and a commitment to 
perfect democracy. As a matter of fact, in the last two years 
our country has made a qualitative leap. I ask you: Is this a 
fact that has ended or is it a process, and if this is a process 
as I believe it is, what is you point of view and what will the 
future bring? 
  [Alarcon] Well, Luis, I believe you are absolutely right. 
For 
some time now, we have been advancing in perfecting the 
country's governmental system, or the system of the People's 
Government which consists in just that: the perfecting and 
strengthening of our democracy. Traditionally, the classic trend 
in the world is that when there is a difficult situation, a 
crisis, or a special situation, democracy is restricted as a 
natural thing. All countries in their constitutions have 
chapters on states of emergency. It even includes the 
suppression of certain rights, etc. Some even include the right 
to hold elections and the parliamentary function. The 
parliaments of this world, many of them, went into recess when 
the country had some difficulties, which, if we compare them 
with the problems of Cuba, were truly minor problems. 
  We are doing the exact opposite. In this and in many other 
things we could say that we follow a nontraditional path. 
However, I believe it does correspond with our characteristics 
and needs. In other words, despite the greater difficulties and 
challenges of the country, we must continue advancing in the 
people's participation in the government system. To continue 
perfecting this system means to rely more on the people, summon 
the people, use their effective, real and systematic 
participation on what is...[30 second break in reception] 
...what their government should be. 
  This seems like a paradox. Nevertheless, because of its 
principles, a socialist government or society by definition is 
the fullness of democracy: a true democracy, a democracy of the 
people according to the Greek language, where the word came 
from. This implies the people truly participate in the 
government. This only happens in socialism, in a society based 
on equality, fairness, and human solidarity which truly 
advocates the people's participation in the government as equals 
and collectively. This is the aspect of principles. 
  However, there is also a strategic aspect. How can we 
successfully confront the enormous challenges Cuba faces if we 
do not do so with the conscientious, true, voluntary, and 
energetic participation of the entire people. This is something 
we see in our daily lives: the efforts, the sacrifices of our 
people, the burden they must shoulder. Only by relying on the 
people, in my opinion, will we be able to become successful in 
confronting today's difficulties. All this relates to the issue 
you left for the end. We try to make the people participate, to 
make them feel more and more they are participants -- as the 
subject of the society rather than a passive object -- in issues 
such as the financial situation and many others. This is the 
essence of democracy. This can only be attained through 
socialism. 
  [Santana] I believe that the subject of perfecting of 
democracy has been thoroughly covered. We can move on to another 
subject. Renato? 
  [Recio] Evidently, we need to now touch on the cardinal 
issue 
on the streets. I believe that at the last session of the ANPP 
something unusual happened when contrary to expectations, 
particularly those abroad regarding the impending approval of an 
entire package of measures, the ANPP decided to simply discuss, 
report, increase awareness, and enlighten public opinion rather 
than make decisions. Evidently, this is not usual. Something 
else that is unusual in other societies is happening now, a 
so-called parliament of the workers has been summoned, and those 
issues which the ANPP discussed regarding the financial 
reorganization are becoming issues of public discussion, of 
discussion by the masses, of discussion by millions. 
  I will like Alarcon to give us his opinion and comments on 
this process. What does it mean for him? What can be expected 
from it? 
  [Alarcon] This is a very important issue because it relates 
to the expectation you mentioned that existed before the ANPP 
meeting. There was much talk of measures, packages of measures, 
etc. 
  We have to clarify several things. We have been implementing 
measures such as the creation of the Basic Cooperative 
Production Units [UBPC], a concrete measure which is already 
helping to heal the national finances in two sectors where a 
good part of state subsidies are concentrated: sugarcane and 
nonsugarcane agriculture. Above all, this should result in an 
increase in production in both sectors which is the essence, the 
ultimate goal to heal the finances and improve the economy, 
rescue the value of the peso, stimulate work, etc. Why? To be 
able to produce more goods and services, to produce more and 
better to benefit our economy. Certain comrades have the 
simpleminded hope that certain measures could be implemented on 
the assumption that certain measures can solve the problem, as 
if someone were stupid enough to have the answer to make our 
lives better in his pocket and not use it. Unfortunately, that 
is not the case. There are certain things that can and have been 
done, such as the example I just gave about the UBPC. 
  We cannot forget, particularly you who work in journalism, 
that there are foreign ideas, things they try to impose on us 
such as the expression "package of measures". This is a concept 
that any listener immediately associates with many packages of 
measures that have been implemented in the world apparently in 
order to solve financial problems. I would like to ask if anyone 
could name a single Third World country that has solved its 
economic problems, been able to mend its finances, and above all 
reactivate development and improve the living conditions of its 
people's with any of those packages of measures. Every example 
points to the contrary: People are rising up in the provinces in 
Latin America and even attacking the governor's palace. 
  Why? Either because a package of measures was not 
implemented 
or because it was? A package of measures is associated in the 
world with capitalism, with neoliberal formulas, with the IMF, 
with things that are already classics: a budget deficit? Then 
expenses have to be reduced. How do you reduce expenses in the 
capitalist world? By cutting social programs, privatizing, and 
decreasing the role of the state in society. 
  We have to study measures to reduce the size of the state, 
reduce the bureaucracy, the burden bureaucracy represents to the 
state, etcetera. However, this is quite different from 
diminishing the responsibility of the state -- in other words, 
of society in relation to the people. 
  We face a great challenge. How to fix the finances, how to 
implement our measures, those which we have taken and will take 
in the future. However, we cannot use any of the tools out 
there. That would be very easy. There would be no need to 
discuss or invent anything. The IMF measures are repeated 
everywhere. It is not possible to invent different ones, at 
least coming from that perspective. However, measures with a 
socialist perspective, for socialism, have to be created in a 
socialist manner. 
  There are general measures which as a matter of fact we have 
been implementing in the economy, and there have been 
discussions with the workers in every factory and service 
center, etcetera. We are doing this not only to collect the 
comrades' opinions on these problems but also to relate the 
solutions to each place's specific condition. It is possible to 
improve efficiency by reducing costs, waste, improving 
organization, increasing discipline, etcetera, with the concrete 
action of the workers in each workplace, rather than with a 
parliamentary address or a decision of a general nature. 
  Therefore, as part of the process of preparing for the 
special ANPP meeting, we are now beginning with a process of 
discussion by the workers. We hope this discussion is well 
structured and organized. In other words, the first step must be 
adequate information from the leadership, the basic data on the 
specific work center, production costs, resources, etcetera, in 
other words, all the objective material elements of that 
workplace. It has to be a collective discussion among all 
workers to see what can be done there and now, rather than 
waiting for a grandiloquent quote legislative unquote decision. 
The idea is take steps here and now to help mend the national 
finances. 
  [Recio] Some people are claiming that this might be a 
government strategy to free itself of responsibility in the end 
when the measures are taken and they affect a sector of the 
population which has already debated the measures and approved 
them. 
  [Alarcon] This brings to mind a friend, an Italian 
legislator 
who visited us in October. We went together to see the 
functioning of the people's government. We attended a progress 
report meeting in the outskirts of Havana where very complex 
problems were discussed. The Italian told me: "The president of 
our parliament has never, never attended a meeting with the 
people, even less, of course, in a shanty like this. I, a 
leftist deputy, had never done it either. I have seen here in 
action what a truly democratic society is." 
  The people debated intensely, without rhetoric or 
formalisms. 
They said what was on their minds about their problems from 
deeply revolutionary and patriotic perspectives. He added: "This 
cannot be done in my country because it would end in a great 
fracas between the people and their deputy, even more with the 
president of the parliament." 
  In reality, to discuss the kind of issues with the 
people....[changes thought] It is still to be seen the first 
case of a country where the famous packages of measures are 
implemented and someone has the brilliant idea of discussing it 
with the workers. 
  [Santana] I have never seen the IMF or [World] Bank 
suggesting such a thing. 
  [Alarcon] Even less, asking the worker's opinions before 
adopting measures. This also helps to create a mind set. The 
people get to express themselves and might become convinced of 
one possibility or another which might not be the most 
appropriate at a certain moment. First of all, the ANPP -- and 
this has been acknowledged in dispatches by several foreign news 
agencies which I have read -- discussed information on the Cuban 
economy that is usually handled with more discretion, and this 
was broadcast from coast to coast to the entire population. 
Information such as the size of the deficit, the subsidies, 
etcetera, and unpaid accounts was discussed openly. 
  This is the opposite of the practice of famous parliaments 
which perhaps meet for three months with an overabundance of 
speeches but where the information is not handled as openly. To 
me, this is very important. I said this in the ANPP meeting, and 
other comrades also said that other parliaments do not openly 
discuss packages of measures, but they do so with the 
millionaires; they do so with the great powers of the economy of 
those countries. It might be that the unions will not even find 
out until they read the papers. It might be that certain 
legislators are in the dark about the packages of measures that 
are going to be promulgated. However, those who truly control 
the economy in those countries are made aware and agreements are 
reached with them. In our case, we would have to do it backwards 
-- our millionaires are the workers, the people -- also, even in 
order to discuss, and this can be done, possible measures which 
perhaps are not pleasant or well seen by a sector of the 
population. [as heard] 
  [Santana] Alarcon, I find it interesting that this process 
of 
consultation involves only the workers. However, there are 
sectors of the population such as housewives, retirees, and 
students who also have their opinions on probable measures to 
mend the economy. What is the ANPP planning to do to include 
these opinions? 
  [Alarcon] We also have to think about the other sectors of 
the population. However, there are several basic reasons why 
this process began with the labor movement. First of all, 
because it relates directly to production and services. This is 
the core of the economic problems. Second, because the union 
movement in our society has to play its proper role. 
  The union movement is the vanguard of society. It is the 
class that has to exert its hegemony, its leadership. Because of 
the concrete experiences of the meetings which I have attended 
and the ones I have been told about by other comrades, I know 
they are yielding specific results that can begin to have an 
effect right now to improve the national financal picture. Of 
course, when we speak of workplaces, this also includes 
educational centers. We have included the youth, students, 
teachers of that sector. 
  I believe that in a later phase we have to see how to attain 
through the People's Council the participation of other sectors 
of the population not organized in unions. 
  [Bel] Deputies who belong to a workplace also are found in 
People's Councils and can be of aid in the discussions at that 
level. 
  [Recio] I believe all Cubans must be quite clear on this, we 
must reach a consensus on that no measure can -- as you 
mentioned earlier -- solve the national problems right away. In 
other words, they are not a magic wand or a magician's hat: A 
measure is implemented and the problem is solved. 
  In other words, these are measures we have to necessarily 
adopt to solve part of the problems. Certain measures have 
already been taken. You mentioned an essential one. 
  Now, regarding the financial unbalance: There is an opinion 
out there. I have had to discuss it. However, I would like you 
to speak about it. Some say that if these measures have to be 
taken we are already late. They argue that this process of 
collective discussion is a delay that unnecessarily protracts 
the implementation of measures which will help solve our 
problems. I would like you to explain why this is not a waste of 
time. 
  [Alarcon] I believe it is necessary. For example, the budget 
deficit: If an organization or enterprise is inefficient, in 
other words, it costs more money to the people than what it 
contributes, [words indistinct] this is very simple: Close it 
down. However, if in the budget of an organization expenses 
surpass income they have to reduce expenses to match income. 
Under capitalism this is solved quite simply: How many surplus 
workers are there? How many enterprises are you going to close 
down? Etcetera. 
  Is it not a measure discussing the situation of the 
enterprise, factory, or institution with its workers so that 
among them, with the data at hand, with the same openness with 
which the information on the national economy was disclosed, 
they can discuss and understand what needs to be done in case 
there is no other alternative but to take certain measures that 
affect them? What measures can they, the workers, the owners of 
the society adopt to mend their finances, to reduce costs and 
make their work more rational? This is why I say that this 
discussion process is an extremely important measure, or a total 
of very important measures we hope will be adopted throughout 
Cuba. 
  On the other hand, I believe that it is somewhat 
simpleminded 
if you were to say that by implementing this measure from the 
top, beginning tomorrow, the situation will begin to change. We 
are not sitting on our hands, thinking about measures. On the 
contrary, they are being adopted. For example, we mentioned the 
UBPC, but there is self-employment, and even the famous 
decriminalization of foreign currency. These are measures that 
also effect the national finances but which by definition did 
not require a process of consultation, of increasing the 
awareness of the people. As soon as we understood how to 
implement them, we did it even before the ANPP met. 
  There are cooperatives that are costing less than a [state] 
farm in certain places, that have attracted workers -- in other 
words, there are healthy signs -- and have reduced costs. There 
are concrete results you can see. Nobody has refrained from 
implementing measures that are clearly defined, measures that 
have clear and immediate implications. What is important here is 
to elevate the morale of the workers. Fidel pointed out that 
work is attained through pride, honor. Well, we have to appeal 
to that pride and honor and consolidate them in specific 
measures to be taken at each place. This is one of the most 
important things that can be done. This would not be based on 
that famous package of measures, but would be based on something 
we can do here and cannot be done elsewhere: to appeal to the 
workers and frankly discussing with them all these problems 
specifically, calling them by their right name and not using 
general terms. 
  [Recio] I would like to ask Alarcon about an issue based on 
the experiences other countries have had when they mix these two 
concepts: democracy and the economy. It is known that in most of 
the countries implementing neoliberal formulas of economic 
reorganization and readjustment, democracy, the functioning of 
democracy is hampered in many cases and there are sad, regretful 
events. However, based on Alarcon's words on the previous 
program, democracy in Cuba, the development of our democracy 
could be a force to possiblyt help the economy recover. I would 
like Alarcon to tell us about this issue. 
  [Alarcon] This has to be developed to its fullest extent. I 
have seen in some assemblies....[changes thought] For example, 
in terms of the two issues of the greatest importance in this 
society: the surplus administrative personnel -- of workers not 
directly linked to production, and the problems of lack of 
controls which result in lost resources, crime, etcetera. We can 
find places, such as I have seen in some of these meetings, 
where the workers are of the opinion that there is surplus 
administrative personnel. Sometimes this is the result of our 
methods, mechanisms still in effect which I believe we have to 
eliminate or change. At times, we demand much unnecessary 
information or work which implies repetition of work mechanisms 
at the base level. This generates bureaucratic positions. In a 
factory there might be need of productive work, a space for 
those adminsitrative workers. It is not a matter of throwing 
anyone on the streets. I am thinking about the specific case of 
La Corona factory where we discussed these issues with the 
workers on 12 January. 
  On the other hand, although at times we have an excess of 
administrative mechanisms which are there to exert control, it 
is evident that control is not one the best functioning things 
in our society. There are way too many problems in this area. In 
that meeting the workers stated that the union and workers 
should and ought to play a much more important, active role. If 
the organized workers discuss things collectively and 
democratically, and establish specific principles and work 
standards, they can replace a bureaucratic mechanism. Not only 
that. They can implement a much more effective mechanism in 
terms of real control and committed discipline and more definite 
order. 
  Now, I believe that besides all of this, our country has 
confronted a difficult situation, a situation of blockade, of 
confronting the abrupt changes in our foreign trade relations -- 
the things we know shaped the special period. Likewise, the 
country attempts to resist these setbacks and to develop, while 
preserving that which I believe reflects the broadest national 
consensus. I do not think anyone here is crazy enough to wish 
for a return to private medicine. No one here is crazy enough to 
hope for Cuba to have the situation of the richest capitalism 
country -- the United States, where today they are debating if 
40 million Americans are finally going to have some degree of 
paid medical coverage; paid, because not even in their dreams 
can American conceive of free medical care. If socialism did not 
exist, Could any Cuban conceive of the barestl possibility of 
upholding such a vital accomplishment, which is reflected in the 
low infant and maternal mortality rate, and a number of things 
which are truly dear to most people? Could anyone be 
simpleminded enough to imagine this would exist in Cuba if our 
socialism did not exist? Evidently, not. 
  The same can be said of education, elder care, and our 
entire 
social security system. To preserve all that, to save all this 
requires the effort and sacrifice of all. We have to turn this 
hope into a daily thing. The struggle for these hopes has to 
become a real, daily, permanent thing. This can only be done 
with the support of the people. This is not going to be the 
result of decisions or conclusions reached by a sharp, 
well-intended, etcetera, group of people. This requires the 
understanding and support of the entire population of workers of 
Cuba. This is why I believe they are inseparable. However, given 
our type of democracy and the conditions Cuba faces, it is not 
only a matter of principles but a philosophical reason which 
should be our political hope: to perfect our political system. 
This is the only possible strategy to really maintain the 
mobilization and struggle of a people who have resisted 
heroically and have amply proven that they will be able to 
confront and overcome this entire challenge. 
  [Cavada] A question in connection with this idea and even 
that of the Parliament in the Work Place: At the beginning many 
perhaps might have thought that a tobacco worker -- such as you 
mentioned from La Corona, or perhaps a metallurgy industry 
worker -- could not give his opinions and decide or propose 
things for the economy or the future economy of Cuba. However, I 
believe that in the practice it has been different. This is 
proven by another of our accomplishments in the last 35 years: 
the educational level of the people. I also was at the tobacco 
factory on 12 January, and it was truly impressive to hear a 
tobacco worker -- in charge of the tobacco refrigeration unit -- 
speak of the law of value, analyzed scientifically what it 
entailed to increase production, what products to increase, 
which to decrease, and even cited how harmful elements in other 
countries collect the excess currency. 
  This is why I think it is a very healthy and logical 
practice, on the part of the CTC and the ANPP, to summon an 
extensive debate. What limits or points might it reach? How much 
longer might this involvement of the people last after the 
special session of the ANPP? 
  [Alarcon] I believe we must continue it. I believe that 
presently it is directly tied to these issues, but it is also 
part of the process of perfecting our system of government. I 
believe that the CTC has to play a key role. It should be 
maintained as a practice, system, and as a method of management, 
organization, and control. The effective, real participation of 
the workers in the economy is consubstantial with a socialist 
democracy. I do not believe that in this or in the case of the 
People's Councils we have reached perfection or anything like 
it. This is why we speak of perfecting. This is a continuous 
process of seeking how to do things better. 
  You gave a great example, that of the comrade in charge of 
the tobacco refrigeration unit. Unfortunately, it would have 
been surprising to find such an example in Cuba several 
generations ago. However, this is now common everywhere. We have 
a people much more highly educated, a cultured people, a people 
ready to exert further their rights and social function, their 
active role in society. 
  [Sexto] I want to change the focus from perfecting the 
system. These measures being discussed nationally are to solve 
immediate problems such as the excess currency, financial 
unbalance, etcetera. Are these measures not also part of a 
necessary effort to correct our economy? Can we speak of 
political correction without speaking of economic correction? 
  [Alarcon] I believe that -- we have said it several times -- 
they are deeply interrelated. I believe that, first of all, we 
cannot separate the economy from politics. We have a socialist 
perspective. The struggle, particularly in a blockaded country, 
a country with our difficulties, or even without those 
difficulties, to build a socialist society -- a society based on 
equality, justice, and fraternity -- also has a material, 
economic dimension. This means a need to produce more goods and 
to provide a higher quality of life to the people, but above all 
to fulfill a group of ideals, ethical aspirations which have to 
do with the conscience -- the conscience we effect politically. 
  I believe that although we are highly involved in the 
reorganization of our finances, the economic struggle in 
general, and in confronting the special period, these 
mechanisms, these methods are not designed for this struggle 
alone. Their effect and lifespan should not be limited to this 
period. I am convinced we are going to surpass the special 
period. I am convinced that we are going to put our finances in 
order, that we are going to successfully resist this phase and 
make progress. We will also continue making progress in the 
perfecting of our political system which is also essential in 
order to continue the economic development and the development 
of a socialist economy and society. 
  [Sexto] On what do you base the hope that we are going to 
surpass the special period, that we are going to overcome this 
entire situation? 
  [Alarcon] I do not want to sound overconfident or anything 
like that. However, without stressing the essential need to 
continue struggling hard....[changes thought] I said this to the 
deputies when I wished them a happy new year. This relates to 
Marx's famous quote: Happiness is the struggle. I told the 
deputies: I wish for all of us to continue struggling united and 
hard. 
  I believe it is not a waste of time to value the feat of 
our people. For four years we have been living in a world where 
all its experts vainly predicted our death. These also have been 
very difficult years where we have had to rethink a number of 
things, seek new markets, and abruptly reorganize our economy on 
completely different bases. I believe as hard as the problems 
are there is something we cannot forget: These four years have 
demonstrated our people's capability to resist. We cannot deny 
that there are people who may have weakened. That is what the 
entire criminal policies of the Yankees, the whole blockade 
seeks. They seek to attract peoples, tear away certain sectors 
of the population from the patriotic and united attitude the 
immense majority of the people upholds. I believe that our 
people's unique show of resistance is truly significant. In the 
last four years, several governments have collapsed under less 
dramatic conditions that those faced by the Cuban Government. 
They have fallen like a house of cards. There have been many 
changes in the world, even people with frustrations and lost 
illusions who now wish for the socialism of certain European 
societies. 
  There have been great changes in the world. And this small 
country, located in the worst of places, is the only socialist 
country that is far away from the former socialist bloc and too 
close to the empire. Yet, here we are, and it is even possible 
to discern signs of progress amidst this crisis. Tourism is 
growing. In Cuba, tourism is growing at one of the highest rates 
in the world, if not the highest. The accomplishments we have 
attained in certain fields amidst such an adverse situation 
cannot be ignored. I believe that in the measure that that 
spirit, that will is channeled, organized, and boosted we have 
the possibility of showing modest, limited signs of the 
beginning of a recovery in 1994. 
  One example is the sugarcane harvest. There is the real 
possibility that this year's harvest will be more efficient than 
last year's and a little higher in terms of volume of 
production. The sugarcane harvest categorically proves wrong 
those who believed, imagined -- and much was said abroad -- that 
Cuba was inexorably going downwards. For us it is an essential, 
highly significant thing to take this step with the limited 
resources Cuba will receive, but also because it confirms the 
righteousness of the effort we all are conducting. Many other 
examples could be given: the entire science sector, scientific 
research, biotechnology, the pharmaceutical industry, etcetera. 
Step by step, despite all the obstacles and the immense 
competition with the transnationals in this sector, some of our 
products are making headway because they are unique, and also 
because they are useful and effective and our production 
capacity has grown. And all this takes place amidst a truly 
difficult situation. These are the elements for a justified 
optimism. 
  [Sexto] One quick question. I can see that your cautious 
optimism is based on the capability for resistance and work of 
the people, but I also believe that you trust the strategy that 
Cuba is following to overcome this, in the success of this 
strategy. 
  [Alarcon] Of course. I am cautious in terms of the concrete 
results we might see. I am totally and completely confident in 
the correctness of our strategy and the capability for 
resistance and work of our people. 
  [Bel] In all these ongoing debates and in the people's 
mouths 
there are highly generalized terms such as subsidies, taxes, 
confiscations, etcetera. You spoke of the need to work on the 
conscience of the citizens, of acting politically. Are there 
plans to provide new programs to contribute to organizing the 
thinking of the masses in this regard? 
  [Alarcon] I believe that in this we all have to contribute 
with our grain of sand. I believe that what the unions do, what 
we are trying to do in the people's government, what you do in 
the press is using every mean to reach many people, and serving 
as tools for reflection and analysis by the comrades. I believe 
that we have to see these things as issues on which we all have 
to become educated collectively by confronting opinions, views, 
in the search for elements, etcetera. These are issues that in 
another country would be the exclusive realm of the 
intellectuals, the experts, or the powerful. In our case, the 
same thing happens: The owners have to decide on the issues, but 
here all of us are the owners. We have to assume this role 
fully. I believe this is not easy. 
  This is not a simple issue. This is why I answered 
positively when I was asked earlier about the relationship 
between the economy and politics after the special period and 
the present financial situation. 
  I believe that in a society such as this every worker should 
aspire to become a connoisseur of details, of costs, of 
efficiency, and of all the economic fields which are not the 
responsibility alone of the manager hired by an owner. Those 
people managed very well to keep their enterprises running 
efficiently because they sought something called profits. We do 
not have this now. There is no one profiting from our sweat. 
Therefore, we have to be more creative on how we assume the role 
of owner -- of owners in a more noble sense, more open, and 
including the entire people. 
  This is very complex. It is not a matter of becoming 
specialists in a limited fiield of action. I believe that it is 
also very important to develop a collective awareness in society. 
  [Recio] It is going to be one year since the elections of 
1993, a highly significant moment in the history of democracy in 
Cuba and Cuban history itself. Alarcon is perhaps the best 
person to answer the following question: A year has gone by. Is 
that overwhelmingly majoritarian support of socialism, the 
revolution, and the fatherland still there? A year later, what 
changes have taken place in the awareness of the people who did 
not understand well enough the essence of those elections and 
its results? 
  [Alarcon] I deeply believe so. I believe that in the measure 
that times goes by, this cultivated, educated people understand 
even more that what is at stake is the defense of socialism, 
which is everything for us. Even our national identity, the 
possibility of the existence of this land as a sovereign and 
independent nation is inseparable from the project of social 
justice which the Cuban people have undertaken. I believe this 
is the explanation of what we commented on earlier: Why our 
people have resisted so hard for four years of the special 
period while others have not. 
  Regarding the second question: We will, of course, always 
have detractors and this honors us. The day those who live in a 
pseudodemocracy, in a society that uses terms as noble as this 
one to disguise the opposite, to hide the lack of equality and 
therefore the lack of the real authority of the people over its 
government, see our system as praiseworthy would be reason 
enough for us to conduct a self-examination to find out what are 
we doing wrong. 
  I believe that in the political aspect, in general, the 
defense of Cuba's revolutionary project is growing each day 
throughout the world because it is precisely an alternative. As 
long as there is a country which, confronted with immense 
challenges, maintains alive ideals which for many people are but 
dreams of a more noble world, a world based on equity, justice, 
fraternity rather than profit, exploitation, and individual 
selfishness which is capitalism, as long as this exists, there 
is a threat to people who exploit and discriminate in this 
world, as all this keeps the people's dream alive. In the 
political sense, this should be reflected more each day in a 
system of government that is genuinely, truly, and authentically 
of the people, one that is really participatory. I believe that 
despite the enemy campaigns, this is a concept that continues to 
become more deeply rooted, continues to progress. 
  I mentioned the other day an Italian friend who saw 
something 
he cannot do in his country. Here it can be done and will be 
done more and better each day precisely because we have a just 
society and a people aware and capable of sustaining and 
preserving that society, a people who have a great revolution 
made by the people and worthy of the people. 
  [Recio] There is one more question: A special session of the 
ANPP has been announced. What is expected of this special 
session? When will it be held? 
  [Alarcon] It will be held at the appropriate time -- here I 
am returning to the diplomatic language of my previous job 
[laughter]. I believe that it will happen early in the year. The 
session should reflect what was decided in December -- the 
continuation of that discussion which I am sure will be held 
under better conditions, with more preparation, more in-depth 
analysis, accompanied much more by the people as a result of 
this process in which the people are participating. I believe it 
will be held at a time when we are more on the offensive. The 
people are not only talking about finances, but they are acting 
on them everywhere across the land. At the time the ANPP meeting 
is held, I am sure that this process by the unions and ANPP 
deputies and delegates will have attained much more dynamism and 
strength, and this will be reflected in the ANPP meeting. 

