CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Krylov, jurist: "Businessmen Do Not Feel </F>
Safe; Free Economic Zone `Yantar' in Kaliningrad Suffering Birth 
Pangs"] 
  [Text] Kaliningrad today is seemingly all in anticipation 
of an economic miracle. The hour is not far off when the free 
economic zone "Yantar" will announce itself in full voice. 
Already today there has been a notable revitalization of 
entrepreneurial activity in the city and the oblast. 
Representatives of the business world from all of Europe have 
become frequent visitors here. Blocks of bank offices, financial 
institutions, customs services and trade representations will 
spring up in the oblast center. 
  However, for a full assurance of tomorrow, the newly 
emerging 
Russian "gold coast" needs one other indispensable condition: 
Stability, the guarantee of effective and safe activity of 
businessmen, industrialists and merchants. And who, if not the 
law enforcement agencies together with the administration, must 
provide them? 
  The matter, of course, is not a simple one, and quite 
troublesome. Yet otherwise, the positive undertaking in 
development of an international economic and trade center in the 
west of Russia may become just the opposite--a sort of 
provincial Klondike, where there is a constant re-drawing of the 
zones of influence by shadow groupings, money laundering and 
racketeering, and where justice is meted out by people who are 
subservient to and dear to the hearts of those who are strong in 
this world. So as not to make unsubstantiated statements, let me 
cite just one example from the life of present-day Kaliningrad. 
  At the start of 1994, the local newspapers illuminated in 
detail the course of the judicial proceedings in the case of the 
joint Latvian-Russian-Argentinian enterprise "Silar 
International." Vladimir Shershakov, the general director of the 
firm, and Petr Saranchuk, the director of its Moscow branch, 
were sentenced by the court of Baltiyskiy Rayon in Kaliningrad 
to four years and three years two months, respectively, in a 
strict regimen correctional-labor colony, with confiscation of 
property. The convicted men were incriminated in attempted 
contraband and document forgery. 
  The scandalous episode began in the winter of 1993, when 
fuel 
belonging to "Silar" which had been prepared for shipment to 
fishing sites was suddenly detained by order of B. Livenkov, 
deputy chief of administration of the oblast MB [Ministry of 
Security]. Even before the trial, 10,000 tonnes of diesel fuel 
were handed over "for storage" to the Pioneer Base of the 
Kaliningrad Ocean Fishing Fleet. Then, in investigative 
language, this "material evidence" mysteriously disappeared. 
Together, as it later became clear, with the many thousands of 
dollars in profits from its sale. The accused parties, headed by 
Mr. Shershakov, patiently waited for proof of their guilt to be 
presented. The version of "attempted contraband" clearly did not 
hold water, and the MB investigators began looking for 
compromise throughout all the activity of the enterprise. For 
them it was now a question of saving face, since, with the aid 
of TV and the local newspapers, it had been reported to 
Kaliningrad residents ahead of time (before the trial!) that the 
activity of the contrabandists had been curtailed and that the 
10,000 tonnes of diesel fuel had been returned to the homeland. 
  During this period, the associates of one of the rayon 
sections of the Kaliningrad militia filed a criminal case 
against the Pioneer fishing fleet base for unlawful sale of fuel 
which did not belong to them. It seemed that a further 
investigation of the cases should be conducted jointly, uniting 
them into one. However, the MB administration rejected this 
proposal. Moreover, the transport procurator's office, to which 
the case had been handed over, had already begun its processing. 
  Today, after the proceedings, it is not surprising that the 
accused persons never admitted their guilt and insisted that the 
case against them had been fabricated. At the same time, the 
representatives for the defense--both Moscow and Kaliningrad 
lawyers--synonymously called the trial "lawlessness in regard to 
progressive and law-abiding enterprise," and intend to fight for 
a review of the ruling in the oblast court, and if necessary 
even in the Supreme Court. 
  Work with problems of entrepreneurship and private business, 
for example, demands additional knowledge and special training 
on the part of the representatives of the law enforcement 
agencies. 
  In the economic zone which is being created, under 
conditions 
of market relations Kaliningrad jurists are already today 
encountering numerous problems. The goods traffic and turnover 
of capital is increasing many times over. Aside from the 
national code of laws, it is necessary to have an excellent 
knowledge of international law and its peculiarities in one or 
another partner country. 
  The judicial proceedings surrounding "Silar International," 
in my opinion, are a good illustration of what we have said. 
  If you, for example, do not have a sufficiently good grasp 
of 
the questions of formulating agreements between branches, or 
doubt the correctness of preparation of the customs documents, 
what will you do? That is right, you will call in experts. It is 
a pity that Judge Tamara Dolinskaya thought differently, and 
because of this for two months the defense was not able to have 
even one (!) economic expert evaluation with the participation 
of independent specialists. 
  We might add that an elementary commercial analysis, an 
expert evaluation, were it to be conducted, would immediately 
show that the efforts on organization of the fishing trade, 
including the provision of vessels with fuel, is several times 
more economically expedient than the resale of this fuel. And 
furthermore, a one-time deal cannot be more attractive to 
businessmen than a long-term profitable venture. (For 
comparison: The resale of the fuel could have brought "Silara" 
$600,000 in profits, while the fishing could have brought it 
over $3.5 million). 

