Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Ministry of International Trade and Industry 
[MITI] and the U.S. Department of Commerce on 16 February issued 
a joint report on "Why U.S. Automobiles Do Not Sell in Japan." 
The report predicts that if the problems in selling U.S.-made 
automobiles -- like Japanese auto manufacturers' close ties with 
auto dealers and the U.S. manufacturers' inadequate sales 
efforts -- are removed, annual sales will grow from the present 
19,200 (in 1993) to about 57,000. As the report represents 
results of a survey endorsed by both countries, it is likely to 
have an impact on the new Japan-U.S. economic consultations with 
respect to automobiles and auto parts, an agreement on which 
could not be reached at the recent Japanese-U.S. summit. 
  The survey was proposed by the United States at the 
Japan-U.S. structural impediments initiative talks in 1991. It 
was conducted in 1992 by Nomura General Institute of Japan and 
Boos Allen and Hamilton, interviewing or presenting 
questionnaires to domestic and foreign auto manufacturers, 
importers, dealers, and consumers. 
  As reasons for Japanese dealers being reluctant to handle 
U.S. automobiles, the report cites: 1) Problems in securing 
enough employees; 2) the problem of U.S. manufacturers not 
making enough efforts to enter the market; 3) difficulties in 
obtaining good outlets; and 4) lack of funds. 
  According to the report, if the auto dealers are able to 
secure enough employees their sales will grow by 5,000 units, 
and if the U.S. manufacturers adopt systems in their automobiles 
that the Japanese are used to, sales will grow by an additional 
3,500 units. Furthermore, the report estimates that if all 
these problems are resolved at the same time, there will be 
multiplying effects, and the sales of U.S. automobiles will jump 
up to 57,000 units. 
  MITI itself says: "Some of the estimates given in the report 
are difficult to understand; there is not much meaning in the 
numbers given there." But it is possible that the United States 
will use these numbers in criticizing the "Japanese-style 
structure" like keiretsu dealings. 
  Moreover, in relation to the manufacturer-dealer 
relationship 
the United States complained about in the new economic 
consultations, the report points out that 33 percent of dealers 
have received capital investment from manufacturers and that 40 
percent have long-term debts owed to manufacturers. Even though 
rules banning keirestu-affiliated dealers from handling 
nonkeiretsu vehicles were removed in 1990, the report notes that 
16 percent of the dealers replied: "I think restrictions exist." 
  As evidence of U.S. manufacturers making no efforts to enter 
the market, the report points out the need for them to bring 
right-hand drive vehicles into Japan, quoting U.S. company 
representatives in Japan as saying: "Parent companies are not 
putting enough energy into the Japanese market." 
  The report also says the actual price of U.S. vehicles sold 
in Japan are higher than those for Japanese vehicles by an 
average of 20 percent; and, advertisement and maintenance of 
sales network expenses are pushing up prices. 

