BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Talal al-Hasan, minister of state </F>
for foreign affairs, in Amman, by Fayiz al-Miliji, in Cairo; 
date not given; from the "Dialogue from Afar" program -- 
recorded] 
  [Text] [Al-Miliji] Can you brief us on the most 
important results of his Majesty King Husayn's tour of the 
United States? 
  [Al-Hasan] The Jordanian-U.S. summit meeting was successful 
in the true sense of the word. His Majesty King Hussayn held 
meetings with U.S. President Bill Clinton and the secretaries of 
state, defense, and commerce. He held a meeting with the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee and U.S. congressional leaders. In 
my opinion, the royal visit achieved its objectives of deepening 
bilateral relations. The visit was also a precious opportunity 
which came at the appropriate time to discuss the peace process 
and ways of promoting it so that it would reach its goals of 
achieving a just, comprehensive, and lasting peace in the 
region. In addition, the Jordanian-U.S. Joint Committee held 
its first meeting, during which it conducted a general review of 
the relations in all areas and domains. Naturally, these talks 
resulted in a convergence of views. This undoubtedly will would 
have positive and beneficial effects on the two countries' joint 
interests. 
  [Al-Miliji] Regarding the impact of the visit on 
Jordanian-U.S. relations, was agreement reached on implementing 
joint projects or were certain agreements concluded between the 
two sides? 
  [Al-Hasan] Undoubtedly, the talks held within the framework 
of the joint committee were thorough. They dealt with several 
issues, especially in the economic field. I am confident that 
the indications that emerged from these meetings were positive 
and reassuring. The meetings that were held within the 
framework of the joint committee were fruitful and constructive. 
All issues were discussed in depth and in detail. I am sure 
these talks will have positive effects in all areas and domains. 
  [Al-Miliji] We now move to the results of the Jordanian 
king's visit to the United States in regard to the Middle East 
peace process on its Jordanian-Israeli track. The Jordanian 
monarch's talks in the United States aimed to push forward these 
talks. What was achieved, Mr. Minister? 
  [Al-Hasan] Regarding the peace process, or regarding the 
part of His Majesty King Husayn's visit to the United States 
dealing with this process, the royal visit, in my opinion, was 
an important stage, coming as it did after the activation of the 
formulas for negotiations on the Jordanian track. I am fully 
confident that this development will have a positive and 
tangible effect on all other tracks. This is because 
essentially we all seek a just, lasting, and comprehensive 
peace. We also look forward to achieving joint objectives 
according to a comprehensive view of the peace track. 
  [Al-Miliji] Mr. Minister, let us go back to your statement 
on the activation of the talks on the Jordanian track. What do 
you mean by this phrase? What progress was made on the 
Jordanian-Israeli track in the past phase? 
  [Al-Hasan] Undoubtedly you are aware that the media have 
reported extensively on the progress within the framework of the 
tripartite U.S.-Jordanian-Israeli Committee. Positive results 
were achieved regarding the demarcation of the border, the 
issues of land and security, and other issues pertaining to 
water and the environment. Accordingly, this progress has had 
positive effects on the Jordanian-Israeli track. Therefore, 
there should be real progress regarding all these issues, which 
are a basic part of the agenda approved by the two sides last 
September. 
  [Al-Miliji] Your Excellency, has an agreement been reached 
with Israel concerning the issues of land, security, the 
environment, and borders? 
  [Al-Hasan] An agreement to form a committee has been 
reached. 
In the past Israel had refused to form a committee on the 
demarcation of borders and land. This is an important basic 
issue because it concerns Jordan's sovereignty over its land. 
Therefore, the direct results produced by the tripartite 
committee were represented in the Israeli approval to form this 
committee. This has triggered the real progress to which I 
referred in my previous answer. 
  [Al-Miliji] Did King Husayn of Jordan discuss this issue, 
the 
issue of the land, during his talks in the United States? Did 
he also ask the Israeli side for an understanding on this issue? 
  [Al-Hasan] During His Majesty's meeting with the U.S. 
President and other U.S. officials, the talks focused on the 
peace process and Jordan's principal role in this process, to 
which Jordan is committed with the aim of reaching a just, 
comprehensive, and lasting peace in accordance with the 
Jordanian national constants. His Majesty the King briefed the 
U.S. President and all U.S. officials on Jordan's stand and 
concept regarding this process. The U.S. side showed real 
understanding for His Majesty the King's explanations of these 
issues. The Jordanian stand was received with complete 
satisfaction; and the U.S. side made clear statements, praising 
Jordan's role and adopting the Jordanian viewpoint concerning 
the issues of land, borders, and other things. 
  [Al-Miliji] Your Excellency, can we say that the coming days 
will witness the signing of a peace agreement between Jordan and 
Israel? 
  [Al-Hasan] When all the issues on the agenda--the agenda 
which has been agreed upon and ratified by the two sides--are 
discussed and when all Jordan's demands pertaining to the issues 
of lands, waters, refugees, and other issues that are clearly 
listed on the agenda are met, we will undoubtedly reach, as part 
of a comprehensive agreement, a comprehensive and just peace 
that will be accepted by future generations. 
  [Al-Miliji] At the end of this dialogue, we convey our 
heartfelt thanks to Talal al-Hasan, Jordanian minister of state 
for foreign affairs. Your Excellency is always welcome as a 
guest on the Voice of the Arabs. Thank you. 
  [Al-Hasan] You are welcome. 

