BFN 

  [Text] Georgian leader Eduard Shevardnadze says that any 
refusal to sign an agreement on cease-fire and troop 
disengagement with Abkhazia during peace talks in Moscow would 
mean that Georgia was opting for a military solution. 
  In a televised interview late on Saturday [14 May], he said 
that "this could not be justified either from the point of our 
possibilities or morally." 
  Shevardnadze rejected opposition charges saying the Saturday 
peace deal infringed on Georgia's territorial integrity. "There 
is no word about Abkhazian sovereignty or statehood in the 
paper," he said. 
  This problem, he said, is to be solved at a later stage, and 
Abkhazia shall be given a new political status but within 
Georgia itself. 
  Nor did he accept one other allegation saying Russia wanted 
to send troops into the region to assert Abkhazia's independence 
and secession from Georgia. He expressed confidence about 
recovering the region soon. 
  Shevardnadze said that although he raised the question of a 
confidence vote in the head of state and transfer of power to 
parliament at private hearings on Friday, the deputies had not 
enough courage to discuss it. He spoke of staying away from the 
Saturday session to help them take a decision "but they failed 
to do so". 
  Shevardnadze said he was once again convinced how fatal it 
would be to transfer power to the incumbent parliament. 
  Meanwhile, Georgian deputes after two days of debates on 
Friday and Saturday have failed to reach any agreement what is 
to be done with the Moscow peace deal which provides for the 
disengagement of the warring sides and introduction of 
peacekeepers into a buffer zone along the Ingur river. 
  Our correspondent says it appears that the parliamentary 
resolution banning the Georgian delegation to sign any documents 
in Moscow has no legal force. By law, it is the country's head 
of state who is vested with powers to conduct negotiations or 
sign any papers on Georgia's behalf. 
  This must have been an eye opener to many deputies who would 
not have continued this pointless dispute for two days in a row 
otherwise, Deputy Speaker Vakhtang Rcheulishvili who leads a 
parliamentary majority supporting Shevardnadze told INTERFAX. 
  However, opposition leader Boris Kakubava disagrees. In an 
interview with Interfax, he said that the government's dismissal 
of the parliamentary resolution amounted to its disregard of the 
law. In his words, there can be no question of democracy in 
Georgia once a capitulatory deal has been signed in Moscow. 
  On the agreement itself, Kakubava said it helped Abkhazia to 
legitimize the genocide against the Georgian people and write 
off thousands of lost lives. "Our organization, the Alliance of 
the Liberation of Abkhazia expressing the interests of most 
refugees from Abkhazia is not going to put up with this," he 
said adding "we have our own way of how to return to Abkhazia." 
  The army will obey any orders from commander-in-chief and 
head of state Eduard Shevardnadze, a defence ministry spokesman 
in Tbilisi told Interfax. Troops and weaponry will be pulled 
back from the Ingur river and a buffer zone for peacekeepers set 
up, he said. 

