Disaster 

<F P=102>   94WN0246A Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in Russian 29 Mar 94 pp 
1-2 </F>

<F P=103> 94WN0246A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrey Bayduzhiy: "Safety: Radiation </F>
Disaster in Norwegian Sea Is Almost Inevitable; Departmental 
Muddle Causing Country To Lose Last Chance To Make 
Nuclear-Powered Submarine Komsomolets Safe"] 
  [Text] In a few days, on April 7, it will be exactly five 
years since the loss of the submarine Komsomolets and 42 of its 
crewmen in the Norwegian Sea. As the tragedy recedes into the 
past, it no longer evokes such keen interest. And this can 
easily be explained: In the time since the Komsomolets went 
down, Russians have witnessed a sizable number of disasters and 
accidents. 
  A brief surge in attention to the Komsomolets problem 
occurred in September 1993, when the fourth expedition to study 
the site where the submarine sunk returned from the Norwegian 
Sea. Its findings were extremely alarming. Using the Mir-1 and 
Mir-2 deep-sea units, it was able to ascertain that the casings 
of two of the Komsomolets's nuclear torpedoes had been almost 
completely eaten away by rust and that they would leak plutonium 
far more quickly that had been expected. The expedition gave 
late 1994 as the most likely date. 
  Despite such bleak forecasts, however, the specialists 
studying the Komsomolets problem were confident that a radiation 
disaster could nonetheless be prevented. They had rather 
compelling grounds for optimism. A Committee for Special 
Underwater Operations (CSUO) was created to coordinate all 
efforts in this area, and a project was devised for sealing the 
submarine and its nuclear cargo right on the seafloor using a 
special substance known as khitozan, which has high sorption 
properties. Repairs on the research vessel Akademik Keldysh were 
completed in Germany, the Mir units underwent repairs in 
Finland, and contracts began being concluded with Russian 
enterprises for deliveries of equipment. In addition, CSUO chief 
Tengiz Borisov managed to do the almost impossible: Financing 
for all operations involving the Komsomolets was included in the 
state order. Preparations for the main operation, scheduled for 
June through August 1994, went into full swing. 
  But the overconfident CSUO officials failed to take one 
thing 
into account. Departmental muddle and bureaucratic ambitions in 
Russia can be far more terrible than any natural disaster or 
technical difficulty. And these two "natural calamities" have 
posed an insurmountable obstacle to solving the Komsomolets 
problem. The CSUO was abolished on January 10, 1994, in 
connection with the establishment of the Russian Federation 
Ministry for Emergencies, and its functions were transferred to 
one of the new structure's administrations. As is often the 
case, the changes took considerable time, during which 
preparations for the expedition itself had to be forgotten. 
While the expedition was the only "headache" for the CSUO, for 
the leadership of the Ministry for Emergencies, with all its 
other concerns, solving problems relating to a submarine on the 
bottom of the faraway Norwegian Sea proved by no means a top 
priority, something that was quick to have negative consequences. 
  In early 1994 the plan for sealing the Komsomolets was 
approved by a session of the Security Council's 
interdepartmental commission on environmental safety (better 
known as Aleksey Yablokov's commission) and forwarded to the 
Russian Ministry of Environmental Protection for expert 
environmental review. However, the fact that the project had 
lost its sponsor led to a situation in which there was no one to 
"push" it, and processing of the document at various levels 
slowed sharply. The first session of the expert environmental 
review group was held only on March 22. Instead of assessing the 
environmental danger or, on the contrary, the dangers of the 
sealing project, the council's members opened a new discussion 
of the operation's expediency per se and other possible options 
for rendering the Komsomolets harmless. The commission promises 
to present its conclusions only by May 25. By that time it 
simply won't make any sense to evaluate anything: Even if the 
recommendation is a positive one, the expedition will no longer 
be able to put out to sea. Preparations for it will take at 
least two to three months, and without the expert environmental 
assessment no financing of expedition-related operations can 
begin. 
  A radiation disaster in the Norwegian Sea is exceedingly 
probable. The countdown is no longer in months or weeks but 
days. Meanwhile, a lack of interest in accelerating efforts to 
prevent it is being shown by not only the Russian Federation 
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Natural Resources, but 
also by the Ministry for Emergencies. And while one can still 
understand the unhurried actions of the Ministry of 
Environmental Protection, the position of the department that 
now bears full responsibility for the Komsomolets's fate seems 
inexplicable, at first glance. However, the paradox has a simple 
explanation: The leadership of the Ministry for Emergencies has 
all but the greatest interest in scuttling the expedition to the 
shipwreck site! 
  If the Akademik Keldysh, with the Mir units aboard, does put 
out to sea all the same and the operation, God forbid, collapses 
at sea, full blame for the collapse will rest with incompetent 
ministry officials who were unable to think through all the 
details. And that such an outcome cannot be ruled out is borne 
out by several facts. Sergey Khetagurov, former chairman of the 
North Ossetian Council of Ministers, who switched chairs to 
become deputy minister for emergencies, has been put in charge 
of all measures relating to the Komsomolets. What can an 
official who lost an election in a completely landlocked 
republic know about underwater operations? On the other hand, 
three months after the creation of the ministry administration 
in charge of the Komsomolets problem, it has just one 
member--Reserve Rear Admiral Mikhail Tolokonnikov, former deputy 
chief of the old CSUO. But even that specialist was recently 
deprived of his governmental communications link and moved into 
an office with a single city telephone. If the expedition to the 
Komsomolets collapses, ministry officials will be able to blame 
the mistakes and muddling within their own ministry on seemingly 
objective difficulties caused by the delay in obtaining expert 
environmental review and the lack of financing. And so 
departmental interests have proved stronger than the national 
interest. 
  Meanwhile, the problem of making the Komsomolets safe has 
taken on a new, international aspect. It is no secret that 
sizable financial resources are being enlisted for this; having 
caught the scent of money, representatives of the most diverse 
organizations, pursuing their own interests, are descending on 
Russia like moths to light. One such organization is the 
Komsomolets Memorial Foundation, which was created in Holland 
and has announced to the entire world that it is raising funds 
to raise the submarine. In 1993 the foundation managed to raise 
about $140,000. To properly assess this amount, it must be said 
that Russia itself spent an incomparably greater sum--$4 million 
and 1 billion rubles--on operations relating to the Komsomolets 
in that same year alone. But not even all of the money collected 
by the foundation reached Russia in the form of purchased 
computers; part of it stayed behind in Holland. 
  Still, one could only welcome such assistance from a private 
organization--especially considering that the foundation 
promises to make available a further 2 million guilder (just 
over $1 million) in 1994--were it not for the fact that its 
outwardly selfless actions conceal other, far less altruistic 
considerations. Provision of the funds--which, incidentally, the 
Dutch government, not the foundation itself, intends to provide 
as aid to Russia--is contingent on a number of conditions, chief 
of which is that the Dutch firms Smith and Heerem [Kheyerem] be 
hired as the main contractors in operations involving the 
Komsomolets. They are both part of a Dutch consortium that 
carries out underwater operations. In other words, the 
foundation has assumed the role of lobbyist for Dutch interests 
in matters relating to the Russian submarine. However, that is 
not the end of the problems. In the final analysis, in order to 
avert an environmental disaster, we could sacrifice the 
interests of Russian industrialists. Were it not for one "but." 
Hiring for the project Dutch firms that do not have deep-water 
units at their disposal but do own hoisting cranes will most 
likely lead to a fundamental revision of the entire plan of 
action and to replacement of the plan to seal the submarine with 
a plan to raise it. In that case, it will no longer be possible 
to mount an expedition to the Norwegian Sea this season, and an 
environmental disaster will become almost inevitable. In the 
summer of 1995, there will be an underwater Chernobyl at the 
Komsomolets site: By that time the submarine's torpedoes will be 
destroyed completely, and no one and nothing will be able to 
stop plutonium-239 from leaking out. 
  In experts' opinion, the consequences of the impending 
catastrophe will be very grave. The section of the ocean where 
the submarine lies is one of the most productive, accounting for 
80 percent of all fish taken from the Norwegian Sea. The losses 
to Russia from reduced catches alone, as well as from fines paid 
to other countries, above all Norway, will amount to hundreds of 
millions of dollars a year. In addition, rather large suspended 
radioactive particles that can be transported by currents were 
found at the Komsomolets site in August 1993. In the event of 
massive plutonium discharges that will continue for several 
years, the strong underwater currents in the region, which reach 
speeds of 1.5 meters per second and change direction several 
times a day, will lead to the rapid contamination of several 
thousand square kilometers of seafloor. Considering that the 
half-life of plutonium is 24,000 years, the sea in that region 
will be closed to fishing for 600 to 700 years. 

