CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article under the rubric "Sociological Poll": </F>
"Democracy or Dictatorship?"] 
  [Text] The International Institute of Marketing and 
Social Research GFK-Rossiya conducted a poll of the population 
in 110 cities and 66 rural population points. It questioned 
2,000 people. 
  The study showed that 50 percent of the population were in 
favor of a democratic form of rule, sharing the opinion that in 
any case democracy is better than dictatorship. Another 27 
percent think that under certain conditions dictatorship can be 
better than democracy. It makes no difference to the remaining 
23 percent whether they live under a dictatorship or democracy. 
  Fifty percent are against restoring the communist system. 
  Nineteen percent said they would "rather not," 15 
percent--"categorically yes," and 16 percent said they would 
"rather have it than not." 
  While there is great universal confidence in the army, the 
version of a military dictatorship does not attract our people 
either. The balance here is 85 percent "no" and 14 
percent--"yes." 
  The idea of restoring the monarchy is not popular at all 
either: "No"--87 percent and "yes"--11 percent. 
  The idea of not a parliament and elective organs but a 
strong 
leader who can quickly implement decisions is extremely popular: 
"Yes"--63 percent and "no"--36 percent. 
  Even more popular is the idea of an independent "government 
of experts" who are not involved in politics: "Yes"--71 percent 
and "no"--28 percent. 
  Thus hopes are placed either in a "wise government" of 
specialists who do not participate in political disputes or in a 
strong authoritarian individual. 
  Can we expect that our new political system will eliminate 
all its "growing problems" or should we replace it with another 
one if it does not produce good results in the near future? The 
opinion of Russians was divided almost equally: 49 percent and 
51 percent. 
  So far our compatriots are not ecstatic over the existing 
political system. Only 9 percent say that their expectations 
related to the change of the political system were justified; 42 
percent were more disenchanted and another 26 percent were 
extremely disenchanted because they expected more; the remaining 
22 percent expected nothing good from the change of political 
system from the very beginning. 

