Language: <F P=105> Georgian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Statement by the Union of Georgian Officers" issued on 14 </F>
March 1994; place not given] 
  [Text] The most serious economic crisis prevailing in the 
country has created great difficulties for the Georgian Army, 
which is in the process of formation. An alarming situation 
exists in army units. It is not possible to satisfy to the 
minimum degree those essential demands of personnel without 
which the tasks facing the country's protectors cannot be 
fulfilled. The training process is, to all intents and 
purposes, in disarray. Combat, weapon, tactical, and other 
types of training are not being conducted at the appropriate 
level. As a result of being socially unprotected, experienced 
cadres are leaving the army. The families of those who have 
died or been made invalids fighting for Georgia's territorial 
integrity have been left to the mercy of fate. Along with 
material deprivation, there is the nihilistic attitude of 
society toward those in military uniform. Moreover, the vile 
disinformation that has recently been spread by certain mass 
media concerning the former defense minister [Giorgi 
Qarqarishvili] is doing great harm not only to the standing of 
the Armed Forces but also to the country's defense capability. 
  Georgian officers have been left with nothing today save the 
honor of their uniforms, and violation of this honor, no matter 
by whom, is bringing grist to the enemy's mill. The Union of 
Georgian Officers, which was created to contribute to the 
process of building the Armed Forces and popularizing the 
military cause, calls upon the Georgian authorities, all strata 
of society, industrialists, businessmen, and representatives of 
the mass media to render effective assistance in forming a 
single strong defense-capable Georgian Army. The Union of 
Georgian Officers calls upon officers and soldiers, in spite of 
all kinds of difficulties, to preserve their spiritual vigor and 
guard their military honor. 
  14 March, 1994. 

