Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Sergey Chugayev report: "State Duma: Two Sensations in </F>
Half an Hour -- New Deputies' Group Overtakes Liberal Democrats. 
The Leader of the Communist Faction Is Not Zyuganov, But 
Lapshin"] 
  [Text] The Duma's first sitting 13 January lasted a total 
of 30 minutes. For purely technical reasons. First the 
electronic voting system broke down, and then the requisite 
documents were found not to be ready. 
  Nevertheless, two sensational developments occurred in those 
30 minutes: The "New Regional Policy" deputies' group, set up 
12 January, has overtaken the LDPR [Liberal Democratic Party of 
Russia] in terms of numbers, becoming the largest deputies' 
association in the Duma after "Russia's Choice." 
  On the whole then, the deputies divided up as follows: 

  -  The "Democratic Party of Russia" faction -- 15 members; 
  -  the "Women of Russia" faction -- 23 members; 
  -  the LDPR faction -- 63 members; 
  -  Yavlinskiy's faction -- 25 members; 
  -  "Russia's Choice" -- 76 members; 
  -  the PRES [Party of Russian Unity and Accord] -- 30 members; 
  -  the Agrarian Party of Russia -- 55 members; 
  -  the Communist faction -- 45 members; and 
  -  the "New Regional Policy" deputies' group -- 65 members. 
  An ITAR-TASS correspondent learned the names of the leaders 
of the State Duma factions from deputies in the lower chamber. 
  Vladimir Lukin has been put forward for the post of chairman 
of the "Yabloko" faction; Ivan Rybkin for that of the Agrarian 
Party; Sergey Glazyev for the Democratic Party of Russia; 
Vladimir Zhirinovskiy for the LDPR; Sergey Shakhray for the 
PRES; Mikhail Lapshin for the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation; Oil Workers' Union President Vladimir Medvedev for 
the "New Regional Policy" faction; Alevtina Fedulova for "Women 
of Russia." "Russia's Choice" has so far refrained from 
publicizing the name of its faction chairman. 
  The organizational formalization of factions is not over 
yet. 
But it can already be noted that the Communists have teamed up 
with the Agrarians. 
  The main result of the consultations by independent deputies 
on the subject of forming deputies' groups in the Duma, for 
which purpose a day and a half's recess was proposed, was the 
appearance of the "New Regional Policy" deputies' group. There 
are 62 people on its lists [figure as published]. So in terms 
of strength, the new deputies' group has overtaken the 
Communists and the Agrarians, and gotten very close to 
Zhirinovskiy's faction, which yet again casts doubt over the 
LDPR head's claims to undisputed leadership in the parliament. 
  Judging from the group's declarations, the Duma's political 
center has not stayed vacant for long, and it is precisely "New 
Regional Policy," which has taken the place of the former "Civic 
Union" in the old Russian parliament. The composition of the 
new deputies' association is interesting and diverse. On the 
one hand, a group of representatives of Russian republics and 
autonomies led by former CPSU Central Committee Secretary A. 
Dzasokhov has joined it, and, on the other, famous Russian 
businessman A. Tarasov is among its ranks. Almost all the Army 
generals who were elected deputies have ended up in the group's 
line-up. But the association's fundamental support consists of 
the managers of major enterprises, including from the fuel and 
energy complex. Along with the PRES, "Russia's Choice," and 
Agrarian factions, "New Regional Policy" also has a minister in 
its midst -- Government apparatus leader V. Kvasov, who obtained 
ministerial rank a few days ago. It is said in the Duma 
corridors that the new association has the prime minister's 
sympathies. 
  On the subject of the political nature of "New Regional 
Policy" and opportunities for it to form alliances and blocs, 
there will be a more detailed discussion of this in an interview 
with the group's chairman, Oil Workers' Union President V. 
Medvedev, to be published in a forthcoming edition. However, 
judgment can be made about its claim to the role of a serious 
force in the Duma by the fact that V. Medvedev has already been 
put forward as a candidate for the post of speaker of the lower 
chamber. At the same time, it is not ruled out that his 
candidacy will receive the support of the "Russia's Choice" 
bloc, which has as yet failed to put its own candidate forward. 
  In point of fact, the creation of the "New Regional Policy" 
group was the only successfully completed attempt at forming new 
deputies' associations. The so-called industrial-financial 
group failed to gather the requisite 35 people under its banner. 
The groups of deputies led by I. Khakamada, after much 
deliberation, decided to join "Russia's Choice." Likewise, the 
patriotically minded deputies led by A. Lukyanov did not succeed 
in registering, although observers are of the opinion that they 
still have a chance of setting up a deputies' group. 
  At the same time, despite the recent spread of rumors, the 
"Russia's Choice" faction remained united. As G. Burbulis 
declared in a conversation with IZVESTIYA's correspondent, he 
does not entertain the possibility of a split in the faction, 
although it is not impossible that some of its members will not 
match up to demands placed on them for a high level of 
professionalism. As for the faction's possible stance in 
connection with the expected government reshuffle, G. Burbulis 
declared that "Russia's Choice" will not play the role of 
passive observer of government actions. Along with this he 
stressed that the faction does not intend to switch to opposing 
the president, and it will try to help B. Yeltsin to maintain 
his stance as a president of reform. 

