Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] Helsinki HUFVUDSTADSBLADET in Swedish on 
8 March on page 8, in an article by Tomas Hellen, describes 
efforts of Estonian towns, especially Parnu, to improve their 
harbors thereby increasing trade with Western countries. 
  As in Finland and other countries around the Baltic 
following 
the breakup of the Soviet bloc, the harbor towns in Estonia are 
already competing in trying to quickly adapt to new trade 
patterns. No other component of the former Soviet Union has 
reoriented its foreign trade structure to the West as thoroughly 
or rapidly as has Estonia. Today, half of Estonia's exports go 
to Finland and Sweden, and the earlier completely dominating 
East bloc trade has almost entirely dried up. Even the energy 
dependence on Russia has been broken: The country is now at 66 
percent self-sufficiency, and the remaining requirement is 
mainly met by imports from the West. 
  Under the Soviet Union, the harbors of Estonia served 
entirely the needs of the empire, and in Soviet fashion the 
effort was on centralization and creation of large units. The 
symbol for this is Tallinn's outer harbor, Muuga, which was 
built by Finnish companies for handling the state's grain 
imports from the West. At the same time, the smaller harbors in 
Estonia were completely closed to traffic and allowed to 
deteriorate. Soviet authorities always cited so-called security 
concerns as the reason for its maritime policy. 
  The reviving activity and ambitious planning found at Parnu, 
the formerly lively Gulf of Riga port, is a case in point. 
Reopened to commercial traffic only in 1989, for almost 50 years 
it had functioned almost exclusively as a Soviet naval base and 
as home port for the local deep-sea fishing kolkhoz. With the 
end of the Soviet Union, the kolkhoz lost the market for its 
"catch quotas" set by Moscow and is now for all practical 
purposes bankrupt and it ships laid up. 
  Overall, however, conditions have gradually improved for the 
harbors, which are being operated at least temporarily by 
municipal governments. This is perhaps again seen dramatically 
in the case of Parnu. Seen as having good potential as an export 
harbor, it is located at the town center a few miles up from the 
mouth of the Parnu River. Last year its harbor facilities 
handled over 300,000 tons of cargo. Most of the volume 
constituted exports, with shipments of lumber and peat to Sweden 
in turn making up most of this. At the end of this year still 
another important product will be added when a newly constructed 
Swedish plant for making sandbox sand will start operating. 
  City officials claim they have made harbor fees the lowest 
in 
the country to attract business and see the most immediate 
prospects for increasing port usage lying with passenger 
traffic. Thanks largely to foreign investments, again mostly 
from Sweden, there has been a lively restoring of shops, hotels, 
and restaurants, and many new ones have been built. Largely due 
to this, the town is regaining its old reputation as a resort 
center for Scandinavian and German tourists. This summer 
authorities expect cruise line visits for the first time since 
before the war. Kristina Cruises of Finland has talked with 
officials about making Parnu a port of call part as part of a 
new Estonian cruise route. A Baltic boating festival next August 
is also expected to boost Parnu as a tourist resort. 
  Regarding long-range efforts to develop shipping, the 
Estonian Government has submitted completed plans to the 
Investment Bank and the European Bank for Redevelopment in order 
get financing to improve and expand wharves, warehouses, and 
other port buildings through soft loans. Authorities believe 
that approval of the project would permit Parnu to double its 
cargo handling capacity to 600,000-700,000 tons per year. The 
proposal also includes funding for dredging the harbor from the 
current 6-6.5 meters. This would allow ships of up to 3,000 grt 
[gross registered tonnage] to call at the port. 
  Parnu's main drawback is that it lacks direct rail 
connections eastward. Nevertheless, a Parnu port official 
envisions a key regional economic role: "Parnu can become 
Estonia's next-largest harbor after Tallinn. We aren't talking 
about the transit traffic with Russia, but we are trying to find 
a niche in our natural hinterland in the southern part of 
Estonia." 
  However, many infrastructure deficiencies remain to be dealt 
with even if the international agencies grant funding. In 
addition to the mentioned poor land-transportation connections, 
an even more urgent problem needing solution is the lack of 
icebreaker vessels in the Gulf of Riga, which because of the 
unusually harsh winter this year was closed until around 
mid-March. Estonia has only two icebreakers, both obtained from 
Finland, and these are fully occupied in the Gulf of Finland 
keeping open the vital Tallinn area ports. (Finland also 
recently sold an older icebreaker to Latvia.) 
  In addition, other Estonian ports, most importantly 
Haapsalu, 
have similar harbor development plans for which they are seeking 
foreign funding. Parnu's Gulf of Riga neighbor Salacgriva, in 
Latvia, is seen as another competitor. 
  Muuga will likely continue to remain unchallenged as 
Estonia's most important harbor, however, due to its good rail 
communications with Tallinn and east to Narva and St. 
Petersburg. Moreover, it has the deepest harbor in the country, 
18 meters, which means that any ship able to transit the Danish 
straits can call there. It also has by far the best 
cargo-handling facilities and equipment. Paldiski, located to 
the east of Tallinn, may regain some of its prewar importance 
after the former Soviet naval base is closed, but much work will 
need to be done in clearing the harbor of sunken ships and 
rebuilding deteriorated facilities. 

