Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report from Stockholm by Audrius Braukyla] </F>
  [Text] Government leaders of the three Baltic states have 
decided to step up cooperation in the security field. This was 
reported by Linas Linkevicius, minister of national defense, 
after a meeting with Valdis Birkavs and Mart Laar in the Latvian 
Embassy in Stockholm yesterday afternoon. According to Linas 
Linkevicius, it has been agreed to coordinate at top 
governmental level the issues of airspace and border control of 
the Baltic states. 
  The minister of national defense also pointed out that the 
Lithuanian delegation bound themselves at the meeting to prepare 
a draft treaty of the states on the peace-keeping battalion. 
  During the meeting negotiations were held by the leaders of 
the three governments on the development of the Lithuanian, 
Latvian, and Estonian power engineering system. In this 
respect, according to Linas Linkevicius, his conversation with 
Danish Prime Minister Poul Rasmussen yesterday was worth 
mentioning. They talked about the possibility of the Baltic 
states tapping into the gas supply system of the Nordic states. 
  According to the leader of the Lithuanian delegation, the 
Danish prime minister would regard positively the possibility of 
supplying gas to Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia from Denmark. 
  Much attention at the meeting was given to the problem of 
speeding up the negotiations between Russia and Latvia and 
Estonia. Estonian Prime Minister Mart Laar told Lithuanian Radio 
that his country feels strong support from Lithuania on issues 
concerning the withdrawal of Russian troops. Mart Laar believes 
that in the future, when the Russian troops have been withdrawn 
from Latvia and Estonia, one of the greatest problems for the 
security of the Baltic states may be the large concentration of 
Russian troops deployed in the Kaliningrad region and the 
question of their transit. 
  At the moment the delegations from the governments of the 
Baltic states are taking part in debates currently under way at 
the session of the Council of Ministers of the Nordic States. 

