Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Shijiazhuang, Mar 1 (XINHUA) -- A major green 
campaign aimed at transforming barren mountains into orchards 
has been launched in north Hebei Province. 
  The curtain was lifted on the campaign on last Friday [25 
February] when thousands of explosions echoed among the hills of 
the Taihang Mountains to the west of Shijiazhuang, the 
provincial capital. The blasting will make it possible to form 
fields on hill sides. 
  The vice-director of the city's forestry bureau, Liu 
Zhanzhong, said that from 25 February to 12 March, nearly a 
million blastholes of dynamite would be exploded in the 
mountains. 
  The vice-director said these blasts would pave the way for 
the reclaiming of some 13,000 ha of fields, on which 300,000 
apple trees could be planted. 
  Hebei's campaign is only part of the Chinese Government's 
plan to afforest the Taihang Mountains which run along the 
border between Shanxi and Hebei. 
  In the mountain area, poor vegetation has been causing 
serious erosion, resulting in a rugged terrain and poor water 
conservancy, which, in turn, poses a fundamental difficulty for 
the life of local people and their production efforts. 
  Listed in the "Agenda for the 21st Century" of the Chinese 
Government, the afforestation of the Taihang Mountains will be 
one of the largest environmental construction projects ever 
launched in China. 
  It is also a critical part of global efforts to improve the 
earth environment, and will be carried out as an obligation of 
the Chinese Government to the 1992 United Nations Environment 
and Development Conference. 
  In the first year of full-scale operations on this plan, the 
effort will be concentrated on the development of apple farms, 
and will feature improved management on the side of the 
government, the vice-director said. 
  Besides its effects on the environment, the vice-director 
said the green campaign would also bring about a remarkable 
economic return. 
  The government estimates that in three to five years, these 
hillside orchards will be making 600 million yuan a year for 
local farmers. 

