Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "A Brand of Shame on the Face of Justice"] </F>
  [Text] Yesterday's sensational trial ended with a verdict 
worthy of the deviousness of our rulers and their unprincipled 
sycophants. Aleksander Frangaj's's dose of prison was added to 
that of the journalist Martin Leka, while that of the serviceman 
Feta was added to that of the officer Romeo Licaj. Thus, the 
production plan was fulfilled in total, but not item by item. 
  This political and legal farce does not raise a smile. On 
the contrary, journalists and all citizens who honor, value, and 
are prepared to make sacrifices for free speech are downcast and 
indignant today. Martin Leka is the first Albanian journalist 
to be sentenced to prison. This is no longer a sign, but an 
ominous fact in itself for democracy. Leka was sentenced to 18 
months' imprisonment simply because he bravely exercised his 
profession as journalist in order to inform the public about a 
true fact, on which he commented according to his own 
independent convictions. 
  Martin Leka is today a political prisoner and his 
persecutors 
have names and surnames. First among them is Defense Minister 
Safet Zhulali, this civilian who walks with head held high while 
successive scandals perch on his shoulders like a general's 
epaulets. The foot-soldiers of the state's judiciary are afraid 
to investigate the dollars lost by Zhulali, and are afraid to 
investigate the ship Sotirios. Zhulali makes his confession 
with his hand on his heart to a little German magazine, saying 
all kinds of things about the Albanian Army, and then has the 
shamelessness to demand the imprisonment of a journalist who has 
written about one of his orders. Zhulali has chosen his own 
road, but his career ended at the moment when he launched his 
attack on journalists and succeeded in sending one to prison. 
  The second is Arben Qeleshi, the Tirana procurator. This 
"unprincipled sycophant of Berisha's regime," as Martin Leka 
called him in his speech of defense, deserves the "credit" of 
having handcuffed a journalist in his office. It emerged at the 
trial that Qeleshi had no charge sheet. The defendants' counsel 
insisted at length on this legal point, but perhaps it did not 
occur to them that, in the mentality of sycophants, there is no 
need for charge sheets. A verbal order or a gnash of the teeth 
is enough to set them to work. Qeleshi threw Leka in jail, 
accusing him of slander. On this charge, the journalist 
languished in a cell for one month. Then came the day of the 
trial, and it emerged that there had been no slander, but a 
secret had been revealed. Normally, Qeleshi should be punished 
and dismissed for incompetence and malpractice, begging Martin 
Leka's pardon. But such miracles happen in an independent 
judiciary. Arben Qeleshi's friends changed the charge against 
Martin Leka and sentenced him in cold blood. 
  It was never for a moment demonstrated to the court that 
Zhulali's order constituted a secret. The list of secrets was 
never brought forward. On the contrary, it was not only proved 
that Zhulali's order was not a secret, but that it was also 
illegal. 
  It was not for a moment proved in court that the journalist 
Leka and the officer Licaj had "collaborated in a crime." The 
prosecutors and the judge considered the fact that they both 
lived in Lezhe and had several times drunk coffee together to be 
"collaboration in a crime." This is the logic of Svejk or, if 
you like, Qazim Mulleeti [Tirana humorist], forbidding people to 
meet in twos and threes. 
  The court did not prove Martin Leka's guilt, and could not 
do 
so as long as no crime existed. Arben Ristani, the judge at the 
trial, this young lad with a sleepy and contented expression, 
was invited in vain to take as his example the independence and 
dignity of American judges. However, Ristani decided this time 
that Martin Leka should be the suffering Socrates. Well, better 
that way than to sit like a satisfied pig. 
  Thus, Arben Ristani committed a fatal blunder in his 
just-begun career by sentencing a journalist for revealing 
secrets in a country with political pluralism. He put a bad 
mark against his name in the book of justice that we want to 
write. One is genuinely sorry. That is all. As for those who 
imagine that this sentence has taught the press a lesson, 
whether Ristani himself or his political and nonpolitical 
bosses, let them not rejoice too soon. There is no stopping or 
scaring the press. 
  The sentencing of Martin Leka is a mark of shame on the 
face of Albanian justice that, as in the time of the 
single-party dictatorship, has capitulated under democracy to 
the instructions, pressures, and unbridled appetites of the 
political establishment, striking with an iron fist against the 
free press and against young journalists who do not dance to the 
tune of moldy minds that govern as if in the days of Enver. 
  The journalist's sentencing is therefore a serious 
indictment 
of the political regime today and of the demagogy and cynicism 
of a state that, on the one hand, shouts about human rights and 
freedom of the press and, on the other hand, complains about 
journalists' irresponsibility in revealing in free elections, 
while there will no doubt be a court of justice for those who 
have personally committed crimes. 
  Martin Leka has today been sentenced. The Albanian press has 
suffered a serious blow to its freedom of conscience, which we 
feel with pain and in a spirit of solidarity with our handcuffed 
colleague. However, nobody must imagine that the press will be 
frightened and cowed. Confronted with such shamelessness, free 
newspapers and journalists know only the motto: "Fight for the 
truth." It is with this motto that journalists see off to 
prison their colleague Martin Leka, this young journalist who 
with his good sense, courage, and wisdom, has unexpectedly 
become the symbol of a free press. 

