BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Banking on Prudence"] </F>
  [Text] No Central Bank worth its salt can afford to shape 
the nation's monetary policy on the basis of short-sightedness, 
an inadequate grasp of economic realities and myopic ad-hoc 
improvisations. Any action and decision operating on the above 
justification reflect no vestige of the financial wisdom and 
prudence expected of an important and distinguished institution 
such as the Central Bank. 
  Thus, we find the disclosure by the Governor of Bank Negara 
[Central Bank], Tan Sri Jaffar Hussein, that the bank had 
incurred a loss, which he referred to as a net deficiency, of RM 
[Ringgit malaysia] 5.7 billion in foreign exchange transactions 
in 1993 very disturbing. The transactions were obviously 
carried out beyond the fundamental needs of protecting the 
country's foreign reserves and stabilising the ringgit. They 
were treated as a profit-making venture. No matter how sincere 
and well-meaning its intentions were, the Central bank, in doing 
so, had compromised its prime function of protecting the 
reserves and stabilising the ringgit. 
  The admission by the Governor of this abominable loss may 
place the seemingly endless tirades of speculation about the 
matter in the coffin of history although the loss is, by any 
measure, significant. It is, undoubtedly, a costly lesson but 
it should be a lesson well-learnt and heeded by the bank in all 
its future foreign exchange dealings. 
  We are gratified that the Governor had assumed full 
responsibility for the loss and accordingly, had instituted 
immediate steps to re-instil public confidence by removing the 
officer or officers responsible for the decision and action that 
ultimately led to the bank's losses. At this point there is 
nothing to suggest that a fraudulent act had been committed. 
What went wrong was that the officer or officers responsible 
for managing the bank's foreign exchange trading had obviously 
gone beyond the tasks of protecting our foreign reserve funds 
and stabilising the ringgit but had been involved in currency 
trading instead. 
  We accept the fact that monetary policy planners are not 
prophets but, surely, they must be able to make forecasts and 
formulate a monetary direction based on a deep understanding of 
economic fundamentals. More importantly, they must be capable 
of differentiating a well-discharged task from short-sighted 
profit- making indulgence, the pulses of responsible 
consciousness from the impulses of money-spinning desires and 
the demarcations of duty from the whims of misplaced financial 
wizardry. Therefore, all future foreign exchange transactions 
by the bank must strictly be for the purpose of defending our 
reserves and stabilising the exchange rate of the ringgit and 
they must be prudently carried out and regularly reported to the 
relevant authorities. 
  Having admitted responsibility for the loss, the position of 
Tan Sri Jaffar as the Governor of the bank is no longer tenable. 
Although he did not say when he will submit his resignation, he 
did inform the press that when he does, they would be the third 
-- after the Prime Minister and Finance Minister -- to know. It 
is expected that he would submit his resignation before the next 
sitting of Parliament, when Finance Minister Datuk Sri Anwar 
Ibrahim will certainly have to explain the losses. 
  It is fortunate for us that the loss suffered by the bank 
had 
not affected the nation's robust economy which is projected to 
grow at 8.4 per cent this year. Our economic health is good, if 
not better than ever, but there must be greater accountability 
to ensure no misadventures jeopardise its growth. 

