Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Lamia Radi] </F>
  [Excerpts] Cairo, Feb 3 (AFP)--Western embassies urged 
their citizens to be on the alert on Thursday after Islamic 
militants warned foreign tourists and investors to stay out of 
Egypt. 
  Security forces said meanwhile that three of the seven 
militants killed in a police raid here on Wednesday -- sparking 
the threat against foreigners -- had taken part in the murder of 
a British tourist in October 1992. 
  Embassies said the threat issued by the underground 
al-Jama'a 
al-Islamiyah was being taken seriously. But they did not warn 
their nationals against visiting Egypt, where the economy relies 
on tourism. 
  British embassy spokesman Martin Day said the mission was in 
contact with the Egyptian authorities, although he noted it was 
not the first time that foreigners were being threatened. 
  "Obviously we're taking this call seriously," he said. 
  The US mission said it issued a statement to notify 
Americans 
living in Cairo of the threat. It was a strictly precautionary 
move in response to concern from the American community, the 
embassy said. 
  A French spokesman said there was no cause for alarm, while 
the foreign ministry in Paris said its citizens should stay on 
the alert in Egypt. [passage omitted covered in previously 
filed material] 
  On Thursday, there was no immediate sign of panic 
cancellations but hotels said that bookings were already low, 
despite it being the high season for tourism to Egypt. 
  "At the moment, 90 percent of our clients are Arabs from the 
Gulf. They don't feel concerned by the threats of the Moslem 
fundamentalists," said a hotel manager, asking not to be named. 
  In January, Tourism Minister Mamduh al-Biltaji said revenue 
from tourism slumped by 42 percent last year, compared to 1992. 
  In financial circles, there was also no immediate response 
to 
the latest threat. "It's not going to lead to the liquidation of 
foreign holdings in Egypt, that's for sure," said an official in 
an Egyptian-Western bank. 

