Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, March 8 (KCNA) -- Today is the 
international women's day. 
  The Korean women who had been out of society in the past are 
now leading a worthwhile life, sharing responsibility with men 
for the country. 
  Thanks to the proclamation of the law on sex equality in 
1946, the Korean women have been exercising rights on an equal 
footing with men in the realms of politics, the economy and 
culture. 
  They take an active part in the affairs of the state with 
the 
rights to vote and to be elected. 
  The women account for 20.1 percent of the total number of 
the 
deputies to the Supreme People's Assembly. 
  Many women are active in important posts of the party, the 
state, administrative and economic bodies, working people's 
organisations and other units. 
  The role of the women is great in education, culture, public 
health, commerce, textiles, production of daily necessities and 
foodstuff. 
  Many "Kim Il-song Order" and "Kim Il-song Prize" winners 
have 
been produced among them for their devoted services to the 
country and the people. 
  There are a large number of heroines of the Republic, labor 
heroines, people's teacher, people's scientist, people's actress 
and other honorary title winners and the state order bearers. 
  The state provides the women with all conditions so that 
they 
may work without any inconvenience. 
  As there are nurseries and kindergardens in all places where 
women work, they devote themselves to work. 
  The well-furnished modern foodstuff factories, garment 
factories, household goods factories and public service 
facilities built in different parts of the country relieve them 
of the heavy burden of domestic affairs. 
  The women workers with several children work six hours a 
day, 
but they are paid for 8-hour work a day. 
  And they enjoy such benefits as 150-day maternity paid leave 
as well as a regular paid leave. 
  It is regarded as an ordinary thing in Korea that a special 
plane flies to carry a woman in childbed and a medical team does 
its best for her. 

