Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Cheng Ying (2110 1305): "Special Editorial: </F>
Criminal Gangs Challenge Security on Mainland--The Rise of 
Secret Gangs on the Mainland"] 
  [Text] In Shaoyang City, a secret gang openly proclaimed in 
a public announcement that it had executed a policeman. This 
gives us a small indication of the rise and rampancy of criminal 
gangs on the mainland. Higher authorities acknowledge that 
secret society organizations have appeared in a number of 
provinces and cities. In Guangdong Province, at least 100,000 
persons are suspected of being involved in secret societies. 
  Data reveal that crimes committed in various parts of the 
mainland in recent years, such as gun running, drug trafficking 
in the border regions, car and highway robberies, plundering and 
murder, and also the overt and covert operations of underground 
gangs leading to serious crimes of great viciousness committed 
in groups, are becoming more blatant with each passing day. 
<H5>  Startling and Frightening </H5>
  Let us first look at a few truly frightening incidents: 
  In the summer of 1991, a policeman of Shaoyang City in Hunan 
Province was shot and killed on a public square in the middle of 
the city. The next day, a public announcement was impudently 
posted on the board for municipal judicial notices. It said: 
"This is to give notice that the Xiao Xiong [Hsiao Hsiung] 
Society of China has executed a policeman." It was signed Kuang 
Long [Mad Dragon], president of the society. 
  The "Xue Shou [Hsueh Shou] Gang," that had been extinct in 
Fujian Province for the last few decades, has been revived, 
headed by a man named Hua Ruya [5478 1172 1509]. Membership of 
the gang is made up of inkstone carvers. In a big fight that 
erupted on 7 April 1991 with quarry workers, the gang, using 
various weapons, enacted a slaughter that had blood flowing in 
streams. 
  In October 1991, a series of murders occurred at Tangshan, 
in 
which the "Sanjianke [Three Swordsmen] Gang" were involved. The 
"three swordsmen" were Liu Zuo [0491 0146], Wang Xincheng [3769 
2450 1004], and Lei Yunhai [7191 0061 3189]. The "oath of 
allegiance" sworn by gang members was: "Together in life and 
death, together in enduring adversity, and no betrayals of the 
cause." The purpose was stated as "causing the Communist Party 
as much trouble as possible," and their principle of action was 
"to perform world shaking deeds." 
  In May 1990, the public security department of Hebei 
Province 
broke up the "Jianghu Langren [Vagrants of Rivers and Lakes] 
Gang," said to be the country's largest gang of thieves and 
burglars. Its chief called himself "Langli Aoyou Yi Quexian," 
which translates as "a crippled immortal roaming 
unrestrainedly." He has a 30 year history as pickpocket and 
thief, and his real name is Yao Zunxian [1202 1415 6343]. This 
gang has gathered up local thieves and burglars and plagued city 
and countryside, raking in as much as 100,000 yuan every week 
from thefts and burglaries. The gang has a chieftain, a person 
in charge of public business, and also a person in charge of 
military affairs. Some of its gang members come from highly 
educated families, and some have also studied law and have on 
several occasions evaded prosecution. The gang also controls a 
group of female camp followers, on the one hand, for the purpose 
of satisfying the desires of gang members when on long overland 
treks without wives, and on the other hand, to screen 
activities, having the women appear as serving as young lady 
secretaries. 
  There have been reports that the lodges of the triad society 
set up in Guangzhou control prostitution and trade in smuggled 
pornography throughout the entire Huanghuagang district. Control 
of all underground trades in Guangzhou is divided up between 
different gangs, a fact that has already been verified very 
early by security personnel. 
  Most of the independent small street vendors in the 
country's 
largest small commodities market, the Hanzheng Street in Wuhan, 
are being harassed by hosts of self-styled "secret societies." 
They enforce payment of "protection money," and it is suspected 
that some wear military police uniforms, so that the vendors are 
reluctant to report them. 
<H3>  Main Occupation of Criminal Gangs: Smuggling, Drug 
Trafficking </H3>
  Whether in the market towns of the southwestern border 
region 
or in the "opened-up" zones along the southeastern seaboard, 
underground secret gangs have arisen everywhere in recent years, 
and they live by victimizing the people. They expand their power 
by depending merely on five lines of "trades," namely smuggling, 
drug trafficking, arms trading, controlling the immoral trade, 
and controlling gambling houses. The following are some 
instances of such: 
  Car thefts and smuggling of stolen cars has been a serious 
vexation for the police in Hong Kong and Macao since 1987. The 
underground gangs in Guangzhou, Shenzhen, and Dongguan 
collaborate with underground gangs in Hong Kong, have them steal 
lots and lots of high class Hong Kong limousines, and then get 
them shipped over in repeated successful operations. In 1992 
alone, 6,500 limousines were stolen in Hong Kong, and every 
month over some 600 cars were transported to the mainland along 
secret routes. 
  Guangzhou's public security department acknowledges that the 
criminal gangs on the mainland that steal and smuggle motorcars 
are broadly organized and have also infiltrated security, 
customs, and border defense agencies. In Huizhou City alone, 
security personnel received "goodwill fees" from criminal gangs 
amounting to over 10 million yuan. 
  A certain Tan [6223], leader of the car theft criminal gang 
in the Huiyang district, has 34 underlings, and their equipment, 
from communications to transportation, is much superior to that 
of the security forces. 
  Some gangs have set for themselves extremely strict 
regulations as "society admission" or "gang admission" rituals. 
The reason why people are willing to face the risks and join the 
gangs is no other than the lure of high reward. The sale of one 
stolen car in Guangzhou can often bring a profit of from 30,000 
to 50,000 yuan. Quite a few gangmembers are former convicts or 
former inmates of "reform through labor" institutions, or have 
escaped from prison. They will risk their everything to fight 
the police to take personal revenge. 
<H5>  Arms Trading, A Casual Affair </H5>
  On New Year's Day of 1986, a military convoy on its way to 
relieve a garrison on the Sino-Vietnamese border was stopped 
when it approached a small town near Menglian. A crowd of young 
girls and boys swarmed around the vehicles, peddling 
pornographic books and magazines and golden trinkets to the 
soldiers. In the baskets of some of these people there were, 
open for everybody to see, Soviet-made pistols and ammunition. 
One pistol, to be given with 50 bullets in the bargain, was 
marked out at 50 yuan. These trading activities were completely 
uncontrolled, going on as nonchalantly as fruit sales on inland 
railway stations. A few steps further on, in the people's homes, 
you could discover baskets full of hand grenades and U.S.-made 
semiautomatic weapons. Arms trading in the border region seems 
to be a relaxed and free occupation, but actually in most cases 
firmly in the hands of some criminal gangs. Some of these people 
are indeed the "little Red Guard generals" who 20 years ago had 
gone to Vietnam and Cambodia to "support the world revolution." 
They have settled and become lawful residents in Laos and 
Cambodia and have become quite powerful members of local gangs. 
Some have mounted gangs at their disposal and have hired gunman 
to protect the arms smuggling and trading on both sides of the 
border. The local criminal gangs have their own "Ho Chi Ming 
Trails" and are hard to catch and to bring to justice. All these 
large and small weapons have a ready market among Hong Kong's 
criminal gangs and among the bands of drug dealers in Southeast 
Asia. On some routes of the drug trade, local people serve as 
well-paid hired guards. 
  The following are some figures released by southwest border 
defense units and other related agencies: 
  Nov 1988: Sichuan Province broke up an arms case, seized 17 
pistols. Sep 1989: Fujian broke up an especially large arms 
smuggling case, seized over 1,000 pistols and arrested 30 
gangmembers. Apr 1990: Guangzhou broke up a gun and ammunition 
case; seized over 100 rifles and over 1,000 bullets. In 1992: 
the two provinces of Yunnan and Hainan broke up 21 arms 
smuggling cases; involved were 84 rifles, 1,100 bullets, and 90 
suspected gangmembers. 
  In the public security regulations promulgated after the 
establishment of the PRC, unauthorized possession and 
concealment of firearms is an extremely serious crime. However, 
by the 1980's, smuggling of guns and ammunition by devious 
routes is no more a unique occurrence. In the hands of the 
criminal gangs, these weapons are like time bombs that can go 
off at any time and do great harm to society. 
<H5>  Some Peculiarities of Criminal Gang Activities </H5>
  Public security agencies are well aware of the rise of 
criminal gangs all over the country. As early as at the 
All-China Public Security Work Conference in May 1989, Ren 
Jianxin [0117 1696 2450], president of the Supreme People's 
Court, indicated: "The important and large burglary and robbery 
cases that have occurred are clearly of a criminal gang nature." 
This acknowledgment is more and more verified by actual facts. 
In Shanghai alone, the following gang-type secret societies have 
been broken up: The Qing Tian She [Blue Sky Society] (in the 
suburbs), the Shisan Taibao [Thirteen Guardians] (in the Zhabei 
district), the Jiangnan Qixia [Seven Heroes South of the 
Changjiang] (in the Nanshi district), and also some others. 
  When a cadre of the Guangzhou Police Bureau, who did not 
want 
to reveal his name, was privately interviewed by a certain 
Japanese writer, he made some frightening revelations about the 
grouping and organization of criminal gangs in the Guangdong 
region. He said, there are at least 100,000 suspected criminal 
gangmembers in Guangdong. They generally operate as follows: 
  1. Most make a living in the free market. The government 
leaves large loopholes in its control of illegal actions by 
small vendors and individual entrepreneurs. Hiding among those 
has become like a natural protective screen for the criminal 
gangmembers. 
  2. The link between the criminal societies of the mainland 
and the criminal organizations across the border, such as the 
Triad Society and the Xin Yi An [Sun Yee On] Society, is 
becoming stronger with each passing day. The forces of the 
various factions establish "contacts and backing" with and from 
the outside, always seeking behind-the-scenes backers and 
accomplices for their deeds. 
  3. Although the territory on the mainland is divided up 
between local gang powers, internal rivalry has not yet been 
serious so far. For instance, the passenger minibuses in the 
cities of Guangzhou and Dongguan are controlled by different 
gangs for different routes. They either cajole people to ride 
their buses and then halfway rob them clean, or they act in 
collusion with the drivers and take from the passengers whatever 
they have. This is the root of the scourge expressed in the term 
"car thieves and highwaymen." However, if conflicts arise 
between different gangs as to "territorial jurisdictions," they 
have their own bigwigs who will privately arrange peace. In 
Guangzhou there are over 1,000 minibuses that will have to buy 
"insurance" from various gang lodges. At 20 yuan per day per 
bus, it gives them an average daily income of 20,000 yuan. 
  4. Places of nightlife entertainment in such big cities as 
Guangzhou and Shenzhen are about 80 percent, and to varying 
degrees are controlled or infiltrated by underground gangs. Some 
of them have their own security guards (thugs), some force girls 
into prostitution, and some call all the shots in illicit 
gambling operations. 
  5. Whenever they run afoul of the authorities or are 
threatened with a police raid, they have immediate operative 
underground "communications channels" that will take the matter 
up with the police or the authorities in power and work out a 
compromise. In serious cases, they will finally alert the high 
and mighty in Hong Kong to personally allay the dispute. In 
actual fact, much of the immoral trade in Shenzhen is tacitly 
permitted by the police, and the criminal gangs have their 
informers right inside the police. 
  6. It has come to light in recent years that the criminal 
gang organizations, for more effective operations, have started 
to hire intellectuals at great expense. For instance, the 
criminal gang organization in Xiamen already has highly educated 
people as ringleaders, and they even have the services of 
specialized lawyers who will absolve them from guilt or blame, 
besides criminal gangs do not just rob, kill, and commit 
misdeeds all day long. They are also very much engaged in 
legitimate trade as a shield, and that fact creates great 
difficulties for investigating personnel. 
<H5>  "Secret Societies Have Become Part of Society" </H5>
  It is not possible to narrate one by one all the large cases 
of national significance, but it has to be emphasized: Although 
their history is a short one, the underground criminal societies 
on the Chinese mainland have a savage and cruel character that 
is frightening, as they display an extreme hatred for society. 
In April of this year, at the Mudanjiang railway station in the 
Northeast, it was necessary to call up 300 fully armed policemen 
to prevent interception by powerful criminal gangs of the 
transfer to jail of a group of 15 prisoners convicted of serious 
crimes, because the gangs had threatened that they would use 
their guns to rescue the prisoners. Interrogation of the 15 
prisoners led to the breakup of a criminal gang of over 90 
persons. As a show of force against the police, these people had 
committed over 200 crimes of various kinds and had publicly 
declared that they would fight the police to the very end. This 
case was a great shock to the state's public security and to the 
heads of the Chinese communist regime. 
  To sum up, "secret societies have become part of society" 
was 
the conclusion reached in one of the internal documents of the 
public security department of Guangdong Province. Communist 
China has for a long time boasted that secret societies like the 
"Qing Bang" and the "Hong Bang" societies, have disappeared from 
mainland society. Now we witness their revival in such cities as 
Shanghai, Nanjing, Guangzhou, and Hangzhou. 
  As I finish these lines, there is news that the city of 
Harbin in Heilongjiang Province has won a "complete victory" in 
wiping out its criminal gangs. Prior to this, the ringleader of 
the criminal gang in the city of Harbin had just been planning 
to take the precious seat of a member of the Municipal Political 
Consultative Conference. 

