Language: <F P=105> Georgian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Georgia's National Ideology Party press center today 
gave IBERIA news agency the following statement: To UN 
Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali; Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, 
chairman of Russia's Liberal-Democratic Party; Iliya II, the 
catholicos-patriarch of all-Georgia. 
  Georgia's National Ideology Party expresses deep sorrow over 
the tragic death of Zviad Gamsakhurdia, the leader of the 
national movement of contemporary Georgia, the first president 
of Georgia. He was an internationally recognized dissident, 
human rights activist, writer and philosopher. Georgia's 
National Ideology Party calls on the current official 
authorities of Georgia to show good will and hand over the body 
of Zviad Gamsakhurdia to the Georgian nation. Meanwhile, this 
will give Georgian people the possibility to pay proper homage 
to their first president. Those who think that the national 
and political symbol of Zviad Gamsakhurdia will fade following 
his tragic death are mistaken. On the contrary, with time this 
symbol will grow larger and become stronger for the good of the 
Georgian nation. Georgia's National Ideology Party, expressing 
the wish of the ancient Georgian people, demands that Zviad 
Gamsakhurdia, Georgia's first president, the author of Georgia's 
soul mission, be buried in the Mtatsminda pantheon [overlooking 
Tbilisi] next to Merab Kostava, and the day of his burial be 
made a day of national mourning. 
  By holding the corpse and keeping it in secret, certain 
forces wish to create a myth of the dead president's life, as if 
he were alive, which confuses people and neutralizes the 
Georgian people's reaction to the death of the president. Then 
these forces could claim that Zviad Gamsakhurdia's death had no 
impact on the Georgian people. The appearance of the corpse 
would dispel all kinds of misinformation and would not further 
psychologically torture the people, who have already been 
tortured enough. 
  Moreover, in our opinion, there are well-grounded doubts 
that 
before his tragic death, Zviad Gamsakhurdia, together with his 
entourage, were arrested under strictly secret circumstances. 
It is obvious that the arrest was aimed at the political and 
personal repentance to which Gamsakhurdia would have reacted by 
going on hunger strike. 
  Was it a forced suicide or murder? Time will establish 
which. Today only one thing is clear -- the first president of 
Georgia is no longer alive and a proper homage must be paid to 
him. 
  Georgia's National Ideology Party firmly believes that the 
political farce connected with the murder of Zviad Gamsakhurdia 
must end and the Georgian people and the whole world must be 
told the truth. A special commission comprising the leaders of 
political parties, alongside public representatives, must be set 
up for this aim. 
  [Signed] Zurab Gagnidze, chairman Georgia's National 
Ideology 
Party, Tbilisi, 10 January 1994 

