BFN 

  [Text] Shanghai, May 15 (XINHUA) -- Thanks to the changes 
in the people's conception of marriage and birth, China's most 
populous city of Shanghai expects to see a negative population 
growth for the second year running this year. 
  The Shanghai Municipal Family Planning Committee estimated 
the number of new-born babies is less than 81,000 this year as 
against 84,000 last year, the lowest birth rate on record in the 
city's history. 
  According to the latest report provided by the Shanghai 
Municipal Statistical Bureau, the municipal population (the 
number of people with permanent residence permits) stands at 
13.49 million, the population growth rate is 6.5 per thousand 
and the death rate is 7.3 per thousand. 
  A recent survey shows that the government's family planning 
policy has struck roots in the minds of young couples and young 
people prefer to marry late. The marrying age for men averages 
28.8 years old and that for women is 26.8, both three years 
older than a decade ago, although the marriage eligibility age 
for men is 22 years old while that for women is 20 as the 
revised marriage law provides. 
  The survey shows that at least half of the newly weds have 
planned to have a child late, because some wanted to sharpen 
their skills and develop themselves to secure a place in the 
market economy; some plan to enjoy themselves and others are 
waiting for their best child-bearing years. 
  "My home is far from the work place and I feel tired after a 
day's work," said a dentist whose family name is Yu. 
  The 36-year-old Yu married four years ago and still does not 
want to become a father. "I cannot spare the time for raising a 
child," he said. 
  The sea of people everywhere, in streets, buses, shops and 
parks has compelled more and more couples to adopt a prudent 
attitude towards birth. 
  At present, 85 percent of the couples in Shanghai are in 
favor of the "one-child family" policy, and one-third of them 
said they do not care whether their offspring is a son or a girl. 
  Shanghai has 1.95 million couples who have vowed never to 
have another child after the first, accounting for 4.87 percent 
of some 40 million couples on the Chinese mainland. 
  "To avoid bearing a child," an official of the Shanghai 
Municipal Family Planning Committee said, "92 percent of the 
city's 5.49 million couples have employed contraceptives." 
  The contraceptive rate on the Chinese mainland is 72 percent 
and most of the one-child families are in large and medium-sized 
cities. 
  The official noted that China's family planning is not only 
aimed at reducing the population, but also at helping couples to 
have a child. 
  At present, several thousand couples have their babies with 
the help of the Shanghai Family Planning Research Institution 
and a number of hospitals, which have opened special services to 
treat infertility. 
  Experts here agreed that some are still influenced by their 
parents and want to marry early and give birth early. 
  Guo Youning, associate research fellow of the institution, 
said that, influenced by their parents, about 27 percent of 
newly-married couples change their plans and want to have 
children early. 
  "Much remains to be done to persuade all young couples to 
accept the ideal of late marriage and late birth," he added. 

