Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Eduard Filatyev under the rubric ``Scientific </F>
Surroundings'': ``Physicists Are No Longer Joking''--first 
paragraph is LITERATURNAYA GAZETA introduction] 
  [Text] Russia did not shudder, although this summer the 
Chernobyl disaster again began to be in the air. The 
inconceivable, exceptional event occurred casually, with the 
most sparse information. 
  The sensation of the year, if not of the decade, is like 
this: At two closed cities of Russian nuclear 
physicists--Arzamas-16 and Chelyabinsk-70--at meetings of many 
thousands a desperate word began to resound loudly: STRIKE. 
Warning notices were sent to the leadership of the country. 
  True, in the first official explanations of executives of 
the 
institutes it was specified: There is not a strike, but merely a 
prestrike situation. Is there a difference? Indeed, I do not 
know if a nuclear physicist comes near a ``piece of work,'' 
excuse me, not having eaten because of two- to three-month 
delays of pay. 
  Who does not remember the ``secret physicist'' Ilya Kulikov 
from Rommovskiy's ``Nine Days of One Year'' in the brilliant 
performance of I. Smoktunovskiy? An elegant, impressive, witty 
theoretical physicist "smelling like a barber," at whose service 
there was everything: from a seat on any scheduled airliner to 
enormous laboratories in secret underground bunkers. 
  Recently I had occasion to see him again. Of course, not 
Kulikov-Smoktunovskiy personally, but one of his prototypes. A 
man, who had become somewhat heavy, but as before was not losing 
heart, and was self-confident, left a single room of a hotel of 
the capital, which hardly anyone knows and is located in an old 
building on Maksim Gorkiy Embankment. An elegant, impressive, 
witty man who smelled of cologne bought with currency and 
expensive imported cognac. 
  The appearance of a living atomic physicist evoked 
involuntary admiration: 
  ``What a fine `secret physicist'! And the years have not had 
an effect on him! A hero of any time!'' 
``He is not at all secret,'' the woman manager on duty replied 
in a deferential whisper. ``And he is not at all a physicist, 
but a cooperative member, a businessman.'' 
  The picture is a familiar one. Today well-to-do people get 
everything! They get the best rooms with a telephone and a 
television. They get the keys to the shower room first of all. 
While the real "secret" people in their semisecret departmental 
hotel patiently endure crowding in common rooms without a 
telephone and without a television. 
  And these are our celebrated forgers of the nuclear shield 
of 
Russia! 
  ``What forgers they are!'' a familiar ``official'' from the 
Ministry of Atomic Energy waved his hand. ``How many years they 
have had nothing to do! It would be a good thing if they have 
not yet forgotten how to 'forge'! The wage of a scientific 
associate in Arzamas-16 on the average is half as much as that 
of a worker of the local sobering-up station. They are scarcely 
releasing money for direct work, they have cut travel 
allowances, having forced people to change from airplane to 
train, and have cut off financing for social needs.'' 
  They have put nuclear physicists on the same footing as 
medical personnel and teachers, physicians and librarians, 
engineers and agronomists. And they seem to have done so quite 
justly. It is now hard for everyone, hence, it is also necessary 
to share the burdens of life impartially--equally. Everyone is 
the same kind of people. 
  Yes, the same. But who will relieve them of responsibility 
for weapons that are capable in a matter of moments of wiping 
millions of human lives from the face of earth? And life on 
earth itself in addition. 
  Incidentally, in the past, in spite of ``the tireless 
concern 
of the party and government,'' secret nuclear weapons developers 
did not show off very much. They lived normally. A little bit 
better, perhaps, than the average level, but not more than that. 
  In one of the laboratories of what is called ``site 20'' of 
the closed city Chelyabinsk-70 there stands an enormous 
instrument the height of a multistory building. It has a 
romantic name--Igur. At times they take visitors here. Even 
foreigners. Last year then U.S. Secretary of State James Baker 
also visited here. 
  I do not know what kind of impression the multistory Igur 
made on the high-ranking American, but the hopeless obsolescence 
of the console, at which research physicists sit, is immediately 
obvious to many of our visitors. The measuring instruments, 
buttons, tumbler switches, microphones, tables, chairs, door 
handles, plates with inscriptions--in short, the entire design 
as if came from the times of the same Kulikovs and since then 
has never been updated. 
  The console of the Japanese boiler house looks like a 21th 
century spaceship. But then in its furnaces they burn nothing 
but ordinary household garbage. 
  For decades, while trying first to catch up with, and then 
to 
outdistance the overseas competitor, we invested the lion's 
share of the assets being released for nuclear affairs in 
``warheads'' themselves. While we invested in instruments and in 
other ``design'' and in human services only what was left of the 
main amount. 
  A few examples. The do-it-yourself building at the same 
``site 20,'' which in common parlance is called a ``lean-to,'' 
is stuffed to capacity with expensive laser equipment. Here they 
are trying to solve the problem of the century--to learn to 
control thermonuclear fusion. Fine! More than that, splendid! 
  But it is stuffy and crowded in the ``lean-to.'' There is no 
room for the relaxation of personnel, there are no cloak room 
and lavatory. 
  The physicists go to eat in a magnificent dining room, the 
two-story building of which has been moved several hundred 
meters beyond the territory of the ``zone.'' Secrecy! It is 
categorically prohibited to allow the cooks and food servers 
beyond the barbed wire of ``site 20''! And one can understand 
this. But.... 
  Was it really hard to bring the building of the dining room 
close to the integrated receiving center or if only to extend to 
it a covered gallery so that the people going to dinner would 
not have to jump over puddles or fall into snowdrifts? 
  We go farther. On the industrial site adjacent to ``site 
20'' 
there is a unit for the production of optical fiber. This is the 
pride of the institute, its present pride, that is why they also 
take visitors here. 
  Once a group of television people from the capital had 
occasion to film the optical fiber equipment in operation. 
  ``But would it be possible,'' the director asked, ``for the 
engineer-physicists all to wear white laboratory coats?'' 
  ``Of course!'' followed the response. ``No problem!'' 
  In a minute the operator filmed a man in a white laboratory 
coat. After a while he filmed a second and third man. The 
trained eye immediately took note that the same 
number--2906--was embroidered on all the laboratory coats. At 
any rate I was interested: 
  ``Is this by any chance not the secret designation of 
something?'' 
  ``Oh, come on!'' the engineer-physicists scoffed. ``This is 
the personal account of Ulyanov. A clock number, in short. And 
the laboratory coat is also his--Ilich's.'' 
  It turned out that for the entire laboratory there was just 
a 
single white laboratory coat. Of scientific associate Anatoliy 
Ilich Ulyanov. 
  Once an article of theoretical physicist V. Bekhterev 
appeared in the factory newspaper of the closed city 
Chelyabinsk-70--NASHA GAZETA. In it alarm was expressed with 
regard to the fact that the executives of the nuclear institute 
on the institute production base had formed several limited 
liability companies. The administrators had begun, as they say, 
to make money. 
  It is possible to understand them in purely human terms: The 
leadership was sick of receiving--moreover, with constant 
delays--a symbolic wage, it decided to set its financial 
situation straight. 
  But just why, the author of the article wondered, did 
officials of the basic structural subdivisions of the institute 
and leading specialists of the operations on nuclear weapons 
decide suddenly to take up private entrepreneurial activity, 
which hardly differs from their official duties? And why in the 
charter of the company is it not stipulated that all the 
operations, which are connected with this activity, should be 
performed during nonworking time? 
  In addition to this there is an irrepressible wanderlust. In 
the same NASHA GAZETA, in particular, it was stated: ``In the 
last three years he (V. Nechay, director of the nuclear 
institute--E.F.) directed the institute from abroad in all for 
about a year.'' 
  Further V. Bekhterev concluded: ``We have not less than 10 
specialists who are capable of performing work in the United 
States no less successfully than the director. Is it not easier 
to grant the present director a good wage and to oblige him to 
deal only with the affairs of the institute?! Or even more 
simply to hire another director and to appoint the present one 
as his deputy for foreign relations?!'' 
  It goes without saying that such insolence, which came in 
addition from the mouth of a rank and file member of the 
collective--I say, some senior scientific associate with 30 
years of service!--could not go without consequences. And a hail 
of the most diverse retributions fell on the head of the too 
emboldened physicist. About 10 years ago they probably would 
have simply wiped him from the face of earth. But, fortunately, 
the times have changed, and V. Bekhterev not only survived, but 
also proposed his candidacy for the post of mayor of 
Chelyabinsk-70. And in the spring of this year he won! 
  However, the opposing side also satisfied, as they say, its 
own interests: Foreign trips are continuing. Now they are going 
with their wives. 
  Outside Russia they have even begun to take into account 
this 
``weakness'' of our executives. Thus, for example, when China 
invited us to exchange delegations of nuclear physicists, they 
sent responsible workers of Chelyabinsk-70 invitations to visit 
the PRC together with their helpmates. Eight Chinese physicists 
came to our country with a return visit. For them this trip was 
an ordinary scientific mission. For us it was a tourist voyage 
of ``nuclear generals'' with their spouses. 
  In recent decades, as specialists claim, we have made such a 
number of nuclear weapons that if today, now we began their 
complete disassembly and destruction and worked in so doing 
around the clock at full tilt, all the same by 2000 it would not 
be possible to eliminate the entire arsenal. And a bit of work 
would remain for the 21st century! 
  As in every sector, in this one, which up to now has been 
silent and has been made most shiny, its own organ of 
self-protection has appeared. It is called the SRYaZ--the union 
of developers of nuclear warheads. For a year and a half the 
members of the SRYaZ have been sending letters to the highest 
instances, trying to familiarize the authorities with the 
critical situation in their sector. But all the attempts of the 
``secret physicists'' to knock at the doors of the offices of 
the ``first people'' until heard, alas, have been unsuccessful. 
  Meanwhile they want to say very little. Every nuclear 
warhead, the members of the SRYaZ recall, has a specific term of 
reliability, upon the expiration of which the warhead is liable 
to disassembly and partial destruction. It is necessary to turn 
over the fissionable materials for special storage. 
  This entire process should take place under the strictest 
monitoring of specialists. The ones who conceived and developed 
this nuclear warhead. The ones who know it thoroughly. No other 
nuclear specialist--be it an American, a Frenchman or an 
Englishman--will be able to guarantee the safety of the 
disassembly of our bombs or projectiles. For the simple reason 
that our nuclear secrets, which have been incorporated in one 
warhead or another, are known only to its developers. 
  Only one formula is acceptable here: As long as if only 
one nuclear warhead exists, specialists, who know it in detail 
and are capable owing to this of guaranteeing us complete 
safety, should serve. 
  It is, it would seem, so simple, so logical. But no, the 
collapse of the Russian nuclear sector is continuing. 
  On 4 August of this year a telegram from Chelyabenergo, in 
which in categorical form they were ordered by the 10th of the 
month to pay off the debt on the charge for used electricity, 
arrived at the nuclear center in Chelyabinsk-70. Otherwise, it 
was stated in the telegram, the closed city would be 
disconnected from the electric power network! 
  A most unique document of our market era! A most honorable 
place in the future museum of nuclear physics should by right 
belong to it. Next to photographs of the authors of the 
telegram. Do they realize what can happen a second after the 
closed city ceases to receive electric power? 
  The noose on the neck of closed nuclear cities is being 
drawn 
tighter and tighter. A little more and complete financial 
collapse will set in, after which the ``secret physicists,'' who 
have been thrown to the mercy of fate, will finally scatter in 
different directions. And then it will remain for us just to 
wait until it expires--this term of reliability of nuclear 
warheads. But even physicists are not joking with this. 

