BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 26 (XINHUA) -- The Standing Committee 
of the Beijing municipal people's congress has just issued a set 
of new regulations for the implementation of China's Law on the 
Protection of Women's Rights and Interests. 
  The law was adopted by the Standing Committee of the 
National 
People's Congress in April 1992. 
  Wu Xiuping, deputy director of the Beijing Municipal 
Commission for Protecting Women's Rights and Interests, said 
that the 53- article regulations cover women's political rights, 
their rights in culture and education, their work rights and 
interests, their rights of person, marriage and family, and 
legal liabilities. 
  She said the regulations also specify the names and duties 
of 
agencies in charge of protecting women's rights and interests. 
  The regulations state that except for special cases, no 
employer may refuse to hire women. 
  Moreover, no enterprises may discriminate against women 
while 
carrying out the labor reform and transforming their operational 
mechanism. 
  The regulations ban insulting, beating and maltreatment of 
female members of a family, and the abduction, kidnapping, 
selling and buying of women, as well as prostitution. 
  No hotels, dance halls, bars, cafes or beauty shops may 
facilitate prostitution or provide sex services. 
  Wu Xiuping said that half of the 10.5 million residents in 
Beijing are women. 
  At the end of 1993, Beijing had 368,000 women government 
employees, 44.5 percent of the total. 
  Nearly 12 percent of the leading officials at the 
prefectural 
commissioner's level and 22 percent of those at the county 
magistrate's level are women, she said. 
  Women now account for nearly 52 percent of technicians and 
engineers in state-owned businesses and institutions. 
  She said that 33 percent of the representatives of the 
municipal people's congress are women, she said, adding that 
also about 26 percent of the representatives of the people's 
congress at the county and district level are women. 
  She also acknowledged a number of problems in bringing the 
role of women into full play. 
  For example, the ratio of women among leading officials is 
too low and woman college graduates find it relatively difficult 
to get jobs. 

