BFN 

<F P=106> [Yuriy Nikolayev report: "MiG's Not Sold Instantly. It </F>
Took Us Over Two Years To Break Into Southeast Asian Arms 
Market"] 
  [Text] Malaysia could become the first Southeast Asian 
country to use Russian fighters. Namely, our MiG-29's. The 
negotiations with Malaysia regarding their purchase have been 
long-drawn-out -- more than two years -- and quite complex. The 
reform of the military-industrial complex, conversion, and the 
complex political events in the Russian Federation have had an 
impact. Speaking more bluntly, Russia was not seen as a 
reliable partner by businessmen in foreign countries. Judge for 
yourselves -- no sooner had Malaysia evinced a desire to buy 
aircraft than 50 Russian firms, state institutions, and even 
citizens started vying with each other to offer their services! 
  Moreover, a deal was concluded not only on aircraft, it was 
part of a large overall program of trade and economic ties and 
military-technical cooperation -- along with the delivery of 
military equipment it is planned to create a technical servicing 
center and a joint venture to manufacture spares and components, 
to transfer technology in the aircraft construction and other 
sectors, and to train Malaysian pilots. In the future this 
package of agreements will allow Malaysia to create its own 
aviation industry and, on the whole, it forms the basis for 
long-term cooperation between our countries. 
  The deal was also based on details such as Malaysia's desire 
to partly pay for the military equipment in palm oil. In short, 
Moscow considered the deal profitable, with Malaysia considering 
us a "partner to be trusted," and a delegation headed by Vice 
Premier Oleg Soskovets set off for Kuala Lumpur. According to 
certain information, the contract is valued at around $600 
million. 
  According to evidence from Malaysian representatives 
("Rosvooruzheniye" refused to quote any specific figures on the 
pretext of secrecy), 18 MiG-29's will be bought for use by 
Malaysia with its Air Force. 
  To this can be added the fact that India has finally decided 
to modernize the MiG-29 with Russian help. That, at least, was 
what M. Mallikarjun, minister of state for defense, stated. 
According to him, fitting this aircraft with state-of-the-art 
equipment will allow it once again to perform as a modern 
front-line fighter. Specialists believe that the aircraft's 
total combat potential will be increased more than sevenfold. 
Twenty-one aircraft will be modernized. The contract will be 
worth around $350 million. The Mikoyan Design Bureau won the 
refit tender against fierce competition from Western and Israeli 
firms. 
  Our producers are not entering the difficult world arms 
market for fun. Arms exports fell from $22.6 billion in 1987 to 
$2 billion in 1993. According to forecasts from our experts, 
the figure should reach $3.4 billion this year. 

