Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Dmitriy Kamyshev report: "Situation in North Caucasus. </F>
North Ossetian Parliament May Lift State of Emergency Rule"] 
  [Text] Tensions in the area of the Ossetian-Ingush 
conflict may begin ratcheting up in the very near future. 
KOMMERSANT-DAILY learned yesterday that some deputies of the 
North Ossetian parliament expressed no-confidence in the 
Provisional Administration of the State of Emergency Area and 
proposed that the state of emergency rule on the republic's 
territory not be extended. If this decision is made, Moscow 
will lose the possibility to contain the conflict by force, and 
the situation may consequently spin out of the federal 
authorities' control. 
  The North Ossetian authorities' support for the Provisional 
Administration has until recently been a very significant and 
necessary factor for Moscow, particularly after Ingush President 
Ruslan Aushev accused Provisional Administration chief Vladimir 
Lozovoy in January of deliberately trying to thwart the 
implementation of the Russian president's December edict on the 
return of Ingush refugees; Aushev also demanded that Lozovoy be 
removed from office. Now North Ossetian politicians, too, have 
expressed no-confidence in the Provisional Administration, 
claiming that it is unable to bring order and security to the 
state of emergency area. In this situation Vladimir Lozovoy's 
very presence in the state of emergency area is becoming 
nonsensical, because the presidential and government decisions 
on conflict settlement simply cannot be implemented without 
close contacts with the local authorities. 
  What poses a much greater danger is the proposal by some 
North Ossetian Supreme Soviet deputies not to extend the state 
of emergency rule, which will expire on 31 March, because, in 
their view, it has proved ineffective. This decision, if 
adopted, may spark the resumption of the armed conflict in its 
initial, most bloody version. Given that none of the earlier 
agreements and decrees on the return of refugees have been 
complied with, the troops deployed in the state of emergency 
area operate as a containment force: Their very presence is 
cooling down somewhat the "hotheads" who call on the Ingush to 
return to their land in Prigorodnyy Rayon regardless of the 
consequences. If these forces are withdrawn from the region, 
even Ruslan Aushev's high authority will be not enough to keep 
the refugees from returning on their own and to avert the 
possible bloodshed. 
  Moscow may buy time, however, if it agrees with the Ingush 
and Ossetian demands to replace the Provisional Administration 
chief. In this event the two sides will need some time to assess 
the activity of a new person and to draw corresponding 
conclusions, whereas the Russian authorities may use the respite 
to prepare new initiatives to settle the conflict. 

