Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Baranov, renowned </F>
scientist and physician, by Nikolay Vasilyev under the ``Be 
Healthy!'' rubric: ``Is the Family Necessary?''; first paragraph 
is boldface FEDERATSIYA introduction] 
  [Text] ``Family -- nucleus of society'' is a 
customary combination. [Family] is the foundation or base of any 
government. But who in our time is thinking about this very 
foundation? Decide for yourself -- What indeed is there to say 
about the family? Nevertheless it is today celebrating a 
singular anniversary. It is a year since the creation of the 
International Fund for the Protection of Motherhood and 
Childhood. And its president, the renowned scientist and 
physician A. Baranov has himself suggested talking with us about 
the current maternal and child health status in Russia because 
it is impossible to keep silent any longer. 
[Baranov] Evidently, a few statistics for a 
beginning. In Russia there has been a catastrophic decrease in 
the birth rate. This year the figure will amount to 
approximately 25 percent. This is an unprecedented for us. Such 
was not the case during the war. 
  Some are trying to prove that this is not really so bad. In 
Europe, for example, the birth rate has been traditionally low 
in recent years. Denmark, on whose level we are now, is cited as 
an example. These are false figures. The point is that when 
compared with the Danes, we have a 40-fold higher maternal 
mortality rate and a 5-fold higher child mortality rate. Are 
such incorrect comparisons -- we and they -- possible? 
  From the standpoint of perspective, it is better here to 
take 
Germany, Israel, and America, which have until recently 
stimulated immigration. They understand that the worker will 
make their government prosper and strengthen its power. They 
give shelter citizens from various countries of the world, and 
we unfortunately cannot take care of our own children and women. 
  Recently a new and dangerous trend has made itself known. 
The 
child mortality curve has moved upward since June 1991. I will 
mention that before then, it had decreased steadily for 3 years. 
The maternity hospitals in Moscow, and yes throughout all of 
Russia, today stand empty or half empty. I think the reasons are 
clear and common for all of society: the meagerness of 
financing, the lack of the most elementary drugs, the low 
salaries of medical personnel, etc. And indeed before the 
collapse of the Union a program was undertaken to construct 
modern maternity hospitals throughout the entire country. Now 
when will there be time for them? 
[Vasilyev] Excuse me, but why build if they are now 
standing empty? 
[Baranov] The trouble is that in our country health 
care has always seemed to be in the background of society. The 
things we just never built -- KamAzes [i.e., automobiles 
produced by the Kamsk Automotive Plant], canals, dams. The 
programs we just never thought of. The medicine we just never 
paid attention to. Maybe it's a commonplace situation. 
Specifically, the overwhelming number of our maternity hospitals 
are in old impractical buildings or buildings that are simply 
falling to pieces. That is why we must build. 
[Vasilyev] We have spoken with you about the birth 
rate. But what about maternal health... 
[Baranov]Here, as you understand, the situation is 
hardly any better. Four million abortions are performed in our 
country each year as opposed to 1,700,000 births. There is no 
larger number of abortions anywhere in the world, hence the 
maternal mortality and various female diseases and the overall 
health of the nation. 
  Our fund has chosen the task of family planning as its main 
direction. The question is whether to do something that should 
be a government task under the power of some fund. Of course 
not. Our goals are more modest. We want to help the government 
in this matter. 
  The point is that the fund has united in its ranks renowned 
specialists and scientists in the field of protecting maternal 
and child health. We already have departments open in Georgia, 
Kyrgyzstan, Azerbaijan, the Crimea, Nizhniy Novgorod, Ivanovo, 
Khabarovsk, Irkutsk, and Stavropol. There is even a department 
in Washington, and one is now being registered in Belgium. Our 
intent is to make use of all of the advantages provided by this 
form of public organization, namely, speed, flexibility, and 
informality, in solving one problem or another. 
  What specifically have we set as our task? To begin a family 
planning campaign and, above all, to fight to reduce the number 
of abortions. Correct family planning can reduce maternal 
mortality by 40 percent and can cut the infant mortality rate in 
half. 
  And here, above all, the need for contraceptives must be 
met. 
We used to buy them. But it is impossible to live on purchases. 
We must create our own industry. We have found a Dutch firm 
called Organon that is examining our proposal to sell coils and 
Marvenol contraceptive tablets in Russia. The firm produces the 
world's best product of its type. In general, we feel that if 
some production process is created in Russia, it should be 
geared toward the highest-quality products. 
  Estimates show that it really possible to begin 
manufacturing 
coils and contraceptives by the end of 1993. We are planning to 
increase annual production to 7 million units plus 80 million 
packages of Marvenol. This will fully meet Russia's need. 
  Of course the fund cannot sustain such a gigantic program 
itself. Government help is needed. We have approached parliament 
with our proposals. It apparently supports our proposal and is 
now thinking of a way to provide more specific assistance. 
[Vasilyev]Production, as far as I can see, is only 
part of the problem. And what about the rest -- increasing the 
overall, let us say, medical level of service to mothers and the 
necessary consultations? 
[Baranov]You are right, the problem cannot be solved 
by the manufacture of contraceptives alone. We are also planning 
to create a network of women's medical centers in Russia. There 
they will see, first and foremost, women from what is called the 
high-risk group. They will be given the necessary examinations 
and consultations. 
  Such a center has already been created in Moscow based on 
the 
former Maternity Hospital imeni Guberman. The building lay empty 
for an entire year owing to pretensions of a 
sanitary-epidemiologic station. We asked Moscow's mayoralty to 
release it to the fund, and they met us halfway. Repairs are now 
under way there. We are hoping that the center will begin 
operating soon. It will be equipped with the most modern 
equipment. In a year we are planning to have as many as 50,000 
women seen in it. There is also an agreement with Nizhniy 
Novgorod to create an analogous center. 
  You understand, the fund is acting as a kind of catalyst. We 
know all the bottlenecks of our health care and, without waiting 
for the government to get moving, are trying to eliminate them. 
We have more than a few helpers abroad. We are very hopeful that 
when people learn more about our ideas and plans in our native 
Fatherland, they will come to our aid. 
[Vasilyev]Aleksandr Aleksandrovich, don't you have 
the feeling that all attempts to save medicine are doomed. It 
can collapse together with the entire economy. Unfortunately, 
all your good beginnings will not come to pass. 
[Baranov]I am an optimist by nature. If I adopt your 
philosophy of doom, I will have to fold my arms and wait for the 
end to come. But life goes on. And sooner or later the economy, 
and medicine along with it, will move uphill anyway. Our task is 
to help these processes. And how can one live without a future? 
  I would like to continue. We have implemented two more 
programs. One is related to vaccination, and the other involves 
baby food. 
  With respect to vaccination, we have begun working with the 
American firm Lederle, which is one of the world's two biggest 
firms in this area. It currently produces AKDS [expansion not 
given] vaccine, which is being used successfully against 
pertussis, diptheria, and measles. We found a place far from 
Moscow in Obolensk where facilities may be established to 
produce this vaccine. A study of the project is now under way. I 
will add that it is one of today's best. And we are maintaining 
our approaches here. 
  I think that one of the most complicated situations in 
Russia 
today is that of baby food. Our next program is related to just 
this problem. Previously, the USSR had five large factories 
producing baby food that met 60 percent of the country's need. 
Now after everyone has scattered to his own corner, only two 
factories remain in Russia. They meet only 40 percent of 
Russia's demand. The problem is most critical. We have reached 
an agreement with the leaders in the Stavropol Kray to construct 
a plant there. We have long been conducting talks with foreign 
firms on this score. There are two concrete partners; 
unfortunately, they have still not made a final decision. 
  But we also have our own developments in this area. 
Scientists from the Nizhniy Novgorod Microbiology and 
Epidemiology Scientific Research Institute and Pediatrics 
Scientific Research Institute have created a unique product that 
is a substitute for baby food -- lactobacteriosis. Its taste is 
reminiscent of foreign yogurt but it is much more valuable from 
the standpoint of its qualities. It may also be used 
successfully by workers in toxic industries, in the Chernobyl 
zone, and in regions of ecological trouble. 
  A shop producing this product is already operating at the 
Rossiya state farm [sovkhoz] near Nizhniy Novgorod. We had 
wanted to set up production at small shops producing this 
foodstuff. We have now found manufacturing shops based at a 
defense plant. Next year we are planning to launch 10 such 
shops. The process is simple, and the raw material is available. 
Eventually we want to increase facilities to launch 50 shops a 
year. The objective is to cover the entire country with such 
small shops producing baby food. 
[Vasilyev]These are alluring plans. But excuse my 
indelicate question. They are all just plans; is there anything 
concrete? 
[Baranov] The U.S. government has allocated $1.5 
million for creation of a Neonatal Intensive Care Center. We are 
organizing it on the basis of the Morozov Hospital in Moscow. 
Our partner in the United States is Norfolk Children's Hospital. 
The building is being renovated. Our physicians are training to 
work with the very latest equipment. The department will be open 
next year. The creation of another seven such centers is planned. 


