BFN 

  [Text] Pretoria May 9 SAPA -- Israeli President Ezer 
Weizman and Palestine Liberation Organisation Chairman Yasir 
'Arafat met on South African soil on Monday when they paid a 
courtesy visit to President-elect Nelson Mandela. They are in 
the country for Mr Mandela's inauguration in Pretoria on 
Tuesday. The three men posed for a photograph at the presidency 
in Pretoria where they held talks. Mr Weizman presented Mr 
Mandela with a silver-plated scripture, called a Tanach in 
Hebrew. 
  Outside at an impromptu press conference, Mr Weizman said Mr 
Mandela had promised him and Mr 'Arafat he would visit their 
countries [as received]. Mr Arafat said they had had "very 
important discussions". 
  Mr Weizman and Mr 'Arafat were among a string of dignitaries 
who met Mr Mandela on Monday. British foreign secretary douglas 
hurd was the first. After his talks with Mr Mandela, Mr Hurd 
said the president-elect was full of plans and ideas for the 
future. He said he had told Mr Mandela Britain was anxious and 
keen to provide assets or experience that could be useful to 
South Africa. 
  Other dignitaries to visit Mr Mandela were former Australian 
prime ministers Mr Bob Hawke and Mr Malcolm Fraser. 
  Scheduled to visit Mr Mandela on Monday night were 
representatives of a selected Commonwealth group, including 
Canadian deputy prime minister Ms Sheila Copps, Malaysian 
minister of foreign affairs Mr Abdullah bin Haji Ahmad Badawi, 
Singaporean minister of finance Dr Richard Hu and Sri Lankan 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Mr A C S Hameed. 
  The southern African group included Botswanan President 
Quett 
Masire, Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe, Mozambican President 
Joachim Chissano, Angolan President Eduardo dos Santos, Namibian 
President Sam Nujoma, Zambian President Frederick Chiluba, 
Basotho King Letsie III and Swazi King Mswati III. 
  Most leaders and heads-of-state presented mr mandela with 
gifts. 
  The South African Communications Service said in a statement 
on Monday night King Constantine of Greece was in South Africa 
in his private capacity, and not to represent the Hellenic 
Republic of Greece. "Neither is he a member of the Greek 
delegation attending the inauguration of President Mandela, 
despite press reports to the contrary," the statement said. 

