Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by correspondent Shigeru Komago] </F>
  [Text] "Japan said no" at the Japanese-U.S. framework 
talks, and that has become sensational. The Japanese-U.S. 
framework talks have another major feature. The Japanese 
Government and the U.S. Government attempted to swing public 
opinion in the two countries to them by aggressively using the 
news media publicly and privately to stress the correctness of 
their assertions at the talks. They spoke ill of each other and 
slandered each other. They also engaged in a "media war," which 
was unprecedented. 
  This article examines the advantages and disadvantages 
resulting from "making public" in this way the trade 
negotiations, which have so far on many occasions been held 
secretly. 
  Anyway, the Japanese-U.S. framework talks were mysterious. 
In news conferences right after the vice-ministerial 
negotiations and working-level negotiations attended by 
division-chief officials from the two countries, the standard 
official explanation of both sides was that "both sides cannot 
speak of any specific matters in accordance with their mutual 
promise." Both the Japanese and U.S. sides, however, were 
incredibly responsive to individual news coverage and fully 
explained what was discussed in the negotiations. 
  The feature of the Japanese-U.S. framework talks was that 
both sides spoke ill of each other. To cite an example, the 
U.S. side criticized the Japanese bureaucracy, and the Japanese 
side criticized the U.S. proposal for objective criteria as 
"numerical targets." As Japan publicly criticized the United 
States, the U.S. criticism of Japan was conspicuous. Both sides 
repeatedly made slanderous comments about each other in front of 
many reporters. 
  As a result, although the negotiations were held behind 
closed doors over the past six months, the details of what was 
discussed in the negotiations were fully reported, and the 
negotiations under the Japanese-U.S. framework talks were 
unprecedented bilateral negotiations between the two countries. 
  As their slander competition began to give them trouble, 
some 
negotiators accused reporters of creating the problem, saying, 
"the news media are hampering our negotiations." Many reporters 
certainly felt that the negotiations would hammer out no 
agreements if they were held that way. 
  Now, looking back at the Japanese-U.S. framework talks, 
which 
ended in a breakdown, it can be said that their criticism 
competition itself ended in victory by Japan, which waged an 
anti- U.S. campaign after labeling the U.S. demand for objective 
criteria as "numerical targets." Japan succeed in nudging 
European and Asian nations and even Americans to criticize the 
Clinton administration. 
  U.S. negotiators said, "We had a harvest of transparency." 
It was said that "both Japan and the United States kept 
themselves from making behind-closed-door deals, at which Japan 
is good, by opening their discussions to the news media." 
  Neither Japan nor the United States reached any easy 
compromises at the negotiations, and this was a painful option 
for the United States. A U.S. negotiator said while the U.S. 
criticism of Japan stirred up anti-U.S. sentiments among the 
Japanese, "what was a plus for us was that we made the Japanese 
not leave the negotiations in the hands of bureaucrats, and that 
we made the Japanese pay attention to the negotiations." 
  Criticism of the government is growing for rejecting the 
"U.S. demand for setting numerical targets," and the sentiment 
is growing for opening Japan's market voluntarily following the 
breakdown of the Japanese-U.S. framework talks. Perhaps these 
were the goal of President Clinton, who criticized the Ministry 
of International Trade and Industry and the Finance Ministry by 
name, and the goal of the U.S. Government, which meddled in 
Japan's domestic affairs. 
  Regrettably, a media war between Japan and the United States 
to gather information on each other's real intentions was an 
incredibly poor idea, perhaps because of each side's excessive 
use of energy in competing to use the news media to swing the 
public opinion of the two countries to its side. 
  Based on information supplied by the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo, 
the United States continued to have high hopes that "Prime 
Minister Hosokawa will make statement going beyond [fumikonda] 
the views of the bureaucrats." Japan failed to fathom the 
president's real intentions to the last. It still says, "We do 
not know whether the President is taking a tough stand toward 
Japan on trade." 
  While both Japan and the United States are calling their 
relations the "most important bilateral relations," Japanese and 
U.S. negotiators distrusted each other and wrangled with each 
other in the negotiations, without there existing a channel to 
fathom the intentions of their leaders. This is the current 
state of Japanese- U.S. relations. The Japanese-U.S. framework 
talks were meaningful in disclosing the actual state of 
"relations between the Japanese and U.S. Governments." 

