BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by Gloria Salguero Gross and Carmen Elena </F>
Calderon de Escalon, deputies of the Nationalist Republican 
Alliance, with unidentified reporters in San Salvador -- live] 
  [Excerpt] [Salguero Gross] Members of the Nationalist 
Republican Alliance [ARENA], thank you for coming. We called 
this news conference to discuss a piece of correspondence 
presented by ARENA on 29 April concerning the Assembly's 
handling of a secret allotment that is currently in existence. 
As a faction we have decided that this allotment should be 
converted into an audited fund to prove that our party intends 
to make the next five years of government crystal clear and 
honest in the eyes of the Salvadoran people. We are very 
pleased to make this announcement. The secret allotment will be 
turned into an audited fund so that it can be disclosed to the 
public. This is the situation regarding secret expenses. 
  As for the presidential tax exemptions, we are going to 
eliminate them. There will be no presidential tax exemptions so 
the people can see what ARENA's intentions are. We will also 
eliminate the Supreme Court of Justice's tax exemptions because 
we believe that will also be a positive step. 
  I would like my colleague Dona Carmen Elena Calderon de 
Escalon to explain the changes in tax exemptions granted to 
deputies. 
  [Station announcer] Deputy Carmen Elena Calderon de Escalon 
will discuss the tax exemptions. 
  [Calderon de Escalon] ARENA as a party wants to ensure 
greater honesty and austerity; we believe that in the past the 
tax exemptions granted to deputies gave them access to a 
considerable amount of money, and on Friday we proposed to the 
plenum that deputies be authorized to purchase only one vehicle 
tax-free during the term of the principal deputy, without 
establishing any price limits to ensure that the tax exemption 
will never be used for any other purpose. This, I believe, will 
help the Salvadoran people understand that the politicians of 
this country are working on a daily basis to improve their 
image, which is what all the members of this new assembly want. 
I am certain they will approve this piece of correspondence. 
  I wanted to say this because Friday was a very important 
day; 
constitutional reforms were also approved that day. 
Additionally, ARENA also believes that the Supreme Court's 
secret fund is no longer justified because the Constitution 
establishes that the Supreme Court receive the resources it 
requires. In other words, all monies must be confirmed by the 
Accounts Court [corte de cuentas]. I believe this will 
contribute to the honest management of funds throughout the 
entire country. Thank you. [passage omitted] 

