BFN 

<F P=106> [Special article by Fan Gang (2868 4854): "Speedy Growth </F>
and Macrostability -- A Theoretical Analysis of Macroeconomic 
Issues"] 
  [Text] Abstract: The fast growth of our national economy 
during the past two years has been basically healthy and the 
overheating problem has not developed into such a severe state 
as to require an overall austerity policy. The increase in the 
price index was mainly caused by the expansion of aggregate 
demand. During the economic transformation period, in the course 
of structural reform, inflation tends to be inevitable. 
However, the fact that inflation has not caused big problems in 
the past does not mean that "inflation is harmless." The 
structural reform is a process which takes quite some time to 
show any effects, while macroregulation and control are an issue 
of short-term "management of aggregate demand." Those two must 
not be confused. Therefore, the formula of "currently seeking 
macrostability by way of deepening the reform" is a specious 
argument. Only the formula of "seeking long-term economic 
stability by way of deepening the reform" is correct. Some 
reform measures in use at the moment are confined to the area of 
state-owned economy. Therefore, the reform of the 
macromanagement system should go beyond the vision of 
state-owned economy. [end abstract] 
  In 1993, our country's economic growth rate was 13 percent, 
higher than in 1992. In the meantime, the general price index 
also registered a fast growth. Judged by the factors in various 
areas at the moment, the economic growth in 1994 will continue 
to maintain a relatively high rate and great potential 
inflationary pressures remain. In this context, how to view the 
current state of our economic system and the tendency in 
economic development, whether or not necessary measures should 
be adopted, and how to maintain macroeconomic stability 
alongside high-rate economic growth and truly realize sustained, 
rapid, and healthy [chixu, kuaisu, jiankang] development are 
obviously important questions we have to answer. 
<H5>  Correctly Evaluate the Extra Fast Growth During the Past Two </H5>
Years 
  The first thing to point out here is that it is 
inappropriate 
to draw a simple analogy between the growth rate and inflation 
rate in 1992-1993 and the situation in 1987-1988. The high 
growth in the past two years has been, to a greater extent, 
"real [zhenshi 4176 1395]," healthy [jiankang 0256 1660], and 
nonoverheating [fei guore 7236 6665 3583]. 
  First, during the prior three-year improvement and 
rectification, there were quite a lot of goods in stock, the 
scope of investment was relatively small, and some additional 
social production capacity was created (including, in 
particular, that created by some newly commissioned construction 
projects). While the high growth in 1992 was of a recovery 
nature, the 1993 high growth was still based on the increase of 
social production capacity during the previous two years. 
  Second, as the reform and opening up in China deepened, 
foreign investment has significantly increased since 1992. Such 
input has not only expanded the aggregate demand but also 
generated purchasing power in foreign exchange. As a result, we 
have been able to utilize the supply from the international 
community and consequently expand the "total supply" which can 
be utilized. 
  Third, what is of particular importance is that because our 
market economic mechanism has begun to play its role in an 
ever-expanding area and the proportion of the non state-owned 
economy has been expanding, the efficiency of resource 
disposition has been raised as has the investment efficiency. 
The reality of the growth has also been greatly increased as 
the structural reform itself can upgrade the real growth rate by 
several percentage points. 
  Fourth, because local governments and many enterprises have 
begun to gain a better understanding of the importance of such 
basic industries as infrastructure, energy, and communications, 
during these years the investment in these fields has expanded 
and some of the investment has started to pay off, thus 
alleviating some local bottleneck problems and expanding the 
general supply capacity of the society. 
  All these factors indicate that making simplistic 
comparisons 
between the growth rates in different years and under different 
conditions is inappropriate. We should make realistic analyses 
of the real quality of the various growth rates and correctly 
evaluate the fast growth of the economy during the past two 
years. The author personally believes that the fast growth of 
our economy in the past two years has been basically healthy; 
though there has been a tendency toward "overheating" the 
problem has not become so severe as to call for the 
implementation of an overall austerity policy. 
  However, though the problem is not yet very severe, it has 
certainly reached the extent of meriting serious attention in 
many respects. Commodity prices on the market experienced a 
high rate of growth: Throughout the year, retail prices rose by 
13 percent over the previous year, while the cost of living of 
residents rose about 15 percent. In 35 large and medium cities, 
the cost of living index reached as much as 20 percent or so. 
On the basis of the high growth during the previous year, the 
investment in fixed assets grew by another 47 percent or so. 
The extent to which such bottleneck industries as 
communications and energy restrict the economic growth has 
become very serious, as the freight satisfaction rate is only 
about 60 percent and, on several arterial railway lines such as 
Beijing-Guangzhou, only 40 percent. All this indicates that the 
destabilizing factors in the economy have increased somewhat. 
If we fail to have a sober and scientific understanding of this 
in good time and just let it run its course without adopting 
pertinent remedial measures, this will lead to serious 
consequences. 
  Is There "Inflation of Total Demand?" 
  Since last year, the following question has been in dispute 
in Chinese economic circles: Has there been "inflation of total 
demand" in our economy and have the price increases been caused 
by excessive total demand? Many people have answered this 
question in the negative. 
  We can deny that there has been an inflation of total demand 
but we must explain the reason for the price increases, not only 
the increase of the means of production price index of 40 
percent or so but also that in the urban cost of living index of 
over 20 percent. 
  Some hold that price increases are not a result of inflation 
of total demand but of "price adjustments" or price reform. One 
must admit that the price increases in China in the past two 
years do have something to do with some measures for price 
adjustments or price reform. But why did the prices of some 
items go up, instead of going down, the moment they were 
decontrolled, in turn causing the price of other items to go up? 
The answer to this question is that before the prices were 
decontrolled, what was termed in economics as "suppressed 
inflation" existed because the original total demand had already 
expanded but had manifested itself in "shortages," as the demand 
exceeded supply at the original price levels. That is why the 
prices, once decontrolled, went up. Naturally, however, some 
element of "suppressed inflation" existing in our economy is not 
necessarily a result of the total demand expansion during the 
past two years but a problem left behind from history. However, 
at the end of the day, the increases of commodity prices after 
price controls were lifted have to be explained by the 
purchasing power (demand) which has an objective presence in the 
current economy. The price reform itself is nothing more than 
to "digest" the excessive purchasing power; in itself, it has 
not created this amount of purchasing power. 
  Another argument ascribes price increases to "cost-push." 
There is indeed a type of so-called "cost-push" inflation but 
it mainly refers to the situation whereby the costs in a 
country's economy are generally increased due to such "external 
impact" (exogenous variable) as an "oil crisis." However, it 
does not make much sense to ascribe China's post-1992 situation 
to "cost-push." Since the second half of 1992, because the 
demand on investment quickly expanded, the price levels of the 
means of production increased by 40 percent or more. Such cost 
increases will certainly have to be "digested" by other 
commodity prices through cost increases [as published] in a 
gradual process (over a period of time). It is obviously a 
confusion of concepts and a circular argument to term this price 
change as "cost-push" rather than ascribing it to the expansion 
of the original investment demand. In present-day China, a kind 
of "cost-push" inflation does often happen, i.e., the payroll 
costs of state-owned enterprises (including all kinds of 
consumption at public expense, distribution of benefits in kind, 
and welfare benefits) constantly rising at a higher rate than 
the growth in labor productivity, causing a chain reaction in 
price levels. This factor can be considered a constant factor 
in our system at the moment, which does not change whether the 
economy is "hot" or "cold." For example, one could say that 
1990 was a relatively "cold" year for our economy, as there was 
no serious inflation. But it was that year that the actual 
per-capita wages of state-owned units increased by 9.7 percent 
(bringing the actual total payroll up by 9.2 percent), 
representing the highest growth rate since the 1970's. However, 
this did not cause high-rate inflation that year. Since this is 
a "constant factor," it cannot cause high-rate inflation of 
itself. Therefore, we cannot use this factor to explain what 
has happened over the past two years. 
  Still another argument is to ascribe price increases to an 
"imbalance of structure." True, in economic studies there is a 
type of inflation related to structural change but it usually 
means that when an economic structure experiences a change, 
because prices generally have a "rigidity against lowering," 
relative adjustment of price structure can only be achieved 
through the increase of some prices, thus causing an increase in 
overall price levels. The cause and effect of this situation is 
different from, and therefore cannot be compared with, the cause 
and effect of another situation, i.e., price increase caused by 
the inflation of total demand and the failure of total supply to 
expand quickly due to serious structural "bottleneck" 
restrictions. Economic structural adjustments have been 
continuous in our country in past years (i.e., the first case), 
including the past two years and the earlier period of 
improvement and rectification (structural adjustments and price 
adjustments never being infrequent during the period of 
improvement and rectification) but they did not cause high price 
increases. Therefore, we cannot use this to explain what has 
happened over the past two years. The structural problem in our 
economy over the past two years is mainly that the expansion of 
total demand has aggravated the restriction of the structural 
"bottlenecks" (i.e., the second case), such as the 
communications bottleneck and the energy bottleneck, in turn 
aggravating the price increase pressures. Therefore, the main 
cause should be ascribed to the imbalance of total supply and 
demand, not to structural adjustments. 
  There is no denying that there are always an infinite number 
of factors in economic life which determine the movement of 
prices (each factor determining the price change at a certain 
percentage point). However, by carefully analyzing the 
situation with economic theory, we will have to come to the 
conclusion that the increases of price levels in our country 
over the past two years were mainly caused by the inflation of 
total demand. According to the "objects," the total demand can 
be divided into two parts, investment demand and consumption 
demand. The expansion of total demand in our country over the 
past two years finds expression mainly in the expansion of 
investment demand and the demand of "consumption at public 
expense" and the basic mechanism of such expansion is not very 
different from the previous one. The mechanism of China's 
macroeconomic operation has not gone through a "fundamental 
change." Lack of a sober understanding of these basic judgments 
will make it very hard to uphold a correct and realistic 
guideline in economic work. 
  Why Is Inflation "Not Good?" 
  One cannot deny there is some point in the 
"inflation-is-harmless theory." First, in terms of the 
relationship between total supply and total demand only, any 
change in the general price level merely means a change in the 
"nominal value" of the GNP and does not affect the growth of its 
"real value," the increase of actual income being most 
important. Second, though the prices may go up a bit, as long 
as the economy maintains an active growth momentum it is better 
than the situation whereby commodity prices stay where they are 
but economic growth comes to a halt. Third, many structural 
problems and problems with price parity can only be gradually 
adjusted and solved in the course of the increase of the general 
price level and so on and so forth. 
  Nevertheless, to this day, there is no country in the world 
that does not try its best to avoid inflation. Why is that? 
The reason is that inflation does have some negative effects 
that must not be overlooked. There may be nothing wrong with 
inflation itself but some things which happen during and after 
inflation are not so good. 
  First, the process of inflation normally involves 
redistribution of the national income and widening the gaps in 
income, which includes not only the gap between urban and rural 
incomes but also that between the incomes of different regions 
and walks of life. This is more so during the current period of 
economic transformation when the market mechanism in our country 
is still underdeveloped and its economic structure is 
irrational. For instance, a relatively developed region had an 
economic growth rate of 14 percent in 1993, its cost of living 
index was 20 percent, and the monetary income of the residents 
there grew by around 44 percent. To this region, that bit of 
inflation was of course tolerable and no big deal. But where 
did the "extra" income of around 10 percent come from? 
Obviously, it could only have come from other regions, more 
likely from the more backward regions and rural areas. 
Therefore, this involved further expansion of regional income. 
Naturally, however, the development of the market economy means 
that we can no longer practice egalitarianism, as the existence 
of income discrepancies to some extent has a degree of 
rationality. If inflation is allowed to continue and the income 
discrepancies are too wide, this will obviously lead to 
instability in the society and will be detrimental to the 
further sustained development of the economy. What merits 
attention is that the widening of the income discrepancies is 
related to macroeconomic conditions. 
  Second, inflation and the overall imbalance whereby total 
demand exceeds total supply would ordinarily cause acceleration 
of economic growth. Under the existing system of our country, 
it will cause "overheated growth" in the economy. What is 
called "overheated growth" is relative to the growth rate of the 
total supply capacity of the society or the actual growth 
capacity of economy. It is not measured by the absolute value 
of growth rate but manifests itself through such phenomena as 
"bottlenecks," "excessive utilization of equipment," "lowering 
of the actual capital accumulation rate," and "eating corn on 
the stalk." In the history of our country, these phenomena have 
happened from time to time and they are all forms of "overheated 
growth." They point to a poor dynamic efficiency of economic 
growth and are detrimental to the long-term, sustained, steady, 
and fast growth of the economy. 
  Third, inflation, unstable currency value, and failure to 
maintain long-term overheated growth all cause stronger 
uncertainties in the economy. This will hamper the growth of 
savings deposits and the expansion of actual investment, 
especially the input of foreign capital, and weaken the 
favorable conditions we have for absorbing foreign capital. 
They are also unfavorable for the continued fast growth of the 
economy. 
  One has to admit that during the period of economic 
transformation, in the process of structural reform and in the 
initial stage of economic development, inflation is often 
unavoidable and some fluctuations in the macroeconomy are also 
unavoidable. Without them, economic transformation and economic 
growth would probably have been impossible. People at all 
levels must have a sober understanding of this. In the past 
dozen years of reform and development in our country, the 
average growth rate was about 10 percent and inflation rate was 
always kept under a controllable level, without causing the 
galloping inflation which has plagued many developing countries 
and countries going through structural reforms or caused big 
social turmoil because of inflation. This in itself is a very 
big achievement and should not be underestimated. However, 
because inflation has not caused big problems in the past does 
not mean that "inflation is harmless" or that we do not have to 
take preventive measures. 
<H5>  "Double-Track Regulation and Control" </H5>
  After we have obtained a relatively clear understanding of 
the reality of our economic situation, the problem now is how to 
conduct macroregulation and control to achieve our goals. 
  1. Evaluation of the current economic system. 
  The first issue to understand is that the choice of 
effective 
means of macroregulation and control depends on understanding 
the microeconomic system and the macrooperational mechanism. 
The existing system is the basic premise for the effectiveness 
of current macroregulation and control policies. 
  After 15 years of reform and opening up, our country's 
economic system has undergone many important changes. First, 
the nonstate-owned economy, as a "new sector of system," has had 
much development and its proportion in the total industrial 
output value and GNP has exceeded 50 percent. As economic 
subjects which are oriented to the market and have relatively 
strong self-restraint, they play a positive role in stabilizing 
the economy. Second, the price reform, after the "double-track 
transition" in the past years, has scored a decisive success. 
The prices of over 90 percent of consumer goods and the prices 
of over 80 percent of the means of production have been 
decontrolled and put under market regulation. Third, marked 
successes have been achieved in opening to the outside world. 
Foreign investment has greatly increased, imports and exports 
have further expanded, and price increases have been restricted 
by the prices on the international market in many respects (such 
as rolled steel and other means of production). Fourth, all 
kinds of markets have gone through some development. Though some 
confusion has happened on the stock market, real estate market, 
and securities market (especially activities of "speculation at 
public expense" by state-owned and semi state-owned companies 
that have emerged in these markets), residents have been given 
more investment channels after all. This is conducive to 
checking the expansion of consumption demand and encouraging the 
accumulation of capital. As a result of all this, the system of 
market economy in our country has begun to play a part, to some 
extent and within a certain scope, and an embryonic form of 
market mechanism has come into being in China. 
  However, it is still too early to think that China's 
economic 
system has gone through a "fundamental change" simply on the 
basis of the abovementioned situation or in reference to the 
spell of "market sluggishness" during the austerity period 
during the previous two years. Our economy is still in the 
stage of "double-track transition," an important manifestation 
of which is that the old economic system is still functioning. 
This can be recognized from the following two most important 
aspects. 
  First, there has been no change in the structure of the 
basic 
system of the state-owned economic sector and soft budgetary 
restraints by local governments and state-run enterprises, as 
well as various behavioral patterns based on them (including the 
ways to react to many economic "policy variables"), have 
remained basically unchanged. For instance, the "way to react" 
to the adjustment of "interest rates" by state-owned enterprises 
and local governments as an important macroregulation policy 
instrument has not changed. Though everybody is complaining that 
the "interest rate costs" are too high, even if interest rates 
are raised even higher, the demand by the state-owned sector for 
loans will not decrease. 
  Second, the dominating position of the state-owned economy 
(note that we are not talking about the "public-owned economy" 
here) in the entire economy has remained unchanged. This can be 
illustrated from the following aspects. A) While in terms of 
output value or the creation of national income the state-owned 
economy has ceased to take up the bigger portion, in terms of 
expenditure or the creation of total demand the state-owned 
economy still occupies a dominant position. The key issue here 
is that when bank deposits from different economic sectors are 
transformed into loans, they flow mainly to state-owned economic 
departments through the state banking system (generally 
estimated at over 80 percent at present). The loans used by 
township and town enterprises and the private or 
individually-owned economy only take up a very small proportion. 
This way, the state-run sector, which accounts for the smaller 
proportion in the revenue structure continues to enjoy the 
bigger proportion of the expenditure structure, especially 
expenditure on investment. In terms of direct financing by 
enterprises, because budgetary restraints are soft, state-owned 
enterprises are relatively "bold" and, naturally, are able to 
attract more funds. B) The state-owned economy is concentrated 
in such lifelines of the national economy as light and heavy 
industries, energy, and minerals and, therefore, its role of 
leadership in the national economy has not changed either. C) 
With the abovementioned two points as a basis, what is 
determining the changes in various stages of economic 
fluctuations in China at present is still the state-owned 
economic sector. Township and town enterprises, the private 
economy, and so on showed relatively high growth rates as early 
as 1990. However, because they were mainly concentrated in 
consumer goods processing industries, commerce, and the service 
industries, they merely played the role of maintaining the 
supply of consumer goods and were still unable to cause the 
entire economy to pick up. Only when the state-owned economy 
"recovered" did the entire economy gradually become active. 
Particularly outstanding is that, aside from the fact that the 
investment by the state-owned sector still takes the bigger 
portion of the overall investment society-wide (over 67 percent 
in 1993), the expansion of investment in the state-owned 
economy, as in all previous cases of economic fluctuations, 
plays a leading and decisive role in the overall pickup of the 
economy. D) In financial revenue, the income from the profits 
and taxes delivered by state-run enterprises still takes up the 
bigger portion. Because the state of fiscal revenue and 
expenditure plays a very important role in the formulation of 
macroeconomic policies, the performance of the state-run 
economic sector continues to play a decisive role in shaping the 
trends of the entire macroeconomy. For instance, just in order 
to keep the amount of profits and taxes delivered by state-run 
enterprises from dropping or to avoid further expansion of the 
extent of losses, the relevant departments probably do not dare, 
or are not willing, to adopt policies which curtail credit 
expansion and inflation of demand (e.g. raising the interest 
rates for loans). 
  2. "Double-track system" and "double-track regulation 
and control." 
  The basic meaning of what is called "double-track regulation 
and control" is that: According to the "double-track" feature 
of our economy, is to exercise integrated regulation and control 
on the economy by actively using some macropolicies and means of 
market economy which have begun to show effect while, on the 
other hand, continuing to use the means of "direct control" 
which are suited to the old system, including some 
administrative means. 
  In the process of choosing the right stabilizing policies 
for the macroeconomy at present, the following issues concerning 
understanding should be made clear before anything else: 
  First, what one should particularly seek to have a clear 
understanding about at the moment are: A) The effectiveness of 
different macroeconomic regulation and control policies depends 
on different economic systems, especially the "micro basis" of 
economy. B) We need to develop the market economy but our 
existing economic system is not yet a market economy and the 
"micro basis" of the macroeconomic operation is far from being 
the "micro basis" of a market economy. This is the very reason 
that many stabilizing policies for macroeconomy which are 
effective in the context of a market economy are, in reality, 
unable to play their role effectively in the context of our 
existing system. This finds conspicuous expression in the 
following: The state-owned economic sector, which still resorts 
to administrative links in operation to a large extent, can only 
be restrained by administrative means for the time being; while 
localities and enterprise lack a built-in self-restraining 
mechanism, it is still imperative to retain certain external 
restraints. We must now energetically develop the system of 
market economy. This mainly requires us to put our efforts into 
the structural reform, especially in transforming the micro 
basis of the economy. It does not mean that we can change the 
"policies" or "means" for managing the economy entirely. Any 
blind attempt to try using the policies of market economy which 
have proved effective in managing our economy now will not 
really be conducive to the development of a market economy and 
will not really be a move toward "marketization." 
  Second, the structural reform is a process which takes quite 
some time before any effects can be seen but macroregulation and 
control is an issue concerning the short-term "management of 
total demand." These two must not be confused. Therefore, the 
formula of "seeking current macrostability by way of deepening 
the reform" is a specious concept. The reform should move ahead 
at a faster pace and this is even more necessary at present. 
However, before the reform is accomplished, we still have to 
face the issue of how to exercise macroregulation and control in 
the context of the existing system. Only the formula of "seeking 
long-term economic stability by way of deepening the reform" is 
correct. Third, though our economy is not yet a complete 
market economy, it is no longer a complete planned economy 
either. It is in the period of transition from the old system 
to the new and its basic feature is "one system on double 
tracks." This feature of an economic system obviously requires 
the means of macroregulation and control also to be on "double 
tracks." Using only one method, in defiance of the law of 
movement of things, will actually fail to bring about the 
desired results. This finds conspicuous expression in the 
following: We do not now have a means of macroregulation and 
control that can effectively regulate and control the economy, 
be it direct or indirect, "market" or "administrative," 
"monetary" or "planned"; on the other hand, none of the various 
means of regulation and control is entirely useless, for they 
all have a certain role to play to some extent within a certain 
scope. This requires us to use various means in an "integrated" 
way and exercise "integrated regulation and control" on the 
economy. During the "double-track transition" period, 
"integrated regulation and control" is, by nature, a 
manifestation of "double-track regulation and control." 
  3. The reform of the macromanagement system must step 
beyond the vision of state-owned economy. 
  As to how to shift from the "double-track regulation and 
control" to "one track" ("market track"), it obviously will have 
to depend on the deepening of the reform. (At present, the 
reform of the relations between ownership and management of 
enterprises is of especial importance.) As regards some reform 
measures which have been adopted or are going to be adopted, I 
think an important problem here is that many reform proposals 
are still confined to the area of the state-owned economy and 
have not stepped beyond the vision of the state-owned economy. 
The reform of the financial system is still largely about the 
division or merger of state-owned banks and the development of 
nonstate-owned financial institutions has not been put on the 
agenda. The reform of the tax system is still largely about the 
division between the central government and local governments 
and the question of how to straighten out the control on the tax 
management of the nonstate-owned economy, reconstruct local 
financial systems, and sort out basic financial relations, 
according to the changed economic structures, and rebuild the 
entire financial system on the basis of this is still being 
neglected. The reform of the investment system is still largely 
concerned with how to handle the investment in the state-owned 
economy and how to provide protection for such investment. The 
enterprise reform is still revolving round the state-owned 
enterprises, as if the enterprises in the nonstate-owned economy 
have nothing to do with promoting faster and more healthy 
development by way of strengthening the building of their 
system. Even the reform of the statistical system has not done 
anything new about how to conduct statistical studies on the 
activities of the nonstate-owned economy which already makes up 
over 50 percent of the total output value. The nonstate-owned 
economy has been developing for many years as a "new force 
suddenly coming to the fore" in an "expected" way, helping our 
economy break through the confines of the state-owned economy in 
an "unconscious" way. Should this "unconscious" state continue? 

