CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kenji Suzuki, MAINICHI SHIMBUN editorial staff </F>
writer: "Dangers of Power Diplomacy Under the Banner of `the 
Asian Age'"] 
  [Text] What Awaits in the Future After Hosokawa's "No" 
  Mass media commentary applauding "Prime Minister 
Hosokawa for saying `No'"is conspicuous. Although it is said 
that Japan-U.S. relations have entered a new phase, we probably 
should exercise caution over distorted nationalism and 
ill-founded pan-Asianism emanating from attempts by Japanese to 
extricate themselves from pent-up anti-U.S. sentiments and 
reactionary behavior. 
<H5>  Sense of Satisfaction in Dispelling Resentment by Having </H5>
Said "No" 
  A change of direction is under way. 
  The direction in which Japan is proceeding is undergoing a 
bold change at least in the area of diplomacy as it nears the 
50th anniversary of the end of World War II. 
  What is visible to the eye may be insignificant. If one were 
to inquire at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs [MOFA], the likely 
response will be, "We are merely following the basic policies of 
the past." However, if we were to piece together the fragments 
of recent events, we note an obvious meandering of diplomatic 
actions. 
  In succinct terms, those events can be termed "a shift from 
the United States to pan-Asianism." 
  "I felt a sense of satisfaction as though dispelling a 
grudge 
in the prime minister's `No.' It was tantamount to declaring 
independence and I would like to applaud his move without 
reservation... I felt much satisfaction in that he made the 
statement with the firmness that should be displayed whenever 
making an initial remark like that." 
  "I felt satisfaction, sensing that the virtual breakdown of 
Japan-U.S. negotiations signaled initiation of a new age in 
Japan-U.S. relations... I would like see a resolve that refuses 
to retreat from the new trend." 
  The foregoing quotes were extracted from letters sent by 
readers to the editor of newspapers published after the 
Japan-U.S. summit talks in Washington on 11 February. The first 
quote was from a letter sent to the MAINICHI SHIMBUN by a 
76-year-old businessman. The second quote was from a letter sent 
to the ASAHI SHIMBUN by a 68-year-old housewife. Both were 
published on 18 February. 
  Those letters to the editor are a direct reflection of the 
Japanese mass media commentary following the breakdown of the 
negotiations. 
  Just a while back, if Japan-U.S. negotiations had been 
broken 
off, that alone would have caused the resignation of the cabinet 
or the prime minister. The situation would have met with a 
barrage of criticism. However, this time around, even though it 
was not labelled "a job well done," there is an attitude that 
the situation was handled logically. The ASAHI SHIMBUN editorial 
started with the comment, "It was a summit meeting which gave a 
vivid sense that a new phase of Japan-U.S. relations has been 
launched under a leader of the new age," while the YOMIURI 
SHIMBUN editorial read, "It is said that mature diplomatic 
relations at times require `an agreement to disagree.'" 
  An erstwhile proponent of "let's say `No'" to the United 
States was House of Representatives member Shintaro Ishihara. 
About four years ago when The Japan That Can Say No, 
which he co-authored with Sony Chairman Akio Morita, was 
released, the majority of mass media commentary was critical. 
The ASAHI SHIMBUN criticized the book, saying, "The book can 
hardly be considered representative of Japanese opinion," while 
Shizuoka Prefecture University professor Terumasa Nakanishi, in 
the magazine CHUO KORON denounced the book as "barber shop 
political talk." However, now it seems as if The Japan 
That Can Say No has gained widespread recognition as the 
prevailing sentiment. 
  Needless to say, we cannot place the contents of The 
Japan That Can Say No and Prime Minister Hosokawa's 
position of "No" in the same category. Mr. Ishihara's assertions 
are fragmentary, full of errors, and replete with 
sensationalism. Prime Minister Hosokawa had said "No" to the 
idea of setting numerical goals for specific trade categories 
such as automobiles as proposed during six months of Japan-U.S. 
trade negotiations. And European and U.S. mass media expressed 
understanding of Japan's opposition to the establishment of 
numerical goals. 
  However, I believe both Mr. Ishihara's "No" and Prime 
Minister Hosokawa's "No" hit the public with identical 
psychological impact. I say this because Messrs. Ishihara and 
Morita's book sold an astounding 1.2 million copies. In his 
follow-up book titled, The Japan That Can Still Say 
`No', he says, "It is a very unusual situation where a book 
sells 1 million copies and that no doubt demonstrates that there 
was a social necessity for the book." Whether the book was a 
"social necessity" is beside the point, but it is obvious that 
public sentiment--which had been daunted by wanton U.S. 
manipulation of the Japanese Government--was imbued with a sense 
of emancipation. 
  Prime Minister Hosokawa's "No" had the same impact. As 
reflected in the letters to the editor, the public was hit by a 
sense of delight by a statement of "No" to the United States 
which had somehow seemed to keep Japan under a state of 
oppression. There seems to be a common quality between that 
situation and the words of Tetsutaro Kawakami who wrote 
immediately following the opening of the Japan-U.S. war, "I can 
now relax with a genuine sense of emancipation." 
<H5>  Revenge Emanating From Anti-U.S. Sentiment </H5>
  Whether the news is good or bad, the mass media and public 
sentiment seem to move in unison. If that were not the case, the 
newspapers would not print letters to the editor of that nature. 
On the other hand, if the public had not sensed the change in 
the mass media's posture, readers probably would have not 
written and sent letters like that. Now, the question is why has 
the mass media, which four years ago frowned upon the word "No," 
capitulated to and joined in a chorus of approbation? 
  We can picture a variety of reasons. As often mentioned, the 
Cold War structure has collapsed and coordination of economic 
matters has become the foremost concern in bilateral relations. 
Even during President Bush's tenure, the United States 
approached Japan somewhat high-handedly. Now that the Clinton 
administration has positioned economic recovery as the 
foundation for the security and growth of the United States, it 
gives the impression that it is willfully bullying Japan without 
any concern for obvious appearances. 
  An issue of foremost importance during the past four years 
was the Gulf war. The Gulf war served to display differences in 
the public's perception of international and security matters in 
Japan and the United States. Of special note is that the 
Japanese people, who contributed $13 billion through increased 
taxation, were inflicted with deep psychological wounds when 
hardly any appreciation was expressed and were contrarily 
ridiculed for "checkbook diplomacy." It just may be the case 
that such resentment has taken the form of "anti-U.S." 
sentiments and is deeply rooted in the hearts of the general 
public. 
  On the other hand, there is an energetic cry for restoration 
of absolute values in the United States. Allan Bloom's 
Closing of the American Mind and Arthur Schlesinger's 
The Disuniting of America and Samuel P. Huntington's 
treatise, Clash of Cultures which recently captured 
literary recognition all treat European and U.S. value standards 
as a universal force, projecting a conspicuous move to abandon 
the doctrine of relativity concerning cultural-anthropological 
issues. The revisionist movements which were extremely popular 
during the latter half of the 1980's serve to reinforce 
journalistic trends of this nature. It may be that Japan is 
witnessing the birth of psychological reaction to distance 
itself from the United States in response to fear, doubt, and 
resistance to such journalistic trends. 
  Some may rebut that "alienation from the United States is an 
exaggeration." But, as the $60 billion surplus with the United 
States demonstrates, Japan is dependent upon the United States 
in a major way in the area of trade. Japan's defense is 
integrated with the United States in terms of policy, weapons 
systems, and, if one exists, in terms of strategy. You might say 
that it is unrealistic to even think of Japan extricating itself 
from U.S. influence. 
  However, because those are the facts and because the impulse 
is unrealistic, Japanese people want to separate themselves from 
the United States in the world of fantasy. They say that 
"feelings of dispelling a grudge" and "feelings of satisfaction" 
may have originated from such thoughts. 
<H5>  In the Name of Pan-Asianism </H5>
  However, we now begin to hear subtle voices saying, "No. 
Shouldn't we think of such an approach with seriousness." 
Instead of speaking of cautious separation from the United 
States, rather, those arguments call for widely addressing 
Japan-U.S. cooperation, while inspiring nationalism on the part 
of the public. One that need not be mentioned is Shinseito 
Secretary General Ichiro Ozawa's "A Normal Nation" theory and 
another is former MOFA Economic Affairs Bureau director Kazuo 
Ogura's Asian theory. 
  In the article "An Idealistic Empire and Fissure of a Lost 
Civilization," published in 1991 in GAIKO FORUM, Mr. Ogura 
attempted a profound psychological analysis of Japan-U.S. 
friction from a perspective which differs from revisionists. He 
said, "From the U.S. viewpoint, Japanese become Americans as 
soon as it is said that Japan shares American values. They say 
Japanese should behave in the same manner as Americans... in 
fact, must behave in the same manner. On the other 
hand, many Japanese feel that the U.S. approach to Japan in 
substance is based on the idea that Japan is nothing more than a 
spiritual colony of the United States, denies the Japanese way 
of life, and violates the basic principle of international 
friendship." 
  Mr. Ogura published a paper titled "For the Restoration of 
Asian Authority" in the July 1993 edition of the CHUO KORON, 
calling for revival of the Asian ethos. He stipulates that Asia 
was "created" in a self-seeking manner by Europe and the United 
States as a target of exploitation, confiscation and cultural 
reorientation. He then writes, "We now face the issue of how we 
will overcome ardent nationalism, which accompanied European 
modernization, as we approach the 21st century, the issue of how 
we will control the Faustian characteristics of mechanical 
culture centered around the search for unlimited desire and 
insatiable self-assertions, as well as the issue of realizing 
genuine harmony between the natural environment and human 
lifestyles. I wonder if the time has come when it is necessary 
to activate traditional "Asian" ethos in addressing such issues." 
  Needless to say, the Ogura thesis was not officially 
recognized by the MOFA. The principal forces in the ministry 
still believe in a close Japan-U.S. alliance. However, the 
treatise does have more than a minor appeal to young bureaucrats 
of the ministry. There are two reasons. First, the treatise is 
novel in that it sets aside technical debate on security and 
economic policies and focuses on cultural aspects. Second, the 
young generation is disgusted with negotiations with the United 
States that are fraught with problem issues. In contrast, Asian 
countries which have been blessed with pleasant, rapid progress 
in economic interchange are far more appealing duty stations. It 
appears they are attracted to the Ogura treatise which justified 
"a drift from the United States to pan-Asianism" on the basis of 
such unrealistic desires. 
  Considering that such conditions exist in the MOFA, it is 
easy to visualize the situation in other ministries. 
  At one time, fiscal officers of the MOF and trade 
counsellors 
of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry [MITI] 
comprised a pro-U.S. stronghold. As a pattern visible in former 
trade counsellor Naohiro Amaya and former fiscal officer Makoto 
Uchimi, these individuals were acquainted with the United States 
and U.S. leaders based on assignments to the embassy and 
legations in the United States in their younger days and advised 
the government, from a comprehensive perspective if put in a 
positive way and from a pro-U.S. position if put in a negative 
way. However, that tradition is about to crumble. 
  Pro-U.S. elements are definitely decreasing in both 
ministries. Just like the situation in the MOFA, young 
bureaucrats at the MOF and MITI prefer assignment to the Asian 
countries rather than the United States. Even the director of 
the Americas Department of MITI has no experience serving in the 
United States. It was even rumored that the episode in which 
former Industrial Policy Bureau director Masahisa Naito of MITI 
was reassigned represented a move to expel pro-U.S. elements. 
  The recent breakdown in Japan-U.S. negotiations was not only 
a reflection of lack of leadership skills on the part of Prime 
Minister Hosokawa, but was probably not unrelated to such 
indifferent attitudes towards the United States and the trend to 
drift from the United States among young bureaucrats. In 
essence, they consider negotiations with the United States as 
only one aspect of the total situation and lack the zeal to 
succeed in negotiations with the United States regardless of 
cost as was the case with their predecessors. And, they mutter 
indiscriminately , "If we can't make a deal with the United 
States, there's Asia." 
  There's probably no need to make another introduction of Mr. 
Ozawa's book, Blueprint for Building a New Japan. In 
that book, he seeks concentration of power relative to internal 
government affairs and externally seeks a "strong Japan" 
stressing international contributions including those of a 
military nature. 
  Mr. Ozawa's foreign policy emphasizes a Japan-U.S. alliance 
and the Asia-Pacific region. These principles are clearly 
enunciated in "The Five Guiding Principles of Japanese 
Diplomacy." It appears that in this respect, there is no change 
whatsoever in policies between the Liberal Democratic 
Party-controlled government and the current government which 
inherited them. Notwithstanding, the Ozawa theory has been 
welcomed enthusiastically by MOFA bureaucrats, especially young 
bureaucrats, as being epochal in nature. The question is, why? 
  One reason is that Mr. Ozawa's "normal nation" tenet 
incorporates the qualities aspired to by Japanese diplomats who 
have engaged in diplomacy lacking authority. Mr. Ozawa defines a 
normal nation as one that "engages in normal activities in 
international society as if they were commonly accepted actions 
in a responsible manner.... We should not insist on assertions 
that are acceptable only in Japanese society and never 
reluctantly engage in activities only because of international 
pressure." You might say that MOFA bureaucrats basically support 
Mr. Ozawa because he, in a way, spoke for them by saying what 
they wished to say but hesitated to say. However, was that the 
total picture? 
  In fact, Blueprint for Building a New Japan 
contains a viewpoint which is similar to the Ogura treatise. 
Ozawa wrote, "The basic tenet of Western values which influenced 
the world in the past calls for the conquest and control of 
nature by mankind. Science and technology were developed as 
tools to be used in pursuit of that goal... However, mankind is 
now faced with the need to cope with the environmental problems 
arising from mankind's actions. In other words, the basic issue 
of the environment concerns the issue of human `lifestyles.' 
Mankind is faced with the need to convert from the Western value 
of controlling the environment to Eastern values in which 
mankind coexists as one part of nature." Those words are 
amazingly similar to those of Mr. Ogura. And, it is this very 
ex-Western value that serves as motivation for MOFA bureaucratic 
appeal for Mr. Ozawa. 
<H5>  The Dangers of Treading an "Old Path" </H5>
  My comments may invite the criticism that I am 
overemphasizing the critical issues, but even if there are signs 
that that is the case, any attempt to stipulate the formation of 
Japan's future course may be scorned as reflecting a fragile 
basis. However, when such books and treatises become popular 
among bureaucrats and influence the venting of resentment of the 
United States by the public, one wonders if we can merely laugh 
off any seemingly groundless fears that such minor signs of 
potential problems could become a torrent. 
  I do not say that distancing oneself from the United States 
is wrong. And, there is no reason to declare that a return to 
Asia is dangerous. The Soviet Union has undergone a fragile 
collapse and the United States remains as the single superpower. 
And the United States has no intention of abandoning its 
singular position as the only world military power. On the other 
hand, it is attempting abrasive intervention in other nations in 
an effort to recover strength in its ailing economy. 
  That fact casts a very serious problem on Japan, which can 
be 
called the foremost beneficiary of the Cold War structure. It is 
not strange that a movement has surfaced in an effort to 
establish an identity for Japan. 
  However, both Mr. Ozawa's and Mr. Ogura's arguments reflect 
a 
degree of fantasy and omission of historical facts. The fantasy 
consists of associating all modern evils with conversion to 
Euro-American and modern ethos, and an infatuation with vague 
Eastern values. The historical omission covers the desperate 
struggles by our previous generation to "leave Asian society and 
assimilate into European society" and the process under which 
there was a rise in pan-Asianism and ultranationalism in an 
attempt to conceal the conflicts arising from those struggles. 
  For a time after the defeat in World War II, progress was 
made in an intellectual effort to thoroughly expose efforts at 
modernizing Japan, pan-Asianism, nationalism, and 
ultranationalism. Intellectuals such as Ko Takeuchi, Masao 
Maruyama, and Bunzo Hashikawa researched the topics with 
extraordinary pain. However, during the high-growth period, 
intellectuals neglected any effort to continue such research. 
The likes of Mr. Ogura neglect to examine the remains of such 
research as if they were so much rubbish. 
  Modern ministries and agencies of the central government are 
staffed with middle managers who enjoy the entertaining features 
of comics rather than building a foundation in theory. It is 
said that we now see increasing numbers of bureaucrats who 
fantasize about diplomacy and politics that "stir the 
imagination" in a manner akin to animated comic strips. I am 
vaguely apprehensive to see the proliferation of simple logic 
which run the risk of implanting additional fantasies in the 
minds of such bureaucrats. 

