BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview: "Maintaining the Protracted Nature </F>
and Stability of Policy on Religion -- Person in Charge of the 
Religion Affairs Bureau of the State Council Answers Reporter's 
Questions"; date, place not given] 
  [Text] On 31 January 1994, Premier Li Peng signed State 
Council Decrees Nos. 144 and 145 to promulgate the "Provisions 
for the Management of Foreigners' Religious Activities Inside 
the PRC" (hereinafter referred to as the "Provisions") and the 
"Regulations on the Management of Places for Religious 
Activities" (hereinafter referred to as the "Regulations"), 
which were put into force as of the date of promulgation. A 
RENMIN RIBAO reporter interviewed a responsible person of the 
Bureau of Religion Affairs of the State Council on the 
formulation and implementation of these two sets of 
administrative regulations on religious affairs. 
  Question: Why was it necessary to formulate the "Provisions" 
and the "Regulations?" 
  Answer: In order to maintain the protracted nature and 
stability of the policy religion, to institutionalize effective 
policies for handling religious affairs in our country and turn 
them into laws, and to promote the building of socialist 
democracy and the socialist legal system in our country, we need 
to quicken the work of religious legislation. The "Provisions" 
and the "Regulations" are just two sets of laws and regulations 
in the process of religious legislation. The promulgation and 
enforcement of these two sets of regulations is an objective 
need in the course of fully and correctly implementing the 
party's policy for the freedom of religious belief. 
  Question: Would you please discuss in detail the purpose of 
formulating the "Provisions" and the "Regulations"? 
  Answer: First, guaranteeing foreigners' rights and freedom 
of religious belief and normal religious activities inside the 
PRC. The major religions in our country all have historical and 
extensive relations with their co-religionists throughout the 
world. With the continuously in-depth development of reform and 
opening in our country and the increasing expansion of our 
international exchanges, religious circles in our country will 
continue to increase exchanges with their overseas counterparts, 
and a large number of foreigners with various religious beliefs 
will come to China to carry out economic, 
scientific-technological, cultural, educational, public health, 
and sports exchanges and cooperation, or will come to China for 
purposes such as visiting relatives, sightseeing, various types 
of visits, and doing business. Their religious life is their 
private affair. The Chinese Government respects their religious 
beliefs and protects their normal religious activities. This is 
a constant policy that our government has always pursued. The 
"Provisions" reaffirm this policy in the form of a legal 
document, and this fully expresses the clear-cut attitude of our 
government on this issue. Second, guaranteeing friendly 
international religious exchanges, as well as cultural and 
academic exchanges related to religion. This is a component 
part of our friendly exchanges with other peoples, and is 
beneficial to increasing mutual understanding and friendship 
between the peoples of various countries, to reform and opening 
in our country, and to maintaining world peace. The Chinese 
Government always supports such activities. Therefore, it is 
also necessary to protect them in the form of laws and 
regulations. Third, safeguarding the public interests of 
society in our country. China is an independent state with 
sovereign power, and no international exchange can harm our 
country's sovereignty and state security. Religious exchanges 
are no exception. Therefore, when foreigners are involved in 
religious activities inside China, carry out friendly exchanges 
with China's religious circles, and carry out cultural and 
academic exchanges in China, they must abide by China's laws and 
regulations. These three points are the purpose of formulating 
the "Provisions." 
  The first point of the "Regulations" explicitly specifies 
its 
purpose, which is "to protect normal religious activities, 
safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of religious 
places, and to improve the management of places for religious 
activities." The places for religious activities are places for 
the masses of believers to express their religious feelings and 
carry out collective religious activities; they are also places 
where the religious clergy live and perform their religious 
duties. At the same time, they constitute a type of social 
organization. Where the activities are normal, whether their 
legitimate rights and interests are properly guaranteed, and 
whether their relations with other social quarters are well 
coordinated all will have a major bearing on their own 
conditions, as well as on the public community as a whole. In 
order to fully and correctly implement the policy for freedom of 
religious belief, to protect normal religious activities, to 
safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of the places for 
religious activities, and to improve the management of the 
places for religious activities, it is necessary to formulate 
the "Regulations." 
  Question: After reading the "Provisions," I found that most 
provisions there show full respect for foreigners' religious 
beliefs and protect their normal religious activities. Do you 
need to give any additional explanation? 
  Answer: As you said, Articles 2, 3, 4, and 5; the first 
point of Article 6; and Article 7; all show full respect for the 
rights of foreigners to enjoy freedom of religious belief, and 
protect their normal religious activities. All foreigners 
inside China, no matter whether they have religious beliefs and 
no matter what religious beliefs those are, the Chinese 
Government will show respect for them. The Chinese Government 
and citizens will not interfere in their normal religious 
activities based on their religious belief as long as such 
activities are not related to Chinese citizens. Along with the 
in-depth development of reform and opening up in the future, 
some large-scale international conferences, sports events, and 
cultural or academic exchange activities will be held in China. 
In order to satisfy the needs of the collective religious life 
of foreigners who come to China, the units organizing such 
activities may apply for arranging religious activities for 
non-Chinese citizens in places specified for foreigners' 
religious activities with the approval of the religion affairs 
department of the Chinese Government. All such provisions fully 
show that the Chinese Government respects the freedom of 
religious belief of foreigners in China, protects their right to 
have normal religious life, and also gives expression to China's 
spirit of reform and opening up. 
  Question: What is the spirit of "China's relevant 
regulations" in Article 7 of the "Provisions"? 
  Answer: That is the principle of separating religion from 
education in our country. The selection of students sent to 
foreign countries to receive religious education in order to 
train as clerics is different from the selection of students to 
study in foreign countries in ordinary institutions of higher 
education in our country. The selection of religious students 
is an internal affair of the religious organizations in our 
country, and must follow our country's principle that China's 
"religious bodies and religious affairs are are not subject to 
any foreign domination," as specified by the PRC Constitution. 
According to the relevant regulations of the Chinese 
Government, religious students being sent to study in foreign 
countries should be selected and arranged by the relevant 
national religious bodies in good coordination, and should be 
reported to the government's religion affairs department for 
approval. No foreign religious bodies, international religious 
organizations and organs, or individuals sent by these 
organizations to China can enroll such students on their own 
without the approval of the Chinese authorities. 
  Question: What approach will be taken to the religious 
activities held on the mainland by residents of Taiwan, Hong 
Kong, and Macao? 
  Answer: Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao have close and 
extensive religious ties with the mainland, and exchanges in 
this aspect are expanding day after day. The exchange of visits 
for religious purposes also is increasing markedly. Such 
activities should be regularized by law so that they can be 
managed on the basis of the law. Taiwan is China's inalienable 
territory, and the PRC soon will restore the exercise of its 
sovereignty over Hong Kong and Macao. According to the Basic 
Laws of Hong Kong and Macao, after China restores the exercise 
of sovereignty over Hong Kong and Macao, we will put into 
practice the policy of "one country, two systems." The principle 
for handling religious relations is "non-affiliation, 
non-interference, and mutual respect." "Peaceful reunification 
and one country, two systems" are the guidelines that our 
government uses to handle relations between the two sides of the 
Strait. Religious relations between the mainland and Taiwan also 
will follow the three-point principle. Under the circumstances 
of "one country, two systems," Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao 
compatriots will be different from residents of the mainland, so 
Article 11 of the "Provisions" lays down the principled rule. 

