BFN 

<F P=106> [Franz Schoenhuber commentary: "Defenseless But Not </F>
Dishonorable"] 
  [Text] Not just a few of our compatriots no longer believe 
in historical justice but hope only to preserve their standard 
of living. They refuse to see that one depends on the other. A 
humiliated people, full of self-doubt, can be blackmailed and is 
defenseless against rising burdens -- no end to having to make 
up for the past. 
  However, no matter how difficult it is to say it, even those 
who live in the shadow must know: Man does not live by bread 
alone. Young people in particular accept this biblical wisdom. 
They not only want to live a decent life, they are no longer 
content with a picture of history that has been trampled into 
place by the victors' boots. They are showing increasing 
distrust for the embarrassing stammering by priests about guilt, 
the anxious interpretations of insecure teachers, the shrugs by 
fathers and grandfathers, and the politicians' deep bows to the 
zeitgeist. How much our politicians, sociologists, and 
journalists are afflicted by the ailment of national masochism 
is shown by the reaction to the question whether German 
politicians should participate in the events commemorating the 
anniversary of the successful landing of the Allied troops in 
Normandy or not? Our answer: no, no, and no again! 
  For us the successful landing in Normandy remains the 
beginning of military defeat. Should we celebrate this in view 
of the graves of the thousands and thousands of fallen German 
soldiers? To those who want to move on to the next item on the 
agenda I call out: Could your brother, your father, your 
grandfather not have been among the fallen and mutilated? 
  And the Day of Liberation? Was Germany not amputated? Was 
the brown [fascist] tyranny not smoothly replaced by the red 
[communist] one in the east of our fatherland? Did the 
insistence on unconditional surrender not pull the ground out 
from under German resistance and let doom take its course? 
  It may be that we are still defenseless against the 
controlled mechanism of humiliation, but we do not want to 
become dishonorable. Therefore, we will not cease our efforts to 
stop the march of the German lemmings to the cliffs of death. 
We owe this to our people. 

