CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "The City Budget for 1993"] </F>
  [Text] Starting with today's issue we will be 
publishing materials from the 28th session of the city soviet of 
people's deputies. 
  We offer for your attention the statement of the 
revenues and expenditures of Kazan in 1993 submitted by the 
chief of the city financial administration V. Titov and the 
resolution "On Local Taxes and Fees." 
  Kazan began 1993 without an approved budget, but specialists 
of finance and tax organs and leaders of the city and rayons 
were working under calmer circumstances. Having had the 
stressful experience of 1992, the city accumulated a small 
reserve of financial resources in the amount of 2.2 billion 
rubles [R]. 
  The first to be financed were immediate expenditures on 
wages, grants, stipends, medications, and food, compensations 
for children, and costs of acquiring equipment. [Line(s) 
missing] financing of repair and capital construction. 
  But again it was necessary to make a request to the republic 
finance minister, D. Nagumanov, to allot the city an 
interest-free budget loan, which would make it possible to solve 
many problems in city management and the sociocultural sphere 
and to grant financial aid to rayons and enterprises that had 
found themselves in an extremely difficult financial position. 
  Only on 28 April 1993 did the deputies of the city soviet 
approve the city budget and take under advisement the 
consolidated budget of Kazan for revenues; for expenditures--R54 
billion, with a deficit of R7 billion or 18 percent [line(s) 
missing]. 
  The rayon leaders were urged to look for new revenues and to 
utilize budget funds economically. There was a concrete plan of 
extraordinary measures for the period from May through December 
1993 for each city service and for each rayon. Thus revenues 
amounting to R246 billion were mobilized. 
  The main sources of revenue for the city budget in 1993 
were: 
  --profit tax--R94.2 billion; 
  --income tax on individuals--R29.2 billion; 
  --property tax--R3.6 billion; 
  --land fees--R1.7 billion 
  --revenues from privatization--R46.5 million; 
  --water fees--R59 million, and other receipts. 
  With the help of local taxes and fees approved by the city 
and rayon soviets of people's deputies an additional R2.6 
billion was mobilized for the budget. Moreover additional income 
was collected in keeping with decisions of administrative 
commissions in the amount of R222 million, fees collected for 
automotive inspection--50 [lines missing]...books--R387 million, 
and the sums received from raising prices above the maximum 
level of profitability--R365 million. Other reserves were 
utilized as well, for example, tax on profit of enterprises with 
foreign capital amounted to a total of R14 million, the tax on 
profit from intermediary operations--R25 million, the tax on 
operations with securities--R108 million, and fees for 
transactions conducted on commodity markets--R5 million. So the 
developing market structures are capable of providing the city's 
treasury with considerable funds in the future. 
  Because the growth rates of expenditures considerably 
outstripped the growth rates of revenues, the financing of the 
local economy and the sociocultural sphere was extremely 
strained. Practically all of the overfulfillment of the revenue 
part of the city budget was used to cover costs related to 
indexation of material expenditures and the wage increase. More 
than R15 billion was spent just on raising wages of workers of 
the sociocultural sphere. 
  On the whole, expenditures from the city budget amounted to 
R169 billion: 
  R81 billion was spent on the economy; 
  R69 billion--on sociocultural measures; 
  R44 billion--on the development of housing and municipal 
services enterprises; 
  R35 billion--on capital investments in various branches; 
  R16 billion on capital repair of roads and maintenance. 
  R3 billion was spent on capital repair of residential 
buildings and yard areas, which made it possible to repair 
70,500 square meters of apartments and restore the facades on 
327 buildings. R534 million was spent on routine maintenance of 
cemeteries. 
  An amount of R19 billion was allotted to make up for the 
declining revenues of housing and municipal service enterprises 
and organizations. Allotted from the budget for housing 
operations organizations was R8 billion just to cover planned 
losses caused by the sharp increase in the cost of materials and 
heat and electric energy. 
  In 1993 there was a significant increase in the proportion 
of 
financing of city electric transportation with city budget funds 
since the actual revenues of the transportation workers 
compensated for only 3.3 percent of the costs of transporting 
passengers. Thus the average cost of transporting one passenger 
on city electric transportation was R65, of which R58 or 89.2 
percent was paid from the city budget. On the acquisition of 17 
streetcars [line(s) missing]... cultural institutions in 1993, 
R56.2 billion or 33.2 percent was allotted from the state 
budget. Some R25.5 billion was spent on public health. Costs of 
food and medications came close to R5 billion. The same amount 
was spent on capital repair of treatment institutions. 
  An amount of R13 billion was allotted for the development of 
cultural institutions. With these funds they managed to finance 
24 children's music and art schools, 66 libraries, a zoo, and 
the Central Park of Culture and Recreation. More than R190 
million was spent on partial reimbursement for costs of editing 
the city's newspapers SHAKHRI KAZAN and KAZANSKIYE VEDOMOSTI; 
and on the creation of city programs of the Efir television 
company and the Radio and Passazh organizations--more than R37 
million. 
  A total of R28 billion was spent on the development of 
public 
education, of which R10 billion went for wages. Last year about 
R7 billion was spent on repair of schools and other educational 
facilities; on the acquisition of computers--R125 million, and 
on the repair of school dining rooms and the purchase of 
equipment for them--R600 million. In 1993 local soviets included 
on the balance sheet 51 children's departmental preschool 
institutions, whose maintenance took R990 million. 
  Some R136 million was allotted for mass sports measures and 
capital repair of the Central Stadium imeni Lenin; R17 million 
was allotted for maintaining 12 movie theaters that were 
transferred to city ownership. 
  The reinforcement of the material and technical base of the 
municipal militia and the maintenance of its subdivisions cost 
the budget R1.5 billion. 
  Expenditures on maintaining organizations of representative 
and executive powers of Kazan amounted [line(s) missing] ... 
required collecting budget funds in a volume of R50 billion, 
including for housing construction--R18 billion, municipal 
construction--R16 billion, construction for public education--R4 
billion, and public health--R9 billion. Some R2.6 billion was 
spent on compensation for the rising cost of construction of 
housing construction cooperatives, and R400 million on the draft 
of the General Plan for the Development of Kazan. 

