Language: <F P=105> Burmese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Full text" of the 46th Independence Day message from </F>
Senior General Than Shwe, chairman of the State Law and Order 
Restoration Council, at the Independence Day flag raising 
ceremony held in Rangoon's People's Square on 4 January -- read 
by announcer] 
  [Text] The date 4 January 1994 is a special and auspicious 
day that marks the 46th independence anniversary of our Union of 
Myanmar [Burma]. On this 46th anniversary of independence, I 
respectfully extend my good wishes to the indigenous people 
residing in the nation. 
  Our Union of Myanmar, which had existed as a sovereign 
nation 
in the world for centuries, was subjected to acts of aggression, 
annexation, and servitude by avaricious colonialist-imperialists 
for three times during the 19th century. Our patriotic 
indigenous brethren took up available arms, fought and repulsed 
this aggression, annexation, and servitude by 
colonialist-imperialists. These patriotic Kachin, Kayah, Karen, 
Chin, Bamah, Mon, Rakhine, and Shan nationals, who waged the 
anti-imperialist struggle for national liberation, will be 
remembered as patriotic heroes in the annals of our history. 
There were millions of people like these heroes. They included 
military personnel, public servants, and ordinary people -- 
children of people -- who fought with their lives and blood to 
uphold the nation's independence. The citizens of Myanmar have 
the firm tradition of cherishing and protecting their 
independence. We have the duty not only to uphold this spirit 
in our generation but to pass it on to the future generations. 
  All our indigenous nationals should rely upon themselves in 
striving to remain as an independent nation in the world and to 
ensure perpetuation of sovereignty. Indigenous nationals are 
duty-bound to strive to collectively safeguard independence and 
sovereignty. They are to maintain their patriotic and 
nationalist fervor. 
  In the course of our history, the citizens of Myanmar have 
always repulsed and overcome attempts aimed at destroying the 
nation where the people have lived together through weal and 
woe. Furthermore, there are many instances showing that the 
citizens of Myanmar were capable of rising from the ruins by 
constructing anew. Therefore, in our era, we have been able to 
overcome the destructive elements and are constantly striving to 
engage in constructive endeavors. 
  We as a nation deserve independence and is capable of 
carrying out national construction and maintaining the national 
heritage. We stand as a nation in the international community. 
  The national government is implementing border region 
development schemes with momentum in the long-term interests of 
the fraternal indigenous people in the border regions. 
Currently, 10 indigenous organizations have given up the line 
of armed struggle and are participating in national construction 
tasks in accordance with the law. The threat of insurgency has 
been cleared in these areas and construction tasks are being 
implemented. 
  Currently, delegates are discussing the state constitution, 
which will ensure the rights and equal development for the Union 
nationals in accordance with their wishes at the National 
Convention, which opened at the beginning of 1993. The 
convention is systematically deliberating on various tasks, and 
it has already drawn up chapter headings for the constitution 
and the basic principles that should be incorporated into the 
constitution. More important matters have yet to be discussed 
in detail in the future. It is very important that the 
constitution be in accordance with the six objectives and the 
wishes of the people and that it ensure the future prosperity of 
the Union. 
  It is important for the delegates to carry out the duty of 
drafting the constitution and for all the citizens to give 
necessary assistance. That is why it is said that the drafting 
of the state constitution is as important as life. 
  The State Law and Order Restoration Council, which is 
leading 
the nation, had carried out the following tasks with the 
people's cooperation: 
  A. The three cardinal tasks -- nondisintegration of the 
Union; nondisintegration of national unity; perpetuation of 
sovereignty; 
  B. Prevalence of law and order and local peace and 
tranquility; 
  C. Smooth and secure transport and communications; 
  D. Easing the people's need for food, clothes, and shelter; 
  E. Priority and protection given to development tasks for 
all 
indigenous people throughout Myanmar. 
  Its achievements in working for peace and prosperity, 
political stability, and economic development in the country are 
known to the people. 
  The Union Solidarity and Development Association [USDA] has 
been formed with the objective of safeguarding and perpetuating 
the Union of Myanmar, promoting friendship among the indigenous 
people, perpetuating national sovereignty and territory, 
promiting national development, and emergence of a peaceful and 
modern state. It is necessary for the national people to study 
and scrutinize the changes in international and domestic 
situation and participate wholeheartedly in the association. 
  Presently, progress has been made in international relations 
and international trade. As the country's economic development 
accelerates, the momentum of success should be maintained, and 
more efforts should be made for development. Only then will the 
country emerge as a developed, peaceful, and modern state. It 
will be necessary for all the people to continue to cooperate 
and work with the SLORC to achieve this goal. Therefore, it is 
urged that the objectives of the 46th Independence Day be 
implemented. The four objectives being: 
  1. For all Union nationals to collectively safeguard and 
ensure the perpetuation of national independence and sovereignty; 
  2. The promotion of nationalism and patriotism; 
  3. Each citizen to strive to work for the emergence of the 
State Constitution; 
  4. To work with firm conviction, zeal, diligence, and 
tenacity for national development and emergence of a peaceful 
and modern nation. 

