Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, 24 Feb (XINHUA) -- While attending a speaking 
forum jointly organized by the Japanese Foreign Ministry, NIHON 
KEIZAI SHIMBUN, and the Japan Association for the Promotion of 
International Trade today, Chinese Vice Premier Zhu Rongji 
delivered an important speech on three main topics of wide 
interest in Japan -- a review of China's economic development in 
1993, conditions for the reform of the economic structure in 
1994, and prospects for Sino-Japanese economic and technical 
cooperation -- and answered questions raised by attendees. 
  Zhu Rongji said: The just-concluded year of 1993 was a year 
during which China achieved brilliant successes in reform and 
opening up, as well as in its modernization drive. For the past 
dozen years or so, under the guidance of Deng Xiaoping's theory 
of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, we have 
succeeded in exploring an effective way for both reform and 
development while maintaining social and political stability 
amid tremendous changes in both the economic system and the 
social structure. China will firmly proceed along the road of 
establishing a socialist market economic system. 
  Touching on the conditions of China's economic development 
in 
1993, Zhu Rongji said: China has entered a new phase of rapid 
economic development since 1992 with an annual growth rate 
reaching 13 percent for two straight years. Under conditions of 
a sustained, high growth-rate economy, some issues worth paying 
attention to did arise, primarily including overinvestment in 
capital construction, the irrational investment structure, 
heated development in real estate and development zones, and 
aggravated "bottleneck restraints" on economic development 
originating in the communications and energy sectors. To 
guarantee sustained, rapid, and healthy economic development, we 
introduced in June last year a series of timely measures to 
strengthen and improve macroeconomic regulation and control 
which have swiftly turned around the situation and helped 
preserve the favorable trend of economic development. Zhu 
Rongji pointed out: When we strengthened macroregulatory 
control, we did not seek all-round retrenchment. Rather, this 
was aimed at readjusting -- through the correct enforcement of 
the monetary policy and the rectification of the financial order 
-- the investment orientation and structure according to 
industrial policy and market demands, in an effort to channel 
funds to such fields as agriculture, communications, and energy 
to aid the development of the national economy. The enforcement 
has resulted in maintaining rapid economic growth, preventing 
the excessive circulation of money, and bringing inflation under 
control. 
  Zhu Rongji said: We must be moderate in all our endeavors. 
In a country such as China with a population of more than 1.1 
billion people, it is particularly necessary to avert both sharp 
rises and sharp drops in the economy. The dynamics of 
macroregulatory control and a tight- or loose-money situation 
will all depend on our national conditions and the realities of 
economic development. Facts have proved that we have been 
successful in doing things this way. 
  Zhu Rongji emphasized: Although the ongoing macroregulatory 
control has achieved results, the effects of a permanent cure 
lie in the continued deepening of reform and the establishment 
of a socialist market economic system -- a direction decided by 
the Third Plenum of the 14th CPC Central Committee. 
  Turning to the question of this year's reform, Zhu Rongji 
said: After long-term preparations, the Chinese Government this 
year has introduced reform measures for finance and taxation, 
banking, investment, foreign trade, and enterprise mechanisms 
that served as major preparations for the establishment of a 
socialist market economic system. These reform measures were 
formulated under the guidance of the party's central leadership 
with General Secretary Jiang Zemin as its core, with the 
concerted wisdom of the people across the nation, and by drawing 
on the successful experiences of the developed countries. 
Judging from the conditions of enforcement over the past 50 
days, the overall situation has been fine and without the 
emergence of major problems. The current market and social 
stability and popular feeling among the people have reinforced 
our determination to push forward reform right up to the finish. 
Zhu Rongji pointed out: The aforementioned reform measures 
will basically take shape this year with more people getting 
familiar with them next year; and by the year 1996, China will 
begin entering the track of a socialist market economy. 
  Zhu Rongji emphasized: In promoting reform, China will 
fully look after the interests of foreign investors, and its 
implementation will further improve investment environments in 
China. With the objective of realizing the principle of 
standardized, uniform, and fair competition, the ongoing tax 
reform has not increased the burdens of foreign-funded 
enterprises, and we will take compensatory measures for 
individual foreign-funded enterprises that may have been 
affected by it. All preferential policies toward foreign-funded 
enterprises will remain unchanged. 
  Touching on Sino-Japanese economic relations, Zhu Rongji 
indicated: The development of Sino-Japanese economic relations 
has been fine, and it was particularly so last year when the 
bilateral trade volume reached $39 billion, a 54-percent 
increase over 1992. Japan has become China's largest trading 
partner, with China becoming Japan's second largest. 
Simultaneously, Japan is also China's largest trading partner 
for technology, with Japanese investment topping other 
foreign-funded enterprises in terms of paid-up capital. 
However, when compared to the potential for Sino-Japanese 
economic cooperation and the potential of the Chinese market, 
this $39 billion was too small a figure. We should make joint 
efforts to broaden the extent of economic cooperation between 
the two countries, which will be significant to the development 
of both nations. To spur an economic recovery, Japan has 
formulated measures to stimulate its economy; the opening up of 
overseas markets, particular the Chinese market, will have an 
important role in revitalizing the Japanese economy. Citing the 
successful, practical example of all-round cooperation between 
Japan's Matsushita Electrical Company and a Chinese enterprise 
in producing video cameras, Zhu Rongji expressed the hope that 
friends in Japanese economic circles will make unremitting 
efforts to promote friendly and cooperative economic relations 
between the two countries. 
  Because of limited accommodations, out of some 2,700 people 
from all walks of life in Japan who expressed an interest in 
hearing Vice Premier Zhu's speech today, only a few more than 
900 were able to attend the function. The speaking forum was 
filled with a friendly and warm atmosphere, during which Zhu 
Rongji also made impromptu replies to questions asked by 
attendees. His speech many times resulted in warm applause. 

