BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest, ROMPRES, 12/4/1994 -- "I am coming to 
Bucharest with an open heart and with optimistic plans. Both 
countries need to cross the threshold of conciliation and, 
moreover, of cooperation, and I hope that in future our peoples 
will work together in friendship," said Imre Pozsgay, president 
of the Democrats' National Alliance of Hungary [MDSZ] on the eve 
of his delegation's visit to Romania. 
  "As far as the Romanian-Hungarian relations are concerned, I 
also wish to add that MDSZ, which the forthcoming elections are 
very likely to usher into parliament, is pursuing a foreign 
policy based on understanding, not on [word indistinct] looking 
back into the past. Only a foreign policy looking ahead at the 
future stands the chance of forging the conditions of 
cooperation between our countries in a united Europe," the 
president of the Democrats' National Alliance of Hungary also 
said. 
  MDSZ President Imre Pozsgay arrived in Bucharest today for a 
visit to Romania. 
  Adrian Nastase, speaker of the Chamber of Deputies, received 
Tuesday, April 12, a Hungarian parliamentary delegation, led by 
independent deputy Imre Pozsgay, co-chairman of the Democrats' 
National Alliance of Hungary. 
  Adrian Nastase and Imre Pozsgay reviewed the political, 
economic and social evolutions in Romania and Hungary in the 
past four years. It was stressed that it was important for the 
two countries to have normal, good neighborliness relations, 
with stress being laid on the necessity to increase economic 
links. 
  Adrian Nastase mentioned that it was essential that 
psychological barriers be overcome, for the progress the two 
parties intend to be put in place in point of their relations. 
  The Hungarian parliamentary delegation had interviews 
Tuesday, April 12, with leaders of the parliamentary groups in 
the Chamber of Deputies, with members of the Foreign Policy 
Commission. The two parties showed willingness to establish 
good neighborly links, to support each other in the two 
countries' activity in international bodies. 
  Imre Pozsgay expressed total confidence in an exemplary 
solution to the problems still causing divergencies. "Our common 
interests are more powerful than our divergencies and all means 
have to be found to pull down existing barriers." 

