BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Iden Wetherell] </F>
  [Text] Joe Modise -- tipped as South Africa's next defence 
minister -- made an undisclosed visit to Britain in December at 
the invitation of the British Ministry of Defence's sales 
division, the British embassy has confirmed. 
  And the ANC's PWV [Pretoria-Witwatersrand-Vereeniging] 
chief, 
Tokyo Sexwale, this week told the MAIL &amp; GUARDIAN that he had 
held talks with French arms manufacturers. Umkhonto we Sizwe 
[Spear of the Nation; ANC military wing -- MK] chief Modise and 
Sexwale's contacts with the European arms industry are highly 
significant in the context of a fierce debate unfolding within 
the ANC on the role of defence in a democratic South Africa. 
  ANC leader Nelson Mandela has pledged to cut defence 
spending 
to pay for the ANC's R39-billion [rand] Reconstruction and 
Development Programme. But sources say powerful ANC insiders, 
including Modise, are fighting for a larger defence budget. 
Modise is said to be angry that he was not consulted about 
proposals to fund the RDP from defence allocations. The "hawks" 
are said to enjoy growing support. 
  ANC attitudes towards the South African Defence Force [SADF] 
have shifted radically in the past few months, sources within 
the movement admit. Institute for Defence Policy Director 
Jakkie Cilliers confirmed that the budgetary claims of a new 
defence force had been boosted by continued unrest and the 
failings of the police and National Peacekeeping Force. Defence 
specialists say that in these circumstances, South Africa's 
defence budget is likely to be hiked, not reduced. The 
integration of the SADF with MK and homeland forces, together 
with a growing reliance on the army as primary internal 
peacekeeper, are cited as new burdens on the fiscus. 
  British embassy spokesman Geoffrey Adams confirmed that the 
British government's Defence Exports Services Organisation had 
"facilitated contacts" between Modise and British industry, 
including defence contractors, during his December visit to 
Britain. Sources say Modise discussed the possibility of a 
British military advisory and training team, similar to that 
based in Zimbabwe, assisting in the military integration process. 
  MK spokesman Calvin Kahn, who together with Armscor 
[Armament 
Corporation] general manager Tielman de Waal accompanied Modise 
to London, would neither confirm nor deny the visit. 
Interviewed this week, Sexwale disclosed he had visited Paris 
last July as the guest of Paris mayor Jacques Chirac and held 
talks with leading politicians and manufacturers. These had 
included representatives of avionics/missile company Matra, 
Thomson communications, and aircraft manufacturer Aerospatiale. 
  Sexwale said he was embarrassed by press speculation that he 
was also being tipped as a future minister of defence. On the 
outcome of his discussions, he added that he had "not been taken 
in by French wine". Sexwale confirmed attending the Paris Air 
Show in 1991 as a guest of French missile systems giant Sagem. 
"I'm a hard-nosed nationalist in matters of technology", he 
said. "This country must not become a banana republic. The 
destruction of our hi-tech base by the current government is a 
crime against the people." But he favours technology that can 
be converted to civilian uses and does not want to see social 
imperatives sacrificed so generals can have "military toys". 
  He described the South African Air Force's recent Pilatus 
deal with Switzerland as "highly questionable". British 
manufacturers complain privately that the French are boasting of 
having tied up sweetheart deals with the ANC. But Sexwale 
denies that any deals have been cut. 

