BFN 

  [Text] Everyone is aware of the fact that the Popular 
Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Labor Party, MPLA-PT, 
forces have launched a major offensive against areas under the 
control of the National Union for the Total Independence of 
Angola [UNITA] in Cuanza Sul Province. The UNITA forces fought 
until [words indistinct] the Luanda regime [words indistinct] 
our correspondent followed the fighting closely and sent us this 
report: 
  [Begin unidentified correspondent recording] While the 
residents of Conde were coming under fire from long range 
artillery set up in (Antena) and Quilenda District [words 
indistinct] many enemy groups, MPLA-PT Lieutenant General Antas 
was ordering his notorious People's Armed Forces for the 
Liberation of Angola [FAPLA] soldiers deployed at Ebo to move in 
the direction of the principal target of Quibala District. 
Those forces were very well equipped. 
  Our glorious patriotic and revolutionary Armed Forces for 
the 
Liberation of Angola [FALA] (?pounced) on those enemy forces and 
pushed them back to Ebo village. Benefiting from support from 
the air and other land forces, the enemy did not stay calm. 
Instead, it again turned on the people and attacked positions 
held by the FALA troops, which counterattacked and, after 
intense clashes lasting some three hours, took Ebo village in 
spectacular fashion. This happened at about 1500 on 5 April. 
  The enemy suffered the following losses: our forces captured 
two BMP-1 armored vehicles, two 76mm cannons, one 14.5mm cannon, 
one RPG-7 rocket launcher, four 60mm mortars, two 82mm mortars, 
(?55 AK- 47 rifles), and many tonnes of assorted war materiel, 
including (?hand grenades), mines, ammunition, and so on. Our 
forces also captured many tonnes of food given by the World Food 
Program, WFP, which were also found [words indistinct]. 
  The FAPLA forces also suffered 165 soldiers killed. 
  Those enemy forces who managed to flee did so in disarray 
and 
in the general direction of Gabela District. 
  The people must be protected from the enemy's maneuvers. 
Those who attack us must pay. [end recording] 
  In Bie Province on 3 April, the air force of Engineer Jose 
Eduardo dos Santos attacked civilians and religious figures 
celebrating the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Two MiG-23 
aircraft attacked the evangelical missions at Chilonda and 
(Canguengo), killing many civilians, children included. Jardim 
Chiquito Prata, our correspondent in Bie Province, reports: 
  [Begin Prata recording] Finally, they dropped four powerful 
bombs on the evangelical center at Vila Estrela, causing 
irreparable human and material losses. In this genocidal 
operation by the MPLA- PT, nine persons -- including three 
children -- were killed. As yet unconfirmed reports from that 
area also say that another five people are missing. It is 
thought that they may have also been the victims of those 
MPLA-PT air force attacks. [end recording] 

