CSO 

    [Editorial Report] In a study prepared at the request of 
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, a team of 
economists from a leading Slovak economic institute has 
concluded that, in 1993, the Slovak economy was strongly 
affected by the breakup of Czechoslovakia and the subsequent 
currency division, by extensive tax reforms, and by the 
recession in developed economies, especially in West Europe. The 
study by the Bratislava-based SAV Economic Institute was 
reported in the 28 February issue of the Prague daily 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY. 
<H5>  GDP Decline Slows </H5>
  The SAV Institute economists noted that the decline in 
productivity moderated only slightly from the first-quarter 
drop. However, compared to 1992, when the GDP dropped by 7 
percent, the estimated 1993 GDP decline was only 3.7 percent, 
and the institute expects improved performance in 1994. The 
decline in industrial production was 17.1 percent in constant 
prices, and exports of industrial goods remained relatively 
high. Reduced production was only partially reflected in 
unemployment but caused about an 8-percent decline in overall 
labor productivity, in contrast to 1992, when it was almost 
constant. 
  Developments in the construction sector were unfavorable. 
The 
study attributes at least 25 percent of the decline in the 
construction industry to the Slovak recession and concludes that 
it will only be possible to use the excess capacity abroad. 
Structural changes in the industry are reportedly proceeding 
rapidly. Up to 50.9 percent of construction-material production 
came from private or nongovernmental businesses. Agricultural 
production declined by 6-7 percent in 1993, about half the rate 
of 1992. Because of significant price increases, the 
agricultural economy has actually improved. 
<H5>  Inflation, Wages </H5>
  On the positive side, the study points out that, in spite of 
numerous problems, Slovakia remained part of a small group of 
transforming countries with relatively low inflation, with 
consumer prices increasing by only 15.9 percent in the first 11 
months of 1993. Continued nominal wage raises increased labor 
costs expressed in Slovak korunas (Sk), but the devaluation of 
10 July 1993 reduced such costs in dollars. 
<H5>  Unemployment </H5>
  The labor market situation was influenced by the domestic 
recession and somewhat exacerbated by the effects of recessions 
in Germany and Austria. The rate of unemployment increased from 
10.4 percent at the end of 1992 to 14.4 percent by the end of 
1993. (The study, however, also points out that this is only the 
statistical unemployment rate; hidden unemployment, especially 
in the nationalized and privatizing industries, accounts for an 
additional unrecorded number of unemployed.) During the year, 
the number of industrial workers declined by 11 percent and 
construction workers by 16 percent. Trade-sector employment, 
however, increased by 22 percent, and the number of people 
employed by the private sector as a whole increased by 49 
percent. 
<H5>  Foreign Trade </H5>
  Initial estimates of foreign trade volume in 1993 indicate a 
continued decline, especially in trade with the Czech Republic. 
Compared to 1992, imports from the Czech Republic dropped by 
approximately 38 percent, while exports fell by approximately 24 
percent, leading to a rough overall balance of trade between the 
two countries. Trade with other countries showed a relatively 
small decline. The trade deficit with countries other than the 
Czech Republic increased from Sk2 billion korunas in 1992 to 
approximately Sk17.5 billion in 1993. 
<H5>  Budget Deficit </H5>
  The budget approved for 1993 was balanced. However, because 
some of the macroeconomic assumptions on which it was based 
proved to be wrong, the preliminary review of the budget 
indicates a deficit of Sk22.6 billion. Net Slovak Government 
indebtedness reached approximately Sk61 billion in 1993. 
<H5>  Outlook for 1994 </H5>
  In assessing the prospects of the Slovak economy for 1994, 
the SAV Institute economists point out that the ongoing 
transformation process will continue to have a major impact and 
will make accurate forecasts difficult. Nevertheless, their 
evaluation of general conditions leads them to believe that 
economic performance in 1994 will be better than that of 1993. 
  The SAV Institute study predicts an overall 14-15 percent 
increase in consumer prices in 1994. It qualifies its inflation 
forecast with the proviso that stagnant or very slowly improving 
labor productivity, combined with low inflation rates in Western 
countries, could weaken the Slovak koruna, leading to further 
devaluation. A policy to counteract these pressures has not yet 
been developed. Devaluation could lead to additional consumer 
price increases of 2-3 percent, resulting in a consumer price 
increase of 16-18 percent. 
  The SAV Institute study warns that liquidation of 
unprofitable business operations could have an additional 
negative effect on economic performance. Elimination of all 
highly unprofitable companies could cause a 1-percent drop in 
the GDP. A growth in private enterprise could possibly negate 
this effect, provided it continues at least at the 1993 levels. 
The SAV Institute economists also expect that foreign trade will 
be negatively influenced by the economic recession in much of 
the rest of the world. With the exception of several large 
investments in energy and communications, foreign investors are 
expected to remain rather conservative. On this basis, the 1994 
GDP is expected to range from a negative 1.5 to a positive l 
percent. Unemployment is expected to remain in the 
17-to-18-percent range. 
  In the opinion of the study's authors, relatively positive 
economic performance will be accompanied by relatively high 
levels of inflation and a deficit in the range of 5.2-5.9 
percent of the GDP. These factors could make tighter monetary 
policy necessary, leading to a moderate decline in living 
standards. 

