CSO 

  [Excerpts] It is not known for certain, despite official 
statistics, how many drug addicts there are in Thailand. 
  However, while Thailand has been actively involved in the 
international effort to suppress the drug trade and eradicate 
the demand for narcotics, the number of addicts in the southern 
provinces has steadily increased. 
  In the South drug addicts are plentiful in villages, prisons 
and seafaring communities. 
  A great variety of narcotics are used heavily in nearly all 
of the villages in the 14 southern provinces. The five 
provinces with a predominant Muslim population--Songkhla, 
Pattani, Yala, Narathiwat and Satun--are reputed to be 
drug-infested areas. 
  "Drugs traffickers are digging gold in the South. Their 
annual combined earnings are well over a billion baht," an 
official at the Southern Narcotics Prevention and Suppression 
Centre (NPSC) asserted. 
  How do drugs find their way to the South without being 
intercepted by the watchful drug suppression units? 
  The drug route stretches from the northernmost Thai 
territory 
bordering Burma, a major source of narcotics, to the southern 
provinces adjacent to Malaysia. 
  To avoid the anti-narcotics squads, the traffickers have to 
zig-zag their ways through the Central plains. 
  The transactions for both local consumption and shipment to 
overseas markets are done at "strategic locations" in the South. 
  According to the NPSC official, the highly-priced 
narcotics--mainly raw opium and high-grade heroin--get to the 
South by land and sea. 
  The most widely used route is the Petchkasem Highway. The 
traffickers' first stop is generally somewhere in Lang Suan 
Dlstrict, Chumphon. Then, to make it more difficult for the 
authorities to track their movements, the traffickers split into 
two groups--one heads for the southernmost provinces; the other 
takes a detour along the Andaman Sea. 
  According to the official, the narcotics trade thrives in 
Surat Thani, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Songkhla, Hat Yai, Sadao, 
Satun and Sungai Kolok. A substantial amount of the illicit 
drugs are sold locally and shipped to overseas markets via 
Malaysia. 
  Surat Thani is one of the major narcotics shipment centres 
due to the large demand for them in nearby Koh Samui and Koh Pha 
Ngan, which draw a lot of foreign tourists throughout the year. 
  And Hat Yai, which has the highest percentage of drug 
addicts 
in the South, has an inexhaustible demand for the narcotics. 
  Various kinds of illicit drugs are sold and distributed to 
the ready Sadao and Sungai Kolok markets in Songkhla and 
Narathiwat provinces. 
  There is also a lucrative narcotics trade in Satun where 
local traffic ends and shipments to overseas markets begin. 
Satun--with over ten ports including the ones in Pak Bara, Hua 
Hin and Tu Tae Lum--is the region best-suited for narcotics 
shipments in the South. 
  Prior to the transactions, the illicit drugs can be kept 
hidden in the numerous islands in the Satun vicinity. The 
narcotics are then loaded on to awaiting vessels for shipments 
to Singapore and elsewhere. 
  Meanwhile, the second group of narcotics traffickers 
continue 
along the Andaman Sea until they get to a well-guarded location 
in Phuket. There, the illicit drugs are shipped to the United 
States and Europe. Well-equipped luxury yachts are used for 
transporting purposes. 
  "The narcotics transported to the South by sea are generally 
successful. When in danger of being intercepted and searched, 
the crew simply drops the insulated drug packages into the sea 
for later retrievals," said the NPSC official. 
  Young drug users in the 14 southern provinces are the prime 
target of the mushrooming narcotics trade. 
  "Drug use is prevalent among local youngsters in the two 
southern districts," said the NPSC official. 
  Five of the 14 southern provinces--Songkhla, Yala, Pattani, 
Satun and Narathiwat--are heavily infested with the illicit 
drugs. And of the 6,991 southern villages, 3,504 villages--over 
50 per cent--are infested with the illicit drugs like marijuana 
and heroin. 
  "In fact, there are heroin addicts in over 90 per cent of 
the 
southern villages and communities," and marijuana is grown in 
almost every village, according to the NPSC official. 
  Narathiwat is singled out as the most drug-infested 
province. 
According to official statistics, the province had 2,412 drug 
addicts in 1992, an increase of 43 per cent from the previous 
year. 
  Some 8,675 drug addicts, a negligible number compared to the 
total addicted population, underwent treatment and 
rehabilitation at the 18 Southern Drug Addicts Treatment Centres 
in 1992. 
  More than 70 per cent of Narathiwat's 400 villages are 
infested with drug addicts who are mostly youngsters and 
labourers. An unspecified number of drug addicts are found in 
soem 39 per cent of Pattani's 600 villages. And approximately 
44 per cent of Yala's 300 villages are reported to have drug 
addicts. 
  According to research done by Narathiwat Hospital, some 99 
per cent of heavy cigarette smokers have in time become addicted 
to marijuana and then heroin. Further, many heroin addicts are 
addicted to powerful sleeping pills, the hospital said. 
  The number of drug addicts has increased rapidly in 
narathiwat over the past few years because of the availability 
of narcotics in Muang District and in most of the outlying 
villages. 
  Sungai Kolok District is plagued with a drug addiction 
problem, including intravenous drug use popular among teenagers 
which accompanies the thriving prostitution business. Thus, the 
rise in AIDS cases because of the expanding prostitution 
business is of additional concern in a province already infested 
with drug addicts. 
  "Fifty-two per cent first sexual experiences for boys under 
18 are with prostitutes. Some 80 per cent of them do not use 
condoms. The two groups infected with the Aids virus are the 
prostitutes in Muang District and the Yaweh-speaking addicts who 
find Thai literature on the dangers of the fatal disease and 
ways to prevent it incomprehensible," said the hospital report. 
  Because of an insufficient budget and personnel, drug 
trafficking suppression has met with repeated failures. 
Further, the simplistic tactics of law enforcement is 
ill-suited to deal with the increasingly sophisticated narcotics 
trade. Thus, narcotics transactions and addictions have 
increased and multiplied over the years. 
  The narcotics trade in the 14 southern provinces is believed 
to be worth over a billion baht the past year, and an annual 
increase of ten per cent is projected. 
  There are allegedly ten large-scale narcotics traffickers 
and 
about 1,000 low-level dealers dominating the southern drug 
markets. 
  Law enforcement has always been a big problem. The suspects 
may be arrested only when caught red-handed. Smart traffickers 
now keep the narcotics away from their businesses and 
residences. Only after the deals are sealed are the whereabouts 
of the purchases revealed. [passage omitted] 

