Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr Salih al-'Adhl, chairman of the King </F>
'Abd-al- 'Aziz City for Science and Technology, by Fahd al-Zuman 
in Riyadh; date not given: "Dr. Salih al-'Adhl: Now That Kingdom 
Has Headed Atomic Energy Agency, Our New Plan Is To Produce 
Hydrogen From Solar Energy; We Have Utilized Atom for Peaceful 
Purposes"] 
  [Text] Riyadh--Because it is the distinguishing mark and 
the decisive factor in a nation's progress and superiority, 
sophisticated technology and its dazzling means have become the 
constant concern of nations. Consequently, this sphere has 
witnessed a terrible race and a bitter struggle among the 
advanced nations in their effort to settle the struggle for 
power in their favor. 
  Out of its awareness of the importance and necessity of 
entering this sphere struggle and of waging the struggle with 
all our strength so we will not lag behind civilization's 
bandwagon, the government of King Fahd Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz, 
custodian of the two holy mosques, has built the King 
'Abd-al-'Aziz City for Science and Technology to be a scientific 
bastion that shoulders the responsibility of bolstering and 
enhancing technology so this bastion will serve the Kingdom's 
development objectives. 
  Although relatively young, the city has achieved numerous 
accomplishments in the areas of research and technology transfer. 
  To trace the march of the city's accomplishments and its 
future plans and programs, the weekly ['UKAZ] conducted this 
interview with Dr. Salih al-'Adhl, chairman of the King 
'Abd-al-'Aziz City for Science and Technology. This interview 
has gained an added dimension with Dr. al-'Adhl's return from 
abroad after he headed the International Atomic Energy Agency's 
[IAEA] general conference. It focuses the light on the 
significance and importance of the Kingdom's selection to head 
the conference. 
<H5>  Scientific Accomplishments </H5>
  [Al-Zuman] King 'Abd-al-'Aziz's City for Science and 
Technology has achieved numerous scientific accomplishments in 
various fields of technology and research. What are your most 
prominent current and future plans? 
  [Al-'Adhl] We have 20-year plans, five-year plans, and 
one-year plans. At present, we have a project to produce 
hydrogen from solar energy. It is being implemented in 
cooperation with the German Ministry of Scientific Research and 
Saudi universities. This is a pioneer project in the world, 
especially in the field of solar energy. We launched our efforts 
in this field even before other countries contemplated it. The 
main problem in solar energy is the problem of storage, which 
makes it possible to use this energy as a fuel to generate 
energy. 
  We have completed the first phase and begun the second 
phase, 
embodied in implementation and in developing equipment that uses 
hydrogen to generate energy, whether for cooling, for heating, 
or for other purposes. 
  We have been able to build a station that is the first of 
its 
kind in the Arab world and Africa, namely the Saudi station for 
receiving photos from artificial satellites, be they the French, 
the Japanese, or other satellites. 
  This station is the most sophisticated accomplishment 
achieved by science and technology in this field. It covers an 
area that has a diameter of 2,500 km. This station's photographs 
are used in all areas, especially in exploring natural resources 
and in city planning. Since this station was built, we have 
developed a training program andr telescopes and radio-wave 
observatory. We have other activities as well. I do not look 
forward so much to the completion of these projects as I look 
forward to the results for which we aspire. Results are the most 
important thing. We also have a laser have sent specialists to 
train on the use of this technology in the United States. The 
objective is to secure trained national cadres removed from 
bureaucracy and red tape. 
  Other projects we have include an earthquake-observation 
network and the lunaproject. We also have the Research and 
Computer Institute, which has Arabic-language programs. We have 
a project to train the disabled to use computers. We also have 
several activities connected with automatic translation through 
the use of computers. Regarding the "surveyor," we now have 
Arabic-language survey programs that make it easy to enter data 
all at once. 
  All these projects are good. But I look at the manpower 
comprised of Saudi youth and I hope that it possess a [high] 
degree of capability because this manpower is what lasts. 
Sincere and energetic manpower is the most important element. 
This is why we will focus on youth training and development 
programs so that our young men will get higher degrees. I 
believe that this is where we start laying the foundation on 
which we can build. This is something of which we can be proud. 
<H5>  Atom and Water Desalination </H5>
  [Al-Zuman] At a conference held recently in Vienna, you said 
that the Kingdom uses the atom to desalinate water. Can your 
excellency tell us about this program? 
  [Al-'Adhl] Because we must not rely on a single source of 
wealth, we have decided to plan for the future, considering that 
availability of the oil energy cannot make us dispense with the 
search for alternatives so as to develop other sources. We have 
had to consider the long run. The current circumstances require 
us to embrace certain policies that reflect the economic 
situation. We have to have the technology to desalinate water, 
to generate power, and for use in the various economic and 
social areas. We also have to have the capability to deal with 
this technology. 
  Nuclear energy has its several aspects, including the 
negative aspect of radiation and the possibility of radiation 
accidents. It also has its peaceful aspect. Because problems 
have developed in the advanced countries that use nuclear 
energy, we will be more conservative before we embark on this 
field. 
  Despite all this, we must have the technical capability 
first. Protection from radiation is very important, and we have 
made a stride in this regard in the area of the peaceful use of 
the atom. 
<H5>  Not True </H5>
  [Al-Zuman] An accusation was made against the King 
'Abd-al-'Aziz Science and Technology city and those who made it 
believe that you are close to the King Sa'ud University but that 
you are not as close to other academic circles. 
  [Al-'Adhl] This is a misplaced accusation. The city is eager 
to have close cooperation with all of the Kingdom's 
universities, and such cooperation does, in fact, exist even 
though the city is specialized in technological sciences. 
<H5>  Specialized Institutes </H5>
  [Al-Zuman] The city has established a number of specialized 
scientific institutes. But we notice that there is a delay in 
developing programs for these institutes. Perhaps your 
excellency can shed light on these institutes and their goals. 
  [Al-'Adhl] The city performs three major and important tasks 
in supporting and promoting scientific research throughout the 
Kingdom. First, the city seeks to support research at 
universities and at private and public sector academic and 
research centers. Second, the city conducts applied scientific 
research. Third, the city coordinates cooperation between the 
Kingdom and other countries in the area of science and 
technology. There is another axis connected with research by 
research centers. The main objective is not to set up centers 
but to conduct new research and to use the accomplished research 
to serve development. The objectives are the same but the 
programs must vary so as to serve this effort. We have to have 
flexibility and capability. It is not so easy to establish such 
institutes because they require manpower. Building construction 
must be completed at the time when cadres become available. We 
must have the main seed, namely qualified youth, and I must not 
be compelled to conclude contracts [with foreigners]. 
  So there has to be planning, especially since it is not easy 
to create a scientific establishment, which is not just a 
building. This is why we have built a multipurpose premises. The 
existing research institutes building was constructed to be a 
first-phase nucleus of all these research institutes. Each 
building is constructed according to a specific design and it 
becomes a specialized institute when completed, such as the 
energy and petroleum research building, the petrochemical 
industries building, the space and astronomy building, and the 
natural and environmental sciences building. 
  [Al-Zuman] It is noticed that the city is interested in 
purely scientific research and we find that human research is 
neglected, despite its importance. What is your excellency's 
comment on this? 
  [Al-'Adhl] Human research is important. However, it is 
conducted at universities. As planned, a most important 
objective of the city's is to devote attention to applied 
research, which requires laboratories and technicians, meaning 
that that this research has a special characteristics whereas 
human research is focused on researchers, libraries, and so 
forth. Yes, this accusation is true. But there are other 
institutions in the Kingdom which have a greater role in this 
type of research. 
  [Al-Zuman] The city has enjoyed the attention of the 
custodian of the two holy mosques, as proven by this equipment 
and these enormous buildings. But the question that obviously 
persists is: what has this city offered in return for all this 
support? 
  [Al-'Adhl] Some aspects may be disclosed and others may not. 
I have already answered some points, such as energy, lunar 
observatories, and so forth. 
  So, I do not believe that the city has been lax. It is true 
that one aspires for more. But we do all we can within the 
limits of our resources. 
  [Al-Zuman] Is there a plan to hold international scientific 
symposiums? 
  [Al-'Adhl] The city participates in numerous conferences and 
symposiums, especially those of an applied nature. Next Shawwal 
[April], the city will hold a technology symposium in 
cooperation with the various governmental sectors. The purpose 
will be to raise the questions: How can we improve our work? 
Have completed studies achieved their desired outcome or have 
they been shelved away and forgotten? 
  So our objective behind this symposium is to probe the 
aspects of failure, if they exist, especially since development 
is the objective that we all seek. 
  We have invited guests from Japan, the United States, 
Malaysia, Australia, and China to participate in this symposium 
so we can familiarize ourselves with their experiences. We have 
also invited Arab guests to participate and familiarize us with 
their experiences and with the methods they have employed. 
  [Al-Zuman] What is your evaluation of the selection of the 
Kingdom, represented in your person, to head the IAEA 
[conference] and how do you see the world community's impression 
of the Kingdom in this regard? 
  [Al-'Adhl] There is no doubt that this is the first time 
that 
an Arab country has headed the IAEA's general conference. If 
anything, this choice shows the place that the world community 
gives the Kingdom in this regard--a place that truly reflects 
what the Kingdom has accomplished. This is testimony for the 
Kingdom from everybody. I would like to point out here that 
international representation in the IAEA's general congress is 
done on the basis of blocs. 
  There is the European bloc and the North and South America 
bloc. The general conference chairman is selected annually. This 
chairmanship is alternated annually between the various blocs, 
thus entitling a certain bloc to the annual chairmanship. This 
bloc selects or nominates one of its members to the chairmanship 
and the general conference then votes on the candidate. 
  In some cases, things proceed smoothly and agreement is 
reached within the bloc to nominate just one country to chair 
the conference. In such a case, approval by the general 
conference is almost guaranteed. But in other cases, one finds 
that more than one country is competing for the chairmanship. 
The conference decides by vote. 
  This time, the Kingdom sought the chairmanship. The city 
represents the Kingdom in the IAEA and the ambassador of the 
custodian of the two holy mosques is the permanent resident 
representative at the agency. Royal approval was given to the 
Kingdom's nomination. There were some countries that wanted to 
nominate themselves but they decided to withdraw their candidacy 
out of appreciation for the Kingdom. 

