BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Antonia Vymazalova: "Sidonia Will Be Set Apart </F>
From Horne Srnie and Annexed to the Czech Republic; Slovak 
Government Revoked Resolution of Its Predecessor"] 
  [Excerpts] Bratislava -- The Slovak Government held its 
regular meeting yesterday with Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik as 
chairman. Among the first points on the agenda was the 
discussion and approval of a proposal to release funds for this 
year's financing of the reconstruction of Grassalkovich Palace 
in Bratislava, which is going to become the seat of the 
president of the Slovak Republic. The government agreed with the 
continued work on the reconstruction of the palace and 
appropriated 50 million Slovak korunas [Sk] as temporary 
financial assistance. 
  The minister of finance was charged with submitting to 
parliament an amendment to the Law on the State Budget of the 
Slovak Republic for 1994 and on changes to some other laws, 
under which the budget of the Office of the President will be 
increased by Sk100 million. The increase in expenditure will be 
allocated for the purpose of the technical reconstruction of the 
seat of the president. 
  The government yesterday revoked its predecessor's 
Resolution 
220 of 8 March 1994 on the report on the activity of the Joint 
Slovak-Czech Border Commission and on the state of work on 
delineating the border in 1993. It fully approved conclusions 
from the January 1994 talks between the ministers of interior of 
Slovakia and the Czech Republic concerning expedient changes to 
the borderline. On the basis of this approval, it charged the 
minister of interior with ensuring, through the Slovak 
delegation to the Border Commission, the implementation of the 
proposed expedient changes to the border between Slovakia and 
the Czech Republic in the following localities: the Sidonia 
settlement on the territory of Horne Srnie in the district of 
Trencin (to be annexed to the Czech Republic); the U Sabotu 
settlement on the territory of Velky Javornik in the district of 
Hodonin (to be annexed to the Slovak Republic); and along the 
waterways Morava, Sudomerice creek, Skalice creek, and Moravka. 
Explaining the cancellation of the resolution at a news 
conference following the government meeting, Minister of 
Interior Ladislav Pittner said that Vladimir Meciar's cabinet 
did not agree with the Sidonia settlement being annexed to the 
Czech Republic as compensation for the annexation of the U 
Sabotu hamlet to the Slovak Republic. As regards the Kasarne 
recreational area, which is part of the community of Makov, 
Cadca district, Pittner said that the border here is a 
historical border and the Slovak Republic has no reason to call 
it into question. A decision on the problem of Kasarne is to be 
made by the two prime ministers in the near future. [passage 
omitted] 
  The government discussed a proposal to carry out the 
training 
of UN personnel from the Pakistani Armed Forces (PAF) in the 
Slovak Republic. It decided to submit the proposal to the 
National Council of the Slovak Republic for approval. It 
approved the proposal to appoint Professor Fedor Macasek, doctor 
of natural sciences, as state secretary at the Ministry of 
Education and Science. 

