Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Amy Yip] </F>
  [Text] China's dissidents-turned-businessmen are facing 
close surveillance by secret police while they catch up with the 
tide of running profit-making ventures. 
  And state-linked businesses have been ordered to sever ties 
with dissidents, Chinese sources told The Standard yesterday. 
  Dissidents believe the authorities feared that greater 
economic capabilities would enable them to expand political 
activities. 
  A dissident whose business was affected by police actions 
complained: "It is more difficult for us to run a business, not 
only because of the austerity measures, but also the disturbance 
created by the secret police." 
  Sources said that Jia Chunwang, head of the Ministry of 
State 
Security, recently asked Song Jian, chairman of the State 
Science and Technology Commission, to keep the commission's 
subordinate enterprises away from the dissident businesses. 
  A dissident, who was jailed for almost a year after the 1989 
Tiananmen Square military crackdown, had signed a contract with 
an enterprise under the commission on the exploration of a land 
development. 
  Under the Security Ministry's intervention, the plan was 
frustrated and his company plunged into difficulties. 
  A press conference planned by the dissident about his 
business plan was barred a few months ago as the police stopped 
a Beijing hotel from renting a room to him to hold the function. 
  Released veteran dissident Wang Xizhe, who opened a 
jewellery 
shop in Guangzhou over the weekend, was annoyed by police 
interference in his business. 
  "I am a businessman, not a dissident any more. Why should my 
clients be questioned by the police," Wang asked. 
  He said a Sichuan businessman who had planned to set up a 
joint venture with him was taken in by police for questioning. 
  Wang was sent to Zhuhai by police last July when he was 
about 
to meet an American businessman introduced by John Kamm, an 
American working on China's human rights issue. 
  Wang claimed that police action had already affected his 
business. 

