BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chieh Ming (2212 2494): "Beijing's `Extraordinary 9 </F>
March Political Case'"] 
  [Text] On the night of 7 March, the Ministry of Public 
Security received a report: Four incendiary devices had been 
found in a large basket of apples at Beijing's Fengtai Sports 
Center; at the same time, two smoking incendiary bombs were 
found at a work site near the Military Museum of the Chinese 
People's Revolution. The Beijing Municipal Government duty 
office also received an anonymous telephone call, saying that an 
explosive package had been found under a bridge on Nansanhuan 
Road and that it would explode soon. When public security 
personnel and People's Armed Police arrived at the scene, they 
found nothing. The calls were hoaxes. That evening, the Beijing 
Municipal Public Security Bureau and the Beijing Municipal 
Government received 12 telephone calls and dispatched over 80 
people on various occasions to no avail. Later that night, two 
People's Armed Police on duty at the International Conference 
Center were wounded by a sniper. 
  In the early morning of 9 March, with the help of a police 
dog, the 2d detachment of the Beijing People's Armed Police 
found a time bomb made with 30 kg of TNT in a ditch beside the 
highway to the airport. The bomb was set to explode at 0500. 
In the meantime, public security personnel also found a time 
bomb in a wooden box on a slope near the Beijing-Guangzhou 
railway in Fengtai, and the ignition time was also set at 0500. 
  According to the Ministry of Public Security, the two cases 
on the night of 7 March and in the early morning of 9 March were 
carried out by the same underground organization. Anonymous 
telephone calls on the night of 7 March were also made by them. 
The incendiary bombs were home-made and the advanced way the 
chemicals were made up showed that they were made by persons 
with specialist knowledge in this field. The time bombs were 
smuggled into the country from outside the borders. It can be 
basically ascertained that this was a case connected with or 
controlled by a hostile organization overseas. The time bombs 
probably came from Japan or Taiwan. This is the most serious 
case of violent destruction found in recent years and has been 
called the "extraordinary 9 March political case." Public 
Security Minister Tao Siju has personally taken charge as the 
leader of the special group responsible for examining the case. 
  In another development in early March, a time bomb was also 
found near Putian City's Dongzhen reservoir in Fujian Province. 
Affected by damp, the bomb did not explode at the prescribed 
time. According to the Fujian Provincial Public Security 
Department, if the bomb had exploded, the political effects 
would have been greater than the explosion itself. 
  On the early morning of 8 March, a time bomb was found in 
soap box at an artillery base near Changsha, Hunan Province. 
The bomb was later detonated by servicemen stationed there. 
  According to a relevant source, the aforesaid time bomb 
incidents are similar in terms of timing and the type of bomb. 
Therefore, the possibility that they were carried out by a 
hostile organization with branches in many parts of the country 
cannot be ruled out. 

