Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Zhu Baoxia: "State Plans Massive Assault </F>
on Pollution"] 
  [Text] The government plans to develop eight major 
environmental projects in the next three years in a bid to 
control industrial pollution by the turn of the century. 
  The schemes will be supported by international financial 
organizations including the World Bank, the Asian Development 
Bank and Global Environmental Facilities (GEF). 
  Up to $1.2 billion is needed to launch the projects which 
will treat water and air pollution and dispose of solid waste, 
said an official from the Foreign Economic Co-operation Office 
of the National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA). 
  The prevention of acid rain and studies on the environment 
are also high on the list of the planned projects, the official 
said. 
  NEPA is due to get grants of $200 million to $300 million 
from GEF to control greenhouse gases and to protect 
bio-diversity. 
  The agency is now selecting suitable projects around the 
country. Its reports will be sent to the international 
organizations for further evaluation. 
  NEPA officials hope the eight projects will solve 
environmental problems which damage people's health, like 
pollution in Lake Dianchi in Yunnan Province and Lake Chaohu in 
Anhui Province. 
  They also hope the projects will check the spread of acid 
rain in the south of the country. 
  In recent years, China has worked more and more with 
international organizations on the environment. 
  And by the end of last year, NEPA had set up 21 Sino-foreign 
environmental protection projects. 
  The World Bank and the Asian Development Bank had loaned the 
agency $1.14 billion by 1993 and, together with the GEF, they 
had granted China $65.61 million for environmental protection 
and research. 
  The funding helped environmental protection schemes in 
Shanghai and in Liaoning Province, research in Hangzhou Bay, and 
studies on urban infrastructure throughout China. 
  It also helped to promote local environmental protection 
work 
and improve NEPA's administrative capacity, said Xie Zhenhua, 
the agency's director. 
  Co-operation between China and the international agencies 
has 
enabled the country to obtain advanced environmental protection 
facilities and improved its environmental information network. 

