Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Hao Hsue-ching and Y. C. Tsai] </F>
  [Text] Geneva, March 21 (CNA) -- The Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) will decide 
whether to call for trade sanctions against Taiwan on March 25, 
CITES Standing Committee Chairman Murray Hosking said Monday [21 
March]. 
  Hosking pointed out that the committee, which opened its 
meeting in Geneva Monday, will discuss on Tuesday the alleged 
trade in rhino horn and tiger bone in Taiwan, Mainland China, 
Hong Kong, South Korea, and Yemen. 
  Hosking pledged that the committee would take into account 
Taiwan's progress in wildlife protection before making a final 
decision on trade sanctions. 
  Taiwan police reportedly visited 519 herbal medicine stores 
out of 8,000 on the island March 15-17 and found seven selling 
rhino horn powder and 27 selling tiger bone. 
  The findings run counter to allegations by Britain's 
Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA), which claimed that 
rhino horn powder and tiger bone are still available at more 
than half of all Chinese medicine shops in Taiwan. 
  Meanwhile, during a meeting of non-government organizations 
(NGO) following the CITES Standing Committee meeting on Monday, 
EIA aired a 20-minute videotape which said more than 90 percent 
of the rhinoceros killed in South Africa were for the Taiwan 
market. 
  The Earth Island Institute (EII) and the World Wildlife Fund 
also said Taiwan, Mainland China, Hong Kong, South Korea, and 
Yemen conduct trade in illegal wildlife products. 
  Li San-wei, deputy director of the Forestry Department under 
Taiwan's Council of Agriculture and leader of the Taiwan 
delegation to the NGO meeting, noted that he was unable to rebut 
EIA's accusation as he spoke before the videotape was shown. 
  "How could they verify their claims," Li asked. 
  Another delegation member, Chairman Ted Ting of the 
Beautiful 
Taiwan Foundation, worried that the shocking videotape would 
increase the chances that Taiwan will be slapped with CITES 
sanctions. 
  Moreover, Ting noted, any CITES decision will strongly 
influence the United States, which will make a similar decision 
next month. 
  In order to avoid an economic boycott, Taiwan will ask 
delegates from other countries to help defend its wildlife 
conservation efforts at the CITES Standing Committee's Tuesday 
meeting, Li said. 
  As a non-CITES member, Taiwan could only attend the 
EIA-sponsored NGO meeting. 

