CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Francois Soudan and Nabila Berrada Gouzi: </F>
"Morocco-Tunisia: the Contest"; fist six paragraphs are JEUNE 
AFRIQUE introduction] 
  [Text]Both countries are doing well. Comparing their 
respective economic and social performances is not easy, 
however. Too many analyses are still tinged with subjectivity or 
even passion. Here are the figures enabling one to decide the 
matter. 
  Probably because of the existence on both sides not 
only of a civil society that is self-assured and open to the 
outside world but also of a middle class whose cultural 
references are quite often identical, a traveler arriving from 
Sirius would presumably find more similarities than differences 
between Morocco and Tunisia. The political observer or 
"Maghrebologist," on the other hand, would see only dissonance 
between an age-old monarchy and a young republic: between a king 
rooted in tradition, land, and loyalty and a president born of 
the people and favoring the use of forceps to introduce 
modernity. 
  The truth of the comparison, which is neither that of 
the hurried tourist nor that of the gossip columnist in palace 
newspapers, lies halfway between Tunis and Rabat. Situated 
between them is Algiers, and the high-risk civil war being 
experienced by Algeria is forcing the two countries to act more 
and more like each other. In the rallying speeches heard both 
here and there, the Islamic danger and decay of the state have 
to some extent replaced the conflict in Western Sahara and the 
myth of the supreme fighter. 
  The responses to the threat are also similar: on both 
sides, a great deal more attention is being paid to traditional 
and religious values, and also on both sides, defense of the 
government rests with the Ministry of Interior and the 
police--not with the Army, as is the case in Algeria. And last, 
it can be seen that both sides are accelerating the process of 
social reconstruction and economic development in order to 
deprive the fundamentalist fish of waters in which to swim. 
  The comparative study whose results we are presenting 
here shows that in that latter respect, Tunisia is ahead of 
Morocco and, consequently, essentially less exposed than the 
kingdom to the risk of radical Islamism. That is no doubt a 
paradoxical result, considering that Morocco has not experienced 
an organized Islamist movement like that headed by Rached 
Ghannouchi. It is true that because of the secular tradition of 
the Tunisian political apparatus, Tunisian police were not 
prepared to understand the fundamentalist phenomenon and reduce 
its importance--although they have made up for lost ground since 
then--whereas the Moroccan Ministry of Interior has always 
recruited some of its staff from the schools of theology. But 
after five years of tension--from 1987 to 1992--Ben Ali's 
Tunisia is in the process of returning to its basic 
equilibriums. And the truth as revealed by figures argues in its 
favor. 
  Of course, comparisons are not always accurate. And it 
could be objected in Rabat that in areas as diverse as 
information and decentralization, Morocco is more open and more 
"modern" than Tunisia at the moment. All the same, the 
statistics speak. And only rarely do they correspond to 
generally accepted ideas. 
<H5>  Comparative Results in Two Countries Undergoing Change </H5>
<H5>  1. Strategy and Growth </H5>
  In the race for development, Morocco and Tunisia have been 
forced to adopt the same strategy: structural adjustment under 
the aegis of the IMF. The standard formula was applied in 
Morocco beginning in 1983 and in Tunisia beginning in 1986. It 
called for a smaller government deficit, less state involvement, 
the gradual deregulation of prices and credit, an opening up to 
world trade, the lifting of import restrictions, a "competitive" 
devaluation, current convertibility of the currency, and so on. 
Both countries are now acknowledged to be "good pupils" by the 
IMF and the World Bank. 
  The two Maghreb countries differ not only in area and 
population but also in wealth. Tunisia is one-fourth the size 
and has one-third the population of Morocco, but is 
proportionately richer, because its per capita income is some 70 
percent higher. 
  Morocco has always been more heavily in debt. Its foreign 
debt increased massively until the early 1980's, first because 
of the low level of domestic savings and later because of the 
increase in the cost of international credit. Its debt amounted 
to some 140 percent of gross national product (GNP) in 1985. For 
its part, Tunisia is generally thought of as a relatively 
well-behaved country: its foreign debt has never exceeded 75 
percent of GNP. Both countries are currently less indebted than 
they were five years ago. Morocco's debt of $21.5 billion at the 
end of 1992 amounts to nearly 78 percent of GNP, compared to 
$8.5 billion (55 percent of GNP) in Tunisia's case. 
  Stimulated by a wonderful agricultural harvest (even though 
two-thirds of its olive oil production has been put in storage 
for lack of markets), Tunisia experienced record growth of 8.6 
percent in 1992, but 1993 was a rather mediocre year--the latest 
estimates predict 3-percent growth. 
  Morocco's economic situation is clearly not that good. A 
recession made worse by drought hit the kingdom in 1992, and 
activity slowed by 3 percent. Despite the 21-percent drop in 
phosphate prices, the country resumed its growth in 1993 (an 
estimated 2 percent). As can be seen, Morocco's rapid expansion 
(and also that of Tunisia, although to a lesser degree) depends 
on agriculture. North-South Export, the French consulting firm 
specializing in risk assessment, emphasizes "the extraordinary 
vulnerability (worse than in India) to the whims of the 
barometer" and rainfall. Abundant rainfall in the autumn of 1993 
gives reason to hope, after two years of drought, that there 
will be a return to prosperity. The U.S. business bank J.P. 
Morgan is predicting 5-percent growth for Morocco and 6-percent 
growth for Tunisia in 1994. 


Comparison Between Morocco and Tunisia 

Indicator                   Morocco                   Tunisia 

Population (1993)           26.5 million              8.5 million 

Area                        710,850 sq. km.           164,150 sq. km. 
                            including Sahara 
                            (252,120 sq. km.) 

Currency                    dirham ($1 = 9.43         dinar ($1 = 1.03 
                            dirhams)                  dinars) 

GNP (1992)                  $27.5 billion             $15.3 billion 

Per capita GDP (1992)       $1,042                    $1,776 

Debt (1992)                 $21.5 billion             $8.5 billion 

Debt service as a           28.5 percent (33.2        19 percent (25 percent 
percentage of exports of    percent in 1985)          in 1985) 
goods and services (1992) 


Exports (1992)              $3.8 billion              $4.1 billion 

Imports (1992)              $6.9 billion              $6.5 billion 

Current account deficit     1.8 percent               -3.9 percent 
as a percentage of GDP 
(1992) 

Tourism earnings (1993)     $1.24 billion             $970 million 

Transfers by nationals      $2 billion                $500 million 
living abroad(1992) 

Official development        $1.2 billion              $312 million 
assistance (1992) 

Investment (gross fixed     $5.9 billion              $3.5 billion 
capital formation) (1992) 


Foreign direct investment   $530 million              $200 million 
(1992) 

Increase in consumer        4.9 percent (an average   5.5 percent (an average 
prices (1992)               of 7 percent from 1980    of 7.9 percent from 
                            to 1991)                  1980 to 1991) 

Literacy rate (1992)        49 percent                65 percent 

Access to health services   62 percent of             91 percent of 
(1992)                      population                population 

Government spending on      3.2 percent               2.4 percent 
health as a percentage of 
GNP(1992) 

Human development           0.433 (0.268 in 1970)     0.6 (0.335 in 1970) 
indicator (1992) 


<H5>  2. Industrialization and Exports </H5>
  Over the past decade, Morocco and Tunisia have made a good 
start on industrialization. But it has been mainly a matter of 
assembly operations--in the fields of textiles, automobiles, and 
electronics--producing little added value (the imported content 
remains high). Hence the persistence of trade deficits, 
estimated at 12.8 percent of GDP in Tunisia and 9.5 percent in 
Morocco in 1992. 
  In both countries, small domestic markets and low purchasing 
power are forcing industry to look abroad. Exports in 1992 
totaled $3.8 billion (Morocco) and $4.1 billion (Tunisia). This 
means that on a per capita basis, the Tunisians export three 
times as much. The European Union (EU)--mainly 
France--constitutes most of their market. It absorbs 63 percent 
of Moroccan sales and 68 percent of Tunisian sales. Between 1986 
and 1990, the increase in sales to the EU was due mainly to 
rising European demand, but also to a larger market share. "That 
obvious dependence is a handicap when things are not going well 
in Europe," says Agnes Chevallier, a Maghreb specialist at the 
Center for Prospective Studies and International Information 
(CEPII). The worldwide crisis, establishment of the single 
market, and the new competition from the East European countries 
and Asia have led to a marked slowdown in Maghreb exports this 
year. 
  And the problems are not over: the preferential treatment 
granted thus far by the EU is likely to be eroded after the 
signing of the GATT agreements, especially in the textile 
sector. Tunisia, in particular, is threatened because its wage 
costs are still higher than those of its competitors, especially 
Morocco. With its restricting social policy, which is not offset 
by high productivity, it can no longer claim to be a country 
with low labor costs. At the end of 1991, hourly wage costs in 
the textile industry totaled $2.80 in Tunisia, compared to $1.40 
in Morocco, $1.30 in Hungary, and $0.30 in China. 
  To overcome their dependence on Europe, the two Maghreb 
countries have tried to diversify their markets. At the end of 
1991, the UMA [Arab Maghreb Union] was absorbing less than 8 
percent of their exports. Morocco has been more successful in 
penetrating large markets such as the United States, which 
require large quantities. 
  The diversification of export products started earlier in 
Tunisia and is more advanced there than in Morocco. Partially 
processed raw materials are coming to constitute less and less 
of total exports. Over half of Tunisia's exports now consist of 
finished products (notably textiles and clothing), compared to 
less than one-third of Morocco's. 
  On top of slower European demand and fierce competition from 
Asia and East Europe, Morocco, and Tunisia are also having to 
face international competition in their own markets. With the 
opening of their borders to imports, trade balances have 
suffered in recent years. Under the combined effect of slower 
exports and soaring imports, the deficit in the Tunisian trade 
balance rose from $1.35 billion in 1991 to $2.4 billion in 1992. 
The rate at which imports are covered by exports (62 percent in 
1992) is at its lowest level since 1986. 
  Although Moroccan imports have been reduced, the rate of 
cover has grown worse, falling to 56 percent in 1992. The trade 
balance deficit grew from $2.4 billion to nearly $3 billion 
between 1991 and 1992. But a 40-percent increase in tourism 
earnings and an 8-percent increase in transfers from Moroccans 
residing abroad (totaling $2 billion) made it possible to 
contain the deficit in current operations. 
  Tunisia, which relies on mass tourism, receives more 
visitors, but when it comes to revenues, Morocco still holds 
first place. Tunisia recorded 24 million overnight stays in 1993 
and $1 billion in earnings, while Morocco earned nearly $1.2 
billion from 11 million overnight stays. The explanation for 
that difference is simple: not only has Morocco invested in more 
profitable up-market tourism, but international tour operators 
sell the "Tunisian product" more cheaply. The French firm New 
Frontiers is offering a week in April at a three-star hotel in 
Hammamet with full board for less than 3,000 French francs [Fr], 
compared to the same thing in Agadir for about Fr4,000. 
<H5>  3. Confidence and Foreign Investment </H5>
  Smaller budget deficits, a rise in the rate of savings, a 
lessening of the burden of foreign debt, an opening up to trade, 
and deregulation have led foreign investors to regain confidence 
in the two countries. Morocco's foreign exchange reserves in 
1992 totaled $3.7 billion, the equivalent of six months of 
imports compared to only five weeks of imports four years ago, 
while those in Tunisia totaled $927 million, the equivalent of 
less than two months of imports. 
  And that is not all: since the Gulf War, foreign direct 
investments have been returning. They amounted to close to $200 
million in Tunisia in 1992 (compared to $80 million in 1990). 
Morocco, thanks especially to its diplomacy and the appeal of 
its domestic market, does much better in terms of volume. in 
1992, foreign manna passed the $500 million mark (compared to 
$165 million in 1990). But in terms of population, Morocco's 
performance ($20 per capita) is below that of Tunisia ($23.50). 
  "The profitability of an industrial investment is comparable 
in the two Maghreb countries," says Jean-Pierre Prouteau, 
president of the CEPIA (Center for Industrial Promotion in 
Africa), "but Tunisia is still the champion when it comes to 
attracting foreign PME [small- and medium-size businesses] to 
its territory." Between 1990 and 1992, no fewer than 60 
medium-sized factories were established there every year. And 
while the flow of capital weakened in 1993, the reason was that 
investors were awaiting the new investment code, which was 
promulgated last December. The Tunisian Investment Promotion 
Agency (API) is represented in all the Western capitals and 
welcomes foreign investment on the spot. French-Moroccan 
partnership programs, on the other hand, have been suspended 
since 1990. There are several reasons for this: tensions between 
Moroccan authorities and the former French Socialist government, 
the reorganization of the Industrial Development Office (ODI), 
which has been under way for three years, and a lack of interest 
by the CGEM [Moroccan General Economic Federation]--the Moroccan 
employers association--in PME and small business. The result, as 
Jean-Pierre Prouteau goes on to say, is that "if a manufacturer 
wants to set up a business in the Maghreb, the French employers 
association directs him to Tunisia, where the reception 
facilities are operational. If an investor chooses Morocco, he 
can rely only on his own personal contacts." 
  Are foreign investors interested only in export activities? 
No, says one of the Maghreb representatives of the Swedish food 
packaging firm Tetra Pak, which operates in partnership with 
local manufacturers in both countries. "The main objective of 
our investments in Morocco is to satisfy domestic demand, 
whereas in Tunisia, most of our production is for export." The 
main concerns, then, are these: "In the case of Morocco, to be 
sure of getting paid within a reasonable amount of time, and in 
the case of Tunisia, to find foreign markets." 
<H5>  4. Progress and Standard of Living </H5>
  In Morocco, structural progress is not really being 
reflected 
in a higher standard of living. Growth is still inadequate: 
population growth of 2.7 percent per year cancels out growth in 
the GDP by just that much. Social inequalities, which cause 
unrest and are therefore feared by foreign investors, are 
obvious. According to the UNDP [UN Development Program], 7.9 
million Moroccans--some 30 percent of the population--still live 
below the poverty line. The rise in consumer prices has been 
halted, but the minimum wage totals barely 1,400 dirhams (about 
850 French francs), whereas the rent on a modest three-room 
apartment in Casablanca easily exceeds 2,500 dirhams (about 
Fr1,500). 
  The population problem is less serious in Tunisia, where 
birth control has been effective and where population growth has 
been reduced to 2 percent per year. This means that at the same 
rate of economic growth, per capita income in Tunisia rises more 
quickly than in Morocco. In addition, social inequalities are 
much less pronounced in Tunisia, although they are tending to 
reappear. According to the UNDP, 1.4 million Tunisians--16 
percent of the population--now live below the poverty line, 
compared to 73 percent just after independence. A genuine middle 
class has appeared. Although the minimum wage is equivalent, 
"the average income level and purchasing power are markedly 
higher than in Morocco," says Agnes Chevallier. 
  According to a survey by the UNDP and the World Bank, the 
average standard of living in both countries has continued to 
rise during the years of adjustment, and progress in education, 
health, and housing has continued. Between 1975 and 1985, 
Morocco invested 6 percent of its GNP in education annually, and 
the figure since 1988 has been 7.4 percent. Much remains to be 
done, however: less than half of all Moroccans are literate, 
whereas over 40 percent of the population is under 15 years of 
age. Only two-thirds of the children are in school, and in the 
rural areas--which account for 51 percent of the total 
population--the rate of primary school attendance is even lower. 
Between 1975 and 1985, Tunisia devoted as much as 7.5 percent of 
its GNP to education annually. Since 1988 the figure has been 6 
percent. The results reflect the effort made: the rate of 
illiteracy has been reduced to 35 percent. All children attend 
primary school, whether they live in towns or in the rural areas 
(46 percent of the population). In both countries, far more than 
half the adolescents drop out of school before obtaining their 
baccalaureat, and 10 percent at most obtain a university degree. 
  In the field of health as well, Tunisia boasts results much 
better than those in Morocco: life expectancy of 69 years, an 
infant mortality rate of 44 per 1,000, and one physician for 
every 2,160 inhabitants. In Morocco, life expectancy is about 63 
years, infant mortality stands at about 57 per 1,000, and there 
is only one physician for every 4,760 inhabitants. Government 
spending on health as a percentage of GNP is higher in Morocco, 
but the kingdom is so far behind that access to health services 
is still unavailable to the majority of the population. 
  In the case of equipment, Moroccans are no worse off than 
Tunisians: one automobile for every 40 inhabitants in Morocco 
and for every 44 in Tunisia and one television set for every 15 
in Morocco (14 in Tunisia). Even better, and still according to 
the UNDP, is the fact that 73 percent of Moroccans have a supply 
of drinking water, compared to only 65 percent of Tunisians. On 
the other hand, telephones are still a luxury in Morocco, where 
there is one for every 65 inhabitants, compared to one for every 
24 in Tunisia. 
  Overall, Morocco's human development indicator (HDI)--which 
combines statistics on real purchasing power, education, and 
health--is much lower than one would expect from studying its 
economic performance. In the worldwide ranking published by the 
UNDP in 1993, Morocco is classed among the countries with poor 
human development, ranking 119th (out of 179 countries) in terms 
of HDI and 106th in terms of GNP, leaving a "negative" gap of 
13. To put it briefly, the kingdom's economic policy has been 
far more effective than its social policy. Tunisia, on the other 
hand, is classed among the countries with average human 
development, being ranked 93d in terms of HDI and 88th in terms 
of GNP, giving it a "negative" gap of only 5. 
<H5>  5. Outlook </H5>
  It is readily admitted that Morocco's economic potential is 
markedly better than Tunisia's, but that the latter seems much 
better equipped today for the race for development. Baccar 
Touzani, secretary general of the French-Arab Chamber of 
Commerce in Paris, explains the gap between the two countries as 
being due to education. "Illiteracy in Tunisia affects only 
people over 60 years of age, whereas in Morocco it touches all 
age groups. After independence, President Bourguiba assigned 
priority to education and health. That decision to pursue human 
development has paid off and is now being reflected in economic 
development." Is Tunisia being managed better than Morocco? 
"Perhaps. In proportion to population, it has more trained 
men--more cadres." 
  According to one Moroccan diplomat, Tunisia's lead dates 
back 
not to Bourguiba but to the French presence. "Tunisia was made a 
protectorate in 1881--30 years before Morocco. It therefore had 
access to modernity, public education, and health long before 
Morocco did." 
  In Agnes Chevallier's opinion, "it was petroleum that 
enabled 
the Tunisian economy to take off in the 1970's and led to the 
gap in per capita incomes between the two countries. While their 
industrial sectors are comparable today, the difference involves 
the relative importance of their archaic sectors--handicrafts, 
traditional agriculture, and the informal sector--which are much 
more important in Morocco. The kingdom is a country moving at 
several different speeds, while Tunisia is relatively 
homogeneous." 
  Another explanation is that military expenditures by 
Morocco, 
which is faced with the Saharan conflict and tensions with 
Algeria, have become higher than those by Tunisia, which has 
experienced only brief periods of tension with Libya. Military 
spending accounted for 2 percent of Moroccan GDP and 2.2 percent 
of Tunisian GDP in 1960, compared to 4.5 percent and 3.3 
percent, respectively, in 1990. The increase in military 
spending compared to expenditures for health and education 
combined reflects a recent adjustment in Tunisia: 58 percent in 
1990, compared to 35 percent in 1977. When President Ben Ali 
came to power, the human development strategy had borne fruit, 
whereas the military apparatus was still underdeveloped. Since 
1987, social spending has been reduced and attention focused on 
an autonomous defense policy to ensure the country's domestic 
and foreign security. In Morocco, on the other hand, the rate of 
military spending compared to spending on health and education 
fell from 88 percent in 1977 to 52 percent in 1990: military 
expenditures have not been reduced in absolute terms, but the 
social sector has become a priority. 
  A Tunisian economist qualifies the assessment of Tunisia's 
notable lead by saying: "It is better equipped than Morocco only 
in a certain sense. Its industrial fabric is more diversified 
and is locally more integrated. Working conditions are better, 
compliance with legislation is better, the unions are better 
adapted, and the bureaucracy is less burdensome. Morocco has 
advantages that are just as important. It is in a much better 
position in the international market: it projects a good image 
abroad. Moroccan investments abroad are much more sizable than 
Tunisia's. The kingdom's businessmen are freer, more dynamic, 
and less encumbered by domestic political constraints." 
  A study published by Paribas Bank in its magazine 
CONJONCTURE 
in November 1993 shows just how far the two countries have come: 
"The economic future of Tunisia and Morocco is certainly 
promising. Real progress has been made. A certain fragility 
remains. It is still too early to see these countries as the 
dragons of tomorrow." Morocco and Tunisia will have to meet 
several challenges in order to join the 21st century. The first 
is unemployment, which, depending on the source, affects from 15 
to 20 percent of their active populations and is not yet covered 
by unemployment compensation systems. According to North-South 
Export, "growth is creating only one-third the number of jobs 
required by Moroccan demographics." Even more serious, drought 
has accelerated the rural exodus and, therefore, the 
overpopulation of shantytowns. Another challenge is the 
negotiation of agreements on free trade and assistance with the 
EU. Many experts say that the future of the Maghreb is Europe. 

