CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mirel Scherer: "Investment in Robotics Still </F>
Declining: Less than 1,000 Robots Installed in France in 
1993"--first paragraph is INDUSTRIES ET TECHNIQUES introduction] 
  [Text] Slightly fewer robots were installed last 
year. The installed base in France consists of 11,795 robots. 
  The number of robots installed in 1993 dropped by only 4 
percent (974 compared with 1,013 in 1992). The total number of 
robots operating in France thus amounts to 11,795 units. This 
gave our fellow magazine ROBAUT and the French Industrial 
Robotics Association (AFRI) an opportunity to announce the first 
upbeat statistics published in a long time. With a warning note, 
however, because sales dropped considerably--by 20 
percent--after manufacturers engaged in a "fierce price and 
discount battle." Small to mid-size industries and firms 
continued to invest in these automation means, and 407 robots 
were installed in their plants in 1993. This is due to the sharp 
fall of robot prices (11 percent in 1993 alone). 
  When the automobile industry sneezes, robotics catches cold: 
the depressed market confirmed the saying. For the first time 
since these statistics are computed, automobile manufacturers 
and their subcontractors accounted for less than 50 percent of 
the market (only 46 percent). There is some hope, however. 
Several industries claim that they need more robots. The 
agrifood industry, for instance, with a 36-percent growth rate 
(by number of units), or the electric/electronics industry with 
+6 percent, or again the glass/ceramic industry which increased 
its purchases fourfold, from 7 to 29 units. 
  From a technical point of view, four-axis robots and robots 
with more than six axes were the most popular with users. The 
same was true of robots with Cartesian, spherical, and parallel 
axes. Over two thirds of the robots installed in 1993 handle 
loads weighing less than 60 kg. Parts handling, remains a major 
robot application, although it was hit hard. That was not the 
case of pallettization and packaging, a sector which 
considerably increased its use of robots, while machine 
loading/unloading was far from achieving the same score as in 
1992 (it declined by about 50 percent). The feeding of plastics 
injection-molding machines made a remarkable leap. On the other 
hand, welding (arc welding as well as spot welding) no longer 
pays: the number of robots installed is in marked decline. As 
for education and research, the number of robots they use 
increased threefold. 


