Language: <F P=105> Indonesian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Excerpts] In 1994 the government is determined to hold 
fast to its cautious policy of controlling the fiscal and 
monetary sectors in order to place our economy in a safe 
position. J. Soedradjad Djiwandono, governor of the Bank of 
Indonesia (BI), made this statement at the Annual Banking 
Meeting held last Friday (14 January) in Jakarta. [passage 
omitted] 
  The government's cautious approach to banking could have 
been 
anticipated at the beginning of January when it lowered credit 
expansion objectives from about 20 percent in the second half of 
1993 to about 17 percent in 1994. 
  The governor of the Bank of Indonesia's statements in his 
welcoming remarks can be made into a touchstone and a direction 
for the Indonesian business community. The governor of the Bank 
of Indonesia reminded the audience of the fiscal-monetary steps 
taken to safeguard the macroeconomic balance, in particular to 
prevent unnecessary pressures on the balance of payments. 
However, we must watch out for two areas: first, the uncertain 
price of oil on the world market; and second, an excessive 
increase in imports due to an increase in domestic economic 
activity. [passage omitted] 
  Based on the latest figures, the overall minimal capital 
adequacy ratio (CAR) has reached more than eight percent. The 
governor admitted, however, that not all individual banks have 
reached this eight-percent figure. [passage omitted] If national 
banking has succeeded in meeting this eight-percent CAR 
requirement, as stated by the governor, it shows that the health 
of our banking system has made significant progress. However, it 
is not easy to meet this eight-percent CAR provision because, 
roughly speaking, for each 100-billion-rupiah increase in bank 
assets eight billion rupiahs in additional capital must be set 
aside from what is left of net profits after deducting taxes and 
dividends distributed to shareholders. 
  From 1991 to 1993 the average CAR of the seven government 
banks, except for the BTN [Bank Tabungan Negara], which is still 
around 5.35 percent, was raised to eight percent. This is 
certainly an achievement, considering that the additional 
capital needed to meet the provisions of the February Policy 
Package was provided under conditions of tight money when bank 
interest rates, for both deposits and loans, jumped up, 
accompanied by a high percentage of nonperforming loans. 
  Other developments in banking which are showing bright 
prospects according to the governor's report include the rapid 
increase in the number of banks which have succeeded in meeting 
the loan to deposit ratio (LDR) provisions. Banks with lending 
limits of 10 percent above deposits or with a ratio below 110 
percent are considered healthy. It is ideal if the LDR does not 
exceed 100 percent, meaning that the bank lending limit does not 
exceed deposits. According to the governor's report, only 15 
banks have LDRs above 110 percent. 
  As for the problem of the legal lending limit (3L), or the 
Maximal Limit for Granting Credit (BMPK)-- a recent subject of 
discussion -- Soedradjad warned banks to reduce their 3L 
violations by forming credit syndicates with other banks. 
  Section 11 Paragraph 2 of Banking Law Number 7 of 1992, 
states that the BMPK (3L) for groups of clients or individuals 
may not exceed 30 percent of the bank's capital. The objective 
of this tightening of credit is to minimize the risks and to 
equalize credit allocation because too much credit granted to a 
group of clients or to an individual can topple the bank if the 
loans cannot be paid back. Bank Summa is a recent example. 
  We agree with the governor when he suggests that the 
strategy 
of our national banking system should be to increase our 
qualitative ability to channel funds so that these mediating 
institutions can guarantee the safety of people's savings. 
Greater efforts should be made to uphold, for example, the 
provisions of the regulations in Law Number 7 of 1992, including 
criminal provisions. 
  The effects of globalization, the consequences of the 
speed-up in innovations and of recent structural changes which 
have changed the international financial system, must also be 
taken into account. Risks have been increasing and this has 
forced the monetary authorities, especially the central bank, to 
adjust its approach to monetary problems and to its 
macropolicies. 

