BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Peter Weiss, chairman of the Party of the </F>
Democratic Left, by Martin Krno; place and date not given: 
"Hatred Is a Poor Counselor"] 
  [Text] I suppose it would not be far from the truth if we 
were to state that the most bitter exchange to date between 
representatives of the Party of the Democratic Left [SDL] and 
the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia [HZDS] took place during 
the most recent "Kroky" television program. Their mutual 
relations seemed different two years ago. Why have they 
worsened considerably? We turned to SDL Chairman Peter Weiss and 
asked him this question. 
  [Weiss] Our relations were never ideal. 
  [Krno] Now you can say it openly: Did the prime minister 
really rip your jacket at the U.S. Consulate in the summer of 
1992? 
  [Weiss] No. It was merely a verbal tussle. We respected 
the results of the elections, but we always tried to formulate 
an independent policy. We rejected the "Join us!" philosophy 
and all of the sermonizing aimed at us. We have our own 
objectives. We did not cause the domestic political crisis; it 
was caused by the gradual differentiation in the Slovak National 
Party and the HZDS. This movement has still not adopted a 
profile. It does not belong to any European political family, 
it has no allies abroad, it does not know exactly what it wants, 
and it is inscrutable. Therefore, again and again it inclines 
toward social and national demagoguery. The reasons for the 
crisis can also be seen in the way the HZDS leadership treated 
its own deputies. One-quarter of them refused to subject their 
honor to any more humiliation and left. We proposed early 
elections in April 1993. The HZDS rejected this proposal, 
although, given the ratio of forces in the National Council at 
that time, we could have put the early elections far behind us. 
The crisis culminated in the intensifying conflict between the 
prime minister and the president, a conflict that began to 
threaten our constitutional system. 
  [Krno] Parliament adopted its well-known decision on 11 
March. Some people have called it a parliamentary putsch... 
  [Weiss] The idea is being foisted on our citizens that, in 
the last elections, they did not elect 150 deputies but one man 
who was given carte blanche to govern for four years and that 
parliament did not have the right to recall him. The art of 
politics is not only to win the elections, but also to maintain 
a majority in the parliament. I see no political, policy, or 
moral reason that the SDL deputies should be obliged, by means 
of their votes, to patch up the hole the HZDS chairman created 
by not being able to keep his parliamentary club together. 
  [Krno] The SDL had already had particular experience with 
the former prime minister. Why were you considering, until the 
last moment, whether or not to enter into a coalition with the 
HZDS? 
  [Weiss] I personally was not in favor of this, but ways were 
being sought of bridging the period until the early elections. 
However, it was impossible to reach a compromise with the HZDS 
on a date for the elections. Following Michal Kovac's speech in 
parliament, it was essential to consider whether we would take 
the side of those who, on Zupne Square, were chanting the slogan 
"Rather a civil war than the president!" or of those who wanted 
to resolve the crisis by democratic means. Not only our grave 
reservations about the government's inept policy but also its 
very bad image abroad played a role in our decisionmaking. 
Support for the former prime minister would have complicated 
our position abroad and our chances of being accepted into the 
Socialist International. Despite this, I said in the National 
Council on 11 March that we were willing to enter into an open 
coalition with the HZDS for the transitional period, but on the 
condition that there would be no political elite in the Cabinet. 
The prime minister, however, placed his personal interests 
above the HZDS remaining in power. 
  [Krno] Information was made available at an HZDS meeting in 
Bratislava last week about the visit made to Washington last 
year by Jan Carnogursky. Apparently, he reached an agreement 
there with President Clinton that, along with you and Milan 
Knazko, he would tear down Meciar's government. Are we to 
understand your coming visit to the United States as the 
culmination of this agreement? 
  [Weiss] I would view this as a political joke, with the 
addendum that the U.S. Democratic Party has swollen the ranks of 
HZDS traitors.... But, seriously, I am going to the United 
States with Milan Ftacnik to hold talks on the opportunities for 
economic cooperation and the development of political relations. 
We will meet with representatives from Congress, the Department 
of State, the National Security Council, and business circles. 
  [Krno] Will you ask them what is happening with regard to 
the flow of money to Slovakia? When the prime minister returned 
from New York last year, he claimed that he had been told there 
that, if the SDL enters the government, we can wave good-bye to 
U.S. capital. 
  [Weiss] The SDL is now a governing party, and the atmosphere 
of the talks with the IMF and the World Bank being conducted on 
behalf of the Slovak Republic by Deputy Prime Minister Brigita 
Schmognerova, who was nominated by our party, is favorable. I 
recently toured the most crisis-hit regions, Gemer and Spis, and 
I am preparing to visit others. 
  It is depressing for a left-wing politician to look into 
the eyes of unemployed workers and high school and university 
graduates and, at the same time, feel that they want to hear 
from you something that would give them immediate hope. 
However, I will not promise them the earth, as the former prime 
minister did last year at a meeting in Spisska Nova Ves. Not 
one heller of the 250 million korunas promised to revitalize the 
district has materialized. It is necessary to place the economy 
as a whole on its feet, but, at the same time, it is essential 
to draw up special programs for the most threatened regions. 
Some activities can be financed from foreign aid. Therefore, 
in the United States, we will also discuss guaranteeing the 
political conditions for expanding investments in Slovakia. 
  [Krno] What is the situation regarding the accusations from 
Pavol Hagyari and, most recently, Vladimir Meciar that you are 
not a left-wing party? 
  [Weiss] The first does not know how to win support for his 
own right-wing party, so he is at least dreaming that the SDL 
has deviated to the right. The shadow prime minister is not a 
political scientist; he contradicts himself very often. There 
are also other statements made by him--for example, that the 
HZDS forms the pragmatic center between the SDL and the 
Christian Democratic Movement [KDH]. The truth, however, is 
that HZDS deputies have on many occasions voted in the 
parliament along with the Christian democrats. For example, on 
agricultural policy, on the restitution of church property, and 
on the law on national holidays. At that time, our 
left-wingedness presented a major obstacle to the HZDS. Meciar's 
movement pursued, especially as far as satisfying the interests 
of its functionaries' aktiv was concerned, a vulgarly 
egotistical, elitist right-wing policy based on controlling the 
state apparatus by the system of "winner takes all." The 
reproaches aimed at us, that we do not pursue a left-wing 
policy, are part of the normal preelection propaganda, and are 
an element of the scenario to destroy the SDL. The HZDS 
chairman is peeved that only our party has resisted his ability 
to break up political entities. 
  [Krno] Divide et impera, maintained the ancient Romans.... 
It was interesting to observe on the aforementioned program how 
Kroky tried to bring you into conflict one after the other with 
Roman Kovac, the KDH, the SDL membership base, and even your own 
ministers. Is there really such cantankerousness between you 
and your coalition partners in the government? 
  [Weiss] The wish is father to the thought. I know that we 
are troublesome because, in an election coalition with the 
Social Democratic Party of Slovakia, the Green Party in 
Slovakia, and the Farmers' Movement, we will be the most serious 
opponent of the HZDS in the elections. Naturally, it is not 
easy to work in the current coalition government. However, we 
have agreed on a government program that also proceeds from the 
SDL's fundamental policy aims. Many supporters of the left wing 
are not reproaching our deputies so much for expressing no 
confidence in the former prime minister as for entering into a 
coalition with the KDH. This coalition, born of reason and 
aimed at getting Slovakia out of its plight, has an important 
aspect: All of us participating in it have stopped looking back 
at the past and have begun to emphasize the future. Slovakia is 
marked by feelings of hatred among those who, from 1945 to the 
present, have experienced major political defeats. Now it must 
decide whether to challenge the intensity of intractable hatred, 
the setting of people against each other, and the concoction of 
enemies. Left-wing policy can also be formulated in a coalition 
government. If this were impossible, the Austrian Social 
Democratic Party, which is already serving a second term in a 
government with Christian democrats, would not have the right to 
call itself left-wing. We will go into the elections on the 
basis of an agreement among the left-wing forces. We also want 
to achieve the results that would enable us to continue all the 
positive things our ministers have begun in the current 
government. 
  [Krno] Reports have been leaked to the public that disputes 
have erupted among your ministers. Were there threats of 
resignation in the air? 
  [Weiss] There is a need for a consistent dialogue in every 
government. We have had some lively discussions in the SDL 
ministerial club. They concerned, in particular, the 
negotiations with the IMF and the World Bank, the measures for 
stabilizing the state budget and creating the financial 
resources for education, health care, and the judiciary. It is 
quite natural that, during these discussions, views were 
expressed that had to be harmonized on the basis of reasoning. 
We had such a useful discussion in Malanta on 5 May. In the 
end, an agreement was reached between the deputy prime minister 
and the agriculture minister and between the deputy prime 
minister and the defense minister. 
  [Krno] The election campaign is already under way 
unofficially. The HZDS has set a specific tone from the 
beginning. What are your views on the preelection struggle? 
  [Weiss] We did not conduct privatization. Therefore, we 
certainly will not have enough money to place a full-page 
advertisement in the press every week from today until the end 
of September. We will present our political values and aims to 
the citizens, and we will explain how we intend to assert them. 
We intend to offer a modern European and, at the same time, 
patriotic left-wing alternative to resolving Slovakia's 
problems. That is, we will not embark on a black campaign, 
denunciation, scandal, and manipulating public opinion. Of 
course, if it is necessary to react to attacks, scandal, and 
gossip, we will do so. It is natural that we want to publish 
the SDL program in the form of advertisements in PRAVDA, as an 
independent daily with a high print run and a well-known 
structure of readers, but these will certainly not be articles 
scandalizing our political partners. That would be beneath us. 

