Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Egyptian Organisation for Human Rights (EOHR) 
said, in a report issued last weekend, that Islamist militant 
groups bear the "major part of the responsibility" for all acts 
of violence carried out in 1993, while police forces were 
becoming less and less involved in acts of "physical 
liquidation" directed against these groups. 
  The report did not absolve the government of responsibility 
for the spread of religious extremism and fanaticism, however, 
but noted that the state institutions and state-controlled media 
were "retreating" in the face of the pressures brought to bear 
by the "political Islamic tendency." 
  EOHR said it "followed with extreme concern the escalating 
terrorist activity and the acts of violence carried out by some 
armed groups of the political Islamic tendency which 
constituted, in 1993, an unprecedented violation of a 
fundamental human right, which is the right to live." 
  Statistics compiled by the EOHR indicate that "the harvest 
of 
bloody violence" in 1993 included the death of at least 207 
people, more than the total for the previous three years during 
the course of which 139 people were killed in acts of violence. 
  The statistics show that these Islamist groups "bear the 
major part of responsibility for all acts of violence in the 
country, although they had shared this responsibility with the 
police forces in 1992," EOHR said. In 1992, Islamist groups 
killed 39 people while 38 others were killed by police fire. 
  In 1993, however, Islamist groups were responsible for the 
death of 137 people including 90 policemen, 39 innocent 
civilians, 6 Christians and 2 foreign tourists. On the other 
hand, 59 Islamist militants were killed either in clashes with 
police or in suicide missions. Moreover, 11 citizens were 
killed by police fire in the course of clashes between police 
and members of militant Islamist groups. 
  "EOHR, while noting that 59 police victims were killed 
deliberately in acts of physical liquidation carried out by 
these groups, must also note that police have desisted since 
last March from acts of physical liquidation of members of these 
groups," the report said. 
  It said that while 118 people were killed by Islamist 
groups, 
only eight members of these groups were killed by police forces 
when they stormed Al-Rahmah (Mercy) mosque in Aswan last March. 
  The report also noted that Islamist groups have upgraded 
their techniques by using explosive parcels, booby-trapped cars 
and time-bombs placed in public squares and densely-populated 
areas "in order to cause the largest possible number of human 
losses." The year 1993 witnessed 12 major terrorist explosions, 
including nine explosions which aimed to kill indiscriminately. 
  The year also witnessed a sharp escalation in assassination 
plots directed at state officials, the report said, citing 
abortive attempts on the lives of Prime Minister 'Atif Sidqi, 
Information Minister Safwat al-Sharif, and Interior Minister 
Hasan al-Alfi, in addition to numerous attacks on police forces. 
In the southern governorate of Asyut alone, 57 policemen were 
killed. Christians and tourists also continued to be terrorist 
targets, the report said. 
  EOHR affirmed its position that the only way to deal with 
this escalation of violence is "the peaceful and courageous 
confrontation of all violations of human rights, regardless of 
their source and the identity of their intended victim." It 
said a police confrontation is not enough, "particularly in view 
of the increasing retreat of the state institutions and media 
before the pressures brought forth by the political Islamic 
tendency, which is bound to encourage religious fanaticism and 
sectarian hatred. 
  "In this connection, EOHR notes that the state institutions 
were giving in to the pressures exercised by Al-Azhar and the 
political Islamic groups to ban numerous literary, intellectual 
and enlightened works under the pretext that they are opposed to 
Islam," the report said. 
  "The organisation also notes that the state is primarily 
responsible for the social phenomenon of religious extremism and 
fanaticism. Educational institutes, state-owned media and 
religious newspapers published by the state or the ruling party 
are playing a role which is as grave as that of the newspapers 
of the political Islamic tendency in preparing society to accept 
and encourage religious fanaticism and sectarian hatred, curtail 
freedom of expression and literary and artistic creativity," the 
report said. 

