SUMMARY 
                              Russian President Boris Yeltsin reacted angrily to former U.S. 
President Richard Nixon's meetings in Moscow with opposition 
leaders, including former Vice President Aleksandr Rutskoy, who 
had only recently been released from prison.  Despite his harsh 
reaction, he appeared to attempt to minimize the damage to U.S.- 
Russian relations.  Nevertheless, his reaction and the initial 
treatment of the incident by the Russian media suggest that 
Moscow is concerned that the United States may be reevaluating 
its policy toward his administration. 
                           END SUMMARY 
   Yeltsin angrily announced cancellation of his meeting with the 
former U.S. President on 9 March.  He told reporters that it was 
"impossible" for him to meet Richard Nixon after the latter's 8 
March meetings with Rutskoy, recently released from jail under an 
amnesty approved by the Russian legislature over Yeltsin's 
opposition, and Communist party leader Gennadiy Zyuganov. 
Yeltsin stressed that neither he, the government, nor his chief 
of staff--all scheduled to meet with former President Nixon- 
-would now receive him.  Further highlighting his displeasure, 
Yeltsin stressed that "Russia is a great country" and "simply 
cannot be trifled with" (Interfax, ITAR-TASS, (9 March). 
   Yeltsin appeared concerned to limit the damage to relations with 
the United States while at the same time giving an implicit 
warning that bilateral relations could be harmed by such 
incidents.  He noted that he was "impressed" with the position 
taken by U.S. President Bill Clinton who he said had phoned him 
and "distanced himself from [former President] Nixon's trip," and 
stressed that the "U.S.-Russian partnership must be preserved and 
developed" as a "great achievement" that "we worked very hard for 
and we must not lose" (ITAR-TASS, 9 March). 
   Similarly, the Russian Foreign Ministry appeared to distance 
itself and the U.S. government from the former president's visit. 
According to Interfax, the ministry said that it "has nothing to 
do with [former President] Nixon's visit" and the news agency 
quoted a "high-ranking" Russian diplomat as saying that the 
ministry "would have monitored" the visit "had the American 
embassy been in charge of it" (9 March). 
   In contrast, Zyuganov and the Russian Communist Party's press 
service portrayed the meeting with former President Nixon as a 
deliberate effort by the U.S. government to broaden its contacts 
within Russia.  Claiming that the ex-president's meeting with 
Zyuganov will give U.S. officials a more realistic picture of 
what is happening in Russia, the press service announced that the 
meeting "proves" that such a "better understanding" is what the 
U.S. leadership wants.  Zyuganov himself claimed that the 
Communists and "all Russian patriotic movements" were "concerned 
over the inflexible U.S. approach to Russian political forces" 
and "believed that the growth in anti-American sentiment in 
Russia" was connected with "U.S. unconditional support for the 
present unpopular executive power" (Interfax, 9 March). 
   Media Coverage 
   Russian media coverage of the visit, as presented on 9 March, 
after his meeting with Rutskoy, was negative.  ITAR-TASS, citing 
"competent sources" on the reasons behind the cancellation of the 
government meetings, said that the former president's initiatives 
had been seen "as a sign of disrespect for the political will of 
the Russian leadership."  One Russian television commentary (see 
box)--describing Rutskoy as a "recent Lefortovo [prison] inmate"- 
-linked former President Nixon's meetings with what it claimed 
was recent U.S. "maneuvering" on foreign policy toward Russia and 
wondered "what's going on in American foreign policy," and if 
there was a "change of politicial direction" in Washington 
(Russian TV, 9 March). 
   Implications 
   Yeltsin's angry response to what he portrayed as a personal and 
political insult suggests a concern that the United States is 
reevaluating its relationship with Russia and with him 
personally.  Yeltsin's sharp reaction and the media coverage of 
the incident so far is consistent with previous Russian reaction 
to what are seen as the U.S. administration's efforts to review 
its policy toward Russia. 
   BOX 
   State-run Russian Television's coverage of former U.S. President 
Richard Nixon's visit to Moscow included what appears to be a 
deliberate attempt to raise questions about U.S. policy toward 
Russia and dramatize the Yeltsin administration's decision to 
cancel meetings with him. 
   The coverage of the visit on the 1100 GMT newscast on 9 March 
began with a commentary on relations between Russia and the 
United States which claimed that recent visits to the U.S. by 
Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk and Georgian President Eduard 
Shevardnadze had led to agreements with the U.S. that were 
"revisions" of agreements previously reached "with Russian 
participation."  The commentator, G. Shakhov then turned to the 
"private" visit by former President Nixon, noting that the latter 
"considered it necessary" to meet the previous day with former 
Vice-president Aleksandr Rutskoy and Russian Communist Party 
leader Gennadiy Zyuganov but "only today" intended to meet with 
leading officials such as Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and 
Administration Leader Sergey Filatov.  Shakov also noted the 
former President's intention to meet with Liberal Democratic 
Party leader Vladimir Zhirinovskiy and concluded his commentary 
by asking rhetorically whether "all this" is a foreign policy 
"maneuver" by the U.S. or a "change in political orientation." 
   The news anchor then reported that Richard Nixon was 'expected" 
to meet with Chernomyrdin and Filatov and hoped to meet with 
Russian President Boris Yeltsin.  The report was followed by 
another commentary, seemingly designed to embarrass both former 
President Nixon and U.S. President Bill Clinton and to suggest 
that former President Nixon would be reporting to President 
Clinton on his Russian visit.  The commentor noted that when he 
returned to the United States, the former president would be able 
to share not only his impressions from Moscow but also his "rich 
experience" in political scandals, asserting that President 
Clinton had already "suffered through" some "unpleasant moments" 
due to the "Whitewater scandal."  The news anchor concluded the 
program's coverage of the visit with an announcement that he had 
"just received" a report from ITAR-TASS that the "planned" 
meetings with Chernomyrdin and Filatov would not take place. 
ITAR-TASS was first observed to have run this report at 0745 GMT, 
more than three hours prior to the beginning of the news 
broadcast. 
   END BOX 
   (AUTHOR: BELLINGER, CRIMMINS.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE 
CALL CHIEF, RUSSIA ANALYSIS BRANCH, (703) 733-6070). 
ENEAG/BLOUGH JEG 10/0412Z MAR 

