PRO   System Development in Our Country and Experimental PRO 
Testing Range Complex (System A) 

<F P=102> 947G0017A Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEMII NAUK: TEKHNICHESKAYA 
KIBERNETIKA in Russian No. 6, Nov-Dec 92 (manuscript received 19 </F>

Aug 92) pp 166-174--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 947G0017A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEMII NAUK: TEKHNICHESKAYA 
KIBERNETIKA </F>

<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by O. V. Golubev, Yu. A. Kamenskiy, M. G. Minasyan, </F>
and B. D. Pupkov, NIO NIIRP [Research Department of Research 
Institute of Radio-Instrument Building], under the rubric 
``Control of Complex Systems''; UDC 533.629.7; first paragraph 
is TEKHNICHESKAYA KIBERNETIKA introduction] 
  [Text]This article deals with the scientific engineering 
aspects of development of the first experimental PRO 
[antimissile defense] system (1953-1962) in our country. It 
discusses methods, means and results of solving problems of 
controlling antimissile missiles, providing for firing 
effectiveness required for the experimental complex, and 
appropriate precision of antimissile missile guidance. The main 
data are submitted on full-scale tests of system A, including 
the world's first interception and destruction of the head of an 
R-12 ballistic missile fired on 4 March 1961. 
  Introduction. This article is apparently the first 
publication in the open press concerning scientific-engineering 
(cybernetic) aspects of development of real PRO systems already 
developed and being developed in our country. We consider this 
publication to be quite relevant and timely, because it is 
expressly in our country that the world's first experimental PRO 
complex (system A) was developed and, at the present time, only 
Russia has a functional PRO firing system. We believe that a 
rather open discussion of these matters is particularly timely 
at the present time, when negotiations are in progress, in 
accordance with the agreement made in June 1992 between the 
United States and Russia, in order to ``develop jointly with 
allies and other concerned states of the concept of global 
defense against a limited ballistic missile 
attack.''[.sup]1[/] 
  Having worked on the PRO since the early 1950s, these 
authors 
intend to describe in this article and its continuation the main 
results of scientific-engineering developments in the PRO field 
(from 1953 to the present time), as well as to express our views 
on future development of PRO systems. 
  Beginning with this article, we intend to discuss the above 
issues in the following order: 
  1. Experimental PRO firing range (system A). 
  2. PRO system of Moscow (system A-35). Planning the Taran 
border PRO system and territorial Aurora [``Avrora''] PRO system. 
  3. Development of Moscow PRO system. Further refinement of 
PRO system. 
  The history of PRO development in our country and the PRO 
problem at the present time have many other aspects: political, 
and both domestic and international military ones. This history 
is steeped in dramatic events, creative achievements and 
disappointments, spurts of activity and prolonged slacks. Such 
political and military figures as Khrushchev, Ustinov and 
Gorbachev, prominent scientists and designers had a bearing on 
the PRO problem and participated actively in it. If this broader 
discussion of the PRO problem finds readers, we are prepared to 
share with them our recollections and views on this problem, 
which is not simple. 
  1. First stage of research in the PRO field. Search for 
a means of damaging the warheads of ballistic missiles. In 
late December 1953, research on the problem of developing the 
means and system for anti-missile defense (PRO) began at KB-1 
[design office] where we worked. The work was carried out 
concurrently in several departments. Systemic questions, 
distinctions of systems for control of AMM [antimissile 
missiles] and questions of efficacy of AMM firing on ballistic 
missile warheads were explored mainly in the laboratory headed 
by Professor N. A. Livshits. The laboratory consisted of several 
groups, including the firing effectiveness group. Academician V. 
S. Pugachev, who was a professor at the Zhukovskiy Academy 
[Military Air Engineering Academy imeni N. Ye. Zhukovskiy] at 
that time, was scientific chief of this group. The task for the 
group was to select a plan and optimize the specifications for 
firing equipment of GAAM [guided anti-aircraft missiles], i.e., 
their warheads and electronic fuzes. Development of 
fragmentation warheads and electronic fuzes was carried out in 
specialized organizations. 
  The task of selecting and optimizing firing equipment for 
guided anti-aircraft missiles was carried out in accordance with 
the general guidelines and methods of assessing effectiveness of 
a firing system proposed in 1945 by Academician A. N. 
Kolmogorov. At that time, these guidelines and methods were 
developed at the Zhukovskiy Academy (by V. S. Pugachev, Ye. S. 
Venttsel and others), as well as several other research 
institutes of the defense industry and military institutes. 
Later on, after publication in our country of the book by P. 
Morse and G. Kimball, ``Methods of Operations Research,'' in 
1956, we learned (like a Moliere character) that in working on 
the choice and optimization of firing equipment we were engaged 
in studies of operations. At that time, assessment of firing 
effectiveness[.sup]2[/] at KB-1 was made by the optical 
modeling method, which was used at the Zhukovskiy Academy. 
Theoretical estimation methods were combined effectively with 
missions to testing ranges for warheads and electronic fuzes, as 
well as the State Central Testing Range (GTsP) not far from 
Kapustin Yar. There, group members were included in commissions 
for evaluation of effectiveness of firing of live GAAM at target 
aircraft (Tu-4, Il-28, MIG). 
  It became apparent very soon to the members of the firing 
effectiveness group that the firing equipment for AMM designed 
to destruct warheads of ballistic missiles must be very 
different from the warheads of GAAM that had already become 
standard (high-speed fragmentation warhead with a circular 
strike field [``field of destruction''], and electronic fuze 
with a directional radiation pattern and a radius of action 
within the maximum range of GAAM misses). A positive solution to 
the problem of damaging warheads was suggested to us in the 
reports of our precursors who studied the PRO problem, the 
groups of Mozharovskiy (Research Institute 4, Ministry of 
Defense) and Khlebtsevich (Research Institute 885). In their 
work, which was carried out in 1948-1951, plans were proposed 
for arming AMM with two types of guidance systems. For remote 
control AMM, fragmentation warheads were proposed with slow 
fragments and circular (disk) strike field. The optimum radius 
R[.sub]o[/] and form of strike field were 
determined according to a number of factors, and it could change 
with each firing. It was proposed to detonate the fragmentation 
warheads with an advance, which is required to have a radius of 
R[.sub]o[/] between the target and the strike 
field at the moment of contact. However, the method of such 
detonation and effect of its precision on firing effectiveness 
was left virtually unconsidered. For AMM with a homing device, 
it was suggested to use fragmentation warheads with a guidance 
system that would turn in the direction of the target and 
explode upon receiving information from the homing 
head.[.sup]3[/] 
  Since it was planned to use remote controlled AMM in the 
work 
on PRO carried out at KB-1, attention was focused mainly on 
implementation and optimization of the first system for arming 
the AMM. The first results of evaluation of precision of AMM 
guidance and effectiveness of firing at ballistic missile 
warheads were obtained at KB-1 in August 1954. A method was 
proposed for controlled detonation of AMM fragmentation warheads 
on the basis of data from the same ground-based information 
resources used to guide the AMM. It was proposed that the 
command for detonation be transmitted over the same line of 
command over which commands for AMM were transmitted, but with 
much less timing discreteness. 
  It must be stated that both systems for arming AMM to 
destruct the warheads of ballistic missiles were subsequently 
proposed repeatedly and used in AMM, and have survived to this 
day in a modified form. A method was developed to evaluate 
target W in order to assess the influence of 
detonation precision on probability of damaging W, 
and a large volume of calculations was carried out.[.sup]4[/] 
Calculations revealed that detonation precision had little 
effect on W, which made it possible to adopt and 
subsequently use this rather simple and reliable method of 
controlled detonation of fragmentation warheads (later on of 
nuclear warheads also) in PRO systems. 
  However, with the calculated precision of AMM guidance, 
firing effectiveness was low, although it was close to the usual 
level for antiaircraft systems. At that time, no one imposed 
requirements on W, but the consequences of missing 
even one ballistic missile with a nuclear charge over Moscow 
were apparent to us. 
  In late 1954, Professor G. V. Kisunko (corresponding member 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences from 1958 on), who headed one 
of the largest KB-1 subdivisions, began to play a leading role 
in research on PRO at the KB-1. He requested an evaluation of 
firing effectiveness of several AMM. Estimates revealed that, 
with the guidance precision determined for AMM, in the opinion 
of G. V. Kisunko effectiveness was acceptable only with the use 
of 8-10 such missiles, and this was unrealistic for the PRO 
system. It may be that expressly this estimates compelled G. V. 
Kisunko to search for a new method, not used for GAAM, for 
determination of target coordinates, and an AMM that would 
permit radical improvement of precision of AMM guidance. Such a 
method was soon found. This change in content and 
characteristics of information resources of the PRO system 
indicates the relationship between firing equipment and general 
systems characteristics, i.e., the need for a systems approach. 
On the other hand, with such high requirements of firing 
effectiveness, it was necessary to have reliable data concerning 
vulnerability of ballistic missile warheads as related to 
fragmentation warheads. The most realistic way to obtain such 
data was to carry out experiments with ballistic missile 
warheads produced in our country. Without going into the details 
of this important question, the scientific problems of which is 
beyond the scope of this article, we believe it necessary to 
note that such experiments were organized in the next 2-3 years 
on the testing ranges near Moscow, and in 1956 in Arzamas-l6. 
The latter experiments were carried out with real R-5 ballistic 
missile warheads under the scientific supervision of Academician 
Yu. B. Khariton. R-5 ballistic missiles with warheads destructed 
by fragments were also launched. The results of these 
experiments revealed the limited capabilities of fragmentation 
warheads and gave impetus to investigation of use of nuclear 
warheads in PRO. 
  2. AMM guidance system and detonation of its 
warhead. The AMM guidance system aimed at a ballistic 
target refers to the aggregate of interacting firing elements, 
singled out on the principle of participation in AMM control in 
order to execute the military objective of interception. Thus, 
the guidance system is the aggregate of information resources 
controlling computers, earth-missile radio circuits and the 
object of control -- the AMM with its onboard equipment and 
ammunition, which is organized by means of the appropriate 
choice of parameters of these resources and software generated 
computer algorithms for AMM control in order to have it come in 
contact with the head of the ballistic target and then to 
destruct it. 
  Development of the AMM guidance system for ballistic 
targets, 
as an element of the PRO system, was a major new research 
problem. A decree of the USSR government in 1956 marked the 
start of solving this problem within the limits of specific 
research-experimental and experimental-design work. This decree 
called for establishment of our country's first experimental 
firing range complex of PRO equipment, the A system. 
  The design, development and testing of this complex were 
carried out in 1956-1962 under the scientific-engineering 
supervision of general designer G. V. Kisunko. 
  The complex consisted of the following main elements: 
early-warning radar for ballistic targets (Dunay-2); 3 precision 
guidance radars, each of which consisted of radar channels to 
measure target and AMM coordinates; radar station for AMM 
lift-off station for transmission of control commands to AMM; 
station for transmission of control commands to AMM; main 
computer control center consisting of a command post, and M-40 
control electronic digital computer; radio relay circuits for 
communication between system objects. Interception of ballistic 
target heads at the complex was carried out with V-1000 AMM. 
  The early-warning radar detected ballistic targets at a 
distance of D = 1200 km, and in the course of 
automatic tracking it relayed plots to target channels of 
precision guidance radars. 
  The precision guidance radars, which are radar stations with 
parabolic steerable antennas [dishes], operating in the 
centimeter range of waves in a single-pulse mode, would pick up 
the ballistic missile head during automatic tracking at a 
distance of D = 700 km and the AMM (upon receipt of 
signal from onboard responder) by the time of the start of 
precision guidance. Measurement of distances to them was made 
with precision characterized by a mean-square error not 
exceeding _s_ = 5 m. 
  The AMM lift-off radar station with steerable parabolic 
antenna and a scanning beam picked up the AMM during automatic 
tracking immediately after lift-off. Determination was made of 
deviation of the AMM from the kinematic trajectory at the 
lift-off stage from the station's measurements of AMM 
coordinates and range, whereas at the guidance stage dynamic AMM 
instructions were formed for the precision guidance radars for 
angular tracking of AMM. 
  The station for transmission of control commands, whose 
parabolic antenna was rigidly attached to the antenna column of 
the radar station for AMM lift-off, relayed control and warhead 
detonation commands to the AMM. 
  All these elements of equipment, which were located at 
different points and at considerable distances from one another 
in the Betpak-Dala Desert, were interconnected by a highly 
informative radio relay system of communications and data 
transmission, which made it possible to control all elements of 
the experimental complex by means of the M-40 electronic digital 
computer with a computer control center in a single firing cycle. 
  In view of the speed of interception processes and 
impossibility of human intervention in these processes, as well 
as the high guidance precision required, the entire target 
interception process was automated for the first time with use 
of the M-40 computer, which is one of the first developments of 
the presently well-known Institute of Precise Mechanics and 
Computer Engineering, headed at that time by Academician S. A. 
Lebedev. The computer operated at a speed of 40,000 
single-address operations per second. 
  Development of the algorithm to control the system A 
experimental firing complex was carried out by the head 
institute under the supervision of G. V. Kisunko, whereas the 
Institute of Precision Mechanics and Computer Engineering, which 
already had some highly professional programmers on its staff, 
took on the software task. 
  The V-1000, which was developed by OKB-2 [special design 
office] of the Ministry of the Aviation Industry under the 
supervision of P. D. Grushin, was notable for particular 
engineering innovativeness. This was a two-stage rocket with 
powerful solid-propellant booster and controllable second stage 
with a liquid-propellant engine. The mean velocity of the AMM, 
1000 m/s, was unprecedented for those years,and its 
controllability permitted interception of targets at altitudes 
of up to 25 km. The specifications for the guidance system 
stemmed from the purpose of the experimental testing range 
complex, its structure and features of its elements. Since its 
purpose was to prove experimentally and demonstrate that guided 
AMM can intercept a ballistic target and destruct its head by 
warhead fragments, the main prerequisite for the guidance system 
was utmost precision of guidance. At the firing range complex 
planning stage, the precision characteristics of coordinate 
information about the target and AMM obtained from radars and, 
accordingly, the characteristics of possible guidance precision 
were coordinated with parameters of AMM fragmentation warheads 
and, in particular, with the size of the damage to head sections 
caused by fragmentation warheads. 
  Since a fragmentation warhead was selected for a disk-shaped 
strike field with slow dispersion of destructive elements (of 
the Zavesa type), and also to enhance guidance precision and 
reduce the effect on it of errors in detonation of fragmentation 
warheads, an important specific requirement of the guidance 
system was to assure encounter of AMM with the target on 
collision courses, with close to zero angles of impact. 
  The short balance of time in the system of interception of 
ballistic targets because of their high velocity and, in 
particular, the short time available for precision guidance 
(t = 12-14 s) required high dynamic qualities of the 
guidance system and, in particular, determined the high 
requirements of precision and speed of the guidance system. 
  By the time system A began to be developed, systems with 
guided rockets, including those with GAAM, had already been 
developed and tested at KB-1. 
  The initial posits in planning the guidance system for the 
V-1000 AMM were largely determined by experience in developing 
guidance systems for anti-aircraft guided missiles. However, the 
specific operating conditions of the AMM guidance system and 
higher requirements for it, as mentioned above, made it 
necessary to develop substantially the traditional guidance 
system of GAAM. At the same time, use (for the first time in our 
country) of a digital computer to solve guidance problems 
provided the prerequisites for such development. Concurrently, 
an utterly new problem arose in the practice of planning 
guidance systems, that of developing computer algorithms, and 
two directions emerged that corresponded to theory of optimum 
systems: development of algorithms to process data about 
ballistic targets and AMM, and development of algorithms for 
actual control of AMM. 
  The problem of determination of coordinates of the target 
and 
interceptor with precision sufficient for use of fragmentation 
charges with the acceptable weight and dimensions, was one of 
the most serious problems. Considering the fact that error in 
radar measurement of angular coordinates is the main 
contributing factor to error of determination of object 
coordinates, G. V. Kisunko proposed use of a method based on 
using measurements of range from three points geographically 
distant from one another (the three-distance method), thus 
obtaining rather high precision in measurement of target and AMM 
coordinates in the areas of hypothetical location of the points 
of impact between the AMM and target, thanks to the high 
precision of range measurement. 
  Some original formulas were obtained demonstrating the 
direct 
correlation between all three cartesian coordinates and 
distance, which made it possible to carry out an in-depth 
analysis of precision of the three-distance method and, in 
particular, determine which was the optimum location, in the 
sense of precision, of the three range finders. As a result, the 
radar stations were situated at the apices of an equilateral 
triangle, with 150-km sides 100 to 250 km away from the shore of 
Lake Balkhash, in the middle of the Betpak-Dala Desert. 
  The method of parallel approach of AMM to the target on 
head-on courses was selected as the guidance method, due to the 
substantially higher velocity of the target than the AMM, and it 
provided conditions for destructing the target with the disk 
field of warhead fragments. AMM lift-off in a trajectory set by 
this method was carried out in a regular curve, the parameters 
of which were determined by the projected trajectory of the 
target. 
  The rotating mechanism of the launcher turned the guides for 
azimuth and angle of the site. Such turns placed the missile, at 
the time of the launch, in a plane traversing the launcher and 
tangent to the ballistic missile target trajectory at the 
proposed point of impact between the rocket and the target. 
Thereafter, the entire trajectory remained in this plane in the 
process of lift-off. 
  Originally, in view of the considerable scatter of points at 
which the warheads of ballistic missiles R-5 and R-12 fell, as 
well as considering the relatively short range of V-1000 AMM 
travel, it was proposed to create two launching positions on the 
firing range and to prepare two AMM for simultaneous launches, 
and to set the proper deviation of the launching position from 
the results of existing deviation of the target trajectory. In 
view of the substantial increase in expenses to prepare and 
carry out experiments with such arrangement of the complex, a 
solution was found with respect to optimum AMM control at the 
lift-off stage with fixed boundary conditions, which made it 
possible to preclude the need to build one of the launching 
positions. 
  The choice of law for control, types of feedback in the 
autopilot and their parameters, method of limiting AMM overloads 
[or accelerations], was made on the basis of analysis of dynamic 
characteristics of homing with use of frequency methods and 
modeling. 
  As for methods of analysis and engineering synthesis of 
guidance systems used at that time, due credit must be given to 
the book ``Theory of Tracking Systems,'' edited by H. James, N. 
Nichols, and R. Phillips, which appeared in the USSR in the late 
1940s and was published in Russian in 1951. The frequency 
methods of calculating the parameters of tracking systems 
developed in this book were used in designing practice for a 
long time, and have not lost their significance to this day, in 
spite of the unquestionable effectiveness and popularity of 
modern methods of statistical theory of systems for control of 
states in space. 
  As a result, an original design of a guidance system was 
designed and executed, with one feedback in the AMM 
stabilization circuit responding to signals from the damping 
gyroscope, and a developed direct control circuit, in which 
problems of formation of the law of control, stabilization of 
coefficient of amplification of the control circuit, limiting 
AMM overloads, input of the necessary differentiating effect 
(phase advance) to provide for stability of a second-order 
astatic system were solved with algorithms. All these algorithms 
were programmed in the M-40 control computer. 
  This design of the guidance system design made it possible 
to 
avoid many of the flaws inherent in the traditional design for 
GAAM control, where several of the above problems were solved 
using resources in the missile. 
  The appearance of computers in the guidance system, as a 
dynamic element in the AMM control circuit, put a new task to 
developers: analysis of the effect of computers on dynamics of 
guidance systems. This was solved analytically using the 
frequency method. The obtained formulas for transfer functions 
corresponding to linear algorithms for processing information 
about the target and AMM, and algorithms for AMM control made it 
possible to analyze the dynamics of the guidance system with 
consideration of computers, and to obtain a number of important 
recommendations on choice of guidance system parameters. 
  Refinement of the guidance system of V-1000 AMM was carried 
out by modeling processes of guiding AMM to a target. This was 
done in two stages: first, a technological model executed with 
an analog machine and later on a complex digital-analog 
simulation stand. Studies of different aspects of guidance 
system dynamics with actual control equipment were carried out 
on dynamic stands of Research Institute 2 of the Ministry of the 
Aviation Industry (now called GosNIIAS [expansion unknown]), 
with the participation of the staff of this institute. 
  Modeling on the analog part of the complex stand produced 
simulators of the main elements of the system (lift-off and 
guidance radars, station for command transmission, earth-missile 
radio links) and an anti-missile missile with onboard radio 
equipment and autopilot, and on the digital part of the standard 
M-40 computer, programmed firing guidance system algorithms. 
Such a stand was developed for the first time in the practice of 
designing and refining guidance systems of guided rockets. 
  Subsequently, development of complex simulation stands of 
this type, with execution of a firing program and simulated 
environment on a standard computer of the firing complex gained 
a firm place in refinement of GAAM and AMM, and gave an 
additional impetus to development of experimental theoretical 
methodology for testing rocket armament systems. 
  Simulation on the complex stand made it possible to check 
the 
validity of chosen guidelines for designing the guidance system, 
define the parameters of its main elements, and assess the 
dynamic characteristics of the guidance system, including 
precision of guiding AMM toward a target. 
  In order to carry out full-scale tests of the guidance 
system 
for the V-1000 AMM, which was done on the newly built testing 
range in Sary-Shagan, a new technology was developed in the 
range complex of system A devices, that conformed to the very 
complicated nature of this complex. In particular, in addition 
to traditional independent launches of GAAM upon command 
programmed on the missile and launches in a closed control 
circuit and open control circuit upon stepped commands from the 
computer, relayed to the missile over a radio link, launches of 
AMM in a closed control circuit according to preset, fixed 
lift-off and guidance trajectories, model launches of an AMM 
simulator programmed on a standard computer toward an actual 
target in the firing cycle of the complex. 
  Input of new intermediate stages in the full-scale tests 
made 
it possible to apply to a greater extent of the principle of 
going from the simple to the complicated, which is inherent in 
the most effective methodology for refining complex engineering 
systems. As a result, it was possible within a rather short time 
to refine on the range the guidance system and firing complex as 
a whole, in spite of their great complexity. Such methodology 
for full-scale tests found broad application as well in testing 
next generation guidance systems. 
  The guidance system characteristics obtained in planning and 
refining the complex provided for interception of the heads of 
ballistic targets with sufficient precision for testing purposes. 
  Concurrently with development of the guidance system, work 
was done to produce a new type of firing equipment. Considering 
the experimental data obtained on the effect of fragments on 
warheads of ballistic missiles, the technical assignment was 
made to develop a fragmentation warhead for the V-1000 AMM. The 
method of detonation upon command was executed in the complex of 
an algorithm and equipment to put out commands for activating 
and detonating fragmentation warheads. The same equipment of 
system A used in the guidance system was used here. In 
developing the algorithm for activation, the main task was to 
determine precisely the moment of encounter of the target with 
the strike field of the fragmentation warhead of an activated 
AMM. The radius of the strike field was determined on the basis 
of obtaining maximum probability of destructing a warhead in a 
given launch. Since the activation and detonation commands for 
the fragmentation warhead were irreversible, special attention 
was given to protecting the detonation channel against 
malfunctions in the program and equipment involved in this task. 
  We must mention that much attention was devoted to recording 
and processing data obtained when refining programs in all types 
of work, including firing launches. Study of this information 
made it possible not only to find errors in algorithms and 
programs, but also to find ways to enhance firing effectiveness. 
Thus, it was noted that guidance of AMM toward a target and 
impact with the target usually occurred with noticeable dynamic 
guidance errors. In addition to steps to improve the guidance 
system, it was proposed to determine the optimum radius of the 
strike field, not only on the basis of a priori data 
(statistical characteristics of guidance errors), but also with 
consideration of dynamic errors h[.sub]dyn[/] 
occurring and extending to the point of impact between the AMM 
and target. Use of these elements of adaptation in the 
detonation channel made it possible, on the average, to improve 
firing effectiveness appreciably. This suggestion was followed 
by the time of the first firing launch. 
  3. Results of full-scale tests. Firing 
effectiveness. The first firing launch of an AMM armed with 
a fragmentation warhead took place on 24 November 1960. 
  The AMM was armed with a fragmentation warhead designed by 
A. 
V. Voronov. In this launch, the warhead of an R-5 ballistic 
missile was not damaged. The guidance error was too close to the 
established strike radius R[.sub]o[/], and for 
this reason 2-3 months were spent working on improving guidance 
precision. On the other hand, it was decided to use in the 
future a new fragmentation warhead designed by K. I. Kozorezov. 
It differed from the first type of fragmentation warhead in that 
it had a different type of destruct element. 
  On 4 March 1961, for the first time in the world system A 
intercepted and destructed the warhead of an R-12 ballistic 
missile flying at a speed of more than 3 km/s. 
  The fact that destruction occurred was recorded by equipment 
on the firing range for external trajectory measurements. 
Examination of warhead fragments scattered beyond the normal 
zone for falling warheads confirmed visual observations, 
according to which warhead destruction occurred at an altitude 
of about 10 km. 
  Subsequently, V-1000 AMM were launched that were aimed at 
R-5 
and R-12 ballistic missile warheads with a more developed system 
of recording damage to warheads, including damage to the warhead 
charge proper. 
  Direct damage to ballistic missile warheads was recorded in 
two AMM launches aimed at R-5 and three aimed at R-12 ballistic 
missiles. 
  Frequency of strikes obtained in all launches was close to a 
priori estimates. 
  To further enhance precision and effectiveness of firing, a 
modification was made in the V-1000 with a heat homer. For this 
AMM variant, an arming system was developed which included a 
guided fragmentation warhead with directional action and an 
original warhead control system, i.e., turning, change in 
response to misses in width of strike field sector and 
detonation time. The control system was installed in the 
missile computer operating on information from TGS [telegraph 
stations?] and from earth over the detonation channel. Several 
such AMM were built; however, trials were unfortunately not 
completed for nontechnical reasons. 
  On the whole, the full-scale tests of system A revealed that 
it is possible in principle to intercept and destruct rather 
effectively the heads of ballistic missiles. 
  Interception and destruction of ballistic targets not only 
was very important from the military engineering point of view, 
but also had political significance, since even a single 
ballistic target was considered an absolute weapon at that time. 
However, the event did not elicit an appropriate reaction in the 
country. There were sufficient reasons for this. In part, it 
happened because work on PRO in those years was very classified, 
partly because the administrative circles of the military 
industrial complex were concerned with preparations for the 
first launch of a manned earth satellite in orbit, which 
happened on 12 April 1961, leaving the outstanding event in the 
history of PRO in the sidelines. 
  Nevertheless, the positive results achieved in developing 
system A opened the way for developing a PRO firing system for 
the Moscow. 
Footnotes 
  1. IZVESTIYA newspaper, 17 June 1992. 
  2. According to Kolmogorov's ideas, PRO firing effectiveness 
was characterized primarily by probability of 
damaging the target. 
  3. For example, in essence the solid circular impact zone 
with strike-ready destructive elements was used in the 
well-known NOE [expansion unknown] experiment in the 
United States in 1984. 
  4. It should perhaps be noted that these calculations were 
among the first to be made at the KB-1 using the first 
Strela [Arrow] computer at this design office and among 
the first in the country. 


