Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Mihailo Nicota: "Two Singles on Turbulent </F>
Kupa River"] 
  [Text] Do you think that war might break out between 
Croatia and Slovenia? And if such a war were to break out, do 
you think we could win? Some two months ago the Ljubljana 
weekly MLADINA conducted a public opinion poll asking its 
readership these two questions. A large majority of Slovenes 
who took part in the poll, some 57.5 percent of them, do not 
think that a war between the two neighboring countries could 
break out, but as many as 31.8 percent fear that it might yet 
happen. However, while answering the second question a majority 
of respondents, though not an absolute majority, that is 48 
percent, believed in Slovenia's victory, while only 13 percent 
believed the opposite! 
  Obviously, given the choice between realism and patriotism, 
the majority of Slovenes chose the latter, although it seems 
that in Slovenia, at least officially, just as in Croatia 
somewhat earlier, there now prevails the phase of a return to 
reality. To be more precise: In Slovenia one notices a strange 
discrepancy between the official policy of the coalition 
government, which is endeavoring to be objective, realistic, and 
moderate, and the Slovene media, which, with the assistance of 
some right-wing opposition politicians, are maintaining the high 
temperature with a sort of anti-Croatian campaign, full of 
exaggerations and fabrications. 
  Therefore one has to keep in mind that MLADINA conducted the 
poll with this campaign in full swing. Its climax seems to be 
the recently announced results of another public opinion poll, 
in which the Slovene respondents said for the first time that 
the Croats were their greatest enemies, and that a major 
disaster threatened them from the Croats, rather than -- the 
Serbs! Such statements are very well supplemented by the 
threats delivered by Zmago Jelincic, the leader of a nationalist 
party, not only at rallies and through the media, but also in 
the Slovene parliament. Recently he even announced in Zagreb's 
GLOBUS a forthcoming war between the Croats and Slovenes. Of 
course, Zmago the celebrity (his name translated means "victor") 
throws no doubts whatsoever upon the Slovene victory in the war 
that will be started by the Croats, since, as Jelincic 
definitely knows, a group of experts in the Croatian Army is 
planning an attack on Slovenia! It is true that the nationalist 
madness sometimes knows no limits, but it is also certain that 
the insane campaign carried out by some Slovene media, as well 
as the performances of some politicians, do not reflect the real 
disposition of public opinion, and particularly the official 
policy on Croatia. Nevertheless, the fact is: Croato-Slovene 
relations have been through many turbulent phases of rises and 
falls. 
  In short, in two and half years, first in the period up to 
25 
July 1991, when both Croatia and Slovenia declared themselves 
sovereign and independent states, after which they recognized 
each other as such, and then after that historic date, those 
relations evolved from the initial high temperature, euphoria, 
and romantic phase, when their close future was seen as joint, 
through sudden estrangement and open disputes, up to a near 
freezing point, verging on animosity. So, those relations, 
instead of being friendly and neighborly, are now rather 
encumbered with mistrust and disputes. 
  At the beginning of the way into independence -- in the 
struggle to crush Yugoslavia to and self-liberation, and later 
also in the first days of independence -- Croatia and Slovenia 
gave the impression of a well-harmonized rowing crew (without a 
cox) that skillfully rowed, and dodged around dangerous 
obstacles on the Kupa, that is Kolpa [in Slovene], and the 
Sutla, that is Sotla [in Slovene], rivers (these two form the 
border between these neighboring countries). However, the crew 
fell apart, and two rowers took separate ways. Such an outcome 
was largely influenced by the Yugoslav, that is the Serbian, 
aggression, at first against Slovenia, than against Croatia, and 
finally against Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The war brought about a drastically different situation for 
the two young states: It disconnected their destinies, showed 
them the differences in their interests, and introduced more 
problems and disputes that originate from former Yugoslavia, but 
the majority of them were still prompted by the new situation, 
and the historical fact that Croatia and Slovenia had become 
independent states. That imposed an obligation and 
responsibility on the newly constituted authorities to settle 
independently the many difficult problems that are not identical 
in both states. Those problems are certainly much more 
difficult in Croatia because of the consequences of the war. 
  Unfortunately, Slovenia failed to show enough 
understanding, patience, and solidarity with these problems, 
while Croatia, perhaps unjustifiably, expected too much from its 
neighbor. So that in the course of 1992 Croato-Slovene relations 
dramatically cooled and deteriorated. This last year, 1993, in 
which various negotiations on different levels were held, is 
also over, but still it did not bring about any more 
considerable steps forward, although on several occasions it 
appeared that a dramatic turn toward an improvement of relations 
in general, as well as on individual points, was almost at hand. 
  This refers to the following event: After the meetings 
between Slovene President Kucan and his Croatian counterpart 
Tudjman (on the hill of Brdo kod Kranja in October 1992), 
between [foreign ministers] Lojze Peterle and Skrabalo (in the 
town of Otocec na Krki in February 1993), and between Peterle 
and Mate Granic (in Bizeljsko, October 1993), both sides were 
issuing quite optimistic statements to the effect that almost 
all the problems had been solved, and that the signing of a 
whole series of agreements would follow that were quite 
important for the establishment of neighborly and friendly 
relations. However, on each of the three occasions everything 
stopped. One gets the impression, at least from a brief insight 
in the development of mutual relations, that in 1993 no 
considerable progress came about. Does that mean that the past 
year was yet another lost year? 
  This first impression is deceptive, however. The worst and 
most critical period seems to have been surmounted: The 
precipitating decline of Croat-Slovene relations has been 
halted, and they have entered a phase of "a return to reality." 
The two individuals on the Kupa and Sutla rivers will probably 
never form a rowing team again, but now they are at least trying 
not to disturb the water, and to row without colliding with each 
other or capsizing. Anglers and swimmers on the Croatian bank 
of the Kupa River can be at ease again: For the time being they 
do not have to fear that the former's bait would hit another 
part of the river, or that the latter would not be allowed to 
swim across it. The two individuals on the Kupa and Sutla 
rivers are quite well personified by two people with whom we 
talkedh: Matija Malesic, Slovene ambassador to Zagreb, and 
Smiljan Simac, aide of the Croatian foreign minister, who is 
responsible for relations with European countries. Both of 
them, in separate talks with DANAS, tried to cool the game down, 
and to keep the ball somewhat lower. To the assessment that the 
1993 was yet another lost year, that nothing remarkable happened 
in Croato-Slovene relations, both Malesic and Simac 
categorically denied it: No, that is not true! 
  On that occasion they gave two pieces of evidence that 
relations are still improving. First, so far a total of seven 
agreements, contracts, protocols, and annexes have been signed. 
It is not so striking a number, and they do not deal with any 
of more important issues that are still being disputed and are 
still muddying the waters of the Kupa and Sutla rivers. Yet, it 
is proof that the neighbors have finally accepted the principle 
that problems are to be solved step by step. And that is a more 
reliable way than dealing with all the problems at once, in 
packages. Or to put it symbolically: The two individuals are 
harmonizing their courses. 
  All the more since, second, the meetings on different 
political and expert levels are constantly taking place, at 
which, also step by step, the sides are trying to remove 
obstacles and reach agreements. Reportedly, several important 
agreements have already been prepared: On cultural cooperation, 
employment, health security, and railroad communications. For 
that reason both Malesic and Simac speak of a standstill in 
mutual relations, rather than a deterioration. Still, they dare 
not make any forecasts when a radical breakthrough from that 
standstill could be made. Obviously, the existing disputes are 
still difficult and there are no considerable signs of optimism, 
but, therefore, realistic thinking seems to be firmly 
established. 
<H5>  [Box, pp 38-39] </H5>
  In the entire history of Croat-Slovene relations the 
toughest 
realist, with traces of pessimism, seems to be Dr. Radovan 
Pavic, an eminent geo-strategist and geopolitician, who saw 
Slovenia as early as last spring as a potential barrier to 
Croatia's land connections with Central, northern, and Western 
Europe. This professor from Zagreb believes that Croatia and 
Slovenia, in view of their economic structures and geographic 
positions, can be nothing but permanent rivals, even after a 
possible settlement of the majority of problems is made. Still, 
according to Pavic, only good will can reduce all of that to the 
most civil relations possible. 
  And, as we have seen, good will exists on both sides. From 
the brief insight into the documents prepared by Zagreb and 
Ljubljana for the new round of negotiations, perhaps even for 
those at the highest level, one gets the impression that a 
considerable number of problems in mutual relations have been 
surmounted. Still, several disputed issues are still hampering 
relations. Those are territorial-border, economic-proprietary, 
and communications issues regarding the territory between the 
Slovene coastal town of Piran and the nuclear power station of 
Krsko. 
  The bay of Piran. The border disputes have been settled in 
95 percent of the cases, mostly by following the principle of 
natural borders (like the Kupa and Sutla rivers), and the 
so-called land registry districts. One dispute has remained 
unsettled: the destiny of the bay of Piran. Or more precisely, 
the sea border is disputed. Croatia has accepted that the 
border along the St. Odorik Channel at the mouth of the Dragonja 
River should be determined according to the international 
practice of equidistance. However, in that case sovereignty 
over the bay is shared, and Slovenia loses the approach to the 
open seas. Although Croatia is offering a whole range of 
privileges regarding shipping and fishing, the Slovenes would 
like to have control over the entire bay, as they did in the 
times of the former Yugoslavia. 
  The Sentilj-Zagreb highway. That route is of vital 
importance for Croatia, as well as for some other European 
countries. It should be constructed as soon as possible in 
cooperation with Slovenia, given the foreign (Austrian) 
investment. However, the Slovenes consider their priority to be 
the route from Koper via Ljubljana via Celje to the Hungarian 
border, and for the time being they are not likely to satisfy 
Croatian interests. On the other hand, Zagreb is linking the 
issue with the settlement of the dispute over the Piran bay. 
  Economic and proprietary-legal relations. A whole string of 
unsettled proprietary problems is tightly bound up with the 
standstill and even decline of economic and business 
cooperation. In just one year, for instance, Croatian exports to 
Slovenia have dropped by 35 percent, whereas Slovene exports to 
Croatia have dropped by 25 percent. For such a situation one of 
the factors responsible is the disputed method of payment in 
exchange between these two countries, but agreement has also 
been made difficult by many unsettled proprietary-legal 
relations, or to be more precise, the unclear destiny of 
state-ownership, from the Slovene resorts on the Adriatic coast 
to Ljubljanska Banka. 
  The Krsko nuclear power station. Slovenia has recently 
dismissed 19 Croatian employees, and threatened the suspension 
of the delivery of power from Krsko to Croatia, because Zagreb 
has not yet paid its debts. However, the Slovene Government 
also owes money to Krsko, whereas the ownership of Krsko is 
shared between Slovenia and Croatia in a 50-50 relationship. 
The dispute might end up in the International Court. 

