BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Bart Stam: "Lower Costs or Higher Return Is the </F>
Dilemma for Solar Energy""] 
  [Text] Amsterdam -- While a large European conference on 
photovoltaic solar energy (PV) will take place in Amsterdam next 
week, many countries are wrestling with the question of how to 
proceed from here. More funds for research and development into 
improved solar cells, or a reduction in costs of the present PV 
systems? The Netherlands is betting on both horses. 
Photovoltaic solar energy has the best credentials for becoming 
the most important durable source of energy in the next century. 
In contrast to wind turbines, for instance, there is enough 
space in heavily populated countries to be able to mount solar 
cells on roofs and walls of buildings and houses. This is why 
Japan is attempting to have 70,000 homes fitted with a PV system 
on their roofs by the turn of the century. 
  The choice with which many industrial countries are 
struggling is: should we first improve the yield from solar 
cells, or should we reduce the high costs of the present PV 
systems by improving production? Several years ago, Germany 
chose the second option, but it has not turned out to be a 
useful as originally thought. The ambitious `Thousand Roofs 
Project' has sadly produced very little new knowledge; in fact, 
each time the same information was obtained from 2,250 separate 
projects. 
  Unlike Germany, the Netherlands has not yet made a definite 
choice between the two options. The National Research Program 
into Photovoltaic Solar Energy (NOZ- PV) specifically states 
that both higher cell yields and market development are 
essential in order to make PV competitive in the long run with 
fossil fuels. 
  An important part of the congress in Amsterdam (11-5 April) 
is concerned with the technology. In the short term, it would 
appear that the leading part has been reserved for solar cells 
made from (semi) crystalline silicon. In the Netherlands, R&amp;S 
Renewable Energy Systems and the ECN (the Dutch Energy Research 
Center) are the two most important bodies as far as R&amp;D is 
concerned. 
  After the turn of the century, cheaper thin film solar cells 
made of amorphous silicon and polycrystalline silicon will be 
introduced. The highest priority is without any doubt amorphous 
silicon. Japan is leading the field in this area, but the 
University of Utrecht is also making an important contribution 
to international research and development. At the moment the 
University of Utrecht is researching the so-called tandem cell 
(two cells, one on top of the other), with a return of 9.5 
percent. 
  Completely different from the above-mentioned types is the 
organic solar cell. Thanks to the Agricultural University of 
Wageningen, international skepticism about the possibilities of 
this solar cell has largely disappeared. 
  In the long term, that is to say by the period after 2010, 
solar cells must be so far advanced technologically that they 
can compete with conventional energy sources. Cells with very 
high yields of more than 30 percent are therefore now needed. 
This is where the so-called III/V solar cells come in, where 
Netherlands research is concentrating on germanium substrates. 
  PV applications in consumer electronics are slowly becoming 
more common. The same applies for applications where no 
electricity network is available. For garden houses, 
houseboats, drinking water pumps and light buoys, PV systems are 
becoming economically attractive. 
  PV is still, however, far too expensive for the present 
electricity supply. Yet the United States and Japan in 
particular are working on larger demonstration projects in which 
the accent lies on applications of PV systems in houses and 
buildings. 
  On a smaller scale the Netherlands is also active. Novem 
[Netherlands Association of Energy and the Environment] , ECN, 
and R&amp;S, together with four energy companies, have prepared a 
plan for the slow introduction of PV into the Netherlands energy 
supply. According to the plan, by 1996 a total of 1.3 MW 
[Megawatt] of network-linked systems should be installed on the 
roofs of between 500 and 750 houses. The capacity will rise to 
about 240 MW only between the years 2000 and 2010. The largest 
projects which are being prepared at the moment will take place 
in Amsterdam (66 houses) and Amersfoot (400 houses). 

