Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by FRG Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel: ``The </F>
Concept of `Extended Security'''] 
  [Text] Europe stands at the begining of a new era. With 
the decisions that we are making now in a period of upheaval and 
transition we will determine the political structures far into 
the next millennium. After the end of the East-West conflict, 
in which, as Raymond Aron said, peace was impossible and war 
improbable, the point is to make war impossible and peace the 
reality. Our goal must be a lasting and just peace order in 
Europe, which brings peace, stability, and security to all 
Europeans and, at the same time, safeguards democracy and human 
rights. 
  Since 1989, a revolution of security policy has taken place. 
The movement of the states in Central and Eastern Europe and of 
the former Soviet Union toward democracy, rule-of-law state, and 
market economy is making progress, but it has not yet become 
irreversible; the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact took place not 
quite three years ago; the pressure, with which the former 
Warsaw Pact states want to get into NATO and into the European 
Community, is rising; defense strategies, military doctrines, 
operation concepts: All this must be thought over once again. 
  However, at the latest since the outbreak of the combat 
actions in the former Yugoslavia, we know that the classical 
scenario of threat in Europe has not been replaced with general 
European peace. We are facing new risks: risks of instability, 
of the collapse of domestic order, ethnic conflicts, chauvinist 
claims to power, and nationalist myths. The challenges of 
poverty and hunger, of nuclear disasters a la Chernobyl, the 
proliferation of mass destruction weapons, potential mass 
migration movements, worldwide drug trade, and internationally 
organized crime require responses that no state can provide on 
its own anymore. 
  Today, security can less than ever be created in a national 
solo action; at the same time, security cannot be defined in 
purely military terms anymore. We need a comprehensive security 
policy approach, which unites political, economic, and military 
elements in a solid concept. Such a concept of ``extended 
security,'' as I have called it, cannot end at the classical 
Alliance border. It requires, in particular from us Germans, a 
complete revision of thinking. In a radically changed Europe, 
in a quickly changing world, Germany must become an export 
country also as regards security policy in the future -- our 
interests require this! We must use the unique opportunity for 
peace in Europe. 
  However, this opportunity does not lie in a militarization 
of 
foreign policy. On the contrary: Priority is given to solving 
conflicts by political means; our security policy must be a 
security policy of prevention, in which early recognition and 
preventive diplomacy are key concepts. However, the old logic 
of deterrence also applies to the effectiveness of preventive 
diplomacy. Crossing the threshold toward the use of force is 
prevented most easily if the aggressor must expect the use of 
superior force in return. This means: So as not being forced 
to fight, one must be able to fight. Also after the end of the 
East-West conflict, peace cannot be ensured lastingly without 
the possibility of using armed forces if necessary. Therefore, 
we continue to need functioning and democratically anchored 
armed forces. They are an indispensable element of a preventive 
security policy. 
  The establishment of the future security architecture is an 
all- European task. All of Europe must be integrated in this 
network. No new trenches must be torn up. A simple shifting of 
the current Alliance borders is not sufficient in any case. We 
need a network of multidimensional and differentiated 
interlacement, which integrates all participating states, does 
not isolate anyone, and takes the respective specific interests 
and abilities into consideration. 
  What are the elements of the concept of ``extended 
security''? 
  We need the United Nations as a legal basis and political 
legitimation for our actions. We must develop the CSCE into an 
area of collective security. European and global efforts for 
disarmament and arms control must be continued energetically. 
We need NATO with its dual approach, so as to keep the 
remaining military potentials under political control on the one 
hand and to support and accelerate the domestic transformation 
processes of the former Warsaw Pact states on the other. And we 
must gradually push ahead the European Union's ability to act on 
security policy. 
  1. After the end of the bipolar world order and of the 
blockade of the Security Council, the United Nations is facing a 
historical turning point. Today, it has the opportunity to 
become mankind's central guardian of peace and efficiently carry 
out its guardian function for the benefit of international law 
and human rights. This does not mean trusting with naive 
optimism that the UN Charter will always be observed by everyone 
in the future. However, what would be the alternative? If the 
United Nations does not intervene in cases such as Somalia, 
where state authority and order had collapsed completely and 
hundreds of thousands were facing death by starvation, who else 
should do it? Therefore, it was so important for the Federal 
Government to participate in the peace mission in Somalia. 
However: The United Nations has hit the limits of its 
capacity with its peace missions. Here, too, the subsidiary 
principle is valid: The United Nations needs support by 
regional agreements. In the area between Vancouver and 
Vladivostok, the CSCE can take over this task. Military 
capacities must also be contributed to this network. NATO has 
stated its readiness to implement UN peacekeeping measures. 
  At this year's General Assembly, I emphatically came out in 
favor of strengthening the United Nations as regards 
peacekeeping measures. The concept of ``stand-by forces,'' 
which was suggested by the secretary general, should be put into 
practice and also include civilian components, such as election 
helpers or police forces. In order to better prepare the 
blue-helmets for their missions, I suggested that the United 
Nations should do more coordination, work out common training 
guidelines, and establish its own training capacities. 
  A policy, which is based on the concept of ``extended 
security,'' presupposes unlimited German participation in 
safeguarding peace on the basis of the UN Charter. That is why 
it is so important that that we finally establish the 
constitutional bases for the use of German armed forces. 
However, even after the juridical clarification, every specific 
mission will depend on the fulfillment of political criteria. 
Thus, we will always have to ask whether a political concept is 
available for solving the conflict and whether the use of 
military means is suitable to contribute to that; whether the 
possibilities of a peaceful solution to the conflict have been 
exhausted; whether our interests and our values justify 
incurring a military risk; whether there is a justifiable 
relation between the price that we might have to pay and the 
potential success. Here, too, the primacy of policy must be 
applied. The application of military force must always be just 
the last resort. In the future, too, the German contribution to 
peace will have to be primarily of a political and economic 
nature and not of a military nature. The culture of restraint 
suits us Germans well. 
  2. The CSCE is the only all-European institution that 
comprises all states in the cooperation area from Vancouver and 
Vladivostok as equal members. Its basic principles--the 
renunciation of violence, respect for human rights and the right 
to self-determination, and the commitment to democracy and 
rule-of-law state principles--have contributed to overcoming the 
division of Europe and of Germany. It is to the credit of the 
CSCE network, that there never was a serious danger of military 
conflicts during the period of upheaval in 1989-90. 
  The CSCE, with its comprehensive approach, corresponds to a 
particular degree to the concept of ``extended security.'' From 
the very beginning, it defined security not only in purely 
military terms but embedded it in the overall relations, 
including the issues of human rights, democracy, and economic 
development. The focal issue of the ``new'' CSCE must be the 
early recognition, prevention, and peaceful solution of 
conflicts. The CSCE is called upon to prevent fires, it cannot 
itself act as the fire brigade. 
  In order to further expand the abilities of the CSCE and 
facilitate a speedy reaction in cases of crises, I have 
suggested a number of more far-reaching measures, regarding 
which the CSCE Foreign Ministers' Council adopted specific 
resolutions in Rome on 1 December 1993. Thus, in Vienna, a 
Permanent CSCE Committee will be established, which can act as a 
permanent organ in its own right, as well as a new, efficient 
CSCE Secretariat. The office of High Commissioner for National 
Minorities will be strengthened financially and materially. The 
Warsaw Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights will 
be used more strongly for coordination in developing democratic 
structures and in the early recognition of human rights 
violations. 
  The issue of peacekeeping will play an increasing role in 
the 
sphere of the CIS states. This, too, was on the agenda in Rome. 
Georgia, Moldova, and Tajikistan are topical cases. Peace 
missions in this region cannot be Russia's monopoly. Russia 
itself wants its missions to be legitimated by the CSCE. This 
is also in the interest of the other member states. However, 
these missions must be examined thoroughly in every individual 
case. They can be endorsed only if they clearly fulfill certain 
conditions--in particular the observation of international law 
and CSCE principles, impartiality, agreement by all parties, 
being embedded in efforts for political solutions, coordination 
with and the duty to report to the CSCE, which must itself be 
involved, as far as possible, by sending its own observers. 
  As a regional institution in the sense of Chapter VIII of 
the 
UN Charter, the CSCE can and should first try to solve conflicts 
within its sphere of application peacefully and upon its own 
responsibility. As was decided at the Helsinki summit in July 
1992, this includes sending its own peace missions. For this 
purpose, the CSCE may resort to organizations such as NATO or 
the Western European Union [WEU]. 
  In the Vienna CSCE forum for security cooperation, a code of 
behavior regarding questions of military-political security is 
being worked out. It is oriented not only toward the further 
fencing in of military power, it also offers the opportunity to 
prepare elements of a system of collective security in Europe. 
In my view, the goal should be an agreement, in which the 
participating states commit themselves to jointly appealing to 
the UN Security Council in case one member of the CSCE family 
disturbs peace and jointly apply the resulting decisions. The 
commitment to act against those who disturb peace should also 
include those institutions, which can be assigned the 
implementation of peace missions, that is, specifically NATO and 
WEU. 
  3. Our efforts in disarmament and arms control must be 
continued. Not only because the arms race continues in many 
parts of the world and the military budgets continue to rise. 
The elimination of the weapons arsenal, which dates back to the 
Cold War period, requires our full dedication. Thus, there are 
about 40,000 tonnes of chemical weapons in Russia, which must be 
destroyed in line with the agreement on chemical weapons. In 
addition, there are more than 25,000 warheads, to whose 
destruction Russia committed itself in the two START treaties 
and in unilateral statements. This process of destruction will 
take at least a decade and will devour sums amounting to 
billions. 
  a) First of all, there is the observation of the obligations 
of disarmament that have been incurred. This applies, in 
particular, to the CFE Treaty, which envisages the destruction 
of 50,4000 weapons systems by the end of 1995, that is mainly 
tanks, artillery, combat aircraft and helicopters, and whose 
implementation is making good progress. Later wishes for 
modification must not lead to a revision of the treaty itself. 
The unlimited implementation of the START package with the two 
START treaties and the follow-up stipulations of the Lisbon 
Protocol must not be delayed any longer. The ratification of 
START I, which has been carried out by Ukraine now only under 
certain conditions, is not sufficient. In talks with the 
Ukrainian Government and, most recently, at the CSCE Council 
meeting in Rome, I have repeatedly advocated that the Ukrainian 
Government should observe its obligations arising from the 
Lisbon Protocol and join the Nonproliferation Treaty as a 
nuclear-free state. This would make the path toward 
international cooperation considerably easier for Ukraine. 
  b) The danger of the proliferation of mass destruction 
weapons gives reason for utmost concern. Therefore, the 
nonproliferation system must be comprehensively strengthened. 
As a country, which gave up all mass destruction means at an 
early time and permanently, Germany has a special legitimation 
to call for progress in this matter. On the basis of this 
responsibility, I am advocating a particularly active 
nonproliferation policy. My proposals on this matter can be 
summarized in 10 points: 1. universal membership in the 
Nonproliferation Treaty as well as in conventions on biological 
and chemical weapons; 2. unlimited extension of the 
Nonproliferation Treaty in 1995; 3. expansion and utilization 
of the CSCE as a model of regional nonproliferation policy; 4. 
political strategies for the prevention of ``nuclear 
contagion''; 5. expansion of global cooperation in export 
control; 6. international armament aid for destroying mass 
destruction weapons; 7. establishment of an international 
plutonium regime; 8. introduction of a nuclear weapons registry 
at the United Nations; 9. a comprehensive nuclear test ban 
agreement; and 10. coercive measures by the United Nations as a 
last resort against proliferation on the basis of a 
corresponding mandate granted by the Security Council. 
  In particular the reliable and environmentally compatible 
abolition of the mass destruction weapons in Russia and in the 
other CIS republics is in Germany's direct interest. Since 
these states need both financial and technological aid, the 
Federal Government supported this process at an early time with 
a policy oriented toward the long term. For this purpose, it 
has concluded an agreement with the Russian Federation on the 
abolition of nuclear and chemical weapons and has made 10 
million German marks available for this purpose this year alone. 
In a framework agreement with Ukraine, too, we have declared 
our readiness to provide disarmament aid. However, this 
disarmament aid must be further expanded and increased. 
  c) Arms control must not exclude special regional problems, 
such as the ones in Southeastern Europe for instance. 
Therefore, we have taken the initiative to discuss with our 
partners concepts of arms control policy for the Balkan region, 
which should be implemented within the framework of the CSCE and 
should be included in the current efforts of the peace process 
of the former Yugoslavia. Proceeding from confidence-building 
and stabilizing measures, a reduction, limitation, and 
restriction of the armed forces of all successor states of the 
former Yugoslavia should be striven for. 
  4. NATO, too, is facing the task of examining, adjusting, 
and supplementing its role. First steps have already been 
taken. Others will follow at the forthcoming NATO summit at the 
beginning of next year. The NATO ministers' meeting and the 
meeting of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council on 2 and 3 
December have established good preconditions for that. One 
thing is clear: For the European security architecture and our 
German interests, the preservation of the central functions of 
the Alliance, of the protection it provides, and of its 
guarantees is as important as the close transatlantic ties. The 
presence of the United States in Europe is an indispensable 
element of a stable peace order all over Europe. 
  With the goal of a Partnership for Peace, the security 
policy 
cooperation between the European and American members of the 
Alliance is to be extended toward Central and Eastern Europe. 
As a first step, the Alliance will, as I have demanded for 
months, offer cooperation and consultation agreements to 
non-members from Central and Eastern Europe as well as Russia, 
Ukraine, and also other CIS states. This is to develop into a 
network of close cooperation relations, which are tailored to 
the respective partner -- a network that is to be the expression 
of closer security policy ties at present and a preliminary 
stage for potential membership in the future. 
  With the expansion of the North Atlantic Cooperation 
Council, 
which I have also proposed, the Alliance will set another sign 
of opening up toward the east. Then the Cooperation Council 
will no longer be just a dialogue forum but will develop into an 
institution, within the framework of which armed forces in East 
and West could begin to plan and exercise joint peace missions. 
This is one of the main reasons why the expansion by the 
neutral and nonaligned states, such as Sweden, Finland, and 
Austria, which I have suggested, is useful and necessary. 
  The security, which the Alliance ensures for its members 
toward the inside and toward the outside, has the effect of a 
magnet all over the CSCE area. Therefore, the forthcoming NATO 
summit should affirm the Alliance's basic readiness to open up 
toward new members. A partnership of NATO with the Eastern 
neighbors must, however, not lead to the isolation of individual 
European states. Therefore, a controlled and gradual opening of 
the Euro-Atlantic institutions toward the East should make it 
possible not only for the Central and East European states but 
also for Russia, Ukraine, and other states of the former Soviet 
Union to enter a strategic partnership with NATO. We must not 
alarm others with our efforts to give some states a feeling of 
greater security. This applies, above all, also in view of the 
latest developments in Russia. We must continue our policy of 
supporting the reform forces without any restrictions, 
contribute to making Russia's path toward democratic structures 
irreversible, and promote Russian foreign policy,which is 
oriented toward integration in the international community of 
states. 
  5. The European Union and the European defense and security 
identity, which is to be achieved through it, are a constituent 
element of a concept of ``extended security.'' With the 
expansion of the WEU as the defense policy arms of the European 
Union, Europe accepts grater responsibility for its security and 
defense. In this connection, it is important that this policy 
is developed further in close and constant coordination with our 
North American allies. 
  The expansion of the WEU's operational capabilities is 
making 
progress: The WEU Planning Staff has been established; the 
chiefs of the general staffs meet regularly; the member states 
have named their military units that are assigned to the WEU; 
the work for intensified armament cooperation is making 
progress. The Eurocorps, which was put into operation recently, 
has now been assigned to the WEU. At the same time, it remains 
linked with the integrated command structure of NATO. With the 
monitoring measures in the Adriatic and on the Danube, the WEU 
has shown that it is not just an organization on paper. 
  The WEU, too, has a specific role in expanding cooperation 
with the states of Central and Eastern Europe. In its 
cooperation forum it cooperates with those states on security 
policy, which have prospects for becoming members in the 
European Union. Together with my French colleague, I suggested 
that these states should be offered a special status in the WEU. 
With this they are to be prepared in terms of security and 
defense policy for the future membership in the European Union. 
The WEU ministers' meeting on 22 November 1993 took up this 
German-French suggestion. 
  At their summit in Copenhagen in June 1993, the EC member 
states stressed their intention to accept the new democracies in 
Eastern Europe as members as soon as they are able to fulfill 
the political and economic obligations arising from membership. 
Until this time, practical cooperation in the fields of foreign 
policy, trade, international security, immigration, and 
environment will become increasingly closer. This process of 
transformation also contributes to increasing security. 
  Any country that joins the European Union will then also be 
a 
candidate for membership in the WEU. Today all WEU members are 
also members in NATO. New members of the European Union should, 
therefore, get access to NATO through their accession to the 
WEU. By linking membership in the WEU with membership in NATO we 
can also make sure that Europe's transatlantic anchor does not 
come loose. 
  6. It is necessary to link long-term prospects with specific 
steps. The new democracies in Central and Eastern Europe need 
signs of our solidarity. They need a clear orientation and 
visible proof of the fact that the transformation, which is 
painful for them, pays off. At the same time, Russia and 
Ukraine need assurances that they are and remain fully 
integrated in the establishment of a cooperative European 
security architecture. 
  It will be an important task of the NATO summit in January 
1994 to further develop the exist structures in the sense of the 
concept of extended security, as it has already been done at the 
ministers' meetings of NATO, the WEU, and the CSCE. I expect 
this summit to provide new stimuli, which will take us closer to 
the goal of a lasting and just peace order for Europe. 

