BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Christopher Lockwood: "Austria Sinks British </F>
Hopes of New EC Ally] 
  [Text] Brussels -- The Austrian Chancellor Herr Franz 
Vranitzky, yesterday declared himself in favour of further 
European integration, dashing British hopes of acquiring an ally 
in the struggle to curb the increasing power of Brussels when 
Austria joins the EC at the start of next year. 
  Both Mr John Major and Mr Douglas Hurd, the Foreign 
Secretary, have championed the accession of Austria and three 
Nordic countries. 
  They have stressed repeatedly the virtues of "widening" the 
EC as opposed to "deepening" it -- that is, moving further down 
the road to federalism. Mr Major has constantly presented the 
widening as a clear alternative to deepening. 
  Britain has also argued that Austria, Finland, Norway and 
Sweden will help to shift the balance of power within the EC 
away from the federalisers and towards the concept of a 
decentralised "Europe of nation states" which is the key 
principle underlying the Conservatives' Euro-election manifesto, 
to be launched on Monday. 
  Yesterday Chancellor Vranitzky begged to differ. In 
Austria's case at least, the supposed ally would appear to be 
something of a Trojan horse . 
  Herr Vranitzky said: "We do not see any need to choose 
between widening and deepening the EC. From the very beginning 
of our membership we will contribute to the process of 
deepening." 
  He said he expected Austria to approve EC membership when 
the 
country votes at a referendum on June 12, the same day as its 
Euroelection poll. The way will then be clear for it to join 
the EC on Jan 1. 
  During a visit to Brussels, Herr Vranitzky also declared 
himself in favour of an extension of the Qualified Majority 
Voting system, to cover some of the areas in which currently 
each country enjoys a right of veto. 
  "It is my firm conviction that the extension of this 
principle is necessary to give the institutions of the Union 
flexibility," he said. Institutional reform of the EC will be 
discussed at an intergovernmental conference in 1996, and 
Conservative Eurosceptics will view with horror the idea that an 
alleged new ally will be pressing for further dilution of 
national sovereignty. 
  Herr Vranitzky also pronounced himself in favour of drawing 
up a European constitution, something which Britain has not 
favoured. 
  In a calculated attack on British and German proposals that 
the EC should concentrate its energies on deregulation as a tool 
to cure Europe's economic ills, Herr Vranitzky again outlined a 
more Euro-activist position. "The crucial issues on the 
European agenda can in my view not be solved by deregulation or 
removing barriers alone, but call for a common active approach," 
he said. 
  It has suited Britain to project the new EC members as close 
to British positions on free trade, sound economics and minimal 
bureaucratic interference from Brussels; but Herr Vranitzky said 
that there was no question of his country joining such a 
"northern bloc". 
  He also registered a firm commitment to a progressive social 
policy and appeared to criticise Britain's opt-out from the 
Social Chapter of the Maastricht Treaty. It does not appear 
that, on the awkward political issues that will confront the EC 
in the next two or three years, the hand of Herr Vranitzky will 
often be raised alongside that of Mr Major. 

