CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lj. Cudomirovic: "The Money Is Going to Reserves </F>
Instead of to Loans"] 
  [Text] The decision of the National Bank of Yugoslavia 
[NBJ] to raise overnight the so-called mandatory reserve for 
dinar deposits from 10 to 15 percent (on new dinars) and from 3 
to 7 percent (on old dinars) is clumsy to say the least, and its 
consequences will have the greatest impact on production. After 
all, it was adopted in a period of what was already an 
appreciable reduction of bank liquidity, so that many who found 
themselves in an extremely unenviable situation are being 
charged with sabotaging the program by being slow to extend 
loans for production, while at the same time funds are being 
withdrawn from the accounts that are actually the only ones from 
which they can extend credits to the economy. In practical 
terms, many among them, for all practical purposes the largest 
ones, have been compelled to seek a way out either through 
premature withdrawal of credit or a forced sale of the foreign 
exchange, which they were thought to have in much greater 
quantities than the facts indicate. 
  This was all reported in yesterday's meeting of the 
Committee 
for Banking and Financial Affairs in the Serbian Economic 
Chamber, where the bankers stated their position on the most 
urgent matters of monetary policy and bank liquidity. 
  According to Dragoljub Vukosavljevic, president of Union 
Bank, the NBJ and other banks have a vital interest in the fate 
of the program for monetary reconstruction, but the higher 
liquidity of the banks is not the main culprit for the pegging 
that is being done. What is more, the figure that no less than 
27 percent of the total money supply is now in the hands of the 
public was in his opinion a much stronger reason for alarm than 
the threat to further implementation of the program represented 
by the amounts in the giro accounts of the banks. After all, 
compared to 26 March, when the banks had a total of 187 million 
dinars, by 9 April they had only 79 million dinars, and today 
they have a total of barely somewhere between 50 and 60 million, 
including the cash in cash drawers, without which they cannot 
operate. 
  In his opinion, this situation with bank liquidity and the 
most recent measure to raise the mandatory reserves, and on that 
basis withdraw no less than 30 million dinars from bank giro 
accounts, could be a severe blow to the credit financing of 
production, especially agriculture, which is right now on the 
threshold of large seasonal investments in planting operations. 
The situation is even so absurd that some of the banks will not 
be able to raise the mandatory reserves without being overdrawn. 
  Marko Steljic, president of Jugobanka (JU Bank) Joint-Stock 
Company, said the issue of whether there is a surplus of money 
in circulation or less money is the key issue whose resolution 
is being insisted on equally by both the banks and enterprise 
collectives which have already undertaken to invigorate 
production. The present level of credit financing of the economy 
(700 million dinars) is not enough, because that amount could 
only satisfy the annual needs of Jugobanka. In his opinion, 
then, the banks themselves will have to undertake urgent 
reorganization of their own business operation and reduction of 
the size of their staff, but that also applies both to the NBJ 
and all the others. 
  Zika Ilic, president of the PKB Bank, was of the opinion 
that 
the decision of the NBJ to increase the mandatory reserves was 
hasty and not backed up by a carefully studied calculation. He 
also put the quite specific question of whether this country 
needs such a large staff in the National Bank of Yugoslavia, in 
the settlement system, but also in the commercial banks 
themselves, when it is thought that no less than half of the 
staff are unnecessary. Dr. Milovan Milutinovic, chairman of the 
board and general secretary of the Association of Yugoslav 
Banks, and Milomir Spasic, president of Slavija Bank, recalled 
at the end that the NBJ also has far more delicate mechanisms 
and instruments for determining the total money supply that 
would equally satisfy both the invigoration of production 
without being an additional source of inflation and without 
affording an opportunity for the pegging of foreign exchange. In 
that connection, the bank has agreed that there is now an urgent 
need to bring various securities onto the financial scene. 

