Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Aarticle by Agata Nowakowska and Dominika Wielowieyska: </F>
"The Coalition by Night"] 
  [Text] Yesterday, at 2300, the PSL [Polish Peasant Party] 
and the SLD [Democratic Left Alliance] unexpectedly announced 
that the dispute between them was over. They want to remain in 
the coalition together until the end of the Sejm's term of 
office. They will be united in supporting the budget. 
  The leaders of both parties said that compromise was about 
"returning to the coalition agreement and reminding themselves 
of why the coalition was formed." It was formed "to promote 
Poland's development." 
  The prime minister and the leader of the SLD thanked [SLD 
official Marek] Borowski and stressed his knowledge and ability. 
"However," said Sejm Marshal Oleksy, "the prime minister is 
determined, and there is no question of Borowski's returning [as 
finance minister]." 
  Will the government pursue a less liberal economic policy 
course now that Borowski is gone? The prime minister's reply 
was: "This government's policies were not a continuation 
anyway. We have endeavored to pay more attention to the needs 
of the poorest." 
  At 2000, before the talks began, SLD leader Aleksander 
Kwasniewski said that "there is little prospect of reaching 
agreement." However, by 2300, during a break in the coalition 
talks, everyone appeared to be in excellent spirits. 
Kwasniewski and Pawlak shook hands from time to time. They 
invited journalists to have a glass of wine or vodka. Then they 
went off to continue their discussions. 
  PSL Deputy Franciszek Stefaniuk said: "It is better to 
conduct a love affair directly instead of by letter. The same 
applies to the coalition. It is better to conduct direct talks 
rather than to conduct them through the media." 
  The president, who is resting in the mountains, signed 
Borowski's resignation in the late afternoon. "I am in favor of 
presidential government," he commented. Walesa speaks to the 
prime minister on the telephone "almost daily." "I am in 
complete control," he added, raising one of his ski poles. 
<H5>  What Will the Budget Be Like? </H5>
  Speaking on Warsaw's ZET radio station yesterday evening, 
the 
prime minister gave assurances that there would be no general 
change of course with respect to economic policy. The 
government will not increase the budget deficit now that 
Borowski is gone. Yesterday the government had still not 
finished discussing Sejm commission proposals that would involve 
50 amendments to the draft budget. We learned unofficially that 
ministers had agreed to transfer money (about 4 to 5 trillion 
zlotys [Z]) from some areas of the budget to agriculture and 
social welfare, above all. They have not, however, increased 
the budget deficit, as the prime minister, among others, opposed 
that. The government rejected demands from the Agricultural 
Commission for a further Z10 trillion. 
<H5>  Is Chmielak Weaker? </H5>
  The coalition has decided but has not revealed who will 
replace the "politically deceased," as Kwasniewski quipped about 
Borowski. We have learned that two candidates have paid visits 
to the prime minister--the 46-year-old Henryk Chmielak, who was 
a PSL rival candidate to Borowski when the coalition was being 
formed, and Ireneusz Sekula, the head of the Main Customs 
Office. The former seems the more likely candidate because some 
people are of the opinion that "people who belonged to the old 
system, like Sekula," should not receive such appointments. 
  Other names that are being mentioned by journalists are 
Professor Grzegorz Kolodka (who turned down the post in 
October); Wladyslaw Baka, the former head of the National Bank 
of Poland and a member of the Polish United Workers Party from 
1958 until the end; and Cezary Stypulowski, the president of 
Handlowy Bank S.A. 
  There is speculation that Pawlak is seeking to weaken the 
post of finance minister, who has held a key role in previous 
governments. According to unconfirmed reports, the SLD wants 
Wieslaw Kaczmarek, the current minister of ownership 
transformations, to become the deputy minister with 
responsibility for economic affairs. 
<H5>  The Fears of Businessmen </H5>
  "Every day we receive telephone calls from abroad asking us 
what we think. We do not want to paint too gloomy a picture of 
the situation, but, at the same time, the situation does not 
give us a basis for painting a bright picture," says Witold 
Michalek, of the Business Center Club. 

