BFN 

<F P=106> [By Michel Cariou] </F>
  [Text] Kamembe, Rwanda, June 26 (AFP) -- Crack French 
troops in southwestern Rwanda on Saturday [25 June] set about 
ordering down roadblocks manned by Hutu militiamen accused of 
massacres and atrocities against the minority Tutsis. 
  An eight-man paratrooper team roamed the Kamembe area in a 
reconnaissance vehicle, a machine-gun -- in position and ready 
to fire -- mounted on the roof. 
  The soldiers, from France's 11th Armored Division, are part 
of the first French advance teams sent in from Zaire on Thursday 
on what Paris has said is a strictly humanitarian mission -- 
codenamed Operation Turquoise -- to protect minority Tutsis 
trapped in Hutu zones. 
  They showed no hesitation when they encountered roadblocks, 
and their "determination," as one French soldier put it, made 
Hutu militiamen understand they meant business. 
  The message was the same each time they hit a roadblock: 
"Return to your work, your fields. France is here to ensure 
your safety, the safety of all Rwandans. You must take down the 
barriers." 
  The patrols started combing the roads Friday in the 
southwest 
near the southern tip of Lake Kivu and just over the border with 
Zaire. 
  "All roadblocks held by civilians must disappear," said 
French Colonel Didier Thibaut, who heads the operation in the 
Kamembe zone. "They have no legitimacy. We only want to see 
soldiers and policemen on the road." 
  The firm tone is the same when the team questions the 
manager 
of the local airport. "What are these barrels blocking the 
runway? You think the RPF (rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front) have 
planes?" 
  When the airport manager tries to argue that there "might be 
pirate flights," the French captain's answer is short: "Get 
these out of here." 
  At another roadblock on a route parallel to Lake Kivu, the 
patrol met a civilian armed with a grenade. 
  "Hey you, are you a soldier?" a French troop demands. The 
man, clearly caught off guard, replies that he is not. 
  "Then give me that. A civilian has no business carrying a 
grenade," the French patrol orders, and the man quickly handed 
over the grenade without protest. 
  As they turned to leave, the French patrol left the man with 
a final warning: "We are going to come by here often and we 
don't want to see anyone here and no roadblocks. Understand?" 
  One paratrooper said the French patrols generally "had to 
insist" but said the Hutu militiamen were obeying orders to take 
down the barriers, if slowly, though many still remained 
Saturday. 
  France is committed to sending 2,500 soldiers to take part 
in 
the UN-authorized military intervention, which is to last two 
months. 
  France went ahead with the mission despite warnings from the 
Tutsi-dominated RPF, which blames France for arming and propping 
up Hutu regimes in Kigali whose forces are blamed for most of 
the estimated 500,000 dead since Rwanda slipped back into civil 
war in April. 
  UN spokesman Pierre Mehu in Kigali told AFP Saturday that 
the 
rebel RPF that even if it did not welcome the French troops the 
rebels would not fight them provided they stuck to their 
humanitarian mission. 
  Another 200 French soldiers are in Gisenyi, a key town in 
Rwanda's northwest where the interim government opposed by the 
rebels has set up after fleeing rebel advances. 
  Thousands of residents massed into the town when the French 
troops arrived in Gisenyi from Goma, Zaire, on Thursday, crying 
"Long Live France" and children waved French flags. 
  But an authoritative Rwandan source Saturday said the 
welcome 
had been staged by the local Hutu political leaders. 

