Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Lev Aleynik report under the "Security" rubric: "Lev </F>
Fedorov Unsure Russia Produces No Chemical Weapons. He Urges 
Investigation Into Military-Chemical Complex Activities"] 
  [Text] Dr. Lev Fedorov has stated that he "would not give 
guarantees" that Russia has totally discontinued the production 
of chemical weapons. These conclusions, according to co-author 
Vil Mirzayanov, are also suggested by the recent splash of 
events connected with "Mirzayanov case" and the reticence of 
officials unwilling to provide the public with details of the 
state of affairs in the military-chemical complex (MCC). 
  Lev Fedorov presented yesterday a report, "Chemical Weapons 
in Russia: History, Ecology, Politics." He stated in a press 
conference that "there are no forces in the government... that 
would regard seriously both the danger posed by the MCC, and the 
safety of the population. The government has not even started 
to solve the problems of getting rid of highly toxic dioxins; 
the questions we raised of elimination of liquid rocket fuel in 
the same class of danger as toxic substances also await 
consideration." 
  Lev Fedorov underlined that he and his colleagues "have so 
far received neither from the army nor industry any precise 
information on where and when they worked in Russia with 
chemical weapons. Society remains unaware of the size of the 
threat to our existence." In the opinion of Mr. Fedorov, people 
in Russia, and elsewhere in the world for that matter, "are 
being denied the opportunity to take an integral look at the 
country's military-chemical past and present: reserved for us 
are miserly crumbs of information. Meanwhile the MCC not only 
exists, but it is also totally unprepared to enter together with 
us into the next millennium; it cannot give up the idea that it 
can no longer hide the costly and highly dangerous chemical 
weapons toy, and that it will not be able to get a free ride on 
this any longer." Lev Fedorov stated that "it is necessary to 
campaign for the full declassification of documents once the 
country's leaders sign the convention renouncing chemical 
weapons, to look into our past and get rid of the old onus of 
secrets." 

