BFN 

<F P=106> [Safa Haeri report: "Iran Tried To Hire IRA Hit-Men"] </F>
  [Text] The IRA has turned down a request by Tehran to 
assassinate three leading Iranian dissidents in exchange for 
explosives, guns, missiles and cash, according to informed 
sources in Iran. 
  The deal was allegedly put to IRA representatives by 
officials from the Iranian Information (intelligence) Ministry 
at a meeting in Tehran last November but was turned down in 
February this year. 
  This latest revelation comes after the Iranian charge 
d'affaires in London, Gholamreza Ansari, was summoned to the 
Foreign Office last Thursday [24 April] to be told that known 
contacts with the IRA should cease. British intelligence had 
information that Iran was plotting to supply the IRA with guns 
and money. 
  The Iranian sources, who have contact with the Information 
Ministry, said that at last November's meeting the Iranians 
offered to meet an IRA "shopping list" in exchange for the 
murder of three named people. The list 
included: 

  -  Micro-communications and eavesdropping 
equipment; 
  -  Semtex explosive; 
  -  Eight Stinger surface-to-air 
missiles; 
  -  400 Colt pistols and 80,000 rounds of ammunition; 
  -  100 
Uzi submachine guns and 50,000 rounds of ammunition; 
  -  $6 million 
(4 million pounds) in counterfeit dollar bills and $500,000 in 
real bills. 
  The IRA was to assassinate three people: the former Iranian 
president, Abolhasan Bani-Sadr, exiled in France since 1981; 
Javad Dabiran, a spokesman for the opposition People's Mujahedin 
Organisation, based in Bonn; and Farzaneh Ta'idi, a prominent 
Iranian actress exiled in London. Ms Ta'idi angered the regime 
for her part in the 1991 film "Not Without My Daughter," which 
depicts the plight of the American-born wife of an Iranian 
stranded in post-revolution Iran. 
  The offer was made on the margins of a meeting in the 
Iranian 
capital which also involved the Greek left-wing group November 
17, Corsican nationalists and ETA, the Basque separatists, the 
sources said. 
  They said the IRA took three months to consider the scheme, 
though informed Western sources said the IRA was known to have 
rejected previous proposals to carry out assassinations, 
including requests from Libya. 
  The Iranian sources also gave new details of contacts 
between 
Iran and the IRA going back to shortly after the 1979 
revolution, when IRA representatives attended a "world meeting 
of liberation organisations" in Tehran. 
  At that time, Tehran wanted the IRA to provide weapons and 
logistics for Iranian teams sent to Europe to kill prominent 
opponents of the new regime, including General Fereyduon Jam, a 
brother-in-law of the late Shah, Ardeshir Zahedi, a former 
ambassador to Washington, and Shapour Bakhtiar, the Shah's last 
prime minister, who was murdered in Paris in 1992. The 
assassinations did not go ahead, although the sources did not 
know if this was because the IRA had refused to co-operate. 
  The initial reaction from Tehran to last week's British 
warning was muted. But over the weekend the tone of press 
comment hardened, after a briefing by Hojatoleslam Hosayn 
Ruhani, chairman of the Parliamentary Defence Committee. 
  "How can anyone criticise Iran for having contacts with the 
IRA when the United States does exactly the same when it 
receives Mr Gerry Adams?" said the radical daily SALAM. 
  The semi-official daily ETELAAT in effect confirmed the 
Iran-IRA contacts when it said: "Why, when British MPs and 
government officials rationalise their direct contacts with 
Iranian terrorists (a reference to the People's Mujahedin 
leadership)...should the same not apply to Iran? Why should we 
be ashamed of our contacts?" 
  The official news agency, IRNA, quoted an unidentified Sinn 
Fein spokesman denouncing the British allegations of 
co-operation between the IRA and Iran as "baseless and 
trouble-making." "The noises the British make are because of 
their failure to reach peaceful agreement over Ireland," the 
spokesman was quoted as saying. He claimed Britain was trying 
to cover up the arming of loyalist terrorists by MI5. 
  It is known in Northern Ireland that the IRA has long wanted 
Stinger missiles to shoot down Army helicopters, and the cash on 
offer from Iran would have been tempting in the face of British 
measures against IRA fund-raising. 
  On the other hand, high-profile assassinations attract 
intelligence attention and the IRA would not relish a "guns for 
hire" image. In particular, killings on behalf of Iran would 
damage the republican movement's American support. 

