Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ivan Zhagel, IZVESTIYA: "Central Bank Warns: </F>
Trustfulness Is Dangerous for Your Purses"] 
  [Text] The Main Administration of the Central Bank in 
the city of Moscow disseminated a special press release, in 
which it called upon the capital's population not to give in to 
the "aggressive" advertising campaign now spread in the mass 
information media, in which various firms, as bait, mention a 
very high interest or other very advantageous terms for 
investing money. 
  It is especially stressed that the attraction of deposits is 
a banking operation and, in accordance with the Russian 
Federation Law on Banks and Banking Activity, it can be carried 
out only by institutions that have received the license of the 
Central Bank and not by those that simply include in their 
constituent documents the point stating that they will engage in 
the attraction and investment of finances. 
  Specific organizations, which have received licenses for the 
performance of banking operations, are also mentioned. Taking 
the importance of this matter into consideration, we will also 
mention them. In Moscow at present, in addition to commercial 
banks, the Orgbank Interbank Association, and the Rus 
Association of Commercial Banks for Social Development, the 
following have received appropriate permits of the Central Bank: 
the Transprogress Scientific Production Association, the 
International Financial Company, the Financial and Credit 
Society, the Atis Joint-Stock Credit Company, and the Moscow 
Clearing House Limited Partnership, as well as the Central 
Clearing House, Sovfintreyd, Deviza, the Company for Project 
Financing, the Moscow Clearing Center, and the Interbank 
Financial House, which are close joint-stock companies. 
  All the other commercial structures, including GMM, Tibet, 
and others known for their advertising, do not have such a 
license and, when they engage in banking operations, they do 
this illegally. Natural and juridical persons, who have placed 
funds there, risk being deprived of their money altogether. The 
Main Administration of the Central Bank in the city of Moscow 
does not claim that all the organizations engaged in banking 
operations without a license are undisguised swindlers. Most 
likely, many simply are not familiar with existing legislation. 
However, this also characterizes their level of professionalism 
quite unequivocally, which clients should take into 
consideration. 
  Well, what punitive measures have Central Bank workers 
prepared against violators of banking legislation? 
Unfortunately, for now they are quite light and, basically, are 
reduced to the recommendation to these structures "to transfer 
their activity to official tracks, receiving the license of the 
Central Bank." The quite "merciless" measure lies in the 
transfer of the information on violators to tax services for the 
withdrawal of illegally obtained income from structures 
operating without a license. 
  I will not be mistaken if I assume that hardly anyone will 
be 
frightened by this. However, what can one do if Central Bank 
workers do not have a stable normative base under their feet to 
fight against violators? On the other hand, however, the Central 
Bank should have shown initiative and found the way to close at 
least one firm operating with the money of citizens and 
enterprises without a license--even if in order to gain the 
necessary experience here and to see the range of problems. 
  Nevertheless, to this day not a single--I repeat, not a 
single--organization, which violates banking legislation and 
endangers the financial interests of ordinary Russian citizens, 
has been closed or punished in any way. 

