Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Press Agency NOVYNY interview with Ukrainian Minister of </F>
Environmental Protection Yuriy Kostenko; place and date not 
given: "It Is Not Disarmament, but Stripping the State Bare" -- 
first paragraph published in boldface] 
  [Text] Being convinced that the tripartite agreement on 
the fate of Ukrainian strategic missiles that he signed conforms 
to the parliamentary decree on this issue, Ukrainian President 
Leonid Kravchuk asked the people's deputies to annul their 
reservations regarding Article 5 of the Lisbon Protocol and to 
adopt a decision on Ukraine joining the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty as a nonnuclear state. 
  This is how the Moscow statement was commented upon by Yuriy 
Kostenko, people's deputy, minister of environmental protection, 
and head of the special working group of deputies in charge of 
the preparation for ratifying START-1 and acquiring Ukraine's 
nonnuclear status. 
  Kostenko: The Moscow tripartite statement has, in 
fact, offered an entirely different procedure for Ukraine's 
nuclear disarmament, a procedure different from what our Supreme 
Council decided on the issue. The new procedure does not take 
into account many aspects, associated both with Ukraine's 
national security and its economic interests. For this 
particular reason, the Moscow statement must be regarded as a 
totally different agreement and must be given a corresponding 
legal evaluation. 
  NOVYNY: However, it is a statement, and not an 
agreement. The parliament cannot either ratify or refuse to 
ratify it. 
  Kostenko: I realize this. The statement is 
formulated in such a manner as to make it impossible for the 
Supreme Council to consider it. These are so-called legal 
intrigues. However, one cannot overlook the fact that the 
supreme legislative body has adopted one procedure for nuclear 
disarmament and, at the same time, the executive power has 
proposed an entirely different one. That is why the Supreme 
Council, which has the right, ensured by the current 
Constitution, to discuss international agreements, also has the 
right to discuss this particular document and determine whether 
it is advantageous for Ukraine or, perhaps, it should be vetoed 
as being at variance with Ukraine's interests. Moreover, I want 
to stress the following point: The work conducted by the 
Supreme Council would, in my opinion, make it possible to more 
or less coordinate Ukraine's interests with those of other 
states that seek Ukraine's nonnuclear status. I do not see 
Ukraine's interests, either economic or military, in the Moscow 
document. Nor do I see there any security guarantees for 
Ukraine, guarantees about which there has been so much talk. 
  NOVYNY: How would you comment upon the fact that 
neither the statement, nor the supplement to it makes any 
mention of compensation for the tactical nuclear weapons 
transferred to Russia? 
  Kostenko: This once again emphasizes the fact 
that there exist certain discrepancies between what the Supreme 
Council adopted and what the president signed. The parliament's 
decree states clearly that there must also be compensation for 
the tactical nuclear weapons, whereas the Moscow statement does 
not deal with this issue separately. As far as I am concerned, 
Russia is just promising to consider this question and give some 
compensation. 
  NOVYNY: Is there any deadline for giving Ukraine 
compensation for the tactical nuclear weapons? 
  Kostenko: No, no deadline has been specified. 
Besides, this is difficult to do, because nobody knows at the 
expense of what this compensation must be made. If it is done 
from the money received for those 500 tonnes of highly enriched 
uranium that Russia will sell to the United States, compensation 
may only be given to Ukraine after the uranium is sold on the 
world market. Only after that will Russia receive some real 
money and be able to give some monetary compensation. Today, 
there are no funds, absolutely nothing. It is true that there 
also exists such a variant (it might be the most acceptable one 
for Ukraine) as compensation for the cost of every warhead. 
This could be done, because it is known how much uranium or 
plutonium they contain, and, therefore, the cost of the tactical 
weapons transferred by us might be determined. In accordance 
with preliminary estimates, it is more than $10 billion. If we 
proceed from this sum, Russia is indebted to Ukraine and not the 
other way round, as we are being assured today. Speaking about 
energy sources, in view of the fact that uranium and plutonium 
are extremely valuable energy sources, it might be possible to 
make an equivalent exchange: We can give them highly enriched 
uranium and plutonium and they can give us oil and gas. 
Unfortunately, however, this procedure was not adopted, 
moreover, during the negotiations, such an element as plutonium 
was totally "omitted." It is a very expensive element. By 
various estimates, 1 kg of highly enriched plutonium may cost up 
to $1 million and 1 kg of highly enriched uranium $100,000. 
Just imagine the cost of the materials that we have already 
transferred to Russia. 
  NOVYNY: Transferred with tactical weapons? 
  Kostenko: Yes, with tactical weapons alone, we 
transferred [to Russia] about 10 tonnes of highly enriched 
plutonium and about 90 tonnes of highly enriched uranium. What 
happened in Moscow cannot be referred to as nuclear disarmament; 
it is the stripping of the state bare. Not only in military, 
but also in economic and political aspects. 
  NOVYNY: The following information is known to 
have been leaked from presidential circles: If Ukraine had not 
agreed to concessions in Washington and in Boryspil, and then 
also in Moscow, it might have found itself in international 
political and economic isolation. What is your attitude to this? 
  Kostenko: I cannot agree with this thesis, 
because it is not the availability of nuclear weapons that 
determines the possibility of international isolation, about 
which there is so much talk. Had it been so, all those states 
that presently create nuclear weapons would also have found 
themselves in isolation. Today, there are about 20 countries 
worldwide that either have their own nuclear weapons, or are 
about to create them. These are so-called threshold states, 
which are in violation of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. 
Ukraine proceeds along the road toward nuclear disarmament, 
and, for that reason, it cannot constitute an obstacle to anyone. 
  That we do not, today, have effective economic ties with 
other countries points to one circumstance only -- the absence 
of reforms in Ukraine. We do not make a single step toward 
reforms, and as long as there are no reforms, industrial circles 
and financiers with large capital will not be interested in 
cooperating with Ukraine or in investing in its economy. That 
is why, if somebody says, today, that nuclear weapons have 
brought about Ukraine's international isolation, it will be an 
erroneous assessment of the situation that has taken shape. We 
will soon become convinced of this. Even after the entire 
disarmament strategy proposed by our president is implemented, 
investments will not flow into Ukraine all the same. They will 
nor flow as long as there are no real reforms. Incidentally, 
this was also stressed by Mr. Clinton, who said that Ukraine 
would only be given $175 million and the rest when economic 
reforms begin to be implemented. 

