BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Advanced Testing for Advanced </F>
Materials"] 
  [Text] In a model of how European industries can exploit 
the expertise of the Joint Research Centre (JRC), the UK's 
Rolls-Royce and Germany's Motoren und Turbinen Union have joined 
forces through the Third Framework Programme, using the JRC's 
Institute for Advanced Materials (IAM) as a subcontracting 
laboratory. 
  The international recession and defence cutbacks have 
intensified international competition in aeroengine 
manufacturing, which is divided between a small number of 
European and American firms. To remain competitive, Rolls-Royce 
is focusing on making engines as fuel-efficient and as cheap to 
maintain as possible. Motoren und Turbinen Union GmbH (MTU), 
which is Rolls-Royce's major partner on the upcoming 
Eurofighter's engines, faces similar challenges. Both see using 
advanced materials as essential to their future as hi-tech 
manufacturers. 
<H5>  Turbine Blades: Critical Components </H5>
  In an aircraft engine, fuel and compressed air explode 
inside 
combustion chambers at high temperature and pressure. The 
resulting gases are ejected out the back, propelling the 
aircraft forward. However, as they leave the combustion chamber 
they also drive a set of turbine blades, which transfer energy 
to the front of the engine to compress incoming air. 
  The mechanical load, or stress, on these turbine blades 
varies enormously, and these stresses occur over a wide range of 
temperatures, with blade surface temperatures approaching to 
within a few hundred degrees of the material's melting point. 
Due to their extreme operating conditions, their importance to 
safety and the inexact understanding of their lifetime, the 
blades are regularly checked and replaced when any structural 
faults, such as microcracks, are detected. 
  Engine efficiency is proportional to the temperature inside 
the combustion chamber, so improving engine requires turbine 
blades which can withstand higher temperatures and whose 
lifetime is more exactly understood, reducing the need for 
maintenance checks. Blades must also be as light as possible, to 
keep engine weight to a minimum. 
<H5>  Industry Link -- Up Through JRC </H5>
  According to British materials scientist Andy Bennett, 
"Rolls-Royce had worked on isothermally testing potential 
turbine blade materials, where samples were stress-tested at one 
temperature. However we needed a thermo-mechanical fatigue, or 
TMF, testing laboratory, which would put the materials under 
similar conditions to those found in the engine itself. We 
decided to subcontract to an existing laboratory, and the IAM 
was the obvious choice -- their resources, both human and 
technical, make them the best in Europe." 
  The IAM knew that MTU were also interested in this field, 
and 
put the companies in touch with one another. Together with 
Spanish modelling institute Centro de Estudios e Investigaciones 
Tecnicas de Guipuzcoa (CEIT), they formed a project under the 
EC's Industrial Technologies and Advanced Materials Programme 
(BRITE/EURAM II), with the IAM as a subcontracting laboratory. 
Project BREU-0338, as it became, was launched in 1991 for four 
years, with Rolls-Royce as the prime partner. 
<H5>  Thermo-Mechanical Testing </H5>
  A turbine blade consists of two main components: a metal 
core, or substrate is a single crystal of a "super alloy," while 
the coatings are composed of one or more elements which are 
easily oxidised, forming a protective oxide layer. 
  The IAM test equipment simulates the behaviour of the blade 
under its operational conditions in the laboratory, and observes 
the growth of any cracks. The sample is heated by 
electromagnetic induction, while the strain is produced by a 
hydraulic piston and measured with an extensometer. A load cell 
measures the stress applied by the piston. 
  In this way the researchers can measure the 
substrate-coating 
combination's actual stress-strain-temperature relationship, 
which is crucial to predicting the blade's lifetime. 
  According to IAM project scientist Dr. Johan Bressers, one 
of 
the most important and unique features of the system is that it 
investigates non-intrusively. 
  "We have developed a computer vision system, composed of an 
optical microscope coupled to a video camera, which monitors the 
sample for microcrack initiation and growth," he explains. 
"This system captures, digitises and displays images of the 
sample in real-time, and can either scan the entire surface or 
concentrate on a particular region with a magnification of up to 
1000 times." 
  This enables the operators, if they wish, to find cracks as 
they appear and focus in on them for more detailed analysis. 
Usually, however, the scanning pattern is programmed in 
advance, so the equipment needs no supervision. 
  This system compares well to the "replica technique," which 
is traditionally used to monitor surface damage. The replica 
technique requires that the test be halted so that the surface 
of the sample can be replicated by means of an acetate film. 
This has to be done dozens of times for each test, a laborious, 
resource- intensive process which can also compromise the 
results. 
  After the test is completed the data is analysed to produce 
a 
crack growth history of the primary crack, the one which leads 
to total breakdown. At this stage the important data are when 
the cracks appeared, how fast they grew, and whether they joined 
together. 
  The sample is also analysed using electron microscopy and a 
scanning electron microprobe, which also provides information on 
its micro-chemistry. This three-dimensional information on the 
crack helps to identify and analyse the mechanisms which affect 
crack growth, as well as the crucial question of why some cracks 
grow from the coating into the substrate and others do not. 
<H5>  Lifetime Prediction Model </H5>
  Working together, Rolls-Royce and MTU identified two 
substrates and three coatings to be tested in this way. The IAM 
laboratory has already performed 55 of the 80 tests, and has 
also finished a literature survey of over 30 different models, 
selecting one for further development. 
  "The test data will form an invaluable database, giving us a 
feel for how changes in operating conditions, coating materials 
and other parameters affect blade performance," explains Mr. 
Bennett. "It will, for the first time, give us an 
understanding behind the data. CEIT's work has also been 
important. Previous models were very material-specific, but 
CEIT has focused attention on which phenomena and parameters are 
the most important. This should eventually lead to a general 
model which can be applied to a wider range of materials, 
because we will be working from a better understanding of the 
material mechanics." 
  The final goal is a lifetime prediction model, enabling the 
industrial partners to select better materials for new engines, 
although neither MTU nor Rolls-Royce expect the project to 
result in an `off-the-shelf' product. "By giving us a good 
picture of the behaviour of these materials under these 
conditions, the project will make the first step towards a more 
general model," stresses MTU scientist Dr. Affeldt. "Our 
company laboratory will continue the work for our specific 
needs." 
  Rolls-Royce has similar plans, and may continue its 
collaboration with the IAM. "We found the IAM very focused to 
our engineering needs." Andy Bennett adds, "so in the future we 
may enter into a private arrangement where the IAM tests our 
more confidential materials, those closer to the edge of 
development." 
  The IAM has also launched several sub-projects within their 
own research programme to provide, as Dr. Brassers explains, "a 
better basis for the mechanistic understanding and the 
mechanism-informed modelling of blade lifetimes. These projects 
will help us prepare for contracts for manufacturers of 
land-based turbines, such as in power plants, as there's no 
reason why we cannot serve these industries as well." 
<H5>  The JRC in Brief </H5>
  The Joint Research Centre is a European scientific and 
technical research centre established by the EC. The four 
research sites in Belgium, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands 
house eight institutes: The Central Bureau for Nuclear 
Measurements, The Institutes for Transuranium Elements, Advanced 
Materials, Systems Engineering and Informatics, Safety 
Technology, Remote Sensing Applications and Prospective 
Technological Studies, and the Environment Institute. 

