BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff correspondent Yang Liu (2799 2692)] </F>
  [Text] Hainan Province, China's largest special economic 
zone, has decided to build a large international airport under 
the name of Meilan in Haikou. The authorities are planning to 
share the rights and interests generated from the development of 
the Haikou Airport, now shared by civilian and military 
authorities, with the Army at a ratio of two to one. 
  Hainan personnel said that the Haikou Airport can no longer 
meet the passenger and cargo transportation demand posed by the 
zone's vibrant tourism and economic growth. The authorities 
have decided to spend 3 billion yuan building the Meilan 
International Airport in the eastern part of Haikou. 
  The Meilan Airport will have two runways, each 3,600 meters, 
and a 70,000 square meter terminal, the construction of which 
will begin this year and will be completed within four years. 
  Capital for the new airport comes from the following three 
sources: (1) issuing shares; (2) the auction of the 3,000 mu 
of land at the Haikou Airport; and (3) inviting foreign capital 
(including foreign government loans and foreign participation as 
shareholders). 
  The Haikou Airport currently in use was built in the 1950's 
as part of a Chinese Naval unit and was expanded in the 
mid-1980's into a civilian-military airport. Last year it 
handled a total of 1.2 million passengers; it is one of China's 
busiest airports. 
  With an area of 4,400 mu and adjacent to the city, the old 
Haikou Airport carries premium commercial value. The local 
government and the Navy have worked out a deal on the 
development of the airport land. 
  The Hainan Government will give the Navy 800 million yuan to 
enable it to build a new military airport somewhere on Hainan 
Island, and 1,400 mu of the old airport land earmarked for the 
development of tertiary industry. 
  The Hainan Provincial Government will get the remaining 
3,000 
mu of airport land and the right to auction and develop it. The 
authorities are hoping for 4 billion yuan of income from the 
3,000 mu of land. Deducting 800 million for the Navy, the 
government will have 3.2 billion to spend on the new airport and 
other commercial projects. It is perfect. 
  Also, Hainan Province has recently set up a Property Rights 
Exchange Center and arranged for the first "Convention of 
State-Owned and Collective Property Rights Exchange" to be held 
in Haikou from 8 to 13 April. 
  So far, 33 Hainan enterprises (manufacturers, hotels, and 
airlines) have applied for admission to the property sale 
convention. Items on offer include the Hainan Airline and part 
of the property rights of the Meilan Airport and Sanya Fenghuang 
Airport, which the authorities are planning to sell to foreign 
companies. Sources say property sales transaction commissions 
for the Hainan Government are temporarily set at 4/1,000. 

