Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Cali Surrender Stalled"] </F>
  [Text] On Tuesday afternoon, after several high-level 
meetings, President Cesar Gaviria telephoned the DAS 
[Administrative Department of Security] director, Fernando 
Brito, to request his presence at the meeting with the attorneys 
of two presumed traffickers from Valle. It was due to be held 
the following day at the office of the prosecutor general of the 
nation, Gustavo de Greiff. 
  What the president wanted was to establish his position on 
the policy of surrender, after rumors citing previous talks in 
which the presumed drug traffickers requested house arrest 
during certain phases of the surrender process. 
  However, what most concerned Gaviria was the fact that the 
matter of confession apparently had not yet been clearly 
explained during the previous talks with the attorneys of 
Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela and Julio Fabio Urdinola. 
  For those reasons, the president decided to send Justice 
Minister Andres Gonzalez and the DAS director to the meeting at 
the prosecutor general's office. 
  The fact is that, until that Wednesday, 12 January, the 
talks 
had been conducted through the prosecutor general and the 
attorney general of the nation, Carlos Gustavo Arrieta, who, in 
turn, were reporting to the government. Nevertheless, in 
December the president decided to take part in the matter and, 
at several meetings between De Greiff and the justice minister, 
agreement had already been reached on the government's presence 
at the meeting planned for early January. By that time, a 
tentative date had been set, but the exact day and time had not 
been decided. 
  On 11 January, Gonzalez, with the prosecutor general and 
attorney general, confirmed the date and time of the meeting: 
Wednesday, 12 January, at 1500. 
  When Brito and Gonzalez arrived, the prosecutor general and 
attorney general were already conferring with the drug 
traffickers' attorneys. Some tension was felt there, due mainly 
to the presence of the DAS director, because only the minister 
was expected. Moreover, the fact of not knowing in advance who 
was going to attend apparently annoyed the prosecutor general, 
according to one source. 
  Then, with the attorneys, the determination was made that 
this was an informal meeting, and it was agreed that, when the 
surrender processes actually began, each government department 
would play its part. In other words, they would be judicial 
proceedings that no one from the government would have any 
reason to attend. 
<H5>  The Meeting Began </H5>
  Finally, at 1510, the meeting began. 
  First, one of the lawyers took the floor, stating that it 
was 
Rodriguez's and Urdinola's desire to surrender based on the 
expedient of house arrest, in the course of a process that 
should culminate in one result, either: dismissal of all charges 
or sentencing to a prison term. 
  The next to speak was Minister Gonzalez. The official 
explained to the attorneys the design of the surrender policy, 
indicating that anyone who surrenders must have a real 
willingness to submit to a process, to collaborate effectively 
with the authorities, and to confess his criminal activities. 
  Nevertheless, the traffickers' lawyers used the argument 
that 
it was very important to their clients not to make a mandatory 
confession. They noted that it was the intention of the two 
presumed traffickers to submit to a trial without meeting that 
requirement. The justice minister, for his part, claimed that a 
surrender and repentance did not suffice. 
  The other attorney intervened, also declaring that what the 
two presumed drug traffickers wanted was to have the information 
supplied by them to break up the Medellin Cartel taken into 
account in their case. 
  However, according to sources queried by EL TIEMPO, that 
decision is incumbent solely on Prosecutor General De Greiff, 
who must assess the veracity of those reports, which could 
become a part of the government's policy on collaboration. 
  After the remarks, the DAS director spoke, claiming that the 
government did not consider house arrest part of the surrender 
policy. He added that anything other than the terms of that 
program was not associated with the state's position. 
  The two lawyers, somewhat shocked, commented that such 
blunt, 
clear talk was quite positive, making it possible to obtain 
information on the government's thinking. Furthermore, they said 
that, from this standpoint, the process could not continue until 
they first consulted with their clients. 
  Prosecutor General De Greiff then remarked that the decision 
on house arrest was a judicial determination, but the DAS 
director reaffirmed the negative position on house arrest. 
  Specifically, the official declared that the government did 
not interpret the policy of surrender in that way, and that the 
issue being treated had to be viewed clearly. 
  Gonzalez, for his part, claimed that they were not dealing 
with any criminal organization or common crimes, and that, for 
the persons under discussion and the crimes with which they were 
charged, it was impossible to seek house arrest. 
  Finally, Brito asserted that the government would not, under 
any circumstances, permit house arrest, among other reasons, 
because its implementation would have no acceptance on the 
international level. 
  After 1700, when the two government officials concluded 
their 
remarks, De Greiff declared the informal meeting adjourned, and 
remained in a hearing with the attorneys. 
  According to the government, the essence of the matter is 
that various conditions must be met for the process to continue: 
imposition and effective serving of adequate sentences in 
regular jails, and real, effective collaboration with the 
administration of justice. In other words, the state must be 
allowed to solve crimes and to sentence those judicially 
culpable. 
  Hence, in the government's opinion, the surrender of the 
Cali 
Cartel members is muddled, for the present; because it is 
assumed that they will not fully accept the surrender policy. 
However, a second meeting has already been arranged; and, as one 
government official aptly observed: "All is not lost." 

