Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jose Gonzalez Batista] </F>
  [Text] Alleged Colombian guerrillas who are guarding poppy 
and coca plantations in the jungle areas along the border 
between Panama and Colombia have threatened the members of the 
National Air Service (SAN) with future attacks on their 
aircraft, according to reports issued yesterday. 
  A police source who declined to be identified has revealed 
that the alleged guerrillas informed SAN personnel "if they 
continue to overfly those areas where they had their narcotics 
plantations, they would execute artillery attacks against their 
aircraft." 
  The insurgents threatened to down every helicopter that 
overflew the region and gave a 48-hour deadline to cease those 
incursions. "The Colombian Army in the area where crops are 
located is warned, and so their lives would be endangered." 
  During recent weeks, several SAN airplanes carrying video 
equipment and Panamanian police have overflown the inhospitable 
jungle of Darien Province, where they have detected coca and 
poppy plantations covering an immense number of hectares. 
  Once the report about the alleged guerrillas was confirmed, 
Panamanian police made a new incursion with the aid of the U.S. 
Army, the result of which is unknown. 
  It seems in the next few hours the air operations will be 
intensified in those regions to reach the sites where the rebel 
groups and drug traffickers are guarding the plantations. 
  Until now and unofficially speaking, it is believed the 
guerrillas belong to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia 
(FARC), which protects the drug traffickers' million-dollar 
plantations for hefty sums of money. 
  A report indicated that after announcing their intentions 
the 
FARC rebels may stage an attack against Panamanian aircraft, 
because the report stated the rebels are protected with 
sophisticated weapons of war. 
  In February 1993 a contingent of Panamanian police, with the 
backing of the U.S. Army and DEA officials, destroyed coca and 
marijuana plantations on 90 hectares located in the remote 
Darien Jungle on the border with Colombia. 
  The operation, called "Frontera Libre," was conducted to 
rescue three U.S. "New Tribe" missionaries whom the rebels had 
kidnapped. Several drug traffickers and undocumented aliens were 
arrested during that operation. 
  According to preliminary reports by the Panamanian police, 
the new poppy and coca plantations are scattered in strategic 
jungle areas between Darien and Colombia, making access to them 
difficult. 
  Opium is the plant from which heroine is extracted. It is 
one of the world's deadliest drugs and to date has killed 
thousands of people in the different countries where it is 
consumed. 

