Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, March 8 (AFP) -- A militant Islamic group, 
al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah, late Monday claimed responsibility for 
renewed train attacks in southern Egypt and warned they would 
continue until the end of the week to avenge the Hebron massacre. 
  Gunmen, suspected by the interior ministry of being Islamic 
fundamentalists, meanwhile shot dead a plain-clothes policeman 
in Asyut province in southern Egypt just hours after a bomb 
exploded outside a hotel in the area, causing no casualties. 
  Al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah, which seeks to replace the secular 
government of President Husni Mubarak with an Islamic state, 
urged the population to avoid "tourist sites, public 
transportation and everything connected with banks, which 
practice usury." 
  A communique delivered to international press agencies here 
said the group had carried out three attacks in southern Egypt 
early Monday that according to the latest interior ministry toll 
wounded 12 Egyptians. 
  It said the operation, the third it has claimed against 
trains travelling in southern Egypt in the past two weeks, had 
targeted "tourist trains" and had been conducted "to avenge the 
martyrs" of Hebron. 
  An estimated 30 Palestinians were gunned down last Friday by 
an Israeli settler as they prayed at a mosque in the West Bank 
town of Hebron. 
  Al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah said the train attacks would 
"continue until the end of the month of Ramadan," the holy month 
of dawn-to-dusk fasting scheduled to end this weekend. 
  While the movement has directed previous operations against 
tourist facilities as part of its campaign to cripple the 
government, two of the trains attacked with automatic weapons 
early Monday carried only second and third class carriages and 
were being used by Egyptians of modest means. 
  Eleven people, six of them tourists, were hurt in a bomb 
attack on February 23 on a train between Cairo and Luxor. Four 
days earlier, two tourists and two Egyptians were wounded when 
gunmen fired on a train south of Asyut. Al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah 
claimed responsibility for both operations. 
  The policeman attacked Monday died instantly after gunmen 
shot him in the village of Durunkah. The assailants made good 
their escape and the interior ministry was unable to indicate 
how many were involved. 

