Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Tamara Zamyatina] </F>
  [Text] Moscow January 6 TASS -- President Boris Yeltsin 
appointed Yuriy Baturin as his national security aide, the press 
service of the Russian leader reported on Thursday [6 January]. 
  Commenting on his appointment, Baturin told TASS that he 
would now act as a "link between the president, the federal 
counterintelligence service and the foreign intelligence service 
and would solve those issues which do not demand immediate 
control from the president". 
  This first appointment in the presidential administration 
this year can be characterised as a good sign. By appointing 
the doctor of law as the presidential national security aide, 
Yeltsin confirmed his intention announced late last year to rely 
on professionals while reforming his administration. 
  The 44-year old Baturin proved to be a professional during 
nearly one year of work as the presidential legal adviser. Most 
of legislative decrees of the president were drafted with his 
participation. 
  Besides, Baturin has often surprised reporters by his 
independent outlook. An author of the law on the press he has 
recently criticised the government position on state control 
over the media. 
  Baturin, who has an education of a journalist, also 
graduated 
from the Moscow Physical-Technical Institute and the Insitute of 
Law. His first scientific work which gave him the degree of 
master of sciences was devoted to Europarliament, the second one 
which made him doctor of sciences dwelled on the problems of 
computer legislation. 
  Baturin began his political career in the administration of 
former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev. Many of his 
colleagues quit state work after Gorbachev resigned, but Baturin 
was called up to work in Yeltsin's administration. 
  In contrast to many of his colleagues in the Kremlin, 
Baturin 
did not participate in the recent election campaign saying that 
"if a state official gives priority to political activity, then 
his direct work moves to the background". 

