Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Special dispatch by XINHUA reporter Chi Maohua (3069 5399 </F>
5369) for SHANXI RIBAO: "The Central Authorities Are Concerned 
About Shanxi"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 22 Mar (XINHUA) -- The Shanxi delegation 
to the Second Session of the Eighth National People's Congress 
[NPC] drew attention from people whether it was at the session 
or not. 
  Shanxi is a base of energy resources and heavy chemical 
industry and enjoys an important strategic position in the 
nation's economic setup. Its coal, iron, aluminium, and other 
natural resources are well-known around the country; nearly 
four-fifths of total commodity coal supplies are from Shanxi. 
  Shanxi is poor at the same time. Luliang Prefecture is one 
of China's 18 collectively and perpetually poor areas. Of the 
118 counties (cities, prefectures) in the province, 14 are 
state-level poor counties and 36 are provincial-level ones. 
  Because of this, the CPC Central Committee and the State 
Council have been concerned about people in Shanxi, and economic 
development there. During the Second Session of the Eighth NPC, 
Li Peng, member of the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau 
Standing Committee and premier; Qiao Shi, member of the CPC 
Central Committee Political Bureau Standing Committee and 
chairman of the NPC Standing Committee; Li Lanqing, member of 
the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau and vice premier; Ren 
Jianxin, secretary of the CPC Central Committee Secretariat, 
secretary of the CPC Central Commission on Politics and Law, and 
president of the Supreme People's Court; and other leaders have 
separately visited the Shanxi delegation and held forums with 
its members on plans for revitalizing Shanxi's economy, and 
encouraging the 30 million people in Shanxi to score new 
achievements in the reform, opening up, and modernization drive. 
  Veteran comrades of noble character and high prestige, 
including Peng Zhen and Bo Yibo, are also very concerned and 
have kept thinking about the elders in their hometown and the 
development of Shanxi's work. 
  In short, the central authorities are concerned about 
Shanxi! 
<H3>  Premier Li Peng: Thanks for Shanxi's Significant 
Contributions to the Nation </H3>
  During the NPC session, Premier Li Peng joined discussions 
with the delegations of Beijing, Hebei, Hainan, Jilin, Henan, 
and Heilongjiang. Although he was very busy, he still decided 
to visit Shanxi deputies as he was really worried and concerned 
about Shanxi. 
  When they started the discussions, Hu Fuguo, secretary of 
Shanxi Provincial CPC Committee; Governor Sun Wensheng; Zhang 
Kui, chairman of Shanxi Provincial Planning Commission; Wu Ang, 
secretary of Yuncheng Prefectural CPC Committee; Zhang 
Guangjian, president of Shanxi Academy of Social Sciences; and 
other comrades spoke on the current situation in Shanxi's 
economic development, and existing problems. When Guo Baolin, 
director of the Taiyuan Mining Machinery Plant, said the 
enterprise developed from over 2 million yuan in losses in 1991 
to some 2 million yuan in profits in 1993 through keen reform, 
Li Peng was very pleased and made more inquiries about the 
factory's present conditions in production, and existing 
problems. Li Peng continued: The central authorities have 
attached great importance to large and medium-sized enterprises 
and do not think their problems have been properly resolved. 
This is the focus, as well as the knot, of reform. You have 
just noted many problems and it seems that comprehensive 
management is necessary. Starting from what has been achieved, 
the central authorities are prepared to conduct due 
investigations and studies this year to resolve large and 
medium-sized enterprises' problems thoroughly and in a 
step-by-step manner. The institution of share-holding system 
has given enterprises a driving force, but it cannot completely 
resolve problems. The most important issue is that their 
products must be marketable, technology must be upgraded, and 
efficiency must be improved -- with these, enterprises will 
display their vitality. This, of course, will need mechanisms, 
as well as investment and many factors combined. 
  Datong is a famous coal-producing city in China. People 
would not forget Li Peng's several visits to Datong. Premier Li 
has left his footprints at Datong No. 2 Power Plant and in the 
villages of Yanbei. Speaking on Shanxi's coal mines, Premier Li 
Peng said: Shanxi's coal mines include those whose production 
is under unified central planning, those managed by the local 
authorities, and those run by village and town enterprises. 
Coal mines run by village and town enterprises account for over 
half of the nation's total output. How should we deal with this 
problem? It requires the correct understanding that small 
coalpits have their drawbacks, such as low percentage of 
resources recovery, some waste of resources, less advanced 
equipment, and higher casualties. However, if we say Shanxi has 
made contributions to the national coal production, small 
coalpits have contributed their share too. So how should we 
treat small coalpits? We should vigorously support them to 
develop further, upgrade technology, raise their labor 
productivity, and improve safety levels. 
  At this moment, Premier Li Peng asked with concern: "I 
visited the Dongyi Coal Mine in Pinglu District whenever I went 
to Datong. I wonder how it is now?" 
  Xue Jun, secretary of Shuozhou city party committee, 
replied: 
"The mine is much better off than the time you saw it on your 
previous two visits. They have established a group company now." 
  Li Peng said: "I think this is a good model -- to turn every 
small coalpit into a semi-modernized coalpit or one developing 
in the direction of modernization. The future of Shanxi's coal 
industry will be promising if we follow this model." 
  When Shanxi Party Secretary Hu Fuguo briefed Li Peng on 
Wanjiazhai's project of diverging water from Huang He, Li Peng 
said: Shanxi is a province short of water supplies. The central 
authorities are very concerned about this problem. We should 
make concerted efforts to construct the Wanjiazhai diversion 
works well; the construction of this project is an important 
strategic measure. He added: Shanxi has still made significant 
progress compared with itself. When I was still engaged in the 
work of power supplies in northern China in the late 1970's, I 
visited Datong, which was very poor then -- low agricultural 
output value, with only 200 kg of grain output per mu for lack 
of chemical fertilizers and water. Later, small coalpits were 
developed and when I went to Datong again, grain output per mu 
had also increased because of more investment. This had brought 
about a significant change in people's lives. When compared 
with developed areas, Shanxi must not improperly belittle 
itself; when measuring their gaps with others, Shanxi should not 
forget that in some poorer areas, such as the mountain areas in 
Luliang Prefecture and Yanbei Prefecture, people's food and 
clothing problems remain unsolved or are not completely solved. 
When northwestern Shanxi was a base of the War of Resistance 
against Japan, and revolution, the most difficult time for the 
area, life in Pianguan, Youyu, Zuoyun, Baode, Xingxian, and 
Sanjiao Town in Linxian was very hard because natural conditions 
were fairly poor. Now the whole nation should help them to get 
out of poverty. I hope Shanxi will do a better job, and the 
people will get richer every year. 
  Li Peng said: "You have put forward many good suggestions in 
your remarks. I used to be very familiar with some localities 
in Shanxi because I paid many visits there. I have not gone 
there for years and I apologize to you for this. I will go 
there if circumstances permit this year. The central 
authorities are very concerned about and have attached great 
importance to Shanxi. General Secretary Jiang just visited 
there not long ago." Premier Li's sincere remarks won the 
applause of every deputy. 
  Li Peng said: Shanxi delivers over 200 million tonnes of 
coal to other localities every year, and China's commodity coal 
is mainly from Shanxi too. Shanxi has not only played an 
important role in the nation's economic construction in the 
past, but also will continue to make more contributions. 
  Facing the premier of the republic and in the spirit of 
being 
highly responsible to the state and the people, deputies spoke 
without reservation and frankly stated their opinions. 
Listening to the deputies' remarks -- suggestions or criticisms 
-- Li Peng wrote them down one by one in his notebook. 
  Finally, Li Peng hoped Shanxi would bring out the best in 
itself, forge ahead in unity, and make more achievements in 
various tasks of the province. 
  The premier's ardent talk was greeted with deputies' 
applause 
again. 
  Chairman Qiao Shi Hopes Shanxi Will Be Built Better 
and Better 
  At 10 A.M. on 17 March, Qiao Shi, member of the CPC Central 
Committee Political Bureau Standing Committee and chairman of 
the National People's Congress Standing Committee, visited the 
Shanxi delegation. The deputies, one after another, stepped 
forward to say hello to him. 
  Chairman Qiao Shi has inspected Shanxi many times and is 
very 
much concerned about the province. He also conducted studies 
and investigations in Shanxi's rural areas, factories, and 
schools. 
  Shaking hands with the deputies, Qiao Shi said with a smile: 
"You are working very hard. I am here to see you and say hello 
to you." 
  After posing for a group photo with the deputies to mark the 
occasion, Qiao Shi said: "Shanxi is China's coal energy base 
with abundant coal deposits. It has made great contributions to 
our country. At present the coal industry is having some 
difficulties with respect to prices. I believe that the problem 
will be solved and Shanxi will become better off in the days to 
come. 
  Qiao Shi said: Shanxi has more than just coal. It also has 
agricultural, scientific and technological, cultural, 
educational, and other undertakings. I hope that Shanxi will 
constantly make progress in all these undertakings. 
  He said in conclusion: Shanxi is an old revolutionary base 
area with very fine revolutionary traditions during the 
revolutionary war years. I hope the new generations will carry 
on the glorious traditions and build Shanxi better and better. 
  Hu Fuguo, secretary of the Shanxi provincial party 
committee, 
said on behalf of all Shanxi deputies: We are determined to 
live up to the central leading comrades' trust and expectations, 
continue to carry forward the spirit of hard struggle, and work 
hard to develop Shanxi's economy. 
<H3>  Vice Premier Li Lanqing: In Education, the Fundamental Way 
Out is Reform </H3>
  Bai Feng: "It is necessary to create a good environment for 
youngsters to grow up." 
  Li Lanqing: "You are right." 
  Ma Cuizhen: "Education should start with children." 
  Li Lanqing: "I agree with you completely"...[ellipses as 
received] 
  This was the discussion between Li Lanqing, member of the 
CPC 
Central Committee Political Bureau and vice premier of the State 
Council, and the Shanxi deputies in the afternoon of 18 March. 
  Li Lanqing, who is in charge of education, arrived at the 
Shanxi delegation's quarters at 4 P.M. Some deputies from the 
teaching profession vied to speak, and Li Lanqing occasionally 
answered their questions. The discussion was conducted in a 
very lively manner. 
  Bai Feng, a teacher of Taiyuan city's No. 5 Middle School, 
loudly said at the meeting: "In society today, the problem of 
over-emphasis on intellectual education to the neglect of moral 
education is very serious. We must not pay attention to only 
the proportion of students advancing to higher schools and 
overlook the job of making students develop morally, 
intellectually, and physically at the same time." 
  Li Lanqing nodded in approval and responded with a quote 
from 
a late old educator, Tao Xingzhi. 
  Bai Feng was followed by Ma Cuizhen, a teacher of the Beijie 
Elementary School of Shuozhou city. She said: "We must not 
neglect the elementary education. Education should start with 
children. This is an important task which has a bearing on the 
future of our country." When she became quite emotional in her 
speech, Li Lanqing asked her to slow down a little, and 
seriously took notes of what she said. 
  Then, several other educators, including Liu Rongfen, Liang 
Hongfei, and Ling Daqi successively spoke. Li Lanqing 
attentively listened to their views and occasionally interrupted 
and discussed with them how to develop education. 
  After deputies, from teachers to other deputies, had taken 
the floor, Li Lanqing said: "All the views just expressed by 
every deputy present were very good and educative." He then 
talked about his opinion on improving the quality of education 
and teachers. He said: The fundamental way out for education 
lies in reform. It will not do to rely on the government alone 
for solving the problems encountered by universities. Of 
course, the government should do its duty and, in particular, it 
must fulfill its duty on compulsory education. We must readjust 
China's macro educational structure. The government should do 
its best to successfully conduct compulsory education; it is an 
important issue related to the improvement of the quality of all 
the Chinese nation. China should develop a great deal of 
vocational education as well as adult education. Vocational 
education and adult education are the main channel for our 
Chinese youths to become useful personnel. Our current 
educational work faces sweeping reform in such areas as the 
pattern of running a school, school systems, admission fees, 
student distribution system, the establishment of branches of 
learning, and so forth. I think it is necessary to carry out 
reform in the light of the overall needs of a socialist market 
economy. 
  Touching on the development of resources, Li Lanqing said: 
Resources must be developed. However, it will not do if we 
simply pay attention to the development of resources. We must 
pay attention to making use of them, too. In the past, 
exploited coal was transported to eastern China; we spent a 
large amount of money on repairing the Datong-Qinhuangdao 
Railway. It was necessary at that time because we did not 
acquire the technology for long-distance electric power 
transmission. In addition, Shanxi possesses one more very good 
strong point, namely, a comparatively solid foundation for heavy 
industry, machine-building industry, and basic industries. Let 
all provinces give full play to their respective strong points, 
instead of promoting a similar [industrial] structure. We have 
established powerful machine-building industries and basic 
industries over the past four decades or so; therefore, we enjoy 
a better competitive edge than others in this field of endeavor. 
The problem facing us now is that we have not very successfully 
tapped the export potentials of these sectors yet. With regard 
to foreign economic relations and foreign trade, economic 
decision-making powers shall be delegated to those large and 
medium-sized enterprises whose conditions permit them to have 
liberalized operation. 
  Everyone spoke freely during the discussion meeting, which 
presented a scene of warm participation by all present. Other 
deputies also successively expressed their views on issues of 
their respective concern. 
  Though many deputies vied with each other to take the floor, 
the hour hand of the clock already pointed at 1840... [ellipses 
as received]. 
  [Supreme People's Court] President Ren Jianxin: "We 
Should Promote Stability in the Same Way As We Develop the 
Economy" 
  On the morning of 13 March, the Shanxi delegation to the 
Second Plenary Session of the Eighth NPC held a group meeting to 
deliberate the "Government Work Report." In his speech, Ren 
Jianxin, member of the CPC Central Committee Secretariat, 
secretary of the Central Commission on Politics and Law, 
president of the Supreme People's Court, and deputy to the 
Eighth NPC, said: "This year is very important and crucial for 
deepening reform. Party and government leaders at all levels 
should maintain social stability in the same way as they carry 
out economic work." 
  Ren Jianxin expressed satisfaction with the hands-on 
approach 
adopted by leading comrades from the Shanxi provincial party 
committee and government in maintaining stability. He was very 
delighted to hear that Shanxi Province had set the goal of 
becoming one of the provinces with the best public order in the 
country, and that provincial leaders and local leading comrades 
had specifically signed documents to assume leadership 
responsibility for comprehensive management of public security. 
He said: "You have my full support. I sincerely hope people 
across the province will work together to realize this goal at 
an early date." 
  Ren Jianxin said: Our country now enjoys economic 
development, political stability, national unity, and social 
progress; the situation as a whole is favorable. It should be 
noted, however, that factors affecting social and political 
stability are increasing. We must be mentally well-prepared and 
take practical and effective measures to go all-out to maintain 
social stability. 
  Speaking of several current issues that merit attention, Ren 
Jianxin said emphatically: 1) Principal leading comrades from 
parties and governments at all levels should place a great 
premium on maintaining social stability and earnestly assume 
responsibility. Party and government leaders at all levels 
should arm themselves with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics, and fully 
recognize and correctly handle the relationship between reform, 
development, and stability. They should follow the principle of 
"carrying out two tasks simultaneously while paying equal 
attention to both," and maintain social stability in the same 
way as they carry out economic work. 2) We should deal a stern 
blow to criminal activities that gravely jeopardize public 
order, and tighten comprehensive management of public security. 
A normal state of law and order now prevails in most parts of 
the country, and the trend toward significantly higher crime 
rates has been initially stemmed. However, the continuing 
existence of many law and order problems, and the substantial 
increase in major violent crimes have caused serious harm. 
Criminal gangs are rather rampant in some areas, with some of 
them showing clear attributes of organized crime. Some areas 
suffer from a lack of public order. With hooligans committing 
all sorts of crimes, riding roughshod over fellow villagers, and 
bullying people, these areas offer little reason for optimism 
about their law-and-order situation. We should take this matter 
seriously. We should continue to fight against criminal 
activities that gravely jeopardize public order, taking swift 
and stern actions in accordance with the law. We should stiffen 
our blows; bolster our means of delivering such blows; swiftly 
wage special and intensive struggles against criminal activities 
that have aroused strong public resentment; and resolutely 
eradicate all kinds of social ills. 3) We should wage a 
deep-going struggle against corruption to promote clean 
government. The anticorruption struggle determines whether we 
can gain public support, whether our political power is secure, 
and whether reform and opening up are successful. Currently, we 
should make still greater efforts to seriously study Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's propositions on the anticorruption struggle, 
study Comrade Jiang Zemin's speeches at the second and third 
meetings of the Central Discipline Inspection Commission, and 
implement the party Central Committee's plans to the letter. 
Specifically, we should redouble our efforts to investigate and 
deal with major and important cases, base our actions on fact, 
follow the principle of taking the law as the criterion, and 
mete out stiff and heavy punishment to criminals involved in 
embezzlement and bribery cases in accordance with the law. 
Judging by the situation over the past few months, many 
localities have conscientiously investigated and dealt with some 
major and important cases, penalizing a number of felons who 
committed economic crimes. However, they have also encountered 
some difficulties, running into stumbling blocks or even some 
resistance in investigating and dealing with some of the major 
and important cases. 
  In view of some major and important cases brought to light 
by the deepening anticorruption drive, we must strengthen 
leadership, undertake painstaking organizational efforts, 
promptly investigate and deal with them, conduct thorough 
investigations, and mete out stern punishment without mercy 
regardless of who is involved and how much resistance we may 
encounter. We should severely punish people who obstruct our 
efforts to handle cases or who shelter corrupt elements, acting 
in accordance with party discipline and state law. Furthermore, 
we should stress key aspects of our work and fulfill the 
requirements of the central authorities by focusing on 
investigating and dealing with criminal cases involving 
personnel in leading party and government bodies and in 
judicial, administrative, law enforcement, and economic 
administrative departments who embezzle public funds, take 
bribes, and bend the law for personal gain. 4) We should 
fortify primary government and party organs and rely on the 
masses in maintaining social stability. Party and government 
leaders at all levels must show a strong sense of urgency, 
institute practical and effective measures, devote great efforts 
to consolidating primary party and government organs in 
different stages and groups, and continuously strengthen work in 
this respect in keeping with the evolving situation. Moreover, 
we should improve various self- governing mass organizations 
based primarily on party branches, such as villagers', 
neighborhood, public security, and mediation committees. We 
should remove various difficulties hindering the normal 
operation of these primary organizations; give full rein to 
their role in maintaining social stability; and work in 
conjunction with the masses to maintain social stability to 
ensure smooth progress in reform, opening up, and modernization. 
  After Ren Jianxin finished his speech, Peng Peiyun, state 
councilor and concurrently minister in charge of the State 
Family Planning Commission, and Wu Yi, minister of foreign trade 
and economic cooperation, spoke. 
  NPC deputy Dong Qinjun, president of the Shanxi Provincial 
Pediatrics Hospital, said: Endemic diseases have erupted in 85 
percent of the counties across the country, afflicting more than 
60 million people. In Shanxi, 90 percent of the counties are 
plagued by endemic diseases, especially by Kaschin-Beck disease, 
Keshan disease, iodine deficiency, and brucellosis. 
Poverty-ridden areas are prone to endemic diseases. He said: 
Endemic diseases not only endanger the patients but also affect 
their children and future generations. The past few years have 
witnessed an upswing in endemic diseases as a result of 
slackened prevention and control efforts nationwide and of 
serious shortages of funds for prevention and control. The 
prevention and control of endemic diseases is a major 
undertaking that has a bearing on the nation's rise and fall, 
the health of posterity, reform, development, and stability. We 
can never allow a recurrence of the previous situation in which 
even doctors as good as "Hua Tuo [a famous surgeon in the Han 
Dynasty] could do nothing to control parasitic worms." For this 
reason, he filed a motion in which he said: "We should quickly 
enact laws on preventing and controlling endemic diseases to 
bring such prevention and control onto the legal track." 
  After hearing his speech, Minister Peng Peiyun said: In 
preventing and controlling endemic diseases, we should enlist 
the joint efforts of all social sectors and rely on overall 
coordination between departments in charge of medical and 
educational services as they relate to economic development. 
The central authorities have decided to solve the endemic 
disease problem in the near future. 
  After hearing the deputies' remarks, Wu Yi noted: At 
present, the most important task in developing foreign trade is 
to enhance our own competitiveness, to train foreign economic 
and trade personnel, and to survive and develop in the course of 
competition. 
  Hu Fuguo and Sun Wensheng said: The period from now on until 
the middle of the next century will be crucial for Shanxi's 
development. We have no choice but to make unremitting efforts 
in carrying out the central task of economic construction. This 
is a historic opportunity and a great mission of the times for 
Shanxi. Now that a sound blueprint has been mapped out and the 
way forward has been pointed out, we need to work in a 
down-to-earth manner. 
<H5>  Comrade Peng Zhen: "Unity Is Strength" </H5>
  At 1600 on 21 March, Hu Fuguo, Sun Wensheng, Lu Gongxun, Li 
Ligong, and Wang Tingdong, all Shanxi deputies to the Second 
Session of the Eighth NPC, came to Comrade Peng Zhen's residence 
to call on this veteran comrade of noble character and high 
prestige on behalf of all comrades in the Shanxi delegation as 
well as the elders in Shanxi. 
  Comrade Peng Zhen, who was full of energy, was very glad to 
see the comrades from his hometown. He said repeatedly: "How 
are you, comrades? Thank you for visiting me. Thank my fellow 
townfolk for their concern for me." He then inquired about the 
speeches, opinions, and suggestions made by comrades in the 
Shanxi NPC delegation. He specifically inquired about the work 
carried out in his hometown and the living conditions of his 
fellow townfolk over the past year. 
  Peng Zhen told Shanxi CPC Secretary Hu Fuguo: "I heard 
people say that, after returning to your post in Shanxi, you did 
a number of things that really benefited the people and that 
were very welcomed by the masses. We are all very pleased, too." 
  Hu Fuguo said: "Thank you for your encouragement. It is an 
inducement and a spur to us. There are a lot of things that I 
still need to do. I will do an even better job in the future 
and I hope you will give us more directions from now on." 
  Then, Hu Fuguo told Peng Zhen: Shanxi is building highways 
and the Wanjiazhai Project to divert the Huang He.... 
  Peng Zhen asked with concern: "Has construction of the 
project started?" 
  "It has already started," Hu Fuguo said. "The central 
authorities are very concerned with Shanxi's work. Vice Premier 
Zou Jiahua went to the job site to cut the ribbon for a ceremony 
to kick off construction of the Wanjiazhai Project. General 
Secretary Jiang Zemin made a special trip to Shanxi to inspect 
its work before the Spring Festival; he is very concerned with 
Shanxi's work, its people, highways, and water. During the 
current session, Comrades Li Peng and Qiao Shi specially joined 
discussions with Shanxi deputies to hear, face to face, 
everyone's views and suggestions. They all showed the central 
authorities' concern and support for Shanxi." 
  Peng Zhen said: "Shanxi has made very tremendous 
contributions to the nation no matter whether it was in the war 
era or after the founding of the People's Republic, in the past 
or present. It is still necessary for us to carry forward this 
fine tradition. Shanxi faces a water shortage. I hope the 
problem can be solved at an early date." 
  When Hu Fuguo told Comrade Peng Zhen that Shanxi's leading 
group is very closely united, the latter said gladly: "Very 
good, unity is strength. An important content of Marxism-Mao 
Zedong Thought stresses unity. When you succeed in promoting 
unity, you, as a secretary, have tackled your work's crucial 
point." 
  Li Ligong and other comrades told Peng Zhen: When you 
returned to your hometown in 1986, you earnestly exhorted its 
people again and again to promote unity and not to fuss about 
such past unpleasant trifles as the Zhang's dog having bitten 
the Li's chicken or internecine strifes. You also strictly 
forbade your own relatives to always think about three family 
members being persecuted to death during the "Great Cultural 
Revolution." Let bygones be bygones, you told them; and you 
urged them to take the lead to promote unity and carry out 
construction in the town. These words of yours and your breadth 
of vision still spread among the people of your hometown; they 
become the strength that spurs all its people to promote unity 
and build the town. 
  Peng Zhen had repeatedly said: Those who allow themselves to 
be swayed by personal feelings do not belong to a communist 
party. The whole party and all the people across the country 
must unite. Nothing can be accomplished without unity. After 
listening to deputies' speeches, he stressed: "Communists and, 
in particular, the party's leading cadres at all levels, must 
stress unity more than other things. Only when we are united 
can we have strength." 
  Peng Zhen exhorted with deep feeling: "Shanxi is an old 
revolutionary area. It made efforts during the war and also 
during socialist construction. I hope the people of our 
hometown will make even greater contributions." 
  At last, on behalf of the Shanxi people, Hu Fuguo wished 
Comrade Peng Zhen good health and a long life. Peng Zhen said: 
"Please convey my regards to the people of my hometown. I hope 
it will achieve greater successes in carrying out its work!" 
  Comrade Bo Yibo: "Develop Shanxi's Economy" 
  On the afternoon of 22 March, 24 Shanxi deputies attending 
the Second Session of the Eighth NPC, visited Comrade Bo Yibo at 
his residence. Bringing along the good wishes of all members of 
the Shanxi delegation, they called on the veteran comrade of 
noble character and high prestige. 
  Walking to the courtyard with vigorous strides, Bo Yibo 
shook 
hands with the comrades from his home province and had a group 
photo taken to mark the occasion. 
  He said happily: The current NPC session has been convened 
very well. I read newspapers about it every day. To correctly 
handle the relationship among reform, development, and stability 
is everyone's duty, not just the party and government leaders. 
The proper handling of the relationship among the three is very 
important to accomplishing the tasks forwarded by the current 
session, as well as to bringing about a sustained, rapid, and 
healthy development of the national economy. He was glad that 
the deputies shared such a view and supported the major and 
basic principles for the work of the whole party and country 
this year. 
  Shanxi Governor Sun Wensheng briefed Bo Yibo on his work 
after being transferred from Hunan to Shanxi and on his concept 
about Shanxi's economic construction. Sun Wensheng said: "We 
are building roads and water-drawing projects and we pledge to 
perform more actual deeds and do good work in Shanxi. Although 
Shanxi is not my native province, I am willing to dedicate the 
second half of my life to Shanxi." 
  Bo Yibo said happily: "Very good! Since both you and Comrade 
Hu Fuguo tell the truth, perform actual deeds, and set good 
examples, things are a lot easier to do there. The people in 
Shanxi place very high hopes on you two. I am very glad that 
you two are teaming up so well." 
  Bo Yibo said: "Success lies in unity. Shanxi has abundant 
underground natural resources. The question now is how to take 
advantage of them. People often say that a place becomes 
glorious if there are outstanding talents there. It is true. 
We should rely on specialized personnel and unity. A genuine 
unity is shown by deeds, not lip service. A leading group's 
members should discuss things with one another more often." 
  Wang Tingdong, who sat beside Bo Yibo, butted in: "Shanxi's 
leading body is very united. Fuguo and Wensheng are setting 
examples in everything and the people fully support them." 
  Bo Yibo said: "I constantly read about Shanxi and know about 
Shanxi's determination to deal with some undesirable people and 
things [chu li yi xie bu hao di ren he shi 5710 3810 0001 0067 
0008 1170 4104 0086 0735 0057]. This is very good. However, it 
is also necessary to establish and commend positive examples." 
  He said: "You should seize the opportunity to promote 
economic development, build well the Wanjiachai project for 
drawing water from the Huang He and the Yangcheng power plant, 
and pay attention to training young specialized personnel." 
  Bo Yibo said with deep feeling: "Shanxi is an old 
revolutionary base area with abundant natural resources. I hope 
the people in my native province will make new progress in 
economic development." 
  Then, it was 1830. Hu Fuguo wished Bo Yibo good health on 
behalf of all Shanxi people. Bo Yibo said: "I thank the people 
of my home province. Nothing is better than hearing good news 
about the home province. I am waiting to hear good news about 
you." 

