Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Wafa' 'Amr in Tunis] </F>
  [Text] Palestinian leader Yasir 'Arafat accused the 
Israelis on Wednesday [16 February] of planning to spark a 
Palestinian civil war and to "turn the occupied territories into 
another Afghanistan" by facilitating arms trade. 
  Mr. 'Arafat expressed worry about arms pouring in the 
occupied territories and grave concern over the possible 
repetition of the "Afghan scenario" inside the occupied 
territories after Israeli troops pull out from the Gaza Strip 
and Jericho. 
  Contending that the Palestine Liberation Organisation's 
(PLO) 
takeover from Israel in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of 
Jericho will be fielded with mines, Mr. 'Arafat said Israel was 
trying to spill oil on fire by facilitating the purchase of arms 
by Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, which have already 
been used against Palestinians to disrupt stability. 
  "There is a very terrible trade of arms going on under the 
auspices of some Israeli officers in the West Bank and Gaza 
Strip, smuggling and trading," Mr. 'Arafat said in a joint 
interview with the JORDAN TIMES and the London-based GUARDIAN. 
  "In my opinion, this is being seriously and wickedly 
planned. 
They know that these weapons, while they are withdrawing, will 
not be used against them... then against whom will they be 
used?" Mr. 'Arafat asked in the interview conducted at his 
office here. 
  Leaning closer to a desk covered by huge stacks of files and 
papers, with a serious and worried look in his tired eyes, the 
PLO chairman, raising his voice to a pitch, asked: "Are they 
imagining there will be another Afghanistan amongst the 
Palestinians? This is a very dangerous game they are playing." 
  PLO officials have privately expressed fear of a civil war 
if 
Palestinians did not restrain themselves and continued to 
purchase arms and solve their political differences through 
violence. The PLO-Israeli accord signed in September has caused 
serious rifts among Palestinians. 
  Mr. 'Arafat was also challenged by his own Fatah group, the 
backbone of the PLO, which is also divided over the accord. 
Immediately after the accord, three Fatah leaders were 
assassinated in Gaza. As'ad Saftawi, Fatah leader in Gaza, 
assassinated in October, was 'Arafat's aide and personal friend. 
The assassinations, especially Saftawi's, alarmed Mr. 'Arafat 
and caused him great sorrow. He vowed to do his utmost to put 
an end to inter-Palestinian fighting. PLO officials believed 
Palestinians working as agents to the Israeli intelligence were 
behind the assassinations. The recent distribution of arms in 
the occupied territories, they fear, might lead Palestinians to 
settle political and personal disputes through bloodshed and 
violence. 
  "Some of these weapons have been used against stability in 
the occupied territories, and I have received many complaints 
from our citizens, from the masses against what is happening," 
Mr. 'Arafat said. 
  He said the arms "are falling into the hands of everybody 
(collaborators, Hamas, the PLO), they are being made available 
to everybody, and at different prices. The price is not 
important, it is the policy behind it that is dangerous." 
  The PLO leader said his organisation discovered the Israeli 
role in facilitating arms sales immediately after the signing of 
the September self-rule accord. "The sales have accelerated in 
recent weeks," he said. 
  Asked whether he was sure Israeli officers were actually 
involved in the affairs, he said firmly: "Do you think there is 
a mutiny among Israeli officers? This game is going on with 
their help, and this is not a joke." 
  The PLO chairman was obviously unhappy with what he sees as 
the passive role of the United States and the permanent members 
of the U.N. Security Council, particularly concerning this 
issue. He said he had officially informed them and the Israelis 
of the situation and cautioned them against the consequences. 
  Mr. 'Arafat dismissed the possibility that any Arab state 
opposing the self-rule accord would threaten his life or attempt 
to sabotage the deal, saying: "Only the Palestinans and the 
Israelis, the two partners who signed the agreement in 
Washington, can damage it." 
  He said Israel's policy of delaying implementation of the 
agreement "will sabotage the peace process and reflect 
negatively on the whole process. It will backfire 
dangerously... not only on Palestinians, but on the whole area 
because confusion is contagious and will spread throughout the 
region... it will lead to balkanisation as well." 
  "The Israeli government is not in a hurry to implement 
anything," he said. "We are late anyway because implementation 
of the agreement, the beginning of withdrawal should have been 
on Dec. 13." 
  According to the self-rule agreement, Israeli troops should 
have started withdrawing from Gaza Strip and Jericho on Dec. 13 
to be finalised on April 13. Disputes over security on border 
crossings between Jordan and Jericho and between Egypt and the 
Gaza Strip, as well as the size of Jericho and the area of 
Jewish settlements in Gaza Strip delayed implementation. The 
two sides succeeded in initialling a security agreement in Cairo 
on Feb. 9, but many issues remained unresolved. 
  Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin has said another month 
was needed to resolve pending issues. 
  "We have to remember what Rabin had said about having no 
sacred dates: How can this be accepted internationally, and 
from the American administration, and from U.S. President 
Clinton, since the agreement was signed under his auspices?" 
Mr. 'Arafat said. 
  "Especially the dates are the main part of the agreement. 
But until now, two months have passed and nothing has been 
implemented on the ground." 
  The 65-year-old PLO leader switched from Arabic to English 
when he spoke in a soft voice. His body rocked in his chair in 
a sign of nervousness. He sought help in English from two press 
advisers attending the interview. 
  "This is the first time I speak to the press after the Cairo 
agreement. Even in Cairo I did not speak about it," he said. 
  Fumbling with his files on his desk, he picked up a 
document, 
put on his looking glasses and started reading out the remaining 
"difficult issues and problems" which needed further 
negotiations in Cairo, Taba and in a meeting between him and Mr. 
Rabin before a final agreement. 
  "The Palestinian security forces and the police force are 
still one of the problems that still have to be settled. The 
size of Jericho area has not been settled. Other main issues 
concerning the security zone for the settlements in Gaza Strip." 
  "They (Israelis) are asking more than what they had asked 
before in the beginning they asked for 170 square kilometres in 
the Gaza Strip, half the area of the strip, and then 32 square 
kilometres and about 20 the zoning." [sentence as published] 
  He said Israelis had not given the Palestinians the size of 
the police force they want deployed in the self-rule areas after 
Israeli withdrawal. "But in developed countries it is known for 
the security forces and police force that for every 200 people 
there should be one policeman. In our case, especially that we 
are facing many problems, it should be one policeman for every 
hundred people, since we won't have an army to call in cases of 
emergency." 
  He added among the unresolved issues were the differences in 
security arrangements between the bridges over the Jordan River 
and Rafah entrances. 
  "There is no electronic line on the Egyptian-Palestinian 
border as it is now the case all along the Jordan River border. 
Between Jordan's border and the Palestinian territory at the 
other side of the river there is an electronic line with a depth 
between 2-3 kilometres... Israel wants to keep this electronic 
security line during the interim period." 
  Other details, he said, include the administration of the 
border crossings and security and liaison bureaus on crossings. 
"All these are still under discussion." 
  The 12-page detailed Cairo agreement included eight pages on 
border crossings' security arrangements. 
  Mr. 'Arafat said the most important thing about the Feb. 9 
Cairo accord was that "it was the first agreement for the 
implementation of the declaration of principles which we signed 
in Washington." 
  He described his three-day negotiations in Cairo with 
Israeli 
Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres as "very difficult." 
  The Cairo meeting was on the verge of failure even during 
the 
last minutes before the signing "because of Israeli insistence 
to adhere to certain conditions and certain demands, that is why 
it is clear that many issues in the agreement were left for 
further negotiations and agreement in Taba," he said. 
  "There were many surprises in Cairo, I don't want to enter 
into that again now." 
  Reflecting back on the Cairo meetings, the PLO chairman said 
"all the Israelis are very difficult in negotiations." 
  Refusing to assess his negotiating experience with both Mr. 
Rabin and Mr. Peres, he said: "I don't want to interfere. This 
is an Israeli internal affair and I have no right to speak about 
it. Peres was representing the Israeli government and was 
mandated by Rabin and the Israeli government, as he had 
mentioned to the Egyptians and to me before our arrival in 
Cairo." 
  However, Mr. 'Arafat said, since he founded Fatah in 1964 
with his companions, most of whom had been assassinated, "I have 
become used to difficult times. I don't remember any period of 
my life without difficulties... it is what I had chosen right 
from the beginning. I had no illusions." 

