BFN 

  BOHEMIA BANK LOSES LICENSE: The Czech National Bank Board 
withdrew with an immediate effect from the Bohemia Bank its 
foreign currency license for payment contacts abroad. In 
future, the Bohemia Bank will be licensed only to exchange money 
and maintain foreign currency accounts. The Bohemia Bank issued 
Prime Bank Guarantees and Bank Guarantees, thereby violating the 
banking laws. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 22 Mar 94 p 16) 
  BANK BUILDS EQUITY: While Prime Bank Guarantees issued by 
the Bohemia Bank contrary to the bookkeeping laws are still with 
the Swiss ($300 million worth) and German ($14 million) 
partners, and cannot yet be withdrawn, they have not been traded 
and an agreement will certainly be reached. In the meantime, 
the Bohemia Bank reports 1993 profits of Kc100 million, and 
plans to raise additional capital of Kc200 million. (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 28 Mar 94 p 2) 
  LESS FOR PRIVATIZATION: In the preliminary round of the 
second wave of privatization, citizens entrusted 3.92 billion 
coupon points (or 63.5 percent of the total) to investment and 
mutual privatization funds. This is almost 10 percent less than 
in the first wave. (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 22 Mar 94 p 2) 
  VW, SKODA LOSSES: Volkswagen, VW, ended 1993 with a loss of 
1.94 billion German marks, DM (1992 profit of DM147 million, 
1991 profit of DM1.1 billion). Skoda Mlada Boleslav was the 
only VW Group mark that increased production last year by almost 
10 percent. Nevertheless, following last year's profit of DM233 
million, this year, it joined the losing subsidiaries with a 
loss of DM246 million. One reason for the loss is the change in 
bookkeeping in the Czech Republic. According to Western 
European standards, Skoda would have closed with a profit of DM8 
million (still a fall from DM70 million in 1992). (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 25 Mar 94 pp 1, 22) 
  FOREIGN BANKS PROVIDE CREDIT: According to the Czech Banking 
Association, the foreign banks' share of total credit provided 
in the Czech Republic amounts to only 3.2 percent. Before full 
convertibility is introduced, foreign banks are focusing on more 
profitable services. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 25 Mar 
94 p 2) 
  SKODA PURCHASES ERFURT ENTERPRISE: Skoda Plzen has taken 
over Umform Technik Erfurt. This company manufactures car-body 
presses, farm machinery, and consumer products (sales of DM200 
million). The contract, signed in Berlin on 24 March, specifies 
that Skoda will temporarily employ the company's staff of 1,645, 
later reducing the number to 1,000. The Plzen concern will 
invest DM150 million to modernize the enterprise. Skoda owns 90 
percent of the enterprise. (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 26 
Mar 94 p 6) 
  CSA SHARES SOLD: Transport Minister Strasky, representing 
the National Property Fund, and Air France President Rudolf 
Frantz signed an agreement on 25 March for the Konsolidacni 
Banka to purchase Air France's stake (52,248 shares, 19.1 
percent worth $27 million) in the Czechoslovak Airlines (CSA). 
(Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 26 Mar 94 p 1) 
  VW NEGOTIATIONS: Following the unexpected refusal of DM1.4 
billion credit for Skoda and the reduction of the planned 
investments from DM7.1 to DM3.7 billion, the VW management has 
abandoned the idea of building a new engine plant in Mlada 
Boleslav. According to former Industry Minister Vrba, one of the 
negotiators, however, the Czech side will not accept this 
decision. As a matter of fact, he says, VW should guarantee the 
production of two new models and the introduction of the Czech 
suppliers in the VW network. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in 
Czech 29 Mar 94 p 2) 
  AUSTRIAN COMPANY BUYS IN: The Ergee Schrems textile concern 
purchased 51-percent stake in Roznov garments manufacturer (one 
of the largest Czech producer of infant clothing, childrens' 
textiles, and hosiery). The financial transaction took place 
last July, but the actual association of the companies is only 
taking place now. By the end of February, the Austrian partner 
equipped Loana with new technology valued at Kc100 million, and 
the company's output doubled. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in 
Czech 29 Mar 94 p 6) 
  SKODA TERMINATES STASIS TALKS: Skoda Plzen and Stasis 
(Stavebni a Silnicni Stroje, Construction and Road Machines) 
Horni Slavkov have been discussing the foundation of a joint 
venture since the middle of 1993. The Skoda management is to 
terminate the talks, however, because they feel that "the 
conduct of Stasis is speculative and its demands do not 
correspond to the original intentions." (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 29 Mar 94 p 6) 
  INTEREST RATES: CSOB (Czechoslovak Trade Bank) alters its 
interest rates. Beginning 1 April, the minimum credit rate is 
11 percent, the basic interest rate for short-term (less than 
one year) loans is 12.75 percent, two-year credit is 14.5 
percent annually, and three-year credit is 15.9 percent. 
(Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 29 Mar 94 p 9) 
  DISAGREEMENT OVER FARM POLICY: Entrepreneurial 
representatives in the Council of Economic and Social Agreement, 
comprising representatives of the government, employers, and 
trade unions, expressed their disagreement today with the 
government's agriculture policy, said Jan Fencl, president of 
the Czech-Moravian Association of Agricultural Cooperatives, 
after a meeting of the Tripartite Council. They think that 
government policy is merely shelving the solution to the current 
agriculture problems. "We understand the accepted policy as 
another government decision not to resolve the absurd situation 
in agriculture," stressed Fencl. Entrepreneurs feel that 
agricultural producers are unable to extricate themselves from 
current economic difficulties without government support. The 
farmers are the victims of two kinds of pressure: one from 
monopoly suppliers and the other from monopoly purchasers of 
agricultural products. The profitability of agricultural 
operations during the last three years has varied from -6.7 to 
-10 percent. (Prague CTK in English 1622 GMT 31 Mar 94) 
  TOURISM STATISTICS: Almost 10.6 million foreigners have 
visited the Czech Republic since the beginning of 1994. That is 
a 21 percent increase from the same period last year, the Czech 
Statistical Office said in a report presented to CTK on 31 
March. Out of this number, 910,493 people crossed the Slovak 
border in that period. Some 5.7 million Germans have visited 
the Czech Republic, which is a 27.1-percent increase against 
January and February 1993, 1.6 million Austrians, an increase of 
5.1 percent against the same period of 1993, and about 2.3 
million Poles, which represents a 20- percent increase. In the 
same period, about 4.2 million Czechs travelled abroad, and the 
Slovak border was crossed by 436,605 people. (Prague CTK in 
English 2000 GMT 31 Mar 94) 
  UKRAINE ENVOY ON TRADE: Ukrainian Ambassador to the Czech 
Republic Roman Lubkivski believes that there are pre-requisites 
for Ukrainian-Czech trade to grow to 10 times its current level. 
Ukrainian Counselor Mykhaylo Kuckir said that about 350 
Czech-Ukrainian joint stock companies and firms had been 
established so far. He pointed to problems in mutual payments 
which still existed but did not specify them. He said that 
agriculture, food industry, consumer goods production, 
restructuring metallurgical and machine plant and nuclear power 
stations offered good prospects for Czech-Ukrainian cooperation. 
He also mentioned the idea of establishing a joint 
Czech-Ukrainian bank in the summer. (Prague CTK in English 1601 
GMT 1 Apr 94) 
  DECREASING LABOR FORCE -- The very low unemployment rate in 
the Czech Republic is largely a result of its generally 
decreasing labor force, according to an analysis of the Vienna 
Institute for International Economic Comparisons. Overall the 
Czech Republic's labor force has declined from 5.7 million 
people in 1989 to the present 4.8 million. With its 3.7 percent 
unemployment, the Czech Republic is better than not only the 
other reform countries in Central and Eastern Europe, but also 
many Western countries. The number of job-seekers in the Czech 
Republic is, however, expected to double this year, says the 
institute's study, which is thus at variance with more 
optimistic conclusions by the Czech Government. (Prague CTK in 
English 0821 GMT 5 Apr 94) 
  MAHART TO REQUEST COMPENSATION -- The Hungarian shipping 
company Mahart has not yet worked out the financial loss that it 
suffered from the cut in Danube River transportation caused by 
the blockage of the Gabcikovo lock but will be asking the Slovak 
authorities for damages, Manhart representative Laszlo Koszonics 
told the Hungarian News Agency MTI today. He said that about 20 
Mahart ships and barges are moored near Vienna and Bratislava, 
with others waiting for the resumption of river transportation 
in Hungarian ports. (Prague CTK in English 1010 GMT 6 Apr 94) 
  PRELIMINARY PRIVATIZATION ROUND: Of the 6.17 million 
registered coupon holders, 3.97 million participated in the 
preliminary round of the second wave of privatization. This is 
64 percent of all the coupon holders. A total of 3.87 million 
coupon holders have entrusted all their privatization points 
(1,000 per coupon holder) to privatization funds. The 
privatization funds are administering 3.92 million points, which 
is 65.5 percent of all the available points. This is about 10 
percent less than in the first wave. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY 
in Czech 22 Mar 94) 
  NATIONAL BANK'S ASSETS, LIABILITIES: Ceska Narodni Banka's 
(Czech National Bank) assets and liabilities reached 385.13 
korunas (Kc), which is 15.5 billion more than on 28 February. 
This figure was provided by the bank's press department 
yesterday. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 22 Mar 94) 
  CULTURAL OBJECTS EXPORT LAW: The parliament passed a bill on 
23 March limiting the export of objects of cultural value and 
completely liberalizing trade in them on the domestic market. 
According to the law, artistic works may only be exported with 
a certificate issued by professional organizations, such as 
museums, galleries, cultural monument institutes, and the 
Ministry of Culture. Before the bill was passed, the parliament 
accepted an amendment requiring that export certificates also be 
obtained for original works by artists who have been dead less 
than 50 years, as long as the works are in the possession of the 
artist's direct descendants. (Prague CTK in English 1551 GMT 23 
Mar 94) 
  COMMISSION FOR UKRAINE TRADE: "It is delightful that despite 
all the economic crisis phenomena and our passing through a 
complex period of transformation, our mutual relations have not 
significantly suffered." Ukrainian External Economic Relations 
Minister Oleh Slyepichev stated this in an interview for 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY following his talks with the Czech economy 
ministers, with whom he signed, at the end of last week, 
treaties on economic cooperation and support, and mutual 
protection of investments. "Because mutual relations used to be 
centrally controlled, we are searching for suitable mechanisms 
for their revival," the minister said. That was one of the 
reasons why the Ukrainian External Economic Relations Ministry 
and the Czech Industry and Trade Ministry agreed to create a 
mixed, broadly conceived inter- departmental commission that 
would devote itself to the building of mutual relations. The 
volume of mutual trade has markedly declined in recent years to 
reach a current turnover value of approximately $200 million. 
Trade is more or less balanced. Of the specific priorities in 
mutual trade, the minister pointed to the pressing need for 
restoration and continuous supply of spare parts for the 
extensive pool of Czech trolleybuses and streetcars in Ukrainian 
cities. Ukraine, for its part, used to supply the Czech 
Republic with iron ore and it would be difficult to find a 
replacement for this market. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in 
Czech 22 Mar 94 p 14) 
  SKODA, VW DIFFER ON PROFITS: The Skoda car manufacturer 
registered a slight profit of 7 million German marks (DM) in 
1993, spokesman Milan Smutny told the Reuter news agency today, 
rejecting information from Volkswagen, its joint venture 
partner, that Skoda would make a loss of DM246 million. The 
wide divergence of figures is due to different methods of 
accounting used in the Czech Republic and Germany, he said. The 
definitive results will be presented at the general assembly of 
shareholders on April 15. Volkswagen's financial director 
Werner Schmidt, announcing the results of the Volkswagen Group 
today, said Skoda's DM246 million loss was due to restructuring 
costs. (Prague CTK 1908 GMT 24 Mar 94) 
  AUSTRALIAN INVESTMENT PACT RATIFIED: The parliament today 
ratified an agreement between the Czech Republic and Australia 
on bilateral support and protection of investments. The 
agreement was signed by the two governments in the Australian 
capital, Canberra, on September 30, 1993. The agreement 
expresses the Czech Republic's interest in developing mutually 
advantageous forms of economic cooperation, creating a suitable 
environment for direct foreign investment, and encouraging 
entrepreneurial activity by Czech nationals. It provides for 
the bilateral granting of most- favored-nation trading status, 
for investment-related payments to be made in convertible 
currency, and for guarantees that investments by one state will 
be protected from internal measures of the other, such as 
nationalization. (Prague CTK in English 1614 GMT 24 Mar 94) 
  CENTRAL BANK CURRENCY REPORT: Basic macroeconomic stability 
was maintained in the Czech Republic and the decline in 
productivity was slowed down and nearly halted after the 
division of Czechoslovakia last year, says a report discussed by 
the Banking Council of the Czech National Bank (CNB). The 
currency division on February 8, 1993, and the restructuring and 
privatization taking place in the Czech Republic, were 
significant for the maintenance of currency stability, CNB 
spokesman Martin Svehla stated. (Prague CTK in English 1742 GMT 
24 Mar 94) 
  BANK PURCHASES SHARE IN CSA: Transport Minister Jan Strasky, 
representing the National Property Fund, and Air France 
President Rudolph Frantz signed an agreement 25 March that 
provides for the purchase of Air France's stake in Czechoslovak 
Airlines (CSA) by Konsolidacni Banka (Consolidation Bank). The 
purchase amounts to 19.1 percent of the airline's total stock, 
said Pavel Kavka from the Transport Ministry. CSA's current 
owners are the National Property Fund with 49 percent, the EBRD 
with 19.1 percent, and Konsolidacni Banka with the same share. 
The other shareholders include the Ceska Sporitelna (Czech 
Savings Bank), the City of Prague and a few Slovak cities. 
(Prague CTK in English 1833 GMT 25 Mar 94) 
  BUSINESSES TO BEAR EXCHANGE BURDEN: Businesses will pay for 
exchange rate differences resulting from the elimination of the 
old clearing account, Czech Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik said 
today after Czech-Slovak negotiations in Smolenice. Slovak 
Finance Minister Rudolf Filkus added that it was inadmissible 
that the state should make up the difference. All liabilities 
on the old account are to be converted into ECUs and transferred 
onto the new account, Kocarnik said. Under the old bloc, the 
1-1 ratio is applied for payments related to trade deals 
concluded before the currency split. The new bloc uses ECUs. 
(Prague CTK in English 1847 GMT 25 Mar 94) 
  KLAUS ON REFORM: The Czech Republic is the first 
post-communist country to enter the second phase of reform, the 
post-transformation stage, Czech Premier Vaclav Klaus said in a 
speech to the Paasikivi Society in Finland. The first phase, 
the transformation phase, includes all the basic reform 
measures. In the subsequent stage there are no visible new 
reforms but the reform process is deepened and improved. It is 
important to proceed with reform decisively and rapidly 
throughout, he said. Today Klaus also met Finnish Deputy Premier 
and Minister of Foreign Trade Pertti Salolainen. The talks 
focused chiefly on EU integration. Salolainen said Finnish 
advice particularly on the EU's regional and agricultural policy 
could be very useful to the Czech Republic. (Prague CTK in 
English 2015 GMT 25 Mar 94) 
  KOCARNIK COMMENTS: Czech Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik said 
today that non-tariff barriers, including certification of 
imported foodstuffs, could complicate Czech-Slovak relations in 
the future. Speaking after meeting with his Slovak counterpart 
Rudolf Filkus and a meeting of the two countries' National Bank 
councils, Kocarnik said "We do not deny the Slovak authorities' 
right to require quality certificates, we fully respect this." 
But he added he was disquieted when certificates were required 
by such close states as the Czech Republic and Slovakia. 
(Prague CTK in English 2032 GMT 25 Mar 94) 
  DLOUHY ELECTED: Czech Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir 
Dlouhy was elected new chairman of the Czech-Slovak Customs 
Union Council on 28 March, replacing Slovakia's Jan Ducky, the 
council's secretariat informed journalists. (Prague CTK in 
English 1010 GMT 28 Mar 94) 
  SKODA-UKRAINE NUCLEAR CONTRACT: The nuclear engineering 
company Skoda Jaderne Strojirenstvi has signed a contract to 
deliver Kc60 million (about $2 million) worth of equipment to a 
nuclear power plant in Ukraine's Rovenskaya district. Ukraine 
has expressed interest in purchasing $150 million worth of 
nuclear equipment from Skoda Jaderne Strojirenstvi over the next 
five to eight years, director Vaclav Lobovsky said. (Prague CTK 
in English 1121 GMT 28 Mar 94) 
  CONFEDERATION'S NEW NAME: The Czech Confederation of 
Industry (SP CR) has adopted a new name: the Confederation of 
Industry and Transport (SPD CR), general director Bretislav 
Ostadal announced today. The main reason for the change is that 
several associations have joined the confederation, including 
the Association of Transport. However, the confederation will 
continue to use the name "the Czech Confederation of Industry" 
when dealing with foreigners. (Prague CTK in English 1419 GMT 
20 Mar 94) 
  STEEL MANUFACTURER'S ORDERS: Poldi Ocel has orders until the 
end of the next year. This is what the director of the company, 
Vladimir Stehlik, said yesterday. Poldi customers signed 
contracts for deliveries of 420,000 tonnes of steel, and another 
220,000 tonnes are subject to negotiations. Apart from that, 
Poldi expects more orders to come from abroad. (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 29 Mar p 2) 
  BANK OWNERSHIP: At present, 22 banks with 100 percent Czech 
ownership operate in the Czech Republic, 13 banks are partially 
foreign owned, and 20 banks are completely foreign owned. 
(Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 30 Mar 94 p 14) 
  POWER PLANT DESULFURIZATION: Sulfurous dioxide emissions of 
the CEZ (Czech Power Generating Works) thermal power plants are 
to be reduced to one-ninth of the current state by 1999. 
Nevertheless, the desulfurization of the first two units is 
only at the preparatory stage. A 2.3 billion koruna (Kc) 
contract for the supply of desulfurization equipment for 
Pocerady power plant was signed on 29 March by CEZ and Dutch 
Hoogovens Technical Services. (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in Czech 
30 Mar 94 p 3) 
  COAL DUST BRIQUETTES: Approximately 7.3 million tonnes of 
coal is mined annually at Bilina Mines (northern Bohemia) but 
only 3 million tonnes is of good quality. The remainder is sold 
as dust to power and heating plants. It is expected that these 
sales will decline fast, and the company is preparing for 
production of coal dust briquettes (possibly in cooperation with 
the U.S. firm KFX). (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 30 Mar 94 p 16) 
  NEW BANK CARDS: The Universal Bank based in Usti nad Labem 
is the first bank in the Czech Republic and Europe to issue 
laser banking cards. The new card is virtually indestructible. 
(Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 30 Mar 94 FINANCNI NOVINY 
supplement p i) 
  INTEREST RATE DOWN: On 1 April, the Ceska Sporitelna lowered 
its basic interest rate by 0.5 percent. Similarly, the interest 
paid on regular saving accounts was reduced by 0.5 percent to 
1.5 percent per annum and the interest paid on two-year term 
deposits to 10 percent. The interest charged on credits to 
natural persons are reduced by between 0.5 and 1.5 percent. The 
bank's margin should not be affected. (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 31 Mar 94 p 2) Evrobanka also announced new 
interest rates -- short-term credits have the minimum rate of 15 
percent, long-term credits 18 percent. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in 
Czech 31 Mar 94 p 9) The CSOB (Czechoslovak Foreign Trade Bank) 
lowers its basic interest rate charged on credits for terms of 
less than a year by 0.5 percent to 12.75 percent on 1 April. 
Other interest rates are similarly adjusted. The biggest 
change is in four-year term deposits, where the rate is reduced 
by 1 percent. (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 30 Mar 94 p 16) 
  SOFTWARE PIRACY: The Business Software Alliance estimates 
the loss resulting from software piracy in the Czech Republic at 
Kc5.5 billion. The copyright protection alliance announced its 
first (in the Czech Republic and at the same time in the Central 
and Eastern Europe) action against firms suspected of using 
computer programs illegally (searches etc.). (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 31 Mar 94 p 3) 
  FIRST SATELLITE PROGRAM: At 1830 on 2 April, Kabel Plus Film 
launches the first regular program broadcast via satellite 
(Gorizont) in the Czech Republic. Kabel Plus Executive Director 
Pohl also reported that more than one half of the 400,000 cable 
subscribers in the republic are Kabel Plus customers. The film 
channel alone has 178,000 subscribers. (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF 
in Czech 31 Mar 94 p 2) 
  SKODA PLZEN IN BRAZIL: According to Skoda Plzen PR officer 
Hudec, the company's commercial offices abroad have proved to be 
successful -- four times more contracts have been signed this 
year than in the same period last year. Therefore, company 
director general Soudek opened another representative office 
last week, this time in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Skoda is well 
on track for its 1994 goal of sales exceeding Kc17 billion. 
(Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 31 Mar 94 p 6) 
  GDP UP: The GDP generated in the Czech Republic last year 
amounted to Kc923.1 billion, i.e, 14.9 percent more than in 
1992. (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 31 Mar 94 p 6) 
  PRAGUE MAYOR INTRODUCES BONDS: Prague Mayor Jan Koukal is to 
meet important financial investors in the City of London today 
and introduce $250 million worth of bonds to finance nine 
projects in the Czech capital. The projects include continuing 
the subway and repairing roads. Koukal is to give a lecture to 
institutional investors at the headquarters of Nomura, the 
company which has traditionaly brought Czech bonds onto foreign 
markets. Last year Nomura negotiated the issuing of dollar bonds 
from the Czech National Bank. They are the second lot of Prague 
bonds to be issued this century. (Prague CTK in English 0811 
GMT 7 Apr 94) 
  SKODA SELLS GERMAN PRESSES: The first contract since signing 
the sale of 90 percent of Umformtechnik Erfurt to Skoda Plzen is 
a shipment of car-body presses for a Volkswagen Chinese 
subsidiary. The contract is worth almost 10 million German 
marks. The first of five presses will be shipped in April, the 
last in October 1994. The deal was arranged by Skoda Trading. 
(Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 1 Apr 94 FINANCNI NOVINY 
supplement p ii) 
  SWEDISH SANDVIK IN CHOMUTOV: Sandvik Chomutov -- Presne 
Trubky (Precision Pipes) Ltd., a subsidiary of the Swedish 
concern AB Sandvik opened for business in Chomutov on 1 April. 
The company emerged following the assumption of 100 percent 
ownership of the precision pipe manufacturing plant formerly 
owned by Valcovny Trub Chomutov (Pipe Rolling Mills). Within 
the next two years, the plant's production should more than 
double (current sales of Kc780 million), while the staff is to 
be reduced by 10 percent. (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 2 Apr 
94 p 6) 
  INSURANCE COMPANIES PROFIT: While the Czech Statistical 
Office reported 1993 pre-tax profit of Czech insurance companies 
at Kc4.5 billion, the Czech Insurance Companies Association 
(CAP) claims profits of only about Kc300 million. (Prague CESKY 
DENIK in Czech 2 Apr 94 p 14) 
  BALANCE OF TRADE WITH SLOVAKIA: The Slovak deficit on the 
clearing account markedly declined (from Kc4.45 to Kc2.07 
billion) in March. The current Kc2.07 billion translates to 62 
million ECU, which is less than a half of the 130 million 
allowed margin. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 2 Apr 94 p 14) 
  DOMESTIC LETTERS OF CREDIT: At the beginning of April, the 
Investicni a Postovni Banka is introducing letters of credit as 
means of domestic payments. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 
6 Apr 94 p 2) 
  FORMS OF CAPITAL INFLOW: Last year, Czech entities borrowed 
$825.6 million abroad in the form of direct credits, direct 
foreign investments amounted to $567.8 million, and foreign 
portfolio investments reached $350 million (up from $15 million 
the preceding year). (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 6 Apr 
94 p 2) 
  OIL COMPANIES' PROPOSAL: Agip, Conoco, Shell, and Total 
reached an agreement and, as the International Oil Companies, 
submitted a proposal to the Ministry of Industry and Trade 
concerning their joint participation in the privatization of 
Czech oil refineries. The companies promise to invest Kc15 
billion here over the next five years to modernize production. 
(Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 7 Apr 94 pp 1, 2) 
  TENANTS CONCERN OVER RENTS: Higher rents are causing concern 
in two out of five households, 13 percent more than last 
December, according to the results of a public opinion survey 
conducted by the Institute for the Public Opinion Research 
(IVVM) among 885 Czechs aged over 15. The survey followed rent 
increases in January. Concern over rent is high among people 
with a basic education (17 percent), families with small 
children (17 percent), old age pensioners (16 percent) and 
residents of towns with over 100,000 inhabitants (12 percent). 
Food costs is a problem for 23 percent of the respondents, down 
17 percent on last October. Most people, however, said they 
were able to cope. (Prague CTK in English 1050 GMT 7 Apr 94) 
  NATIONAL BANK LOWERS RATE: On 8 April, the Czech National 
Bank lowers its Lombard rate from 11.5 percent to 10.5 percent. 
(Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 8 Apr 94 FINANCNI NOVINY 
supplement p ii) 
  HUNGARIAN TRADE: According to the Czech Statistical Office, 
the volume of trade with Hungary increased in 1993 (in 
comparison with 1992) by 12 percent to reach $441.5 million with 
a trade surplus on the Czech side. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY 
in Czech 8 Apr 94 p 21) 
  STUDY ON CZECH ECONOMY: According to an expert study by the 
banking house Nomura International, the traditional intermediary 
in the sale of Czech bonds on the international financial 
markets, the exchange rate of the Czech koruna is two and a half 
times undervalued with regard to its purchasing power, making it 
the most undervalued currency in Central Europe apart from the 
Slovak koruna. This is despite an 18 percent real revaluation 
against the U.S. dollar over the last three and a half years. 
The Nomura calculations imply that the exchange rate of the 
Czech koruna should be 7:1 against the German mark, for 
instance, and 1:1 against the Austrian schilling. (Prague CTK 
in English 1213 GMT 8 Apr 94) 
  RESEARCH WORKERS LEAVING: While in 1988 some 135,000 people 
worked in research and development, the figure declined to only 
50,000 in 1993, Miroslav Ecler, president of the Association of 
Research Organizations of the Czech Republic told CTK on 8 
April. The number of people with higher education employed in 
them declined from 44,000 to 19,000 over the period, Ecler said. 
A large part of them have been attracted by more lucrative 
jobs, such as dealers for foreign companies or the banking 
sector, he added. The largest decline occurred in the power 
industry, non-ferrous metallurgy, electrical engineering, and 
textile and glass industries, Ecler reported. In spite of this, 
75 per cent of the total industrial research and development is 
concentrated in the engineering, eletrical engineering and 
chemical industries. About 95 per cent of all the institutes 
are affiliated with small- and medium-sized companies. More 
than two-thirds of them have fewer than 200 workers, Ecler said. 
(Prague CTK in English 1736 GMT 8 Apr 94) 
  SECOND WAVE OF PRIVATIZATION: The first round of the second 
wave of privatization begins on 11 April. While 'only' 5.94 
million citizens took part in the first wave of privatization, 
6.17 million are taking part in the second wave. After three 
funds withdrew their applications in the last moment, there are 
349 privatization funds participating in the second wave. That 
is 35 more than in the first wave of privatization. Of the 
total number of participating citizens, 65 percent are taking 
part through privatization funds. The funds and citizens will 
claim the property of 861 companies (it was 943 Czech and 60 
federal enterprises in the first wave) with the nominal value of 
Kc155 billion (more than Kc200 billion in the first wave). 
Applications are accepted until 25 April. (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 11 Apr 94 p 1) 
  GERMAN FIRMS INVEST: The German firm Wexler will invest 
approximately 7 million German marks in an industrial facility 
in Rokycany, where it intends to manufacture car plastic parts 
for Skoda Mlada Boleslav. Two other German firms specializing 
in production for the car industry are joining Wexler in 
Rokycany -- Borgers, manufacturer of textile parts for BMW and 
Audi, which will launch the construction of its facility still 
this year, and Brose, which intends to manufacture some 
mechanical parts for the Skoda carmaker. (Prague MLADA FRONTA 
DNES in Czech 11 Apr 94 p 14) 
  MONEY SUPPLY TO INCREASE: According to Jan Vit, vice 
governor 
of the Czech National Bank, the money supply is expected to 
increase by 15 percent in the Czech Republic in 1994. Combined 
with the expected 10 percent rate of inflation, this should not 
create a restrictive environment. (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in 
Czech 11 Apr 94 p 6) 
  FOREST OWNERSHIP: According to Agriculture Minister Lux, 
after the restitutions are completed, 800,000 hectares of 
forests (approximately 54 percent of the total) should remain in 
the ownership of the state, further 20 percent should be 
communally owned, and approximately 6 percent should go to the 
church. (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 11 Apr 94 p 6) 
  VW INVESTMENT PLANS: Volkswagen Board Chairman Ferdinand 
Piech confirmed his company's investments plans for the Skoda 
carmaker in Mlada Boleslav in a meeting today with Czech 
Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy. Dlouhy said that 
the Czech side is prepared to settle compensation for land in 
the district where Skoda would place its investments. "We are 
prepared to buy up the land and include it in the joint venture 
in line with the accord between Skoda and VW," he said. In May, 
or June at the latest, an addendum to the 1991 Skoda- VW 
agreement will be signed, Dlouhy said. "The chairman of the VW 
board refuted reports that other plants would take over the 
manufacturing role from Skoda. (Prague CTK in English 1922 GMT 
11 Apr 94) 
  TEXTILE PRODUCTION DECLINES: Production in the textile, 
garments, and leather industries declined in 1993 to 87 percent 
of the 1992 output in current prices and to 78 percent in prices 
adjusted for inflation. Total 1993 production of these 
industries (expressed in 1990 prices) amounted Kc21.64 billion 
(Kc43.28 billion in current prices). (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in 
Czech 12 Apr 94 p 6) 
  FOOD IMPORTS, EXPORTS: The percentage of food imports in the 
Czech Republic is considerably lower in individual commodities 
than the percentage of exports, Agriculture Minister Josef Lux 
told a group of parliamentary Left Bloc deputies today. Lux 
said that last year the country imported 9,576 tonnes of beef 
and exported 55,972 tonnes; pork imports amounted to 596 tonnes 
and exports to 15,273 tonnes. The Czech Republic last year 
imported 21,155 tonnes of milk and dairy products and exported 
152,078 tonnes. Lux said there were problems in imports of 
wine, fruit and vegetables because these commodities were highly 
subsidised by the European Union. Referring to non-profit 
areas, Lux said that government aid to regional programs 
amounted last year to Kc300 million and this year was expected 
to reach Kc400 million. He went on to say that at present 57 
percent of state farms were privatized and most of the remaining 
farms were run by lessees on the basis of contracts concluded 
between the Land Fund and the original state farms. (Prague CTK 
in English 1849 GMT 12 Apr 94) 
  STEYER TO BUY AVIA: The Austrian car maker Steyer intends to 
purchase 34 percent of the truck manufacturing company Avie 
Letnany (2,800 employees), Avie director Bohac says. Steyer 
offers investments in the order of hundreds of millions of Czech 
korunas (Kc), top know-how, to continue current production, and 
even to keep the trade mark. Moreover, it offers a new engine 
M1 that conforms to the present West European environment 
standards. The Austrian company should pay for its share no 
more than the book value of almost Kc600 million. The present 
market value is about one-third of that amount. (Prague MLADA 
FRONTA DNES in Czech 13 Apr 94 p 1) 
  SKODA SHARE CONTRACT DELIVERED: Lubomir Soudek, chairman of 
the board and director general of Skoda Plzen, received on 11 
April a purchase contract for 20 percent stake in Skoda Plzen 
(for a total of Kc323 million -- company sales of Kc17 billion, 
profit of Kc800 million) signed by National Property Fund 
chairman Jezek. In the near future, the Komercni Banka (10 
percent) and the Investicni a Postovni Banka (7 percent) will 
also receive their shares. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 
13 Apr 94 p 2) 
  BANK INCREASES CAPITALIZATION: The Bohemia Bank capital 
issued new shares to increase its capital from Kc800.3 million 
to Kc1.002 billion. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 14 Apr 94 p 
1) 
  COMPANY WINS TAIWAN CONTRACT: On 31 March, the Zeleznicni 
Stavitelstvi Praha railroad construction company signed a $64.9 
million contract to supply high-voltage feeding for a 14.4 
kilometer section of the Taipei subway. The construction is to 
begin in the third quarter of 1995. It is already the second 
contract the company won in Taiwan. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in 
Czech 14 Apr 94 p 1) 
  NATIONAL BANK BALANCE INCREASES: On 31 March, the balance of 
the Czech National Bank reached Kc379.82 billion, which is Kc1.4 
billion more than on 20 March. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 14 
Apr 94 p 14) 
  FINANCE MINISTRY REPORTS SURPLUS: According to the Finance 
Ministry report, in the first quarter, the budget revenues 
amounted to Kc89 billion, while the expenditures reached only 
Kc84 billion. (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 14 Apr 94 p 3) 
  RAILROAD HEAVY TRUCK TRANSPORT: The transport of heavy 
trucks by rail on the Lovosice to Dresden line is scheduled to 
begin on September 25, head of the Sales Division of Czech Rail 
Josef Bazala told CTK today. Ten trains, each carrying 25 
trucks, will make the journey each day between the new railroad 
transloading stations for which the Saxony Government has 
allocated 25 million German marks. A meeting of the Saxon-Czech 
working party in Dresden on 13 April set the cost of the transit 
for the Czech and Saxon contractors, although the actual figures 
are a trade secret, Bazala said. It is hoped the truck 
transport will help reduce waiting periods at the border which 
12,000 vehicles cross daily. (Prague CTK in English 1037 GMT 14 
Apr 94) 
  PUMPING STATION GROUNDBREAKING: A ceremonial groundbreaking 
for a pumping station for the future oil pipeline to run from 
Ingolstadt, Bavaria, to Nelahozeves near Kralupy nad Vltavou, 
central Bohemia, followed the signing of an uninsurable damage 
agreement at a refinery near here today. The Czech Government 
has given guarantees to the Bavarian Government, which has 
promised to cover uninsurable losses property owners there could 
suffer if the pipeline were damaged. The Czech National 
Property Fund will deposit 80 million marks with the Czech 
central bank to cover possible claims. Construction of the 
pipeline can start once the Bavarian Industry Ministry approves 
the project, likely this fall. Work has already started on the 
Czech leg of the pipeline. (Prague CTK in English 1117 GMT 14 
Apr 94) 
  TRADE ACCORD WITH MOROCCO: Czech Industry and Trade Minister 
Vladimir Dlouhy and Morocco's Minister of Foreign Trade Murad 
Sharif signed a new agreement on trade between the two 
countries. According to Dlouhy, the new accord is a standard 
agreement that the Czech Republic signs with various regional 
groupings or countries. The last trade agreement between 
Morocco and the then Czechoslovakia was signed in 1988. Last 
year's volume of trade between the two countries amounted to $9 
billion, of which Czech exports, involving consumer goods, 
machinery, transport equipment, and livestock, were valued at $8 
million and imports (foodstuffs, machinery, and raw materials) 
at only $1.5 million. Czech imports of phosphates, Morocco's 
main export commodity, fell considerably after the fall of the 
communist regime owing to the restructuring of Czech 
agriculture. (Prague CTK in English 2036 GMT 14 Apr 94) 
  UNEMPLOYMENT DECLINE: On 31 March, the rate of unemployment 
in the Czech Republic was 3.5 percent (down from 3.73 percent in 
February). (Prague DENNI TELEGRAF in Czech 15 Apr 94 p 3) 
  SKODA SUBSIDIARY: Skoda Controls Plzen Ltd. became a new 
subsidiary of the Skoda Plzen holding. It assumes the operation 
of Skoda Automatizace that terminates its operation at the same 
time. The new firm will supply the Czech market with complete 
controls systems. To enter the market as fast as possible, the 
company opted for an extensive foreign cooperation. A 
Czech-German (40 percent German owned) joint venture was already 
founded. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 15 Apr 94 p 14) 
  CREDIT FOR POLDI STEEL: The Poldi Steel Co. obtained Kc425 
million operational credit from the Komercni Banka. Hence, as 
of 15 April, the company can continue its operation, but Kc100 
million must be paid on its Kc380 million debt to Kladno Power 
Center by 18 April. The Poldi debt is currently growing by 
Kc7.5 million per week. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 15 Apr 94 
p 14) 
  BANK FREEZES DEPOSITS: The Czech National Bank board 
approved the request by appointed trustee of the Bohemia Bank on 
14 April to freeze the deposits. Following the retraction of 
the BB issued bank guarantees, the withdrawals reached such a 
volume that the bank was threatened by bankruptcy. (Prague 
LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 15 Apr 94 p 1) All branches of the 
Bohemia Bank remained closed on 15 April. The reason given is 
the reduction of liquid assets -- between 15 March and 14 April, 
the bank's customers withdrew almost Kc2.5 billion (total 
deposits on 31 December 1993 were close to Kc8 billion). The 
deposits are not in danger but at the bank currently cannot pay 
out interest due on the deposits. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in 
Czech 16 Apr 94 pp 1,8) 
  SKODA MEETING SUSPENDED: The general meeting of shareholders 
of the Skoda car maker on 15 April was suspended because of 
personnel changes, and will be resumed only after its new 
executive officers get acquainted in detail with the company's 
performance, Skoda's spokesman announced. Jiri Hrabovsky said 
after the meeting that Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik had 
succeeded National Property Fund chairman Tomas Jezek in 
representing the rights of the Czech majority stake in the 
Skoda-Volkswagen joint venture. The meeting elected Industry 
and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy to the supervisory council. 
Volkswagen was represented at the meeting by President of the 
Board Ferdinand Piech and Secretary Kristian Ehinger. (Prague 
CTK in English 1828 GMT 15 Apr 94) 
  SKODA IN IRAN: Skoda Plzen will substantially expand its 
operation abroad and it will establish an enterprise in Iran. 
This is guaranteed by a contract signed on 14 April by Skoda 
Director General Soudek and President of Iranian Development 
Agency (IDRA) Khamoosi. Several joint ventures are planned, and 
the first one of them -- a trolleybus assembly company -- should 
be founded within three months. (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES in 
Czech 16 Apr 94 p 14) 
  AGROBANKA INCREASES EQUITY: The general meeting of 
shareholders of Agrobanka decided not to pay dividends this year 
and instead to add the money (Kc340 million) to its equity. The 
company will also issue new shares to raise additional capital 
(Kc500 million) so its equity will increase from the current Kc 
1.7 billion to Kc2.54 billion. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 16 
Apr 94 p 1) 
  JAPANESE WIN CONTRACT: The Opatovice Power Plants Co. chose 
from among 27 -- mostly foreign -- bidding firms the Japanese 
consortium JGC and Kawasaki to construct a Kc1.4 billion 
desulfurization plant at its 330MW power plant. (Prague MLADA 
FRONTA DNES in Czech 18 Apr 94 p 14) 
  SPT TELECOM TO ISSUE BONDS: The first general meeting of 
shareholders of the SPT Telecom on 15 April decided to issue 
company bonds in the value of Kc1 billion. (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 18 Apr 94 p 2) 
  ZIELENIEC, VIETNAMESE DISCUSS TRADE: Foreign Minister Josef 
Zieleniec met with Vietnamese Minister of Trade Le Van Triet to 
discuss economic and trade relations. Later, he told 
journalists that he considered talks on this topic to be the 
most important part of his visit to Vietnam. The two ministers 
discussed specific projects. Le Van Triet was interested in 
very close cooperation in food processing industry. Vietnamese 
partners took interest in the draft project for tripartite 
cooperation which means Vietnamese raw materials, Czech 
technology, and some foreign capital. The ministers also 
discussed the delivery of 40 locomotives from the Czech CKD 
engineering works to Vietnam. Zieleniec informed his partner 
that CKD allegedly found a way of satisfying the conditions of a 
loan that the Vietnamese are ready to accept. A prepared trade 
agreement which has so far been made conditional on repayment of 
Czech claims in Vietnam was a topic for discussion. Foreign 
Ministry spokesman Vit Kurfurst said that Vietnam's debt was 
worth $4.5 million and that Vietnam had no money to repay it. 
However, Hanoi had already prepared a scheme of how the debt 
would be repaid, he said. (Prague CTK in English 1618 GMT 16 
Apr 94) 
Czech businessmen and industrialists accompanying Zieleniec on 
the trip discussed the difficulties of developing trade 
relations with Vietnam today. Rostislav Levicek Zbrojovka arms 
manufacturing company said that Vietnamese legislation forbade 
the import of weapons for hunting and other sports, which his 
company would like to export to Vietnam. Miroslav Fucik of 
Tatra Koprivnice brought up the financial difficulties of 
establishing a joint venture. He added that his company's cars 
would have stiff competition in Vietnam from KamAZ cars, which 
cost half as much. Several businessmen mentioned the difficulty 
of competing in Vietnam, given its low prices and cheap cost of 
labor. Vladimir Riha of CZ Strakonice, for example, stated that 
the production cost of a bicycle in Vietnam was only $50. 
Skodaexport would like to supply water turbines to Vietnam, but 
it would have to convince banks to grant it loans in order to do 
so, business director Tibor Durina said. Another problem for 
Czech exports to Vietnam is that about 30 percent of Czech 
exports to Vietnam are sold through a third country, Tomas Husak 
of the Trade and Industry Ministry said. (Prague CTK in English 
1935 GMT 18 Apr 94) 
  TURKS NOT BUYING SKODAS: Over 2,000 Czech Skoda cars have 
been stored for more than six weeks at the speedway stadium at 
Slany, central Bohemia, because their Turkish dealer has not 
found buyers for them and has nowhere to store them. The 
spokesman for Skoda, Jiri Hrabovsky, told CTK on 18 April that 
the reason of the situation had been mainly a crisis on the 
Turkish car market. Yuce, a Turkish car dealer who used to sell 
3,000 Skodas per month, had purchased 4,000 cars without 
catalytic converters from Skoda. But the collapse of the 
Turkish market, related to internal political problems which may 
lead to an increase in interest rates of 250 percent, has left 
the firm unable to sell the cars and without any place to store 
them. A part of the automobile shipment was thus held up in the 
Czech Republic, to be stored by Skoda at Yuce's expense. "In 
order to help out our Turkish associate, we're looking for a 
customer who wouldn't mind that the cars don't have catalytic 
converters," Hrabovsky said. (Prague CTK in English 1625 GMT 18 
Apr 94) 
  INDUSTRIAL GOODS PRICES RISE: According to Czech Statistical 
Office, the average price of industrial goods rose in the first 
three months of the year 6.2 percent in comparison with the same 
period in 1993. The largest increase was recorded in 
construction -- 16 percent -- while the prices of food rose 
marginally -- 1.7 percent. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in English 19 
Apr 94 p 7) 
  AGROBANKA LOWERS RATES: On 15 April, Agrobanka lowered the 
interest it charges on new credits by 1.5 percent. Thus, the 
basic interest rate declined to 12.5 percent and prime rate to 
9.5 percent. Similarly, the interest paid on deposits has been 
reduced. The interest paid on current accounts, for instance, 
declined by 0.5 percent to 2.5 percent. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY 
in English 19 Apr 94 p 7) 
  CSA RIDERSHIP IMPROVES: More than 120,000 people flew on 
Czechoslovak Airlines (CSA) regular flights in the first two 
months of this year, which is a 5-percent increase against the 
same period last year, Eva Presova from the CSA press department 
told CTK ON 19 April. The majority of the people flew to Great 
Britain (London, Manchester), Germany (Frankfurt, Berlin, 
Dusseldorf, Hamburg and Munich), Slovakia and Russia (Moscow and 
St.Petersburg). Among the intercontinental flights, the most 
popular destination was Thailand, with 6,206 passengers, 
followed by the United States (New York, Chicago) with 5,823 
passengers, and Canada (Montreal, Toronto) with 2,972 
passengers. (Prague CTK in English 1100 GMT 19 Apr 94) 
  NEW BANKNOTES: The Czech National Bank (CNB) is going to put 
a new Kc20 banknote into circulation on 20 April, a CNB 
spokesman announced today. The new notes were printed at the 
State Mint in Prague. On the front they have a drawing of 
Premysl Otakar I, the Bohemian prince of the early 13th century 
who ushered in the century-long reign of the Premyslide dynasty. 
A Kc2000 banknote will also be introduced in May or June. The 
possibility of exchanging stamped Kc200, Kc500, or Kc1000 notes 
from the Czechoslovak federation will continue until May 31, at 
which time the Czech Republic's currency transformation will 
end. (Prague CTK in English 1352 GMT 19 Apr 94) 
  SKODA SALES DOWN: Skoda Mlada Boleslav sold 43,562 cars in 
the first quarter -- that is, 9,711 fewer than in the same 
period last year. The company sold 11,944 cars in the Czech 
Republic (5,927 fewer than last year), 1,132 cars were exported 
to Slovakia (3,249 fewer), and 17,585 cars were sold in Western 
Europe (581 fewer). (Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 20 Apr 94 p 16) 
  BANK OWNERSHIP: As a result of the share transfers over the 
past two years, a total of 49 percent of the Ceska Banka are 
held by the largest Latvian bank Baltija. The Ceska Banka has 
equity of 800 million korunas (Kc) and shares 10th and 11th 
place in the Czech Republic with the Bohemia Bank. The bank's 
after-tax profits reached Kc69 million last year. (Prague 
LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 14 Apr 94 FINANCNI NOVINY supplement p ii) 
  GERMAN INVESTMENT: According to the Czech-German Chamber of 
Industry and Commerce, German enterprises show more restraint in 
investments here, but in 1993, the FRG remained the country 
where most of the direct investments originated. The German 
investment, however, only reached $82 million, which is not 
much. There are 67,000 enterprises with German participation in 
the Czech Republic. According to a survey, approximately 
one-third of all German firms would like to transfer a part or 
the total of its production abroad, and about 50 percent of them 
favor the Czech Republic. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 14 Apr 
94 FINANCNI NOVINY supplement p ii) 
  PRAGUE SUBWAY: Thanks to the quick sale of Prague municipal 
bonds on the London Stock Exchange, an addition to the B line of 
Prague's metro (subway) will be completed on schedule in 1998, 
Prague Mayor Jan Koukal told correspondents today. The metro 
addition will be partly financed from the bonds' sale because 
even this year's subsidies from the municipal budget, totalling 
Kc1.1 billion ($36.700 million), will not cover all the costs. 
A 5.1-kilometer segment is being added to Metro B extending 
from Nove Butovice, and a 6.4-kilometer segment is also being 
added in the other direction, from Ceskomoravska. The 
Japanese-based Nomura bank introduced $250 million worth of 
municipal bonds to the international financial market on April 
15. (Prague CTK in English 1327 GMT 20 Apr 94) 
  DRESDEN-PRAGUE HIGHWAY: On 20 April, the Saxon Government 
approved the southern variant of the Dresden-Prague highway, the 
construction of which, costing about 1.2 to 1.8 billion German 
marks, would begin in 1996 and be finished in 2002. Saxon 
Economy Minister Kajo Schommer and Minister of the Environment 
Arnold Vaatz told correspondents today that a Saxon- Czech 
compromise concerning the route respected economic, 
transportation, and environmental aspects. Under the project, 
the highway will have three tunnels, the longest one measuring 
1,650 meters, and three bridges. (Prague CTK in English 1742 
GMT 20 Apr 94) 
  MOVE TO INSURE DEPOSITS: Deputy Zdenek Vorlicek from the 
opposition Left Bloc (LB) group yesterday sent Prime Minister 
Vaclav Klaus a parliamentary question suggesting that the 
government include the drawing up of a bill insuring bank 
deposits in its program for the second half of 1994. This 
suggestion was prompted by the central bank's freeze on 
citizens' deposits in Banka Bohemia following a dramatic 
decrease in its liquidity. The lack of insurance for deposits 
could undermine confidence in the banking sector, cause 
depositors to avoid small banks, and strengthen the already 
dominant position of "the big four banks," whose deposits are 
insured by the government, Vorlicek wrote. The "big four" are 
Ceska sporitelna (Czech Savings Company), Komercni banka 
(Commercial Bank), Investicni and postovni banka (Investment and 
Postal Bank) and Zivnostenska banka (Trades Bank). He also urges 
that the future law be in harmony with similar norms valid in 
the European Union as of January 1, 1995. (Prague CTK in 
English 1736 GMT 21 Apr 94) 
  CONTACTS WITH CHILE: A group of some 70 representatives of 
Czech companies and banks visited Chile to establish new 
contacts with Chilean partners and to seek ways of expanding 
bilateral trade. Czech-Chilean trade exchange was almost 
nonexistent for many years, but it has markedly increased over 
the past two years to reach $7.1 million in 1993. This makes 
Chile the Czech Republic's 10th largest trading partner in Latin 
America. (Prague CTK in English 2057 GMT 21 Apr 94) 
  PRIVATIZATION FRAUD: Experts believe that tens of thousands 
of people cheated in the second round of privatization when they 
registered more coupon books than just the one to which they 
were entitled. They could have caused the funds damage running 
into millions. According to the Coupon Privatization Center, 
33,000 registered books had to be frozen for the staff to verify 
whether the birth registry numbers of their owners coincided or 
whether they had registered the book several times. The police 
believe that identical numbers are rare and that most of these 
coincidences are intentional fraud. (Prague MLADA FRONTA DNES 
in Czech 22 Apr 94 p 1) 
  MORE SHARES TO BE SOLD: The government has approved the sale 
of all shares that the National Property Fund did not manage to 
sell in the first wave of privatization. They are to be sold 
just like shares designated for sale through a mediator. The 
Fund currently manages Kc6 billion worth of stock. The actual 
price is 70 percent of the nominal price. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY 
in Czech 22 Apr 94 p 3) 
  HOUSING CONSTRUCTION: According to the Czech Statistical 
Office, 31,509 housing units were completed in the republic in 
1993 (13.4 percent fewer than in the previous year). The number 
was lower in all forms of housing except for detached 
single-family houses (the aftermath of the advantageous loans 
young couple could obtain in 1989-1990). Last year, 7,454 
housing units were started (195 communal, 350 cooperative, 88 
company, and 6,824 units in family houses). The total of 
housing begun was 11.6 percent lower last year than in 1992. On 
last day of 1993, there were 72,356 units under construction, 
54,439 of them in family houses. (Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 
22 Apr 94 FINANCNI NOVINY supplement p iv) 
  BANK INCREASES CAPITALIZATION: The balance of the Skala 
banking house reached almost Kc4.5 billion in 1993. The 
reserves of the bank (with German capital participation) amount 
to Kc200 million. The shareholders' general meeting in December 
decided to increase the company capital stock to Kc0.5 billion. 
(Prague RUDE PRAVO in Czech 22 Apr 94 p 8) 
  SKODA PRICES: The prices of cars made by Skoda of Mlada 
Boleslav will go up on May 2, Evzen Krauskopf of Skoda's PR 
Department has announced. The cheapest Favorit will now cost 
Kc196,700 (some $6,556), Kc5,700 or 3 percent more than at 
present, Krauskofp said. (Prague CTK in English 2020 GMT 22 Apr 
94) 
  MEINL OPENS IN PRAGUE: The Austrian concern Julius Meinl 
opened its first store in the Czech Republic on Vinohradska 
Avenue in Prague on 22 April. The 650-square-meter site was 
reconstructed at a cost of Kc10 million and prepared for 
business in just two weeks. The company will offer 5,000 mostly 
Czech goods, and basic food items will be sold at exceptionally 
low prices. According to Julius Meinl (the fourth generation of 
owners), another seven or eight stores in Prague and other major 
cities should be open by the end of the year. The firm is 
planning to expand the network to 30 stores within the next five 
years. The Prague business venture Pronto Plus (one of the 
largest food vendors in the republic, operating two large 
supermarkets in Prague, six smaller stores under the name Lido, 
and three "Cash and Carry" shops) owns a 10-percent stake in 
this company. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 23 Apr 94 p 4) 
  MRS INCREASES OFFER: The International Oil Companies (MRS) 
consisting of Agip, Conoco, Shell, and Total has offered the 
Industry and Trade Minstry a "much higher price" for a 
49-percent stake in Czech Refineries than their last offer of 
$110 million. The actual sum has not been disclosed. The Czech 
Refineries should emerge by separating refineries from Kaucuk 
Kralupy and Chemopetrol Litvinov and their subsequent merger. 
The MRS propose to invest here as much as $1 billion. (Prague 
CESKY DENIK in Czech 23 Apr 94 p 14) 
  SKODA IN CHINA: A machine tool joint venture foundation 
agreement was signed on 21 April by representatives of the 
Quinghai Heavy-Duty Machine Tool Works (60 percent), Skoda Plzen 
(35 percent), and Strojimport Prague (5 percent). The total 
volume of investment is estimated at $350 million. Skoda is to 
supply the production equipment. (Prague CESKY DENIK in Czech 
23 Apr 94 p 14) 
  AUSTRIA CONSTRUCTION FINANCE: The construction of the 
10,000-square-meter administrative and business Holan Center on 
a vacant site next to the Kotva shopping center in Prague will 
cost approximately Kc1.2 billion. It is being financed by 
Immoconsult of Austria, a wholly owned subsidiary of the 
Austrian Volksbank. (Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 25 Apr 
94 p 2) 
  WAGES INCREASE: According to the Czech Statistical Office, 
the average nominal monthly salary in March reached Kc6,789 in 
industry (up 12 percent from March 1993) and Kc7,318 in 
construction (up 22 percent). The average salary for the entire 
first quarter was Kc6,196 in industry (up 13.3 percent from 
1993) and Kc6,519 in construction (up 13.4 percent). (Prague 
HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Czech 26 Apr 94 p 2) 
  TRADE SURPLUS GROWS: According to the Czech National Bank, 
the average inter-bank rate of interest paid on deposits in 
March rose to the level of the last quarter of 1993. The 
foreign currency reserves of the Czech banking system increased 
from $6.6 billion to $7 billion (of which the CNB from $4.2 
billion to $4.6 billion). The foreign trade surplus rose to $32 
million at the end of February. The gross debt declined in 
January from $8.7 billion to $8.6 billion. The CNB reports 
March rate of inflation as 0.3 percent. (Prague HOSPODARSKE 
NOVINY in Czech 26 Apr 94 p 2) 
  NEW ACCIDENT INSURANCE: Motor-vehicle accident insurance for 
large enterprises and companies was introduced by IB Insurance 
Co. in mid-April. The company plans to extend its services to 
individual motorists. In the meantime, in addition to life 
insurance, it offers property coverage. After only two years of 
operations here, IB Insurance Co. has 100,000 customers. 
(Prague LIDOVE NOVINY in Czech 26 Apr 94 p 7) 
  TRADE BANK LOSS: The Czechoslovak Foreign Trade Bank 
financial report shows a loss for 1993. The bank's 1993 gross 
income was 15 percent higher than projected. The loss was 
caused by the creation of bad credit reserves (loans based on 
government political decisions in the past). (Prague LIDOVE 
NOVINY in Czech 26 Apr 94 p 7) 
  TAX PACT WITH ISRAEL: On 27 April the parliament approved an 
agreement between the Czech Republic and Israel, preventing 
double taxation and income tax evasion, which was signed in 
December last year. The agreement will increase the legal 
certainties of investors by allowing the exact calculation of 
earnings from their investment, Economy Minister Karel Dyba said 
in parliament today. (Prague CTK in English 1305 GMT 27 Apr 94) 

