BFN 

  [Text] President Rauf Denktas received Gustav Feissel, the 
UN secretary general's deputy special representative, today. 
Speaking after the meeting, which was requested by Feissel, 
President Denktas said that the UN General Secretariat has 
continued to insist on not including the benefits that will be 
created for the Turkish Cypriot side in the agreement and moved 
to put forward new demands on Maras [Varosha]. Denktas asserted: 
  [Begin Denktas recording] Mr. Feissel requested to meet us 
today. They are expecting us to be more flexible on various 
issues. The main problem is whether or not the rights that will 
be given to the Turkish Cypriots will be effectively included in 
the document on draft ideas, which is known as the 21 March 
document. He has proposed that the UN secretary general could 
convey letters to me and Glavkos Kliridhis outlining the rights 
of the Turkish Cypriots. It is impossible to understand why he 
has made such a proposal. 
  A draft proposal remains as it is until it is given a form 
that is acceptable to both sides. A draft is drawn up in order 
for the sides to work on it. We have done that in goodwill. We 
have maintained as flexible an approach as we can. However, it 
seems that they are still not satisfied. 
  Mr. Feissel will meet with us again at 1600 tomorrow. 
Meanwhile, we shall assess the situation. However, we have 
resolutely asked the following: Since you agree to change the 
draft document on matters related to the customs houses and the 
demilitarization of the area that is under our control in Maras, 
why do you not agree to effectively include the rights to be 
recognized for the Turkish Cypriots in it? Unfortunately, he 
has been unable to reply to that question. 
  Another point is as follows: Glavkos Kliridhis made a 
statement during the past week to the effect that the draft 
document, which he described as the 21 March document, is dead 
and that he will neither discuss it nor agree to any new idea on 
it. I asked Mr. Feissel if he brought a message from Kliridhis. 
I asked him whether Kliridhis will agree to continue the 
negotiations process if the Turkish Cypriot side adopts a 
flexible approach on this or that problem? No, there is no such 
thing. In that case, why should we waste our time? Why is Mr. 
Feissel occupied with us when the other side has withdrawn? Why 
has he not tried to convince the other side to agree to resume 
the negotiations? We received no reply to those questions. 
  Mr. Feissel made a number of requests. We have to assess the 
situation among us. We shall receive him at 1600 tomorrow. 
[end recording] 
  Replying to a question, President Denktas recalled that the 
Turkish Cypriot side has agreed to have the military troops on 
both sides of the access road to Maras withdraw to a point 400 
meters away in order not to be seen. However, he stressed that 
the UN officials have asked that the military units be withdrawn 
to a point one mile or one km away from that road. 
  [Begin Denktas recording] We cannot agree to that from the 
point of view of our security and the maintenance of our 
existing authority. However, as I mentioned earlier, we shall 
make a new assessment. Mr. Feissel was unable to reply to our 
question as to whether or not Kliridhis would agree to have the 
document, dated 21 March, changed and include our demands in it. 
No positive reply was forthcoming. In that case, why should I 
agree to be flexible for no reason at all? That question also 
remained unanswered. 
  He informed us that we should take a flexible approach and 
allow the UN Security Council to assess which side is lagging 
behind. Which UN Security Council are we talking about? France 
is being paid by the Greek Cypriots in order to renovate and 
dispatch more than 90 tanks to them. Those tanks were 
transferred to France from Greece. Russia will sell 134 tanks 
to the Greek Cypriots. 
  The draft resolution to extend the mandate of the UN Forces 
in Cyprus for another six months says that the Greek Cypriot 
side should reduce the funds it allocates for rearmament and 
that the foreign troops in the island should be significantly 
reduced. That resolution will be adopted by the UN Security 
Council. France and Russia are council members. Meanwhile, 
they sell arms for profit. They do not wish to effectively say 
that the Greek Cypriot side must not purchase arms, because they 
wish to make a profit. They will not say that to the Greek 
Cypriots. Meanwhile, they expect us to adopt a more flexible 
approach and agree to withdraw from this or that place or 
further demilitarize this or that area. 
  No offensive remarks should be made against the UN Security 
Council. However, what is being done will not contribute toward 
peace and reconciliation. On the contrary, it will prepare for 
war the Greek Cypriot side, which has destroyed the legal Cyprus 
Government through the use of armed force and inhuman 
activities. The Turkish Cypriots have equal rights in Cyprus. 
They have equal rights to the territory and sovereignty of 
Cyprus. The arms the Greek Cypriots acquire will be used to 
destroy the Turkish Cypriot community, which shares the 
territory and sovereignty of Cyprus. Regardless of the UN 
Security Council's support for the Greek Cypriots, we are 
expected to maintain a flexible approach. I believe that we 
have clearly informed Mr. Feissel on all that. 
  We are grieved by the existing situation. We believe that 
the United Nations has to accord equal treatment to people who 
are struggling for their freedom. We have been treated unjustly 
for 30 years. We have observed that the unjust treatment we 
have been subjected to is worsening. We regret that state of 
affairs. UN Security Council members are selling arms to Cyprus 
in order to start a war on the island. The UN principles and UN 
Security Council resolutions ban the sale of arms to any country 
in which a dispute exists. However, the most important UN 
Security Council members have been selling arms to the Greek 
Cypriots in order to make a profit, regardless of the dispute 
between the two communities. I believe that neither history nor 
humanity will forgive that. [end recording] 

