BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Bassam Abu-Sharif, political adviser to PLO </F>
Executive Committee Chairman Yasir 'Arafat, by Riyad Mansur; 
place and date not given] 
  [Excerpts] [Mansur] The date for the arrival of President 
Yasir 'Arafat in Jericho has been postponed several times. What 
are the causes of this postponement? What are the problems he 
is facing? 
  [Abu-Sharif] President Yasir 'Arafat will not enter the 
autonomous areas unless the pledges made by the donor nations, 
the EEC members, and other industrialized nations about 
financing infrastructure, development, and economic growth 
projects in the Palestinian territories are honored. This is 
because President 'Arafat does not want his entry there to be 
merely ceremonial. He wants to go the autonomous areas to 
rebuild the infrastructure, and to launch economic development 
projects there. Consequently, and despite the speculation of 
all, I would like to say that setting a date for his arrival in 
the autonomous areas is contingent upon his trust that the 
required funds, for the initial period at least, have been 
earmarked so that the implementation of projects may start. 
Otherwise, what would be the meaning of his arrival there? We 
are not seeking ceremonies. What we want is to rebuild the 
infrastructure, as well as the economy. Our people in the 
territories want to build their homeland. But, at the same 
time, they also want to work for a better life. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Mansur] The Palestinian police have begun their work by 
arresting some Islamist leaders. Some have said that this will 
result in a confrontation between the police and the people. Do 
you expect this confrontation to continue or subside, given the 
fact that the Palestinian opposition has refused to surrender 
its weapons to the police? 
  [Abu-Sharif] The Palestinian opposition is legal. The 
democratic atmosphere we seek to create in Palestine will grant 
opposition factions the opportunity to express their views 
through the printed and audio/visual media. They will even be 
allowed to stage demonstrations. This is a right guaranteed to 
them. This will create a vibrant society. The opposition is 
the guarantee that the leadership will continue to seek perfect 
decisions. Nonetheless, when the opposition resorts to violence, 
it becomes illegal. The opposition is guaranteed the full right 
to express its views within the context of the freedom of 
expression ensured in a democracy. However, when you use 
violence, you revoke the rights guaranteed you by the democratic 
society. This is because the faction that uses violence 
violates democratic traditions. Consequently, the factions 
engaged in violence will be pursued; and pursuing these factions 
is a right. [passage omitted] 
  [Mansur] President 'Arafat has not thus far completed the 
formation of the Palestinian authority. It has been reported 
that you have rejected an offer by 'Arafat to take the 
information portfolio. Will you tell us why you rejected this 
offer? 
  [Abu-Sharif] I have refused to take any portfolio, or to 
assume any responsible position at this point in time. This 
does not mean that I am abandoning my sacred duty to play any 
role or perform any task that would promote the interests of the 
Palestinian people. For, throughout my lifetime of struggle, I 
have always sought to promote the interests of the Palestinian 
people, and advance the Palestinian cause. 
  As a matter of fact, this issue has something to do with 
personal convictions that I have regarding the prerequisites of 
creating a democracy in Palestine. [passage omitted] 
  [Mansur] In retrospect, we now realize that we cannot 
count on the political and material support of the Americans 
forever. Look at what happened to al-Sadat and Gorbachev. What 
is the PLO betting on? 
  [Abu-Sharif] When it comes to the Arabs, don't look for the 
word support in the American dictionary. The United States has 
its interests to look after. The Arabs should have the 
intelligence to create circumstances that will make their 
interests coincide with those of the United States. Then the 
Arabs will do well and the United States will necessarily 
support the Arabs. Such are the rules that today's world lives 
by. It is up to us to create the conditions for that to happen. 
The United States has strategic interests in the region. These 
translate as oil, markets, and geography. We have only 
ourselves to blame. We should have stood up for our rights. We 
have failed to deal with the United States as an equal. This, 
despite the fact that the United States depends in a big way on 
our oil, resources, markets, and strategic position. 
  There is no such thing as unilateral interests. Interests 
are a two-way street. Those who are taking revenge on Iraq now 
do not know that their vengeance will be revisited upon them. 
Unless the Arabs agree on a modicum of solidarity in order to 
protect their interests in a world ruled by big powers, the Arab 
world will sink. Iraq is a significant player in Arab politics, 
and yet the Iraqi people are being starved and denied medicine, 
without a finger being lifted in their defense. 
  [Mansur] And yet the PLO abandoned Iraq, having supported it 
during the Gulf war. 
  [Abu-Sharif] The PLO had consistently sought a resolution to 
the Iraq-Kuwait issue, and in concert with certain European 
nations strove to avert war and then open the way for a 
political solution. But the PLO's effort proved fruitless, since 
the United States wanted to hurt Iraq, not liberate Kuwait. 
  [Mansur] Iraq has taken a negative attitude toward the Gaza- 
Jericho First accord out of its concern for the territorial 
integrity of Palestine. 
  [Abu-Sharif] Any country is free to criticize the 
Gaza-Jericho First accord. There is room for a diversity of 
opinion on a political settlement. The Palestinians are 
tolerant of criticism on that score. But the Iraq affair is 
more serious that the Gaza-Jericho First issue. The aim is to 
marginalize the role of the Arab nation by targeting its 
military and financial backbone in Iraq so that the United 
States succeed in imposing a settlement on its terms. If the 
Palestinians stomached Gaza-Jericho, that was a case of the 
choice of the lesser evil. 
  [Mansur] It is no secret that the Jordanian-Palestinian 
relationship is not exactly at its best. Amman does not hide 
its dissatisfaction. Why do you think that is? And how do you 
think excellent and solid ties can be forged with Jordan? 
  [Abu-Sharif] Coordination necessarily presupposes talks 
before decisions are made. Coordination cannot be a matter of 
one party informing the other party that an agreement has been 
reached. However, things are not that simple. My idea of 
coordination is for the parties to combine their strengths. 
Neither the PLO, nor Jordan, nor Syria, nor Lebanon, can become 
any stronger unless there is real coordination among themselves 
about the items on the agenda of the negotiations. 
  Coordination is a lever that could promote the interests of 
all sides. The party that fails to effect coordination with the 
other sides will fall into the Israeli trap. For despite its 
peace program, the Israeli Government has set traps. It seeks 
to drive wedges between the Arab sides, because it makes gains 
when it deals with the Arab sides one at a time. I would like 
to say clearly that had there been true, profound, and sincere 
coordination among Palestine, Jordan, Syria, and Lebanon, and 
had these parties obtained the necessary Arab support, we would 
have obtained a better deal than the Cairo agreement signed by 
President Yasir 'Arafat. Nonetheless, I do consider the Cairo 
agreement a historic step regardless of the reservations some 
might have about it. 
  Inter-Arab coordination, particularly coordination between 
the Palestinians and Jordanians, is necessary. We have a 
problem that has preoccupied the minds of all. Nonetheless, 
nobody seems to be speaking about it. Since time immemorial, 
Palestine and Jordan have been one country and one family. How 
then can there be two communities, two families, and two 
countries at present? The solution that would meet all 
requirements of the people in the two banks of the River Jordan 
and Gaza Strip lies in the launching of a single state 
consisting of Gaza, the West Bank, and the East Bank, regardless 
of the form this state might take, be it a confederation or a 
federation. If all parties, particularly those endowed with 
wisdom and vision, do not act on the basis of the fact that this 
community is a single community, and that this people are one 
people and part of a single country, the population of these 
three areas may not be able to confront Israel, which is seeking 
to swallow up the region, but economically this time. 
  [Mansur] How does the PLO view the momentum seen on the 
Jordanian-Israeli track of negotiations, especially with regard 
to the agreement on talks to demarcate borders? 
  [Abu-Sharif] King Husayn is one of the few Arab leaders who 
possess both vision and wisdom. Some Arab rulers might possess 
wisdom, but be lacking in vision; while others might possess 
vision, but be lacking in wisdom. But, King Husayn has both. 
Through his recent political moves, King Husayn has sought to 
put things right, particularly since the peace process is 
progressing. And since the peace process is a reflection of the 
international community's desire to achieve stability in the 
Middle East, Jordan, which has always advocated the attainment 
of a lasting and durable peace in the region, was bound to make 
its own contributions to the peace process to promote it. I am 
well aware that his majesty the king is fully supportive of the 
Palestinian people's right to self- determination. In the same 
vein, I am also aware that his majesty the king has his own 
views regarding the unity of the people in the two banks of the 
River Jordan and Gaza Strip. His majesty the king is well aware 
that this area; namely, the East Bank of the River Jordan, the 
West Bank, and Gaza Strip are capable of becoming a bastion to 
defend the Arab region in the face of expansionism. We believe 
that His Majesty King Husayn is a leader endowed with both 
vision and wisdom. Likewise, we believe that Yasir 'Arafat is 
also a leader endowed with both vision and wisdom. We also 
believe that these two leaders, if they coordinate their 
positions and moves well, can protect the Arab nation and enable 
it to meet future challenges. [passage omitted] 

