BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "King Husayn's Visit to Washington: Important </F>
Results and Urgent Achievements"] 
  [Text] With the end of His Majesty King Husayn's important 
visit to Washington, and in the wake of the series of meetings 
his majesty the king held with the U.S. President, Congressmen, 
and the secretaries of state and defense, we can say that Jordan 
stands on the threshold of a big historic phase that will 
produce important results on the political and economic levels. 
  In addition to the important achievements attained in this 
visit, we can also note two important accomplishments: First, 
rectifying the course of Jordanian-U.S. relations, which were 
affected by the negative repercussions of the second Gulf war; 
the second accomplishment is represented by the fact that Jordan 
has openly and finally decided its national option through King 
Husayn's announcement that achieving progress on the Jordanian 
track is no longer linked with what is taking place on the other 
tracks. 
  The great importance of this stems from the fact that Jordan 
has reiterated, through this development, its influential peace 
efforts, as well as its commitment to hold -- at the appropriate 
speed -- serious talks on the joint agenda with Israel. Through 
this development, Jordan has also regained the leverage of its 
exceptional role in the peace process and reorganized its 
priorities in light of its long-term interests and in accordance 
with its own views. 
  Jordan has now ended the state in which others have to wait; 
it has ended a situation in which Jordan would be the last party 
to negotiate and the last party to sign. This does not serve 
national interests or higher pan-Arab interests. Furthermore, 
such a situation will not help Jordan restore all its rights to 
land and water and will curb its freedom to exercise its 
sovereign rights. 
  As we look with extreme importance and concern at the 
results 
of His Majesty King Husayn's visit to the American capital, we 
hope that Israel will receive this Jordanian trend with a 
positive spirit and will stop the game of wasting time and the 
tug-of-war policy. The objective is to achieve a fair and 
comprehensive peace that will be accepted by coming generations 
which will feel, through this peace, a change in the quality of 
life of people throughout the entire region. 

