BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Vietnam Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet is to visit 
Cambodia to further strengthen friendly cooperation. It's the 
first official visit to Cambodia of a leader of the Vietnamese 
Government since Cambodia approved its Constitution to establish 
the new Royal Government. 
  This is to take place following the two years of activities 
in bilateral relations. In late 1993, the first and second 
prime ministers of Cambodia, Mr. Ranariddh and Mr. Hun Sen, paid 
an official visit to Vietnam, and in early March this year, 
Chairman of the Cambodian Parliament Samdech Chea Sim also 
visited Vietnam. Early this week, the two co-defense ministers 
of Cambodia were also present for an official friendship visit. 
Meanwhile, many Vietnamese high-ranking state and government 
delegations also went to Cambodia, including the trip made by 
Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam. 
  These activities demonstrate positive developments in 
relations between the two countries, who have had long, 
traditional ties. Vietnam has always respected the Paris 
agreement on Cambodia. Vietnam has also reserved goodwill and 
sincere support for Cambodian people's efforts to overcome all 
trials to achieve national reconciliation and reconstruction. 
For this very reason, the Government of Cambodia has attached 
great importance for the preservation and development of 
friendly relations with Vietnam and neighboring countries, 
considering it an important goal of Cambodian foreign policy. 
  However, there remains a number of pending issues, 
especially 
the interest and security of Vietnamese residents in Cambodia. 
This question must be solved properly in the interest and the 
aspiration of the people of both countries, in face of the 
increasing massacre of Vietnamese residents in Cambodia by the 
Khmer Rouge. The two sides have agreed to solve the question 
through peaceful negotiation. 
  The coming visit to Cambodia by Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet 
will be an opportunity for the two sides to deal with this 
problem and also create conditions for further developments of 
comprehensive bilateral cooperation. Vietnam and Cambodia will 
sign a number of agreements on economic cooperation, trade, 
culture, and education. These are legal documents for bilateral 
cooperation. 
  With the visit to Cambodia by Vietnam's government leader, 
Vietnam and Cambodia relations will pace more constructive steps 
to contributing to peace and stability in Southeast Asia. 

