Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Shen Taikang and Li Guoqiang of the Economic </F>
Information Center of Jilin Province: "A Forecast and Analysis 
of the Corn Market Next Year"] 
  [Text] This year the supply and demand situation has been 
tight on the corn markets across China. There have been no 
sufficient spot goods in the producing areas, resulting in 
increases in the corn price. The per kilogram futures trading 
price is 0.06-0.10 yuan higher than last year. The prices at the 
wholesale grain trading markets in Zhengzhou, Heilongjiang, 
Shandong, Hubei, Weihai, and Qinhuangdao are respectively 20 
percent, 10.7 percent, 8.3 percent, 27.4 percent, 29 percent, 
and 21.8 percent higher than the same period last year. The main 
reason for the rise in the corn price and the tight supply and 
demand situation regarding corn has been the substantial 
increase in the demand for corn across the country. For 
instance: 1) Industry nationwide consumes 8 million metric tons 
of corn each year; 2) the demand for corn on the domestic feed 
market amounts to more than 30 million metric tons; 3) 
nationwide the consumption of corn for medical purposes and by 
the light and food industries already amounts to over 1.7 
million metric tons; 4) as the United States has reduced its 
corn exports, Japan, the ROK, and Southeast Asian countries have 
all tried to buy corn from China; this year corn exports are 
expected to total more than 8 million metric tons. We believe: 
that next year corn from China will still sell well and at a 
good price. With regard to the domestic market, this year the 
output of corn will fall by around 2 percent from last year, and 
at the same time the stock of corn will also fall by over 15 
percent; next year corn consumption will continue to grow at the 
rate of 4-5 percent, and the corn demand and corn supply on the 
domestic market are each expected to be around 92 million metric 
tons. Consequently supply and demand on China's domestic market 
will be in basic equilibrium, and there will be a small surplus. 
  With regard to the world corn market, according to the 
forecasts made by the United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization, this year the total grain output of the world will 
decline; the output of wheat will increase, but the output of 
coarse cereals will decline. The main reason for the decline in 
coarse cereals was that the floods in the midwest of the United 
States and the drought in the southeast of the United States led 
to a decline of around 22 percent in the output of corn. We 
believe that next year the corn price on the world market will 
continue to be high. Furthermore, as exports from the United 
States, the main corn-producing country in the world, will 
continue to be reduced, Japan, the ROK, and Southeast Asian 
countries will be more inclined to try to buy corn from China. 
Next year corn exports from China will continue to grow at a 
high rate, resulting in the need to use another 4-6 million 
metric tons of stocked corn. This will reduce China's national 
corn stock to the level of the previous four years. The analysis 
above shows that because of the impact of the world corn market, 
it will be rather challenging for China to use the corn produced 
this year and a part of the corn stock to achieve a balanced 
situation and meet the domestic and external demand next year. 
For this reason the average corn price on the domestic market 
is expected to increase by over 10 percent again on the basis of 
the substantial increase this year. 
  This year our province achieved a bumper grain harvest, but 
the output of corn is believed to be largely the same as last 
year. Corn exports from our province are expected to total over 
5 million metric tons this year, thereby creating a historical 
record. Next year our province should seize the opportunity 
provided by the strong demand for corn on the domestic and 
international markets so as to try to climb another step in the 
area of exporting goods to earn foreign exchange. 

