BFN 

<F P=106> [Debate between presidential candidates Ernesto Samper of </F>
the Liberal Party and Andres Pastrana of the Conservative Party, 
moderated by reporters Yamid Amat, Maria Elvira Samper, and 
Maria Isabel Rueda, at the Inravision Television Network studios 
in Santa Fe de Bogota -- live] 
  [Text] [Amat] Dr. Pastrana, many times during your campaign 
you said, you reiterated this clearly in the speech you 
delivered to National Exporters Association, that your objective 
is to lower inflation to eight percent. One understands 
inflation cannot be reduced to eight percent without reducing 
salaries by eight percent. Thus, must salaried workers in 
Colombia expect an eight percent salary reduction from you? 
  [Pastrana] No. This is a matter of protecting the 
pocketbooks of Colombians. I am going to give you some 
information. More than half of the salary increases Colombians 
received in December have dissipated so far this year as a 
result of inflation. They no longer enjoy this raise. 
  That is why I have insisted the worst enemy of exporters and 
agriculture is revaluation. That is why we must also fight 
revaluations, to be able to eliminate inflation. What am I 
proposing? Let us seek a healthy fiscal discipline and control 
public spending. Did you know 50 percent of inflation comes 
from excess public spending? That is why we must establish 
healthy fiscal discipline and prioritize spending. 
  Second, what do we accomplish by reducing inflation? This 
will permit us to defend the pocketbooks of Colombians. I 
insist, in December, Colombians received a wage hike and already 
in January the cost of public services skyrocketed. That is why 
we are seeking efficiency in public services. We want to lower 
the rates collected for public services. I have also proposed 
to lower the costs of education. A large part of the basic 
market basket is also due to the high cost of education. We 
must defend the salary of Colombians and we are going to lower 
inflation to less than 10 percent before my term in office 
expires. This has already been done in Argentina. Bolivia did 
it; Peru managed to do it; and we will do it in Colombia to 
defend the pocketbooks of Colombians and maintain basic market 
prices at appropriate levels. 
  [Amat] Dr. Pastrana, with all due respect, one of the things 
for which you are criticized is that when one asks you a 
question, you respond to something different. I asked you 
specifically if workers can expect an eight percent adjustment 
in their salaries from you? 
  [Pastrana] No, no, no, no. Workers must expect an adjustment 
in relation to their salaries. Regarding the question you 
asked, it is inconceivable that when workers get 18- to 
20-percent wage hikes, in early January, the rates for public 
services increased 20 to 22 percent, gasoline increased by rates 
higher than the wage hike. What I am saying is the government 
cannot continue to play with workers in Colombia. In December, 
they get a wage hike and only three or four months later the 
increase is reduced to half. 
  [Amat] Thank you very much, Dr. Pastrana. Dr. Samper, your 
turn now. 
  [Ernesto Samper] Well, I think Colombians have been very 
much 
disappointed by Dr. Pastrana's response. I think he has only 
addressed generalities about inflation. What we have at stake 
here are two fundamental variables, namely inflation and 
unemployment. 
  With an eight percent inflation rate, we can think 
unemployment will go up 15 percent, meaning there will be an 
additional 500,000 people without jobs. I do not know what Dr. 
Pastrana will really do with those 500,000 additional unemployed 
persons, which under the current circumstances is what would 
result from an eight percent inflation rate. What I have been 
proposing is a new system to handle inflation. Everyone handles 
inflation from the demand side, that is, taking resources from 
the people's pockets. Let us not raise the price for coffee 
growers, let us not raise workers' wages, let us not increase 
pensions to pensioners, because that is inflationary. 
  What is inflation? Inflation is many pesos seeking a few 
products. What we must do then is to produce, to produce food, 
to produce new and cheaper services, and that way, and only that 
way, handle the topic of inflation demands. That is how we can 
really lower the people's cost of living without hurting their 
salaries and revenues. 
  [Amat] Dr. Samper, almost the same thing that happened with 
Dr. Pastrana happened now. What will your policy be on the 
workers' wages? 
  [Ernesto Samper] The policy is very simple, and the same 
thing did not happen. The policy is very simple. Salaries must 
go up at least to the same level as the inflation rate. I am 
not going to have the situation we have experienced these past 
few years in which salaries are climbing up the stairs and the 
cost of living, tuitions, and public services are going up on 
the elevator. 
  [Amat] You now have one minute to respond. 
  [Pastrana] I am glad Dr. Samper agrees with me. He is saying 
that while some things are going up, others are coming down. 
That is precisely it, the high costs of public service rates. 
Dr. Samper is contradicting himself, and it becomes clear on 
this topic. He says he is going to curb the inflation rate, 
stamp out revaluation, yet he is proposing white-elephant 
projects to the country, projects for 3 billion pesos or 4 
billion pesos like the Bogota subway. That is a project that 
will generate a revaluation. That is why my proposal is 
different. I am asking the country: Is Cali, Barranquilla, or 
the coast ready to pay.... 
  [Ernesto Samper, interrupting] I would like to know.... 
  [Pastrana, interrupting] We should [words indistinct].... 
  [Ernesto Samper, interrupting] Dr. Pastrana is.... 
  [Pastrana, interrupting] Let us prevent revaluation because 
[words indistinct].... 
  [Amat, interrupting] Dr. Pastrana, Dr. Samper, Dr. Samper, 
please. 
  [Ernesto Samper] I am asking him to let me speak, because he 
is talking very fast. 
  [Amat] Dr. Samper, please. [words indistinct] 
  [Ernesto Samper] So to be more prudent means [words 
indistinct] [Maria Samper and Rueda laugh] 
  [Amat] Dr. Samper, please. 
  [Ernesto Samper] First, I want Dr. Pastrana to tell the 
viewers that the Bogota subway project is a white elephant. 
Just eight days ago, he said it was necessary.... 
  [Pastrana, interrupting] It is a white elephant within the 
concept that Dr. Samper is proposing conducting it through 
[words indistinct].... 
  [Rueda, interrupting] Please. 
  [Ernesto Samper] Talking faster will not make you win. 
  [Pastrana] I think the topic.... 
  [Ernesto Samper, interrupting] Take it easy. 
  [Pastrana, interrupting] That is why I am proposing granting 
contracts.... 
  [Ernesto Samper, interrupting] Take it easy. 
  [Pastrana] ...to private business. I think this is very 
important.... 
  [Ernesto Samper, interrupting] Do not include all the topics 
because you have 30 minutes. 
  [Rueda] Let us have some order. Let us have order, please. 
  [Amat] With all due respect, next is Maria Isabel Rueda. 
  [Rueda] Maria Elvira. 
  [Amat] Pardon me. Maria Elvira Samper asks the next 
question. 
  [Maria Samper] Dr. Samper, the economic model of the Gaviria 
government is neoliberal. We have seen that the views of the 
two candidates do not radically move away from this model. 
Still, we have seen a sort of switching of cables here. 
Whereas the opposition candidate, Andres Pastrana, seems to be 
a faithful follower of this economic model, you seem to be a 
revisionist of this model. How revisionist are you? 
  [Ernesto Samper] Maria Elvira, I participated in drafting 
the 
opening program. As development minister, I supported President 
Gaviria in the reduction of tariffs, giving flexibility to the 
labor market, and increasing private investment. I was involved 
in the process of opening. Right at that time, I mentioned some 
difficulties in implementing this model. I talk of gradual 
actions. Why? Because, I said, if we move the model too fast, 
we will find the agricultural sector will become depressed, as 
has happened. The same thing happened with the export sector. 
That is the gradual action consisted of, namely, giving 
conditions and possibilities to businessmen so they could adjust 
to the new model of competition. 
  What must we do as of now to prevent a return to the past? 
There are two very clear proposals: Dr. Pastrana's, which calls 
for an intensification and radicalization of openness, which is 
stated on page 19 of his government program; and mine, which is 
to complement openness, to initiate the social phase of openness 
by putting feelings into the process. In other words, we must 
promote social investments and development and create the 
conditions for more Colombians to feel that they are part of the 
openness process. That is my position. 
  [Maria Samper] Dr. Samper, will you pursue the privatization 
process? If you do, what institutions will be involved? Will 
Ecopetrol [Colombian Petroleum Enterprise], for example, be 
among them? And can privatization be carried out in a manner 
such that state monopolies will be unable to become private 
monopolies and thus remain in the hands of the few? 
  [Ernesto Samper] I will not privatize Ecopetrol. I am 
definitely not going to privatize Ecopetrol and I am not going 
to turn privatization into a utopian goal. It is not taboo 
either. 
  I will not auction state institutions and be prey to what 
you 
pointed out: a transition from a public monopoly to a private 
monopoly. Should there be privatization processes they will be 
accompanied by democratization. I will not privatize anything 
that, socially speaking, should be the exclusive responsibility 
of the state, such as health and education. 
  [Maria Samper] Dr. Pastrana, it is almost unanimously agreed 
that openness has been reversed. While imports have increased 
50 percent, exports stand at scarcely 10 percent. How would you 
correct this model of reverse openness? 
  [Pastrana] I thought, Maria Elvira, that you would ask me 
the 
same question -- if I would pursue privatization -- which I 
believe is an important one. I will give you the facts. In 
February (?1990) Dr. Samper said: I will not pursue openness. 
This is why, Ernesto, I believe that each of us should talk 
instead of interpret each another. I do not want your 
contradictory policy. My economic program has a human face; it 
calls for investments in the social field. This is what I am 
proposing. 
  First, we must start off with the basic premise that for the 
country to progress we need peace. We must resolve such problems 
as public order and citizen security, invest in our people, 
potable water and infrastructure; we must construct new streets, 
recover the countryside, and once again make farming a good 
business. That is the aim of my government program and that is 
why the entire government program I am proposing to the 
Colombian people establishes the people's time has come and 
those are the areas in which we must invest. 
  In education, we will guarantee the education of all 
Colombian youths between ages five and 15. We must also 
guarantee that if a Colombian is admitted to a university but 
lacks resources, he will be granted a loan on his word. These 
loans will allow us to design a new country by educating our 
people. 
  We must invest in water for 11 million Colombians who do not 
have potable water and we must also generate an entire social 
investment policy like the one I have been calling for in my 
government program. How are we going to.... 
  [Maria Samper, interrupting] Dr. Pastrana, excuse me, but 
you 
have not answered my question. How will you change that model 
of reverse openness? 
  [Pastrana] I will tell you. The model was created precisely 
so the country could export and generate jobs; not so that it 
could import. Thus, I believe that first we should generate 
infrastructure. Colombian exporters pay between 12 and 14 
percent in contract fees. Why? Because we do not have 
highways. I propose to construct 5,000 km of highways in four 
years. Because we do not have efficient ports, because we do 
not have communications, because the countryside is undergoing a 
crisis and has been neglected. We must recover the countryside 
and we must create a viable economic model. 
  [Maria Samper] Dr. Samper, you have the floor to refute Dr. 
Pastrana. 
  [Ernesto Samper] I am even more confused with this answer 
than with the previous one.... 
  [Amat, interrupting] (?Would you like to sit down), Antonio? 
We must interrupt the program for a moment. Let us take a 
commercial break. 
  [Maria Samper] We apologize to our viewers for what just 
happened. Dr. Antonio Navarro, presidential candidate for the 
19 April Movement Democratic Alliance, unexpectedly and 
surprisingly interrupted the debate. Speaking for myself and my 
colleagues, I would like to say that we feel that we have been 
totally insulted. In our opinion, this incident constitutes an 
attack on freedom of the press. Two television newscasts, 
exercising their right to freedom of the press, jointly decided 
to hold a debate with the two candidates who, in our opinion -- 
not in our opinion but according to the polls -- are virtually 
the leading presidential options. I hereby protest on behalf of 
the reporters. I also believe this incident shows a lack of 
respect for the two candidates who, exercising their freedom of 
expression, kindly accepted our invitation. Having apologized, 
we would like to cordially continue the debate. 
  [Rueda] Dr. 
Samper was speaking when we were interrupted. Perhaps he could 
continue? 
  [Ernesto Samper] All right, I was establishing what, in my 
opinion, are the two outlooks on the opening issue being 
presented to the country at this time. On one side, I believe, 
there are several sectors interested in increasing the opening 
process. I consider this not to be the correct way. We need to 
stop our course. We need to make social investments. The 
opening cannot turn into a game of winners and losers, with the 
state picking up and curing those injured by the ravages of the 
opening. That is why I have proposed a plan -- to which I am 
committed and which I definitely do not think is incompatible 
with what has been implemented up to now -- to legitimize the 
opening process with social investment and especially with 
productive employment. This has been the main proposal of my 
campaign. We have to understand that 46 percent of the 
Colombians are in a situation of critical poverty and that any 
social, educational, or health measure will be seen simply as a 
remedial assistance solution. Productive employment is what 
will allow the country to truly achieve a social development 
that will afford people the possibility to, with their own 
efforts, procure and generate their own well-being. In my 
government, social policy will not be the younger sister of 
economic policy. Mainly, this policy will allow us to advance 
socially without sacrificing our growth goals. This is how I 
see it and I have moved to advance to the second phase of the 
opening process. 
  [Rueda] Dr. Pastrana, do you have anything to add? 
  [Pastrana] Yes, the important thing.... [pauses] I disagree 
with Dr. Samper, of course, because I believe the important 
thing is for the country to start doing well. Nevertheless, 
what good does it do for the country to do well if its people 
are not doing well? That is why we have to find ways for the 
country to grow, but together with the people. How are we going 
to get it to grow with the people? By investing, as I propose, 
in education, potable water, infrastructure, lowering costs for 
exporters so they can compete in international markets, make 
roads for farmers so they can sell their products not only in 
the national markets but in the international sphere too. We 
have to establish all the mechanisms that will allow us to have 
infrastructure, efficiency in our ports, communications. We 
have to conduct an opening process that truly works and not only 
-- as Maria Elvira has said -- for the country to import. No, 
we have to find a way for the model to work for exports and to 
generate jobs, as I am proposing to Colombians. 
  [Rueda] Dr. Pastrana, you have mentioned investments. In 
this administration -- I believe President Gaviria himself 
acknowledges this -- social investment has been applied to the 
fields of justice and security. For the viewers who are not 
experts in economics to understand, this means it took money 
away from the poor to give it to security and justice, which 
were national priorities. How will this situation be broached 
in your government? 
  [Pastrana] I propose that we maintain, I believe we must 
sustain our investment in justice in Colombia because we cannot 
have impunity and we must have a Prosecutor's Office that works. 
We have to invest resources in this sector. We have to invest 
resources in our Armed Forces so that our soldiers can acquire 
professionalism to the benefit of Colombia. We have to invest, 
however -- this is my proposal -- between 10 and 12 percent of 
the GNP in the social sphere and by the end of my government we 
will have done this. We will invest in all the programs I have 
mentioned already. 
  [Rueda] That is, when you are president, if you get to be 
president, you will give more money than is given today.... 
  [Pastrana, interrupting] To social investment, to the 
people. 
We are going to invest in the people. 
  [Rueda] You are going to decrease the amounts given to the 
Army and to justice? 
  [Pastrana] No, we have to maintain those investments. The 
Army receives approximately 2.5 or 2.8 percent and I believe we 
have to maintain this. We have to professionalize the Army.... 
  [Rueda, interrupting] This means you will not give them more 
money? 
  [Pastrana] We have to professionalize the Army. I propose 
that we end mandatory conscription and that we gradually 
decrease the size of the Army. President Gaviria has already 
talked about 10,000 new professional soldiers and I believe we 
must gradually.... 
  [Rueda, interrupting] Professional soldiers cost more money, 
however? 
  [Pastrana] ...gradually we will increase it. We will be able 
to do so if we give priority to expenses as I have proposed. 
This means that investments must be made on a priority basis 
and the social sector is our priority. 
  [Rueda] Dr. Samper, please, the same question for you. 
  [Ernesto Samper] Let us see. First, I am glad that Dr. 
Pastrana is looking into the obligatory military service idea. 
On 15 September 1992, he voted in the Senate in favor of the 
draft. Second, I fully agree with Maria Isabel that to speak of 
professionalizing the Army and simultaneously speak of reduced 
Armed Forces expenses is a contradiction. A professional 
soldier costs 3.5 times what a conscripted soldier costs. 
Third, what are we going to do? We will effectively increase 
social investments, not to 12 percent, but to 15 percent. This 
means increasing what is defined as social investment -- 
housing, education, and health -- from $4.2 billion to $10 
billion in 1998, thus covering 15 percent of the GNP. Chile did 
it, Mexico did it, and we also can do it if we rationalize 
expenses, if we increase the efficiency of social expenditures, 
and if we make allowances while we gradually attain peace -- I 
am going to attain peace -- to accommodate different expenses 
to replace security and defense expenditures. 
  [Maria Samper] I have two questions for both of you. Both of 
you speak beautifully of social investments, but the question is 
obvious: Where will the money come from? Dr. Pastrana, 
regarding taxes, will you raise them? Will you lower them? 
  [Pastrana] First, I want to reply to Dr. Samper that I voted 
for the military service because the choice was either to end it 
or keep it. As with everyone else in the Congress, I voted that 
to maintain the military service. What we need to do is end it 
gradually. Second: Peace is the country's top priority. We 
must find mechanisms to consolidate peace and end impunity in 
Colombia. We do not believe in impunity. The last planning 
study indicates that 97 percent of the cases go unpunished. We 
need to investigate there. 
  [Maria Samper] But Dr. Pastrana, excuse me, please reply to 
my question about taxes. I want your pledge to the country. 
Briefly, give me your tax policy. 
  [Pastrana] Regarding tax policies, I have proposed reducing 
the income tax from 37.5 percent to 30 percent. Dr. Samper 
voted for this when he was senator in 1986, and I feel that was 
very important -- to drop the rate from 40 percent to 30 
percent. We do not uphold the notion that because we lower 
taxes we will not collect more. Dr. Samper knows as well as I do 
the economic theory that by lowering taxes there could well be 
greater revenues. How? Because we will control tax evasion, we 
will attract investments, this will generate more jobs, we will 
also democratize and broaden the tax base, and I believe we have 
to match the 1986 reforms -- dropping the rate from 37.5 percent 
to 30 percent. By controlling expenses we will be able to 
invest in social areas, as I propose. 
  [Maria Samper] Dr. Samper. 
  [Ernesto Samper] Well, to say one is going to reduce taxes 
from 37.5 percent to 30 percent is to promise something that has 
already been agreed. In 1997, the war surcharge will have to be 
reduced anyway. It was established by law and by law it has to 
be removed. The problem is whether we will remove it and how 
will we do it. To my way of thinking, the best way to finance 
social development is to use part of the Cusiana resources. We 
can also sign up for a multilateral credit package, the type the 
World Bank is currently offering -- fortunately the World Bank 
is beginning to reform its policies -- and also use 
Inter-American Development Bank funds, which are currently aimed 
at health and education. These are called basic social packages. 
The funds exist to finance a broad and ambitious social 
development proposal. I have studied and located where these 
funds will come from. As part of the government macroeconomic 
program we have planned, the possibility and capacity to 
generate resources for social investment exists. 
  [Amat] Please reply yes or no. Do you believe Andres 
Pastrana has the capacity to handle this country? 
  [Ernesto Samper] Excuse me Yamid, but the question is 
offensive. I have a good personal impression of Dr. Pastrana 
and if I reply no it will be interpreted as an offense and if I 
say yes.... 
  [Amat, interrupting] Do you, Dr. Pastrana, believe him 
capable? 
  [Pastrana] I do believe Dr. Samper is capable. 
  I believe that my political experience as an alderman, as a 
businessman in the private sector, as mayor of the city, as a 
senator, and now as a presidential candidate has been 
acknowledged. That is my experience. My curriculum vitae is 
open. I can tell Colombians that in all the posts I have 
occupied, I have demonstrated that I do what I say I will do. 
This is my commitment as president of Colombia. I am making a 
commitment to the Colombian people: social investment, an 
improved standard of living, promoting Colombia abroad, and the 
search for peace. Those are my commitments, and I am directing 
my efforts toward those objectives. 
  [Amat] Dr. Samper, you have not been accused of being inept 
but of being inconsistent. You say one thing one day, and 
something else the next. 
  [Ernesto Samper] These are common objections in politics, 
especially from people who do not agree with one's position and 
would like to see one shift to their side. My curriculum vitae 
is also open. Throughout my political career I have maintained a 
course toward social work. The other day I was thinking about 
the bills I promoted in Congress. I promoted the urban reforms 
bill, the low-cost housing project, and the accounting and 
cooperative bill. 
  I worked in the Economic Development Ministry and always 
oriented myself along social development lines. Even when I was 
ambassador to Spain, I dedicated myself to helping Colombians 
abroad. Colombians have a difficult time abroad. Imagine how it 
would be if they did not have the support of their embassies or 
consulates. 
  I am prepared to engage in any debate on inconsistency, but 
let us not have abstract charges like someone telling me that I 
am inconsistent and leaving it at that. I want to be told why I 
am inconsistent. Then I can work on that. 
  [Amat] Gentlemen, the debate is now in your hands to express 
any criticism you may have about the other's personality. 
  [Pastrana] I have a record that I can show the country. 
  [Amat] Pardon me, I am talking about criticizing the other. 
  [Pastrana] Right. That is why I want to say that I have 
maintained a clear, consistent policy. I have a record and the 
people know it. I want to defend my record because I have heard 
Dr. Samper's criticism and I think it is right to evaluate his 
work in the ministry. 
  When Dr. Samper was a minister, the industrial sector grew 
only 0.3 percent. When the ministers of the New Democratic 
Force were in charge -- Dr. Ospina and Dr. Moreno -- the sector 
grew more than 4.5 percent. The same happened in the 
construction sector. Under Dr. Samper, construction growth 
dropped to 0.7 percent, but under ministers like Moreno and 
Ospina, it grew by more than 10 percent. If we look at the trade 
sector, the same thing happened. Under Dr. Samper, trade grew 
by 1.6 percent, but under ministers Moreno, Ospina, and others 
of the New Force, the levels were above the 4 percent mark. 
  This is my record: The people of Bogota know that my work 
was excellent, that we worked for the city. That is the record 
I have to show Colombians. 
  [Ernesto Samper] I paved the way for Dr. Pastrana's 
ministers 
at the Economic Development Ministry. Unfortunately, I do not 
know if they wasted what I left them. I was put in charge of 
one ministry and I left two other ministries, including the 
Foreign Trade Ministry. The industrial sector was happy with my 
work. I defended the industrial sector during this first phase 
of the opening. 
  Dr. Pastrana's tenure as mayor is a different matter. I do 
not deny that he did positive things. I was alderman at the 
time, so I know a lot about his term. Insecurity grew because 
he practically finished the CAI's [Immediate Attention Centers]. 
City district finances were practically destroyed. 
  [Pastrana] We have to tell Dr. Samper that Bogota's index of 
crime-related deaths dropped from 47,000 to 44,000 deaths in 
1989. [bell begins to ring] The most important thing is... 
  [Ernesto Samper] The bell is ringing, Doctor. 
  [Pastrana] Most importantly, Dr. Samper does not even 
remember that those were the years of narcoterrorism, so the 
city was given more protection. [Everyone speaks at once] 
  [Pastrana] The death toll dropped from 47,000 to 44,000. The 
CAI's, how were they created? Does Dr. Samper even know? 
  [Rueda] Do you know, Dr.? 
  [Ernesto Samper] Okay, Dr., before you tell us, I will tell 
you the truth in a few words. 
  [Pastrana] The CAI's are the result of a policy and an 
experiment presented to Dr. Julio Cesar Sanchez. 
  [Ernesto Samper] I will tell you the truth in a few words. 
Had there not been... 
  [Rueda, interrupting] But, but.. 
  [Pastrana] If only Dr. Samper will let me speak, I will let 
him speak. That is why....[pauses] Why don't you put a 
30-second rule on both of us? 
  [Amat] We will respectfully go to commercials. 
  [Rueda] We will be right back. 
  [Maria Samper] I believe there is one very important issue 
for the nation: our relations with the United States. They are 
at their worst level in many years because of recent differences 
with the Colombian Prosecutor General's Office, specifically on 
its struggle against drug trafficking, among other things. Mr. 
Samper, how do you plan to reverse or fix this problem? 
  [Ernesto Samper] I would say that Colombia's relations with 
the United States have two angles: First, the trade angle. 
True, we are currently enjoying some advantage thanks to 
(?ADFA) [expansion unknown] -- very important tariff reductions 
that we must continue to take advantage of. At last it was 
understood that we were not the henchmen, but the main victims 
of drug trafficking. Second, we have the judicial cooperation 
relations. I hope to convince the U.S. Government that [timer 
rings] judicial cooperation; I hope to convince the U.S. 
Government that regardless of any review of the penal code 
dealing with drug trafficking crimes -- term reduction systems 
should not be cumulative, which is another point that has the 
U.S. Government uneasy -- we can then fully reestablish our 
relations. I want to emphatically state that on no account 
would I be willing to hand over the prosecutor general's head on 
a platter to solve these problems. These problems must be 
resolved through diplomatic channels and with the harmony and 
understanding Colombia and the United States have experienced 
during the past 20 years. 
  [Maria Samper] The same question for you, Mr. Pastrana. 
  [Pastrana] I believe relations between Colombia and the 
United States cannot be reduced to Senator Kerry and the 
prosecutor general. I believe our relations should go far 
beyond that. We must therefore seek to strengthen our relations. 
  The idea is to bring drug traffickers to trial in Colombia. 
If Colombia is able to send evidence to allow the United States 
to take drug traffickers to trial, we can then send our evidence 
too. Therefore, we must strengthen the exchange between the two 
governments and this is the policy we must uphold. Drug 
trafficking policies not only belong to Colombia. If the United 
States does not take measures against drug demand, then drugs 
will continue to be shipped, possibly from countries other than 
Colombia. That is why it is important to strengthen the 
judicial exchange process between the two countries so as to 
condemn those who commit the crime. 
  Second, we need to strengthen economic relations between the 
United States and Colombia. We must make good use of Colombia's 
current advantage, which we will project by requesting entry 
into NAFTA. This is where our efforts should be directed -- to 
ensure the country grows, that we can export, that we can gain 
from foreign investment, that we can attract industries, 
generate new jobs, and make good use of these advantages that 
grant us today the possibility of joining NAFTA and allow 
Colombia the prerogative to seek employment and well-being for 
the people of Colombia. 
  [Maria Samper] The ring is yours, gentlemen. 
  [Ernesto Samper] You will forgive me, Mr. Pastrana, but that 
coincides with what my proposal offers, and I cannot exactly 
rebut my own proposals, can I? Perhaps he has something to say 
about my idea on this. 
  [Pastrana] I do. What exactly has been happening lately? I 
was the one who presented the submitting to justice policy being 
used in Colombia for the first time in 1990. I asked myself 
then: Why do we not copy a system similar to the U.S. policy?. 
This is why, during the mayoral summit held in the United 
States... 
  [Amat, interrupting] Excuse me, but with all due respect, I 
must interrupt. 
  [Pastrana] Just a minute. 
  [Amat] The one to propose the policy of submitting to 
justice 
in Colombia was former President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen in 1972. 
  [Pastrana] I presented a formal proposal to the mayors. I 
believe this is important. I presented it to the mayors and, if 
I remember correctly, I was criticized by the U.S. media. They 
asked why we should accept this system? I told them that the 
system was theirs, not ours. I believe the policy should be 
directed at getting information from the lower levels that can 
allow us to catch the big fish, that lead us to the real 
criminals. That is where the submitting to justice policy 
should be aimed. The changes we are proposing for the Penal 
Code should not be to increase penalties. No. We must develop 
the instruments to capture these criminals... [timer rings] and 
bring them to trial. 
  [Ernesto Samper] The drug trafficking issue is far more 
complex than that. There are four stages of drug trafficking: 
production of coca, stage two is the issue of trafficking in 
itself, consumption, and money laundering. I would propose a 
binational commission to seek solutions to each of these four 
stages, which are totally different in conception and solution. 
  [Rueda] Mr. Samper, let us move on to another issue, which 
we could call brother to this one: public security in Colombia. 
You have said, or I have heard that you have said, you will not 
negotiate with terrorists, kidnappers, those who plant land 
mines, or those who blow up oil pipelines. The Revolutionary 
Armed Forces of Colombia and the Army of National Liberation do 
these things. With whom will you talk? With whom will you 
negotiate? Or are you going to negotiate at all? 
  [Ernesto Samper] My, please do not be so definitive, Maria 
Isabel. I proposed that Colombia sign the Geneva Convention's 
Protocol II, which deals with the humanization of the war. Why? 
Because the first requirement for negotiating is creating a 
human rights system to protect civilians. It is as reproachable 
for a government soldier or a policeman, no matter where he or 
she may be, to violate the human rights of the people as it is 
for the guerrillas to do so. To this end, we must set up this 
framework. One cannot call blowing a small child's legs off an 
act of war, neither is kidnapping someone. If we sign Protocol 
II, we will be in a position to establish the difference a 
between a criminal and the subject of political negotiation. 
This is why my basic proposal calls for us to establish the 
difference between acts of war and those that harm the civilian 
population. 
  [Rueda] Mr. Pastrana, I ask you the same question, but 
with an additional note. I studied your government program as 
closely as I could, and I found on page 145 that you tend more 
toward a forceful solution, as I understand it, when you address 
the issue of guerrillas. You mention dialogue very 
superficially. What is your position on this? 
  [Pastrana] I think that the program must be read. I will 
tell you clearly what the program's proposal is: The government 
does not choose beetween war and peace, the government has to 
defend the Constitution and the laws. It is the guerrillas who 
must make a choice and decide for peace. Why don't the 
guerrillas tell the country what they want? The country does 
not know what the guerrillas want. Whenever I travel throughout 
the country, the people tell me that the guerrillas want power, 
or kidnappings, or to be paid tolls. 
  I am proposing that we have neither a high commissioner nor 
a 
medium commissioner. No more dialogues for the sake of 
dialogues. If the guerrillas tell us what they want, then I, as 
president of Colombia, am prepared to sit at the negotiating 
table and to talk with them. Once the guerrillas tell us what 
they want, I am prepared to invite international overseers, the 
international community, to come. Then we would have observers 
like the Catholic Church. I am sure that in this way we will 
have peace. 
  If the guerrillas do not tell us what they want, then we 
just 
have to continue implementing the Constitution and the laws 
which state that we have to protect the lives, the honor, and 
the property of Colombians. I am sure that the guerrillas will 
tell us what they want. I am sure that when I become president 
of Colombia we will sign peace agreements with them, along as 
they tell us that this is what they want. 
  [Maria Samper] Your turn, Dr. Samper. 
  [Ernesto Samper] With all due respect, I believe that plan 
is 
overly simplistic. I, as the president, will not wait until the 
guerrillas set the conditions and limits for a dialogue. I will 
take on the peace process myself. That peace process assumes the 
creation of conditions of understanding and the existence of 
respect for human rights, and social investment to counter 
violent elements. I do not agree with waiting for the 
guerrillas to set the conditions and parameters for 
negotiations, and to set the rules of the game vis-a-vis the 
state. 
  [Pastrana] I disagree completely. I believe Colombians are 
sick and tired of holding a dialogue just for the sake of it. 
We cannot go on with high or medium commissioners. I do not 
know if Dr. Samper wants to retain the plan recommended by his 
advisors and Horacio Serpa -- to retain a high commissioner. I 
believe Colombians want to know what the guerrillas are after. 
I am positive that as soon as the guerrillas tell us that... 
  [Maria Samper, interrupting] But is that not dialogue? 
  [Pastrana, continuing] ...they are willing to negotiate 
peace, we will negotiate peace. We will sit at the negotiating 
table whenever they tell us what they want to do, when they 
express their willingness to end kidnappings and threats. I am 
confident we will be able to negotiate peace whenever they tell 
us what they want. 
  [Maria Samper] Dr. Pastrana, you want to hear the guerrillas 
out, but is that not dialogue? 
  [Pastrana] We want the guerrillas to tell us what they want. 
This is different from sitting down at the negotiating table. 
We want the guerrillas to tell us... 
  [Amat, interrupting] Do you want them to send you a letter? 
  [Pastrana, continuing] ...that is why Colombians and I are 
willing, provided the guerrillas tell us what they want, to sit 
down with them, as president of Colombia, and work together to 
achieve peace. I am willing to invite international overseers, 
international representatives, and the Catholic Church, and I am 
sure we will be able to negotiate peace. 
  [Ernesto Samper] I will not wait until the guerrillas tell 
me 
what they want. I will tell the guerrillas: Here is the 
government with the Armed Forces willing to fight a war, and 
here is a government that is truly willing to make peace. It is 
your choice. 
  [Amat] I am still not very clear on your positions. Will you 
or will you not talk with the guerrillas? 
  [Ernesto Samper] I will talk with the guerrillas insofar as 
I 
know it will be useful. I will not make the old mistake of 
sitting at a negotiating table for two years to end up 
empty-handed. 
  [Amat] Very well. The two leading themes in this electoral 
campaign have been unemployment and education. Unemployment in 
Colombia occurs mainly among high school graduates and 
professionals. Is not it contradictory to offer education and 
jobs when those in the unemployment lines are those who are in 
fact educated? 
  [Pastrana] My government plan is entirely based on 
employment 
-- 270 pages in which I address the nation on the need to make 
our economy more dynamic. Where am I trying to create jobs? We 
create jobs through building roads and highways, building 
aqueducts, developing the tourism industry, and developing 
health care. First, if we develop health care in Colombia, 
doctors will have jobs. If we build roads, engineers will have 
work, instead of driving cabs. Second, education is the 
foundation. I recall talking to the Singapore prime minister, 
who told me he was very thankful that God did not give them any 
natural resources because that had enabled them to focus on 
their human resources. Thus, I believe a country must invest in 
its people. 
  Forgive me for correcting you, Yamid, but the highest 
unemployment rate is among women and young people. This is why 
we have to create new opportunities, provide the people with an 
education. We are going to give all young people from ages five 
to 15 the opportunity to obtain a primary and a secondary school 
education. We are going to give credits to professionals who 
want to study and are unable to attend university classes 
because the better educated the people are, the better their 
salaries will be. I ask parents who are watching me right now: 
What is the best legacy we can leave to our children? I am sure 
that the answer is education. It is in this direction that we 
must head. This is our best resource: our people. We may have 
natural resources, but the most important resource is our people. 
  [Amat] Thank you. Dr. Samper. 
  [Ernesto Samper] Let us see: Do you know how many pages Dr. 
Pastrana dedicates to employment in his program? Two and 
one-quarter pages! He dedicates 0.72 percent of his program to 
employment. Everything can relate to employment, of course, but 
he does not view microenterprises, the recovery of the 
countryside, infrastructure, and social investment programs that 
I am proposing as job-generating programs. Why? Behind Dr. 
Pastrana's program there is this posture position that I 
respectfully do not share. It is the old development posture of 
the 1970's that was propounded a few years ago by the very 
illustrious Alvaro Gomez Hurtado, currently a partner of Dr. 
Pastrana. The position is: Let us watch the economy grow and 
generate jobs and just see what we can do. 
  Employment versus eduction. I do not know what will go 
through the minds of high school graduates who sell lottery 
tickets or through the minds of professionals who are driving 
taxis if we tell them: Look, you are qualified unemployed people 
-- the unemployment rate of professional workers is twice as 
high as that of unskilled workers -- just wait some 10 years 
until we educate everyone and then you will have the opportunity 
to get a job. This is not the way! The road is to resolve -- 
as I am going to do -- the unemployment problem right now. This 
does not mean we are not going to develop education. But right 
now the unemployment lists are full of qualified workers. 
  [Amat] Each has 30 seconds. 
  [Pastrana] I disagree with Dr. Samper. I think that what we 
have to do is to create opportunities for the people. If we 
build roads, engineers will be able to work. If we invest in 
health care, creating opportunities for all Colombians, doctors 
will have jobs. We have to create new opportunities. This is 
what we are proposing to the country -- opportunities in the 
form of roads... 
  [Amat, interrupting] [Words indistinct] 
  [Pastrana] Please let me speak, Yamid. Opportunities in the 
form of roads. The television clock says I still have seven 
seconds, and you have been interrupting me. I still have 10 
seconds. I say this respectfully. 
  [Amat] Please go ahead. 
  [Pastrana] We are investing in roads, education, potable 
water. This is the government program. The problem is that Dr. 
Samper has just read 0.2 percent of my program. I am going to 
give Dr. Samper a copy. You may take it home and read it and 
you will see that the entire program is a search for jobs for 
all Colombians. 
  [Ernesto Samper] Dr. Pastrana's disagreement does not bother 
me. To the contrary, if he did not disagree I would be worried. 
The truth is that he has stepped down from his program to climb 
onto mine. This does not bother me either. This is what he has 
been doing for the past six or seven months. What I find 
difficult is the idea of having to shoulder the two programs, 
but I am prepared to do it. Employment must be productive and it 
must be created, induced, and generated by the state. This 
cannot be an automatic process. 
  [Amat] Dr. Samper, I am sorry I have to interrupt you. 
  [Rueda] I am going to ask you a very simple little 
question. What one thing does your adversary have that you 
covet? In one word. 
  [Ernesto Samper] Certain charm that the country recognizes. 
Also that he has an excellent opponent in the upcoming 
elections. 
  [Rueda] What about you, Dr. Pastrana? 
  [Pastrana] I would begin by saying that Dr. Samper 
acknowledges the fact that he has a capable man like me, more 
capable than he, to govern Colombia. I covet his advisers, like 
Rodrigo Oparto and Marta Lucia Ramirez. I envy you that, Dr. 
Samper. Those are intelligent people who will have to work with 
us in the government. 
  [Rueda] One last question because we are running out of 
time. 
In this government, we have experienced a polemical situation 
centered on the presidential family. How does a president 
manage the presidential family? Presidents have brothers. 
There is a brother of Dr. Pastrana who is with him all the 
time. Dr. Samper has three brothers who work... 
  [Ernesto Samper, interrupting] Usually against me. [laughs] 
  [Rueda, laughing] My question is: Do you have any policy on 
how to handle your families while in the government? Dr. Samper? 
  [Ernesto Samper] Yes. My policy is contained in a code of 
ethics that says that relatives of a president, and of a 
candidate, as of today, cannot have any kind of direct or 
indirect commercial ties with the state. As simple as that. 
  [Pastrana] As I see it, ethics need no code. No member of my 
family will work in the government. None. I say this now. As 
I see it, we have our own ethics, and they can have no code. 
Rest assured that no member of my family will work in the 
government. 
  [Amat] Will you agree to another debate? 
  [Pastrana] Of course, anytime. 
  [Samper] Another one?! [Much laughter] 
  [Amat] Let us go to commercials. We will be back. 
  These are the final two minutes. Dr. Andres Pastrana: Why 
do you think Colombians should vote for you? 
  [Pastrana] First, my vice president will be Luis Fernando 
Ramirez, who has the ability to help me govern Colombia. 
Second, I propose new opportunities for the country. The 
country has a very important resource, its people. We have to 
invest in education and create new opportunities so that they 
may have good jobs and we may start changing Colombia. 
  I am not the candidate of political machinery. We are 
thinking about a new future, about new opportunities. I am glad 
to have my family -- Nora, Santiago, Laura. The family 
represents values we need to recover in Colombia so that we, 
with trust in God and in His objectives, may recover our values 
and our families as the core of our society. We have a 
government program that has a main objective: promoting the 
people, an improved standard of living for our people, an 
economic program with a human face, as I call it. I am sure 
this can be done with the help of all the Colombians. I am not 
going to ask you just to vote for me on 29 May, I am going to 
invite all of you to work for the good of Colombia. 
  [Amat] The end of the program has been [word indistinct]. 
Dr. 
Samper, why do you think Colombians should vote for you? 
  [Ernesto Samper] I thank Yamid, Maria Elvira, and Maria 
Isabel for the debate. This has been the true debate. This was 
not a contrived debate but a debate on essence, on theses. 
  I hope Colombians have been able to establish that there are 
two clear alternatives for 29 May. Mine is that of 
socially-oriented capitalism, which will give subsidies back to 
farmers and will provide jobs for the young, that will decidedly 
invest in society. 
  I invite all of you to participate actively. Once I was the 
victim of violence like many other Colombians. Thank God, I won 
a second chance at life, and I want to use this second 
opportunity God has given me to help many Colombians have at 
least one opportunity to succeed. Thank you very much. 
  [Amat] Thanks to Daniel Coronel and to journalists from the 
two news teams. Maria Isabel has something to say. 
  [Rueda] Maria Elvira and I just want to thank the two 
candidates. 

