BFN 

<F P=106> [``Japan's Nuclear Armament has Reached Danger Line -- White </F>
Paper of DPRK Foreign Ministry'' -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, April 11 (KCNA) -- The Foreign Ministry 
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea published a white 
paper on Monday [11 April] exposing Japan's nuclear armament 
which has reached the danger line. 
  ``The `Monju,' the first fast breeder reactor of Japan, was 
put into normal operation on April 5 in defiance of the bitter 
denunciation and concern worldwide. This means a dangerous step 
in Japan's nuclear armament,'' the white paper says. 
  ``Japan's nuclear armament which is being promoted on the 
danger line,'' it notes, ``is an open challenge to the 
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and the desire of 
mankind to build a nuclear- free world. This is a question of 
which the international community must take a serious view.'' 
  Follows a summary of the white paper: 
  1. Japan has sought its nuclear armament from long ago. 
  Its ambition for nuclear armament has been fully revealed in 
remarks of successive Japanese authorities and official 
documents. 
  Article 9 of the ``Constitution of the State of Japan'' 
(Peace Constitution) which was adopted in November 1946 under 
the strong internal and external demand and pressure says: ``The 
Japanese people, sincerely aspiring after international peace 
based on justice and order, shall abandon for good and all war, 
armed threat and armed action through the invocation of state 
power as a means of resolving international disputes. To this 
end, they shall not possess the Army, the Navy, the Airforce and 
other war potential and not recognize the right of belligerency 
of the state.'' 
  The successive Japanese authorities, however, urged by the 
desire to turn the country into a military power, a nuclear 
power, have tried by hook or by crook to justify their nuclear 
armament scheme from the 1950s, totally denying or arbitrarily 
interpreting the Constitution itself. 
  On May 7, 1957, the prime minister of Japan, Nobusuke Kishi, 
said at the Budget Committee of the House of Councillors: ``If 
anyone simply mention the nuclear weapon, all people say it 
contravenes the Constitution. But such interpretation of the 
Constitution is wrong. ... [ellipses as received] Without 
looking into the future development, we cannot say uniformly 
that it is wrong to mention any kind of nuclear weapon.'' 
(Japanese book ``Japan's Nuclear Arming Which Has Reached This 
Stage,'' 1975) 
  The Japanese authorities' wild design for nuclear armament 
was dealt a hard blow by the movement for the ban on atomic and 
hydrogen bombs which had gained strength within and without 
Japan from the 1950s. This compelled the Japanese Prime 
Minister Eisaku Sato, quite upset, to announce at the Diet in 
1968 the ``three nonnuclear principles'' -- not to manufacture, 
possess and introduce any nuclear weapon. 
  For this announcement, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. 
  On June 2, 1969, however, he said at a plenary session of 
the 
House of Representatives that ``the `three nonnuclear 
principles' can be altered any time when the policy is changed 
or the cabinet is replaced by another'' (the above-mentioned 
book), making it plain that these principles advocated by him 
were a rhetoric to deceive public opinion at home and abroad. 
  On March 2, 1978, the Japanese Foreign Minister, Sunao 
Sonoda, stated at the Foreign Affairs Committee of the House of 
Representatives that ``it is not that Japan cannot possess 
nuclear weapons, restricted by the provision of the Constitution 
itself'' (the JIJI press, March 2, 1978). And, at the Budget 
Committee of the House of Councillors on March 15, 1984, the 
Japanese Prime Minister, Yasuhiro Nakasone, answering an 
interpellation by a Komei Dietman, said that ``Japan may possess 
atomic power, if it is for defence.'' (Japanese ASAHI SHIMBUN, 
March 16, 1984). 
  Entering the 1990s, the Japanese authorities, vociferating 
about the changed international situation, have openly revealed 
their scheme to step up their nuclear armament at the final 
stage. 
  Notably, Japan intends to work out within this year 
``General 
Principles of the Defence Programme Reflecting the End of the 
Cold War and Domestic Situation,'' holding forth upon the need 
to build up ``defence capabilities to promptly and accurately 
cope with the possible dangerous events'' in neighbouring 
countries such as ``nuclear suspicion'' and ``missile 
development'' by the DPRK. 
  Japan openly manifested its design to arm itself with 
nuclear 
weapons even on UN rostrums. 
  Till the first half of the 1960s, the Japanese Government, 
though reluctantly, voted for resolutions on the prohibition of 
the use of nuclear weapons and ban on nuclear weapons at the UN 
General Assembly. From the latter half of the decade, however, 
it voted against or abstained from voting on such resolutions, 
thus disclosing its intention to become a military power, a 
nuclear power, at any cost by making haste with nuclear 
development in full scale and producing and stockpiling nuclear 
weapons. Explaining the reason why they voted against or 
abstained from voting on the resolutions, they said ``total ban 
on the use of nuclear weapons is incompatible with nuclear 
deterrent'' and it ``might destroy the nuclear equilibrium.'' 
But, in actuality, this was an open and undisguised revelation 
on the UN rostrums of Japan's ulterior intention to produce and 
possess nuclear weapons and pave the way for overseas aggression 
so that they could use them in case of emergency. 
  Thus Japan has overtly and covertly manoeuvred ever since 
the 
1950s to adopt its nuclear armament as a policy and legalize it 
under the veil of ``three nonnuclear principles,'' opposing and 
distorting the ``Peace Constitution.'' 
  2. Japan's nuclear armament has reached the danger line. 
  The nuclear policy of Japan is being promoted in two 
directions, that is, solving the problem of power by nuclear 
energy and, at the same time, securing a large quantity of 
plutonium for the manufacture of nuclear weapons by itself to 
proceed with nuclear armament any moment. 
  In July 1966, the first nuclear power station went into 
operation in Japan. Since then the Japanese Government has 
considered the construction of nuclear power stations as an 
important state policy for solving the problem of energy. 
  According to the director of the high centre of Social 
Sciences of France, in 1976, the United States made such special 
concessions to Japan as approving its civilian nuclear 
development and promising it a continued supply of 
highly-enriched uranium under a far looser inspection system 
than other allies in reward for its ratification of the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty. As a result, Japan has been able to 
freely reprocess nuclear materials and develop advanced 
technologies for its rearmament. (Radio France Culture, 
November 5, 1993). 
  Japan has already installed sufficient nuclear facilities 
for 
its nuclear arming. 
  At the beginning, the United States, with a view to 
controlling the nuclear development by Japan, sold to it only 
light water reactors feeding on U.S.-made enriched uranium and 
prohibited it from developing atomic reactors of other types. 
Under this condition, Japan developed a new-type converter 
mainly feeding on Canadian natural uranium with an investment of 
404 million dollars. Situated in Tsuruga, Fukui Prefecture, this 
reactor has been in a full-scale operation since 1979. 
(Japanese book ``Imidas'' 1992). In this way, Japan has gained 
relative independence in nuclear development, freeing itself 
from the control of the United States. 
  According to the ``White Paper on Nuclear Energy'' published 
by the Japanese Government in 1993, Japan has 16 nuclear power 
stations with 46 reactors in operation, which are capable of 
producing 37.36 million kw. This means that Japan ranks third 
in the world after the United States and France in the total 
designed capacity of nuclear facilities. 
  1993 alone witnessed the commissioning of 12 new reactors, 
and 9 units of facilities with a total capacity of 8.9 million 
kw are under construction. In all this, Japan annually uses 
some 3,000 tons of nuclear materials. 
  Japan may become a dangerous nuclear power with its capacity 
of nuclear weapon production largely expanded when 10 nuclear 
power stations, one fast breeder reactor, one uranium enriching 
plant, one radioactive waste storage (low standard) which are 
now under construction and four nuclear power stations including 
one new-type converter, one reprocessing plant and one 
radioactive waste storage (high standard) now projected are put 
into operation (Japanese book ``Imidas,'' 1992). 
  Japan has secured enough nuclear materials to arm itself 
with 
nuclear weapons. 
  Japan set itself a long-range goal of depending upon fast 
breeder reactors feeding on plutonium in the 1950s when it 
started the development of atomic energy and it has produced and 
stockpiled a large quantity of nuclear materials by operating 
reprocessing plants from the middle of the 1970s. 
  Japan has stockpiled 26 tons of plutonium which far 
surpasses 
the quantity needed for the peaceful purpose. It is enough to 
manufacture more than 3,000 atomic bombs of Nagasaki type. 
(Japanese magazine ``BUNGEI SHUNJU,'' June 1992). 
  Japan buckled down to the implementation of its ``great 
programme for the use of plutonium'' at the beginning of 1992. 
  In the period from 1975 to 1992, it brought in one ton of 
plutonium from Britain in top secrecy and reportedly shipped in 
1.5 tons of plutonium from France in 1993. 
  What offers particular problem is that Japan plans to secure 
about 100 tons of plutonium by the year 2010, though the amount 
of plutonium actually needed by Japan is estimated at 85 tons. 
(KYODO News Service, October 5, 1992). This means that, by 
2010, Japan will store 15 more tons of plutonium than needed for 
the peaceful purpose, which is enough to manufacture some 2,000 
nuclear bombs. Therefore, Japan's claim that it has stockpiled 
``an appropriate amount of plutonium for economic development'' 
can never be justified. 
  A latest report on the nonproliferation of nuclear materials 
including plutonium, which an influential advisory agency worked 
out, entrusted by the U.S. Defence Department, expressed deep 
concern over Japan's nuclear armament and said Japan should be 
urged to fundamentally reexamine its nuclear policy, demanding a 
stop to the project of the demonstration reactor for a fast 
breeder reactor. 
  Urging Japan to reduce the scale of the construction of 
nuclear power stations with 12 reactors feeding on plutonium 
planned to be completed by the year 2005 (to two) and stop the 
construction of a new-type demonstration reactor following the 
``Monju'' and the construction of the reprocessing plant no. 2 
in Rokashomura, Aomori Prefecture, the report said potential 
fear of Japan's nuclear arming is sprouting within the U.S. 
Government. (Japanese MAINICHI SHIMBUN, November 10, 1993). 
  Voice of America on April 6,1994 said that the commissioning 
of a fast breeder reactor in Japan is arousing serious 
apprehensions and uneasiness in the European countries and the 
United States, to say nothing of its neighbouring nations, and 
it is foreseen that it would give a greater shock to the acute 
nuclear issue. This indicates that Japan might become one of 
the largest nuclear state in the near future, the radio added. 
  Japan is possessed of modern means of nuclear delivery. 
  The socalled ``Self-Reliant Defence Programme'' worked out 
by 
the Japanese Defence Agency in 1969 makes it plain that Japan 
would continue to develop and possess domestic nuclear weapons 
and ballistic missiles for their delivery. (Japanese ASAHI 
EVENING NEWS, June 27, 1969). 
  Japan's system of launching nuclear warheads was established 
already during the ``Third Program of Readjustment of the 
Defence Capacities'' (1967-1971). The Japanese Defence Agency 
completed the ``domestic production'' of cruise missiles in 1985 
in cooperation with the Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and other 
companies. This cruise missile is a sophisticated guided 
missile which is available for the delivery of nuclear warheads 
and conventional warheads. 
  The Japanese ``Self-Defense Forces'' successfully carried 
out 
a test launching of a Japanese ground-to-warship missile (SSM-1) 
at the Pacific Missile Centre of the U.S. Navy in California in 
the summer of 1987. (the Japanese magazine ``SEKAI SEIJI.'' 
First semimonthly number of January 1990). 
  As of December 1991, Japan was possessed of 393 155-mm 
howitzers and 132 203.2-mm howitzers which can fire nuclear 
warheads. The number of its nuclear-capable planes is on the 
steady increase. 
  It had secured 145 new-type fighter-bombers ``F-15'' with an 
action radius of 1,052 km by 1991. It plans to increase its 
number to 180- 200 by the end of 1994. 
  It developed a new fighter-bomber ``FSX'' by remodeling the 
``F-16'' in 1993 and plans to introduce 130 of it by the year 
2000. 
  On February 4, 1994, Japan successfully launched a new 
``H2''-type rocket no. 1 developed entirely by its independent 
technology at the cosmodrome in Tanegashima, Kagoshima 
Prefecture. This rocket is tantamount to 50 metres in length 
and 260 tons in weight and can be converted easily for a 
military purpose. 
  The former director of the Atomic Energy Research Centre of 
Rikkyo University, Japan, stated that Japan has been able to 
make substantial material and technological preparations for 
manufacturing high-performance nuclear weapons in one month or 
so. More than 150 companies and over 3,300 factories are 
involved in the manufacture of nuclear warheads in Japan. In 
recent years, investments in this domain have sharply increased 
to jump from 1.73 million dollars in 1954 to 360 million dollars 
in 1991. (the Indian paper WORUM, March 11, 1994). 
  In actuality, Japan has built perfect material and 
technological foundations for the manufacture of nuclear 
weapons. Concern over Japan's nuclear armament is expressed by 
government authorities of Western countries including the United 
States. 
  If Japan is armed with nuclear weapons, it will pose the 
most 
serious and grave threat to the Korean peninsula and, 
furthermore, it will harass peace and security of Asia and the 
rest of the world. 
  With Japan's nuclear armament reaching the danger line, the 
danger of the denuclearisation of the Korean peninsula being 
made meaningless is increasing. 
  Though Japan is promoting its nuclear armament on the danger 
line, the United States and other Western countries are turning 
blind eyes to this and carrying on a hysteric pressure campaign 
over the fictitious ``suspected nuclear development'' by the 
DPRK. This policy of double standard, in fact, eggs Japan on to 
nuclear armament. 
  The Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
expresses the belief that the governments, parliaments, 
political parties and organisations of all the anti-nuke and 
nonnuclear states and international organisations and 
peaceloving people of the world will heighten vigilance against 
the dangerous moves of the Japanese authorities for nuclear 
armament and make positive contributions to the peace and 
security of Asia and the world by checking and frustrating them. 

