OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94UM0337A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by E. Gams] </F>
  [Text] The United States presently is carrying out a set of 
measures for preparing to eliminate its stockpiles of chemical 
weapons. This is connected with fulfillment of obligations 
stemming from the Soviet-American Agreement on Disposal of 
Chemical Weapons (1990) and from the Chemical Weapons Convention 
(1993). 
  According to official data, in terms of chemical agents 
there 
are presently around 32,000 t of U.S. chemical weapon 
stockpiles. In addition, the United States has an unannounced 
number and capacity of casings and devices not filled with 
chemical agents. Half of the stockpiles consists of nerve agents 
(sarin and VX) and the other half is mustard gas. Around 40 
percent of chemical agents are loaded in munitions and 60 
percent are stored in containers and can be loaded into 
munitions in less than two years. 
  Over 90 percent of existing stockpiles are in the 
continental 
United States and 6.6 percent of the munitions, delivered from 
Okinawa during 1962-1971 and from the FRG in November 1990, are 
on Johnston Atoll in the Pacific. Stockpiles of chemical agents 
and munitions filled with them have been stored for over 20 
years (with guaranteed safe periods of 10-15 years). Up to 90 
percent of stockpiles of filled munitions consists of models of 
systems that are obsolete or no longer operational; as a result 
of above-norm storage periods, some projectiles are beginning to 
leak, which creates a danger of contamination of depots and 
surrounding terrain as well as injury to the local populace. 
  A commission recommended eliminating 80-90 percent of 
obsolete chemical weapon stockpiles. As a result, the U.S. 
Congress adopted a program for destroying these stockpiles up to 
1998, and $111.3 million were allocated to the Defense 
Department in FY 1988, $196.9 million in FY 1989, $213.8 million 
in FY 1990 and 264.4 million in FY 1991 for its implementation. 
The overall cost of the program for destroying obsolete 
stockpiles initially was $1.7-2.2 billion, but specialists 
estimate the costs may grow 2-3 times because of increased 
expenditures for environmental protection.[.sup]1[/] 
  It is planned to build all chemical weapons disposal 
enterprises near storage sites, which should preclude the 
appearance of dangerous incidents in transporting munitions to 
the site of their disposal. One experimental installation 
presently is operating at Tooele (Utah), where 42.3 percent of 
all stockpiles are located. A second enterprise (on Johnston 
Atoll, which was the range for conducting atmospheric nuclear 
tests during 1958-1962) is in the stage of coming up to design 
capacity (Fig. 1 [figure not reproduced]). Construction of 
another seven enterprises will be completed during 1993-1994, 
after which the process of destroying obsolete chemical weapons 
may be concluded in 6-8 years. 
  The principle of incinerating chemical agents in specially 
equipped furnaces has been made the basis of chemical weapons 
disposal technology. The technological process provides for 
delivering munitions and containers with chemical agents to the 
disposal enterprises; unloading them and separating liquid 
contents, metal parts of munitions and containers, metal parts 
and casings with explosive materials not removed, nonmetal 
parts, packaging, and auxiliary equipment into individual flows; 
incinerating materials of each flow in a separate furnace; 
collecting gases discharged from the furnaces and reburning 
vapors of toxic substances present in them; cooling gaseous 
products discharged into the atmosphere and cleaning them of 
solid ash particles, traces of toxic substances, and oxides of 
nitrogen and carbon; and burying solid remains in sealed 
underground vaults. 
  In the opinion of American specialists, this technology 
permits disposing of all existing chemical agents. It is also 
used widely in working with toxic industrial and household 
wastes. For complete disposal of chemical agents, it is 
necessary to maintain a temperature of over 1,100C in the 
furnaces and ensure an oxygen surplus and the presence of 
gaseous materials in the incineration chamber for around two 
seconds. Temperature and time regimes have been worked out for 
eliminating parts of chemical munitions and packaging--an 
incineration temperature from 760 to 1,200C and presence in 
the combustion zone for from a few seconds to 15 minutes. Safety 
of gaseous discharges is ensured by secondary reburning of toxic 
substances and trapping of ash, hydrogen fluoride and chloride, 
phosphoric anhydride, sulfur dioxide, and oxides of nitrogen and 
carbon in cleaning devices. Gaseous discharges should not 
contain harmful solid and gaseous substances in amounts 
exceeding norms established for ordinary industrial enterprises, 
or concentrations of chemical agent vapors above a specific 
level. The table shows maximum permissible concentrations of 
chemical agents in the air in built-up areas and workspaces and 
also in gaseous discharges of chemical weapons disposal 
enterprises as set by the U.S. Department of Health. 


Maximum Permissible Concentrations of Chemical Agents in Air, mg/m[.sup]3[/] 

Conditions      Tabun and Sarin   VX                Mustard Gas       Lewisite 
and Periods 
of Effect of 
Chemical 
Agents 

In air of       3x10[.sup]-6[/]    3x10[.sup]-6[/]    1x10[.sup]-4[/]    3x10[.sup]-3[/] 
built-up 
areas (up to 
72 hrs 
persistence) 

In a            1x10[.sup]-4[/]    1x10[.sup]-5[/]    3x10[.sup]-3[/]    3x10[.sup]-3[/] 
workspace 

In gaseous      3x10[.sup]-4[/]    3x10[.sup]-4[/]    0.03              0.03 
discharges of 
chemical 
weapons 
disposal 
enterprises 

Threat to       0.2               0.4               0.4               - 
health and 
life with one 
contact 


  Modern means and methodologies provide for determining those 
concentrations of chemical agents in the air, on the soil and in 
an aqueous medium and also provide reliable protection against 
them. The experience of operating the enterprise at the chemical 
depot in the city of Tooele confirms the possibility of safe 
disposal of various chemical munitions and chemical agents (Fig. 
2 [figure not reproduced]). Over 146,000 projectiles with 2,800 
t of chemical agents already have been disposed of by 
incineration in the United States. Over 38,000 munitions with 
sarin (34 t) and VX (3.6 t) as well as 16.6 t of chemical agents 
of the mustard gas, chloropicrin, Lewisite, phosgene and 
cyanogen chloride type have been eliminated right in Tooele. 
During 1990-1991 5,700 M55 rocket-propelled projectiles 
containing 24 t of the chemical agents sarin and VX were 
disposed of on Johnston Atoll. 
  In accordance with the standard design, a chemical weapons 
disposal enterprise is accommodated in an area of 4.5-5 
hectares. It includes a three-story building (platform) for 
eliminating munitions, a depot for temporary storage of arriving 
munitions, administration building, multipurpose building, 
equipment for monitoring access to the enterprise and the state 
of affairs in its separate parts, a power facility and sewer 
facility. Capital construction costs are evaluated at $55-75 
million depending on location. The design duration for using the 
enterprise is ten years, after which it is either to be closed 
or retooled as a production unit for disposing of especially 
dangerous industrial wastes. 
  Building the enterprise takes from two to three years, after 
which tests are conducted and attendant personnel master the 
technology for 3-9 months. The model staff is 140 persons. The 
production process is supported by a shift of 22 persons. The 
equipment servicing and routine maintenance team includes 13-14 
persons. The enterprise must work three eight-hour shifts five 
days a week. The first shift destroys munitions, the second 
maintains serviceability of equipment and performs repairs, and 
the third is the duty shift. The design capacity is 40 
projectiles per hour and the maximum is up to 50. In the course 
of a year the enterprise may destroy up to 80,000 projectiles, 
each containing 5 kg of chemical agents (350-500 t of chemical 
agents per year). Ten-year operating costs were evaluated at 
$120 million in 1988. 
  In tying in the project to specific construction sites, a 
study was made of the degree of risk to people and of damage to 
the environment under various working conditions, and 
alternative options were studied for transporting chemical 
weapons to their disposal site. In addition, defects of chemical 
agent incineration technology, technical troubles, personnel 
error, and the possibility of aircraft falling on enterprises, 
of transportation accidents, earthquakes, and terrorist 
attacks--a total of around 3,000 situations--were taken into 
account. It was determined that the danger of injury to people 
and of damage to the environment is practically nil with normal 
operation. The enterprise should be located in a seismically 
safe zone away from airways, railroads and highways and have 
autonomous routes for access and for bringing in electrical 
power and water. Dangerous consequences are possible from 
incidents involving chemical agent vapors getting into the air 
and chemical agent spills into the soil or water. 
  A vapor cloud which has appeared from a motor vehicle 
accident with the destruction of a container holding one ton of 
sarin or VX can spread under certain meteorological conditions 
and injure people, animals and birds more than 10 km from the 
accident site. Entry of these chemical agents into small and 
medium rivers is very dangerous, especially if the spilled mass 
breaks down into drops or forms a floating spot (characteristic 
of mustard gas). The entry of 5 kg of sarin into a medium-size 
river can cause the death of over half the fish at a distance of 
more than 40 km from the spot of the spill. A spilled chemical 
agent penetrating water-bearing layers of soil can lead to 
poisoning of potable water sources, in connection with which 
their toxicological monitoring is necessary. An analysis of the 
risk forced American experts to reject the use of water 
transportation (with the exception of the FRG-Johnston Atoll 
route) and air transportation for carrying chemical munitions 
and to choose the safest land routes. 
  Human death risk zones in case of an accident involving a 
chemical agent spill have been determined for each disposal 
enterprise and for all "wind rose" directions in a given 
locality, and with the most likely and worst weather conditions. 
According to U.S. press data, an average of 500-1,400 persons 
within a radius of 20 km from a chemical enterprise may die from 
an accident. It has been established that the safety zone 
boundary must be approximately 35 km from chemical weapons 
disposal enterprises. 
  The high danger connected with chemical weapons disposal led 
the U.S. Congress to the need to adopt a national program in 
1985, and the U.S. Defense Department was made responsible for 
its fulfillment. The U.S. Congress allocates funds for it each 
year and monitors it through the General Accounting Office. 
Within the Defense Department the Army Deputy Chief of Staff for 
Logistics and the chief of the Chemical Weapons Disposal Agency 
subordinate to him are responsible for this program. The 
director of the chemical weapons disposal program and his staff 
organize the development of measures and immediate fulfillment 
of plans. The Environmental Protection Agency, Department of 
Health [and Human Services], and administration of territories 
where chemical weapons disposal depots and enterprises are 
located and where transportation routes for moving them pass are 
responsible for monitoring the provision of measures for 
environmental protection and for safety of the populace. 
  Technical studies are conducted by the U.S. Army Center for 
Chemical Research, Development and Technologies (Aberdeen 
Proving Ground, Maryland), by specialists of the Chemical 
Weapons Disposal Agency, and by personnel of arsenals and depots 
where stockpiles of chemical weapons are stored. The FBI, CIA 
and special-purpose subunits of these departments and of the 
Army may be involved to prevent terrorist acts. 
  Military-scientific accompaniment of the program is being 
provided by military chemists of Aberdeen Proving Ground. 
Representatives of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences and of 
the Association of the Chemical Industry are brought in for 
consultations. The main scientific problems at the present time 
have been resolved. The development and evaluation of techniques 
and details of the process of destroying casings of chemical 
munitions under conditions of their cryogenic cooling (Fig. 3 
[figure not reproduced]) are being concluded, for which the U.S. 
Congress allocated around $10 million in 1990. Nontraditional 
disposal processes such as a nuclear explosion or biodegradation 
also were examined, but were rejected (as was the method of 
incineration in deep mine shafts or dumping in the ocean). 
  The main unresolved scientific problem is an evaluation of 
the degree of danger to people, animals and plants of the 
lengthy effect of chemical agent vapor concentrations below 
maximum permissible norms and of their mixtures with flue gases. 
This problem also has not been completely resolved for other 
dangerous incineration products of industrial and household 
wastes such as tetrachlorodioxins. 
  Along with construction of chemical weapons disposal 
installations, the Department of the Army presently is arranging 
the conduct of measures to ensure safety of the local populace 
in case of accidents involving a release of chemical agents. 
Situations being examined as typical are the spill of up to 1 kg 
of sarin or VX type chemical agents or up to 4 t of mustard gas 
and the explosion of a container holding 100 kg of VX. It is 
presumed that in such cases enterprise heads should notify the 
local administration and populace in order to evacuate people 
from the danger zone. With the most adverse weather conditions 
no more than 30 minutes remain to notify and evacuate the 
populace located up to 10 km downwind from the accident site 
(zone of active measures), no more than 1-3 hours at a distance 
from 10 to 35 km (zone of protective measures), and from 3 to 10 
hours at a distance over 35 km (zone of preparatory measures). 
  Roads and bridges 10-35 km from an enterprise or depot with 
chemical weapons (as the most likely site of an accident) should 
be prepared for evacuation of the populace. The presence of 
gasproof shelters and conduct of measures for gastight sealing 
of schools, hospitals, kindergartens, public establishments and 
dining halls is required within a zone of active measures. The 
populace and medical personnel should be supplied with means of 
individual chemical protection and medical aid, as well as with 
necessary duty means of evacuation. In case it is impossible to 
evacuate people from other zones (10-35 km distant), gasproof 
shelters also are prepared for them. The entire population is 
supplied with means of chemical protection (protective masks for 
adults and children, special carriages for infants). Advance 
evacuation or even resettlement of people to a safe zone are 
planned as an extreme measure. 
  Those measures require significant expenditures. According 
to 
calculations, their average cost is $53.30 per person. 
Considering that 1.9 million people live near the eight depots 
where it is planned to organize chemical weapons disposal, the 
Department of the Army requested an additional $100 million in 
1989 alone to assist local authorities and protect the populace. 
  In accordance with U.S. legislation, local authorities of 
territories on which harmful substances are stored and destroyed 
are responsible for protecting the population. They are 
obligated to draw up plans of action in case an emergency 
situation appears. A check showed that not everywhere is the 
local administration informed of the danger of measures being 
taken by the Department of the Army. In connection with this, 
the Department is assisting local authorities in drawing up 
evacuation plans and carrying out other measures to protect the 
populace and provide technical means. The administration also is 
obligated to take similar actions in anticipation of the 
possibility of accidents at nuclear and chemical enterprises. 
  In connection with the organization of chemical weapons 
disposal, the problem is being raised in the U.S. press of 
insurance under special policies and for differentiated payment 
rates against ecological risk at the enterprises being created. 
It is noted that after the soil and underground waters were 
polluted with dangerous wastes on the grounds of the military's 
Rocky Mountain Arsenal (Colorado), the military's losses were 
recovered from Shell, which designed and built the storage 
facilities for especially dangerous wastes without the necessary 
lining. The insurance company refused to cover this firm's 
losses inasmuch as the leak was not accidental, but resulted 
from personnel negligence. 
  The country gives exceptional attention to psychological 
preparation of the populace for the siting and operation of 
depots and chemical weapons disposal enterprises near built-up 
areas. As a rule, people willingly agree to the need for such 
enterprises as long as they are far from places where they live. 
This is connected with the fact that they fear acute or chronic 
poisoning from possible accidents, contamination of lands and 
buildings, the death of animals, other economic losses, and loss 
of freedom of movement and comfortable conditions. There have 
been cases of psychological trauma. The absence of information 
about danger usually only increases public tension. 
  To overcome resistance appearing in the population, the U.S. 
Army command has been widely informing the public about all 
measures and strengthening the people's confidence in their 
safety. Thus, the press describes in sufficient detail the 
chemical weapons disposal program; time periods for 
accomplishing it in different states, for taking preventive 
measures, and for testing protective devices; as well as 
incidents which have occurred (especially those mopped up 
quickly and successfully). 
  As reported in the foreign press, a citizens' committee was 
formed in the city of Richmond, Kentucky to oppose military 
chemists from nearby Lexington-Blue Grass Depot. In response to 
this, the command arranged a visit by committee members to the 
Tooele Army Chemical Weapons Depot and a demonstration of the 
operation of a munitions incinerator. A technical library was 
set up under the citizens' committee and certain additional 
measures to lower population risk were considered and included 
in the chemical weapons disposal plan with the participation of 
committee members. It is also proposed to involve this committee 
in the discussion and selection of a site for building a 
chemical munitions disposal enterprise. 
  The press has widely publicized both the achievement of a 
cessation of dumping of obsolete munitions at sea and the 
transition to their incineration, has been actively discussing 
results of successful transportation of chemical projectiles 
over FRG territory as a model of skilled, precise organization 
of safety measures, and has emphasized the many years of 
experience in safe work with various kinds of these weapons at 
ranges and depots. The activity of the U.S. Department of the 
Army Chemical Weapons Disposal Agency also is propagandized. 
Critical writings regarding shortcomings of the military 
department's work in this area receive an immediate response 
from highly placed Defense Department officials. 
  In parallel with this, plans for fulfilling a chemical 
weapons disposal program and its individual stages, and open 
competitions of chemical weapons disposal enterprise projects 
(each project is discussed publicly, with all responses set 
forth in special digest-annexes) are being submitted for 
consideration of official bodies of states, the federal 
administration, and the scientific and technical public. 
Official project reviews and documents are accessible to the 
public. A public discussion of submitted projects was organized 
in 1988 with the involvement of military and civilian 
specialists at Aberdeen Proving Ground (at the Newport Chemical 
Munitions Production Plant) and in the city of Richmond. 
  Department of the Army training of all local residents in 
measures of protection against chemical agents, in the procedure 
and rules of actions in response to chemical alarm signals, in 
practical use of means of protection and gasproof shelters, and 
in supplying the population with means of medical aid and 
necessary medicines is of great importance in overcoming the 
population's psychological resistance. 
  Thus, the chemical weapons disposal program developed in the 
United States represents an orderly system of financial, 
organizational, logistical, medical, information and other 
measures presently being accomplished in an integrated manner. 
In the opinion of American specialists, it is being done rather 
successfully. Scheduled operation of the enterprise on Johnston 
Atoll began in 1990. After building one other plant in the city 
of Anniston, Alabama, the United States will be able to support 
the disposal of over 1,000 t of chemical agents per year in 
1993-1994, which is in keeping with the concluded agreement. 
Disposal technology has been worked out to a sufficient extent 
and may be presented to Russia if the U.S. Congress approves 
such a decision and does not include it in the category of 
advanced technologies, transfer of which is prohibited by 
existing law. U.S. experience in realizing the chemical weapons 
disposal program may be used to accomplish similar measures in 
our country. 
Footnotes 
  1. Chemical weapons disposal programs were carried out in 
the 
United States even earlier. For example, 6,600 t of chemical 
agents were destroyed from 1973 through 1985 mainly on the 
territory of Rocky Mountain Arsenal (Colorado) and Dugway 
Proving Grounds (Utah). 

