BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by King Husayn with unidentified </F>
correspondents in Washington on 21 June -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Husayn] Good morning ladies and gentlemen. It is a 
great pleasure for me to have this opportunity to be with you 
today, and to see many old, and dear and familiar faces. I hope 
that I'll have the chance in the next few minutes to respond to 
any of your questions, and of course to have once again a frank, 
and open dialogue. On behalf of Nur and the Jordanian group 
with me, we would like also to express our delight at seeing you 
all at this hour. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, perhaps we could begin by, 
first of all, thanking you for spending the time with us, and as 
[words indistinct] a sense of, if you think now that there is 
enough progress made for Jordan to move forward, forging a peace 
treaty with Israel? 
  [Husayn] I believe in response [?to your comments] that we 
are on the verge of beginning the serious negotiations that, 
hopefully, will lead to the establishment of peace between us. 
As you will recall, we ratified the agenda following the great 
event that took place here in Washington on the 
Palestinian-Israeli track, and we have been waiting to commence 
serious negotiations on all aspects of the problems between us 
and Israel, and on all the subjects, topics mentioned in that 
agenda. I believe that a major step was taken when the meetings 
were held here (?last), and I believe it is a very constructive 
moment in the sense that we have decided to move to the area, 
and to commence negotiations there. I would like to say, once 
again, that we were fully convinced that nothing meaningful 
could have been achieved, or could be achieved unless it was 
preceded by serious [words indistinct] of all problems, and that 
the final achievement of all these efforts [words indistinct]. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, would you tell us about your 
talks in Washington, and your expected meeting with the 
President tomorrow. What you have achieved, what do you have to 
achieve, actually, from your dialogue with the American 
administration? 
  [Husayn] As you would probably realize, I am here in the 
United States, in Washington in particular, following my visit 
to Rochester and to the Mayo clinic where I am pleased to say 
that I was given a clean bill of health. There was no evidence 
of cancer after two years from surgery and, therefore, hopefully 
my visits to Mayo will be on an annual basis from now on. But, 
I could not have been in the United States, and not be here in 
Washington, particularly at such an important and exciting time 
regarding developments in our region. So, I have had talks with 
the secretary of state yesterday, and I look forward to my 
meeting with the President, tomorrow, and in the meantime, there 
are other meetings scheduled. And whenever we meet, we meet to 
discuss all aspects of our bilateral relations and regional 
matters, and the cooperation that we hope will grow in the times 
ahead between our two countries. 
  [Correspondent] This is a question about coordination 
between the Arab parties to the peace process. You visited 
President al-Asad recently. Shortly after, there was progress 
on the Jordan-Israel track. But, there has been some criticism, 
(?of course) from Syria that Jordan is moving too fast. Could 
you say something about the coordination with Syria, and how the 
timing of the progress can go forward, how fast can Jordan move 
If Syria is not moving, and also on the question of 
Palestinian-Jordanian cooperation, when I was recently in Amman, 
I heard a word used often, frequently, even from Palestinians 
living on the East Bank, that I hadn't heard in a while, and the 
word was federation, and I heard it used quite frequently. I 
wonder if you could say something about when the issue of the 
future relationship between the Palestinians and the Jordanians 
has to be addressed again? 
  [Husayn] Well, to begin with, I think I'll address the 
second 
part of our question regarding the future relationship between 
Jordan and our Palestinian brothers on Palestinian soil. I 
believe that it is premature to speculate as to what form it 
will take. I am sure it will be a very close relationship, and 
I am sure that, in time when conditions are ripe, people under 
conditions of total freedom can work together to define that 
relationship. This hasn't happened so far. So, it is 
premature to really define the way these relations will be 
formulated. But, as far as your question regarding the peace 
process, we started at the same point in time, and, I believe 
that as far as Amman and Damascus are concerned, we have always 
been in touch, and in terms of matters relating to policy, this 
has been discussed time and again between me and the president 
of Syria, President al-Asad. So, my visit there was, naturally, 
within that context, and we were negotiating, they were 
negotiating there. I hope that, eventually, all these tracks 
will see active movement toward the objective of having a 
comprehensive peace in the region. But, as far as we are 
concerned, we will be as fast, or as slow as we are able to 
achieve real progress in resolving all the problems that are 
there on the agenda, and between us and Israel, and I hope that 
they will approach the coming negotiations with a constructive 
serious [word indistinct] for we will move rapidly. I can't 
set a time or.. I really don't know. But, I really hope that we 
will see rapid progress in that regard. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty on this question. You said 
that you discussed this matter with Mr. al-Asad. Does this mean 
that you discussed the agreement that you had with the Americans 
[word indistinct] and why are serious [words indistinct] 
Jordanians left them alone? 
  [Husayn] Well, I think that it seems to happen, we seem to 
find every now and then that someone complains about another 
leaving him alone, but this hasn't happened at the very level I 
was discussing. I believe that President al-Asad and I 
understand each other very very well. I know of his concern to 
see Syria move towards achieving the kind of peace that it can 
live with, and that he knows that we are doing the same. So, in 
the area of coordination I'd like to say there has never been 
the kind of coordination that will enable us to know exactly 
where any track is at any given movement. We have our own 
peculiar set of circumstances and problems that we try to 
address, and the Syrians have the same, as do the Lebanese, our 
brethren. Therefore, movement as far as we concerned is a 
question of a sovereign matter regarding Jordan itself and there 
is nothing to do nor is it tied to movement on other track. We 
hope that they will catch us, and may be they will overtake us 
in time if they so desire, but that is something which we can't 
control. Its something that they can control. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, [words indistinct] trip, was 
reported that you and President al-Asad suggested [word 
indistinct] unity Jordan and Syria. Will [words indistinct] 
Syrian idea [words indistinct] 
  [Husayn] No sir, we have always worked for complementarity 
and the closest possible cooperation between Jordan and Syria, 
and Lebanon, hopefully, and certainly with Egypt, and there was 
a meeting of a prime ministerial commission with Egypt that was 
revived again just a short while ago, and in the same context, 
there was going to be a meeting with Syria. So, this was 
postponed, but essentially this would have dealt with issues 
other than the political ones that usually are dealt with 
between me and my brother President al-Asad. 
  [Correspondent] Your highness, on your talks with the 
Americans. Did you make any headway on the request to resell 
[words indistinct] and also your request to purchase additional 
American military equipment, and lastly finalizing the 
arrangements for the land-based inspection system [words 
indistinct] naval blockade the Gulf of Aqaba? 
  [Husayn] I haven't had the chance to cover all these points 
with any detail, but we are, as Jordan is concerned looking at 
the moment that the present situation and the future, in terms 
of, hopefully, reorganization of our armed forces to meet the 
challenges and the demands of the coming period, both in terms 
of the defense of Jordan and also in terms of the role that we 
play on the international arena, particularly in the area of 
troops that are with the United Nations, and have beeen over a 
period of time. So we have ideas and plans, and we hope that we 
will be able discuss them with our friends to modernize and 
reorganize our armed forces in times ahead. 
  [Correspondent] So this time you'll be discussing mainly 
[words indistinct]? 
  [Husayn] I am not discussing anything in particular. I am 
just giving you an idea of where we are at the moment. We 
haven't formulated our plans totally, but obviously we discuss 
our requirements with our friends from time to time. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, [words indistinct]. 
  [Husayn] This is not something that is one of [word 
indistinct] replace in the future, then we'll have to see what 
we replace them with and what we do with them. But this is 
something that I am not prepared to answer at this stage. It is 
something that we will be discussing with our friends in the 
times ahead. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty [word indistinct] the peace 
process. At this stage, do you think it is reversible, 
particularly in terms of circumstances, such as, for example, 
the Likud taking over the Israeli government. In such 
circumstances, do you think it could, the clock, be turned back 
to where the Middle East was three years ago? 
  [Husayn] I certainly hope not, and I believe that the 
process is irreversible and we are certainly committed to moving 
ahead towards the establishment of a just, comprehensive peace 
in that region. This is something that we feel we are close to, 
but it's [word indistinct] to require the best efforts of all 
concerned. We are looking forward to seeing some rapid progress 
on the Jordanian-Israeli track and we hope that this will be the 
case with the other tracks as well. 
  [Correspondent] [Words indistinct] that the Americans could 
be doing right now to further the peace process? 
  [Husayn] They have been involved with the process. They 
have sponsored the process. They have, I am sure, helped us 
very, very much indeed to get to this point and I hope that 
their involvement will continue in the times ahead. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, how do you foresee Jordan's 
relations with Israel after an agreement is signed? Do you 
think it will be [word indistinct] for Jordanians in terms of 
economic and [word indistinct]? 
  [Husayn] As far as that goes, I believe, obviously, that if 
we arrive at a state of peace, it would be a change of 
everything that we've had to live with and endure over many, 
many years. It will be to the benefit of people in both Jordan 
and in Israel and in the whole region, particularly if the 
circle is enlarged to include all involved in the conflict so 
far. As far as we're concerned, these coming negotiations, and 
why in place there are, as you know, within the areas of grave 
concern for us are territorial rights. [sentence as heard] The 
border between us and Israel is not clearly settled yet, in 
terms of an issue that is very, very important to us to regain 
our sovereignty over the areas that are occupied by Israel in 
southern Jordan at this stage. So the question of border 
demarcation and delineation is very, very important, not to 
create a new barrier, but in the context of movement towards 
peace. We hope that the Rift Valley, the valley itself, will 
become the valley of peace, the valley of opportunities for 
cooperation in many fields and many areas. 
  Another area, of course, is of importance to us, and that is 
the question of water and our rights and our share in that. 
Plus the environment, plus all the other subjects that have to 
be discussed. So what we are trying to do right now is hopefully 
approach a serious phase of negotiations to resolve all these 
problems. [Words indistinct] the quality of life of people, 
affect them in terms of their hopes and aspirations and the 
opportunities that will be the resultant fact of all these 
efforts which have been ongoing so far. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, you mentioned moving quickly 
between Jordan and Israel, and that there is no link between the 
Jordanian track and the other tracks. When you finish the 
negotiations on the agenda, would you be ready to sign, even if 
the other tracks are not progressing? 
  [Husayn] Our position on that is not linked to anything that 
may or may not happen on any other track. What I am saying is 
that what we are searching for is a comprehensive peace, and 
therefore one would obviously stress the need for progress on 
all tracks so that we achieve this comprehensive peace. For 
example, in regard to Jordanian-Palestinian relations in times 
ahead, we in Jordan will continue to respond to any demand for 
help in any particular area, but, let us say we take the area of 
economic dimensions, the economy as between us and our 
Palestinian brethren and Israel. If coordination has not 
achieved very much, then obviously we have to negotiate this 
subject as Jordan, together with the Palestinians, and the 
Israelis in the times ahead. In other words there are bilateral 
negotiations and trilateral negotiations, and there are going to 
be quadrilateral negotiations with regard to Egypt, for example, 
in terms of the return of Palestinians to the occupied 
territories. 
  You can't resolve the question of water without, hopefully, 
seeing progress everywhere. But, the point is our wishes for 
progress to be achieved on all tracks. However, we are a 
sovereign country, we are dealing with our own problems, we 
started at the same point and we are trying to see what we can 
achieve. Whether we will or not does not depend on any other 
factor, other than Israel's coming through with the same kind of 
spirit and our mutually reaching a satisfactory conclusion to 
the differences between us as settling all the items of the 
agenda. 
  [Correspondent] Will we see a peace treaty this year, Your 
Majesty? 
  [Husayn] I can't tell you that, I can't tell you that. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, you were quoted yesterday as 
saying that you would agree to talk to Israeli leaders, as you 
have indicated in the past. Today, they are responding, saying 
they would like to meet with you. Do you foresee that this 
peace process, the talks beginning next month, would lead to or 
conclude in some, finally, a public meeting between you and 
Israeli leaders? 
  [Husayn] Whenever the time is ripe, whenever there is a need 
to, I welcome that, there is no problem with that at all. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, can you confirm for us whether 
you saw the Israeli leadership, please? 
  [Husayn] I am not going to comment on press speculation in 
that regard, or media speculation, one way or the other. I 
think you have had their answer, so this is my answer, too. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, [words indistinct] concerning 
the Syrian criticism, directly or indirectly, after ... 
  [Husayn, interrupting] Let me ask a question myself, to all 
of you: Is Jordan expected to be the last to ratify a peace 
treaty? 
  [Correspondent] I thought everybody would sign it within the 
same timeframe? 
  [Husayn] Inshallah, inshallah, that is what we hope will 
happen. But to get there we have to begin negotiating and this 
is precisely what we are doing. So I hope that these serious 
negotiations will achieve some results. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, will you explain please, and 
shed some light, what made you feel that this was the right 
moment to go forward on the road that eventually will end in a 
peace? 
  [Husayn] That was not our doing. But, I think [word 
indistinct] suggested since the outset that we have to translate 
the items on the agenda into realities by negotiating over them, 
and that a peace treaty is a crowning achievement of resolving 
all the problems. So we have been waiting, but when the 
Israelis were ready to begin I think we have seen some progress. 
It was not anything that was a result of our hesitation or an 
attempt to avoid the issue. 
  [Correspondent] I mean, were there any historical moments 
you thought that this is the right moment to go for? 
  [Husayn] Not at all, sir. We weren't playing tactics. We 
were waiting and ready, and the moment has arrived, so we were 
beginning to (?work out). 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty: You mentioned something about 
the water rights which the Israelis have been denying, refusing 
to discuss water rights before, and finally they did this 
Washington [word indistinct]. Did this Washington [words 
indistinct] contribute to making progress on the Jordanian 
track? You went back to the beginning of the establishment of 
Israel. From 1948 to 1951, Israel received 600,000 immigrants 
and this caused a serious water shortage in Israel. As a 
result, Israel started to divert Jordan River in the whole 
sequence of events that (?led to the) June 1967 War. Are you 
concerned now about the wave of immigration coming from Russia, 
that [word indistinct] more than 430,000 already arrived on the 
ground in Israel? This is, apparently, causing a serious threat 
and shortage of water in Israel itself. Are you concerned that 
you'll be... [pauses] do you see that this one is one of the 
reasons for, maybe, the Israeli moves toward peace, and do you 
see a new threat on the Arab waters because of the new 
immigration? 
  [Husayn] I hope that the question of water resources 
available in the region will be resolved to the satisfaction of 
all. But, on the other hand, I would like to say that it's my 
feeling that before too long even all these resources that are 
available will not be enough to meet the demands and the needs 
of all. So, water is a very, very important subject, an 
important need for everyone in the region. And, that again is a 
reason for us to move ahead, because amongst the many reasons, 
we have to resolve this problem that could be very explosive 
unless resolved, and cannot be resolved except in the context of 
peace. 
  [Correspondent] The Israelis, Your Majesty, are suggesting 
that as the [word indistinct] under the Johnston Plan, I think, 
they have indeed received more water than they were allotted to, 
or that they've stolen, if you want to use the word, more water. 
Has that been communicated to you, that there is going to be an 
arrangement under which large quantities of water are restored 
to Jordan? 
  [Husayn] I certainly hope that we will receive our share and 
that this will be defined in the coming negotiations, sir. 
  [Correspondent] But, sir, If I can just ask you another 
question. I know you can't speak for the Syrian leadership. 
But from your talks in Damascus, do you have any sense of what 
the major problem is now for the Syrians. There seems to be, as 
you know, Secretary Christopher has put off his trip to the 
region because he was not convinced that it will produce 
progress on the Syrian- Israeli track. Do you have any thoughts 
about what may be required either from the Israelis or from the 
Syrians to try to produce progress? 
  [Husayn] My impression is that progress was made, and that 
certainly, reflects my impression of the Syrian position that 
they would like to get on with it as rapidly as possible and 
arrive at a satisfactory conclusion to these talks. I think 
that positions were set out, and they probably are starting 
positions at this stage, but I hope that on both sides there 
will be an effort to achieve progress, and I hope that we will 
see that happening in the time ahead. It is not for me to 
comment on when the secretary will visit, but I think that 
further progress is expected before too long. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, on the question of Jerusalem, 
it seems no one is talking about Jerusalem any more. Is 
Jerusalem going to be just a Palestinian-Israeli issue, 
especially that the Palestinians will not have any leverage 
on....? 
  [Husayn, interrupting] Not in the least, not in the least. 
The agenda [words indistinct] that. I don't know, maybe you 
have not been hearing us. I think that we've been talking about 
Jerusalem continuously and our feelings for Jerusalem have never 
changed, will never change. And, again, the idea that we are 
trying to put across is that we should, somehow, find a way by 
which we can address the problem in terms of the holy sites, 
holy to the followers of the three great monotheistic religions, 
the three great Ibrahmic religions, to remove those away from 
the realm of politics and politicking. And we recognize no 
sovereignty over these holy places except to God. 
  We hope that in a state of peace, these places will come to 
symbolize peace between the followers of the three great 
religions. And, as far as the rest is concerned, I believe 242 
applies to that side of the equation, and I am sure that future 
negotiations, we understand, will deal with them. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, permit me to ask about Yemen, 
mainly. It is another subject, but still you have a position 
and your position is very well known concerning Yemen. Now we 
have reached this phase of problem where there is actually war 
and there is no cease-fire. What is the Jordanian position, 
what is your position, Your Majesty, on this problem? 
  [Husayn] Sir, our position is one of deep regret over seeing 
the situation in Yemen develop to the point of war and military 
action. We regret the losses, those who have been lost in terms 
of the ongoing struggle and those who have suffered and those 
who continue to face a threat within Yemen. We had tried our 
utmost to help all Yemenis achieve an understanding of how the 
state of Yemen will be formulated in the future. And they have 
reached an agreement, which they ratified, representatives of 
all schools of political thought and representatives of all the 
people of Yemen, in Amman. Unfortunately, it did not last long 
and the situation has erupted. Naturally, it would be our wish 
and hope that the unity of Yemen could be maintained. But I am 
very concerned and very, very worried that even that might be in 
jeopardy at this stage. I hope, somehow, that the situation 
will improve and that what is in the interest of Yemen will be 
in the forefront of the thoughts of all concerned. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, you've said that, getting back 
to the face-to-face meeting with the Israeli leadership, you've 
said that [word indistinct] must wait [words indistinct] until 
the time is right. The Israeli leadership has been using 
similar language. What is the sequence of provisional 
agreements, on various issues, that must be achieved before time 
is right for a face-to-face meeting, or is it necessary to wait 
until all agreements are (?agreed)...? 
  [Husayn, interrupting] Sir, let's put it in another way. I 
think that it's fair to describe the situation in the following 
way. We are negotiating. Negotiations are taking place. 
Negotiations are going to take place. So, whether they are at 
my level and the prime minister, or at the level of our 
representatives at this stage, one and the same thing. The 
question of exactly when we will meet, hopefully, we'll see some 
progress before that happens. But the fact that we haven't met 
publicly does not mean that the efforts of our colleagues and 
those who represent both countries are not a reflection of the 
spirit and the desire to negotiate between the two, as is 
happening. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, regarding the venue for such a 
conference, such a meeting within the area, will it also be in 
the region [words indistinct]? 
  [Husayn] It could be. Why not? 
  [Correspondent] It could be in the region? 
  [Husayn] It could be, I suppose. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, just to clear up one thing. 
Are you drawing a distinction between the starting of 
negotiations with the Israelis and the signing of the agreement, 
because sometimes we are putting them together? 
  [Husayn] I think, sir, that this is a problem in the minds 
of 
many. I mean, obviously, it is a very important moment and we 
are starting serious negotiations at this stage. Hopefully with 
good will and with a determination to achieve progress and 
resolve all problems. That doesn't mean we have ratified peace 
yet. But when we reach satisfaction on all the problems, when 
we've resolved all these problems, then, obviously, we will be 
at the state where the crowning achievement, as I've said time 
and again, is a peace treaty. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, have you detected any 
flexibility in the American position on sanctions on Iraq? Is 
there any change in the American position? 
  [Husayn] I do not care to comment on that, sir. I haven't... 
[pauses] anything that I would say would be out of place, I 
think. 
  [Correspondent] Could I just follow that up, Your Majesty, 
on 
Iraq. There is an agreement between Jordan, an economic 
agreement between Jordan and the PLO to provide oil to the Gaza 
and Jericho, the self-rule areas. Jordan gets about 60,000 
barrels a day of oil from Iraq. Presumably, if Jordan is going 
to provide oil to those areas, it is going to be Iraqi oil, and 
it is going to come from the oil that you need for your country. 
Doesn't that create an incentive for you, and indeed for the 
West in general, to relook at the sanctions, and perhaps provide 
some relief for the Iraqis to, at least, provide some oil, or 
greater quantities of oil. 
  [Jordanian Prime Minister al-Majali, whispering to King 
Husayn, in Arabic, after Husayn queries him] There is an 
agreement between Israel and Egypt, and we have nothing to do 
with that. 
  [Husayn] We have not yet concluded an agreement, sir, with 
our Palestinian brethren to provide oil from Jordan. And as you 
do suggest, I was just asking if there is anything new that has 
happened while I was away. But, I don't think that anything 
has, in that regard. But, regarding Iraq, I continue to feel 
very, very strongly with the people of Iraq. And I hope that 
the rest of the world will share with us these feelings that the 
impact, the suffering of the people of Iraq is really out of 
proportion to all (?reason). Regardless of who is responsible, 
regardless of who caused it, and regardless of [as heard], we 
are interested obviously in the humanitarian dimension; and Iraq 
is an important element in our region. So, let us hope that 
this nightmare somehow comes to an end before too long. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, (?could you say something 
about) the demarcation of borders between you and Israel? 
[Words indistinct] does Jordan want this to be the first thing 
on the agenda? Do you think it will be a problem with the 
Israelis, because they always reject... 
  [Husayn, interrupting] I hope that it will not be a problem. 
And I hope that... [pauses] I think that we are going to meet 
face to face. I am sure the Americans will be present and most 
welcome at this stage. And as far as we are concerned, 
obviously the question of sovereignty over our territories is 
one that has to be resolved. And as I have said earlier, by 
that, I don't mean that we should create a new barrier between 
us. But, we have to recover our territory, we have to recover 
our water rights. Let me put it another way. To those who ask 
so many questions about Jordan and Jordan's actions and why, I 
think no country in the Arab world has done more for the 
Palestinian cause, or identified more with the suffering of the 
Palestinian people, or their hopes and aspirations of regaining 
their rights on their soil. No Arab country has done more for 
Arab unity, and cooperation, and coordination. We paid a very 
heavy price in 1967, because we lived up to our commitments as 
members of the Arab League, and we respected our agreements in 
terms of the joint defense dimension within the Arab world. We 
knew fully well what the results might be. Yet, we lived up to 
our commitments, and we endured all the results, as hard as they 
have been. Later, we saw Egypt move on its own, too -- and it 
was our leader, obviously, in that period, in the 1967 period -- 
and achieve a peace treaty with Israel, and a situation of peace 
with Israel. We have done our best to move the Palestinian 
dimension forward. And suddenly, we saw our Palestinian brethren 
move, and they are the people most immediately concerned, and 
(?our concern) and achieve progress there. In this situation, 
we feel that nobody has the right to ask us what to do, and we 
have a responsibility toward ourselves, toward our country, 
toward our lands, toward our rights, to do whatever we can to 
move and safeguard our interests; and that is what we are doing, 
precisely. So, I hope that we will see progress on every other 
track, and we will see eventually the coming together of the 
comprehensive peace in the region. But, we are aware of our 
responsibilities towards our people, and we are carrying them 
out. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, can I ask you to step back 
from the daily news events, to look at the broader issue of 
democracy in the Middle East. Your kingdom has taken strides, 
but in most of the Arab world there is little or no movement, 
and in other places where it has been tried, there are 
breakdowns, in Yemen and Algeria. Could you reflect, for us, 
for a minute, on the prospects for democracy in the Arab world 
and the challenges that lie ahead? 
  [Husayn] As far as I am concerned, and many may or may not 
agree with me, democracy, pluralism, respect for human rights is 
the only way, is the best way. I hope that we have demonstrated 
that in Jordan that we will continue to do so in the times ahead 
and there is nothing more important than for people to feel that 
they are something, that they mean something, that they have 
rights to share in shaping their future. And I hope that Jordan 
will be a good example to others in that regard and in that 
respect. I believe when institutions are established, they are 
also a guarantee for continuity, for stability in the entire 
region. So we cannot claim to have the right to speak for 
others or advise others what to do, but as far as we are 
concerned, democracy, pluralism, respect for human rights, is a 
part of our very existence, and will continue to be always. 
  [Correspondent] [Words indistinct] experiments in Algeria 
and 
Yemen have been so unsuccessful so far, very discouraging to 
people who would like to support democracy in the Arab world? 
  [Husayn] Well, regarding Yemen, unfortunately, again, I 
didn't cover the answer in any great detail, but when one sees 
this ongoing struggle one is really puzzled because the unity 
was not created by force. The unity came as a result of the 
people of Yemen electing to have that unity come to be. There 
was a plebiscite, there was a formation of unity within the 
country, there was an election for a parliament, there was an 
election of a president, there was creation of something new, 
and suddenly we see it falling apart. Obviously what is in my 
heart is a wish that if there is any meaning to all these 
terrible losses that have occurred, that at least that is 
preserved somehow, and that dialogue will result in a solution 
to these problems. We have been involved in the problem to the 
best of our ability. We have tried to create bridges and a 
solid foundation for progress but that, in terms of the 
realities of the matter, required a political will at the very 
highest levels that maybe was not always there, and therefore it 
has failed. And I hope that somehow the Yemenis can pull it 
together, so that it is not a question of north and south but 
union for those who are opposed to it, and those who are opposed 
to it, I hope, will be a minority. But who can tell? I really 
can't tell what will happen. 
  [Correspondent] Concerning the confrontation, Your 
Excellency, the confrontation countries which are supposed to be 
meeting before any resumption of talks, has this formula ended 
now forever; that Jordan, Syria, PLO, and Lebanon meet with each 
other? Has it ended? 
  [Husayn] It hasn't necessarily ended, but here again, let me 
remind you that we were the people who are pushing for that more 
than any, and for coordination more than any. But the realities 
of the matter are that, maybe, we haven't all risen to the level 
that is needed to create the kind of coordination that could 
have been. Nonetheless, we are in touch and we hope that the 
results of our continued efforts, all of us, will enable us to 
achieve greater harmony and help each other in the times ahead. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, could you clarify one thing I 
am still a little confused about. You said at one point that a 
meeting with the Israeli leadership, and presumably Prime 
Minister Rabin, would be the natural outgrowth of negotiations 
with Israel that are about to resume in a week; that the 
negotiations could take place at any level, foreign minister, 
any level. At another point you said that a peace treaty was 
the crowning, will be, the crowning achievement of these 
negotiations. Is it possible that a meeting between yourself 
and Prime Minister Rabin may take place before a peace treaty is 
signed? 
  [Husayn] It is a very possible, anything is possible, sir. 
(?I am) quite flexible in that regard. But at the moment, there 
is a mechanism for negotiations and they are ongoing, and if and 
when there is a reason perceived by us, or by the Israelis, or 
jointly, for us to meet, then we will meet. It is not a taboo. 
There is nothing that will prevent that. And I hope it will 
come before too long. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, on boycott, how can Jordan 
implement all [words indistinct]? 
  [Husayn] Anyway, this is something that has to be discussed 
as well and resolved in the negotiations that will come. 
  [Correspondent] With Israel, not within the Arab world? 
  [Husayn] Within the Arab world! Do you think there is any 
boycott left? 
  [Correspondent] I mean the direct boycott. 
  [Husayn, amid laughter] (?No, no, no.) 
  [Correspondent] Since the announcement was made of the 
rapprochement between you and Israel last week, have you been in 
contact with any of the Gulf Arab countries, specifically Saudi 
Arabia, and shall we hope for a warming of the relationship 
between these two countries? 
  [Husayn] I haven't been in touch with any, apart from the 
normal contacts that we have with some of our brethren there. 
No, nothing else has happened. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, is there a better world 
understanding of Jordan's position during the Gulf War than 
before? And how will that help in enhancing Jordan's relations 
with the world? 
  [Husayn] I believe here there is a better understanding, 
yes, of Jordan's position during the Gulf War, and in the rest 
of the world that is also a fact. And I hope that our position 
will be understood for what it really was and what it really has 
been throughout that very dark moment, and it will always be. 
We have our own positions that we adopt as a result of what we 
believe is in the best interest of all. And our concerns for 
the region were real. And I think that they have been 
justified. We tried to prevent a war, we tried to reverse 
occupation peacefully. There was nothing wrong with that. 
Unfortunately, the problem is with some of our brethren who 
still believe that we knew that Kuwait was going to be attacked, 
that we were a party to a plan, allegedly, to create that 
eruption in that area, and this is totally false. And I wish to 
God that somebody will be able to come out and talk to us about 
it in any detail. We know where we are. We know where we were. 
So, somehow this problem has got to be addressed. It hasn't 
been, so far. We haven't been able to deal with it 
satisfactorily. And it would be in the interest of all to come 
out with [words indistinct] and find exactly what happened, who 
was responsible for concocting such an idea, to avoid falling 
into such pitfalls in the future. We have done everything on 
our side. We've indicated time and again that any step toward 
us will be met by two from us. But beyond that, we can't do 
more. So, we'll have to wait and see and in time, I hope that, 
things will move in the right direction. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, have there been any contacts 
with Egypt also regarding the progress as far as peace is 
concerned with Israel, any contacts with Cairo? 
  [Husayn] No contacts. In the sense of what context? 
  [Correspondent] I mean to apprise them of what is happening, 
just as Israel does, just as the Palestinians do, in that sense. 
  [Husayn] This happens normally, sir, it happens normally, 
but, have I talked to President Mubarak in the last period? 
This hasn't happened. I talked to him a while ago, around the 
'Id time [21 May] but nothing (?came of it). 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, you said you meet, as you 
said, 
you meet frequently with President al-Asad, and you said, if I 
understood you correctly, that you understand each other's 
positions. Does that mean that should you meet with Prime 
Minister Rabin in the course of negotiations, when you thought 
the time was ripe, that you would assume that President al-Asad 
would understand that and there would not be any worsening of 
relations between... 
  [Husayn, interrupting] I don't think that there is any 
reason 
for the worsening of relations. There is every reason for the 
improvement of relations, and I hope that this will be a fact. 
I haven't heard from President al-Asad anything to the 
contrary. So, whatever has been said in that regard, I do not 
really consider to be all that important. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, would you describe the state 
of 
the Jordanian economy? 
  [Husayn] It is passing through a difficult phase. I think we 
have done a lot in the recent past, but we are carrying a very, 
very heavy burden, and I hope somehow that all the efforts will 
result in some improvement in terms of the Jordanian economy in 
the future, that all the opportunities that will be there would 
enable us to move ahead so that they will bring about a change 
in the quality of life of our people and meet their demands and 
needs and expectations regarding the future. 
  [Correspondent] What would a peace do [words indistinct]? 
  [Husayn] I think it will enhance these possibilities, but 
obviously we are passing through a moment where we hope that we 
will get support from a lot of friends throughout the world, 
including our friends here in the United States. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, there were so many reports 
about invitations for you to visit Jerusalem. Do you think you 
will visit Jerusalem even before the final status and 
negotiations are over, if you sign a treaty with Israel? 
  [Husayn] I think that there is a lot of speculation that is 
way ahead of what is realistic. So I can't say anything in that 
regard. It is obviously my hope as a Hashemite and a Muslim 
Arab, and as a Jordanian, that conditions will permit me to 
visit the holy places in Jerusalem when it is possible for me 
and for others, in a context of peace, where these holy places 
are respected by all of us and there are sacred to all of us and 
were [pauses]... sovereignty is that of the almighty God on all 
of them. I hope that I will be able to visit Jerusalem, yes. I 
hope it will not be long before that happens. 
  [Correspondent] Yes, may I ask, with Syria and Lebanon, like 
did you exchange any information after the agreement with 
Israel, and what is really (?it), because we cannot define 
exactly Syria and Lebanese positions at this stage? 
  [Husayn] I don't know, but I can tell you one thing. We have 
never, so far as I am concerned, up to this moment, been able to 
sit together with any of our Arab brethren and discuss 
everything in detail. They have their own problems, and we 
don't know about them until after the fact, and we have our own 
problems which we deal with. But in terms of a direction for 
peace, this is something that is (?universal) in terms of our 
determination to achieve it and I hope we will see progress to 
arrive at [sentence incomplete] 

