Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lev Fedorov under the rubric: "Investigation for </F>
ROSSIYA: The Chemical Death Complex"] 
  [Text] Having arrested ex-KGB General O. Kalugin in 
London recently, the British police, in their words, were 
counting on obtaining additional information about the 
participation of USSR special services in the murder of the 
Bulgarian dissident writer G. Markov. But even Kalugin was able 
to shed little light on the origin of the ricin poison, three 
micrograms of which were used to commit this murder. Other 
people could give answers to these questions. But they are 
silent. True, not all of them. In September of last year Doctors 
of Chemical Sciences Vil Mirzayanov and Lev Fedorov reported to 
the world from the pages of MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI about Russia's 
production of chemical weapons, including the latest kinds of 
binary ones. In spite of the postcommunist times, there were 
immediate attempts to silence them. Criminal charges were filed 
against V. Mirzayanov, accusing him of divulging a state secret. 
Lev Fedorov took one more step: He prepared and turned over to 
the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation a document on the 
production of chemical weapons. The fate of the document was 
sad. It burned in the Supreme Soviet building on 4 October. But 
manuscripts, as we know, do not burn. On the basis of 
information he had, Lev Fedorov prepared the article published 
below. 
<H5>  The Granary of the Homeland </H5>
  On the whole during the past two years a good deal has been 
written about problems of destroying chemical weapons and the 
military- chemical complex as a whole. Practically everything 
coming from official sources can without hesitation be called 
deceptive rubbish. To sum up what has been said by the chemical 
generals, we now "have the good fortune" to possess 
approximately 40,000 tonnes of combat toxic substances. 
  The list is surprisingly short. Shorter than the one in the 
brochures on civil defense used in the campaign for eliminating 
illiteracy. It includes: 
  --blister agents (mustard gas, lewisite, and mixtures of 
them); 
  --nerve gases (sarin and soman); 
  --V-nerve gasses; 
  --police CS gas. 
  From civil war times until the 1960's the concept of 
chemical 
weapons and also their arsenals included many other substances 
in addition to those mentioned above: phosgene, diphosgene, 
hydrocyanic acid, adamsite, diphenylchlorarsine. They were not 
only used in military service of the Red Army but were also 
produced on a large scale. 
  During the Vietnam War our press castigated the American 
aggressors who used chemical weapons. It was not chemical 
warfare in the classical form, but a herbicide war--chemical 
means of destroying vegetation were used as combat toxic 
substances. It is known that within the framework of the 
symmetrical response to the imperialist threat the USSR was also 
preparing for herbicide war. The Institute of Phytopathology of 
the USSR Ministry of Agriculture and its numerous divisions and 
branches were particularly successful here. Something was also 
set aside for the practice of waging the herbicide war. One can 
inquire about this in the Moscow Scientific Research Institute 
of Chemical Means of Plant Protection (VNIIKhSZR), its branch in 
Ufa, and also...incidentally, now it is already in a foreign 
country. 
  The Bulgarian dissident G. Markov was killed with ricin. 
"Big 
brother," the USSR special services, shared it with his brothers 
in the socialist camp. It should be added that installations for 
manufacturing ricin as a combat toxic substance until quite 
recently were working along happily in the Moscow State-Union 
Scientific Research Institute of Organic Chemistry and 
Technology (GSNIIOKhT) and/or its Volsk branch (now the State 
Institute for Organic Synthesis Technologies). 
  The chemical generals are guarding their secrets. Toxic 
substances are assigned numbers and names that reveal no 
information to the ordinary person. But the official press of 
the military-industrial complex sometimes gives out state or, 
rather, departmental secrets. Recently KRASNAYA ZVEZDA mentioned 
"Item 33," "Item 35," and a model with the code VX. In the same 
place they mentioned the "binary nerve gas `Novichok.'" The 
British press found out about "Novichok" and its code--"Product 
A-232." 
  Product R-33 is a so-called V-gas. For 15 long years it was 
produced in Novocheboksarsk at the Chuvash Production 
Association Khimprom imeni Leninskiy Komsomol. At the beginning 
of the 1960's two of these combines were planned: one in 
Chuvashia and the other in a place that is now outside the 
country. The Chuvash Production Association placed on the altar 
of the Cold War (according to official data) 15,200 tonnes of 
Product 33. 
  Product R-35 is a toxic substance named "sarin" by the 
Nazis, 
and a plant to produce it was constructed in Diechernfurt on the 
Oder. But the Red Army arrived in time and the plant "turned up 
missing." It materialized in Stalingrad, at the present 
All-Union Production Association Khimprom imeni Kirov. Because 
of their technological backwardness they were not able to put 
the equipment they had won into operation quickly. They did not 
begin to fill ammunition with Product R-35 in series production 
in Stalingrad until 1959, and they produced 11,700 tonnes of it. 
  Soman is a "relative" of sarin, it is Product R-55, and they 
began to produce it in Volgograd, smuggling it out from the time 
the technological flow line was put into operation until the end 
of the 1960's. The dry residue from these efforts is 4,750 
tonnes. Nobody else in the world has this toxic substance and we 
do not yet know how to destroy it safely. 
  Product A-232, which was mentioned in the British press, is 
one of a whole series of "innovations," created under the 
large-scale Soviet Foliant Program during the 1970's-1980's. 
This series began to be created as early as 1973 at the Volsk 
branch of the GSNIIOKhT. After the first "successes," Moscow was 
included with the corresponding scale, programs, and prospects. 
  We now have a whole series of toxic substances of the third 
generation to our credit. 
  Some of them were selected to be poured into ammunition on 
the technological flow line in Volgograd and also for testing at 
the testing ground in Shikhani. 
  In order to understand the danger presented by these 
arsenals, let us do some calculations. Let us say that a fatal 
dose of V-gas for a human being is about a milligram (more 
precise data are a state secret). Our official supply of this 
poison is sufficient to kill the entire population of the earth 
several times. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Toxic substance   |Overall output du-|Turned over for d-|Remainder         | 
|                  |ring the period o-|estruction in 1992|                  | 
|                  |f 1940-1945 (in t-|                  |                  | 
|                  |onnes)            |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|mustard gas       |77,385            |690 (plus 1,010 t-|75,000            | 
|                  |                  |onnes of a mixtur-|                  | 
|                  |                  |e of mustard gas  |                  | 
|                  |                  |and lewisite)     |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|lewisite          |20,601            |6,585             |14,000            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|hydrocyanic acid  |11,104            |0                 |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|phosgene          |8,293             |5                 |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|adamsite          |6,058             |3,200             |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|sarin             |--                |11,720            |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|soman             |--                |4,750             |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|V-gas             |--                |15,200            |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|The table, unfortunately, does not err on the side of completeness and abu-| 
|ndance. For example, mustard gas was produced before 1940 as well, and the-| 
|y continued to produce it along with lewisite after 1945. With respect to  | 
|sarin, soman, and V-gas it is unknown (not only precisely but even approxi-| 
|mately) how much was produced.                                             | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  It must be emphasized that against the background of the 
nuclear missile confrontation there was not the slightest 
strategic need for our generals' chemical "toys." This subject 
deserves a separate study: Immense amounts of money have been 
spent and even more will have to be spent to destroy the poison 
that has been accumulated. Lewisite, adamsite, 
diphenylchlorarsine--a substance containing arsenic. Arsenic, as 
we know, lasts forever and will not disappear of its own accord 
from the places where it was produced or stored. 
  Something else is more important now. The yperite-lewisites 
are a German-American achievement from the beginning of the 
century, sarin and soman are a purely German invention from 
World War II times (one of the versions of Hitler's weapons of 
retribution), gas VX is a postwar Swedish-American creation, and 
CS gas was accepted for use by our army only after U.S. policy 
rejected it. The technical problems involved in producing these 
toxic substances were solved before the beginning of the 1960's 
and it was at that time that they moved from the scientific 
sphere into production. 
  What was our military-chemical science together with 
industry 
doing the rest of the time? Where are the residuals society does 
not know about but which threaten it with many chemical 
Chernobyls? 
  The nation's survival depends upon a complete and honest 
answer to these questions. 
<H5>  The Convict Past </H5>
  Domestic military chemistry has a convict past. For the 
pioneer in the development and production of chemical weapons, 
the GSNIIOKhT, the use of prisoner labor was the norm right up 
until the "Thaw." It began at the end of the 1920's. At that 
time it was still called by its prerevolutionary name, the 
Olginskiy Plant, and it was located on the Highway of the 
Enthusiasts. Then came a series of disguises--Plant No. 1, Plant 
No. 51, GSNII-42, GSNII-403.... 
  The output of mustard gas and phosgene was developed by a 
corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Ye. 
Shpitalskiy. He was arrested in 1929 but his death sentence was 
commuted to a 10-year term. The scientist continued to supervise 
the work, but as a prisoner. Subsequent work in the Institute 
was conducted not only by prisoners but also with the direct 
participation of the NKVD [People's Commissariat of Internal 
Affairs]. One of the renowned industrial developments was called 
"the method of the fourth special division" of the NKVD. 
  Of course, prisoners worked at other military chemistry 
facilities as well. Thus the giant of the First Five-Year Plan, 
the Visherskiy Chemical Plant (VIShKhIMZ), included the 
Bereznikov Soda Plant, which was rebuilt by prisoners--without 
their knowledge--for the production of mustard gas. 
  At that time the price of a human life, even a free one, not 
to mention one in prison, was negligible. Let us take for an 
illustration just one plant--No. 102 in Chapayevsk, where they 
produced shells, mines, and bombs with mustard gas and lewisite, 
and for just one year--1942. 
  During the first quarter 323 people suffered from 
occupational poisoning and injury, in the second quarter--400 
were added, and in the third quarter--another 412 were added to 
these. Nine-tenths of these people worked in specialized shops: 
IV (the manufacture of mustard gas), V (pouring it into 
ammunition), and there was also Shop No. VII, where they 
produced lewisite. 
  The technology for work with strong poisons is back in the 
Stone Age: Toxic substances were poured from tanks into barrels 
through rubber hoses, and using cans and buckets they were 
transferred from the barrels into the ammunition. A work day 
lasted 11 hours and involved wearing a gas mask and specialized 
rubber clothing. The working conditions (a statement from the 
capital commission): dirty in the shops, residuals from the 
poured product not cleaned up, deep potholes in the floor, 
dismantled equipment that had not been moved or decontaminated. 
In Shop No. 5 the station for purifying waste waters did not 
function for months on end and throughout a large area there was 
no ventilation equipment. 
  One time an apparatchik, his assistant, and a "journalist" 
(during those years that is what they called the accounting 
clerks) were doused from head to toe with mustard gas from a 
broken hose. The "journalist" died the next day, the 
assistant--10 days later, and the apparatchik himself also 
barely lived until the Victory. The plant leaders were given a 
reprimand for...losing 700 kg of mustard gas. They did not come 
up with any other method before the end of the war. 
  In 1942 more than 1,000 people were discharged from the 
plant: About 300 were just discharged because of illness and 
approximately the same number fled! 
  Reinforcements arrived at the plant in 1943--about 600 
people 
who had been released from prisons and camps and more than 1,000 
elderly Uzbeks who were not fit to go to the front and spoke 
Russian poorly. Less than 300 of them returned to 
Uzbekistan--the rest were buried in the Chapayevsk city 
cemetery. And more than 500 people fled that same year (out from 
under the wing of Lavrentiy Beriya's department!). 
  The "Thaw" did not break the continuity of the times. 
Thousands of prisoners from the new wave worked on the 
construction of Khimprom in Novocheboksrask at the beginning of 
the 1970's. They continued to work later as well, for example, 
at this plant's twin in a nearby foreign country. The scale of 
the use of forced labor was so great that a term originated--"he 
served time in chemistry" as a synonym for "he served time in 
jail." 
  The high Areopagus of the military-chemical complex landed 
in 
Chapayevsk in the summer of 1989: more than 20 deputy ministers, 
generals, directors, and academicians. They were there to place 
wreaths on graves in the city cemetery and get as far away as 
their legs would carry them from the unfortunate city which had 
been polluted by socialism and forgotten by God and the 
authorities. But the chiefs did not come in repentance--they 
almost declared Chapayevsk to be the most suitable place for 
destroying chemical weapons that were no longer needed. True, 
this decision was not ultimately made.... 
<H5>  War Victims--Burned Out Cities </H5>
  People in military-chemical production burned like straw. 
And 
entire cities where these factories of death were located were 
also unable to keep from burning up. Not a single document of 
modern Russia mentions the fact that scars have been left on the 
body of the earth, even in places where weapons are not 
produced. An immense ring of filth still surrounds each of them: 
bodies of water, underground waters, and soil are polluted. 
Residents suffer from incomprehensible diseases. And there is no 
mention of allotting funds for treating these people, not to 
mention restoring the ecology of these places. 
  The specific addresses and the degree of mutilation of the 
environment are still a well-kept secret. Nonetheless, spies of 
the "probable enemy" have probably progressed much farther than 
we have in recognizing our filthy chemical past. 
  Last year in the United States a paper was published on 
Soviet chemical weapons; it included a considerable number of 
German and Anglo-American discoveries. From this it is possible 
to learn a great deal about the plants of the USSR that produced 
and were preparing to produce chemical weapons during the prewar 
and war years. 
  The current VNIIKhSZR, the brain center for the chemistry of 
toxic substances, was in fact a large hybrid consisting of 
Moscow Plant No. 51 and NII-42 (which grew, in turn, out of the 
central plant laboratory (TsZL) and the special laboratory of 
the Scientific Research Institute imeni V.Ya. Karpov). One can 
also find out a lot about the "numerical" past of many other 
plants that are now leading a quite respectable life as 
flagships of the chemical industry-- Khimprom imeni Kirov from 
Volgograd (Plant No. 91, produced mustard gas), the plant for 
chemical fertilizers from Chapayevsk (Plant No. 102, mustard 
gas, lewisite, phosgene), the soda production association from 
Bereznikov (Plant No. 761, mustard gas), and the Zavolzhskiy 
plant from Kineshma (Plant No. 756, adamsite). A good deal is 
also being reported about plants that were preparing to produce 
chemical weapons but for various reasons did not do so but still 
left the regions contaminated. 
  The spies did not find anything or did not want to share 
their knowledge about Khimprom, which was constructed in 
Chuvashia during the 1970's. Moreover, they very much degraded 
our city's contribution to large-scale chemistry by designating 
in it a plant for chemical weapons--Chernorechensk (Dzerzhinsk) 
combine No. 96/148. Things were complicated and confused. In 
fact in Dzerzhinsk three different giants of aggressive military 
chemistry have been operating since prewar years, and especially 
actively since the beginning of the war. The Chernorechensk 
Chemical Plant imeni Kalinin (now the Korund Production 
Association) produced and filled ammunition with hydrocyanic 
acid, phosgene, and diphosgene. Plant No. 96 (now the 
Kaprolaktam Production Association) produced and loaded lewisite 
and various yprites. And plant No. 148 (the modern Orgsteklo 
Production Association) specialized in ammunition with 
hydrocyanic acid. These plants also made deliveries of toxic 
substances to go--in tanks and barrels. For example, the Kirovo- 
Chepetskiy chemical plant obtained mustard gas for the war from 
Plant No. 96 and all it did was load it into the ammunition. 
  By the 1980's in the main administration for producing 
chemical weapons (it was called the Soyuz Org Sintez All-Union 
Association) there remained perhaps only the Volgograd plant; 
the other active legal entities of war times (Plant Nos. 96, 
102, and 148) were discarded because they were unneeded and 
ended up in other, less wealthy main administrations. 
<H5>  Pin on a Medal </H5>
  Everything that has been said needs to have the names filled 
in, for otherwise the personage of the nomenklatura clan of the 
military- chemical complex will not acquire individual features, 
and the country and its citizens, as they say, must know their 
heroes. 
  The Chuvash newspaper MK in May of this year recalled an 
event from a decade ago when the chemical industry house 
newspaper published a note saying that the general director of 
the Khimprom Chuvash Production Association, L. Shevnitsyn, had 
been awarded the title Hero of Socialist Labor, for which it was 
chewed out by the security deputy. Now one can guess the reasons. 
  The restoration of the personnel iconostasis of the 
military- 
chemical complex is a labor-intensive affair. People in uniform 
are extremely close-lipped. Practically the only sources of 
information are the scanty stories from eyewitnesses and tidbits 
from "champaign toasts" that have sometimes made their way to 
the newspapers when somebody's anniversary was being celebrated. 
Of course, the picture of the personal achievements (bonuses, 
orders) of leading citizens is not very complete. But we must 
try to restore at least that. 
  [Box, p. 8] 
  S.A. Arzhakov. Director of the Dzerzhinsk Institute-State 
Union Scientific Research Institute of Chlororganic Products and 
Acrylates imeni V.A. Kargin (1970's), later--deputy chairman of 
the State Commission of the USSR Council of Ministers for 
Military and Industrial Questions. Lenin Prize--biological 
(anti-immunological) weapons (1991). 
  R.K. Balchenko. Deputy director of the Volsk branch of the 
GSNIIOKhT. State Prize--binary chemical weapons. 
  V.D. Belyayev began at the end of the 1940's as director of 
the Khimprom All-Union Production Association. The collapse of 
the USSR found him in the position of chief of the Main 
Administration of the Microbiological Industry under the USSR 
Council of Ministers, which included the biological attack 
industry. Lenin Prize--sarin and soman (1960). 
  I.M. Gabov. Deputy chief of the All-Union Association 
Soyuzorgsintez. State Prize--chemical ammunition (1970). Order 
of Friendship of Peoples for work on the Foliant Program (1981). 
  S.V. Golubkov. Traveled the path from chief engineer of the 
Khimprom All-Union Production Association to deputy minister of 
the chemical industry of the USSR for special issues. Lenin 
Prize--soman (1972). 
  A.Ye. Gusakov. Colonel, chief of "Dioxin" Administration 33 
of Central Scientific Research Institute of the USSR Ministry of 
Defense (Shikhany in Saratov Oblast. This is the head military- 
chemical testing institute; during its Moscow period, up until 
the 1960's, it was called the Central Scientific Research 
Military- Technical Institute.) Since 1988--director of the 
Moscow Medstatistika Scientific Research Institute (this is an 
institute of the Third Main Administration under the USSR 
Ministry of Public Health; he worked not on statistics but on 
accumulating all the information about chemical weapons, a kind 
of scout for the military chemical system. State Prize--for 
"solving special problems" (1978). 
  K.A. Guskov. Deputy director of the GSNIIOKhT (1963-1988). 
Lenin Prize--V-gas (1974). Order of the Labor Red Banner--aerial 
chemical ammunition (1980). 
  I.B. Yevstafyev. General, academician of the Russian Academy 
of Natural Sciences, since 1992--deputy chief of chemical 
forces. State Prize for "solving special problems" (1978) and 
binary weapons (1991). 
  V.M. Zimin. Director of the Volgograd branch of the 
GSNIIOKhT, director of the Khimprom All-Union Production 
Association, administration chief of the USSR Ministry of the 
Chemical Industry. Lenin Prize--soman (1972). 
  A.M. Ivanov. Shop chief of the Khimprom All-Union Production 
Association, deputy director of GIPROSINTEZ (this is an 
institute in Volgograd which planned the production of chemical 
weapons; it had previously been a branch of the Moscow institute 
of the same profile GSPI-3), chief of the All-Union Association 
Soyuzorgsintez. Order of Friendship of Peoples for work on the 
Foliant Program (1981), State Prize for "solving special 
problems" (1982). 
  M.I. Kabachnik. Academician of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 
deputy director and laboratory chief of the institute of the 
USSR Academy of Sciences. Stalin Prize--sarin (1946), Lenin 
Prize--V-gas (1974). 
  N.N. Kovalev. Deputy chief of chemistry department of USSR 
Gosplan [State Planning Committee], official associate of the 
State Commission of the USSR Council of Ministers for 
Military-Industrial Questions. State Prize for work on the 
Foliant Program (1981) and binary weapons (1991). 
  A.D. Kuntsevich. General, academician of the USSR Academy of 
Sciences, deputy chief of chemical forces (1983-1992), chairman 
of the Committee on Conventional Problems of Chemical and 
Biological Weapons under the president of the Russian 
Federation. Hero of Socialist Labor for work on Foliant Program 
(1981), Lenin Prize-- binary weapons (1991). 
  B.P. Kuchkov. Chief engineer of the Khimprom All-Union 
Production Association, chief engineer for the administration of 
Stalingrad Sovnarkhoz [council of the national economy]. Lenin 
Prize--sarin and soman (1960). 
  G.S. Leonov. Shop chief of the Khimprom Chemical Production 
Association, deputy chief of the all-Union association 
Soyuzorgsintez. State Prize--binary weapons (1991). 
  L.G. Loskutov. Deputy chief engineer of the Khimprom 
All-Union Production Association, director of the Volgograd 
Branch of the GSNIIOKhT. Order of Labor Red Banner for work on 
the Foliant Program (1981). 
  I.V. Martynov. Corresponding member of the USSR Academy of 
Sciences, director of the GSNIIOKhT (1961-1978), institute 
director of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Lenin Prize--soman 
(1972). Hero of Socialist Labor--V-gas (1974). 
  N.N. Melnikov. Corresponding member of the USSR Academy of 
Sciences, laboratory chief of the VNIIKhSZR. Order of the Labor 
Red Banner--herbicide weapons (1977). 
  Yu.I. Musiychuk. Director of the St. Petersburg NIIGP (this 
is an institute of the Third Main Administration under the USSR 
Ministry of Public Health, which officially solved problems of 
hygiene and occupational pathology in specialized productions). 
State Prize for "solving special problems" (1982). 
  G.A. Patrushev. Director of the GSNIIOKhT (1980-1984). State 
Prize for "solving special problems" (1982). 
  S.V. Petrov. General, chief of chemical forces (since 1989). 
Lenin Prize--biological (anti-immunological) weapons (1991). 
  V.A. Petrunin. Deputy director of the Volsk Branch of the 
GSNIIOKhT, director of the GSNIIOKhT (since 1983). Lenin Prize-- 
binary weapons (1991). 
  V.K. Pikalov. General, chief of chemical forces (1969-1989). 
State Prize for work on Foliant Program (1981). 
  V.V. Pozdnev. Director of the Khimprom All-Union Production 
Association. Lenin Prize--sarin and soman (1960), State Prize 
for "solving special problems" (1982). 
  V.R. Rembovskiy. Colonel, deputy chief of 33 Central 
Scientific Research Engineering Institute of the Ministry of 
Defense, chief of the "dioxin" administration. State 
Prize--biological (anti- immunological) weapons (1991). 
  V.M. Romanov. Chief engineer of the Chuvash Production 
Association Khimprom, chief of the All-Union Association 
Soyuzorgsintez, deputy minister of the USSR Ministry of the 
Chemical Industry. Lenin Prize--V-gas (1974), Order of Lenin for 
work on Foliant Program (1981). 
  V.A. Romanchuk. Chief engineer and director of GIPROSINTEZ, 
director of State Union Planning Institute-3, chief specialist 
of the State Committee of the USSR Council of Ministers for 
Military and Industrial Questions. State Prize for "solving 
special problems" (1978). 
  O.I. Stuzhuk. Chief engineer and director of GIPROSINTEZ. 
State Prize for work on Foliant Program (1981). 
  A.V. Fokin. General, academician of the USSR Academy of 
Sciences, deputy chief of chemical forces (1969-1973), deputy 
chief scientific secretary of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 
institute director of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Lenin 
Prize--V-gas (1974). 
  L.S. Shevnitsyn. Since the 1970's permanent general director 
of the Khimprom Chuvash Production Association. State Prize for 
"solving special problems" (1978), Hero of Socialist Labor for 
work on the Foliant Program (1981). 
  A.G. Shkuro. Deputy director of the Khimprom Chuvash 
Production Association. State Prize for work on the Foliant 
Program (1981). 
  N.N. Yukhtin. Deputy director of the GSNIIOKhT, director of 
VNIIKhSZR. Lenin Prize--sarin and soman (1960). [end box] 
<H5>  In Lieu of an Epitaph </H5>
  It would be dishonest to the peoples of Russia not to 
name personally those individuals responsible for declassifying 
the dirty chemical page of our history--they are President of 
Russia Boris Yeltsin and Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin. 
  The seriousness of the problem does not require 
publicistic ardor. Several years ago there was a phrase going 
around that mankind is sitting on a keg filled with nuclear 
weapons. Now the missiles are being destroyed and the threat has 
diminished. But Russia is threatened by another 
disaster--immense arsenals from military chemistry. It is 
frightening to calculate how many toxic Chernobyls are concealed 
there. The truth about the real situation is still being 
concealed. 
  It is embarrassing, of course, to declassify this 
filth, but it is good for us. 
  From the Editors. We understand that people on the 
list were following orders and assignments from the government. 
Today we are not even speaking about their moral responsibility. 
We want them to understand that the chemical death cannot be 
stopped without their direct participation. 

