Language: <F P=105>French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Christel Tardif: "Superconductivity Outside the </F>
Low-Temperature Range"--first paragraph is AIR &amp; 
COSMOS/AVIATION 
MAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL introduction] 
  [Text] Two CNRS [National Center for Scientific Research] 
research teams, one in Grenoble, the other in Paris, have 
observed electric conduction phenomena without any resistance in 
materials at temperatures close to 0 degrees Celsius [xC]. 
  No more overheating of electronic circuits, no more energy 
losses in electric cables... Soon, faster computers, smaller 
transformers, more efficient magnetometry instruments... In 
brief, a technological revolution with a market that is worth 
$1.5 billion (8.7 billion francs [Fr]) today and should expand 
to $200 billion (Fr1,160 billion) during the 2020's! 
  This is the enticing picture of what we can expect from 
superconductivity, if we can really manage to make it occur at 
room temperature. 
  Two CNRS research teams just came closer to this objective. 
To end 1993 with a flourish, one CNRS-associated unit at the 
Higher School of Industrial Physics and Chemistry of the City of 
Paris, and two CNRS units in Grenoble--the Research Center on 
Very Low Temperatures and the Crystallography 
Laboratory--indulged themselves with superconductivity phenomena 
in cuprates, respectively in a bismuth-strontium-calcium-copper 
oxide compound at 250 Kelvin [K] (-23xC) and in a mercury 
cuprate compound at 280 K (+7xC)... a world record. 
  Superconductivity was discovered in 1911; it is a state of 
matter (like the solid, liquid, or gaseous states) obtained by 
lowering the temperature below a so-called "critical" 
temperature, when electric resistance completely and suddenly 
disappears. In this state, matter no longer dissipates any 
energy, and the magnetic field is also expelled outside the 
volume of material; this diamagnetism phenomena was used by the 
Japanese to develop a magnetic levitation train, and it can be 
used to produce intense magnetic fields. 
  As explained by Michel Lagues, head of the Paris team and 
research director at the CNRS, "for 50 years the phenomenon was 
confined to the few tens of degrees above absolute zero 
(-273xC); but since 1986 the discovery of a new family of 
so-called `high-temperature' superconductors, the cuprates, led 
us to look forward to industrial applications." 
  It is all a matter of critical temperature; the latter 
depends on the nature and structure of the material. "The 
cuprates that led to new developments in relation with 
temperature are crystals consisting of octahedrons stacked in 
space in all directions and containing a metallic atom at their 
center and oxygen atoms at their summits; the spaces between 
octahedrons are taken up by another metallic atom," Michel 
Lagues went on. In the Grenoble experiment, the cuprates were 
obtained as massive ceramic-like materials or monocrystals; in 
the Paris experiment, they were obtained as thin films. 
<H5>  Progress Remains To Be Made </H5>
  The researchers, are very cautious about their success. 
Actually, at Grenoble, the temperature record occurred at random 
during a routine operation performed at night. In addition, 
superconductivity occurred in only one percent of a sample of 
several cubic meters; there remains to find where that one 
percent is located and to determine its structure. In the Paris 
experiment, we should indicate that the sample was an extremely 
thin film (eight atom layers, i.e. 30 millionths of one 
millimeter) weighing under one tenth of one millionth gram; all 
these characteristics test the sensitivity of available 
measuring instruments. Large-scale applications, therefore, 
should not be expected to emerge for several years. 
  Besides, increasing the critical temperature will not 
suffice 
to develop industrial superconductivity; results will also have 
to be obtained at room temperature and with high current flows 
within the material. After that, of course, competitive 
manufacturing processes will have to be found. 

