BFN 

<F P=106> [By Queenie Wang in Guangzhou] </F>
  [Text] A trip to learn more about the training methods of 
the People's Liberation Army in order to allay fears about Hong 
Kong's post-1997 garrison turned into a lecture in Communist 
Party history yesterday. Hong Kong affairs advisers saw nothing 
more than an army dormitory on the first day of their two-day 
visit to the People's Liberation Army (PLA) facilities in 
Guangzhou. A senior mainland official told the SUNDAY MORNING 
POST that the troops seen by the 111-strong delegation were not 
those that will be stationed in Hong Kong after 1997. 
  Hong Kong National People's Congress delegate Liu Yiu-chu 
said the trip was a waste of time, despite mainland media claims 
that many visitors had enjoyed the day. Senior PLA officers 
spent much of yesterday briefing the visitors on the history of 
the Red Army before World War II, Ms Liu said. "From the 
party's point of view this may be very important but this is not 
what we came here for," she said. They should have organised a 
modern exhibition for us." Preliminary Working Committee (PWC) 
social and security sub-group convenor Rita Fan Hsu Lai-tai 
branded as superficial the effort to show the PLA on the first 
day. 
  However, XINHUA (the NEWS CHINA NEWS AGENCY) had a different 
version of the impact. It reported that several visitors said 
that with such an army, they were fully confident of a peaceful 
return of Hong Kong to the mainland. Several PWC members called 
for further displays of the PLA at work, and asked that the Hong 
Kong people be allowed to see the army in action. Such displays 
could help people to understand the PLA and lessen any fear of 
the troops. 
  The delegation saw PLA soldiers from the elite Red One 
Company, officials said. XINHUA deputy director Zhang Junsheng 
insisted that the PLA had a good track record, despite its image 
being greatly undermined by its role in the 1989 crackdown on 
pro-democracy groups. Mr Zhang admitted there had been a recent 
case of PLA officers beating people in Shenzhen, but added: 
"This was only a specific case and was done by a minority 
group. If you extended this to a general picture, this is not 
good thinking." 
  Hong Kong media was refused permission to cover the PWC 
visit, but newly appointed Hong Kong affairs adviser, Anthony 
Cheung Bing-leung, said it had contained "nothing sensitive" and 
should have been opened for media coverage. 

