Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Maksim Yusin report under the general headline "Yuriy </F>
Meshkov's Election as Crimean President Creates Fundamentally 
New Situation in Russian-Crimean Relations"] 
  [Text] Moscow -- Yuriy Meshkov's more than convincing 
victory in the Crimean presidential election creates a 
fundamentally new situation in Russian-Ukrainian relations. 
Until now it was only at opposition parties' demonstrations and 
rallies that calls for the peninsula to separate from Ukraine 
and join Russia were voiced, which relieved Moscow of the duty 
of officially reacting to them. After 30 January the picture 
changed: A man who does not conceal his pro-Russian sympathies 
and who is firmly intent on holding a referendum on the 
peninsula's status in the near future has come to power in the 
Crimea. 
  Kiev is resolutely coming out against this idea: It is not 
hard to predict the outcome of the voting. If the new Crimean 
leader shows stubbornness by insisting on a referendum, the 
situation on the peninsular will deteriorate sharply, 
threatening to cause serious complications in Russian-Ukrainian 
relations as well. Especially if matters reach the point of an 
armed conflict between supporters and opponents of the Crimea's 
separation. 
  For Russian diplomats this scenario of the development of 
events is the most undesirable. "We do not need the Crimea to 
join us at the expense of a rift with Ukraine," a Foreign 
Ministry representative, who wishes to remain anonymous, said. 
"We will use all our influence on Meshkov to incline him toward 
a dialogue with Kiev." 
  The Crimean question is a headache that Moscow could well do 
without. Yeltsin has more than enough problems with the Russian 
regions. The best solution for Moscow would be to let Kravchuk 
and Meshkov unravel the Crimean knot while remaining on the 
sidelines: Kiev agrees to a referendum in the Crimea, the 
peninsula's inhabitants come out in favor of a separation, and 
Ukraine recognizes the Crimea's independence; after which the 
Republic of Crimea, as a subject of international law, asks to 
be accepted into the Russian Federation, and Moscow considers 
this question calmly, without fearing a breach of the Helsinki 
accord. In time, as the economic and political crisis in 
Ukraine deepens, this development of events cannot be ruled out, 
but as of today it is unlikely. 
  Most likely Kiev will not reconcile itself to losing the 
Crimea, the threat of a conflict will acquire real definition, 
and the world will perceive support for the separatists by 
Moscow as interference in a neighboring state's affairs and an 
encroachment on its territorial integrity. The result will be a 
threat of Russia's being isolated in the international arena and 
a deterioration in relations with the West and the CIS countries. 
  By all accounts the Russian Foreign Ministry's efforts in 
the 
next few months will be aimed at reducing tension in the Crimea 
and preventing an open conflict between Kiev and Simferopol, but 
if it does break out, avoiding Moscow's involvement in it. 
Undoubtedly this policy will have a considerable number of 
opponents -- and not only among Crimean radicals. As the 
parliamentary elections showed, a considerable section of the 
Russian electorate has nationalistic leanings. Duma deputies, 
who reflect these people's views, will certainly unleash a 
powerful campaign to try to incline President Yeltsin toward 
taking more decisive steps to support his fellow countrymen in 
the Crimea. 

