BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 24 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Premier Li Peng 
today sent a telegram to the special ministerial meeting of the 
Group of 77 in New York congratulating them on the 30th 
anniversary of the group's founding. 
  "On the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the founding of 
the Group of 77 and the convocation of its special ministerial 
meeting, I would like to extend, on behalf of the Chinese 
Government and people, our warm congratulations," Li said in his 
message. 
  "For thirty years, the Group of 77 has made unremitting 
efforts in safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of 
developing countries, breaking up the inequitable international 
economic order and promoting north-south dialogue and 
international economic cooperation," he said. 
  "With major and profound changes in the international 
situation in recent years, the group is facing new tasks and 
challenges," he continued. 
  "At the UN Conference on Environment and Development and a 
number of other important international conferences, the group 
has worked to serve the interests of developing countries and 
made contributions to the achievement of positive results at 
these conferences," the premier pointed out. 
  He noted that "facts show that it is necessary and entirely 
possible for developing countries to close ranks and enhance 
cooperation for a common objective under the current new 
international situation." 
  "Being a developing country itself," Li said, "China has all 
along supported the just stand and reasonable demands of the 
Group of 77 and maintained good relations with it." 
  "Since the beginning of the 1990s, our cooperation has made 
further headway, which has effectively defended the common 
interests of developing countries," he said. 
  "I firmly believe that China and the Group of 77 will 
support 
and cooperate with each other even more forcefully and closely 
in the years ahead," Li added. 
  He stressed that "the Chinese Government and people stand 
ready to work with the Group of 77 for a gradual reform of the 
international economic order and for the common development and 
prosperity of developing countries." 
  The Chinese premier in his message wished every success for 
the Group of 77 special ministerial meeting. 
  The Group of 77, founded in Geneva in 1964, now has 129 
member countries. 

