Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with UK Northern Ireland Secretary Sir </F>
Patrick Mayhew by Philip Stephens and Michael Cassell in 
Belfast; date not given: "Long Haul Across Ulster's Quagmire"] 
  [Text] The stage this week has been held by Mr Gerry Adams. 
His visit to New York was a formidable coup for the man who has 
long cultivated an image as the respectable face of IRA 
terrorism. The often naive questions from the U.S. television 
interviewers who feted the president of Sinn Fein during his 
48-hour trip were a gift to such an accomplished propagandist. 
  So if the public reaction of the UK Government to President 
Bill Clinton's decision to grant Mr Adams a visa has been 
restrained, the private anger has been real. Efforts to end the 
conflict in Northern Ireland do not sit easily alongside 
appeasement of Irish-Americans in Boston and New York. 
  In any event Mr Adams's U.S. trip has done nothing to change 
the realities of a conflict which has claimed more than 3,000 
lives in 25 years. Even as he was appealing in New York for 
"peace," the IRA fired a 150-pound mortar bomb at British 
troops. Nobody was killed. But it will not be long before the 
bombs and bullets -- from loyalist as well as republican 
paramilitaries -- add more names to the death roll. 
  Sitting in his elegant office in Belfast's Stormont Castle, 
Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, was 
concerned with these realities. 
  In an hour-long interview he insisted the Anglo-Irish 
declaration signed in December by Mr John Major and Mr Albert 
Reynolds, the British and Irish prime ministers, would in the 
end provide the basis for durable peace. 
  Sir Patrick refused to speculate publicly on the odds of an 
early end to the violence, but he gave the impression of a man 
preparing for the long haul. 
  Intelligence reports on his desk almost certainly confirm 
the 
competing doves and hawks in the IRA have decided for the time 
being to put internal unity ahead of peace. 
  Sir Patrick's message was that, whatever the IRA does in the 
short term, the joint principles laid down in the declaration 
are inviolable. 
  The two governments had spelt out that Ulster could not be 
coerced into a united Ireland. Nor would Britain take on the 
role of a "persuader" in seeking to break the province's links 
with the rest of the UK. But it would not stand in the way of 
Irish unity if that was ever the democratic wish of a majority 
in the north. 
  As Sir Patrick put it: "Each government has shown that it 
understands and accepts the validity of the aspirations of each 
side in the divided community...each government has agreed that 
the future of Northern Ireland will be decided by the wishes of 
the people living in Northern Ireland. And that is terribly 
important." 
  The republican charge that Britain is an imperialist power 
was no longer sustainable. Northern Ireland is no Gaza Strip or 
Cyprus, where people are denied access to the ballot box. 
  Despite Mr Clinton's decision this week, Sir Patrick is 
convinced that agreement between London and Dublin on the 
province's future will lead to progressive international 
isolation of the IRA. 
  Meanwhile, the two governments would give impetus to efforts 
to reinstate devolved administration in Northern Ireland and to 
enhance co-operation between north and south. 
  Sir Patrick will table [present] within two weeks an outline 
plan for a new political settlement. The plan -- to be 
presented to the Ulster Unionist party, the mainly-Catholic 
Social Democratic and Labour party [SDLP] and the non-sectarian 
Alliance party -- will centre on a new devolved assembly in 
Ulster. 
  It will also include proposals for a number of cross-border 
executive boards with responsibility for such areas as tourism 
and the environment. Reverend Ian Paisley's hardline Democratic 
Unionist party [DUP] will be invited back to the table. 
  Together these proposals make up strands one and two of the 
so-called three-stranded search for a comprehensive political 
settlement. Strand three, as it is known, is concerned with 
updating the 1985 Anglo-Irish agreement between the two 
governments. 
  Sir Patrick cleared up once and for all the government's 
position on Mr Adams's repeated demands for clarification, 
negotiation (call it what you will), of the Downing Street text. 
He will not get it. 
  Mr Adams wanted a place at the table before the IRA had 
stopped its killing: "It is entirely clear what he wants is a 
renegotiation of the declaration.... And we are not going to do 
it." 
  There was "a place and time for negotiation about the future 
of Northern Ireland -- its status and everything else to do with 
it. That place and time is during the talks from which nobody is 
excluded except those who say: `We wish actually to fortify our 
arguments with bombs.'" 
  Mr Adams knows it and, in Sir Patrick's judgment, is playing 
for time. 
  Nor will a temporary truce do: The government will not 
negotiate with Adams or anyone else unless and until they have 
permanently ended violence or permanently ended the 
justification for violence. "I have made that clear time and 
time again. So have the Irish. There is no daylight between us 
on this." 
  The reasoning is obvious: "If you negotiate with people who 
want a united Ireland...in those circumstances (of continuing 
violence) it would undercut fatally other nationalist 
politicians who accept the disciplines of constitutional 
politics." For other nationalist politicians you can substitute 
Mr John Hume, the SDLP leader. 
  It is Mr Adams and his allies, not the British government, 
who have it within their power to bring peace. "The right 
analogy seems to me to be this. Sinn Fein have the key. The 
key is this: their ability to give up violence...if they put it 
in the lock now and turn it, consequences follow which have been 
spelt out." But either way the declaration will remain on the 
table: "The lock is not going to be changed." 
  Nor will the two governments allow Sinn Fein to paralyse the 
search for a political settlement: "The joint declaration is not 
a substitute for the (political) talks process. It complements 
it. But it is not a substitute for it." 
  So after months of tortuous negotiations, Sir Patrick will 
table what he calls a "framework of ideas" to secure agreement 
among the province's constitutional parties on strand one and 
strand two. 
  He is under no illusions that progress will be rapid: "It's 
a 
delicate, slow, pragmatic process." A previous attempt to secure 
agreement broke down in acrimony in 1992. For the time being at 
least the discussions will continue on a bilateral basis with 
each party. 
  The moderate Ulster Unionists led by Mr James Molyneaux want 
a devolved assembly but they are not interested in enhanced 
co-operation with Dublin. The DUP, which walked out of the 
talks to protest against the joint declaration, has yet to agree 
even to join discussions. 
  Mr Molyneaux must be kept on side. Mr John Major's 
government depends upon his support. So Sir Patrick is adamant 
that there can be nothing in strand two (structures for 
cross-border co-operation) which the unionists might condemn as 
representing joint authority between London and Dublin over 
affairs in the province. 
  But the constitutional nationalists represented by Mr Hume 
are only interested in devolution if it is slotted into the 
context of much closer co-operation between North and South. 
They must be given something if they are to sign up to an 
assembly. And so on -- the complexities and complications are 
endless. 
  It will take months if not years to get within striking 
distance of an agreement. The whole process could yet founder 
on the prejudices and suspicions which scar the politics of 
Northern Ireland. Holding the present alliance with Dublin will 
not be easy if the IRA continues its campaign. 
  But in Sir Patrick's view there is no other route. For all 
his success in New York, Mr Adams, identified as a dove in the 
IRA power struggle which has followed the Downing Street 
declaration, knows it. 

