Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by the All-Ukrainian Political Association </F>
"Ukrainian State Independence" (DSU): "The Political Philosophy 
of the DSU"] 
  [Text] The ideology of the DSU is not restricted to the 
interests of a social or party group, stratum, or class, but 
expresses the interests of the nation. The political ideology 
of the DSU is natiocratic [natsiokratychna]. The association 
strives to build a natiocratic state in which the UKRAINIAN 
NATION will be the source of power. 
  Nation is the main concept in the DSU's political 
philosophy. 
The rights and interests of the nation are the main criteria of 
our actions. The government is legitimate when it is guided by 
the interests of the Ukrainian nation. 
  The task of the state is to serve the nation and to be a 
powerful instrument in its political and spiritual 
self-assertion and in its historic activity. The power of the 
Ukrainian nation will also guarantee the rights of every member 
of this great entity. 
  When we say "nation" we mean an "ethnos," which controls 
itself and ethnic minorities. For us, the notions "nation" and 
"state" are inseparable. 
  The WILL, POWER, and GRANDEUR of the NATION is the triad of 
our political philosophy. The national will primarily expresses 
internal aspirations of the ethnos, which has acquired its 
statehood. The category "power of the nation" has both internal 
and external political dimensions. Control over itself is not 
the ultimate goal of a nation. A nation strives to expand its 
influence and its power imperatives beyond its own territory. A 
full-fledged national idea cannot remain confined to the 
boundaries of its own state and it expands beyond internal 
national problems. It is characterized by messianic 
aspirations. A nation strives to make its own values and its 
own understanding of the world a legacy of other nations in 
order to sow its seed on the soil of other states. 
  Every developed nation strives to create a civilization and 
include other nations into the sphere of its influence and into 
its sociocultural sphere. 
  A great nation is a nation that has achieved success in all 
spheres of self-expression, played all the roles meant for it by 
BIRTH [Rid], and is capable of teaching the world and 
influencing the course of history. Such a nation is ideal and 
such a nation is majestic [mayestatychna]! 
  We do not conceal our desire to witness Ukraine's world 
grandeur. Yes, we want Ukraine to become a political, economic, 
and cultural superpower. 
  Political power is created by military force. In order to 
become a weighty political factor in history and in order to 
renounce the pernicious principle of neutrality, Ukraine must 
become a military and powerful state. 
  A country that does not want to be pushed to the background 
and that strives to influence historical processes, must be a 
nuclear power. That is why, despite the unprecedented pressure 
exerted upon us by the United States and Russia, Ukraine must 
keep its nuclear weapons. 
  The 21st century will become an epoch of natiocratic 
revolutions. The Western civilization, which is based upon 
liberal democratic (but, in fact, transformed Judaic) values, 
has exhausted its creative potential. The Russian civilization 
is also moving toward a catastrophe. The natiocratic ideas of 
Mykola Mikhnovskyy, Dmytro Dontsov, Mykola Stsiborskyy, and 
Stepan Bandera are victoriously spreading. The sun of the 21st 
century that rises over Ukraine will herald the advent of a 
total natiocratic renaissance to the world. 

