Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By PRESS ASSOCIATION correspondent Chris Parkin, from New </F>
York] 
  [Text] Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams was today spreading 
a message of peace across the United States as he embarked on 
the second day of a visit to New York. 
  Mr Adams -- granted a visa by President Bill Clinton after a 
20-year ban on entering the U.S. because of alleged terrorism 
links -- re-stated his peace message in a breakfast-time 
coast-to-coast television interview. 
  "My aim is to see an end to violence," the leader of the 
IRA's political wing told the Good Morning America programme. 
  "But there are no simple solutions to the position in 
Northern Ireland. We are at a very critical phase at the moment. 
  "What we want to do is to remove the gun permanently from 
Irish politics, to develop a process in my country which allows 
the people of Ireland and Britain to live in harmony, which 
allows the Irish people -- all of us, unionist, nationalist, 
catholic, protestant, dissenters -- to shape out a future which 
reflects all of our own interests." 
  As Mr Adams was speaking terrorist activity continued in 
Northern Ireland. 
  The IRA mounted a mortar bomb attack on troops at a major 
checkpoint on the main Belfast-Dublin Road outside Newry, Co 
Down. 
  Earlier, in Portadown, County Armagh, a Royal Ulster 
Constabulary officer was slightly hurt when he walked into a 
loyalist bomb trap intended for a Catholic family. 
  Mr Adams, whose visit to New York to address a high-powered 
conference on Northern Ireland is being given blanket coverage 
by the U.S. media, insisted when asked his view of the Downing 
Street Peace Declaration signed by Prime Minister John Major and 
Irish premier Albert Reynolds: "I am committed to taking 
everything in a positive way." 
  There was, he said, "no evidence at all" of a split within 
the republican movement, the IRA or Sinn Fein, on a response to 
the peace statement from the two premiers. 
  "Republicans want peace and want to move forward," he said. 
"We are committed to struggling for as long as it takes, but 
this conflict in Ireland could be over, providing the British 
co-operated in a process to end it." 
  Mr Adams gave the TV interview from his room in the plush 
Waldorf-Astoria hotel in New York's Manhattan district. 
  The hotel will be the venue for today's Northern Ireland 
Conference, organised by the influential National Committee of 
American Foreign Policy. 
  Ulster unionist leaders have refused to take part in the 
debates because of the Sinn Fein presence, but Social Democratic 
and Labour Party leader John Hume and Dr John Alderdice of the 
Alliance Party will be there. 
  Mr Adams said the conference was "a unique opportunity to 
break the stalemate" and added: "I have commended President 
Clinton for giving me permission to come here." 
  When the interviewer asked Mr Adams whether he was or had 
been a "high-ranking IRA commander," the Sinn Fein chief 
replied: "That is not true at all. 
  "I am in a situation where in my own country I have been 
shot. I have been imprisoned without trial on a number of 
occasions. The only time I ever had a charge against me was for 
trying to escape from that imprisonment. 
  "I was charged with IRA membership and the Lord Chief 
Justice 
threw it out of court." 
  Adams, who failed in eight previous applications for visas 
to 
enter the U.S., dominated the front page of New York's tabloid 
DAILY NEWS newspaper. 
  THE NEW YORK TIMES also put the Adams visit on the front 
page, and called the Sinn Fein man "an articulate IRA advocate." 

