CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Toshiaki Yamamoto, planning officer, National </F>
Land Agency: "Revive Japanese Economy Through Creativity; The 
Key Is Improved Productivity"] 
  [Text] When Japan's productivity per unit-time is 
compared with Europe and the United States, it ranks the lowest. 
There is no future for Japan's economy without overcoming its 
low productivity. How can the productivity be raised? This 
writer proposes not the TQC [total quality control] which led 
Japan's postwar economy to success, but TPC [total productivity, 
creativity encouragement], which is a newly coined term that 
appeals for the formation of a high system of creativity. 
<H5>  Low Labor Productivity </H5>
  Japan's economy today may be said to be in considerably 
serious circumstances compared with other postwar periods. It is 
caused by high costs of manufacturing and low productivities of 
the service industries. Without surmounting them, there can be 
no medium or long-term breakthrough for Japan's economy. The 
only solution is to raise the per-hour productivity per worker. 
  In Japan's case, growth rate of its workers and average 
annual total work hours by the workers are gradually declining. 
In order to increase the gross domestic product [GDP], it is 
necessary to raise the productivity beyond offsetting the 
decline. 
  When the unit-time productivity per worker is compared with 
major nations of Europe and the United States (OECD purchasing 
power, parity-base), the trend is gradually upward, it still 
remains in the lowest position. Conversely, the annual total 
work hours are the longest among the major nations. Moreover, 
the commuting time is also the longest. 
  The Japan's livelihood-related asset-and-service price level 
is said to be high internationally and that is partly because of 
its high land prices. However, the fundamental factor is its low 
productivity. It is also because of the low rate of 
capitalization for informationalization of the POS [point of 
sale] system and the EOS [supplementary ordering system]. In 
addition, although the productivity of manufacturing industries 
is considerably higher than tertiary industries, it is low 
compared to major Western nations except for a portion of the 
production workplaces. The reasons are: long work hours, 
substantively low wages followed by high service costs for 
distribution, and excessive indirect personnel. 
  In any case, with the bubble era as a watershed, Japan's 
manufacturing industries once viewed as the world's top find 
themselves in dire circumstances because of high costs stemming 
from surplus plant-and-equipment and personnel, a sharp drop in 
demand, and the impact of a high yen, in addition to 
dissemination in the West of production methods once considerd 
as Japan's forte. 
  The point of economic structural reform is how to minimize 
the gap between the purchasing power parity (currently about $1 
= 190 yen) and the foreign exchange rate. For example, assuming 
that the purchasing power parity is $1 = 150 yen, Japan's 
productivity will rise by slightly under 30 percent to reach 
above 90 percent of the U.S. productivity. Methods to reduce 
the gap are as follows: 1) Promote import of livelihood assets, 
materials, and parts by utilizing the high yen, 2) reverse 
import of finished products and parts by shifting production 
overseas, 3) avoid high-yen pressures by reducing the current 
account surplus, and 4) improve productivity in the service 
industries and the manufacturing industries. Both 1 and 2 have 
been implemented in the past and will probably accelerate in the 
future. As a result, they will be tied to 3. The formidable 
task is how to improve productivity in 4. 
<H5>  Reexamination of Labor Practices </H5>
  Consequently, the way of living, labor practices, commercial 
practices, and corporate practices of the Japanese people must 
change. These tasks have become possible under the changes in 
current circumstances that include a torrid international 
economic environment, a rebellion by consumers, and the changes 
in value concepts of the Japanese people. 
  The changes in value concepts of the Japanese are rooted in 
a 
desire for freedom (liberation from shackles), a desire for 
friendship and association, and a rise in "self first." They 
appear from the standpoint of youths, for example, as a 
decreasing desire to belong to an organization (a rise of those 
desiring change in employment and those changing employment), 
changes in life outlook (manifesting one's own abilities as a 
part of life as contrasted to working as a company person, 
emphasis on a lifestyle to suit one's tastes), an increase among 
males with emphasis on the home, leisure time as a priority in 
one's livelihood, greater weight on leisure and sports, and 
enhanced concern about health and environment. 
  Modernization of awareness and value concepts among the 
Japanese is thus moving forward. However, individual needs that 
emanate from such value concepts are still not satisfied. 
According to a public opinion poll, reasons for dissatisfaction 
regarding leisure activities include a lack of everyday free 
time or a lack of extended vacations and holidays. The energy 
spent toward fulfilling those needs could provide momentum for 
improvement of unit-time productivity and a major change in the 
domestic-type industrial structure. 
  How do we organically combine "self-realization," "authority 
and responsibility," "tension and release," "power of 
concentration," "creativity," and "approach to the consumer" to 
organize a highly creative system? Among the component elements 
of productivity, how do we compress the ratio of personnel 
costs, and how do we enhance values (profits) based on 
creativity? What must we do concretely to improve corporate 
creativity? The principal directions are as follows: 
  1) Streamline the upper echelons of the management sector 
through staff minimization and thus form a strong leadership 
abounding in creativity. Management must detect the deep and 
true currents and focus on the people, return to the point of 
origin of the organization, indicate directions and visions, and 
resolutely implement bold operational reforms from within in 
order to boost creativity. 
  2) Strengthen planning and R&amp;D capabilities. For this 
purpose, a climate of utilizing and nurturing workers of 
superior talent and innovation is demanded. 
  3) Simplify and shorten decisionmaking processes within the 
organization. Respond swiftly by reducing unnecessary checks and 
controls and by clarifying responsible persons without having 
them lean on each other. 
  4) Transfer authority to subordinates and persons in charge, 
or to subsidiaries, plants, and responsible sectors. Although 
this will incur greater responsibility, it will also invoke 
greater initiative and volition. 
  5) Emphasize results through work evaluation. For the 
intellectual workers, "creativity" through "concentration" is 
the decisive factor between success and failure regardless of 
the time factor. A fair evaluation of the results inspires 
morale and creates a favorable cycle in producing further 
favorable results. 
  6) Shorten the sales channels, and unify manufacture and 
sales. Swift response will be possible through reduction of 
distribution costs and understanding of needs of the consumers 
and clients. 
  7) Promote reduction of work hours. Recreation is 
indispensable for creativity, and it is important to provide an 
environment and work arrangement by utilizing paid vacations 
which tend to be underused. 
  8) Use information machines and instruments effectively and 
develop software. Not only can it provide efficient and improved 
standard business affairs through concentrated management, but 
it will also facilitate intellectual support for non-standard 
business affairs and a systematic networking of individual 
knowledge. 
<H5>  Enhancement of Morale </H5>
  These measures help to encourage individuals to respond to 
the trends of the times such as decentralization of authority, 
individualization, and independence. It is also important to 
conduct a general check of the production process which is the 
source of a strong manufacturing industry whether any problems 
exist including the morale of workers. Also, while reengineering 
has recently been in the limelight, its popularity is conversely 
accompanied by a sense of anxiety. It is necessary to pay full 
attnetion to the following points. First, the terminology is not 
appropriate, and it carries a strong inorganic sense of emphasis 
on information machines and equipment and less emphasis on 
humans. Second, because of the emphasis on improving medium and 
long-term efficiency, the medium- and long-term research themes 
tend to be overlooked. Third, the United States has inherently 
been strong in creativity and stresses elimination of waste. 
  Today half a century after the World War II, the Japanese 
are 
enjoying material affluence and are finally beginning to move 
toward mental freedom. The companies and organizations comprised 
of such Japanese find it necessary to devise various 
organizational schemes to bring out maximum use of potential 
talent while considering the independence, sense of 
self-sufficiency, and fulfillment of the workers. This is not an 
idealistic theory. In fact, the companies that are prospering 
despite the major recession have and are implementing a new 
sense of management concept. A representative example is as 
follows. 
  Company A (a chemical company with partial listing, less 
than 
1,000 employees) is improving its productivity while increasing 
its profits and continues to boost its earnings/profits. 
Compared to the overall manufacturing industry, its 
capitalization and profit rate are also high. In addition, it is 
coping aggressively with reduction of work hours. In order to 
encourage planned cutbacks in overtime and use of vacations, 
with the promotion of thorough analysis of each worker's duties 
and office automation, the annual total work hours last year was 
slightly above l,830 hours or about 130 hours less than the 
manufacturing industry as a whole. Incidentally, the per 
unit-time productivity in FY92 was about 50 percent above the 
overall manufacturing industry. 
  The secret of its progress is a powerful leadership with 
high 
creativity, a client-oriented management posture, high worker 
morale based on transfer of authority to those in charge, 
thorough pragmatism and efforts to reduce costs (the sales 
plateau price-ratio dropped about five points in the past five 
years and fell below the 50-percent level), capability to 
develop new products through emphasis on R&amp;D, and unity of 
manufacturing and sales. In addition, it should be specially 
pointed out that about a quarter of all its employees were 
deployed with priority in the R&amp;D and new project sectors 
following an overall reexamination of business affairs and 
expansion of information systems. These aspects are generally 
held in common in other smoothly operating companies. 
  Japan's economy as a whole lags far behind Europe and the 
United States. We should work to create new industries with high 
productivity, centering on the so-called service industries in 
the developing stage. It is important to thus elevate overall 
productivity. Furthering the services and software aspects of 
the economy will be inevitable in the future. Development in 
advanced tertiary industries which provide high-level services 
at relatively low prices must be promoted in a diversified range 
of personal needs including health, medical care, leisure time 
and activities, sports, shopping, academic studies, and safety. 
  These areas have recently expanded their market scale. For 
example, sales in areas close at home such as home-nursing care, 
bathing services, baby-sitting, "karaoke" boxes, TV games 
(particularly software), general sports facilities, cultural 
classrooms, and security services have grown markedly. Also 
drastic modal changes are taking place in retail industries. 
With new types of convenience stores and discount stores as 
their engines, overall productivity is rising and employment is 
expanding. A proper environment to promote such trends is 
necessary. In other words, in addition to reexamination of the 
regulations, it is urgent that we strengthen and expand such 
infrastructures as advanced information and communications, 
livelihood, transportation, and research, and support pioneers. 
It is also important to utilize the foreign capital and the 
wisdom of foreigners who have advanced into these areas. The 
National Land Agency is currently following up the 4th national 
general development plan and the capital region basic plan 
drafted in the late 1980's and is reviewing them with care. 
<H5>  Recommendation of TPC </H5>
  The development of advanced tertiary industries is also 
linked to the revival of manufacturing industries. This is 
because reduction of service costs that depend on the outside, 
the supply of high-value capital assets and systems, and 
participation in new businesses based on the use of superior 
human resources become feasible. 
  Japan as a whole forms a well-balanced chain from 
"productivity improvement per unit-time" and "promotion of 
reduced work hours (raise of hourly pay)" to "increase of free 
time" to "fulfilment of personal needs." In other words, if 
reform on the supplier side progresses, the conditions to 
satisfy personal needs on the consumer side are in order. That 
is, the aim is to "work (study) well, and play well." 
  It means that "productivity improvement per unit-time" 
contributes not only to competitiveness and growth of Japan's 
economy but also to expansion of domestic demand by satisfying 
personal needs and to change in the domestic demand-type of 
industrial structure. We would like to call the series of 
measures for productivity improvement per unit-time toward these 
targets TPC [total productivity, creativity encouragement] after 
Japan's once-successful TQC [total quality control]. Perhaps now 
is the time to boost a TPC movement among the people nationwide, 
focusing on the organizational managment aspects of individual 
awareness, behavior, and enterprise. 

