Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By JORDAN TIMES staff reporter P.V. Vivekanand] </F>
  [Text] Amman--Twenty-three people charged with plotting and 
carrying out attacks aimed at destabilising internal security 
will be put on trial in mid-April, official sources said Sunday 
[27 March]. 
  The sources said the case, which was supposed to have gone 
on 
trial before the military tribunal shortly after the 'Id al-Fitr 
holiday this month, was delayed because the questioning of some 
of the suspects was not completed. 
  "The interrogations are continuing, and the charge sheet is 
being drawn up," said one source. 
  According to the source, the 23 suspects, all of whom are in 
detention, would be tried as one group charged with "plotting 
and carrying out terrorist activities and illegal possession of 
explosives." 
  The suspects were filtered from more than 40 people 
questioned after the Jan. 26 and Feb. 1 explosions at Amman's 
Rivoli and al-Zarqa's Salwa movie theatres. Both theatres were 
showing pornographic movies and the blasts gave rise to 
suspicions that religious zealots were behind them. 
  The sources said some of the suspects belonged to the 
so-called Arab Afghan group--volunteers from Arab countries who 
fought alongside Afghans in the 1980-90 battle against the 
Soviet occupation of Afghanistan--while others were locally 
recruited by them. 
  Asked whether it was established who financed the sabotage 
in 
Jordan, the source declined direct comment, but said that "all 
the suspects were guided by a single group...which sought to 
create chaos and undermine the internal security of the country." 
  Interior Minister Salamah Hammad told Parliament in February 
that authorities had uncovered a plot to destabilise Jordan 
through a series of attacks on theatres, videocassette and 
liquor shops, nightclubs and security forces. 
  Yemeni government officials, who faced a spate of similar 
explosions in their country several months ago, have been quoted 
as saying that Usamah Bin-Ladin, a Saudi millionaire of Yemeni 
origin who supported the "Arab Afghans", was suspected to have 
financed those who carried out the attacks in Yemen. 
  Mr. Bin-Ladin, who has been disowned by his Saudi-based 
tribe 
and family, is believed to be living in Khartoum, Sudan. 
Reports in the Egyptian press have indicated him as a main 
supporter of extremist military groups waging a violent campaign 
to topple the government of President Husni Mubarak. 
  There was no immediate confirmation or denial of whether the 
Jordanian investigators suspected Mr. Bin-Ladin or any of his 
associates of involvement in the bombings in the Kingdom. 
  At least six of the suspects have confessed to have planted 
the explosive devices that went off at the Rivoli and Salwa 
theatres as well as others which were discovered at a 
supermarket outside Amman and the Zahran cinema, local reports 
said. 
  Arabic-language papers carried photographs of the suspects, 
all of whom appeared to be in their early 20s, accompanied by 
prosecutors and police officers, reenacting the planting of the 
bombs at these places after confessing during interrogations. 
  No background details were available on any of the suspects. 
  The sources said most of them are from lower middle class 
families and some of them would be charged as accessories before 
and after the crime. 
  It was not clear from the reports how many of the suspects 
knew each other. They were all said to have worked separately, 
as small groups, unaware of each other, under the guidance of 
one or more people. 
  According to the reports, one of the suspects, Muhammad 
'Adaribah, told interrogators that he tried and failed to plant 
a bomb at the Rivoli, in downtown Amman, one week before the 
Jan. 26 blast. 
  The device, described as a time-bomb that actually went off 
inside the theatre at midnoon, was planted by another suspect, 
Yasin Zahrah, the reports said. Seven people were injured in 
the blast. 
  The youth who planted the bomb which was discovered and 
defused at Amman's Zahran cinema was identified as Samir Ahmad, 
who told police that he was asked to plant the bomb by Muhammad 
Shihadah, a construction material salesman from the al-Baq'ah 
refugee camp. 
  Mr. Ahmad was reported to have met Mr. Shihadah, described 
as 
an Arab Afghan, in front of the al-Husayni Mosque in downtown 
Amman to inform him that he had planted the bomb inside the 
theatre. 
  Mr. Shihadah, who is also under detention, was also 
implicated in the al-Zarqa' bombing by the man who confessed to 
have planted the device, 'Id Jahalin, a 30-year-old plumber from 
al-Baq'ah. 
  Mr. Jahalin lost his limbs in the explosion when the bomb 
exploded prematurely. His confession from his hospital bed is 
believed to have been the most significant breakthrough in the 
case. 
  The suspects also took interrogators to 'Akrush Supermarket 
in Safut, which straddles the main road between Amman and 
al-Baq'ah camp, and reenacted the planting of the device which 
was discovered and defused there a few days before the Rivoli 
blast. 
  Mr. Zahrah, the man who reportedly confessed to the Rivoli 
explosion, was also identified as the one who planted the bomb 
at the supermarket. 
  Another target of the suspects was the sprawling Housing 
Bank 
complex in the heart of Amman, according to the reports. 
  Some of the suspects showed interrogators how "they cased 
the 
joint to determine where to plant the bombs" but no explosives 
were actually placed in the complex. 
  Apart from Mr. 'Adaribah, Mr. Zahrah, Mr. Ahmad, Mr. 
Shihadah 
and Mr. Jahalin, other suspects identified by name included 
Hasan Hamdan and Sulayman Biyah. 
  All the bombs were said to have used crude technology widely 
employed by the Afghan rebels in their battle against the Red 
Army and Soviet-supported government soldiers in Afghanistan. 
  The bombing case is the second known organised sabotage 
attributed to "Arab Afghans" in Jordan. 
  In 1991, members of a group called "Jaysh Muhammad 
(Muhammad's Army)" made up mostly of Afghan returnees were 
arrested following a series of attacks and foiled attempts 
against night-clubs, cinemas, liquor shops and security officers 
as well as government buildings and diplomatic missions. 
  Eighteen of them were tried and convicted; eight of them, 
two 
in absentia, were given the death sentence, and others were 
jailed for terms ranging from two years to 15 years. 
  His Majesty King Husayn later commuted the death sentences 
to 
life imprisonment for the six who appeared in court. 
  In a Feb. 15 meeting with the members of the Foreign 
Relations Committee of the Upper House of Parliament, the King 
referred to the late spate of sabotage actions and said a "small 
group" with foreign links was responsible for them. 
  "There are certain parties and circles trying to reach and 
influence our youth who are in vulnerable positions," the King 
said. 
  The influenced youth, he said, "are goaded into committing 
crimes," and "the parties and circles seek to reach the weak and 
strong points of our people--our religion and faith." 
  "We have warned against such attempts to distort our faith 
and our Islam, and we have often called for action to prevent 
matters from getting out of hand or beyond reason," the King 
said. 

