BFN 

  [Text] The four magistrates who dissented with the ruling 
that decriminalizes consumption of personal doses of drugs in 
Colombia characterize it as "fatal," "anachronistic," and 
"unconstitutional." 
  The magistrates seriously question the premise that taking 
drugs is part of the right to free development of personality. 
  The four Constitutional Court magistrates who dissented with 
the ruling which decriminalizes the possession and consumption 
of personal doses of drugs characterize as "fatal" the majority 
decision by the court and warn that this is an attack on the 
thousands of victims of Colombia's struggle against drugs. 
  Under the premise that the right to freely develop one's 
personality is all-encompassing, the magistrates warn that it 
could follow that other conduct apparently related to the 
individual person could be construed as legal, for example in 
the case of abortions. 
  "Those of us in dissent emphatically reject this notion. As 
with other opinions, we express our confusion in light of the 
enormous contradiction that has been established by this 
decision," they note. 
  The dissenting magistrates make it clear that the decision 
by 
the five magistrates who support decriminalizing the use of 
drugs was adopted in the total exercise of clearly established 
constitutional powers. 
  The magistrates note, furthermore, that decriminalizing the 
use of drugs in the name of the right to free development of 
personality violates rights to health, coexistence of citizens, 
and family integrity; the principle of solidarity; the 
prevailing general interest; and the obligation to respect the 
rights of others and not abuse one's own. 
  In the magistrates' opinion, abandoning the drug addict "to 
the apparent exercise of his free will does nothing but 
subjugate him to the will of those who manipulate and control 
the infamous drug market. They will be pleased to see how their 
victims are authorized to continue depending on their lethal 
market. [no closing quotation mark as published] 
  It was on these terms that Magistrates Hernando Herrera, 
Vladimiro Naranjo, Jose Hernandez, and Fabio Moron formally 
distanced themselves yesterday from the Constitutional Court's 
decision permitting the decriminalization of the use of personal 
doses of drugs. 
  In their dissenting opinion, the four jurists claim that the 
court's decision reflects a paradox and an ambiguity which are 
very difficult to understand. 
  On the one hand, they say, it authorizes personal doses, but 
on the other it continues the penalization of narcotics. That 
is, it allows individuals to take drugs but prohibits the 
production, distribution, and sale of these same drugs. 
  In their opinion, it is totally illogical that the law 
protects the consumer from a product while punishing he who 
supplies that product. "How can this dilemma be resolved?" the 
magistrates ask. 
  "Perhaps by decriminalizing the production, distribution, 
and 
sale of drugs? That is, by legalizing all narcotrafficking 
activities and thus overnight turning the sinister mafia into 
`honorable merchants and exporters'?" 
  National and international opinion would unanimously 
repudiate--and rightfully so--such a preposterous solution that 
would imply, no more and no less, that with the stroke of a pen 
the worst criminals our history has ever known--those 
responsible for the deaths and kidnappings of thousands and 
thousands of people, assassinations of important people, and the 
systematic collective poisoning of youths--would become innocent 
victims of the weight of the law. 
  According to Herrera, Naranjo, Moron, and Hernandez, the 
motive behind the court's decision must be described as 
"ingenuous" and "anachronistic," because it only reflects the 
19th Century concept of individual liberalism, totally 
disregarding the ideological, political, and economic evolution 
experienced by contemporary liberalism. 
  As for the free development of personality, the four jurists 
firmly declare that this right has been interpreted incorrectly 
in this ruling that has decriminalized drug use. 
  "To interpret, as the majority has done, that this right 
implies the unlimited power of each person to do whatever he 
chooses with his life, even to irrational extremes--such as 
threatening his own physical or mental well-being--is a fatal 
mistake," they state. 
  Further, the jurists who rejected the ruling warn that 
liberty cannot be contrary to humankind, because the human being 
is an end in himself, "therefore, it is incorrect to affirm that 
on behalf of his liberty man should be degenerated, which would 
be equivalent to depersonalizing himself." 
  Herrera, Naranjo, Moron, and Hernandez warn at the same time 
that the decision which decriminalized personal drug doses has 
skimpy legal arguments and added that drug addiction is 
undoubtedly a blatant attack on mankind's dignity. 
  In their opinion, straying from the principle of human 
dignity undoubtedly leads to man's degradation. 
  According to the four magistrates, drug production is by 
every definition an existing crime--not a potential 
crime--against humankind. Tolerating consumption of the cause of 
an evil would mean legitimizing its noxious effects. 
  "In other words, it means legalizing that which is illegal," 
they emphasize. 
  In their opinion, liberty promoted through depraved means is 
conducive to libertinage and does not make man more noble, but 
rather deprives him of his dignity. 
  "Human dignity, therefore, requires that man act according 
to 
his conscience and freedom of choice, that is, led by his own 
convictions and not under pressure from a passion or inordinate 
desire, which deep down is actually coercion," they stated. 
  In explaining their vote, they note therefore that leaving a 
drug addict to his fate is equivalent to leaving him subject to 
the enslavement created by his dependence on drugs. The 
magistrates make it clear that taking drugs cannot be considered 
an indifferent act and warned that the rules that were declared 
unconstitutional--Articles 51 and 87 of Law 30 of 1986--have a 
sound basis in law and in the Constitution. 
  In the final part of their opinion, the four jurists say 
that 
permissiveness in the matter of personal drug doses has had 
harmful effects in Spain and in Great Britain--where the measure 
has been reconsidered--and in the Netherlands. 
  In Great Britain--they note--authorities adopted measures in 
the 1960's and 1970's so that addicts could receive heroin 
legally in drugstores; the result was a 100 percent increase in 
the number of addicts and a 300 percent increase in illegal drug 
trafficking. 
  Alaska enacted--they explain--a law which increased the 
personal doses of marijuana to four ounces (some 140 grams.) 
That resulted in marijuana use among children between 11 and 14 
growing to three times the U.S. national average. This law was 
revoked recently. 
  "It should be noted, also, that these cases were in 
countries 
that are not drug producers or exporters; this is not the case 
in Colombia, where high rates of consumption are added to the 
unfortunate fact that this country is one of the principal 
producers and exporters on a global scale, with all the ensuing 
implications," they state. 

