Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Ibrahim Humaydi report: "'Abd-al-Majid Tells AL-HAYAH: </F>
1994 Year of Peace in Region; Israel Will Withdraw Completely 
From Golan, Southern Lebanon"] 
  [Excerpts] Damascus -- Arab League Secretary General Dr. 
'Ismat 'Abd-al-Majid has stressed that 1994 will be the year of 
peace in the region, "even though I do not know the mechanism of 
the negotiation" between the Arab and Israeli delegations. And 
that Israel will withdraw from the occupied Arab territories." 
He pointed out that the Arab states are agreed on the principle 
of reconciliation among themselves and that the issue of lifting 
the Arab boycott of Israel will be referred to the Arab League 
Council in March at a request from U.S. Commerce Secretary 
Ronald Brown because of the U.S. companies' support for the 
Gaza-Jericho agreement, which 'Abd-al-Majid believes a 
"preliminary" step toward peace. 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Majid said in a statement to AL-HAYAH that the 
Arab boycott still stands with regard to Israel, "because its 
causes still exist, namely its occupation of Arab territories." 
  He pointed out that U.S. Secretary Brown asked the Arab 
League to lift the third-degree boycott by U.S. companies that 
played a role in bolstering the Gaza-Jericho agreement in the 
context of the U.S. aid for the agreement. The "issue will be 
referred to the Arab League Council, because it was the council 
which issued the boycott decision, hence only it can revoke it." 
However, he stressed that the U.S. secretary did not broach the 
Arab boycott of Israel, which is classified as first degree, 
"and the Arab League Council is free to take the right decision, 
and we understand the U.S. request." [passage omitted] 
  'Abd-al-Majid said that peace "will be established this 
year, 
but I do not know the negotiation mechanism for me to say 
exactly when." He stressed that he has "no doubt at all that 
Israel will withdraw completely from the Golan, and from 
southern Lebanon as well." [passage omitted] 
  On Arab reconciliation the Arab League secretary general 
said 
that all Arab states are agreed on the reconciliation 
principles. "But some of them say it is not the right time and 
we need some measures." He said that the "the countdown for the 
dispute has begun, and reconciliation is a sensitive issue in 
every Arab country. However, there has to be openness for the 
sake of reconciliation, which is not impossible." [passage 
omitted] 

