BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 20 (XINHUA) -- A high-ranking Chinese 
trademark official stated here today that the country has been 
taking a clear, firm stance in protecting the exclusive rights 
to registered trademarks. 
  "Violators of trademark laws face harsh penalties -- up to 
life imprisonment and death sentence," said Li Bida, deputy 
director of the Trademark Office of the State Administration for 
Industry and Commerce. 
  He was speaking at an international symposium on 
intellectual 
property protection which opened today. 
  The deputy director disclosed that in 12 months from July 
1992, over 3,000 people were handed to the judicial system, 
accused of counterfeiting registered trademarks. 
  Five were sentenced to life imprisonment and four were given 
a death sentence and executed immediately, according to law. 
They were mainly engaged in manufacturing and selling fake and 
shoddy cigarettes, wines, medicines and chemical fertilizers and 
brought great losses to consumers. 
  Other violators were fined heavily. 
  Li Bida said China takes "active measures" to protect the 
registered trademarks of overseas investors. 
  From the time the country joined the World Intellectual 
Property Organization in 1980 until the end of last year, China 
processed 11,144 international applications for territorial 
extension of trademarks. 
  The government not only promptly handles infringement cases 
reported by overseas investors, but also assists them to improve 
their self-protection, Li said. 
  Many world famous companies, such as Mars, Coca Cola and 
Kodak from the U.S.A., have sent letters or silk banners to 
China's local bureau of industry and commerce to express their 
thanks, according to Li. 
  China acceded to the Paris Union for the Protection of 
Industrial Property in 1985, and to the Madrid Union in 1989. 
Its fulfillment of the obligations of a member state has won 
"broad praise" from other countries, he said. 
  It is "by no means an exaggeration," Li told the symposium, 
that China has complied with international practices in respect 
of trademarks classification, general principles and procedures 
in processing trademark applications and registrations, as well 
as in respect of the punishment imposed on trademark rights 
infringers. 
  China has built a legal framework to monitor the protection 
of trademark rights. 
  Li said his office has felt the urge to promote enterprises 
to learn the importance to establish well-known trademarks, 
while stepping up efforts in trademark registration and 
management. 
  China needs to foster more specialists on trademark 
management, he said, adding that China also plans to automate 
trademark registration in the near future. Automatic searching 
is expected to be realized by the third quarter this year, he 
said. 

