Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tehran, Jan. 13, IRNA -- Governor of the Central 
Bank of Iran Mohammad Hoseyn 'Adeli said that the impending G-7 
meeting in Paris is directed against Iran. 'Adeli, quoted by 
the Thursday issue of the English daily `TEHRAN TIMES', said 
reports indicated that Washington was exerting pressures on the 
G-7 to keep Tehran in isolation. 
  The Group of Seven including the United States, Britain, 
Germany, Italy, France, and Japan is to meet in Paris on January 
16. He further elaborated that the Western media launched on a 
U.S.-orchestrated propagnda on Iran's debts to create an 
anti-Iran international public opinion. Then Washington decided 
to air this baseless issue in the G-7 meeting, he said. 
  Admitting that Iran has some financial problems due to the 
prevailing economic situation in the world, he told the daily 
that while the most industrialized countries have faced economic 
recession, others also felt its impact directly or indirectly. 
  He was quoted as saying that the drop in oil prices at the 
international market adversely affected Iranian foreign currency 
revenues, "as a result, during the years of 1991, 1992 and 1993, 
we received dlrs. [dollars] 9,500 million less than we had 
anticipated." 
  Turning to the Iranian debts, 'Adeli brushed aside western 
propaganda in this regard and said Iran has dlrs. 8,000 million 
to be paid. The payment of the amount has been delayed, said 
the CBI governor, due to the non-cooperative attitude of 
insurance agencies to cover medium and long-term credits. 
  "We were obliged to make most of our trade on cash or 
short-term credit basis making ourselves vulnerable to the oil 
price fluctuations," he told TEHRAN TIMES. 
  'Adeli said that Iran has to pay to foreign private 
companies 
and private sectors and not governments and that there were no 
problems with them regarding the repayment process. 
  "But it is the governments that are exerting pressure on 
their private sectors to force the early payments and in this 
way those governments want to take an unfair advantage under the 
present situation." 
  He stressed that most of European governments want to solve 
the debt problems but the U.S. is creating unnecessary hurdles 
on their way. 
  "The U.S. is going to put further pressure on European 
countries, as well as on Japan, in the Paris meeting on the 
so-called debts of Iran. In fact the U.S. wanted to see what 
concessions it could get from the Islamic Republic." 
  'Adeli said to TEHRAN TIMES, "we do not owe the U.S. 
anything, but that country along with Britain will continue to 
initiate a negative stance against Iran." 
  Talks are under way with Japan and Italy to solve the 
current 
problems. 
  Turning to the stand of France and Germany, he said their 
recent moves were far from Iran's expectations particularly 
regarding Bonn that had promised to solve the financial issues 
without making much noise. 
  He said that Iran imports German goods worth 8,000 million 
marks annually while 1,500 million marks worth of Iranian 
products are exported to that country each year. 
  'Adeli said dlrs. 92,000 million was planned to be spent 
during the first 5-year plan but because of the drop in oil 
prices the figure was reduced to dlrs. 80,000 million, 30 
percent of which was invested in basic projects. 
  On the achievements of the plan, he told the paper that up 
to 
1990 Iran imported two million tons of steel annually but now 
exports 700,000 tons each year. 
  He added that over the same period the country imported two 
million tons of cement annually but now has reached 
self-sufficiency and in some cases even exports cement. 
  The country's annual import of 4.5 million tons of wheat has 
dropped to 1.5 to 1.2 million tons and import of petrochemical 
products lowered from dlrs. 800 million to 600 million in 1993, 
the paper quoted him as saying. 
  Iran exports goods worth dlrs. 1,200 million annually 
including carpets, pistachios and saffron. Besides it also 
exports dlrs. 2,300 million worth of non-oil industrial goods 
each year compared to dlrs. 700 million a few years ago. 

