Europe     Economic Review:  WESTERN EUROPE Vol. III, No. 2, 13 
January 1994 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a series published by 
FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group featuring brief summaries of 
foreign media reports on topical issues, compiled from the most 
recent sources available to FBIS. 

   Europe Economic Review (EER) is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA 
SURVEY published by the West and East European Divisions of 
Europe/Latin America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas 
bureaus.  The EER is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Report for West and East Europe, 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear in other FBIS publications. The EER is published in two 
editions, one for Western Europe (also including media coverage of 
Canada and Turkey), and the other for Eastern Europe.  Drawing 
primarily from domestic media sources of these countries but also 
using other foreign media where appropriate, the EER focuses on 
national and regional economic issues, such as economic 
competitiveness, regional economic integration, economic reforms and 
other changes in economic policies, and foreign trade and 
investment. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government.  All comment or analysis contained herein is 
attributable to the cited media source, unless otherwise indicated. 

   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

   FEATURE 

   France:  Bank of France Forms Monetary Policy Council 

   FRANCE 

   6-Year Arms Sales to Saudis Reach Fr30 Billion; Mandil Sees 
Foreign Alliances for GDF, EDF; 52 Percent of Businessmen Satisfied 
With Balladur 

   GERMANY 

   New Ekostahl Takeover proposal; Commerzbank Opens First Western 
Bank Office in Belarus; Construction Outlays Fuel Boom in East 

   ITALY 

   Ciampi's Economic Policy Criticized; Artisans Criticize New 
Finance Law 

   PORTUGAL 

   GATT Advantages Disadvantages Assessed 

   SPAIN 

   Deputy Prime Minister Serra on GATT Accord; Government 
'Vagueness' on GATT Agreement Criticized; PP Proposes Stimulative 
Economic Measures; PP Proposals Criticized; Textile Industry Seeks 
Opening of Asian Markets; PSV Scandal Seen Damaging UGT; Attitudes 
Toward General Strike Polled 

   ECONOMIC BRIEFS 

   EC, France 

   FEATURE 

   Bank of France Monetary Policy Council Formed 

   In early January President Francois Mitterrand approved Bank of 
France (BOF) reform legislation which established the BOF as an 
independent central bank, complying with Maastricht Treaty 
requirements that all EU member states do so in anticipation of 
eventual European Monetary Union.  This legislation established the 
Monetary Policy Council (CPM) which will independently formulate 
French monetary policy.  Media reporting on the appointment of the 
CPM's founding members characterized them, with few exceptions, as 
supporters of European union and as such, commentary noted that they 
"are unlikely to question the main principals of monetary policy" 
the government is currently following.  However, commentary also 
concluded that the CPM's major challenge would be "to prove itself 
capable of stimulating economic growth." 

   Economy Minister Edmond Alphandery has announced the appointment 
of the BOF's new monetary policy group, the CPM.  According to an 
article in LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES, it will end the tradition of 
concentrating all the bank's power in the hands of its governor. 
The appointees are "strong personalities" who are "able to make 
their views known" and most are characterized as pro-European. 
Alphandery confirmed the reappointments of the BOF's first and 
second deputy governors, Denis Ferman and Herve Hannoun 
respectively, who will also sit on the CPM, as will BOF Governor 
Jean-Claude Trichet.  The article characterizes six of the members, 
as well as Trichet, as long-time supporters of a united Europe who 
will continue to pursue European Monetary Union (EMU) with the same 
strong franc monetary policy and close French-German monetary 
alignment which has guided France since former Prime Minister Pierre 
Beregovoy became finance minister in 1988.  The six appointees 
characterized as pro-European are Denis Ferman, Herve Hannoun, 
Michel Albert, Jean Boissonat, Michel Sapin, and Bruno de Maulde. 

   However, some in this group may advocate changing the BOF's 
"extremely cautious" positions and may campaign to lower interest 
rates, breaking the pattern of following Germany's high interest 
rate policy.  Among these advocates may be Denise Flouzat, who was 
an adviser to the anti-Maastricht Gaullist deputy Philippe Seguin 
and who, as a university professor, sided against ratifying the 
Maastricht Treaty.  While some believe she will be inclined to 
defend a stimulative, and thereby isolationist, monetary policy to 
bring France out of its recession, Flouzat has so far refrained from 
commenting on the subject.  Jean-Pierre Gerard, another appointee to 
the CPM, may join Flouzat in opposition to current government 
monetary policy.  Also a close associate of Philippe Seguin, his 
experience in industry makes him respected by the business 
community, which has voiced criticism of the high level of French 
interest rates. 

   Below are profiles of the new appointees: 

   CPM Members 

   MICHEL ALBERT--An article in LE FIGARO calls Albert, president of 
the large AGF insurance company since 1982, more an "agitator of 
ideas" than a financier, whose successful television broadcast "Long 
Live the Crisis" and various writings have eclipsed his insurance 
profession.  The article describes Albert, 63, as having a Christian 
democratic political philosophy.  He served under former centrist 
Finance Minister Raymond Barre as France's EC representative for 
regional development and worked with Hans Tietmeyer, the current 
Bundesbank president, when the two men were in Brussels.   After a 
stint as administrator at the European Investment Bank, Albert 
joined the L'EXPRESS publishing group.  While at L'EXPRESS, he 
edited Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber's book, "The American 
Challenge."  In 1976, former President Valery Giscard D'Estaing, 
then head of the Planning Commission in the Barre administration, 
named Albert as one of his commissioners for planning.  He occupied 
that post until 1982, when the Socialist government of President 
Francois Mitterrand appointed him head of AGF. 

   JEAN BOISSONNAT--Described as having a Christian socialist 
political philosophy, Boissonnat, 64, has the reputation as one of 
France's most respected economic commentators and as a "voice of 
tolerance."  He is an economic journalist and chief editor for the 
monthly economic publication L'EXPANSION.  He is also a commentator 
for the television channel Europe 1 and for several daily 
publications.  According to an article in LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES, 
Boissonnat will have to learn to "keep secrets," a difficult task 
for a journalist. 

   BRUNO DE MAULDE--Considered a warm, humorous man despite being 
caustic at times, de Maulde is reported to have an independent 
character, according to unnamed friends cited by same article. 
Former head of the Credit du Nord bank during 1986-93 and currently 
president of the Stock Exchange Council, the 60-year old de Maulde 
is inspector general of finances and a graduate of the National 
School of Administration.  He worked in the United Stated for three 
years as a financial attache in the French Embassy before joining 
the Treasury for a stint in the 1970's. 

   MICHEL SAPIN--A close associate of Michel Rocard, former Economy 
Minister Sapin will leave his post in the executive office of the 
Socialist Party to join the CPM.  According to the article, Sapin is 
close to Governor Trichet who served as Treasury director in his 
ministry.  Sapin will also derive influence within the CPM from his 
ties to President Francois Mitterrand, who selected him to become a 
founding member of the council. 

   Sapin, 41, is a graduate of the National School of Administration 
and began his career as a counselor to the Administrative Tribunal 
of Versailles.  Elected deputy to the National Assembly in 1986, he 
was named president of the Law Commission in 1988 and minister 
delegate to the Justice Ministry in 1991.  He was economy minister 
from April 1992 to March 1993 under then Prime Minister Pierre 
Beregovoy. 

   DENISE FLOUZAT--The article claims Flouzat, daughter of a former 
Resistance member and Armed Forces comptroller, has the firmness of 
character on which the CPM can count.  The article cites her husband 
as saying, "She accepts nothing without reservations, and refuses to 
act like a bunch of sheep."  Along with some 27 other professors of 
economics and management, she signed a manifesto advocating a "no" 
vote on the referendum to ratify the Maastricht Treaty, the article 
states.  Flouzat is a close associate of Interior Minister Charles 
Pasqua and is president of the "Tomorrow France" association 
established by Pasqua and Philippe Seguin. 

   Flouzat, 65, has a doctorate in economic sciences from the 
prestigious Sciences Polytechnique Institute.  She was a professor 
at the Sorbonne, which she is leaving to join the CPM.  She has 
written numerous books, including "Contemporary Economy," a work 
comprised of three volumes. 

   JEAN PIERRE GERARD--Described by an article in LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES as the "great unknown of the CPM" and the only 
industrialist, Gerard served as director general of Europe de 
Generale Biscuit, where he was "embroiled" in European business and 
negotiated various contracts in both English and in German.  Gerard 
claims, "I was chosen by Philippe Seguin because within the 
corporations I worked for, I lived the consequences of diverse 
monetary decisions." 

   Gerard, 54, has been president of the Council of Administration 
of the National Test Laboratory since 1992.  A graduate of the 
Sciences Polytechnique Institute, he served in the Commissariat of 
Planning before becoming head of Thomson Jeumont Cables.  After 
managing Europe de Generale Biscuit, he became head of the 
industrial measures and instruments company, Desgranges and Huot. 

   Deputy Governors 

   DENIS FERMAN--First Deputy Governor Ferman, who has worked at the 
bank since 1958, knows the intricacies of BOF management and has a 
"heavy hand" in BOF administration and its methods of payments, 
according to the LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES article.  Ferman has a law 
degree and has served a tour of duty at the Federal Reserve Bank in 
New York during 1971-72, then had a stint as an attache in New York 
to the French Embassy.  He was charge de mission to the United Arab 
Emirates for the IMF during 1977-82. 

   HERVE HANNOUN--Second deputy governor of the BOF, Hannoun is a 
relative newcomer to the BOF, joining the bank at the end of 1992. 
He is 42 and a graduate of the National School of Administration, an 
inspector of finances, and served as an adviser in the cabinet of 
Pierre Mauroy during 1981-84.  He then spent five years in the 
Office of the President as an adviser.  In January 1989, he was 
named chief of staff to Minister of Economy, Finance, and Budget 
Pierre Beregovoy.  He remained in that position during Beregovoy's 
prime ministership. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 6 
Jan 94 pp 2-4; Paris LE FIGARO Le Fig-Eco supplement in French 6 Jan 
94 p IV ), 

   COMMENTARY: BOF MUST WIN INDEPENDENCE FROM BUNDESBANK--Although 
the BOF has legally become free of French Government tutelage, it 
must now test its independence from the more "pernicious" influence 
of the German central bank, according to a commentary in LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES.  The test of BOF independence from the Bundesbank will 
come after the CPM establishes its methods of operation and its 
internal regulations and defines 1994 money supply growth targets. 
During the last few years, the BOF announced these targets at the 
same time as the Bundesbank, the commentary noted. 

   An additional "test of fire" for the CPM will be when the council 
addresses its interest rate and credit policy.  The commentary 
points out that since last summer's monetary crisis, the BOF, in 
trying to assure the continuity of monetary policy, "contented" 
itself with following the credit policy of the Bundesbank.  The CPM 
has reasons to question the legitimacy of this "overly prudent" 
practice, according to the commentary.  Among these reasons are the 
fact that the franc has regained its proper EMS parity level and 
there is no longer a reason to maintain a differential between 
French and German real interest rates.  That differential is now 
high, with France's real interest rates 180 points higher than 
Germany's.  In a period of recession and increasing unemployment 
this differential is not justified. 

   The commentary cautions, however, that a revolution in monetary 
policy is not in the making.  In its view, the CPM will gradually 
try to lower this differential over the next weeks and months, 
heeding the lessons of the past, when two serious "misadventures" in 
lowering rates below those of Germany's resulted in long and severe 
currency crises from which France has yet fully to recover.  The BOF 
currency reserves are now only 10 billion francs (Fr) compared to 
the Fr145 billion it held before last summer's monetary crisis.  The 
commentary concludes that any caution the CPM may impose upon 
itself, may be "ambushed" by financial markets which want monetary 
authorities to lower interest rates quickly to stimulate economic 
growth. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 6 Jan 94 p 3) 

   COMMENTARY: BOF MUST LEARN TO COMMUNICATE--The Bank of France has 
been the "champion" of formalistic jargon in the past and now that 
it is independent, it must learn the art of communicating.  A 
commentary in LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES notes that doing so will be 
difficult for the BOF and points to traditional practices of 
stonewalling" such as Jean-Claude Trichet's refusal to reply to a 
question on the accuracy of BOF currency reserve figures, which have 
been a "veritable state secret" since last summer's currency crisis. 
Nonetheless, the law that established the BOF's independence has 
given it an obligation to be more open.  The commentary points to 
the Bundesbank, which regularly gives news conferences to explain 
its monetary policy, and to the U.S. Federal Reserve which testifies 
twice a year before Congress.  Some French parliamentarians would 
like to follow this U.S. practice.  At the moment, the BOF only has 
to address parliament once a year to report on the bank's 
operations, its monetary policy, and its forecasts.  Additionally, 
the BOF governor can be called to testify at any time before the 
Senate or Assembly's finance commissions. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES in French 4 Jan 94 p 3) 

   FRANCE 

   6-YEAR ARMS SALES TO SAUDIS REACH FR30 BILLION--Rebutting the 
"frequently repeated" view that Saudi Arabia has bought "nothing" 
from France during the last six years, an article in LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES reports the details of Saudi purchases of French arms 
during 1987-92. Citing a source "very close to the issue," the 
article claims a "veil has been lifted" on this closely-held 
information and that Saudi purchases for this period have reached 
nearly Fr30 billion (in 1992 francs).  The article points out that 
this information was not "innocently" made public before Prime 
Minister Edouard Balladur's 7-8 January visit to Saudi Arabia to 
discuss large arms contracts. 

   According to the article, France received Fr4.369 billion in 
orders for 1987 and the figure reached Fr4.9 billion in 1988.  In 
1989, it fell to Fr2.763 billion.  The following year, with the Gulf 
War, Saudi Arabia bought Fr1.9 billion in arms, of which Fr3.4 
billion were for Crotale shahine missiles from Thomson CSF.  In 1991 
sales fell to Fr2.948 billion in sales.  In 1992, the figure was 
Fr1.874 billion.  The total, from 1987 to 1992, is Fr29.770 billion. 
(DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 5 Jan 94 p 11) 

   MANDIL SEES FOREIGN ALLIANCES FOR GDF, EDF--Director of energy at 
the Ministry of Industry, Claude Mandil has issued a "public 
version" of his proposals to reform the electric and gas industries 
of France.  According to an article in LES ECHOS, Mandil's revised 
report takes into consideration the debates on the issue held in 
November within the European Parliament, the French National 
Assembly, and the 10 December European Council of Ministers.  It is 
intended to forestall a "social explosion" at Electricite de France 
(EDF) and Gaz de France (GDF) which seemed likely when Mandil issued 
his initial draft issued at the end of last October and which the 
article claims has "little chance of seeing the light of day." 
Mandil's revised report proposes the following: 

   *  Do away with the electricity production monopoly enjoyed by 
EDF. 

   *  Initiate a controlled opening of the import and export markets 
for gas and electricity. 

   *  Do away with import and export monopolies.  According to the 
article, this suggestion has little practical import, however, since 
French Government hostility to third-party access to distribution 
networks and the ban on buying electricity for export will maintain 
EDF competitiveness. 

   * Authorize large industrial users, such as the chemical 
companies, to supply foreigners through long term contracts and 
contributions to gas stocks.  In this framework, the companies would 
use the GDF distribution network. 

   * Authorize large distribution networks, such as CFM and SGSO in 
which Elf and Total hold shares, to import to some extent. 

   Mandil's report notes that these changes would impose on EDF and 
GDF the need to form alliances and engage in reciprocity but also 
gives them more capital and flexibility.  The article adds, however, 
that while the report allows that GDF may join partnerships in gas 
production, it does not mention any future privatization of French 
energy companies.  Nonetheless, the labor unions have already 
criticized Mandil's revised report, foreseeing that "the way to 
privatization is clearly open for EDF and GDF." (DiI)  (Paris LES 
ECHOS in French 4 Jan 94 p x) 

   52 PERCENT OF BUSINESSMEN SATISFIED WITH BALLADUR--Some 52 
percent of French entrepreneurs--11 percent less than in July--are 
satisfied with Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's government, 
according to a poll taken by the economic monthly ENJEUX LES ECHOS. 
According to this poll, 41 percent are not satisfied with Balladur 
and 7 percent did not respond.  More and more entrepreneurs are 
worried about the social climate: 67 percent of them believe it has 
deteriorated compared to 43 percent in July and 64 percent claim 
they are pessimistic about the social climate. 

   On the other hand, Balladur's stewardship gets good marks on 
privatizations, doing away with the one-month gap in reimbursing the 
VAT, and the immigration law.  Asked about the economy for 1994, 41 
percent claimed they were pessimistic and only 28 percent 
optimistic.  Some 49 percent of CEO's were more optimistic about the 
prospects of their own companies.  The businessmen lauded Interior 
Minister Charles Pasqua, Foreign Minister Alain Juppe, Budget 
Minister Nicolas Sarkozy, and Health Minister Simone Veil, in that 
order.  The poorest opinion was expressed of Labor Minister Michel 
Giraud.  More than a third of the businessmen polled  wanted him to 
leave the government.  (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 
5 Jan 94 p 28) 

   GERMANY 

   NEW EKOSTAHL TAKEOVER PROPOSAL--The newly-formed Nordstahl 
company in Hamburg proposes to join with the U.S. Nucor Corporation 
in acquiring majority ownership of the Eisenhuettenstadt-based 
Ekostahl steel company from the Trust Agency.  Under the terms of 
the plan, Nordstahl and Nucor would initially assume 60-percent 
ownership of Ekostahl; the Trust Agency would retain 30 percent of 
the stock, with 10 percent held by Russia's Cherepovets combine.  A 
proposed second phase of the plan provides for Nordstahl to assume 
the Trust Agency's remaining holdings, with the Russian firm 
"possibly" raising its share to 20 percent.  Ekostahl's blast 
furnaces are to be assigned to the Russian firm in exchange for 
shipments of cold rolled steel.  Nordstahl intends to replace 
Ekostahl's "ecologically and fiscally indefensible" blast furnaces 
with electric arc furnaces while Nucor will provide "the know-how 
for a thin slab casting plant."  (CW)  (Duesseldorf HANDELSBLATT in 
German 24 Dec 93 p 9) 

   COMMERZBANK OPENS FIRST WESTERN BANK OFFICE IN BELARUS- 
-Commerzbank has opened a bank office in Minsk, making it is the 
first Western bank to establish a presence in Belarus.  Klaus-Peter 
Mueller, bank director in charge of operations in the East, cited 
the growing number of German firms expanding into Belarus as a prime 
economic reason for Commerzbank's commitment.  He stated that, 
although economic reform in Belarus was not as advanced as in other 
Soviet successor republics, the strategic position of the country 
and the highly qualified work force meant that economic potential 
should not to be underestimated.  Mueller also noted that the 
expansion of private banking in Belarus afforded the possibility of 
profitable commercial banking, while German bankers could provide 
technical assistance in restructuring the local banking system, as 
well as training courses and internships.  Credit for encouraging 
and facilitating Commerzbank's early expansion into Minsk was given 
to Sergei Kostyuchenko, chairman of Priorbank, the leading local 
bank for currency trading and foreign trade.  Commerzbank has 
already opened offices in Alma Ata and Kiev and is planning to do so 
in St. Petersburg before 1994.  (CW)  (Duesseldorf HANDELSBLATT in 
German 21 Dec 93 p 8) 

   CONSTRUCTION OUTLAYS FUEL BOOM IN EAST--According to the Ifo 
Institute for Economic Research, capital outlays in the federal 
laender rose by over one-third in the past year and an additional 
10-percent increase in the 1993-97 period is forecast.  Since July 
1990, about 300 billion German marks (DM) in capital investments 
have been made in the East.  Most of this amount has been spent on 
construction and the total expenditure for construction is expected 
to rise to DM2.4 trillion by 2005.  Construction outlays have grown 
by 16 percent in the current year and are expected to continue to 
fuel eastern German economic growth.  Residential housing 
construction has increased by about 300 percent over last year, and 
the number of units will increase from 30,000 (1993) to about 70,000 
(1997).  By 1997, construction outlays in the eastern laender are 
expected to account for about 25 percent of the total construction 
costs for all of Germany.  (CW)  (Duesseldorf HANDELSBLATT in German 
23 Dec 93 p 15) 

   ITALY 

   CIAMPI'S ECONOMIC POLICY CRITICIZED--Prominent entrepreneur Mario 
Deaglio, commenting in LA STAMPA on Prime Minister Carlo Ciampi's 
end-of-year speech, criticized Ciampi's last minute 6.870-trillion- 
lire tax increase which was added to the 1994 Finance Law.  While 
Deaglio points out that Ciampi should be commended for his "heroic" 
efforts to straighten out the economy, Ciampi's program offers no 
ray of hope" for the future.  According to Deaglio, the tax 
increase highlights three weak points in the government's economic 
policy: 

   * Poor Government Economic Forecasting--Ciampi's government was 
forced to revise downward its economic estimates, losing 
credibility.  The government's revisions had to take into account 
forecasting errors which overestimated tax revenue. 

   * Political Consequences--The government is pursuing a flawed 
policy because implementing tax increases without first considering 
alternatives "challenges the endurance of citizens, courts fiscal 
revolt, and favors political instability." 

   * Bowing to Recessionary Pressures--Raising taxes is a "stopgap" 
measure which responds to the social pressures of a country which 
wants an end to large deficits and economic turmoil.  Such measures 
conflict with sound economic policy, according to Deaglio. (AB) 
(Turin LA STAMPA in Italian 3 Jan 94 pp 1, 4) 

   ARTISANS CRITICIZE NEW FINANCE LAW--According to Ivano 
Spalanzani, president of the General Confederation of Italian 
Artisans and Craftsmen (Confartigianato), the recently passed 1994 
Finance Law did not address the problems of artisans and craftsmen. 
Spalanzani claims the law perpetuates the old welfare state and 
contains inadequate measures to fight recession and encourage 
business growth.  The law has at least two negative consequences, 
Spalanzani believes.  It increases unemployment, causing additional 
expense for the state, and it expands the underground economy. 
Measures to increase the production base and encourage employment in 
small companies were not included, nor were tax breaks to artisans 
to encourage them to hire young, unemployed workers. 

   Although Spalanzani recognized that the Finance Law made great 
strides in privatizing government-owned companies, he also claimed 
that not enough was done to reform public administration.  For 
example, not enough was done to reduce public spending, increase 
public employees' production, and keep absenteeism in check, he 
maintained. (AB)  (Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE in Italian 30 Dec 93 p 11) 

   PORTUGAL 

   GATT ADVANTAGES, DISADVANTAGED ASSESSED--According to National 
Association of Electric and Electronic Materiel Industries (ANIMEE) 
economic adviser Alegre Magalhaes, new GATT regulations determined 
by the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations will have the 
following effects on Portuguese and Community industries: 

   * Electronics, Appliances--Reductions in customs tariffs on these 
products by more than 30 percent "may have a negative effect on 
European industry, especially during a recession" and will 
jeopardize European industry in relation to the United States and 
Japan.  Exports from Portugal of these products comprise 10 percent 
of total Portuguese exports and contribute 1.2 percent to the 
country's GDP. 

   * Automobiles--While it is difficult to gauge the effects of the 
GATT settlement on Portugal, which does not have national 
manufacturers, Renault's Portuguese subsidiary believes the gradual 
abolition of quotas for non-European car imports is "inevitable." 
Renault's Portuguese 1992 foreign sales amounted to 64.5 million 
contos. 

   * Footwear--Footwear sales will benefit from the GATT agreement, 
which will lead to antidumping measures against Asian footwear sales 
in Europe.  Portugal's footwear exports are valued at 200 million 
contos per year and represent 10 percent of foreign sales. (RM) 
(Lisbon PUBLICO in Portuguese 16 Dec 93 p 36) 

   SPAIN 

   DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER NARCIS SERRA ON GATT ACCORD--In a 21 
December  appearance before the Congress of Deputies, Deputy Prime 
Minister Narcis Serra called the outcome of the GATT negotiations 
"fruitful" and "satisfactory" for Spain, adding that the textile, 
agriculture, and audiovisual industries will benefit the most.  As 
for imports, the impact will be "very limited" since more than 75 
percent of Spanish purchases abroad come from countries with very 
low or no tariffs.  The impact on Spanish exports on the other hand 
will be "important," in the chemical, ceramics, tiles, shoes, and 
furniture, among others.  According to Serra, the most important 
structural change will occur in the textile sector.  As for 
agriculture, "Spanish requests have, for the most part, been taken 
into account."  He praised the creation of the World Trade 
Organization, which will "remove the danger of trade wars and 
unilateral reprisals" and the new rules regarding dumping. (MC) 
(Madrid DIARIO-16 in Spanish 22 Dec 93 p 49) 

   GOVERNMENT 'VAGUENESS' ON GATT AGREEMENT CRITICIZED--People's 
Party spokesman Rodrigo Rato has criticized Deputy Prime Minister 
Narcis Serra's report on the GATT agreement to the Congress of 
Deputies on 21 December.  Serra, who had said he would explain the 
impact of the agreement on Spain, limited himself to details of the 
Uruguay Round negotiations and agreement itself, according to an 
article in EL PAIS.  Immediately afterwards, Rato criticized the 
government for its "vagueness" and for not addressing the impact of 
the treaty on the Spanish economy.  He demanded a detailed study 
sector by sector. (MC)   (Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 22 Dec 93 p 43) 

   PP PROPOSES STIMULATIVE ECONOMIC MEASURES--On 20 December, the 
conservative People's Party announced a package of economic measures 
which it considers urgently needed to stimulate the economy, halt 
the increase in unemployment, and maintain competitiveness.  The 
proposed measures include a 5-percent cut in the Personal Income Tax 
(IRPF), an increase in deductions for investment in fixed assets, 
exports, and professional training), a return to the former system 
of workers' compensation, a plan for the privatization of 
government-owned companies aimed at collecting 450 billion pesetas 
to pay the public debt, a plan for reduced government spending, and 
budgetary controls, among other measures. (MC)  (Madrid EL PAIS in 
Spanish 21 Dec 93 p 13) 

   PP PROPOSALS CRITICIZED--The Spanish Socialist Workers Party 
(PSOE) and the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) have attacked the 
People's Party proposals to stimulate the economy.  PNV 
parliamentary spokesman Inaki Anasagasti said on 21 December that he 
did not understand how the public deficit could be lowered by 
cutting taxes.  He described as "interesting" some of the measures 
proposed, adding that some of them, such as tax incentives, were 
already being applied in the Basque Country.  PSOE Organization 
Secretary Txiqui Benegas said that it was "demagogic and 
irresponsible" to base economic recovery on reducing the IRPF by 5 
percent during a time of budget deficit, falling tax revenues, and 
reduced spending. (MC)  (Madrid DIARIO-16 in Spanish 22 Dec 93 p 49) 

   TEXTILE INDUSTRY SEEKS OPENING OF ASIAN MARKETS--In a joint 
effort, the employers' organizations of textile industries in Spain, 
Portugal, Italy, and Greece are demanding that their governments and 
EU Commission initiate negotiations aimed at opening Asian markets 
which under the GATT agreement retain a 100-percent tariff. 
According to an article in EL PAIS, European textile employers are 
convinced that the entire sector has emerged a loser from the GATT 
agreement.  The president of the European textile sector employers' 
organization (Comitextil), Juan Antonio Sanfeliu, said that 
Comitextil is seeking trade protection regulations similar to those 
of the United States which counter practices such as dumping, 
product piracy, and falsifying product origins.  Representatives 
from Spain's textile employers' association, the Intertextile 
Council, say that the Spanish Government used the textile industry 
as a bargaining chip during the GATT negotiations to obtain 
subsidies for the steel industry.  Fearing growing international 
competition, Intertextile is also asking the government "to speed up 
structural changes in the economy especially with regard to labor 
market reform." (MC)  (Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 23 Dec 93 p 58) 

    PSV SCANDAL SEEN DAMAGING UGT--The bankruptcy of the General 
Workers Union's (UGT) housing cooperative and its management company 
to which 20,000 workers had entrusted their savings is being viewed 
as damaging for the union at a time when it is involved in preparing 
a general strike to protest the economic policy of the Spanish 
Government.  According to an editorial in DIARIO 16, until recently 
public opinion polls ranked Spanish labor unions very highly. 
"Undoubtedly," the PSV scandal has "undermined this credibility," 
the editorial claims.  However, there is suspicion within the UGT 
that the scandal was stirred up "deliberately" by the Socialists. 
The scandal will benefit the Socialist government at a time when 
politically important conflicts over labor reform and social welfare 
are being decided.  Additionally, the government is facing a 27 
January general strike, further placing the government under fire. 
The editorial concludes that the "PSV disaster cannot serve as a 
smoke screen to hide an economic policy which is both confusing and 
mortgaged." (MC)  (Madrid DIARIO 16 in Spanish 28 Dec 93 p 5) 

   ATTITUDES TOWARD GENERAL STRIKE POLLED--According to a Demoscopia 
poll published in EL PAIS, 60 percent of the 1,200 Spaniards queried 
do not intend to participate in the 27 January General Strike which 
has been called by five major unions in Spain to protest the 
government's economic policy.  Fifty-three percent think the strike 
is not necessary, but 64 percent predict a heavy turnout.  Following 
are the poll results: 


   "Do you think the call for a general strike was necessary?" 

   Yes                    38 
   No                     53 
   Don't know/no answer    9 

   "Do you think this is the right moment to call a strike?" 

   Yes                    30 
   No                     57 
   Don't know/no answer   13 

   "Do you think the strike will really happen?" 

   Yes                    62 
   No                     18 
   Don't know/no answer   20 

   "If the strike really does occur, will you participate?" 

   Yes                    28   - 
   No                     60 
   Don't know/no answer   12 

   "Do you think there will be a heavy turnout?" 

   Yes                    64 
   No                     16 
   Don't know/no answer   20 

   "In any case, who do you think should change their position more 
to avoid the strike, the government or the labor unions?" 

   Government             40 
   Labor unions           16 
   Both equally           34 
   Don't know/no answer   10 
(MC)  (Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 18 Dec 93 p 43) 



   ECONOMIC BRIEFS 

   EC 

   --Salomon Brothers economist Graham Bishop claims single currency 
more realistic than most think...Italy's IL SOLE-24 ORE quotes 
Bishop as saying market already indicates it expects monetary union 
to take place. (Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE 31 Dec 93 p 6) 

   France 

   --Alcatel won contract from Telecom Australia to supply 5 million 
of 8.5 million total telecommunications lines sought by 
Australia. .. reliable source claims contract worth around Fr4 
billion of total Fr13.2-billion program. (LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES 4 Jan 
93 p11) 

   Anilla B. (703-733-6285), Mary C. (703-733-6288), Dian I. (703- 
733-6286), Rosa M. (703-733-6287), Charles W. (703-733-6473) 
contributed to this Foreign Media Survey. 

ELAG/13 JAN/ECONF/WED/jf 14/0150 JAN 

