BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Ejaz Hussain] </F>
  [Text] The federal government created history last Monday 
[April 25] by announcing a comprehensive and far-reaching 
package of judicial and administrative reforms for Northern 
Areas. The package includes grant of adult franchise given for 
the first time to the people of the Northern Areas, party-based 
elections, and reservation of two seats for women in the elected 
council. The federal minister for information and broadcasting, 
Mr. Khalid Ahmad Kharal, said the chief executive of the 
Northern Areas will have the status of a federal minister. The 
Northern Areas will be granted fiscal autonomy. The existing 
post of judicial commissioner would also be abolished, and in 
its place the chief court would be set up which will be headed 
by a retired judge of a provincial high court. He also said the 
post of chief commissioner will be replaced by chief secretary 
assisted by four secretaries. The minister announced October as 
the month of general elections to the enlarged Northern Areas 
Council. The people of the area, including leading politicians, 
lawyers, intellectuals, and laymen, have hailed this historic 
decision of the government. The Northern Areas with an area of 
over 29,000 square miles and a population of nearly 7 lakh have 
six districts; namely, Gilgit, Skardu, Baltistan, (Jia Mer), 
(Khujar), and (Laochi). 
  The region is enormously important to Pakistan for a number 
of reasons. First of all, its picturesque beauty, snow-covered 
mountains, fabulous lakes, crystal glaciers, orchards and 
gardens, minerals and fruits fascinate tourists from all over 
the world. The government of Pakistan earns over 70 million 
rupees annually from the tourism industry of the region. 
Besides, the legendary Karakoram Highway, which is a towering 
emblem of unbreakable Sino-Pak friendship, links Pakistan with 
the Central Asian Republics, which are integral part of Economic 
Cooperation Organization. 
  The region is also significant from the strategic point of 
view, as Siachen Glacier -- the highest battlefield in the world 
-- is also situated in the Northern Areas. The people of these 
areas won their freedom through armed struggle against Dogra 
rulers soon after the creation of Pakistan. However, their 
grievances and heritage from the Dogra colonial era were not 
redressed. The late Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto started taking 
steps in the right direction. He constituted a land commission 
for them, created Ministry for Northern Areas, allocated service 
and education quota for them, started development programs, set 
up dispensaries and health units, and encouraged NGO's 
[nongovernment organizations] like Agha Khan Trust and Gilgit 
Society. He abolished the notorious Frontier Crimes Regulation. 
  The caretaker prime minister, Moin Qureshi, during his three 
months' rule, took a few vital decisions. It would not be 
inaccurate to say that Moin Qureshi's proposals for reforms in 
the Northern Areas provided impetus to the incumbent prime 
minister, Ms. Benazir Bhutto, who has left no stone unturned to 
offer all types of incentives to the people of the region. The 
prime minister in the fall of 1993 announced 70 development 
schemes for Northern Areas. They included housing, 
communication, transportation, education, health, employment, 
and women emancipation. She has reaffirmed that Northern Areas 
would be among the leading beneficiaries of the social action 
programs. She has also emphasized the establishment of an 
industrial zone in the Northern Areas and investors would be 
offered wide-ranging incentives. The prime minister has also 
asked the OGDC [Oil and Gas Development Corporation] experts to 
prepare feasibility report for providing fuel facilities to the 
region, specially natural gas. The prime minister is determined 
to bring the Northern Areas and other neglected parts of the 
country at par with the other areas. She is well aware of the 
fact that democracy means uniformity of privileges and that 
socioeconomic and political discrepancies damage the entire 
structure of a state. This is one of the interpretations of her 
future vision of Pakistan. 

