Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
fileworthy reports on economic developments in Cuba carried on 
Havana radio and television in Spanish between 22 and 25 
February. 
  Radio Rebelde at 0000 GMT on 22 February reports that eight 
Havana universities will initiate graduate level summer schools 
to run from 20 June to 19 August. According to Deputy Minister 
of Education Rodolfo Alarcon Ortiz, the courses will be open to 
foreign students, whose tuition will supplement university 
income. 
  Radio Reloj in its 2030-3100 GMT newscast on 22 February 
reports the following: 
  Two new centers for making biological pesticides have been 
inaugurated in Sancti Spiritus Province. The centers are part of 
a project financed by the nongovernmental organization "Bread 
for the World" and are located in the Banao area in Sancti 
Spiritus Municipality and on the Nueva Cuba 
Agricultural-Livestock Production Cooperative in Cabaiguan. 
  Cuba and the Dominican Republic have signed a sports 
cooperation agreement whereby Cuban swimming and track and field 
trainers will offer their knowledge to Dominican athletes as of 
March. The agreement provides for consulting by Cuban trainers 
in other sports as well. 
  Guantanamo is to have a provincial biopharmaceutical 
laboratory as of next month, for the production of medicines and 
vaccines for humans and animals. 
  "Camaguey construction workers have built works worth some 
77 
million pesos. This figure represents a drop of slightly over 50 
percent compared to 1989." Over 1,300 low-cost houses were 
finished in 1993. Only 500 of these were built by organizations 
belonging to the sector itself, "which does not correspond to 
the resources and means that the Ministry of Construction has at 
its disposal, as manager of these investments." 
  Cuba Vision Network at 2320 GMT on 22 February reports that 
self- sufficiency and service granges are being formed in 
high-potential municipalities in Havana Province at the 
initiative of the Cuban Government and the Communist Party of 
Cuba. "These granges are to become suppliers for nearby towns, 
gastronomic units, and workers' dining rooms." Ten Havana 
Province municipalities are to have such structures in marginal 
lands, with a view to solving the demand for such production in 
the area. Also, three new tourist installations have been 
inaugurated in Holguin Province: a marina in Boca de Sama [Bay]; 
a new restaurant, El Fuerte, in Guarda la Vaca; and the La Roca 
nightclub. 
  Radio Rebelde at 1255 GMT on 23 February reports that as 
part 
of the solidarity with Cuba campaign being carried out in 
Canada, the ship Energy arrived in Cuba bringing donations 
estimated at $250,000. The donations include 10 containers with 
some 80 tons of specialized medical equipment, bicycles, papers, 
and wheelchairs. 
  Cuba Vision at 0200 GMT on 23 February reports that in the 
last 32 years over 221 million vaccination doses have been 
distributed in Cuba. This resulted in the elimination of polio 
in 1962, diphtheria in 1969, neonatal tetanus in 1972; there 
were only two cases of whooping cough reported in 1993. There 
have been no cases of measles in 18 months. There were fewer 
than 10 cases each of rubella and mumps in 1993. Meningitis was 
widespread in the 80's but there were only 69 cases in 1993. 
  Radio Rebelde at 1800 GMT on 23 February reports that 
representatives from more than 20 countries are participating in 
the Computing-94 conference being held at the Havana Convention 
Center. Computer Science Expert (Arturo Rivagorda), who is also 
chairman of the Spanish national association of computer 
security systems, in stressing the importance of this 
conference, said that the efforts being made in this area are 
the same as those being made worldwide and that Cuba can 
perfectly well become integrated with countries of other 
regions, including Europe. 
  Cuba Vision at 2320 GMT on 23 February reports that the 
Labor 
Union of the Banco Popular Espanol made a donation to the 
campaign for the children of Chernobyl receiving treatment in 
Cuba. Workers donate 1 percent of their wages; so far, they have 
collected $4,000. 
  Radio Reloj at 1530 GMT on 25 February reports that members 
of the National Association of Innovators and Efficiency Experts 
in Santiago de Cuba have managed to establish a new system to be 
added to the irrigation system that will help cut fuel by 13 
percent. The provincial board has thus declared that this new 
system will be added to all equipment with Motor A-41 during the 
first quarter of this year. 

