Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nigel Hawkes, Science Editor: </F>
"Infectious Diseases Evolve To Stage Deadly Comeback"; first 
paragraph is THE TIMES introduction] 
  [Text] Illnesses that scientists thought they had conquered 
with immunisation programmes and antibiotics are beginning to 
reappear. 
  Infectious diseases, once believed to be disappearing as a 
serious threat, have made a dramatic and frightening comeback, 
the British Association for the Advancement of Science was told 
yesterday. 
  "Many old diseases have returned and a host of new ones not 
even dreamt of 15 years ago have made their appearance," 
Professor Michael Levin, of St Mary's Hospital Medical School, 
told the association's annual conference at Keele University. 
"So great is the number of new or re-emerging infectious 
diseases that it would be impossible to mention even a small 
proportion of them in a brief talk." 
  The diseases included AIDS, new strains of cholera, new 
hepatitis viruses, toxic shock syndromes caused by bacteria, 
Kawasaki disease, and new, deadly strains of the Hanta virus in 
America. Such was the complacency about infectious disease in 
the 1960's, when antibiotics and immunisation appeared to have 
conquered them, that by 1970 Britain had only one specialist in 
childhood infectious diseases: Doctor Bill Marshall, of Great 
Ormond Street hospital. Professor Levin said that when he died 
in 1984 there was no paediatrician trained to take over. 
  A bacterium similar to those responsible for scarlet fever 
and rheumatic fever was now causing a new disease in children, 
whose symptoms are fever, shock and multiple organ failure. The 
disease, called streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, is, like 
rheumatic fever, caused by a streptococcus. 
  Another new disease, named after the Japanese doctor who 
first described it, was now the commonest cause of acquired 
heart disease in children in many countries. Kawasaki disease 
has affected more than 100,000 children in Japan, striking about 
the age of one. While most children recover in three weeks, 
about 3 percent die from blood clots forming in the coronary 
arteries. The cause of the disease has yet to be discovered, but 
is likely to be a virus or bacterium widely found in the 
community but causing disease in only a few of those infected. 
  Professor Levin said that in Britain the disease affected 
about 180 children a year, of whom one third suffered permanent 
coronary damage. 
  Lyme disease is an arthritic condition in children spread by 
ticks. The cause is a bacterium related to those which cause 
syphilis. 
  Professor Levin said the emergence or re-emergence of these 
diseases showed that the apparent victory over infectious 
diseases resulting from mass immunisation and public health 
measures was merely a lull in the battle. "We appear to be 
facing an endless struggle in which human ingenuity, science and 
technology will be pitted against the evolutionary mechanisms of 
an ancient and infinitely more numerous foe." 
  The new tools of cell and molecular biology meant that the 
threat could be countered, as long as the medical profession 
avoided complacency. 
  -- Professor Robert May, of Oxford University, outlined a 
new 
theory yesterday to explain the long delay between infection 
with the AIDS virus, HIV, and the development of full-blown AIDS. 
  He suggested it was caused by the way HIV proliferates. The 
virus lacks the ability to correct any errors that occur during 
replication, so produces a wide range of mutations. These escape 
destruction by the immune system which is tuned to attack the 
original form of the virus. The system quickly recovers, 
however, and learns to destroy the new variants. 
  Mathematical modelling shows there is a limit to the immune 
system's ability to diversify. When that limit is passed -- 
which could be years after infection -- the disease develops 
into full-blown AIDS. 
  The theory suggests that there might be some patients in 
whom 
the immune system's defences are never over-run. If so, an 
estimated 10 to 20 percent of HIV-infected people will never 
develop AIDS. 
  TIMES NEWSPAPERS LIMITED, 1993 

