BFN 

<F P=106> [Vissarion Sisnev report: "Attention U.S. Tourists. The </F>
U.S. Consulate in St. Petersburg Has Warned Fellow Nationals 
that Attending the Goodwill Games Poses a Threat to their Lives"] 
  [Text] Washington -- The American public got to know about 
this 12-page guide from an account of it by COX NEWS SERVICE 
correspondents. It is anticipated that about 5,000 sportsmen 
from many countries will participate in the Goodwill Games in 
St. Petersburg, and not only Russians but also thousands of 
foreign guests will attend. 
  It was precisely this that the U.S. Consulate in St. 
Petersburg had in mind when it put together a guide for 
prospective tourists planning to visit Russia's "northern 
capital." It is, however, not exclusively for them but also for 
business people going there at any other time. In the first 
place it is not at all advised that anyone do this alone, as 
"the criminal situation in St. Petersburg has significantly 
worsened over the last year and problems of personal security 
are more acute than ever." The guide informs them that 
"criminal acts, which are often carried out during the day or at 
times when people are at home in their apartments, are becoming 
more and more daring." 
  It goes on to say: "Criminals are better armed than ever, 
are often well informed about their chosen victims, and take 
less and less notice of the law-enforcement agencies, which they 
are stronger than and which feel besieged." Some 15 cases over 
the last six months are cited where the criminals' targets were 
consulate staffers themselves, and in one case the attack took 
place in the street in a densely populated area and no one came 
to his assistance. On one occasion a consulate staffer was 
"mercilessly beaten by four militiamen." 
  In general the U.S. diplomats have a low opinion of St. 
Petersburg's law-enforcement agencies, especially of State Motor 
Vehicle Inspection Administration staffers. For example, they 
said the following about them: "Traffic policemen go as far as 
threatening totally innocent motorists with blood tests using 
unsterile needles in an attempt to extort bribes from them." 
St. Petersburg State Motor Vehicle Inspection Administration 
staffers, the document asserts, "are well-known for using their 
power to stop drivers and extort fines from them for real or 
imagined offenses." 
  Those who travel to this city by rail are advised to wind 
wire around the compartment door's lock for the night because 
the robbers check out in advance who gives the impression of 
being vague or untogether. What is more, they have at their 
disposal a strong, colorless gas with which they knock 
passengers out. Businessmen are advised to keep a lookout for 
literally everyone, including their Russian partners, as "U.S. 
business people are with increasing frequency becoming the 
object of violent attacks, kidnappings, and extortion, which are 
sometimes planned by people with whom they have joint operations 
here." 
  Immediately after this publication appeared, there was a 
hearing in the Senate Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and 
International Communications, in which experts in this field 
spoke. Russia was more or less the main focus of the senators' 
attention, as according to CIA Director James Woolsey, the 
Russian mafia is already working in close contact with the 
Italian mafia and the Colombian drugs cartels. Senator John 
Kerry of Massachusetts added that what we are dealing with is 
the establishment of a "global mafia" and that Russian organized 
crime, embracing 3,000-4,000 groups, is in control of no less 
than 40 percent of the national economy. 
  But there is nothing in all this about which our own press 
has not written. Therefore, there is no reason to accuse the 
U.S. diplomats and politicians of anything -- what's true cannot 
be altered. Tourists and businessmen have traveled here just 
the same, though maybe not in the numbers we would have liked. 
But articles by journalists or television reports are one 
thing; people here regard them not so much with distrust as 
according to the principle: Well they have to write about 
something.... But they have another attitude toward official 
warnings from state and diplomatic organs. U.S. citizens have 
gotten used to paying attention to them, and they have saved a 
large number of their lives when on the advice of the consulate 
they have quickly packed their bags and quit a danger zone. 
  In any case the CNN radio and television corporation -- 
which 
is behind the games -- clearly took the alarm bells in St. 
Petersburg seriously, inasmuch as it considered it necessary to 
assure the public: The consulate has overreacted, it is only 
necessary to "show the same degree of caution as you would in 
New York, or Paris, or any other big city." It was also 
announced that plans are in preparation to guarantee the 
security of athletes and guests at the Goodwill Games, and, as 
has been the case with all other international sporting events, 
additional forces drawn from the militia and Army will be 
brought in to guard the participants and the sporting facilities. 

