Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] "Allowing Japan and the United States, which occupy 
the first and second positions in trade volume, to discuss trade 
policies aimed at setting numerical targets will shake the 
international community's confidence in the market economy." 
The investigation subcommittee for policies and measures to 
prevent unfair trade (with Tokyo University Professor Mitsuo 
Matsushita as chairman) of the Industrial Structure Council, an 
advisory organ to the Ministry of International Trade and 
Industry [MITI], has completed a report harshly criticizing the 
United States which has stuck to its demand for "setting up 
numerical targets" at the Japan-U.S. economic framework talks, 
and submitted it to MITI Minister Kumagai on 19 January. 
  The Japan-U.S. economic framework talks still remain at 
odds, 
and there is no prospect of a breakthrough in the talks. The 
report aims at providing grounds for Japan's opposition to the 
United States' call for setting up numerical targets. In this 
sense, it seems that, with Japan-U.S. summit talks scheduled for 
11 February, the report will have an impact on the negotiations 
which are entering the final stage. 
  The report defines the United States' demand as "policy that 
allows exporting nations to consider importing nations' markets 
as closed, make importing nations set targets for increasing 
market share of foreign products and purchase amounts, and then 
calls on them to attain such targets." The report also 
concludes that setting a market share of foreign products in a 
third nation as a reference index, and setting up an index to 
measure the ratio of increase in the purchase amount, is 
"similar to setting up numerical targets." 
  The report then points out: "The market share of 
foreign-made 
products depends on domestically-made products' supply 
capability and differences in competitive power between domestic 
and foreign companies. It cannot be said the market is closed 
just because the market share of foreign-products is small." 
The report stresses that if Japan should once set up numerical 
figures, such as target figures or reference index, "there is 
the possibility that Japan will be obliged to attain such target 
figures." It calls on MITI to steadfastly reject the United 
States' demand. 
  Referring to the Japan-U.S. accord on semiconductors, which 
specifies the market share of foreign-made products in Japan, 
the report stresses "it is necessary to rescind the accord 
swiftly." In conclusion the report notes: "Basically, trade 
issues should be solved based on multilateral dispute settlement 
procedures of the (Uruguay Round of) multilateral trade talks." 

