BFN 

  [Text] Yesterday in a communique, the Northern National 
Security Command Zone denied that officers serving under its 
jurisdiction have engaged in political activities in Sullana. 
The Huancayo Political-Military Zone Command has also reported 
that two Army servicemen were wounded during antisubversive 
operations in the central jungle of Junin Department. 
  Congressman Henry Pease made the allegation that officers 
were engaging in political activities in a motion he proposed in 
Congress on 3 May. Pease said he had received reports from 
several citizens that General Raul Diez, commander of the 
Sullana-based 1st Cavalry Division, accompanied by a group of 
officers and soldiers, attended a meeting on 24-25 April in the 
township of Santa Cruz, which is part of the Querecotillo 
peasant community, to describe projects implemented by National 
Compensation and Social Development Fund and achievements of the 
government's economic policy with a view to earning their 
support for the president's reelection. 
  The military communique adds that Pease's charge was 
highlighted in two issues of a local newspaper. In this 
respect, the communique adds, the Army commander ordered an 
investigation "which concluded that the charge was baseless." 
The communique adds: "Gen. Diez did not go to Santa Cruz on 
24-25 April because he was discharging specific duties during 
those days." 
  The communique notes that a group of officers went to Santa 
Cruz on 25 April in response to an invitation by the president 
of the Self-Defense Committee of Querecotillo, and that "only 
topics related to self-defense committees were discussed at that 
time, and absolutely no political issues whatsoever," proof of 
which are the minutes of the meeting. 
  The communique adds: "The Northern National Security Zone 
Command hereby conveys to the people that the Armed Forces are 
discharging their duties within the precise framework outlined 
by the Peruvian Constitution, and by their own laws and 
regulations; and that their efforts and professionalism are 
committed to the fundamental task of promoting national 
pacification and the implementation of civic actions in favor of 
the most needy towns. It is thus far from our mission and task 
to engage in any activity that could be construed as party 
politics because the raison d'etre of our military institutions 
is the Peruvian nation." 
  The Political-Military Command of the National Central 
Security Subzone No. 7 (Huancayo) has reported that two Army 
servicemen were wounded during antisubversive operations 
conducted by units of the 31st Infantry Division in the central 
jungle Department of Junin. 
  At approximately 0730 on 7 May, an Army patrol engaged 
Shining Path terrorists in the Alto Cachingari region, Satipo 
Province. Sergeant Adalberto Gonzales Manrique was wounded 
during the clash, and was evacuated to the Lima Central Military 
Hospital. 
  At approximately 0800 on 8 May, another Army patrol engaged 
Shining Path members in the area known as Boca Anapate, in the 
Ene River basin, Satipo Province. Infantry Captain Carlos 
Velezmoro Saucedo was wounded during the clash and evacuated to 
the Satipo hospital. 

