Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "A Report With No Practical Application"] </F>
  [Text] The U.S. State Department's annual human rights 
report is not the first American report that talks about Israeli 
violations in the occupied territories. Its significance, 
however, lies in the fact that it was issued by a friendly 
party, not by a Palestinian or Arab party that can be accused of 
being biased, imbalanced, and lacking credibility. 
  The report mentioned torture and killings in the occupied 
territories before and after the signing of the Declaration of 
Principles, the special units and their activities, torture 
during interrogation, and the Israel Army's adoption of the 
posture of a spectator when settlers engage in their preferred 
pleasure -- attacking Palestinian residents and their 
properties. All these and other violations call into question 
the position of the United States, as it is the strategic ally, 
friend, and partner of a party that over the past years 
committed and continues to commit these violations. 
  Naturally, we are not demanding from the U.S. Administration 
punishment for the culprit. We do not dare call on the first 
military power in the world to deal with Israel in the tools and 
concepts of the Cold War, which are still in effect against 
Iraq, Libya, Cuba and other third world countries and movements 
that previously were proteges of the other bloc before its 
collapse. However, we are asking -- and this is our right -- 
about Washington's responsibility in these violations and 
whether it has done anything other than issue annual reports in 
a bid to stop or ease these violations. 
  In order to avoid leveling rash accusations against the 
neutral mediator and honest sponsor and prevent further 
misunderstandings, we suggest to the U.S. State Department -- in 
observance of reliability and sincerity -- that it clearly 
asserts in the preface that this report is only for propaganda 
and media purposes and that it should neither be quoted nor 
used, because it has no practical application. 

