Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Carla Aguiar: "The End of Social Distribution"] </F>
  [Excerpts] The very foundations of social security are 
threatened by an earthquake of gigantic dimensions called 
"aging." The system for financing social security presently 
rests on the contributions of 3.5 active citizens per retired 
worker, a situation already responsible for large state deficits. 
  Were the system to continue unchanged, however, prospects 
are 
even more disquieting, given that in 60 years, barely 1.3 active 
workers will pay the costs for each retiree. This means that in 
the year 2050, each worker will bear alone the almost entire 
amount a retiree costs. 
  Within this scenario, the system's financial burden may 
"grow 
7.5 times," from 300 million contos distributed in 1990 in old 
age pensions to almost 2.3 billion contos, meaning that the 
system's deficit will rise to "unconscionable heights." 
  This is the point of departure chosen by the authors of the 
book Financing Retirement: The Contribution of the 
Insurance Sector to reach alternative solutions. [passage 
omitted] They advocate the adoption of a mixed, noncompulsory 
system at the company or individual level, leading to the 
accumulation of funds. The management of the these funds may be 
entrusted to entities specializing in this type of activity, 
such as, for instance, insurance companies or pension fund 
managers. 
  While three other types of theoretical solutions are 
possible, "their practical applications entail difficulties": 
pensions can be reduced, the retirement age can be pushed back, 
or contributions can be increased during a worker's active life. 
  Despite the fear expressed by the specialists with regard to 
the first two solutions, given the Portuguese social reality of 
"small pensions with companies increasingly resorting to early 
retirements," the government did not hesitate to postpone the 
retirement age and modify the basis for computing retirements, 
an initiative that resulted in smaller pensions in a number of 
cases. The new social security law also increased the 
contributions of self-employed workers. 

