Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by toz: "Atomic Cluster Formation Facilitates </F>
Production of Nanostructures"] 
  [Text] Frankfurt--Specific production of nanostructures is 
hardly possible with the masking techniques used until now, if 
one wants to produce future electronic switches with structural 
widths below about 50 to 60 nanometers. To be sure, using 
converted grid-tunnel electron microscopes scientists have been 
able to place single atoms in a specific spot on silicon 
surfaces. But this technique is slow, because only one atom at a 
time can be worked on, and it would be very expensive. 
  However, new research results by Swiss and North American 
scientists now indicate that there are various ways to build up 
metals, oxides or possibly other compounds as well in a 
controlled manner for functional electronic structures on 
silicon or metals. 
  A Swiss group of physicists at the EPF Lausanne (Institut de 
Physique Experimental, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland) is using a 
guided separation process which leads to clustering or 
depositing on various surfaces. The surfaces absorb individual 
atoms, which by means of very precise regulation of the 
prevailing substrate and material temperatures gather into 
larger aggregations and finally into clusters. 
  In so doing the individual atoms act similar to 
crystallization nuclei in crystal growing. In these processes 
the atomic surface structure also plays an important role for 
the depositing processes, a "shaping, defining" role, so to 
speak. The physicists describe their work principle as 
"diffusion-controlled aggregation." In these processes the laws 
of depositing follow the kinetic behavior of the various 
materials. 
  It has been possible in the laboratory to deposit, among 
other things, several hundred Angstrom-long, strip-like lines of 
copper atoms on surfaces of palladium foils and cluster-sized 
silver particles on bases of platinum. 
  The results by the Swiss physicists are not yet suitable for 
immediate practical application. But they have discovered 
principles with which it is now possible to build suitable 
structures for simple, and later on also more complicated, 
three-dimensionally conceived, electronic components. 
  U.S. scientists at the NIST National Institute of Science 
and 
Technology in Gaithersburg (Maryland) have taken another 
approach. They use laser light in order precisely to deposit 
individual atoms. With their method they were able to build 
several three-dimensional tracks of chromium atoms on a silicon 
base, for example, which are a little more than 30 nanometers 
high and are spaced about 213 nanometers apart. 
  Right now their method functions with metal atoms which are 
directly applied with the laser beam on the bases. In so doing 
the excited metal atoms "ride" on the laser beam, which 
simultaneously also excites the base, so that when they meet 
aggregations similar to those constructed in the Swiss 
experiments are created. This method works quite fast: In one 
minute it was possible to apply 0.7 nanometers of chromium onto 
a relatively large surface of 0.4 by 1 millimeter with a laser 
in the spectral range of 425 nanometers. 
  For the moment the method permits only application of 
straight line structures. But the developers are working on 
being able to produce more complex structures as well. This 
method has the advantage that it is no longer necessary to work 
with many steps of lithographic masking processes and 
considerably more expensive x-ray or ultraviolet light. In the 
subsequent work one will also use two or more laser beams in 
order to apply structures from not just one but several 
materials. 
  At the moment, the still unsatisfactory stability and 
relatively uneven speed of the laser beams has turned out to 
represent a bottleneck. It is believed that this problem can be 
satisfactorily solved in about two to three years. It would then 
be possible to produce structures with widths of six nanometers. 
In this way "nanoelectronic" switches could then actually be 
produced which are about 100 times smaller than today's 
microelectronic switches. 
  Meanwhile, applications have been made for several patents 
for the laser method. The government institute cannot use these 
patents itself and therefore wants even now to conclude 
utilization agreements with interested industrial enterprises 
which are prepared to participate financially and with manpower 
in the future development work, reports NIST (National Institute 
of Science and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA). 

