BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Commentary" column] </F>
  [Text] During the penultimate congress of the old National 
Party under the premiership of Dr. Malan there were extensive 
discussions about the "native problem" which the National Party 
had to resolve. The "natives" political attitude, preferences 
and problems were tabled. 
  Until a young delegate from the western Transvaal, who was 
attending his first NP congress, stood up and questioned whether 
we were not looking for the solution to the "problem" in the 
wrong corner. The big "problem" and the source of the problems 
was not the "natives" themselves, but the English -- the 
missionaries, the professors and the politicians. Solve the 
English "problem," get rid of the English and Anglicized 
missionaries, professors and politicians, and the "native" 
problem would solve itself. 
  Dr. Malan did not respond to the question but Adv. Strydom, 
through the delegate's MP, let him know that he agreed with him, 
even though he could not talk about it at the congress. The 
"natives'" politics were the hand of Esau, but the voice was 
that of the English Jacob. 
  Mr. Jaap Marais echoed Adv. Strydom's sentiment at the HNP 
[Reformed National Party] congress last week and at a conference 
the night before. The whole black politics, the black majority 
in the government, the human rights argument, the entire 
integration and handover politics are a British-American weapon 
against Afrikaner nationalism which stands in the way of the 
British- American political plan in Africa. 
  This political trend has continued since the days before 
Milner -- who did not want the franchise, but instead the 
Afrikaner's country -- right up to the ANC-dominated new South 
African Government, a product of relentless interference by 
Britain and the United States. It has been coming since Mr. 
F.W. de Klerk's officiousness to serve British interests, until 
current attempts to cripple the Afrikaner's politics and to 
restore British domination by means of cunning methods so as to 
bring about and maintain a British-American "peace" under a 
communist umbrella. 
  Our priority right now should be to frustrate 
British-American meddling in white politics and to bind the 
Afrikaners together against this government. We will deal with 
the blacks ourselves. 

