Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Igor Garcia] </F>
  [Text] The Venezuelan Government has verified through 
Energy and Mines Minister Erwin Arieta that it has no plans to 
increase the price of gasoline this year. Nevertheless, it 
indicated that no plan is definite and any plan, within a 
corporate structure, is subject to revision and cost analysis. 
  The energy and mines minister made this statement when a 
television reporter asked him about the main aspects of the 
situation the nation's petroleum industry is going through. The 
reporter's first question referred to gasoline prices, taking 
into account that it is one of the causes for the deterioration 
of Petroven's [Venezuelan Petroleum] revenues and diverse 
sectors of the national economy have recommended an increase. 
  Although he said several times that the increase would not 
be 
implemented, he hinted that an increase has not been ruled out 
of the nation's political-economic panorama. Moreover, the 
minister said Petroven's plans and projects are constantly being 
reviewed. 
  When asked about the tax the UK announced for Orimolsion and 
the restrictions the United States imposed on Venezuelan 
gasoline exports beginning 1995, he said: "...petroleum is a 
substance that has global nationality and as such it is a 
foreign policy issue. Each nation has tendencies to protect 
their own industry, their own markets," Arrieta noted. The 
Orimulsion case is different than the U.S. gasoline case. For 30 
years, this nation has provided its government with the 
possibility of levying a tax to protect its domestic industry... 
currently this is not what is occurring. Reformulated gasoline 
is another problem. 
  "Some companies, whose product competes with our gasoline in 
the United States, claim that our gas does not meet 
environmental requirements. This is utterly false; we have 
proven that we are in compliance with the standards established, 
and we have pointed out that we are being discriminated 
against.... We are currently holding cordial negotiations, and I 
am sure the problem will be resolved." 
  As for Orimulsion, he said there have always been taxes on 
the import of a number of products. In this case, due to the 
existence of large coal deposits, an effort has been made to 
protect this industry by levying a tax. He added, however, that 
the current negotiations will yield a solution that will benefit 
the two parties. 
  As for problems that could arise within the industry 
regarding investments and expenses due to the dramatic levels 
reached by the price of oil, Erwin Arrieta, former diplomat and 
current minister, vowed that plans to maintain the industry's 
production potential and the expansion of production of some 
products will not be affected so as to not alter the nation's 
future income generated by this industry. 
  The minister was reminded that National Convergence, which 
helped President Rafael Caldera reach power, did not agree with 
some association contracts signed during the administrations of 
Carlos Andres Perez and Ramon J. Velasquez. The Cristobal Colon 
Project was cited as an example. A Convergence member questioned 
its authenticity and even took this case to the Supreme Court of 
Justice to have it repealed. 
  Arrieta's lengthy explanation included experiences of his 30 
years in the oil industry and the absence of an oil doctrine. 
He recalled a decree issued by Liberator Simon Bolivar in 1829; 
the decree ratified what the Indian Laws have established for 
products found in the subsoil. Finally, Arrieta praised the 
energy ministry's employees, who work tirelessly despite their 
low salaries. 

