Language: <F P=105>Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "National News Hookup" program] </F>
  [Text] [Video opens with a reporter speaking into a 
microphone outside a white factory building] Viewers: China 
Hualu Electronic Limited Company -- our country's first large 
modern enterprise that develops and produces internal parts for 
videocassettee recorders, VCR's -- formally went into operation 
in Dalian on 28 December. 
  The Hualu project, which commenced on 1 August 1992, carries 
a total investment of 1.6 billion renminbi. State Council 
leaders once evaluated the project as a leader in terms of 
imported technology, interprovincial and intercity shareholding 
and joint investment, and construction speed. Aiming at high 
levels and high standards of construction, China Hualu 
Electronic Limited Company has imported production technology, 
equipment, and development skills from Japan's Matsushita 
Corporation. With imported production processes, the overall 
equipment automation rate has been raised to more than 80 
percent. There are approximately 500 mechanical arms on 
production lines. The company has brought the processing 
accuracy of precision components to within the range of microns. 
Imported development processes include core and structural 
parts and C1-D and C1-M mould design and development technology. 
China Hualu Electronic Limited Company's first-stage project is 
capable of producing 1.5 million internal parts annually. 
Beginning next year, VCR's made of locally-produced internal 
parts will be marketed in large quantities. A strong foundation 
will thus be laid for the development of our country's VCR 
industry. [video shows people looking at equipment and 
machinery inside the factory, female workers in white caps and 
jackets on a production line, Hu Qili in a dark Western business 
suit being briefed by a factory foreman, and automated machinery 
in use] 
  [Begin recording] [Reporter] Minister Hu, what do you think 
are China Hualu's successes? 
  [Hu Qili] There are two aspects. First, Hualu's successes 
have set a good example of jointly setting up an enterprise 
group. They also offer new experience in overcoming 
disorganization and disorderliness in the electronic industry. 
Second, in importing advanced foreign technology, Hualu has 
established a research and development center to bolster its own 
research and development capability. I think this is a very 
far-sighted move. An enterprise would be void of vitality if it 
did not possess research and development capability. Were this 
the case, we would be in a state of dependency under which we 
would have to import foreign equipment for successive 
generations. [end recording] [Video shows the reporter 
speaking to Hu Qili and then thrusting her microphone toward Hu, 
who speaks while standing and folding his arms behind his back. 
An on-screen caption reads: Minister of Electronics Industry 
Hu Qili. Video then shows a wide shot of the gleaming factory 
premises, automated carts sliding across the factory floor, and 
workers operating machinery inside the factory.] 

