BFN 

  [Text] A responsible military source in the Defense 
Ministry has stated the following: 
  The forces of unity and constitutional legitimacy have 
continued their progress in the coastal region and accomplished 
the tasks assigned to them. These forces were able to reach 
Ra's 'Imran, west of the Salah-al-Din military camp in 
(al-Furayka') on schedule. 
  On the Lahij-Abyan axis, the Armed Forces units continued 
their progress, completing the operation of mopping up of all 
pockets of secessionist dens in Lahij Governorate. The forces 
of unity and constitutional legitimacy were able to capture 
three tanks and three artillery pieces in the northeastern areas 
of al-Hawtah. The forces of unity and constitutional legitimacy 
on this axis were a able to join hands with the other fighting 
forces on the Abyan axis. They established a new dimension for 
their advancing movement. The forces of unity and 
constitutional legitimacy were able to capture two T-62 tanks 
west of al-Harur and an armed cache containing large quantities 
of ammunition and military equipment. 
  On the Shabwah axis, the forces of unity and constitutional 
legitimacy have continued their advance toward the governorate's 
capital, Aden, realizing great successes in carrying out their 
duties. Our advancing forces toward the al-Mahfid, were able to 
continue their advance toward (al-Nakabah) and were able to 
destroy the first and second defense lines established by the 
elements of apostasy and secession in the (al-Nabbabah) area. 
They restored three tanks to the tanks of the forces of unity 
and constitutional legitimacy. 
  Continuing the implementation of their military missions to 
confront the gangs of rebellion and secession and their 
collapsing military dens, our heroes from the pilots of the Air 
Force carried out a number of combat missions, hitting all 
hostile targets. They destroyed two gunboats off the Abyan 
coast and a third off Ra's 'Imran coast. All planes returned 
safely to base. 
  Our air defenses were able to confront counterattacks by the 
air force of the forces of apostasy and secession, downing a 
MiG-21 plane within the Lahij-Abyan operations. They also 
downed a helicopter the day before yesterday on the Abyan-Aden 
axis. This axis is witnessing increasing activity of the forces 
of unity and constitutional legitimacy. In this axis, units of 
our Armed Forces are continuing their brave advance, defeating 
the forces of apostasy and secession, and destroying several 
vehicles and pieces of equipment after knocking them out. 

