Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by "JANA's international affairs editor"] </F>
  [Text] The British defense minister announced that Britain 
is studying the development of its own defense system, claiming 
that countries such as Libya constitute a nuclear threat to 
Britain. The British newspaper THE DAILY EXPRESS reported this 
statement, coupling it by saying that Libya will be able to 
manufacture nuclear weapons within 10 years. 
  JANA's international affairs editor commented by saying: 
This British official statement is further proof that the 
Christians are attacking the Muslims within the framework of the 
Christian-Jewish alliance against Islam. The nuclear weapons 
that now exist include 200 nuclear warheads owned by the Jews 
who occupy Palestine, and they admit owning them despite their 
refusal to sign the Nonproliferation Treaty. No one has talked 
about these nuclear warheads. No one mentioned them or asked 
for their removal. 
  As for Libya, the peaceful country that neither has the 
capability to own nuclear weapons nor is interested in or 
thinking of owning nuclear weapons, and which is subject to the 
annual inspection by the IAEA [International Atomic Energy 
Agency] because of its signing of the Nonproliferation Treaty, 
it is accused of this [constituting a danger] and other similar 
accusations, as if its signing of the Nonproliferation Treaty 
and the regular IAEA inspection are not sufficient. This shows 
that the reason for these and other accusations is the fact that 
the Libyan weapons are not directed against the Arabs. Since 
the Jewish weapons are directed against the Arabs and Muslims 
this is allowed and there are no objections to it. 
  Why? The answer is simply the fact that in the eyes of the 
Christians and Jews the Arabs are animals or a race that no one 
wants and should be annihilated. 
  The editor added: Through this statement the world can see 
the practices of terrorism against peaceful peoples. This 
statement, and the statements that preceded it by the U.S. 
President, saying that Libya constitutes an extraordinary 
danger, are in themselves real, unprecedented terrorism 
practiced by superpowers against a peaceful country. 
  The international affairs editor concluded his comment by 
saying: 
  These are the characteristics of the new world order to 
which 
they call: Terrorism, Jewish and Christian alliance against all 
non-Jewish religions such as Islam, Buddhism, and Confucianism, 
in order to establish Jewish and Christian control over the 
whole world. 

