BFN 

<F P=106> ["Edited text" of interview with ANC President Nelson </F>
Mandela by Editor Ken Owen, at Mandela's Houghton home in 
Johannesburg on 30 April] 
  [Text] You said at one point that the election has 
been subjected to "massive sabotage". Later you said it was 
"free and fair". Will you now accept the outcome, no matter 
what? 
  [Mandela] Oh, certainly. The IEC [Independent Electoral 
Commission] has done tremendous work. We gave them a job 
impossible but they have been able to acquit themselves 
admirably. When I say there was massive sabotage, it has nothing 
to do with them. I mean somewhere in the process of 
distribution this sabotage took place. As far as the voting 
among whites, coloured and Indians was concerned, there was 
nothing irregular except in Alberton and one other town. But in 
the African areas, especially the strongholds of the ANC, there 
were serious problems. In the Transkei and the Northern 
Transvaal, ballots were delivered late, but it was not a 
reflection on the IEC itself. They did an impressive job. 
  Stability must surely be your main concern now. What 
threats to stability do you see? 
  [Mandela] Let me first clear up one report that I am going 
to 
raise taxes, that I am going to tax whites. I don't know where 
they picked up that statement. If there is anything I am 
conscious about it is not to frighten the minorities, 
especially the white minority. What I said is that everybody 
must pay a fair tax; secondly we want a low tax rate to attract 
investment, both locally and from abroad. That is what I 
stressed, and I do that in order to achieve stability in our 
country. If you single out a particular community, you are 
creating instability. 
  To establish stability in this country is not a great 
problem. The only people who can create instability are the 
leaders, ourselves. If we are committed to the ideal of a 
government of national unity, which will bring into government 
the leaders of every party, I think we shall be in a position to 
deal with any threat, certainly of violence, that comes. 
  In our economic policies -- the reconstruction and 
development plan, for example -- there is not a single reference 
to things like nationalisation, and this is not accidental. 
There is not a single slogan that will connect us with any 
Marxist ideology. We have drafted this plan five times. It 
emerged from people's forums and we sent it to various people in 
the country -- business people, academics, state corporations, 
government departments -- and the majority of these people 
supported the plan generally, although they had specific 
criticisms. 
  I was present when we had a discussion with Mr Harry 
Oppenheimer and other top businessmen...and we discussed the 
plan very openly, very frankly, and we took down their 
criticisms, and accommodated them. We are now planning a second 
meeting with them because we are concerned that we should put 
before the country a plan which embraces the concerns and the 
fears of all population groups, especially business. I have not 
taken a single extended visit abroad without coming back to 
report to business what I have been doing. 
  What I have done, Ken, is to see heads of states, the heads 
of governments, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, 
commercial banks and industrial organisations to say, we are 
building a new country, we want your assistance with resources. 
We can never get the support of business if we are going to 
have radical policies, and that is why we have put forward this 
perspective of a government of national unity, which may 
consist of De Klerk, and Viljoen, and Zach de Beer, Buthelezi, 
Makwetu, people who don't share at all in radical left policies 
-- with the exception perhaps of the PAC. 
  That is intended to bring about stability so we can face any 
threat to stability. There are people who threaten violence, 
like Inkatha and the AWB [Afrikaner Resistance Movement], but we 
are having discussions with Inkatha, and with the King, and we 
are not going to allow them do things which arise out of the 
fact that there is no contact between the government of national 
unity and Inkatha. We are going to press them to keep within the 
process, and to participate as far as possible. 
  There have been suggestions that Mr. de Klerk will be 
assigned mainly a ceremonial role as deputy president. Is that 
true? 
  [Mandela] No, no, no. He will have the full powers of a 
deputy president except that he will be the second deputy 
president. We have had differences, as you know, but I still 
regard him as a man of integrity who has made a valuable 
contribution. I have hammered him only on one point -- his lack 
of candour as far as the existence of a third force is 
concerned, and allowing our people to be slaughtered. This is 
the only reason I have clashed with him. 
  Otherwise, I value his contribution and I think it will be 
proper for a government of national unity to recognise that 
contribution if he gets five percent and if he comes in as the 
second strongest party. He certainly will be useful because he 
has had experience of government. Although his government was 
illegitimate and discredited, he has had experience. 
  As we understand his position, if he gets four or five 
seats in cabinet he would want one cabinet seat in each of three 
categories -- security, finance, and social. Are you happy with 
that formula? 
  [Mandela] I have not heard that rumour, but I have said that 
I am interested in stability in this country and it is going to 
be necessary for us to ensure this stability by the cabinet 
appointments we make, but I have not yet discussed these matters 
with my organisation. 
  Would you keep Dr. Stals at the Reserve Bank? 
  [Mandela] I would recommend that. 
  What about amnesty? Will an extended amnesty be 
secret? Will we never know who committed what crimes? 
  [Mandela] You know that opponents of apartheid were granted 
indemnity provided they made applications, and disclosed the 
crimes for which they were applying. The question is whether 
the security forces must get the same treatment. We want the 
support of the security forces, the police and the army, but 
their morale is very low. They are concerned about the 
commission for truth, that it will lead to a kind of Nuremburg 
trials. 
  The ANC must take the lead in removing the lack of morale. 
We will depend on the SAP [South African Police] and we must 
remember that there are 100,000 policemen. Only a small number 
of them are guilty of these kinds of crimes. That is why we are 
looking at an amnesty after disclosure. Of course, there will 
be no amnesty for crimes committed after December 1993. 
  After stability, when things settle down, you will have 
to deal with expectations. What are your three top 
priorities? 
  [Mandela] We have spelled out our priorities: the creation 
of 2.5-million jobs, the building of one million homes, free and 
universal education. These are the central issues, in that 
order, but this does not mean that we will ignore other needs. 
There is, naturally, also the question of peace. 
  Will you disarm the nation? 
  [Mandela] That is absolutely imperative. We must devise a 
strategy of gun control and community policing. Then you must 
understand also that the enemies of peace are poverty, lack of 
jobs, homelessness, illiteracy. We must attack these, and get 
the community involved in the process of controlling the 
violence in the country -- because the fact that the masses are 
not involved helps to aggravate the position. 
  The election has been an extraordinary emotional event 
as well as a political event. The election was in itself an act 
of conciliation. How do you build on that? 
  [Mandela] The question of conciliation is one of the most 
important. This message must go across very clearly, and I hope 
that every leader will realise how important it is for us not 
only to preach but to take some concrete steps to ensure 
reconciliation. 
  The question of indemnity, for example, is part of that 
conciliation. the fact that we have avoided targeting any 
community, even the white community, is an attempt to avoid 
creating fear or concern which may induce our people to leave 
the country. Whatever criticism we have of the policy of racial 
discrimination, the reality is that the whites in this country 
have had opportunities which we have not had -- opportunities of 
education, of acquiring knowledge, skill and expertise -- and in 
the building of a new South Africa we are going to rely on them. 
Their contribution will be critical. 
  That is why we are calling on whites to accept that the 
victory we have achieved is not just a victory of the oppressed, 
it is a victory of the entire people of South Africa. Even 
those that have left the country, we would like them to come 
back, and show them that in everything that we do we place 
importance on consultation with all national groups. 
  That is why I can today go to any big business group in this 
country and ask for support, and I do not come away without 
support. 

