Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] At an expanded meeting of the government in the 
Kremlin on Friday deputies of the State Duma and leaders of 
executive bodies from a number of regions sharply criticized the 
Cabinet's activities. 
  Thus, the chairman of the State Duma's committee on economic 
reform, Sergey Glazyev, accused the government of lacking an 
anti-crisis program of reforms. He described the prime 
minister's report as a declaration of intentions. In his 
opinion, the government has lost control over the economic 
processes. He also noted that the president and the Cabinet 
virtully ingore any economic initiatives and proposals of the 
parliament. 
  According to Glazyev, the main confrontation in society is 
not between supporters and opponents of reform, but between 
those who favor establishing law and order and those who "swing 
the boat stirring up confrontation." In the opinion of the 
deputy, such people work in all branches and structures of power. 
  St. Petersburg Mayor Anatoliy Sobchak warned that the 
country 
is now "on the brink of a financial catastrophe," and unless 
urgent measures are taken there will be mass stoppages of 
enterprises and freezing of social programs. Sobchak spoke in 
favor of cancelling the compulsory character of the 
privatization program adopted by the government at the 
initiative of the State Property Committee, giving regions the 
right to carry out privatization according to their own 
programs. The St. Petersburg mayor accused the Cabinet of not 
wanting to transfer part of the budget deficit burden on 
regions' shoulders. 
  Acting Finance Minister Sergey Dubinin did not agree with 
that point of view. He noted that regions are entitled to 
impose their own taxes and form their own budgets. The acting 
finance minister pointed out that the government can hold 
inflation down with shock methods and knows how to do that. 
However, it does not set such a goal because this would 
threaten to cause grave social consequences in the future. 

