BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Yang Liu (2799 2692): "Guangzhou City </F>
Awards German Consortium $150 Million Contract for Subway Cars"] 
  [Text] Guangzhou Mayor Li Ziliu said that a few days ago, 
Guangzhou awarded an important contract for subway locomotives 
and cars to a German consortium, and because the British 
authorities have adopted an unfriendly policy of confrontation 
toward China on the issue of Hong Kong, Guangzhou will not award 
any subway equipment contracts to British companies. 
  Li said at a public occasion in Hong Kong yesterday that the 
Guangzhou subway invited tenders for the import of 15 items. 
Several dozen foreign companies, including British companies, 
have participated in the bidding so far. However, he said that 
they did not plan to award contracts to British companies. 
  He said that locomotives and car imports were the most 
important. They had decided to award the $150 million contract 
to a German consortium led by Siemens Ltd. According to the 
contract, the German side will provide the Chinese side with 200 
German-made subway cars and locomotives in the next few years, 
when the Guangzhou subway is open to traffic. 
  He said that in addition to the Guangzhou Mass Transit 
Railway Corporation awarding contracts for the importation of 
two items last month, it awarded another supply contract a few 
days ago. At the end of last month, the company awarded 
contracts for the supply of an automatic ticket sales and 
checking system and an escalator system to two suppliers from 
the United States and Japan respectively. Li also talked about 
the development of construction of the 18.15-km Guangzhou 
subway, and he said that everything had progressed smoothly and 
that the whole line would be completed in 1998. The section 
between Fangcun and Huangsha will be open to traffic in 1997. 
  On the question of assigning the right to develop property 
above the 16 subway stations, Li said that of the right to 
develop 25 lots above the stations, 15 have been approved. 
Guangzhou is not anxious to award contracts to develop the 
remaining 10 lots. It will offer contracts when land prices 
have risen one or two years from now. 
  Yesterday, Li also touched on the questions of keeping down 
inflation and stabilizing rice prices and vegetable supplies in 
Guangzhou. He said that the city's price index (inflation) 
dropped from 23 percent in March to 21 percent in February, but 
we still should not lower our guard. He said that both now and 
in the future, Guangzhou, with a population of 7.2 million 
including the suburban areas, will never adopt the previous 
practice of issuing rice and oil coupons to residents. The city 
currently has grain reserves for six months' of consumption and 
puts over 90,000 tonnes of vegetables into the market every day. 

