Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Andreas Forster: ``Was a Skillful Game of </F>
Confusion Staged Concerning 41 Barrels With Poison From 
Seveso?''] 
  [Text] Documents that are available to BERLINER ZEITUNG 
show that at least 47 tonnes of dioxin-containing waste from 
Seveso were stored at the special waste dump in Schoenberg in 
Mecklenburg. 
  The quarrel over the poisonous barrels from Seveso 
dramatically exacerbated once again in Schwerin last Friday [14 
January]. At a mammoth meeting, at which 20 witnesses were 
heard, the members of the Schoenberg investigation committee 
wanted to finally clarify the question as to whether dioxin 
waste from the Italian town of Seveso reached the waste dump in 
Mecklenburg or not. 
  The atmosphere became solemn when the representative of the 
Swiss chemical concern, Hoffmann LaRoche, to which the Seveso 
factory ICMESA [expansion unknown] belonged, raised his hand to 
swear an oath. The 41 barrels with the deadly poison were 
incinerated in his presence in Basel in 1985. Thus, they can 
never have been buried at the Schoenberg dump ground, Heinz 
Hollinger, who is responsible for environmental protection at 
Hoffmann LaRoche, swore. 
  Belgian member of the European Parliament Paul Staes, from 
the group of the Greens, and his aide, the spokesman of the 
Greens in Luebeck, Guenter Wosnitza, presented a chain of 
evidence based on statements of eyewitnesses and hints in 
documents. Staes remembered documents from the Environment 
Ministry of the former German Democratic Republic [GDR] that he 
saw in 1990. They showed that the dioxin-containing waste from 
Seveso really did reach Schoenberg. Yet Staes was not able to 
present a single document proving the transportation or the 
storage in Schoenberg. 
  BERLINER ZEITUNG is now able to furnish this document. It 
has received documents from the former GDR Environment Ministry 
on the basis of which it can be proven for the first time that 
poison from Seveso did arrive in Schoenberg after all and that 
even more arrived than the supposed 6.5 tonnes of reactor waste 
in 41 barrels. 
  In January 1982, the Mannesmann Italia company, a subsidiary 
of the Mannesmann concern in Germany, inquired with the German 
authorities whether it was possible to store a larger quantity 
of waste at the Mecklenburg dump. It claimed that metal parts 
contaminated with 2,3,7,8-tetrachloride benzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 
the most poisonous dioxin, were involved. Even the smallest 
dose of TCDD may cause genetic deviations over several 
generations. 
  The inquiry from the Italian Mannesmann company was 
registered under number I (for Italy) 18/82. ``Seveso/Italy'' 
was mentioned as the producer of waste. 
  On 3 March 1982, the supervisory commission of the special 
waste dump rejected the Mannesmann inquiry I 18/82, giving the 
following reason: Waste from ``well-known poison scandals..., 
Seveso, for example,'' will not be stored in Schoenberg. Thus, 
officially, the GDR was no longer involved in the deal with the 
Seveso waste. Internally, however, order I 18/82 was carried 
out, as documents have now proven. 
  In a ``list of wastes'' that arrived at Schoenberg between 
the establishment of the waste dump and 30 September 1985, the 
rejected Mannesmann order is also mentioned. Under ``waste 
group 6 -- other wastes,'' I 18/82 mentions the delivery of 
calcium chloride residues. Total quantity: 47.482 tonnes. 
  Thus, it is clear that the Mannesmann company that was 
ordered to eliminate the hazardous waste from Seveso finally 
reached agreement on the deal with the GDR side. 
  To cover their tracks, the officials responsible for the 
waste dump simply declared the contents of the poisonous 
delivery wrongly. it is not known whether they stored the 
wrongly declared dioxin waste in a ``poison bunker'' or whether 
they simply dumped the dangerous material somewhere in the waste 
dump to cover up the affair. 
  Another suspicion has not been dispelled: More poisonous 
waste transports from Italy for which inquiries were sent as 
early as in 1982 arrived until 30 September 1985. In three 
cases, they were declared as mercury-containing by-products and 
in one case as methyl metal chrylat residues. Were these 
deliveries also declared wrongly? 
The documents from the GDR Environment Ministry available to 
BERLINER ZEITUNG also make the game of confusion concerning the 
41 Seveso barrels that has lasted for 10 years appear in a new 
light. It seems to become finally clear what the barrel 
operation really might have been -- a gigantic diversion. 
Bernard Paringaux, the French specialist for waste disposal and 
one of the key actors in the barrel comedy, confirmed the 
following to European Parliament member Staes. ``Most of the 
Seveso poison went somewhere else. The responsible officials 
wanted to direct the whole attention of the press and the public 
to the 41 barrels, which they really achieved,'' Paringaux told 
Staes. 
  The spectacle for the media had the required effect. Whereas 
the world speculated about the background to the mysterious 
story and the authenticity of the barrels that had disappeared, 
the transportation of the major part of the poisonous Seveso 
waste was arranged in Milan. 
  An internal communication from Paringaux' company Wadir to 
Mannesmann Italia reads: ``When the first part will have been 
shipped, we will meet in Milan where you can determine the 
modalities and the dates for the disassembly and the 
transportation of the last parts with Mr. Paringaux.'' The 
``final removal is estimated to involve approximately 150 
tonnes.'' 
  The question as to why the entire show concerning the Seveso 
poison was staged with international participation has not yet 
been answered. One possible reason might be that a much larger 
quantity of highly toxic substances resulted from the accident 
at the ICMESA company than has so far been admitted. 
  However, this would only be possible if something other than 
the harmless trichlorophenol was produced over the weekend 
during the mysterious special shift when the grave disaster 
occurred. 
  According to Paul Staes, reports by eyewitnesses support 
this 
theory. They mention a much higher working temperature of the 
reactor than would have been required for the production of 
trichlorophenol. A scientist who visited the factory after the 
accident discovered a second secret production room behind the 
reactor that caused the damage, in which barrels were filled 
with chemicals. 
  According to Staes' theory, a highly poisonous herbicide 
containing various dioxins was produced for military purposes in 
Seveso. Thus, a much larger quantity of toxic waste resulted 
from the accident than the officially admitted 6.5 tonnes. 
  The official quantity that was filled in 41 barrels 
according 
to the rules might have been incinerated in Switzerland in 1985 
to calm the public down. However, the scaring conclusion of 
this version might be that not only the approximately 50 tonnes 
of the deadly substances but twice as much might be stored in 
Schoenberg. 

