CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Saso Colakovski: "Dealers in Dreams"] </F>
  [Text] The growing presence of drugs in our country, 
especially heroin, which is being distributed on a large scale 
in the Macedonian [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia--FYROM] drug market because of the closure of the 
channels of the "Balkan drug route," is bringing this problem to 
the surface in all its seriousness; the army of petty dealers is 
being created from drug addict circles; the "nebulous" figure 
being used is about 4,000 hard drug addicts in our country. 
  The history of drug smuggling and abuse in this region is 
more or less known: The use of narcotic drugs in Macedonia, 
inevitably associated with our country's capital, was recorded 
for the first time in the distant year of 1969, and the first 
"retail" dealers in Skopje were discovered a little over five 
years ago. Since then, to the present date, it has all been 
evolving explosively both in terms of the size of the clientele, 
and with respect to what represents drug dealer networks of the 
most sophisticated sort. The police data on the distribution of 
smuggling channels state the following: During the period from 
1991 to 1992, a total of 10 drug channels were discovered, and 
38 kilograms of heroin, 22 kilograms of raw opium, and 12 
kilograms of marijuana were seized. Meanwhile, however, in just 
the past year 47 drug smuggling cases have been discovered, 102 
individuals have been charged, and a little over 78 kilos of 
heroin, four kilograms of raw opium, 15 kilograms of marijuana, 
and 75 containers of various narcotics have been seized.... All 
of this indicates that during the past three years Macedonia, 
from a transit crossroads on the "Balkan route" to Europe for 
drugs, is slowly turning into a true drug market. One of the 
main reasons for this is the increased problems with 
transporting drugs through the already established Balkan 
channels (in view of the current instability in this region), so 
that an enormous quantity of narcotic drugs is being left, i.e., 
sold, in our country. In spite of the above-mentioned 
difficulties, the "Balkan route" is still in operation, although 
with an extremely reduced length--the last stop, under these 
conditions, is Belgrade now, instead of the West European 
centers. Naturally, the amounts of drugs distributed along this 
route have also suffered restrictions. 
  Proceeding in chronological order, when it had already 
become 
obvious that the drug channel following the path that we call 
the "Fraternity and Unity" highway was becoming unusable, the 
international drug mafia was forced to establish new alternative 
routes. Macedonia, however, is still marked on the maps of the 
big heroin bosses as one of the key spots on the East-West route 
for drugs. Thus, for example, recently the heroin channel from 
Turkey, which supplies the drug markets in Italy, France, and 
Spain, goes through our country. The route more or less looks 
like this: The starting point is Turkey, it goes through 
Bulgaria, it enters our country at the Deve Bair border crossing 
and leaves at the Cafasan crossing, then goes from the Albanian 
port of Durres to Bari in Italy, and it is distributed from 
there to the Apennine and Iberian peninsulas. All of this is of 
exceptional importance for us, since parts of these heroin 
shipments remain to be distributed in the drug market in our 
country. (Fortunately, the smuggling channel that distributes 
heroin for the Central European centers and Scandinavia, and 
goes from Turkey, through Bulgaria, Romania, and the Czech 
Republic bypasses us.) 
<H5>  The Main Bosses in the Background </H5>
  All the roads of the drug business in our country, however, 
lead to and from the Macedonian capital. Without the slightest 
exaggeration of the problem, drugs are "dealt" in Skopje in 
virtually every dark alley of the Old Quarter, according to 
experts on the Skopje underground. They add that what the 
Medellin cartel is to Colombia and the world, the Carsija [old 
marketplace] is to Skopje and Macedonia. Those using the 
services of the Skopje heroin dealers (or 
euphemistically--"dream dealers") know very well where and in 
which spot they can ask for "something white": in teahouses 
obscured by tobacco smoke, inns, and the sinister pathways 
around the Jaja Pasha mosque. The left bank of the Vardar is no 
longer the only place "privileged" for "retail" heroin--the 
dealers are aggressively moving to the right side as well.... 
  The "retail" dealers on the street, however, are only the 
last "operatives" in the forefront and the absolutely final 
category of subordinates in the elaborately organized hierarchy 
of the drug mafia. The main bosses, however, are always in the 
background, far out of sight. As a rule, everything starts with 
Turkey, the main supplier of heroin for the Macedonian drug 
market, but also for the far more discriminating West European 
drug market. The main organizers and financers of the heroin 
channels (usually concealed behind the screen of successful 
businessmen dealing in textiles, leather, food...), through 
their assistants, purchase the drugs from Afghanistan or 
Pakistan in the form of opium cakes, or even as finished refined 
heroin, produced by the primitive laboratories hidden in the 
Kurds' stony wastelands. 
  In this whole chain, no one actually knows who are the real 
bosses and organizers, the main profiteers in this whole 
business. (To illustrate, a kilogram of heroin costs 
18,000-20,000 German marks [DM] "wholesale" in Turkey, and its 
price in the Macedonian drug market is DM45,000, while in the 
European centers, for example in Switzerland or Austria, heroin 
achieves a price of as much as DM100,000 per kilogram; we note 
that the price increases several-fold for "retail" sale.) 
  The statement by 27-year-old Skopje resident F.Z., who 
"earned" a sentence of one year and three months in prison for 
smuggling close to half a kilogram of heroin, virtually does not 
deviate at all from the standard milieu of the people who are in 
the drug chain. 
  "Sometime in the spring of the year before last, two people 
I 
knew came up to me at a table in the teahouse and said to me, 
`Do you want some money?' Who doesn't...? And I agreed to be 
their `mule,' '' F.Z. said. "They knew me from before while I 
was in business... I had dealt the `white stuff' retail, from 
time to time, but until then I had never carried it across the 
border. We agreed that they would give me a car, an old BMW--and 
first I was supposed to get a rent-a-car but they changed their 
minds--they gave me some money and the address of a hotel in 
Istanbul. And, they told me, `You will park the car in such and 
such a parking lot, you will stay there for three days, and 
afterwards you will come back.' It seemed easy to me, and they 
were supposed to pay me DM1,000." 
<H5>  Dealers Who Are Drug Addicts </H5>
  "When I arrived in Istanbul, I parked the car where they 
told 
me and went to the hotel. During the two days that I stayed 
there, they `padded' the BMW and put some goods in it, 
textiles... They caught me here, someone `squealed on' me... We 
fell, me and three others--them as the organizers and me as the 
mule." 
  If one could speak a few years ago of "pure" drug addicts 
and 
"pure" dealers, now this line has been erased--the army of petty 
dealers is being created from drug addict circles, according to 
police information. Both categories are closely dependent upon 
each other. The dealers' working methods are well-known--in most 
cases they choose the victims themselves. As a rule, they always 
give the first dose for free, "as friends," they reel in the 
victim, and then--the horror starts! In the last two years, one 
more phenomenon in the drug addiction problem here has become 
urgent: Previously, in drug addict practice several years had to 
pass from the first "joint" of marijuana, through pills and 
opium teas, to the first dose of "horse" (heroin), but now the 
latest trend among drug addicts is to go to "hard" drugs 
directly. What is even more disturbing, however, is that the new 
victims of the "white powder" are even entering the world of 
drugs in their early teens. Curiosity is usually cited as the 
motive for trying drugs. 
  This is precisely what is confirmed by the specific figures 
on registered drug addicts in the Skopje Outpatient Hospital for 
Dependencies, which state that the age threshold is declining 
every year, and in certain cases is down to 14-15 years old. 
There are around 500 officially registered drug addicts in our 
country (more precisely, 457), and in the last two years this 
figure has been rising continuously and explosively. This 
figure, naturally, by no means reflects the real situation, 
since it is not difficult to assume that there are many times 
more unregistered drug addicts. People are using the figure of 
4,000, but skeptics claim that there are at least that many more 
of them. In this case, in addition to those dependent upon 
"hard" drugs, this includes those who consume the "soft" drugs, 
such as marijuana, for example. Understandably, Skopje, as the 
domestic drug center, accounts for over two-thirds of the drug 
addicts, and concerning the distribution of drug addiction with 
all of its "attributes," one can also speak of Ohrid, Gevgelija, 
Tetovo, Stip, Struga, Radovis, Veles, Kumanovo, and Bitola. 
  It is also characteristic of the cities in the eastern part 
of Macedonia, however, that this climate is exceptionally 
suitable for cultivating the plant cannabis sativa, from which 
marijuana is obtained. The main center is the village of 
Stojakovo near Gevgelija, followed by Strumica, Radovis, and 
Valandovo. Usually the cannabis seed is purchased in the 
Netherlands by those involved in the illegal cultivation of this 
plant, and they locate the "plantations" in hidden places near 
the water. The seeds are planted in the spring, the leaves are 
gathered in September, and the stalks, from which the best 
marijuana is actually obtained, can grow up to three or four 
meters. Cakes of poppy tar (opium cakes which are the basis for 
the morphine base from which heroin is produced) are still 
stored in this part of our country, and occasionally these old 
stocks are distributed in our drug market. 
<H5>  How To Get an Effective Model </H5>
  Now, the question of how to prevent the illegal trafficking 
and abuse of narcotic drugs is justifiably becoming more and 
more topical. Dr. Metodija Angeleski, a lecturer at the Security 
School in Skopje, explained his observations on the problem in 
the specialized journal BEZBEDNOST, issue 4 in 1993. He said 
that the role of the unifying director and coordinator of all 
the activities in the struggle against drug abuse should be 
assumed by a special government body. His program, he 
emphasized, included in addition to general social measures 
standardized programs for individual state bodies, 
organizations, and other entities, such as the police, the 
customs service, the judicial system, health care, social 
welfare organizations, etc. 
  As a counter to this, however, the idea of legalizing the 
"soft" drugs is being more and more widely disseminated among 
the Macedonian public, as one of the long-term solutions to the 
problem of narcotics abuse. Professional experts from West 
European countries are still arguing over this idea, since 
according to their information gathered over many years, 
prohibitions have only yielded barren results. Perhaps the Dutch 
model has gone furthest in this regard. According to a 
presentation by Teo Laus, a psychologist for drug addicts who is 
a member of the Dutch state health organization, given at the 
First Congress on Dependency in Macedonia, held in Skopje in 
November 1993, punishing drug users unfairly limits the freedom 
of adults to use substances (i.e., marijuana) which are not more 
dangerous than those that can be purchased legally, such as 
tobacco and alcohol! In this regard, the sale of "soft" drugs 
has been semilegalized in the Netherlands, and marijuana, for 
example, is sold in specialized shops; the purpose of this model 
is primarily to differentiate the consumers of "soft" drugs from 
the other ones. According to the latest information, this Dutch 
model is finding more and more advocates in other countries as 
well, such as Germany, Italy, France, and the Scandinavian 
countries. 
<H5>  [Box, p 16] </H5>
<H5>  Dr. Slavica Gajdasic, Writer: "There Is No AIDS Among Skopje </H5>
Drug Addicts!" 
  "During just this January, 10 new cases of individuals 
dependent upon narcotics were registered at the Outpatient 
Hospital for Dependencies in Kisela Voda. What is more alarming 
is the fact that all 10 cases involve individuals under 20.'' 
  "Since drug addicts are included in the critical groups that 
are vulnerable to the danger of infection with the AIDS virus, 
all new patients reporting to the outpatient hospital are 
required to have an AIDS test. None of the 60 drug addicts 
currently registered at this hospital is HIV-positive! According 
to the latest information, the incubation period for the AIDS 
virus is 100 days, and for that reason all our drug addict 
patients are sent for retesting--young people every three 
months, and older ones every six months. The tests are done at 
the Clinic for Infectious Diseases and Febrile Conditions." 
<H5>  [Box, p 16] </H5>
<H5>  "I Got All the Way Off With Heroin!" </H5>
  "I am on marijuana, or if you want more, I was for seven or 
eight years. It was domestic marijuana, from Gevgelija. 
Occasionally, and then more and more often, I used opium tea and 
became addicted to it. We gathered pods from the poppies that 
grow in eastern Macedonia and brewed tea. With one cup of tea, 
you `flash' for two hours (this term is used in drug addict 
jargon for the first few hours when the effect from the drugs is 
the greatest--author's note), and then it `holds' you for maybe 
another 20 hours. I was completely dependent on the tea. The 
crises when there was no tea were terrible: vomiting, spasms, 
pains in my muscles and bones... Then on one occasion I tried 
heroin, `horse,' and got all the way off it. In the beginning it 
was beautiful for me, really OK. Then everything became hell! In 
one month, I thought that I could not survive without heroin," 
26-year-old Toni T. told us his terrible story. 
  "When a friend of mine started to smoke marijuana 10 years 
ago, I tried somehow to get him off of it, but in time I got in 
trouble too, even more than him. You know, we associated with 
drug addicts, but for a long time we stayed with just a joint of 
marijuana and opium tea. But afterwards... There was nothing I 
didn't use. Three years ago I sniffed heroin for the first time, 
and at that time I told myself that I would go ahead and try it, 
and I wouldn't die from just one time. But after a few doses I 
couldn't do without it anymore. I smoked horse, I snorted it, 
and several times I injected it. Then my friend and I were 
already deeply dependent on heroin. At that point we didn't even 
care about pleasure anymore, only about being normal and 
surviving. I became numb and nothing interested me anymore. But 
even before I started with heroin, I knew from the experiences 
of some of my other drug addict friends that their hair was 
falling out, that their teeth were falling out, their insides 
were collapsing, they didn't look like people, but I tried it 
anyway," Goran T. said. 
  Our conversation with them was conducted recently at one of 
the "renowned" Skopje cafes, while the two of them were under 
treatment for "getting off" their dependency, and they said that 
they wanted to get out of the hell of heroin. A few days ago, 
however, both of them left "state treatment" and are on the 
street again, hunting for the white powder. 
<H5>  [Box, p 16] </H5>
<H5>  Prof. Djordji Marjanovic--"Legalization of `Soft' </H5>
Drugs--Yes!" 
  Prof. Djordji Marjanovic is of the opinion that the 
criminalization of drug abuse is essential, but basically it 
should be proportionate to the purpose for which it is intended. 
Thus, in his opinion, the drug addicts who use "soft" drugs like 
marijuana should be allowed to do so. Meanwhile, registered 
consumers of "harder" drugs should be given doses of 
substitutes, like methadone, for example, prescribed, specified, 
and controlled by a doctor, at specific "drugstores." This, 
according to Marjanovic, would avoid the abuse and resale of 
drugs. At the same time, he does not support positions opposing 
efforts against drug addiction, but instead urges respect for a 
citizen's freedoms and his right to choose. 
  "Legalizing soft drugs would solve the illegal trafficking 
and production of narcotics. When drugs are legalized, the 
producers, smugglers, and dealers will no longer be attracted as 
strongly.... And society would also benefit in this case, since 
through legalization it would get its own piece of the pie, 
which would not be a small one. This money would thus be used in 
the struggle against drug abuse as a social evil, in the medical 
treatment of addicts, but above all for the prevention of this 
social anomaly. This is because if drug addicts use drugs as a 
ticket to escape from reality, then there is something in 
reality that has to be changed," Dr. Marjanovic thinks. 

