Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial by 'Alireza Shemirani] </F>
  [Text] When the Voice and Vision organization willfully 
broadcast the petrochemical company's answer to the Engineer 
Yahyavi's extemporaneous remarks (during deliberations on his 
vote of confidence as a minister), the belief was that this move 
by the management of the Voice and Vision organization was done 
merely out of an incorrect interpretation of regulations, but 
the broadcast of a new statement from the Voice and Vision 
organization concerning further remarks by Engineer Yahyavi on 
the Voice of the Majles undermined the earlier analysis of the 
Voice and Vision organization's behavior. 
  No one believed, however, that in a short time those running 
the Voice and Vision organization would put the secrets of their 
hearts on paper, and to show everyone the dreams they had for 
the future of the government and the nation. Apparently the 
supervisor of the Voice and Vision organization was issuing a 
warning about the violation of Paragraph 6, Article 3 of the 
Constitution. Paragraph 6, Article 3 of the Constitution is "the 
elimination of all forms of tyranny and autocracy and all 
attempts to monopolize power." 
  A review of all the comments of the nation's experts in 
studying and approving the Constitution shows that they were 
under a heavy cloud of worry and apprehension. The experience of 
the decades before the Islamic revolution and the base qualities 
of individuals has shown that this apprehension goes beyond the 
ordinary. 
  Here and there in the deliberations of the experts during 
the 
writing of the Constitution, much effort was made so that the 
government system in this nation beset by despotism would be 
arranged in such a way that the powerful governing bodies would 
be controlled by each other, that ultimately all would come 
together under the leadership of a single just theologian, and 
that no person or body would have absolute power except the 
absolute vice-regency of the chief jurisconsult. 
  The division of responsibilities among the three powers, the 
recommendation of the ministers by the president of the republic 
to the Majles and the final decision making by the Majles in 
this matter, the election of the president of the republic by 
the nation, the study of his lack of political qualifications, 
and even questioning and interpellating him in the Majles (after 
the revision of the Constitution), the possibility of 
complaining about the work methods of the three powers, the 
study of the complaints in this regard by the Majles Article 90 
Commission, Majles research and investigation of all the 
nation's affairs and other things, all make it possible for the 
deputies of the people to monitor and supervise all individuals 
and organizations. 
  In this statement by the supervisor of the Voice and Vision 
organization concerning the violation of the principles in the 
Constitution, there are many claims and excesses, which are 
questionable, although their falseness is clear and obvious: 
  The executive director of the Voice and Vision organization 
claims first of all that the research and investigation report 
contains accusations, slander and assaults on the reputations of 
individuals. Second, he claims that according to Article 39 of 
the Constitution, even assaulting the reputation and dignity of 
convicts and prisoners is forbidden and subject to punishment, 
as well as the individual and collective reputations of those 
running the government. Third, Article 171 of the Constitution 
gives people who have been subjected to accusations the right to 
defend themselves and it makes it obligatory to restore their 
spiritual and material reputations and dignity. Fourth, he 
claims that Articles 6 and 19 of the Law on General Policies and 
Principles of the Voice and Vision organization's programming 
and the measure enacted by the Supervisory Council in 1363 [21 
March 1984-20 March 1985], required him to broadcast the 
statement against the Majles. 
  A. Article 39 of the Constitution states that "affronts to 
the honor and dignity of criminals are forbidden and subject to 
punishment." Article 37 also says that "no one is to be regarded 
as guilty unless his guilt has been established by the competent 
court." 
  Article 159 says clearly "the Ministry of Justice is the 
official body to which all grievances and complaints are to be 
referred." 
  If a crime has been committed (affront to honor, etc.), the 
authority to determine the crime and set and implement the 
punishments is the judiciary, not the supervisor of the Voice 
and Vision organization. 
  He has apparently cut himself out and stitched himself 
together out of whole cloth. Does the supervisor of the Voice 
and Vision organization think he does not need to go through the 
legal procedures? 
  B. Apparently the executive director of the Voice and Vision 
organization has read Article 171 of the Constitution from 
beginning to end. Consider Article 171 carefully: "If an 
individual suffers moral or material harm as the result of a 
failure or error of the judge with respect to the subject matter 
of a case, the verdict delivered, or the implementation of the 
verdict, the judge must stand surety for the reparation of that 
harm in accordance with Islamic criteria, if it be a case of 
failure. Otherwise, losses will be compensated for by the 
government. In all cases, the repute and good standing of the 
individual will be restored." 
  The executive director has made this article one of his 
justifications. He declares: Article 171 of the Constitution 
gives people who have been subjected to accusations the right to 
defend themselves and it makes it obligatory to restore their 
spiritual and material reputations and dignity. 
  The difference is like the difference between night and day. 
Article 171 pertains to the duties of the judiciary, and it 
requires the judge and the government to compensate for losses 
caused and to restore the honor of the accused person. However 
the Voice and Vision organization, clearly distorting this 
article, heaps heresy upon heresy and says that the accused must 
defend himself. Perhaps he also fancies himself in the role of 
the government, and is eager to enforce this article of the 
Constitution! 
  Does the fact that he attends meetings of the Council of 
Ministers make him think he can speak for the government? 
  C. Under Article 6 of the law on the General Policies and 
Principles of the Voice and Vision organization, this 
organization is required to respect the human dignity of 
individuals and to refrain from affronting their honor, in 
accordance with Islamic regulations. Article 19 says: "In all 
programming, especially the news, items may not be broadcast 
that contain the following: insults to the nation's official 
bodies and organizations and..." 
  1. The name of this law is "Law on the General Policies and 
Principles of the Voice and Vision Organization." This means 
that the programs produced by the Voice and Vision organization 
must be produced and broadcast in observance of the provisions 
given in this law. This is not to be extended to what is outside 
the lawful responsibility of the Voice and Vision organization 
and to what the Voice and Vision organization merely implements. 
  With regard to the broadcast of open Majles session 
proceedings, under the Constitution (which governs all laws, 
including the law cited above), the Voice and Vision 
organization is required to do these broadcasts. If a crime is 
committed, other bodies are the authorities to determine that 
and deal with it, not the Voice and Vision organization. 
  If the claims of the executive director of the Voice and 
Vision organization were to be implemented, before making any 
kind of speech in the Majles or at a Friday prayer service the 
deputies and the speaker of the Majles, the Friday imams at the 
provincial centers, the president of the republic, the chief of 
the judiciary and others would have to submit their speeches in 
writing to the management of the Voice and Vision organization 
so he could correct them and authorize their delivery if they 
achieved a minimum score, so that there would be no violations 
in the broadcast! 

