Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Mar 30, BNS -- The second round of 
free-trade talks between Estonia and the European Union [EU] got 
down to discussion of concrete questions, head of the Estonian 
delegation at the talks, Foreign Ministry Deputy Chancellor 
Priit Kolbre said at a press conference today. 
  The delegations discussed in Brussels the preambula to the 
agreement, general principles of the agreement, trade in 
textiles, agricultural issues and competition policies, Kolbre 
said. 
  The preambula details the content of the agreement and 
states 
its ultimate objective: Estonia's membership in the European 
Union. 
  Under the general principles, the free-trade area as well as 
trade in manufactured goods free of quotas and customs duties 
are defined. Quotas or tariffs on industrial goods in 
accordance with the principles of the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade may be established with a separate protocol. 
  A free-trade regime, but with some restrictions, will be 
established also in the textiles trade. Signe Ratso, a 
specialist from the Economics Ministry international trade 
department and a member of the Estonian delegation, said the 
European Union will not introduce quotas and tariffs on import 
from Estonia, but reserves the right to establish them as and 
when needed. Ratso said the European Union fears most transit 
trade through Estonia and reexport. 
  Agricultural issues working groups approach the talks on a 
product-by-product basis. "In the next rounds we plan to put up 
a fight for more favorable tariffs and quotas for each 
individual farming product," Agriculture Ministry Deputy 
Chancellor Ruve Sank said. 
  The Estonian delegation familiarized its negotiation 
partners 
with the Estonian competition law, which the EU delegation 
regarded in a positive light, said Imbi Markus, a specialist 
from the Justice Ministry international law department. The two 
parties agreed that Estonia will have to bring its legislation 
into line with European standards. 
  The customs working groups discussed rules of origin and 
international cooperation. Both documents are standard and pose 
no problems, claimed Jaanus Raud from the Customs Department, so 
they will probably be initialed during the next round of talks. 
  Estonia will under the agreement be allowed to introduce 
customs restrictions to protect its domestic market, but they 
must not exceed those of the European Union. 
  The third official round of negotiations was scheduled to 
begin April 27 in Brussels, with an unofficial meeting to take 
place April 12-13 in Tallinn. 

