Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Max Christern and Michel Kerres: "KLM Renounces </F>
Merger Under U.S. Pressure"] 
  [Text] Amsterdam, 30 Dec -- The fear that U.S.-Netherlands 
relations could be damaged played a prominent role in the 
cancellation of a merger between the European airlines KLM, 
Swissair, Austrian, and SAS -- [a move code-named] operation 
Alcazar. KLM was willing right up to the very latest stages of 
the merger negotiations to drop its present U.S. partner, 
Northwest Airlines. This emerged from talks with negotiators 
and supervisors and top members of the staff of the four 
airlines concerned. 
  The Netherlands Government and KLM feared that the United 
States would frustrate the intended European airline 
conglomerate in the U.S. market. During the final weeks of 
negotiations, the U.S. Government made clear that an agreement 
between the four airlines and Delta Airlines, which has close 
links with Swissair, would not be given the same rights in the 
U.S. air market as the ones currently being enjoyed by KLM and 
Northwest. In order to make the most of the airline merger, the 
possibility of favorable international air traffic contracts had 
to be available to the Alcazar-Delta conglomerate. "Ultimately, 
it was a question of expectations. The data pointed in the 
direction of Alcazar. However, we sincerely believed that the 
United States would frustrate Alcazar if KLM caused difficulties 
for Northwest. We did not believe that the Americans were 
bluffing. That belief won through in the end," said one KLM 
official. 
  At an early stage of the negotiations, the four partners had 
already informally agreed that they would work together with 
Delta Airlines, Swissair's partner. In doing so, KLM had shown 
its willingness to drop Northwest. The informal agreement was 
scrupulously kept secret for months, for fear of legal steps on 
the part of Northwest. 
  Northwest, in which KLM holds a 20 percent stake, has barely 
any chance of survival without KLM. If KLM were to drop its 
U.S. partner in favor of a European alliance it could face 
claims worth millions from Northwest shareholders. 
  Two days before [operation] Alcazar was called off, KLM 
reached an agreement with the Netherlands Government. KLM opted 
for Northwest, thus saving U.S.-Netherlands relations. In 
return, the government revoked the 1986 promise never again to 
provide financial support for the national airline, and promptly 
expressed its intention to participate in an upcoming shares 
issue planned for next spring. 
  "It was rather simple," said one KLM official. "We told the 
government that if they attached such great importance to good 
relations with the United States, then they had the moral 
obligation to provide financial backing for KLM right now." 

