BFN 

  [Excerpts] First of all, the deaths of the Rwandan and 
Burundi presidents last night: Events seem to be accelerating 
in Rwanda in any case, with the burned-out wreckage that is the 
remains of the Rwandan president's plane, which crashed 
yesterday evening not far from Kigali airport. Eyewitness 
accounts report an explosion or even rocket fire hitting the 
aircraft, bemusement among those who heard the news, and--a few 
hours later--firing in the streets of Kigali. Let us listen to 
the account given by Rwandan Prime Minister Madame Agathe 
Uwilingiyimana, who was contacted by Monique Mas just a short 
while ago: 
  [Begin Uwilingiyimana recording] There is shooting, people 
are being terrorized, people are inside their homes lying on the 
floor. We are suffering the consequences of the death of the 
head of state, I believe. We, the civilians, are in no way 
responsible for the death of our head of state. [end recording] 
  So, there was shooting in the streets of Kigali this morning 
following a night that one might describe as rather surreal. 
Dominique de Courcelles reports: 
  [Courcelles] Yes, in Kigali, after a fairly calm night, as 
you have just heard, shooting is now being heard in the town and 
is in particular directed at the residence of the prime 
minister, who is shut up in her home. From the moment the 
announcement of the accident was made by the radio station of 
the government party, the UN peacekeepers stepped up their 
patrols to attempt to prevent any trouble, and the Rwandan 
Government called on the people to remain calm and to stay at 
home. 
  In neighboring Burundi, the national radio station and the 
authorities, including the speaker of the National Assembly, who 
has become the interim president, have called for calm. An 
emergency committee to follow the situation was immediately set 
up. So far this call for calm has been heeded. The 
circumstances surrounding the accident or the attack have not 
yet become clear, but one thing that is certain is that all the 
occupants of the plane are dead -- apart from the two presidents 
of the republics, this includes two Burundi ministers and the 
whole of the French crew. [passage omitted] 
  The UN mission on the spot, the UNAMIR [UN Assistance 
Mission 
in Rwanda], has not so far formed any theories, but it reports a 
large explosion at about 2100 hours local time and firing on the 
ground at the airport. As for the Rwandan Army and Gendarmerie 
Staff Command, they have not issued any information during the 
night, but doubtless it is their weapons that are being heard at 
the moment. [passage omitted] 
  The prime minister herself obviously sees a link between the 
shooting and the death of President Habyarimana -- very quickly 
she attempted to get in touch with the Army Staff Command, but 
in vain. The failure to respond appears to indicate that it is 
members of the military who are firing in the streets of Kigali, 
with the Army thus targeting this prime minister who is the 
symbol of a difficult period of transition between war with the 
FPR [Rwandan Patriotic Front] and peace accompanied by 
power-sharing, which was clearly repugnant to President 
Habyarimana. [passage omitted] 

