Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Isao Kudo, head, Space Technology Research </F>
Section, Department of Ultraenvironment-Use Technology, 
Electrotechnical Laboratory, Agency of Industrial Science and 
Technology] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Introduction </H5>
  Scientists began to consider taking advantage of the 
weightless environment of space, characterized by having no 
convection, no buoyancy, no sedimentation, no static pressure, 
and no-contact floating, during their research in the 1960s. 
Experiments in space began to be realized in the 1970s when 
Skylab, the Apollo rocket and Soyuz spaceship were launched. 
However, good results were not obtained easily. These features 
of the weightless environment in space can be best exploited 
when the specimen involved in the experiment is fluid in form. 
The reason for good results not being obtained during those 
early years is thought to be that researchers did not have 
sufficient knowledge of fluid phenomena. The material processing 
technology we are using today is based on the technologies that 
have been accumulated through continued research conducted since 
the days scientists attempted to create gold and silver from 
ordinary metals hundreds of years ago. Compared to this long 
history of efforts, our experience in space is still too meager. 
In the First Material Processing Test Program (FMPT) experiments 
conducted recently that involved creating new materials aboard a 
U.S. space shuttle, the total hours accumulated by Japanese 
researchers in space was about 150. Even if the hours of 
experiments conducted by Japanese researchers under weightless 
conditions are added, the total is still short of 1,000 hours, 
making the space material processing technology no match for its 
ground counterpart in terms of maturity. In this sense, we must 
promote basic physiochemical research. 
  Due partly to the Challenger disaster, material research in 
the microgravity environment of space made little progress in 
the 1980s. However, since entering the 1990s, the platforms 
enabling material experiments to be conducted under microgravity 
conditions have been diversifying. Figure 1 [not reproduced] 
gives these platforms and their relative positions on a diagram 
in which the Y-axis represents attainable levels of microgravity 
and the X-axis indicates the length of time a microgravity 
condition can be realized. The length of time required of 
microgravity conditions in order for an experiment to be 
finished ranges from the comparatively brief time required for 
conducting a fuel combustion test to the several months needed 
to grow protein crystals. The platform selected should be 
determined by taking this time factor into account. Due partly 
to the few chances for conducting experiments under microgravity 
conditions that have been available so far, researchers have 
tended to make proposals for new experiments randomly, without 
considering whether such experiments are really worth 
undertaking. Now, with a number of these platforms having become 
available, we must make proposals that can take advantage of 
these platforms. 
  We can expect that the era of the 1990s will produce many 
significant achievements in our efforts to develop space 
technology. For three years, starting in 1991, Japan has been 
conducting the TR-IA program by launching a series of small 
research rockets. In 1992 Japan carried out the MASTER and FMPT 
programs, followed by the D-2 project carried out aboard a U.S. 
space shuttle and the GAS project implemented in 1993. A series 
of experiments under weightless conditions is scheduled in the 
coming years, including the launch of an EXPRESS satellite with 
a recoverable capsule in 1994 and the SFU free flyer program in 
1995. In 1992, a free-fall tower, the tallest in the world, was 
constructed on Japan's northernmost main island of Hokkaido. The 
facility is already available for conducting experiments under 
weightless conditions. The construction of a space station is 
currently under way, scheduled for completion in 1998. While the 
construction is being carried out by the United States, Japan 
and European countries are participating in the space station 
program. 
<H5>  Importance of Promoting Microscopic Observation </H5>
  In recent years, great progress has been made in the field 
of 
microelectronic technology, a technology needed to produce 
semiconductor devices. The linewidth required to create these 
devices has shrunk steadily, from micron to submicron orders, 
and now researchers are developing a technology that will make 
it possible to control molecule-level dimensions. The need for 
this technology is mounting, not only for semiconductor device 
development, but also in the fields of new material development, 
chemistry and biotechnology. The need for the technology that 
will enable the observation and manipulation of molecule-level 
and atom-level dimensions has been increasing in recent years. 
One of the themes for which the Agency of Industrial Science and 
Technology is actively promoting R&amp;D is "atom technology." 
This 
effort involves the development of a technology that will make 
it possible to observe, measure, and manipulate individual 
molecules and atoms on the surface of various kinds of 
substances and materials under different conditions, i.e., the 
development of a technology that will make it possible to 
measure or observe, on the spot, the formation of atomic 
clusters, their concentration, dispersion, and reactions among 
them within a three-dimensional space, as well as research aimed 
at theoretically unraveling the processes involved in 
absorption, desorption, dispersion and reaction. 
  The agency is also promoting research on "quantized 
functional elements." This research aims at developing new 
functional elements by finely controlling such quantum phenomena 
as the tunnel effect manifested in ultra-microstructures, the 
wave motion of electrons, and the transition between different 
quantum levels. The research to develop the elements has been 
stepped up since progress has been made in shrinking the 
dimensions of the semiconductor device circuits. The production 
of these devices calls for these well-controlled elements to be 
available. When the circuit features shrink, the requirements 
for elements become increasingly stringent. The weightless space 
environment could provide the experiment conditions suitable for 
developing these quantized functional elements. 
  When the requirements for metallic materials become 
stringent, it becomes necessary to improve the characteristics 
of these metals by promoting research at the grain level, i.e., 
the constituent element. Each of these grains, in turn, is 
composed of microstructures that develop during the growth 
process of the dendritic structures. The condition of the 
dendritic growth within these microstructures greatly affects 
the parameters required for these metals, such as the parameter 
for mechanical strength. Research on dendritic growth has been 
conducted for the past 50 years. Despite this long history of 
research, it is only recently that the quantization of such 
growth has become possible. An article by J.S. Langer which was 
carried in the October issue of PHYSICS TODAY points out that 
dendritic growth is affected by the fluctuations of temperature 
in the boundary interface between the surface of the solidifying 
substance and the adjoining atmosphere, as well as by minute 
changes in the surface tension. The author went on by saying 
that while these parameters are important, they have been 
ignored so far. Figure 2 [not reproduced] is the schematic 
representation of the solidification of a metallic substance at 
one moment during the solidification process on the ground, and 
it can be seen that the crystal is growing upward. On the 
ground, air convection occurs above the surface of the 
solidifying substance. However, in the boundary interface, 
convection disappears because the convection is impeded by a 
drag caused by the viscosity of the air in the interface. It has 
recently been found that the molecules present in the 
solidifying interface play an important role. 
  In a weightless environment, convection like that observed 
on 
the ground does not occur, creating the conditions suitable for 
conducting the microscopic observation. On the ground, X-ray is 
the only means used to conduct the microscopic observation of 
metals. However, it is unrealistic to lift an X-ray system to 
space to conduct similar observations. Because of this, organic 
substances, such as (saxinonytril), are commonly used as the 
specimens for use in space experiments. Through the 1990s, space 
experiments aimed at unraveling the solidification process will 
be conducted using these organic specimens. 
  (Grieksman), of the United States, has found by conducting 
many experiments on the ground that the crystallization process 
is influenced by gravity. He is scheduled to conduct an 
experiment involving the growth of the dendritic crystal using a 
U.S. space experiment system (USMP). 
  In Japan, experiments to measure the temperature of the 
atmosphere in the solidifying interface were carried out under 
weightless conditions by launching small MASTER-5 rockets 
carrying a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. The experiments were 
promoted and conducted by Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries, 
Mitsubishi Research Institute, Japan Society for the Promotion 
of Machine Systems, and The Society of Japanese Aerospace 
Companies. These experiments made it possible to see clearly the 
heat radiation from a solidifying substance into the atmosphere 
adjoining the substance and the changes in radiation level in 
the form of video images. Figure 3 [not reproduced] shows the 
printout of one of the frames of images obtained by a 
Mach-Zehnder interferometer. The image in the right half of the 
printout, rendered in the form of finite interference fringes, 
shows the change in the atmospheric temperature near the 
substance over time in terms of temperature profile curves. The 
image in the left half, rendered in the form of infinite 
interference fringes, can be used to measure the temperature. 
Recently, high expectations have been placed on the results of 
research that has been under way in an effort to use the 
light-scattering phenomenon as a means of observing the 
crystallization of a solidifying substance. The effect of 
surface tension becomes conspicuous in a weightless environment, 
and, in this sense, it is important to conduct further research 
on surface tension to clarify the crystallization process. In 
September 1993, an experiment for observing the dendritic growth 
process was to be conducted using the Schlieren optical 
observation system by launching a TR-IA3 rocket. The adoption of 
the observation system makes it possible to realize a visual 
rendition of the crystal growth process when a solidifying 
substance is subjected to supercooling conditions. 
<H5>  Advantages of Weightless Experiment Environment </H5>
  In the following, this author will describe the advantages 
of 
the weightless experiment environment by citing some concrete 
instances. As described above, the need for realizing atom-level 
control in developing semiconductor devices is mounting these 
days. However, on the ground, the convection in the atmosphere 
has impeded the realization of crystal growth with no defects. 
Convection causes temperature fluctuations in the solidifying 
interface of a growing crystal, which causes changes in density. 
These, coupled with supercooling and internal thermal stress, 
lead to the appearance of defects within the grown crystal. In 
addition, convection within a melted fluid causes nonuniformity 
in the material composition and the distribution of impurities 
in the direction of crystal growth. No convection, no buoyancy, 
and no static pressure--these are why the weightless environment 
of space draws such high attention. Under weightless conditions, 
uniform crystallization can be attained because convection does 
not occur. In addition, weightless conditions make it possible 
to produce a large temperature gradient in the interface of the 
crystallizing substance. This, in turn, makes it possible to 
limit the supercooled depth in the surface of a liquid-phase 
substance to very shallow, a condition required to realize the 
stable growth of a single crystal. 
  As new types of materials, the alloys which are made using 
iron, nickel, or cobalt as the base materials, and which display 
high strength and toughness at high temperatures, have been 
drawing attention in recent years. These alloys are created by 
scattering ceramics or metal oxides, or by coating them with a 
ceramic film. In order to produce these alloys in space, it is 
thought that processing methods which ensure the uniform 
dispersion of materials or the oriented solidification of 
materials must be used. The uniform dispersion method could be 
used to produce a material in space by dispersing fine material 
components uniformly across the matrix material, or to produce a 
composite material by having the reinforcing fibers embedded in 
a regular pattern by taking advantage of the absence of buoyancy 
and sedimentation in the space environment. The oriented 
solidification that makes it possible to realize a large 
temperature gradient within a melted fluid can be used to 
produce turbine blades. The experiments that will be conducted 
in space using these methods will include one to improve the 
heat withstanding ability of super alloys by dispersing 
ceramics, one on unidirectional solidification, and one to 
create single crystals. 
  Amorphous alloys can be created by introducing silicon, 
boron, phosphorus, zirconium, hafnium, or niobium into such 
transition metals as iron, nickel, or cobalt, and by subjecting 
the melted mixture of these metals to supercooling, taking 
advantage of the fact that it becomes a solid with the same kind 
of atomic sequence that it has in the liquid state (in other 
words, by super cooling one does not have to take the time to 
realign it in the correct sequence). This causes the amorphous 
alloys to manifest high toughness and high 
corrosion-withstanding ability, which the original metals did 
not. Cooling the melted fluid in space would make it possible to 
produce larger amorphous crystals by restraining the formation 
of the crystal nuclei from the portions where the ground 
production process makes the fluid come into contact with the 
vessel holding it. 
  As for use in optical fiber communications, efforts are 
under 
way to develop a glass with high transparency (low transmission 
loss) in the near infrared range. The development of such a 
glass calls for the introduction of an advanced processing and 
production technology that will make it possible to greatly 
reduce the impurity content. On the ground, glass production 
requires the use of a platinum vessel since glass reacts with 
refractory materials at high temperatures. It is thought that a 
highly pure glass for which no impurities can be traced to the 
vessel holding the materials can be created by melting and 
solidifying the materials while floating them in space. In the 
meantime, the Government Industrial Research Institute, Osaka, 
of MITI's Agency of Industrial Science and Technology is 
conducting joint research with the University of Missouri and 
Loyola University of the United States to create glass particles 
with diameters of a few microns in a weightless environment for 
medical applications. We anticipate good results will be 
forthcoming from the research. 
  The experiment conducted by USML in 1992 to grow protein 
crystals in space drew substantial attention from scientists 
around the world as a pioneering attempt to produce medicine in 
space. Protein crystal is brittle and a large crystal cannot be 
created on the ground due to the effects of air convection and 
sedimentation. A large crystal is not necessarily needed as the 
material for producing medicine. However, to determine the 
suitable three-dimensional crystal structure of a medicine under 
development, the availability of a large, high quality crystal 
is essential. It is said that many recently-developed drugs have 
been designed to be effective against specific viruses in order 
to reduce side effects. In order to develop these drugs, 
unraveling the three-dimensional structures of the protein 
crystals involved is important. Producing these crystals in 
space is costly. Therefore, for the time being, the use of the 
weightless environment of space will be confined to the 
development of drugs against cancer and AIDS, the two major 
diseases afflicting the world today, which must be controlled at 
all costs. In the meantime, MITI, in cooperation with DARA of 
Germany, plans to conduct an experiment to grow a zeolite 
crystal in 1994 by launching an EXPRESS satellite. The products 
of the experiment will be recovered in a capsule. Zeolite is 
said to be useful for use in petroleum refining and for reducing 
diesel engine exhaust. 
  Just like a protein crystal, a large zeolite crystal cannot 
be produced on the ground. Thus far, zeolite has been created by 
determining the crystal structure based on experience. The CATEX 
program is designed to conduct a series of experiments to grow a 
zeolite crystal in space. The first space flight, lasting five 
days, will make it possible to conduct experiments by taking 
full advantage of the weightless conditions in space. After the 
experiments have been completed, the satellite will be recovered 
to obtain the data that will make it possible in the ensuing 
CATEX experiments to conduct detailed observation of the crystal 
growth process by making full use of the on-the-spot observation 
technology available. 
  The experiments conducted by using a free-fall tower or 
within a space station are characterized by the fact that they 
can get the support of specialists every time an experiment is 
conducted. As far as the diagram in Figure 1 [not reproduced] is 
concerned, the free-fall tower and space station give the 
impression that they present experiment platforms with opposite 
capabilities and performance. The use of a free-fall tower makes 
it possible to conduct experiments under weightless conditions 
using the experiment systems as sophisticated as the ones used 
on the ground, even though the dimensions of the systems are 
limited by the size of the capsule used in the free-fall 
facility. A space station can employ a low-acceleration 
propulsion system, like a space shuttle. In addition, a space 
station makes it possible to accommodate equally sophisticated 
experiment systems and allows the adjustment or repair of these 
systems to be made by astronauts when the need arises. The 
National Space Development Agency is already developing the 
experiment systems for joint use in space station. In parallel 
with the development, the agency has been encouraging people to 
propose themes for experiments to be conducted in a space 
station since 1992. However, the author's opinion is that such 
sophisticated experiment systems must be created not by the 
agency, but by those establishments which will be conducting the 
experiments within the space station. The experiments conducted 
using these platforms, involving the use of sophisticated 
experiment systems operated by specialists, will greatly help to 
build a database on thermal property values. 
  For example, in order to simulate the growth of a 
semiconductor crystal properly, accurate thermal property values 
must be used to melt the materials. It is impossible to measure 
these values accurately on the ground because of convection. The 
Space Technology Corporation has conducted a series of 
experiments to measure the thermal conductivity of a number of 
materials under weightless conditions created by using a 
free-fall tower and by launching small TEXUS rockets. Based on 
the results of these experiments, the corporation reported that 
there is a difference in the thermal conductivity of InSb 
between the value measured on the ground and the one measured 
under weightless conditions. According to the corporation's 
data, the value is the same within solid specimens, but 
differences appear when liquid specimens are used (Figure 4 [not 
reproduced]). This data will contribute to building the 
database. Germany has been conducting experiments to measure the 
surface tension, thermal conductivity, viscosity coefficient, 
and other property values of a number of materials using a 
TEMPUS magnetic floating furnace. For the time being, it is 
important for us to accumulate data on as many materials as 
possible by changing the parameters using such a furnace. These 
efforts are what must be undertaken and promoted by researchers 
using the two different types of experiment platforms described 
above. 
<H5>  Expectations for Super-High Vacuum Environment </H5>
  A lasting vacuum condition is another characteristic of the 
space environment. However, at the altitudes space shuttles fly 
in space, the vacuum level is not as high. The vacuum at these 
altitudes deteriorates to around 10[.sup]-4[/] Pa due to the 
gases coming out of the shuttles in various forms and the water 
discarded from the shuttles. At this point comes the idea of 
using the wake. The term "wake" refers to the trace created on 
the surface of water behind a ship when it travels. The vacuum 
level at an altitude of 300 km from the earth's surface is 
dictated by the partial pressure of the atomic oxygen, an 
element which accounts for the largest percentage of those 
elements present at the altitude. The partial pressure usually 
ranges from 10[.sup]-5[/] to 10[.sup]-6[/] Pa. By assuming 
that the gases of these residual elements have a Maxwell's 
distribution pattern, the molecular temperatures of these 
elements approach 1,000 K. At these temperatures, the movement 
velocity of these elements' thermal molecules is about one-tenth 
the orbiting speed of a satellite, and this prevents the 
molecules from scattering behind the satellite. This produces a 
wake of a high vacuum level behind a flying satellite. 
Specifically, the travel speed of a satellite is a few times 
faster than the movement speeds of the thermal molecules of 
hydrogen and helium, and about 10 times faster than the movement 
speeds of the thermal molecules of oxygen and nitrogen. This 
means that the elements that can catch up with the satellite are 
confined to the very small portion of Maxwell's distribution 
that has a very high movement speed. This realizes an area with 
a very low element density behind the orbiting satellite. 
  Based on these assumptions, the vacuum level in the wake 
created behind a flying disk measuring 10 m in diameter reaches 
a maximum of 10[.sup]-13[/] Pa in terms of the partial 
pressure of hydrogen (Figure 5 [not reproduced]). In terms of 
the partial pressure of helium, it comes to 10[.sup]-16[/] 
Pa, while in terms of the partial pressure of atomic oxygen, it 
extends to as low as 10[.sup]-33[/] Pa. These figures are 
equivalent to a single atom of these elements existing within a 
space of a few hundred cubic kilometers. The fact that the wake 
has no walls means that a larger vacuum space is created behind 
the disk with the pumping speed approaching infinity, and thus a 
good weightless environment is realized. The University of 
Houston in the United States plans to grow a thin film of 
gallium arsenide in a wake experiment to be conducted aboard a 
space shuttle in orbit by erecting a 3.6 m disk in the shuttle's 
cargo bay. The first experiment was scheduled to take place in 
November 1993. The university plans to conduct three more wake 
experiments after this. 
  As described above, the next-generation semiconductor 
devices 
call for atomic-level device process technology. Under this 
increasingly stringent requirement, epitaxial technology is one 
of the most reliable process technologies available today. The 
background vacuum level currently available when growing a thin 
film using the MBE or CBE method stands at 5 x 10[.sup]-9[/] 
Pa. However, when these epitaxial film growing systems are in 
operation, the vacuum level deteriorates to 1 x 10[.sup]-6[/] 
Pa for the former method and to 10[.sup]-3[/] Pa for the 
latter. The system commonly used on the ground has many such 
chambers for growing the film. An increase in the number of 
chambers causes further deterioration of the vacuum level. This, 
coupled with the lowering of the vacuum level when the system is 
in operation, could lead to impurities finding their way into 
the synthesized thin film due to the scattering occurring near 
the specimen when growing a thin film. When the specimen is 
switched, the contamination from the chamber walls due to the 
hysteresis effect of a specimen used previously appears. These 
impurities affect the characteristics of these synthesized 
electronic materials, even if their contents are very small. 
Even if the density of a dopant is very small--for example, at 
the level of a few ppt--that cannot be detected by chemical 
analysis, its introduction can change the electronic properties 
of a substance. In order to grow a superlattice, it is said that 
the density of the impurity flux must be reduced to lower than 5 
x 10[.sup]-3[/] atoms/cm[.sup]2[/] per second. This is 
equivalent to a partial pressure of lower than 2 x 
10[.sup]-16[/] Pa. 
<H5>  Epilogue </H5>
  The production process that takes advantage of the 
weightless 
and super-high vacuum environment of space will meet the 
requirements for producing advanced electronic materials, which 
call for an ability to control the characteristics at the 
molecular or atomic level. Until recently, the use of 
sophisticated experiment systems in space has been hampered by 
the malfunctioning of the systems caused by the mechanical shock 
of launch and by the lack of electric power in orbit. This, 
coupled with the problem of not having the opportunity to use 
the systems due to the few available, has discouraged 
researchers from conducting experiments in space. 
  However, in recent years the chance to conduct an experiment 
under a weightless environment has increased with the 
availability of various experiment platforms, including the 
completion of the world's tallest free-fall tower in Japan. When 
the construction of the space station is completed, it will 
become possible for us to conduct experiments using experiment 
systems as sophisticated as the ones we use on the ground. The 
decade of the l990s has witnessed a diversification of 
weightless experiment platforms, including the availability of 
the unmanned SFU free flyer and EXPRESS satellite with a 
recoverable capsule. Researchers in this decade will be able to 
select the type of platform most suitable for their experiment, 
a situation different from the 1980s when they had little choice 
and had to conduct experiments by adapting the experiment 
conditions to the available platform. This decade will make it 
possible for us to take greater advantage of the space 
environment in conducting experiments. 


