BFN 

  [Text] Geneva, April 7 (AFP) -- International aid for the 
former communist countries of East Europe is insufficient in 
volume and should be better coordinated, a joint UN-EU 
commission said Thursday [7 April]. 
  The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe made the 
comments in the 1993-1994 edition of its annual report, 
published here. 
  The aid is insufficient given "the scale and complexity of 
the problems to be overcome," the Commission said, adding that 
it was "vitally important" to improve the coordination of 
diverse international assistance. 
  The international community should aim at "avoiding 
duplication among the many sources of international assistance 
but also addressing the more fundamental issues of coordinating 
short-term stabilisation with long-term structural adjustment 
programmes." 
  Aid should be targeted "within coherent national programmes 
of economic reconstruction and development." 
  The Commission said it supported the proposal put forward by 
GATT Director General Peter Sutherland for the creation of a new 
high level international authority to coordinate aid and 
associated discussions with economies in transition. 
  It advised following the "wisdom" of the leaders of the post 
World War II Marshall Plan in "insisting that such programmes 
for economic transformation are the primary responsibility of 
the countries themselves." 
  National leaders know better than outsiders the local 
economic conditions and know their own people's "national 
preferences for one set of social and institutional arrangements 
over another." 
  "To regard the transition process as simply an economic 
problem which can be left to technical experts is to risk the 
loss of popular support for the entire process of reform," the 
commission said. 
  Better coordination of aid would allow agencies to react 
more 
quickly to new circumstances, as they arose, it went on. 
  The key questions of debts owed by former state businesses, 
banking solvency and large business restructuring "were not all 
anticipated four years ago," after the fall of Iron Curtain. 
  It is therefore "reasonable to assume that unexpected 
obstacles will continue to emerge," particularly in countries 
seen as doing well, such as Poland and the Czech Republic. 
  "The problems of structural change and macroeconomic 
stability are still considerable in these economies. The 
fragility of the recovery could be soon tested by the increasing 
resistance of the labour force to further reductions in real 
wages," the commission said. 
  For 1994, it predicted overall growth in East European 
output 
of "a modest one percent (which) would be the first year of 
growth since the collapse of the old system." 
  But "there seems to be little chance of the decline in 
output 
in Russia and most of the other (former Soviet) CIS countries 
coming to an end in 1994." 

