BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mary Brasler: "CBI Calls for `Balance' in </F>
Europe's Law"] 
  [Text] The Confederation of British Industry [CBI] today 
launches a fresh attack on the lack of competitiveness at the 
heart of the European Community and calls for further efforts to 
improve the efficiency of both the Single Market and European 
businesses through better, and, in some cases, less legislation. 
  In a paper entitled The Business Agenda for Europe in 1994, 
to coincide with the run-up to European elections next month, 
the CBI says there should be a moratorium on further social 
legislation and a more balanced approach to environmental 
regulations that recognises industry's need to be competitive 
internationally. 
  "It is vital that the governments of Europe listen to the 
business case. While business itself can do much to reverse the 
decline in competitiveness, it is the legislators who create the 
environment in which business operates," says Howard Davies, 
director general. 
  The CBI onslaught follows an equally critical paper from the 
Institute of Directors as its contribution to the Euro-election 
debate. The institute is pressing for changes in EC political 
institutions and says the European Commission should no longer 
occupy the central position. 
  Members are unhappy about the way the EC is operating and 
behaving but feel the EC should be given "one more chance" 
before withdrawal is considered. 
  The CBI wants more attention paid to competitiveness in 
future legislation, in order to reverse the trend of low growth 
and high unemployment in Europe. New legislation should include 
a cost benefit procedure which should also spur further 
deregulation, its paper argues. Other points of the agenda 
include accelerated plans to outlaw state subsidies and more 
work to complete the Single Market. 
  Social policy should be reshaped to remove restrictions that 
block employment. 
  The CBI is clearly divided, however, on what role a single 
currency should play in Europe. The agenda complains that the 
Maastricht timetable in unrealistic and calls for new proposals 
from the European Monetary Institute. There is deep concern 
among some businesses that a strengthened European parliament 
after next month's elections will have a considerable impact on 
legislation affecting business. 

