Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by M. G. Krasnogorskiy, P. A. Shirokov; UDC 528.8] </F>
  [Abstract] The Space-Based Natural-Resource and Ecological 
Research Section of the Russian Academy of Sciences Space 
Council met on 15 March 1993, in Moscow. The meeting was devoted 
to a discussion of the results of scientific research conducted 
aboard the Almaz-1 station and to the prospects of further 
research in the Almaz program. V. V. Viter, first deputy general 
designer at NPO Mashinostroyeniye gave the keynote speech, in 
which he recounted the history of the Almaz spacecraft, the 
first of which was launched on 25 July 1987, under the name 
Kosmos-1870. Almaz-1 lifted off some four years later, carrying 
an improved radar complex, whose resolution had been brought 
down to 10-15 m. The next in the series, Almaz-1B, is being 
readied for launch in 1996. The new spacecraft will carry a 
radar complex that consists of three sets with wavelengths of 
3.6 cm, 9.6 cm, and 70 cm. Resolution of the sets will be down 
to 5-7 m. The spacecraft will also be outfitted with 
high-resolution electrooptical equipment, spectroradiometric and 
electron-scanning gear in the visible and IR ranges, and a lidar 
set. It should be about five years ahead of similar craft in the 
West. Almaz-2, which is slated for launch in 1999, will be 
multifunctional in that it will study the Earth and its 
atmosphere and will serve to produce general models of the 
ocean-atmosphere system, global biosphere dynamics, and the 
effect of land energy budget on climate. Papers were read on the 
following programs: Briz (study of coastal waters and inland 
water bodies; identification of pollution sources); Geos-A 
(geoecological study; geological mapping; geological 
monitoring); Almaz-Agro (studies of soil fertility and crop 
conditions); Resurs-A (study of natural resources); Okean-I 
(development of radiophysical techniques for studying the ocean; 
study of propagation of surface and internal waves). 

