CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview by MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA correspondent Yelina </F>
Tokarenko with Vyacheslav Valentinovich Lyakhovich, professor 
and corresponding member, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 
and head of the Molecular Pathology and Ecological Biochemistry 
Institute, Siberian Department, Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences under the ``New in Science'' rubric: ``Barrier to 
Xenobiotics''] 
  [Text] [Boxed item: Novosibirsk scientists are proposing 
new methods of protection against chemical aggression.] 
  Do you know how many chemicals surround us in our everyday 
life or that are used in industry and agriculture? More than 
80,000. And according to forecasts, in less than a decade this 
figure will double or triple. Many of them manifest mutagenic, 
carcinogenic, and teratogenic properties fully justifying the 
name xenobiotic (from the Greek word meaning ``foreign to 
life''). And by the way, they include not only the notorious 
pesticides but also the inks, copy machine paper, and printer's 
ink without which this article could not have come to light. 
Comparatively complete ecological and toxicology tests have only 
been conducted on several chemicals of natural and anthropogenic 
origin, however. It is virtually impossible to keep pace with 
all of the new modifications. That is why knowledge about the 
mechanisms and laws of biotransformation of xenobiotics in the 
body must be systematized to at least some extent and why the 
processes must be studied at the molecular level. This is the 
key to the problem of chemical aggression overall and to the 
search for a suitable ``antidote.'' The Molecular Pathology and 
Ecological Biochemistry Institute of the Siberian Department of 
the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences has research priority in 
this field. It was born (it was established only 2 years ago) 
out of the social demand of the region, which had become the 
hostage of technocratic thinking and thoughtless ``subjugation 
of nature.'' Basic research on the biotransformation of 
xenobiotics under the direction of V. Lyakhovich, professor, 
corresponding member of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 
and head of the institute, has already been going on for 20 
years. This research has made it possible to substantiate and 
develop advanced methods of diagnosing, treating, and preventing 
ecologically induced diseases and to monitor health at the 
individual and population levels. V. Lyakhovich responds to the 
questions of our MEDITSINSKAYA GAZETA correspondent. 
  [Tokarenko]Vyacheslav Valentinovich, you are 
essentially contemplating a new, higher level of assessing the 
medical consequences of environmental pollution and predicting 
disease based on modern molecular biology methods? 
  [Lyakhovich]Unfortunately, medical ecology has 
been pretty much restrained in a verification stage, and even 
the scientific literature is essentially devoted to describing 
toxic effects while their role in measuring functional as well 
as biochemical parameters is either assumed with caution or else 
not assumed at all. By the way, it is precisely these indicators 
that are the most adequate criteria of the potentially hazardous 
effect of environmental pollution on man and animals. They make 
it possible to determine the level of xenobiotics' penetration 
into the body and their biologically active doses, and they make 
it possible to judge reactions that are now occurring and to 
reliably predict the risk of disease. Am increasing number of 
scientists are even classifying drug therapy as a 
``pharmacologic press'' that, together with chemical factors in 
the environment, may affect human ecology as a whole. 
  [Tokarenko]And what has become the main focus of 
attention? 
  [Lyakhovich]The body contains enzyme systems 
effecting the biotransformation of foreign compounds localized 
in the cells of the liver, kidneys, and lungs. These enzymes 
catalyze a number of oxidation-reduction reactions and 
conjugation reactions. There are rather many of them. Without 
going into very specific details, I will only say that various 
biotransformation routes may, under the effect of external 
factors, also result in detoxication of a xenobiotic or else 
may, on the other hand, be accompanied by the formation of even 
more toxic components. Specifically, knowledge of these fine 
points makes it possible to conduct biomonitoring of the 
chemical effect of the environment by evaluating xenobiotic 
metabolism systems. 
  [Tokarenko]And how is this done? 
  [Lyakhovich]We focused our attention on proteins 
(cytochrome P-450) capable of transforming polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (and also dioxins, biphenyls, etc.) into products 
carrying the threat of cancers and all possible abnormalities. 
These proteins only begin to ``work'' when the body comes into 
contact with chemical factors of the environment. And so as it 
turned out, many dozens and even hundreds of compounds cause the 
same response in the body -- expression of genes of the 
cytochrome P-450 family. This means that it is possible to get 
by without laborious (and yes expensive) routine studies 
analyzing each of the components of technogenic poisoning. 
  These works have been postulated as the basis of a system of 
methods for the biomonitoring of chemical pollution. 
Experimental animals act as a ``barometer.'' The method was 
successfully tested in Altay, in the Kuzbas, and in the 
Novosibirsk and several other oblasts that are in an adverse 
ecological situation. In addition to everything else, the method 
makes it possible to estimate the total effect of pollution on 
the body, which is still difficult to do by other methods, and 
to determine clear-cut criteria for formulating groups at risk 
of specific diseases just as was done at the Azot and Soda 
enterprises and at the titanium-magnesium combine in the Perm 
Oblast. 
  [Tokarenko] A prediction is a prediction, but 
what about treatment?.. 
  [Lyakhovich]A hybridoma process for obtaining 
monoclonal antibodies to specific isoforms of cytochrome P-450 
has been developed at our institute. A bank of monoclonal 
antibodies suitable for suppressing the activity of these 
enzymes has been developed. 
  [Tokarenko]Is it thought that your research 
should provide a clear-cut picture of the effect of 
``chemistry'' on offspring? 
  [Lyakhovich]One block of work is simultaneously 
related just to the transplacental transport of chemical 
compounds from mother to fetus. Specific recommendations apply 
to both pregnant women who come into contact with chemical 
compounds and to their offspring. We put them into special risk 
groups. The most insidious are organochlorine pesticides (such 
as DDT). They are lipidophilic. They accumulate in adipose 
tissues, reach significant toxic concentrations, and then poison 
the fetus by penetrating through the placenta and cause 
stillbirth. 
  [Tokarenko]In what other areas can you interest 
clinical medicine? 
  [Lyakhovich]There is yet another example where 
the results of basic works are used in practice. A cycle of 
research studies was conducted in Mirnyy, Nobosibirsk, and 
Novokuznetsk. It was related to what is termed metabolic status 
as determined by test drugs. This means the dynamics of liver 
function. Depending on the activity of their metabolic 
processes, individuals are classified as ``fast'' or ``slow'' 
metabolizers. Along with this comes different predisposition to 
selected diseases. 
  The first group includes individuals who are especially 
susceptible to harmful habits and to the effect of negative 
factors associated with industry. They accounted for about 8 
percent of the workers from toxic industries whom we studied, 
and they are at high risk of colorectal cancer and breast 
cancer. Persons with slow metabolization -- approximately 4 
percent of those studied -- have a tendency toward bladder and 
throat cancer. As complications of drug therapy, they may 
possibly develop allergies and systemic lupus erythematosus. It 
is significant that every ``ultraslow'' metabolizer suffers from 
intolerance of some drug or foodstuff. 
  [Tokarenko]And with what is this type of 
gradation linked? 
  [Lyakhovich]The phenomenon of ``fast'' and 
``slow'' metabolizers has been explained at the level of the 
gene apparatus. It has become clear that the bodies of persons 
who are ``slow'' metabolizers contain 100 to 200 times fewer 
enzymes involved in oxidation of xenobiotics. The cause is a 
defect of specified genes. Differences in metabolic status are 
very significant in different ethnic groups. Oligonucleotide 
primer-probes synthesized at the institute can be used along 
with the technique of amplification to successfully detect more 
than 95 percent of cytochrome P-450 dB gene mutations. This will 
help clinicians select individual drug therapy with 
consideration of the metabolic status. We are already using 
techniques based on the method to study the populations of 
Altay, Siberia, and the Far North. 


