Language: <F P=105> Latvian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aisma Coka, Head Visa Inspector: "Immigration </F>
Waves Continue: Door is Wide Open] 
  [Text]I work at the visa department of the Department 
of Citizenship and Immigration for the Vidzeme suburb, and I 
would like to describe the problems I am faced with 
everyday. 
  We shouldn't be pampering any illusions that the bill 
adopted 
at the first reading of the Citizenship Law, as developed by the 
Latvian Way and Farmers Union, will save the Latvian people 
--protect them from further assimilation into the mass of 
foreign immigrants, or promote the welfare of the native people 
of Latvia. In my opinion, the most dangerous section of the bill 
is chapter 2 on naturalization quotas, which are to be 
determined every year by the government. It looks like we have 
missed the train once again, because at present, just like 
during the stagnation years of the recent past, large numbers of 
foreign citizens are arriving in Latvia every day. Some of them 
(honest and dishonest) are attempting to legalize their stay in 
Latvia using various means. Others, who have been successful in 
illegally crossing the border, or whose visa has expired or 
whose permit to stay has expired and have no grounds for an 
extension, instead of returning to their place of permanent 
residence, remain in Latvia illegally and are actively engaged 
in private business activities. The only attempts at dealing 
with the problem of foreigners illegally living in Latvia are 
being made by the Department of Citizenship and Immigration, 
which was created two years ago. Other state institutions, such 
as the Latvian police, for example, who, in accordance with the 
law, should be concerned about expelling violators of 
immigration regulations from the state, show no interest in this 
matter. A violator of the regulations receives an order to 
leave, signs a statement that he will leave the territory of 
Latvia within a seven day period... and continues to walk to 
streets of Riga, because the police structure has not created a 
mechanism through which this matter could be followed up. 
  The procedure for issuing a visa 
  In accordance with resolution 90, passed by the Council of 
Ministers of the Republic of Latvia on February 19, 1993, any 
citizen of Latvia, or any foreigner who is permanently 
registered in Latvia and whose passport contains the "Resident 
registry stamp" and personal code number has the right to 
complete an INVITATION form, with which he can invite relatives, 
friends, acquaintances from other countries to visit. Of course, 
approximately one half of Riga's residents are foreigners who 
illegally entered Latvia during the soviet era, and almost 
everyone of them has a vast circle of friends and relatives in 
the CIS countries. These foreigners registered in Latvia make up 
the majority of our clients. It should be added that recently, 
for reasons unknown, the Latvian mass media and along with this, 
also the public, have popularized the term "permanent resident", 
which is used to described citizens of the USSR living in 
Latvia. This term is totally misleading because such a concept 
is not contained in any legislative act of the Republic of 
Latvia, nor has any such category of persons been defined, for 
whom such a term could be applied for legal purposes. All of 
these people, who, from June 17, 1940 up until July 1, 1992, 
illegally, i.e. against the wishes of the Latvian citizenship 
body, entered Latvia to take up residence contain in their 
passports the information that they are citizens or subjects of 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. As we know, for many 
international rights questions after 1991, the legal heir to the 
USSR is Russia, which is why the body of people described could 
be considered as citizens of Russia, of course, provided that 
they do not posses documents proving citizenship of another 
country. In any case, these people have the status of 
foreigners in Latvia, not of permanent residents. 
  Furthermore, when a Latvian citizen or foreigner registered 
in Latvia has completed the INVITATION, the visa department 
confirms it, and on the basis of this document, the Latvian 
embassies abroad receive entry visas for private visits. A 
private visa is issued for a requested period of time, but not 
longer than for 3 months. In a normal situation, the foreigner 
returns home to his permanent country of residence at the end of 
the private visit. Unfortunately, the situation here is 
completely different. Large numbers of foreigners enter Latvia 
every day, and, after expiration of the visa intended for their 
visit, attempt, by whatever means, to gain the right to remain 
permanently in Latvia. What is so attractive about Latvia for 
foreigners? It is our disorganized legislation and economy. If 
the person who has entered Latvia is successful in extending the 
visa or receiving a permit to stay, he takes advantage of the 
situation created by the Latvian government in which immigrants, 
in terms of economic activities, are placed in a 
considerably more privileged situation than citizens 
of Latvia. And, of course, the foreigner who has come here is 
very quickly hired by some private company registered in Latvia, 
usually as a procuring agent, because the company needs people 
with a wide circle of acquaintances or extensive contacts in 
Russia and other CIS countries. These foreigners continuously 
travel to the CIS countries, back and forth, bringing in various 
goods and selling them in Latvia for inflated prices. 
  Every day, large numbers of foreigners arrive in Latvia 
for 3 months, and can be relatively easily divided into 4 
groups. 
  The first group is numerically the largest, and includes 
foreigners who live in Latvia and their spouses who are citizens 
of other countries and arrive to join their family and to remain 
to live in Latvia, although a majority of those who come own 
apartments and even houses in Russia (CIS). These persons are 
ignoring the law adopted by our state "On foreigners and those 
who are not citizens of any country who arrive and remain in the 
Republic of Latvia", which went into effect on July 1, 1992, and 
the regulation confirmed by the Council of Ministers on May 19 
of this year on the issuing of permits for stay. These 
legislative acts state that permits for stay must be obtained by 
all foreigners who wish to remain in Latvia for more than 3 
months, and that these permits must be requested from the 
Latvian embassies or consular offices (consulates) 
abroad. 
  The spouses of foreigners take an easier road of defiance. 
Again, through falsification and lying that they are only 
coming for a visit, they request an entry visa for 3 
months, and, after spending a pleasant time within their family 
circle, they give notice that they are not going anywhere 
because this is where their wife (or husband) and children are. 
It turns out that, prior to arriving here, the foreigner left 
his job and officially gave up the previous place of residence. 
Thus, the poor person has nowhere to go. The foreigners are 
going around from Pontius to Pilate to show that they are being 
discriminated against. Those who come here are not concerned 
about unemployment, nor about not knowing the state language, 
nor their lack of a legal means of support. 
  The court system, which should be protecting the interests 
and rights of citizens of the Republic of Latvia, is involved 
with examining the complaints of those who have come here 
illegally. Foreigners are now suing, not only to receive the 
"resident registry stamp" in their passport, but also to 
legalize the presence of their spouses in Latvia. I haven't 
heard about any cases being brought to court concerning the 
activities of dishonest workers in the resident registries of 
the Latgale or Vidzeme suburbs, who have received money to 
register foreigners as residents or citizens, when, in fact, 
they are not qualified to be registered as such. 
  The second is an elderly group, consisting of mothers and 
fathers who have come from Russia or the CIS to visit their well 
situated children -- foreigners registered in Latvia -- and 
remain here to live. Also this group of travelers should have 
applied for permits of stay at the embassies before coming over, 
but they have requested visit visas for a period of 3 months and 
cross the Latvian boarder. Afterwards, their children obtain 
from clinics and hospitals either legal or fictive doctors' 
notes, which are not validated neither by the acknowledgement of 
the commission of physicians, nor by the signature and stamp of 
the chief physician. Sometimes, it is a mystery of how these 
people managed to come to Latvia while suffering with such an 
array of diseases. What is interesting is that within 3 months, 
their diseases and chronic conditions have progressed so 
severely that these people are prevented from leaving. It can be 
assumed that these people are not concerned with the problem of 
pensions, nor any other types of hardships. The children of 
these old people are persistent in their fight to receive the 
permit of stay. 
  The third group includes foreigners who come to Latvia 
supposedly on a visit, but are actually here to engage in 
marriage and remain to live in Latvia. 
  Unfortunately, in accordance with the present legislation, a 
foreigner who is in Latvia on a visa can register for marriage. 
If someone who has just come here marries a citizen of Latvia, 
in accordance with the immigration law, this person can request 
and obtain a permit of stay for one year, after which it can be 
extended to 4 years, and after 5 years -- receive a permit 
for permanent stay. Very often, the marriages between 
persons of foreign nationality and citizens of Latvia are 
FICTIVE, concluded for the purpose of obtaining a permit to stay 
in Latvia (obviously, in a situation where the income for the 
majority of citizens of Latvia borders on minimum subsistence, 
citizens are forced to agree to such fictive marriages in order 
to earn some additional income). In practice, our workers have 
come upon the situation where one married spouse does not know 
the other spouse's date of birth, residential address, or even 
the proper spelling of the last name (in many cases, the spouses 
retain their own last names). 
  The fourth group consists of political and economic 
refugees from CIS hot "spots". They join relatives or 
friends here, hiding the true reasons for coming, and often 
mention contracts for work or study in Latvia as the reason for 
their proposed stay in Latvia. 
  In this respect, I would like to examine the Riga Civil 
Aviation University. This institution is a magnet for 
foreigners. This "Alma mater" attracts a large number of 
students from the Transcaucasian republics, who arrive here with 
their entire families (wives, children, fathers, mothers). I 
cannot neglect to mention that there are also quite a few 
aspiring students from the countries of the Near and Far East, 
who, during the school semester, attempt to register marriages 
with citizens of Latvia (also fictive marriages). I would like 
to know what sort of specialists this university is training, if 
even during the study period or immediately after completing 
studies, they are registering companies in the Republic of 
Latvia Business Registry with twenty or thirty dollars or so in 
their pockets to start business activities? It seems that no one 
at present can tell how many firms and limited liability 
companies are registered under the roof of this university, what 
they are involved with, and how this benefits our nation? 
  In my opinion, the site of this university could be used for 
the creation of the Academy for State Officials, as discussed by 
the Minister of Reform, and then there would be no need to evict 
the archives from 15 Rainis boulevard, which is involved with 
the gathering and examination of party and KGB documents. 
  And finally, if the administration does not adopt stronger 
entry regulations, if it doesn't adopt quotas for issuing 
permits for stay already now, then the uncontrollable entry will 
continue of foreigners who are hostile, do not know the 
language, and do not understand the culture and traditions, and 
who are writing to every organization in the world about human 
rights violations, further confusing the issues -- rights of 
citizens and human rights. 

