BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Anthos Likavyis] </F>
  [Text] The postponement or at least the delay in the 
expected submission of the UN secretary general's report as well 
as contradictory information on a possible positive Turkish 
Cypriot response to the confidence-building measures, create 
uncertainty and much confusion. 
  And all the above, despite assurances given to President 
Glavkos Kliridhis by Gustave Feissel, the UN secretary general's 
deputy special representative in Cyprus. That is because the 
American element continues intensive interjections for more 
positive developments. 
  In light of the above, this week is described as 
particularly 
critical, because: 
  The government considers it certain that a Turkish maneuver, 
which could take the form of some "conditional" acceptance of 
the UN document, is imminent. 
  An authoritative source close to President Kliridhis told O 
FILELEVTHEROS yesterday: "Something is happening backstage and 
the U.S. positions unfolding after the impasse cannot be 
considered accidental." Under the pressure of this information, 
which causes concern, and the American statements in particular, 
the president was forced to warn the United Nations, through 
Feissel, that he will accept no amendments to the 21 March 
document, "either in the form of interpretation or in the form 
of clarification." 
  President Kliridhis' exact warning is a sign that "something 
is happening" backstage and that something is being prepared 
based on the "progress" achieved in Vienna! 
  Informed diplomatic sources reveal that this progress, noted 
by the U.S. State Department spokesman, relates to some 
interpretations that "balance" other interpretations and satisfy 
[Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf] Denktas somewhat. These 
"balancing interpretations" concern: 
  First, the "ownership" of territory that will be used for 
access to Famagusta and methods of supervising it. 
  Second, the operational structure of Nicosia Airport, the 
status of the "Turkish Cypriot Airways" and the regulations 
governing the taxation of imported goods. 
  Third, the time, and particularly the coordination, of 
settlement in the area north of Dhimokratias Avenue, in relation 
to the reopening of the Nicosia Airport, in light of the new 
arrangements. 
  The pseudostate's so-called "Council of Ministers" will meet 
in the presence of Denktas tomorrow to finalize its decisions in 
view of the extraordinary meeting of the pseudoparliament the 
following day. Ankara let it be known that the pseudoparliament 
will accept the package of confidence-building measures! This 
is contrary to the impression created by a section of the 
Turkish Cypriot press, thus making the confusion even stronger. 
  Nicosia considers that the process of the 
confidence-building 
measures has indeed ended but does not cease to have 
particularly strong worries that in time and due to the 
uncertainty, the Turkish responsibility will seem less severe. 
  Decisive developments though, which will clarify the 
situation, will occur in the coming days. 

