Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["OANA/pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Colombo, 3 Mar (LANKAPUVATH) -- Sri Lanka's security 
forces have in a new wave of motivation and confidence killed 
over one hundred LTTE [Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam] 
terrorists while losing only six soldiers in the first two 
months of 1994, in ten incidents where the LTTE attacked in 
large strength but were beaten back with heavy losses. 
  They have not only repulsed attacks by the LTTE though 
heavily outnumbered, but also killed as many as an estimated 100 
terrorists mostly in close quarter battle, military spokesman 
Brigadier Gemunu Kulatunga told LANKAPUVATH Thursday. 
  Giving details, he said that a group of soldiers training 
with dummy ammunition and firing mortars at Weli Oya were fired 
on by LTTE terrorists with a barrage of live mortars on Tuesday. 
The mortar trainees had immediately reloaded their mortars with 
live ammunition and hit back hard at the terrorists killing two 
of them and forcing others to withdraw. Two soldiers were also 
killed in this incident which occurred during daylight hours. 
  Brigadier Kulatunga said that 15 terrorists were confirmed 
killed and 10 bodies recovered at Comar Point, Pooneryn, in 
northern Sri Lanka. 
  He said that in an another incident, 30 to 40 LTTE 
terrorists 
had been killed in a dawn attack on an army picket moving from 
Kahambiligasyayad detachment at Weli Oya. In this incident four 
soldiers had been killed when a terrorist mortar hit a buffel 
[as received] vehicle which they were manning causing an 
explosion of the ammunition inside it. In an act of rare 
bravery and courage a single soldier charged at the LTTE 
terrorists with his T-56 firing burst after burst at a group of 
thoroughly shocked terrorists killing five of them while the 
others ran. Subsequently reinforcements and air cover were 
called in and about 30-40 terrorists were killed. 
  A report from Thoppigala in the jungles south of Batticaloa 
District states that troops effectively beat back a pre-election 
attack by about 200 terrorists with two terrorists being 
confirmed killed. 
  The military spokesman said that at Angodawillu eight 
terrorists were confirmed killed when a group of 75 cadres 
attacked a security forces patrol. 
  At Etawetunawewa in Weli Oya, a group of 25 soldiers, many 
of 
them bathing naked in the tank, after a hard day's training were 
repulsed an attack at dusk by two groups of terrorists numbering 
about 50 in each group. The soldiers had swum ashore, picked up 
their rifles and blasted the terrorists killing at least 20 of 
them. The terrorists had on radio transmissions monitored by 
technical sources admitted being stunned at the fierce counter 
attack launched by the soldiers and made frantic calls for 
vehicles to evacuate the wounded terrorists. Only four soldiers 
were wounded in this incident. 

