BFN 

<F P=106> ["J.J."-signed editorial: "Economic Spring"] </F>
  [Text] The latest economic data leave no doubt about the 
fact that economic spring has set in. The economic situation in 
Germany is improving. Recovery following the long and deep 
recession is gaining strength. This is not just a favorable and 
politically helpful message for the government in the 1994 super 
election year, but also a sign of hope that could improve the 
mood in the country. As is so often the case following a 
cyclical slow-down, the mood is worse than the situation. The 
substantial increase of economic output in western Germany shows 
that economic recovery is progressing. In eastern Germany, too, 
the growth rate has probably accelerated. Anyway, the 
production decline apparently has largely ended. 
  However, there is no reason for excessive euphoria. The 
sharp increase of the GNP in the first quarter is also 
attributable to the fact that in the same period of the 
preceding year there was one of the largest postwar slumps. The 
current economic recovery is only owing to exports and a 
gradually decreasing construction boom. However, investment, 
which is a typical driving force for growth, has not been 
stepped up. In addition, because of the financial burdens on 
consumers and lasting unemployment, the demand for consumer 
goods will probably remain low. Moreover, irrespective of 
economic recovery, there will still be many difficulties. In 
international competition, wage costs and taxes in Germany as an 
investment and production center are still too high. This is 
above all reflected by the gloomy situation on the labor market 
where demand is increasing slowly and structural change 
represents a heavy burden. 
  Nonetheless, the longer-term prospects have improved. The 
low pay settlements and further rationalization measures allow 
companies to produce more profitably. They have become more 
competitive. These are favorable conditions for new investment 
and -- consequently -- the creation of new jobs. However, in 
addition to low interest rates, this also requires the tax 
burden to be reduced as soon as possible, not as a reward, but 
as an encouragement for more growth. 

