Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Washington, February 9 (XINHUA) -- President Bill 
Clinton assured the Americans today that U.S. contribution to 
resolving the Bosnian crisis will be "proportional to our 
interests, no more and no less." 
  Clinton made the remarks while announcing a NATO ultimatum 
that the Bosnian Serbs remove their heavy weapons from around 
Sarajevo and all sides stop shelling one another within 10 days 
or risk NATO air strikes. 
  "If any Bosnian Serb heavy weapons were found within 20 
kilometers of Sarajevo within 10 days, or after 10 days, or if 
there is any further shelling of Sarajevo, NATO commanders stand 
ready to conduct air strikes against Serb artillery positions," 
Clinton said. 
  Clinton's proportionality approach is apparently aimed at 
those who urge a greater U.S. involvement and those who fear the 
U.S. would get embroiled in the conflict. 
  The President said Washington's interests in seeing an end 
to 
the Bosnian crisis include prevention of "a broader conflict in 
Europe," NATO's credibility in post-Cold War Europe, the 
stemming of refugees flowing from Bosnia and humanitarian 
considerations. 
  "These interests don't justify unilateral American 
intervention in the crisis," Clinton said. "But they do justify 
the involvement of America and the exercise of our leadership." 
  He said the U.S. would play a more active role in the 
Bosnian 
negotiations in order to reinvigorate the process of peace and 
bring the sides to an agreement. 
  NATO's ultimatum came after last Saturday's shelling of a 
Sarajevo market which left 68 people dead and nearly 200 others 
wounded, the largest civilian toll since fighting broke out in 
the Balkan republic 22 months ago. 
  In announcing the NATO move, Clinton noted reports that the 
Bosnian Serbs had agreed to withdraw their heavy weapons. 
  "If these reports are true, I welcome them," Clinton said. 
  "We hope that Bosnian Serb action will make air strikes 
unnecessary." 
  As if to counter criticism that past NATO threats had 
evaporated, Clinton emphasized that "no one should doubt NATO's 
resolve. Nato is set to act." 
  In response to a question on Russia's opposition to the NATO 
air strikes ultimatum, Clinton said attempts earlier today to 
call President Boris Yeltsin had failed for technical 
difficulties and he would try to talk to him later. 
  Clinton said he hopes the Russians would at least 
understand, 
if not agree with, the NATO move. 
  Russia has traditional and historical links with the Serbs, 
and Clinton stressed that the NATO threat "applies to anyone, 
not only the Serbs." 
  Clinton stressed, "anyone, anyone shelling Sarajevo must 
recognize this fact (NATO's determination to act) and be 
prepared to deal with the consequences." 
  The president said he was grateful for the support of the 
countries with soldiers in Bosnia, such as France, Britain, 
Canada and Spain. 

