BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with ANC leader Nelson Mandela by correspondent </F>
David Dimbleby in Johannesburg on 1 May; from "The New South 
Africa" program -- recorded] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Dimbleby] Did you have to 
pinch yourself to believe that the sight of millions of black 
people voting was actually true, was actually happening? 
  [Mandela] Well, I did not actually have to pinch myself, but 
perhaps I did the same thing, because when I saw those lines of 
people ready to vote, my emotions were stirred and I thought 
that we are going through an unforgettable moment. 
  [Dimbleby] Something you thought you would never see? 
  [Mandela] Well, I have never really lost hope that this day 
would come, but I must immediately qualify that because there 
were periods when the enemy, as we called them at the time, 
appeared to be on top and appeared to have crushed the 
resistance, but those were few and far between. Throughout, our 
morale was very high and we felt imprisoned, but one day we 
would return and the people would be victorious. In that 
regard, the international community played a tremendous role, 
because we felt throughout that the enemy was completely 
isolated, we had the support of the entire world, and in that 
situation, whatever problem you had, ultimately you would win in 
the end. 
  [Dimbleby] Now you are a keep-fit fanatic, you do your 
morning press-ups, do you expect to be leading the ANC in five 
years time, into the next election? 
  [Mandela] Oh yes, on one condition, on condition that my 
people want me to lead. 
  [Dimbleby] Because most people in this country think that 
you 
are the only person that can guarantee continued peaceful 
transition, don't they? 
  [Mandela] Well that is a very flattering opinion, but I must 
say that we have a gifted, committed leadership that would like 
to serve the people of South Africa as a whole, not just the 
members of the ANC, and the leaders themselves will come and go 
but the organization is committed to a specific policy that we 
have worked out and published, and on the basis of which we will 
come into power. 
  [Dimbleby] Of course you have dropped, during the course of 
making that policy, many of our more radical proposals that 
cannot have particularly pleased the communists and the trade 
unionists in the ANC. If this plan begins to falter, does not 
quite work, do you expect the ANC to revert to radicalism? 
  [Mandela] I do not have any pessimism in my heart. I am 
influenced by optimistic ideas as to our future. It is not 
correct that you would think there was any difference of opinion 
between the members of the South African Communist Party and 
COSATU [Confederation of South African Trade Unions] in regard 
to the program that we have worked out. 
  [Dimbleby] At the moment? 
  [Mandela] At the moment. 
  [Dimbleby] But things can change. 
  [Mandela] Well, things can always change and we cannot 
predict the future. The point is, at the present moment we are 
unanimous as to the priorities that have to be attended to. All 
of us, the ANC, the South African Communist Party, COSATU, are 
committed to this policy. 
  [Dimbleby] Chris Hani always said that the great danger when 
the ANC came into power was that it would lose touch with its 
grass roots. How are you going to stop your party becoming 
fat-cats? 
  [Mandela] Well, first, this program, the reconstruction and 
development program, was developed together with the masses of 
people in people's forums. That is a very effective method of 
exercising democracy where it is the masses of the people that 
are telling the leaders what should be done, instead of the 
leaders telling the people what should be done. 
  [Dimbleby] So you think the poor people in South Africa, the 
poor blacks who just voted for you were in favor of the 
concessions you have made to the bankers and the businessmen in 
the course of these negotiations? 
  [Mandela] All that the people are interested in is: Will we 
have jobs tomorrow; will we have hopes; will there be free, 
universal, compulsory education; will we have hospitals and 
clinics; will we have electricity in our homes, running water; 
will we have paved streets; that is all they are interested in. 
  [Dimbleby] And if they do not get that they will turn away 
from you. 
  [Mandela] If they do not get that they will be entitled to 
throw out the ANC government. I will be with them in that. If 
they feel the ANC has failed to deliver the goods, I will be at 
the head of a march to overthrow the ANC government. We are 
there to carry out a specific mandate. What is going to happen 
when the results of the elections have been made is to ensure 
that the masses of the people -- contrary to the legacy of the 
past -- are involved as to how to address their basic needs, 
what the first steps to be taken in each particular region and 
in this particular locality are to address these problems. 
  [Dimbleby] Is it a greater fear for you that the mass of 
the people, as you put it, the mass of black people become 
disaffected with the ANC, or that whites start to leave this 
country because of the measures that you take? 
  [Mandela] No, this plan that we have published, that we have 
drafted five times, has been widely circulated among a wide 
range of opinion makers, including business, academic, state 
corporations, state departments, a wide variety of 
organizations, and the five drafts that we have contained the 
(commitments), and therefore there is no reason for any 
particular population group in this country to leave the country 
because of this program, because working up front in placing it 
before the country and accommodating the fears and concerns of 
all communities. We have had a meeting with Oppenheimer and his 
colleagues to discuss this document, they have made certain 
suggestions, we are planning another meeting next week. We have 
been up front in insuring that that plan should receive the 
support of everybody who is going to be important in bringing 
about economic stability in this country, generate wealth and 
insure that there are job opportunities, job creation in this 
country. 
  [Dimbleby] Of course whites might leave if they felt life 
was 
too violent here -- as it was up until the last few days. Do 
you believe the third force that you often talked about 
allegedly exists, do you believe that is still a threat? 
  [Mandela] Oh yes, it is, and in fact a democratic government 
that is able to say to the security forces, the crimes you have 
committed before 8 October 1990, provided you make a full 
disclosure within a specified time, say four to six months, we 
will be able to pardon you, to give you an indemnity. If you 
continue to say that those who have committed offenses between 8 
October 1990 to December 1993, their case is at the discretion 
of the new government, of the new parliament, we will examine it 
on merit. 
  [Dimbleby] But will your first action be a clamp down on the 
right-wingers who have been bombing and the people who you think 
still threaten security in this country? 
  [Mandela] I do not think that that is an important matter. 
The police are quite sufficient to deal with the right-wing. 
They are a tiny minority and I do not think we should exonerate 
them. To clamp down on them, to bend them, is to give them an 
importance that they do not deserve. Well, look at the way the 
police have dealt with the bombers -- they put an end to it. It 
might still occur but they have nipped it in the bud and I think 
we should congratulate the South African police for having done 
such an excellent job. 
  [Dimbleby] How would you judge your success, or failure 12 
months from now? 
  [Mandela] Well, my success or failure will first be judged 
on 
the basis of whether we have carried out the reconstruction and 
development program and have started to meet the basic needs of 
the people. Second, it will be judged on the basis of whether 
we have been able to remove the concerns and the fears of the 
minority groups, especially the whites. It will be judged on 
the basis of whether we have made progress in creating this 
environment of national reconciliation and nationhood, of 
bringing about peace in our country, whether we have been able 
to involve the religious groups who are concerned with the 
maintenance of high moral standards, whether we are able to show 
that they have an unimpeded government in order to insure that 
corruption, covert operations are eliminated and that these high 
moral standards are maintained in government. 
  [Dimbleby] Mr. Mandela, thank you very much. [passage 
omitted] 

