BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive interview" with "three muffled members" of the </F>
Basque Fatherland and Liberty -- ETA -- by Walter Tauber and 
Pedro Barbadillo; place and date not given: "The Famous Bomb"] 
  [Text] DIE WOCHE: With "Operation Man-Eater," 
the attempt on Franco's Prime Minister Carrero Blanco's life, 
the Basque Fatherland and Liberty [ETA] made the headlines of 
the world press in 1973. How does the ETA leadership assess 
this action today? 
  ETA: Carrero Blanco guaranteed the continuation 
of the Franco regime. By our action, those who supported a 
shift toward democracy gained the upper hand. It may sound 
strange, but thanks to this action there is today this 
pseudodemocracy in Spain. Felipe Gonzalez should be aware that 
he is able to be minister president today also for this reason. 
  DIE WOCHE: Spain changed from a fascist 
dictatorship to a democracy. Do you still think that armed 
struggle is the right way to achieve your objectives? 
  ETA: The Spanish state is oppressing our people: 
This is the core of the conflict. The Franco dictatorship was 
not our only problem, but also the successors appointed by him. 
This is not often discussed and it may sound strange to you, 
but today's monarchy, this alleged "Spanish democracy," was 
established by Franco. We have today the same reasons to 
continue our struggle as we did 20 years ago. 
  DIE WOCHE: Within ETA there have always been 
supporters of an end to the violence, for example "Txomin," one 
of the participants in the "Operation Man-Eater." He later held 
negotiations with the government. 
  ETA: ETA made the attempt on Carrero's life, just 
like the recent one against Joseba Goikoetxea, chief of the 
special units of the Basque police, who had militant Basques 
tortured and killed. We also ignited the famous bomb in the 
supermarket "Hipercor" in Barcelona. We want to say by this 
that the organization ETA assumes responsibility for all 
attacks. It is a government game to attribute our actions to 
individual members, in order to oppress us. Negotiations on the 
armed struggle are not possible, the struggle is political and 
the solution also has to be political. We want independence, we 
have a right to it. Spain and France have to recognize these 
rights. The end of the armed struggle would be a consequence, 
not a precondition. 
  DIE WOCHE: Why did the talks with the Madrid 
government, for example in Algeria in 1988, fail again and again? 
  ETA: The reason is clear -- the government is not 
willing to come to an agreement. There is a significant 
example: About two years ago, the former press spokesman of the 
Interior Ministry published a book in which he clearly says that 
the Spanish Government did not want to negotiate with us. He 
claims quite brazenly that the government "almost succeeded in 
leading the organization up the garden path." Without any 
shyness, he states that the government did not plan to adhere to 
the agreements made with us by its representatives. 
  DIE WOCHE: What would ETA's conditions for 
negotiations with the government be today? 
  ETA: We have repeated until we're blue in the face 
that the first condition is seriousness. The second is the will 
to settle the conflict. The third is the guarantee that 
negotiations can lead to something. We only demand the 
following: the will. The will to take up the political 
conflict and to create conditions to solve it. 
  DIE WOCHE: Are there today any contacts or talks? 
  ETA: No, this is clear: No, there are no 
negotiations. The Spanish Government said itself that there are 
no contacts, that it has no intention of establishing such 
contacts, and that it cut short all ways to them. But the 
government also knows that there is no way out -- it has to 
negotiate some time. 
  DIE WOCHE: The assassination of Carrero was 
selectively aimed against a certain representative of the 
regime. For some years, ETA has perpetrated particularly bloody 
attacks to which civilians who are not involved fall victim, and 
that also cause increasing horror in the Basque region. What is 
the reason for this change? 
  ETA: Without bragging, we can claim that our 
struggle has been and still is absolutely selective. If it is 
not the most selective one in the world, it is one of the most 
selective struggles. In what war were so many high-ranking 
officers killed as in this one? Last year, in June alone, five 
lieutenant colonels of the General Staff were assassinated. Our 
struggle has been and still is selective against those who 
oppress our people. And we will continue to take action against 
them until the situation changes. 
  We certainly know that there were also many civilian victims 
in the past few years. We made mistakes because we did not want 
these victims. We reflected deeply on these mistakes. We have 
to ensure that there are no civilian victims because our targets 
are only those who oppress our people. 
  DIE WOCHE: What would the social order for which 
you are striving be like today, after the breakdown of the 
Soviet bloc? 
  ETA: We want a new society. But we know -- this 
is obvious -- that all models have failed so far. Thus, a new 
model has to be found. However, we are not offering a finished 
version; we want the people to participate in the development. 
This participation of the people must be the basis of the new 
model. In the struggle against oppression, we are seeking the 
road to a society without oppressors and oppressed. 
DIE WOCHE: "Argala" belonged to the commando unit 
that carried out the "Operation Man-Eater." He was killed by 
the rightist Spanish-Basque Batallion (BVE). Other leaders of 
the Basque underground fell victim to the "Antiterrorist 
Liberation Group" (GAL). Who is behind these assassins? 
  ETA: GAL and BVE were founded by the Spanish state 
-- founded, supported, and paid. But it is not the Spanish 
state alone that bears the responsibility, France is also 
involved. The GAL attacks came to an end when France started to 
deport Basques and hand them over to Spain. The whole thing was 
a joint strategy of the two states. 
  DIE WOCHE: Until recently, the possibility that 
peace might be achieved in Palestine or Northern Ireland seemed 
to be mere utopia. In view of such processes, should ETA not 
reconsider the purpose of its struggle? 
  ETA: Palestine and Northern Ireland are of great 
interest to us. However, we have to watch cautiously what is 
going on. If the starting conditions are not quite clear, such 
a development will not progress. The question of whether we can 
achieve self-determination without weapons is answered by 
reality: The Basque people said "no" to NATO in a ballot, but 
the Spanish state did not take this decision into account. The 
Basque people rejected the Spanish constitution in a referendum 
and this was not respected either. 

