Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] The fourth meeting of foreign ministers of member 
countries of the Economic Cooperation Organization [ECO] began 
in Tehran today with a speech by President Akbar 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani. 
  At the opening ceremony, the president stressed the need for 
regional cooperation and collective effort as a crucial strategy 
for the region's economic development and for coping with the 
difficulties arising from global political developments. Our 
correspondent reports: 
  [Unidentified correspondent] Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani said 
that, through strengthening and promoting our economic 
cooperation, we can present new models of cooperation for 
developing our economic infrastructure and for securing a 
lasting development, so as to reduce our economic dependence on 
the developed countries. 
  Referring to the region's potential in view of its vast 
geographical boundaries, its rich natural resources, manpower, 
extensive markets, great capacity to attract capital and 
technology, and its many other valuable resources, the president 
said: Politics and economics are two vital factors affecting the 
destiny of states. Both of them, by influencing one another, 
could secure the region's economic development; that is, the 
main objective of the ECO. This would be a factor enabling the 
member countries to enjoy greater power to maintain their 
economic independence and to take charge of their own destiny. 
  Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani pointed out: Many of the member 
countries' national plans can be prepared in such a way that the 
upgrading of the level of regional relations would accelerate 
overall cooperation. The president added: The grounds for 
cooperation, endorsed and approved in two documents of practical 
plan and long-term planning, are very appropriate and useful. 
If implemented, they would meet major needs of the member 
countries in the important fields of communication, trade, 
industry, culture, science, agriculture, and infrastructure 
across the region. 
  Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani went on to refer to the Islamic 
Republic of Iran's stances based on respect for international 
borders, the peaceful resolution of political disputes, the 
peaceful solution of internal discords in other countries, the 
prevention of tyranny and injustice, and the defense of the 
justified rights of human beings. He declared: We wish to see 
the ECO members enjoy security and tranquillity too. May the 
constructive approach of combining thoughts and cooperating with 
the nations of the region manifest itself in the speedy 
reconstruction of their countries. He added: Along this path 
the Islamic Republic of Iran would not refrain from undertaking 
any efforts, and it expects the other ECO members to employ all 
their efforts for this purpose. 
  The president continued: Unfortunately the arrogant powers 
do 
not care about ending tensions and destructive regional 
conflicts in the Third World as long as their own interests are 
not threatened. On occasion they even fan the flames so as to 
realize their satanic objectives and to pursue their 
illegitimate interests. The Tehran session is, therefore, an 
appropriate opportunity for an exchange of views on political 
situation of the region, to restore stability and security. 
[passage omitted] 

