BFN 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H8>  THE CITIZEN </H8>
  Buthelezi `Loser' in International Mediation Collapse -- 
Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English on 15 April in its page-6 
editorial "cannot think of a greater waste of time and money" 
than the international mediation that never took place. The 
government and the ANC "blame the IFP [Inkatha Freedom Party] -- 
the IFP blames them." However, THE CITIZEN blames "all three, 
for how could they let this chance of ending the constitutional 
impasse go by? How could they waste the time of the mediators by 
bringing them here and then changing the terms of reference once 
the government came into the process?" "If there is a loser, it 
is Chief Buthelezi. mediation was a chance to get his demands 
for greater autonomy for regions accepted by international 
mediators. He has lost that chance." 
<H8>  THE STAR </H8>
  Too Many Strikes, Public Holidays -- "Warning signs are 
flashing that the new South Africa -- its problems of 
governability aside -- will be born amid a culture of 
unproductivity," begins a page-12 editorial in Johannesburg THE 
STAR in English on 18 April. "Strikes are endemic, particularly 
in the former homelands. The election period plus a plethora of 
public holidays are effectively writing off half of April -- and 
a good part of May -- as working months." Besides the strikes by 
public servants in the homelands over pay disputes, there have 
also been "major stoppages in the food industry, mining and the 
public sector?" "All this disruption adds to the widespread 
feelings of uncertainty and impending chaos. A priority of the 
new government should be to get South Africa back to work again." 
  IFP's Rolling Mass Action Act of `Provocation' -- A second 
editorial on the same page says that despite the postponement of 
the 18 April march on the Johannesburg central business 
district, "the IFP Youth Brigade's programme of `rolling mass 
action' is an act of provocation which cannot be ignored. Once 
a principled opponent of this tactic, the IFP has been afforded 
every opportunity to participate in the democratic process." If 
violence breaks out again, "the blame will rest primarily with 
those under whose banner the protest takes place -- and that 
means Chief Buthelezi and the leadership of the IFP." 
<H8>  BUSINESS DAY </H8>
  Postponement of IFP March; Use of Security Forces -- The 
decision by the Inkatha youth leaders to call off the 18 April 
planned march in Johannesburg "is probably just a temporary 
respite, based on considerations of self-preservation," declares 
a page-8 editorial in Johannesburg BUSINESS DAY in English on 18 
April. "Inkatha seems intent on a campaign of mass 
mobilisation." BUSINESS DAY notes that the banning of marches 
by provocative demonstrators, "though perhaps necessary, is 
nothing to feel self-righteous about. Worse, the willingness by 
the new generation of politicians to support the use by security 
forces of lethal crowd control measures against those who defy 
banning orders is an ugly throwback to the past. Most 
disturbing is the apparent faith likely key members of the 
future government place in such measures as a total solution. 
It is really no more than a holding operation." 
<H8>  CAPE TIMES </H8>
  Freedom Front Viljoen's Leadership -- "Any loose talk in 
British newspapers of civil war brewing in South Africa, the 
realistic role of General Constand Viljoen and his Freedom Front 
in encouraging conservative Afrikaners to vote should help to 
keep the political temperature down," states a page 6 editorial 
in Cape Town CAPE TIMES in English on 12 April. "It is 
encouraging, also, to note that Dr Ferdi Hartzenberg of the CP 
[Conservative Party] is not insisting that CP supporters should 
boycott the poll." CAPE TIMES hopes General Viljoen's 
leadership "is steadily marginalizing the wild men on the 
right." "If he succeeds, his strategy will keep the majority of 
conservative Afrikaners within the democratic process, and will 
undermine spurious attempts to justify any resort to violence by 
fanatical rightists." 

