BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chan Wai-Fong and Linda Choy] </F>
  [Text] Beijing has retaliated against Hong Kong 
journalists who signed a statement in support of jailed reporter 
Xi Yang. 
  It has rejected their applications to cover next week's 
visit 
by a Taiwanese delegation to the site of the Qiandao Lake 
boating tragedy. 
  At least seven media organisations were told by the local 
Xinhua (New China News Agency) office yesterday that if they 
wanted to cover the event they had to send journalists who had 
not signed the petition. 
  The Hong Kong Journalists' Association (HKJA) yesterday 
expressed regret at Beijing's move and said it was retaliatory 
and penalising. 
  Last month 117 journalists from 23 media organisations 
endorsed a statement expressing their concern and anger at the 
12-year jail sentence imposed on Ming Pao reporter Xi for 
"spying and stealing state secrets". 
  They also decided to boycott media invitations from China 
which they believe to be propagandist until the end of this 
month. 
  Chinese officials sent the journalists' statement and copies 
of their signatures to the Propaganda Department of the Chinese 
Communist Party, the All-China Journalists' Association, the 
State Council's Information Office, and the Hong Kong and Macao 
Affairs Office in Beijing. 
  In Hong Kong, the local Xinhua office, the Hong Kong 
Government, the Newspaper Society of Hong Kong and the News 
Executives Association also received copies. 
  Yesterday an official from the State Council's Information 
Office told the South China Morning Post that since its 
applicant was one of the signatories she was denied permission 
to cover the Taiwanese delegation's visit. 
  An official at the local Xinhua office also told the Post 
that if it wanted to cover the event it had to send another 
reporter who had not joined the boycott. 
  Ming Pao's application was also rejected, because the State 
Council's Taiwan office said it had no authority to handle Ming 
Pao's application. 
  Ming Pao had wanted to send its Taiwan correspondent. 
  Sun Nansheng, director of the propaganda department of the 
local Xinhua, said that it was "normal" that the applications 
were turned down since the journalists had openly declared a 
boycott. 
  Since the boycott has a time limit, the ban would probably 
be 
temporary, he said. 
  The HKJA said yesterday the ban was proof that China's 
existing rules on Hong Kong reporters was a mechanism to 
"screen" and control reporting. 
  It was also contrary to Beijing's statement that Xi's case 
was an individual one with nothing to do with normal reporting, 
the HKJA said. 
  A local member of the Preliminary Working Committee, Tam 
Yiu- 
chung, said yesterday it was reasonable for reporters to show 
their concern for a fellow reporter who had been jailed. 
  "They should not be punished just because of this," he said. 
  National People's Congress delegate Liu Yiu-chu also said 
China should not discriminate against reporters who had signed 
petition letters to express their personal views. 
  The tourist boat fire on Qiandao Lake killed 32 people, 
including a 24-member Taiwan tour group, last month. 
  The delegation consists of members of the Straits Exchange 
Foundation. 

