BFN 

  [Text] Dakar, 3 Jun (AFP) -- Judicial sources have reported 
that the Dakar regional court yesterday found against the editor 
in chief of JEUNE AFRIQUE, who was tried in absentia, to a six 
months suspended prison term and 50 million CFA in damages for 
"defamation and insult." 
  In addition, the court itself fined Mr. Bechir Ben Yahmed 
200,000 CFA, and the court "banned the weekly from Senegal for 
one year." 
  The court's action followed complaints lodged against the 
paper by Mr. Mansour Tall, a magistrate and former permanent 
undersecretary to the minister of justice. Mr. Tall alleged 
that he was defamed by a JEUNE AFRIQUE article that appeared in 
October 1993. 
  JEUNE AFRIQUE had reported that Mr. Tall, the permanent 
undersecretary to the justice minister, was transferred as a 
technical adviser to the Ministry of Fisheries, after 
"attempting (in vain) to obtain information concerning the case" 
of the murder, in May 1993, of Constitutional Council Vice 
Chairman Babacar Seye. 
  The paper stressed that Mr. Tall was the brother of Aminata 
Tall, a Senegalese Democratic Party [PDS] parliamentarian. PDS 
leader Abdoulaye Wade and several other party officials have 
been charged with "complicity" in the "murder" case. 
  The public prosecution director's office of the Dakar Court 
of Appeals ruled in favor of the PDS officials in the case. 
However, the prosecutor general's department has appealed the 
verdict. 
  In a letter addressed to Senegalese President Abdou Diouf 
today, the Reporters Without Frontiers Association "considers 
that this sentence is totally incommensurate with the charges 
leveled against JEUNE AFRIQUE," stressing that "the sentences 
handed down are in violation of Senegalese press law." 
  In a communique, the Union of West African Journalists 
"strongly protests these sentences, notably, the one year ban on 
the publication." It considers the ban a measure "restraining 
the free flow of information...and constituting a dangerous 
precedent in a country which wants to be a model democracy." 

