CSO 

<F P=106> [UKRINFORM report: "They Are Prepared To Provide Ukraine </F>
with Assistance in Liquidating Nuclear Weapons"] 
  [Text] Meeting with President Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine on 
21 February, the ambassadors of the world's 14 leading countries 
(Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, the Federal Republic 
of German, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Spain, 
Great Britain, and the United States) presented a declaration 
from the governments of their countries regarding their 
readiness to assist our country in the liquidation of the 
nuclear weapons deployed on the territory of Ukraine. As a 
follow-up to this initiative, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
Ukraine invited the representatives of the above countries, 
along with representatives from Greece, the Republic of South 
Africa, South Korea, the United Nations, and the International 
Atomic Energy Agency [MAHATE] to take part in the multilateral 
consultations, at which the scope and areas of assistance to 
Ukraine could be discussed. 
  These consultations began on 19 April at the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine. Taking part in them are 
representatives from the ministries of defense; 
machine-building, conversion, and the military-industrial 
complex; foreign affairs; and education; and the State Committee 
on Nuclear and Radiation Safety. Deputy Prime Minister Valeriy 
Shmarov delivered an opening statement. 
  It was stressed that a whole series of specific programs and 
projects in the areas that are of priority importance to Ukraine 
have been submitted for consideration by the Western countries 
and international organizations. 
  Responding to a request by journalists to comment on this 
important event, Valeriy Shmarov stated: It is very gratifying 
that many countries and influential international organizations 
have responded to our problems in the field of nuclear weapons 
liquidation. This is a show of great political support for us. 
As to actual economic assistance, each will help as best he can, 
as they say. The most tangible assistance at present has come 
from the United States. As we know, in accordance with the 
agreements that have been signed, the U.S. has allocated 350 
million dollars of assistance to be used in carrying out the 
disarmament program. These funds have not yet been received, but 
matters are moving along. It should be said, in all fairness, 
that Ukraine is already engaged in nuclear disarmament. Thus, 
any assistance would be very timely. 

