BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by George Brock: "Beware of Europe's Cliques"] </F>
  [Text] Ten years ago this week, Jacques Attali, the 
unlamented head of the European Bank who was in those days 
right-hand-man to President Mitterrand, noted the following 
conversation between his boss and Germany's Chancellor Kohl. A 
European summit was looming and they were, naturally, bitching 
about Margaret Thatcher. 
  Kohl: I don't know where we're going. Its very difficult to 
talk to her. 
  Mitterrand: I'm not pessimistic. Britain always says "No" at 
the start, but if France and Germany do something together, it 
wants to be involved. 
  According to M Attali, the French and German leaders then 
moved on to a little horse-trading. Germany would pass up its 
chance to name the President of the European Commission, in 
favour of a Frenchman, if the French would promise to back a 
German the next time round. Herr Kohl would accept a French 
candidate "on condition that he doesn't work against the 
political initiatives which you and I will take." The Frenchman 
chosen was Jacques Delors. 
  This episode puts John Major's Corfu veto in perspective. 
Kohl and Mitterrand thought that they could bring off the same 
sort of trick a decade later by cutting an early deal for 
Jean-Luc Dehaene. They lazily assumed that the Dutch and British 
would grumble but roll over in the end. They were wrong. 
  But Mr Major has not broken any mould. M Attali's portrait 
of power-broking between Paris and Bonn captures the authentic 
flavour of high European politics then and now. High-flying 
officials, private-sector go-betweens, ambassadors and Eurocrats 
hop from capital to capital trading milk quotas, votes, slots in 
a variety of international hierarchies and, from time to time, 
ideas. What happened at Corfu was a rare failure of 
stage-management, due partly to the infirmity of the 75-year-old 
Greek Prime Minister, Andreas Papandreou, and mostly to an 
uncharacteristic blunder by Herr Kohl. 
  "The talk of dictatorship should come as no surprise to Kohl 
and Mitterrand," one German correspondent wrote, yesterday, 
echoing another who pointed out that several governments felt 
that German foreign policy was becoming increasingly ruthless. 
Mr Major exploited the grumbling resentment among the 
governments which France and Germany had taken for granted. 
Even if Herr Kohl now manages to glue the broken china back 
together, me bad-tempered dinner at Corfu exposed a gulf which 
is slowly opening between two ideas of how the EU [European 
Union] should evolve. The gap is not the much rehearsed 
difference over more federalism or less (which is moving into 
the background as other more urgent questions shoulder it aside) 
but the fight between little Europe and big Europe. 
  The defective deal to install Mr Dehaene in succession to M 
Delors was made among four of the six states which originally 
formed the EEC -- a fact which French spokesmen quickly 
underlined at Corfu. The veto wielded by John Major is written 
into the rules of the wider, formal EU of 12 states, soon to 
expand to 15 or 16. Disliking vetos used by states outside the 
founders' club and fearing the dilution of their power in a 
growing EU, France and the Benelux countries are itching to go 
back to the intimacy of the past. Could there be a new treaty 
between the six founding states? 
  Supplanting the existing, resilient EU would be impossible 
and the EU treaties are against this sort of exclusive, 
political club. Multiple speeds are inscribed in the Maastricht 
treaty on monetary union and social affairs, and opt-outs are 
either voluntary or determined by agreed rules. "Large Europe," 
perhaps 20 states in the early years of the next century, can 
only rest on a treaty shaped around individual states and their 
powers of veto. The Swedish Prime Minister, Carl Bildt, was 
asked what he thought of the stormy dinner that he and his 
fellow applicants had attended on Corfu. Rough bargaining, he 
said, but it was god to see that the veto is real. 
  The "Little Europe" states of France, Germany and Benelux 
say 
that they want to do away with the veto unleashed with such 
disruptive force by countries like Britain and Denmark. If a 
minority of five or six governments want deeper integration 
under Franco-German direction, other states cannot and should 
not want to stop them. But the larger Europe, working slowly to 
extend the benefits of stability and economic growth to East 
Europe, will still be operating. The wider continent will not 
take orders from the western end. Some decisions will still be 
made at the speed of the slowest, and the veto will continue to 
count. 
  The clash at Corfu was a small victory for the larger 
Europe, 
ponderously procedural, slow and sometimes infuriating though it 
is. But Mr Major's action should have reminded his partners that 
communities run by backroom deals tend to fall under the sway of 
their most powerful members. If Europe comes to a parting of 
the ways, Britain should avoid the small secretive clubs. 

