BFN 

<F P=106> [From 21 Jun EESTI SENUMID, HOMMIKULEHT, RAHVA HAAL, </F>
POSTIMEES, pp 1, 3; "News Bulletin" No. 119/94] 
  [Text] The Chinese leaders fully understand Estonia's 
foreign political priorities and intend to support them, 
President Lennart Meri and Foreign Minister Juri Luik announced 
at yesterday's news conference. 
  The president and the foreign minister met President of the 
People's Republic of China Jiang Zemin, Prime Minister Li Peng 
and Deputy Prime Minister-Foreign Minister Qian Qichen. 
President Meri said that their discussions concerned a number 
of issues, including relations with Russia. The Chinese leaders 
expressed full support to the demand of troops withdrawal by 
August 31 and also pointed out that China will not agree to 
Russia's claim for peacekeeping mandate in the territory of the 
former USSR, he said. The president added that the Chinese 
foreign minister had agreed to his views on the need to increase 
the role of the small countries in the UN. Meri also stressed 
that Foreign Minister Qian Qichen will visit Estonia as soon as 
on July 2. "It would be comical to consider it a mere 
coincidence," Meri commented. 
  Juri Luik added that both parties agreed to exchange 
information between their UN representations. Luik stressed the 
increasing role of China at the UN Security Council. He 
explained that Estonia will follow the practice of most Western 
European countries in developing relations with China and 
Taiwan. Luik also told the news conference that China will 
refrain from supporting possible propagandistic accusations of 
human rights violations in Estonia and will refer to Estonia as 
a country that has restored its independence. When asked about 
discussing human rights situation in China, Luik said that a 
"wide political debate took place". 
  President Meri further pointed out that Estonian-Chinese 
economic cooperation has been quite modest. The 3 million 
dollar loan for purchasing Chinese goods can only be used after 
the presidential visit, since only one enterprise had been 
previously authorised to mediate the trade, Chairman of the 
Consumers Cooperatives Central Union Raivo Kutt said. 
  Luik stressed that China is interested in Estonian cellulose 
and paper production, cooperation in oil shale mining and 
processing and in purchasing Estonian office furniture. 
Estonia's interest in Chinese pharmacy was also mentioned. 
  Estonia can also rely on Kazakhstan's support on all major 
issues, Meri told the news conference. He met President 
Nursultan Nazarbayev and other Kazakh leaders on June 10-12 and 
also the foreign minister on return from China. President 
Nazarbayev explained him the principles for his proposed 
Euro-Asian union. The Kazakh leaders are interested in 
developing economic relations with Estonia and opening 
diplomatic representations, Meri said. An agreement on mutual 
understanding and cooperation was signed during the visit. 

