BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Wang Yanbin (3769 6056 1755) ] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 30 May (XINHUA) -- Since the Ministry of 
Agriculture called for the nationwide implementation of the 
"shopping basket" project in 1987, the quantity and quality of 
nonstaple food on the market for urban and rural citizens have 
increased and risen, thus basically satisfying the increasing 
demands of consumers in urban and rural areas. 
  In 1987, the Ministry of Agriculture, due to serious 
shortages in the nonstaple food supply in the nation and the 
need for citizens to purchase meat, eggs, milk, and even 
vegetables with ration cards, and after summing up successful 
experiments carried out in some large and medium-sized cities in 
building up integrated nonstaple food production bases, called 
for the nationwide implementation of the "shopping basket" 
project centering in the suburbs of large and medium-sized 
cities. The purpose of implementing the "shopping basket" 
project was to increase nonstaple food output, to raise the 
supply level, to apply greater force to reforming the nonstaple 
food distribution system, and to create conditions for a gradual 
lifting of the control of nonstaple food prices and for 
improving procurement and marketing of nonstaple food. 
  China's "shopping basket" product output has experienced a 
sustained and rapid growth since the "shopping basket" project 
was put into practice seven years ago. 
  The nation's total meat output in 1993 was 37.80 million 
tonnes, up 82.28 percent from 1987; egg output was 11.01 million 
tonnes, an increase of 86.55 percent over 1987; output of dairy 
products posted an increase of 58.4 percent over 1987; aquatic 
products' output was 17.85 million tonnes, representing an 
increase of 78 percent over 1987; total vegetable output was 220 
million tonnes, up 4 percent from the previous year and 60 
percent from 1987. 
  The implementation of the "shopping basket" project has 
markedly raised urban and rural citizens' food consumption 
level. China's urban and rural citizens' per capita meat 
consumption rose from 18.4 kgs in 1987 to 32.1 kgs in 1993; egg 
consumption from 5.5 kgs to 9.3 kgs; dairy products from 3.5 kgs 
to 5 kgs; aquatic products from 8.8 kgs to 15.2 kgs; vegetables 
from 135.3 kgs to 186.7 kgs; fruit products from 15.4 kgs to 
25.4 kgs. 
  The varieties and quality of nonstaple food have also 
markedly increased and risen in step with the increase in the 
quantity of nonstaple food consumption. In recent years, 
consumers have been able to buy various kinds of nonstaple food 
supplied from all corners of the country as well as great 
varieties of imported products. Cucumbers, celery, cauliflower, 
and other vegetables, which were much sought after in the past, 
are now being upstaged by some other daintier new varieties. 
Now, an abundant supply of out-of-season vegetables on the 
market has enabled urban and rural citizens to enjoy delicacies 
which were unavailable in the past. 
  The implementation of the "shopping basket" project has also 
promoted reform of China's nonstaple food distribution system. 
China has smoothly lifted controls on nonstaple food prices and 
on procuring and marketing nonstaple food. It has basically 
realized the goal of using market force, which is under the 
guidance of the state's macroeconomic policy, to regulate the 
procurement and marketing prices of nonstaple food and the 
supply and demand relationship of nonstaple foods. Reform of 
the nonstaple food distribution system has promoted the 
development of production. The market, like an "invisible 
hand," is now guiding hundreds and millions of farmers to 
readjust production structure and to increase output and 
effective supply. 

