Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Jamal Kadyr, by Vladimir Mikhaylov; date and </F>
place not given: "What the Kurds Are Fighting For"] 
  [Text] As if conspiratorially, the news media, the 
public of the majority of democratic countries, and 
international organizations are silent about the genocide 
against the Kurds and this people's heroic struggle. RABOCHAYA 
TRIBUNA observer Vladimir Mikhaylov interviews Jamal Kadyr, 
representative of the Kurdistan National Liberation Front in the 
CIS countries. 
  [Mikhaylov] I fear that our readers are not all that well 
acquainted either with the Kurds themselves or with the Kurdish 
problem--Soviet and, subsequently, Russian newspapers 
practically ignored this question. Could you not for a start, 
therefore, briefly identify this problem? 
  [Kadyr] Happily. According to one version, the Kurds came to 
Asia from northern Europe and occupied the territory between the 
present Iran and Turkey 1,000 years before the birth of Christ. 
They fought for approximately four centuries, and it was only in 
612 B.C.E. that they formed their own state. And, as is usual in 
ancient history, there were numerous victories and defeats, and 
states broke up and took shape. 
  In our century, even the territory of Kurdistan in Western 
Asia has been divided among Turkey, Iran, Iraq, and Syria, and 
we have since that time been fighting for the creation of a 
unified and independent state. This struggle is being conducted 
by the National Liberation Front under the leadership of the 
Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK). 
  [Mikhaylov] Does the liberation movement adhere to a common 
strategy and tactics in all four areas? 
  [Kadyr] No. In Iraqi Kurdistan, the struggle began in 1960, 
but, unfortunately, it was conducted not for freedom and 
independence but for the right of autonomy. When this autonomy 
was promised, therefore, the Iraqi Kurds came to trust the 
country's leadership. As a result, Baghdad needed have no fear 
of them and was able to concentrate fully on the war with Iran. 
When the war was over, however, the Iraqi Army, like the Iranian 
Army also, for that matter, struck at the Kurds--1,400 villages 
were destroyed, and 600,000 refugees left their homes, and the 
rest were herded into strategic localities. 
  All weapons, chemical weapons included, have been used 
against the Kurds. 
  In 1991, when Operation Desert Storm was conducted against 
Baghdad, the Kurds once again acquired the possibility of 
struggle. But this did not suit the United States, and it 
afforded Iraq the opportunity to deliver new attacks on our 
brothers--184,000 persons died, and new hundreds of thousands 
became refugees. Washington is playing a double game here: In 
order to keep Baghdad in check it is ostensibly supporting the 
Kurds, but as soon as they begin to gain strength, it washes its 
hands of them, affording the Iraqi Army an opportunity to smash 
them. 
  The situation is roughly the same in Iran also, and this is 
why the national liberation movement is extremely weak in these 
countries and is winning practically no victories. But until 
1983 quite a few provinces were under the control of the Kurds 
there. But after the Khomeyni regime had become entrenched, 
these provinces once again reverted fully to Tehran. In Syria 
the situation is different: No guerrilla struggle has been 
conducted since 1969--we see a peaceful, democratic solution of 
this problem there. And the most tense situation, the most 
brutal genocide against our people, the most bitter war, 
exceeding considerably in its intensity what is happening in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, is in Northern Kurdistan--on the 
territory of Turkey. 
  [Mikhaylov] Judging by the brief wire reports, Turkish 
troops 
are pursuing the Kurds beyond this territory also. There was, 
for example, a report on mass bombing to which Turkish aircraft 
subjected camps on the territory of Iraq, going to a depth of 
110 km. 
  [Kadyr] Were this an isolated action! But such bombing raids 
and other crimes of the Turkish military are merely links in an 
endless chain of inhuman actions aimed at the extermination of 
an entire people. Nor does Ankara conceal this, for that matter, 
cynically declaring: "No more Kurds, no more problem." 
  Hundreds of examples of genocide could be adduced. Let us 
begin with the fact that throughout its history, Turkish 
television has not uttered a single word in Kurdish, and the 
schools teach only in Turkish, and until recently the students 
were forced to say daily: "By nationality I am a Turk, my father 
is Ataturk, Turkey is a country in which only Turks live." 
  As far as the punitive measures are concerned, more than 
3,700 villages and towns have been destroyed, over 12,000 
peaceful inhabitants killed, and approximately 9 million persons 
have become refugees in nine years in Turkish Kurdistan. When 
the troops conduct punitive operations, they do not select their 
targets, and old men, women, and young children die, therefore. 
They kill journalists and members of the Majlis (the Turkish 
parliament). Deputy Mahmad Sanjar, together with two other 
members of parliament, went on 4 September of last year to the 
city of Batman to take part in a funeral ceremony. As they were 
walking along the street in broad daylight, three Turkish 
"contra-guerrillas" (members of anti-guerrilla subunits) came 
running up to them and opened fire from assault rifles. Mahmad 
Sanjar was killed instantly, and another deputy was wounded. 
  The authorities are afraid of the truth, and this is why 
journalists are their victims. Nine reporters and 16 employees 
of the newspaper OGYUR GYUNDAM (Free Agenda), which is published 
in Turkish, have been killed in recent times. The People's Labor 
Party--legal--has 18 seats in the Majlis. But 48 of this party's 
activists have been killed--and the "contra-guerrillas" operate 
absolutely in the open, in broad daylight, in Turkey, what is 
more, and never cover their faces with masks. 
  You began your question with a mention of the recent bombing 
of Kurdish camps. But here is an example of the destruction of a 
town in which there were members neither of the PKK nor of the 
National Liberation Front. On 22 October 1993, Turkish soldiers 
surrounded the town of Lidc, in which all the structures were 
wooden, and began firing from artillery weapons and tanks. And 
then aircraft swooped down on the town, using napalm. The town 
was razed completely. The surviving inhabitants were shot, as, 
for example, were 27 older pupils right in the school building. 
  [Mikhaylov] This is all about punitive measures and 
genocide. 
But you said that a bitter war is being fought in Northern 
Kurdistan. Has the liberation movement scored any successes? 
  [Kadyr] The armed struggle has been under way for more than 
nine years here. We did not want to fight, but we were forced 
into it, and even our unilateral cease-fire, which lasted 83 
days and demonstrated the sincerity of our proposal concerning a 
peaceful settlement of the problem, met with no response from 
Ankara. 
  When we began our struggle, Turkish propaganda declared that 
it was a "handful of terrorists who had arrived from outside" 
and that "they would be finished off in 72 hours, at the most." 
The number of guerrillas today constitutes 15,000. In addition, 
there are 30,000 militia officers who have undergone training 
and who have returned to their villages and towns. They are 
prepared at any moment to take up arms and sometimes perform 
special assignments after the working day. There is fighting 
today on approximately 15 fronts. I can responsibly say that in 
the political, economic, and military respects, practically all 
areas are in our hands. There are places where we are the 
masters at night, but which we have to leave in the daytime. But 
in 1994 we will go over to a decisive offensive against the 
Turkish garrisons in the towns and will force them out of 
Kurdistan for good. 
  [Mikhaylov] What kind of weapons are you using, and where do 
they come from? 
  [Kadyr] Small guerrilla arms, in the main. For defense we 
have a certain quantity of large-caliber air defense machine 
guns and Stinger SAM-type missiles and grenade launchers. These 
are essential for defending our bases in the mountains. From 
where do we get them? Today, when almost the entire region of 
the Near and Middle East is in the grip of wars, buying any 
weapons is not a problem. The money for the guerrillas' needs 
comes from our people. 
  [Mikhaylov] In conclusion let us, if possible, talk a little 
about the fate of the Kurds who lived on the territory of the 
Soviet Union. It is well known that in 1923, on the initiative 
of V.I. Lenin, an autonomous region--Red Kurdistan--was formed 
on the land of Azerbaijan. Seven years later, in connection with 
the new administrative division, it was converted into Kurdistan 
Okrug, and several months later it vanished from the country's 
political map altogether. In 1937 the Kurds were deported from 
Azerbaijan and Armenia. Seven years later the same fate befell 
the Kurds in Georgia. What can be said about the position of 
your brothers today? 
  [Kadyr] Truly, when Kurdistan was divided into four parts, 
many Kurds found refuge in the Soviet Union. Under the 
conditions of the autonomy they were able to develop their 
culture and traditions there. Alas, this soon came to an end. 
Today, despite the fact that there is practically no information 
in Russia and the other republics of the CIS about our life and 
problems, we have opportunities for the development of our 
culture and language and can create committees and associations, 
put out newspapers and journals, and publish books. A special 
place in the fate of the Kurds has been and is now occupied by 
Russia, where the majority of refugees found refuge. We would 
once again have acquired autonomy, probably, but.... 
  [Mikhaylov] Yes, this is a distressing business. The Supreme 
Soviet of the former USSR, taking account of the situation in 
which the Kurds, like other small peoples also, had found 
themselves, formed a commission for restoration of the autonomy. 
But fate played a cruel trick: The Soviet Union ceased to exist, 
and the commission became legally null and void. Its three years 
of work were of no use to anyone, and the Kurds became citizens 
of different states of the CIS. Do you have a sense of 
hopelessness? 
  [Kadyr] No. First, we are sure that an independent Kurdish 
state will shortly emerge on the territory of Turkey. Second, we 
believe in Russia and see a desire to help those of us living on 
its land in every possible way. We have been afforded every 
opportunity for development, and Kurds here have never felt that 
their rights have been infringed and have not seen the least 
signs of discrimination. But as far as the national liberation 
struggle of the Kurds outside of the CIS is concerned, Russia 
has in this respect inherited the Soviet policy, when Moscow 
played up to the bourgeois parties of the countries in which 
parts of Kurdistan are located. It is essential that Russia 
today look at this problem with new eyes and understand that the 
war being conducted by the Kurds and the creation of an 
independent state are fully in keeping with Russia's interests. 
It is essential to break with the old ideas and see that 
Kurdistan serves as an additional guarantee of the defense of 
Russia's borders and the borders of the entire CIS. After all, 
it is no accident that the United States and the West are 
supporting in this way their loyal NATO ally--Turkey. 

