Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Rao Tianfa (7437 3240 4099), Luo Weizheng (5012 4850 </F>
2398) and Sun Lianxing (1327 6647 5281): "To Achieve the 
Brilliance Today -- an Account of the Data-Collection Operation 
on China's First Hydrogen Bomb Explosion"] 
  [Text] The historical account reads like a legend. 
  In the late 1960's, 30 minutes after the detonation of a 
hydrogen bomb, nine crewmen attached to a certain air force unit 
stationed in Jiangxi flew through the mushroom cloud, at the 
risk of their lives, and completed a sample-gathering mission 
for scientific research, thereby making an outstanding 
contribution to accelerating the development of our country's 
nuclear weapons. They astonished the world, and the Chinese 
were proud of them. For reasons of scientific research 
confidentiality, until recently this amazing story was known to 
only a few. 
<H5>  Secret Site Transfers </H5>
  The story began in 1964, after China had successfully 
detonated the first atomic bomb, and the scientific research 
departments of the Ministry of National Defense were working at 
full throttle to make a hydrogen bomb. The making of a hydrogen 
bomb, however, could not be achieved at one go. The United 
States spent seven years in the process. France was still 
empty-handed after four years of effort. Chairman Mao said: 
"Our country must even be faster than the United States and 
France; we will make a hydrogen bomb in three years." 
  Very high speed requires supreme scientific and 
technological 
efforts, as well as extraordinary courage. After repeated 
argumentation, scientists boldly floated the idea of collecting 
nucleoids and observing the whole nuclear proliferation process 
by means of manned aircraft. After the headquarters and the Air 
Force Combat Department studied had the idea, they handed the 
important mission down to a certain Air Force unit that had won 
great merit in the War to Resist U.S. Aggression and Aid Korea. 
  On an unforgettable spring evening, the conference room of 
the party committee of the certain unit was brightly lit and 
very quiet. A special, secret meeting was taking place. 
  Yu Qiancheng, director of the Air Force Combat Department, 
on 
behalf of the Central Military Commission, ordered a special 
sortie: "The military commission is ordering a secret site 
transfer; you will be sent to northwest to carry out the mission 
of flying through the mushroom cloud to retrieve samples 
resulting from a nuclear experiment...." 
  After a short mobilization, the secret site transfer began. 
  That day, they took off and flew into the morning sun [zhao 
yang 2600 7122], having set their navigational compasses in a 
northwesterly direction. Their destination: Gansu's Wuwei 
Airport. 
  The site-transfer flight lasted more than two hours. Fuel 
consumption projections estimated that the fuel-consumption 
warning lights would be blinking by the time the planes reached 
the destination. This meant the pilots would face disastrous 
consequences if they wasted so much as one drop of fuel. 
  However, the flight path was the shortest one possible; 
there 
was no other choice. They had to go that way, even if it meant 
going through hell. 
  The planes were now off the ground and climbing rapidly. 
They set their engines to cruising speed, so as to economize on 
fuel. Twenty minutes later, the weather of a sparsely inhabited 
desert turned nasty. Black clouds appeared in the sky, and the 
planes flew past them. Approaching the airport, the planes 
began to lose altitude in preparation for landing. The clouds 
were low and dense, and the rain was heavy. Through their radio 
headphones, the crewmen could hear the rain hitting the 
fuselages. The dials of the radio compasses were spinning 
violently. The ground was all foggy. 
  "Don't panic; land with the help of instruments," instructed 
the tower conductors. The slightest hesitation or error at a 
critical moment meant running out of fuel, abandoning planes, 
and bailing out. All the ground staff were worried sick. 
  The pilots kept their nerve, their eyes glued to the 
altitude 
and horizontal level meters, their hands reducing fuel and 
pushing levers. The planes were coming down. 
  100 m, 50 m, 20 m... 
  At last, the planes touched the ground, with sparks trailing 
on the runway. All nine planes landed safely. 
<H5>  Flying Through the "Forbidden Zone" </H5>
  No one had attempted to fly through a mushroom cloud to 
collect samples. The Soviet Union and the United States had 
made such attempts, but when the pilots saw the thick fiery 
clouds with blood- red gaping mouths, none of them wanted to 
risk their lives, and all bypassed the clouds. What would the 
Chinese pilots do? People waited anxiously to find out. 
  A silver-haired scholar on the dais explained, in all 
seriousness, the dangers of passing through mushroom clouds. 
He said: "I will adopt corresponding measures to ensure the 
safety of your lives to the extent possible, but your health 
will be affected to varying degrees." 
  He paused, then asked each pilot about his immediate family, 
including their sexes. In fact, one of the selection criteria 
for personnel on this mission was that they had to be married 
and have children. 
  It was easy to see that the professor was caught in a 
dilemma: He hoped the personnel could complete the mission in a 
satisfactory manner, but dreaded the physical damage caused by 
nuclear radiation. 
  "Just give the order, professor; do what you should do. All 
of us are mentally prepared. We want to complete the mission; 
that is all we care about." Although they were not top-notch 
scientists and technologists, the pilots were equally eager and 
sincere in working for the scientific and technological 
development of their motherland. 
  "Thank you, everyone. I believe that at the end of the day 
we 
can submit to the motherland and the people some test results 
that can measure up." The old professor was visibly touched and 
tears welled up his eyes. 
  The desert storm worsened after dark. The pilots found 
themselves keyed up and unable to relax. 
  "To the Central Committee and Chairman Mao: We are 
determined to complete the mission and we hold no grudges, even 
if we all become vegetables after the mission..." At the 
headquarters, Zhang Aiping, deputy chief of the PLA General 
Staff, held in his hand the letter of determination signed by 
the nine crewmen. He was overwhelmed with emotion. He reported 
to the military commission that the air crew was ready. 
  It was a sunny day on 9 May 1966, the day China's first 
hydrogen bomb was to be tested. 
  The airport looked particularly grim that day. Chairman 
Mao's quotations and various slogans could be seen everywhere. 
Dozens of scientists were looking through their binoculars, and 
Zhang Aiping was seated in front of the radio to update the 
central leaders on the progress. The atmosphere was so tense it 
was nerve-wrecking. 
  The planes were to fly past the cloud in five formations. 
Regimental Commander Huan Shulin got the right to lead the 
formation because he held the highest rank. 
  At 0940, a green signal flare arched through the sky. 
  The planes taxied, took off, and flew into the sky. 
  "Taishan reporting: We have reached the destination." 
Twenty minutes later, the planes were above the test site. 
Before them was a glaring tangerine mushroom cloud, slowly 
rising and expanding, and looking like a sunset from afar with a 
burning volcano nearby. Hang Shulin flew into the mushroom 
cloud without the slightest hesitation. 
  "Proceed as planned"; the commander's order came through the 
radio. All of sudden, the cabin was lit by very bright light. 
Hang quickly flipped on all the instruments and the 
electrically powered door for the retrieval operation. The 
meter dials jumped to the top, and engine temperature and 
revolution rate all rose slightly. Hang registered every detail 
with his eyes. 
  With the courage of a superman, Hang Shulin obtained highly 
valuable data and information. Encouraged by his actions, his 
comrades-in-arms completed the mission brilliantly and in high 
spirits. 
  The vast desert witnessed the entire flight. These names 
were inscribed in the republic's roll of honor: Hang Shulin, Hu 
Guangqiang, Xu Shaochen, Zhang Changkun, Qian Yingfa, Chen 
Qingluan, Du Jicheng, Liu Yuji, and Liu Zitian. 
  The Central Military Commission signed an order to confer 
Grade 1 individual and collective merits on all nine crewmen. 
<H5>  The Story Did Not End There </H5>
  With their lives, they wrote a glorious chapter. How are 
these merit-winning fighters faring today? 
  On a warm and sunny day, this writer arrived at the Nanchang 
Military Cadre Guest House. 
  Welcoming him at the door was an old man with a white beard 
and deep wrinkles on his forehead. He was Chen Qingluan. A few 
years ago, he retired as deputy divisional commander. The 
writer introduced himself and stated his purpose of the visit. 
Chen opened the conversation. 
  One week after completing their mission, they all lost their 
appetite and strength. Many of them became bald within days as 
a result of exposure to radiation. The impact of radiation on 
the human body varies, and as the victims age the differences 
become more noticeable. 
  His name is Hu Guangqiang. Aged 61 and wearing a cotton hat 
rarely seen in the south, he has a very old and sallow face, one 
that is much older than his age. It is hard to see in him even 
a trace of the heroic demeanor of his youth. He was exposed to 
twice as much radiation as the others, and since then has 
complained of tinnitus, dizziness, lack of strength, and being 
subject to attacks of influenza. His white cell count is 300 
cc, one-third lower than normal. He suffers from chronic 
hepatitis and incurable liver inflammation. His physician can 
do nothing about his case, merely advising him to exercise more 
and pay attention to his diet. 
  He jogs four miles along the riverside every morning and 
practices one hour of qigong during the day, whether in freezing 
cold or scorching heat. He is fighting the diseases and 
struggling to stay alive. People around him are touched by his 
tenacious spirit. 
  With the onslaught of mercantile values, concepts of value 
and outlook on life have changed. How does Hu Guangqiang view 
his past act of dedication? 
  "I have never regretted it. It was our duty to contribute to 
national revitalization, and this was even truer for a soldier 
like me." He views what he did as a requirement and as a 
mission every soldier would be glad to accept. He has sent two 
of his children into the Army who would relive what he has gone 
through. 
  Owing to the constraints of time and the journey, this 
writer 
was unable to fathom the inner recesses of all nine 
merit-winners, but he believes that these fearless and selfless 
people of the older generation all have a noble heart. Without 
regret or complaint, they dedicated themselves to national 
wealth and power. 

