Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by 'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Khamis: "Saudization of Bank </F>
Jobs Is Back in Limelight; High Salaries and Training Course Are 
Most Important Benefits; Nationals Represent 55 Percent of All 
Bank Employees"] 
  [Text] Riyadh--Sulayman al-Mandil, general director of the 
Bank of Riyadh, has said that more than 25,000 employees work in 
the Saudi banking sector, including 14,000 Saudis, who represent 
55 percent of these workers. But al-Mandil added that an 
increasing number of bank branches does not mean an increase in 
the number of workers because it is expected that modern banking 
machines, such as ATM's, sale points, and automatic services, 
will reduce labor employment. 
  In a seminar organized by the Saudi Economic Society, 
al-Mandil noted that he expects no more than a very slight 
increase in the next five years. He emphasized that there is an 
urgent demand to Saudize the remaining 12,000 jobs. But he 
expressed the belief that to serve the national economy, gradual 
replacement is the best solution because a number of the jobs 
held by non-Saudi nationals are specialized jobs. 
  Al-Mandil's statements coincide with an increasing number of 
complaints by Saudi employees and banks, considering that the 
Saudization issue has resurfaced in the forefront after a series 
of interesting accusations, some of which have been published by 
the local press. The accusations have dealt with completing 
banking Saudization and with how serious and how slow is the 
process. 
  Within the context of the competition among Saudi banks to 
develop and to envelop their activities in a more domestic 
character, most of these banks exert efforts at present to 
attract Saudi youth to work for them. Banks are vying in 
offering inducements to the youth to work for them, including 
high salaries and advanced training courses. Many banks aspire 
to surpass the Saudization plans which were drafted by the Saudi 
Monetary Agency in the early 1980's and called for attaining 
more than 50 percent Saudization. 
  The social and economic difficulties the banks encountered 
at 
that time caused the plan to be frozen. But the plan was revived 
recently in the wake of observations made by the currency and 
fiscal authorities, which created a strong motive within the 
banks, whose profits have grown recently as a result of their 
sound investment to attract Saudi and Arab capabilities and, 
consequently, as a result of their greater understanding of the 
domestic economic reality and capital tendencies. 
  A Saudi banker said that banks have become more interested 
in 
offering services than in attracting deposits whose owners do 
not wish to collect interest on them. Because it is necessary to 
provide services with a domestic character and in a fashion that 
is acceptable to the preferences of the users, banking officials 
have found that nobody is better than local youth to offer these 
services. Deposits not based on interest amount to nearly 30 
percent of investment activities. The banks then rely on their 
various banking services. 
  An employment officer at a joint Saudi bank said that a few 
years ago banks warmly welcomed whoever wished to engage in 
banking. Often, they sent a new employee to the bank branch 
where he wished to work without giving him any training. But now 
banks compare applicants and do not permit them to work until 
they complete specialized training courses in banking. 
  Strong criticism is addressed at joint banks by Saudi 
bankers, who say that these banks support their leaderships with 
foreign cadres, always relying on Indian and Pakistani 
nationals. Some officials of joint banks do not refute this 
claim, and justify it by saying that these nationals have 
extensive banking experience and have mastered English, thus 
making it easy to communicate with them. But Saudi bankers 
refute this justification and assert that these experts are no 
better than Saudi or Arab experts and that language is not a 
barrier as it is mastered by numerous local capabilities. 
  The Banking Institute of the Saudi Arab Monetary Agency 
(SAMA) is entrusted with a task which Saudi bankers demand that 
this institute perform, namely not to wait until employees are 
referred to it by banks and not to conduct courses just for its 
employees. The agency and the institute must launch an ambitious 
training program that calls for meeting Saudi banks' needs and 
requires them to appoint employees from among institute 
graduates who have been trained in the latest technologies. 
  A banker noted that the institute is content currently with 
training SAMA employees and employees referred by the banks and 
that it does not open its doors to students who wish to work in 
the banking sector. This helps banks to allege that the 
unavailability of domestic banking capabilities experienced in 
modern technological banking needs forces them to import such 
capabilities from abroad. 
  Commenting on this matter, another banker said that joint 
banks are managed by the foreign partner according to a 
management contract agreed to by the banks' boards of directors, 
and that this contract affects the banks' employment decisions. 
This banker demands that management contracts include 
Saudization percentages binding on the foreign partner so that 
the Saudization rate will become reasonable. 

