Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Brasilia -- The United Nations estimates that 
between 70 and 80 percent of the chemical substances used in 
processing cocaine in Peru and Bolivia are either manufactured 
in or shipped through Brazil. The statement was made yesterday 
by Herbert Schaepe, secretary of the UN International Board on 
Narcotic Drugs [Junta Internacional de Estupefacientes da ONU]. 
  Schaepe requested that Brazilian Justice Minister Mauricio 
Correa report on Brazilian compliance with three agreements on 
the control of drug production and use. 
  Noncompliance with these international agreements will make 
it difficult for Brazil to obtain resources to fight the drug 
trade. According to Schaepe, the opinion of the Board is 
important for the disbursement of these funds. 
  The Board--which is headquartered in Vienna, 
Austria--consists of 13 member countries, which will evaluate 
the Brazilian Government's reports. 
  The United Nations is concerned about Brazil having become a 
route for cocaine substances, as well as about the consumption 
in the country of 80 percent of the world production of 
Fenproporex, a basic appetite suppressant that causes physical 
and psychological dependence. 
  Fenproporex is an anorectic amphetamine that is used in 
Brazil, namely by drug stores filling up prescriptions issued by 
"obesity doctors" to patients who are seeking to lose weight. 
  In addition to dependence, Fenproporex causes irritability, 
depression, and increases the heartbeat. This drug is more 
dangerous when it is used with other pain relievers. 
  According to the United Nations, the Brazilian Government is 
not informing the Board about controls adopted in these two 
cases. 
  Justice Minister Correa said that the reports requested by 
the United Nations will be filed in the next few days. He noted 
that during the Collor administration the Health Ministry 
discontinued its controls over use of legal drugs such as 
appetite suppressants. He said the Brazilian Government is 
willing to comply with all of its agreements. 

