BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 1 KYODO -- The leader of the Democratic 
Socialist Party (DSP) on Wednesday announced his resignation to 
take the blame for a political maneuver that resulted in leaving 
the ruling coalition with Japan's first minority government in 
39 years. 
  "I wish to step down as party chairman at the coming party 
convention to take responsibility for the fiasco stemming from 
the formation of a new parliamentary group," DSP Chairman Keigo 
Ouchi told an extraordinary session of the party's central 
executive committee. "Specifically, it means I will not run for 
the chairmanship at the next party convention" scheduled for 
next week, Ouchi said. 
  Ouchi, 64, has been under pressure to quit for his role in 
forming the "Kaishin" parliamentary group in April, a move that 
prompted the Social Democratic Party (SDP) to quit the coalition. 
  DSP Secretary General Takashi Yonezawa, 54, will take over 
the top party post, said Ouchi, who became chairman in April 
1990. Kansei Nakano, chairman of the DSP's policy board, is 
expected to succeed Yonezawa as party secretary general, party 
sources said. 
  At Wednesday's extraordinary meeting, Ouchi also spoke of 
the 
need for the party's unity and further prosperity as a 
full-scale political realignment is imminent. 
  Ouchi, who is health and welfare minister in the government, 
said he wants to concentrate on his duties in that post after he 
formally quits the party chairmanship. 
  The Kaishin group was formed by the DSP, Shinseito and other 
elements in the coalition, excluding the SDP, only hours after 
Tsutomu Hata was elected prime minister on April 25. 
  The SDP had voted for Hata, but walked out of the coalition 
because it views the formation of Kaishin as a move to freeze it 
out of policy-making. As a result, the Hata administration 
started as the first minority government since 1955. 
  Ouchi later told reporters he decided to step down as party 
head because he thought it is the best way to resolve the 
disarray over Kaishin and maintain the DSP's unity. But he said 
he still believes the formation of the new parliamentary group 
was right. "I'm convinced my proposal for creating a new 
parliamentary group will prove to be important in tackling a 
reconfiguration of political parties in the future," he said. 
  Ouchi said he decided to resign on May 13 during a plenary 
session of the House of Councillors and prepared a draft 
resignation address at the time. Asked exactly what triggered 
his decision to quit, Ouchi replied he thought it necessary to 
resolve the internal dispute over the formation of the Kaishin 
group and the SDP's subsequent withdrawal from the coalition. 
"When a row surfaces within the party, the leader should 
sacrifice himself," he said. 
  Ouchi said he delayed announcing his intention to resign in 
the belief that too early a revelation could make the matter 
even worse. Asked if he intends to serve as party chairman again 
in the future, Ouchi said, "I have no such plan." 
  Meanwhile, a senior SDP official said Ouchi's resignation 
will not directly lead to the SDP's return to the governing 
alliance. "Whoever is chairman, all we have to do is deal with 
the DSP," the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity. 
Some other SDP sources, however, welcomed the resignation as a 
move that makes it easier for their party to rejoin the 
coalition. 
  On the other hand, a senior member of the Liberal Democratic 
Party (LDP) expressed hope the Ouchi's departure will aggravate 
the schism within the coalition. The LDP, toppled from 
government last summer for the first time in 38 years, has been 
threatening to file a no-confidence motion against the Hata 
cabinet, in a move to form a new government with the LDP as its 
core. 

