CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Organizations Opposed to EU </F>
Membership Starting To Cooperate"] 
  [Text] [no place-name as published] STT -- Civic 
organizations opposed to Finland's membership in the European 
Union [EU] are beginning to cooperate with one another. Four 
organizations have founded Independent Finland -- the Best 
Alternative, a cooperative organ for the antimembership 
campaign. The participating organizations are: Independent 
Nation -- Cooperative World, Finnish Independence Society, 
Finnish People's Independence Front, and the Alternative to the 
EU Information Center. 
  The purpose of the cooperative organ is to serve as an 
umbrella organization and other movements holding the same views 
are invited to join it. They plan to draft a plan for a 
nationwide campaign with in a couple of weeks. 
<H5>  Referendum Must Be Postponed Until Next Year </H5>
  On Thursday [14 April] the executive committee of the 
cooperative organ demanded that, since sufficient time has to be 
allowed for discussion by citizens, the referendum be postponed 
until next year. In the executive committee's opinion, 
postponement of the vote would create better opportunities than 
before to assess Finland's position from the standpoints of both 
Nordic cooperation and Europe's changing conditions. 
  "Citizens want to know about the EU's real values, power 
relations, and political goals as well as how it will affect 
Finland's constitutional democratic rights and obligations," the 
cooperative organ emphasizes in its official declaration. 
  Greens MP Erkki Pulliainen is the chairman of the executive 
committee. The members are: Seamen's Union chairman Per-Erik 
Nelin (Social Democrat), Hilkka Pietila (Center Party), bachelor 
of agriculture and forestry , Professor Pekka Puska (Center 
Party), and General Manager Ylermi Runko (Social Democrat). 
Professor Jan-Magnus Jansson (Swedish People's Party) serves as 
chairman of the cooperative organ's advisory committee. 
  The opponents of membership suffer from a perpetual shortage 
of money. A grant to be applied for from the government occupies 
an important place in the procurement of funds. 
  The invisibility of opponents of membership's opinions is 
also a cause for concern. The members of the executive committee 
complain that opponents' views do not receive sufficient 
exposure in the media. 

