Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Maulana Baabar] </F>
  [Text] Islamabad: The government Wednesday categorically 
stated it would accept inspection of its nuclear instalations 
only on a regional basis. 
  Explaining the government's policy regarding the interest of 
the Clinton administration in inspecting the nuclear 
installations, a Foreign Office spokesman said: "Consultations 
on this issue continue from time to time, including with the 
United States, but we will accept inspection only on a regional 
basis." 
  Reiterating the country's broad policy objectives on nuclear 
non- proliferation in South Asia, the spokesman said it should 
be "on a non-discriminatory basis and, create reasonable balance 
in conventional armed strength." He said Pakistan had always 
expressed its desire for achieving non-proliferation either 
through bilateral arrangement with India or on a regional basis 
and had given many proposals on this count.s 
  While welcoming the assessment of the State Department 
regarding the nuclear non-proliferation in South Asia, the 
spokesman said the new aid bill omitted the country-specific 
Pressier Amendment and, and the Pressler "standards" would be 
evenly applied to all countries. But, he said, the draft of the 
bill was not available. 
  The spokesman initially declined to comment on the new US 
aid 
bill, saying: "It is not for us to comment on the US 
legislation", as its had already been explained by a State 
Department spokeswoman Monday. 
  But when reminded by a journalist that he did not hesitate 
to 
comment on the Pressler Amendment which was also a US 
legislation, he said the government would wait before it reveals 
its official position on the new US foreign aid legislation. 
"We will see what form it will take, then we will comment," he 
said. 
  On the Indo-Pak talks, the spokesman said Pakistan hoped 
India would improve situation in held Kashmir for "purposeful 
and meaningful negotiations". 
  The spokesman also announced that Foreign Minister Sardar 
Assef and his Indian counterpart Danesh Singh would meet in 
Dhaka at the 13th Session of the Saarc Council of Ministers 
meeting, starting December 4. However, it would be an informal 
meeting and there was no fixed agenda, he added. 
  There is as yet no decision regarding Prime Minister Benazir 
Bhutto's visit to New Delhi to attend the UNESCO meeting. The 
dates for Bhutto's China visit have beenf confirmed and she 
would pay an official visit to that country from December 27-29. 
  The government once against expressed its concern regarding 
the continued fighting in Afghanistan. In this regard, the 
Afghan Foreign Minister had been informed that Pakistan 
considered there was no military solution to the infighting in 
his country. "Without taking sides we are willing to bring about 
peace," he said. 

