BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Special Report" program; passages within </F>
quotation marks recorded] 
  [Text] [Unidentified correspondent] Once upon a time this 
office was the heart of the Lubyanka. It was here that Yuriy 
Andropov, the chairman of state security worked. After him, no 
one else occupied this office, and practically nothing in it has 
changed to this day. 
  But plenty has changed in the structure of the Russian 
security services. Names, leaders, and to a certain extent the 
personnel have changed. Russian counterintelligence, as the 
professionals themselves admit, is not having a very good time 
at the moment. Open borders and imperfect legislation do not 
help to catch spies -- and this at a time when Russia remains, 
as she always was, a huge source of new technology -- a fact 
well understood not only by Western secret services but also by 
ordinary commercial companies. 
  [Aleksandr Mikhailov, head of the Federal 
Counterintelligence 
Service, FSK] "There are foreign secret services on Russian 
territory, and they do periodically forget their sense of 
moderation and the fact that they are guests here, and begin to 
act fairly openly in their own interests." 
  [Correspondent] At the most approximate estimate, there are 
about 120,000 foreigners illegally present in Moscow and Moscow 
Oblast at the moment. Of course, not all of them are spies. In 
any case, the greatest damage is caused not by foreign spies but 
by our own ones. We no longer have the concept of a specialist 
who is not allowed to leave the country, practically everyone is 
allowed to go abroad. But practically everyone here earns God 
knows how little, so the market for potential spies here is 
bigger than ever. 
  Vadim Sintsov, alias British intelligence agent Demetrius, 
only worked as a spy for about a year, and was uncovered 
recently and is now testifying from Lefortovo. 
  [Sintsov] "A certain Mr. James Self started working with me. 
After a while he introduced me to his receiving side, that is, a 
communications officer. They met me in other countries, that 
is, not in Russia. But in about the fall, they started to 
develop an option for communicating here." 
  [Correspondent] Sintsov does not know why, of all the 
specialists with access to the information that interested the 
British, they chose him. It might be simply that the British 
secret services got hold of documents that compromised Sintsov, 
and were sure that he would work with them. Sintsov got about 
$12,000 from the British over a year -- not much by Western 
standards. In comparison with the prices for services of this 
kind a few years ago, our spies are getting paid a lot less now. 
But there are still plenty of people wanting to share state 
secrets with foreign powers. Just last year about 20 agents were 
uncovered in Russia. 
  [Mikhailov] "In the West, according to our information, a 
fairly respectable database on our leading-edge technologies and 
our armaments and new inventions has already been formed." 
  [Sintsov] "They were mainly interested in two things, two 
areas where I could offer information due to my official 
activity. The first was Russian arms deliveries to Middle East 
countries, and the second was general issues of the organization 
of arms deliveries here." 
  [Correspondent] It is interesting, however, that science and 
technology may develop, the main methods used by agents from 
various countries have not changed over many years and centuries. 
  [Mikhailov] "The main weapon, as before, is the agents." 
  [Correspondent] Just as before, they use compromising 
material to recruit, hiding places that look like canned food, 
special writing, and even a password when two agents meet. As 
the specialists themselves say, there are intelligence services 
from friendly countries, but there are no friendly intelligence 
services. Incidentally, just yesterday the FSK detained three 
DPRK embassy employees in an attempt to obtain examples of new 
armaments, as well as a diplomat from Africa for other espionage 
activity. 

