CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nikolay Fedorov: "How to Recognize Counterfeit </F>
Money"] 
  [Text] The number of counterfeit ruble bank notes, 
bank notes of convertible currency, and state securities in cash 
turnover have increased sharply in Russia and other CIS 
countries. The following figures indicate the dynamics of such 
crimes: last year they increased at a rate of over 2,120 percent 
and more than 7,060 cases of counterfeiting--21 times more than 
the previous year--were recorded. But if the difficulty in 
recognizing the counterfeit money is taken into account, many 
more of the crimes are actually being committed. 
  In analyzing the reasons for this type of crime, the 
specialists associate it with the interruption or weakening of 
economic ties among the republics. Taking advantage of this 
situation, criminals are actively saturating the currency market 
with a large number of counterfeits, including those with high 
printing quality. The fact that the free circulation of ready 
cash in foreign currency was banned previously in the Soviet 
Union is also very important. And bank and cashier personnel had 
no experience in determining the authenticity of one bank note 
or another. Even now they have practically no experience. 
  On the other hand, there is a convincing explanation for 
that. The extent to which even specialists are informed in 
determining the authenticity of paper bank notes has been 
extremely meager thus far. For example, they lack professional 
descriptions of SKV [convertible currency] bank notes, as well 
as the methods of identifying the means of protection and 
determining the authenticity of paper money. There is not enough 
of the equipment needed to test the bank notes. 
  There are specialized reference publications from Interpol, 
but they have not been adapted to conditions in the CIS 
countries and they are inaccessible to most users because of 
their high price. 
  The problem of combating the counterfeiting of money and its 
further illegal use is many-sided. And law enforcement and other 
organs have been called upon to play a specific role in solving 
it. But what is most important, it seems, is to improve the 
skill in this area of specialists in the financial field, as 
well as all citizens. The Moscow publishing firm "Ivan and 
Partnership" has made its contribution to a solution of this 
problem. It has begun turning out reference and procedural 
literature which makes it possible to test and expose 
counterfeit bank notes with a high degree of reliability. This 
work is being conducted with the participation of specialists 
from the Central Bank and the Russian Ministry of Internal 
Affairs. 
  According to the assessment of specialists in law 
enforcement 
organs, publications by the "Ivan and Partnership" firm contain 
the most complete description of convertible currency bank notes 
with a detailed analysis and illustration of the elements and 
degree of protection. In other words, the publications help one 
see for himself the high quality of printing in the bank notes. 
It is very difficult for any one of the counterfeiters to 
achieve such a level of quality. So it turns out that the 
workmanship here actively withstands counterfeiting. 
  In addition, in the experts' opinion, the firm's 
publications 
have an advantage over a similar publication from Interpol 
because of their saturation with information and simplicity for 
the user. 
  It is worth noting that the Russian Federation Ministry for 
Cooperation With CIS Member-States is very concerned about 
prospects in the struggle against counterfeiting. Incidentally, 
it conducted a special analysis of reference literature, both 
domestic and foreign, on the problem of exposing counterfeit 
bank notes and monitoring their authenticity, and it found the 
"Handbook on Convertible Currency Bank Notes" [Spravochnik 
banknot SKV] published by the "Ivan and Partnership" firm to be 
the most promising at this time. 
  There is a direct recommendation from the Ministry for 
Cooperation With CIS Member-States to organizations in CIS 
countries that they devote their attention to this handbook. 
They believe here that it contains a volume of knowledge that is 
unique in the world, and much of it is being published for the 
first time. The book actually presents a new system for visually 
monitoring the authenticity of bank notes on the spot. In short, 
the publication may become an indispensable aid both in banking 
and currency and cashier operations, as well as for the activity 
of criminological experts in law enforcement organizations. Let 
us hope that it will help us to climb one more step on the 
stairway leading to a civilized market. 

