Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Maryana Oliynyk: "Things are fine with the </F>
Finns, but what about us?"] 
  [Text]The sensational news about Zhirinovsky's 
triumph in Russia overshadowed, as some political pundits noted, 
the equally sensational victories of the `Women of Russia' bloc. 
Contrary to skeptical predictions, the bloc received almost nine 
percent of the votes, coming close to the performance of LDPR 
[Liberal Democratic Party of Russia], Russian Choice and the 
Communist Party of the Russian Federation. Will Ukrainian women 
do as well? 
  Let us begin by examining the relationship of women to 
politics. First, consider some numbers in the report `Women in 
Ukraine: A Political Portrait', prepared by Lyudmyla Aza and 
Lidiya Kononko. This report summarized the results of a national 
poll conducted last May and June by the Center for Democratic 
Initiatives; the center polled 1799 persons, 54% of them 
women. 
  The poll showed that, contrary to popularly held views, the 
gentle sex is just as interested in politics as men. True, only 
7.3% of the women attend political meetings; twice as 
many men 
go to such meetings and three times as many men go to political 
conventions. However, women have been shown to be more 
influential and are much better at communication and public 
relations. 
  The poll further revealed that 83% of the women 
participate 
in political discussions and 78% claim an abiding 
interest in 
political issues 
  Finally, the poll indicated that 46.6% of the women 
do not 
trust the current parliament and 41.9% mistrust the 
government. 
The corresponding figures for men were 55.2 and 46.4% but, 
after all, we women are more trusting. This may be interpreted 
to mean that women want a change. This poll was quite 
selective--1677 of the respondents came from Kiev and 102 from 
other cities--but revealed that equal numbers of men and 
women--52%--have decided to vote. Other revelations were 
that 
35% of the women and 29% of the men will not vote, 
and 13% of 
the women and 19% of the men remain undecided. 
  In selecting candidates for office 49.8% of the 
women felt 
that they should be proposed by workers' collectives, 
26.3% 
think that they should come from the electoral districts where 
they live, and 10.5% feel they should be nominated by 
political 
parties, although they are mistrusted by 64.4% of the 
women 
polled (and 63.2% of the men). Nevertheless, women are 
prepared 
to support those parties and social groups that support women's 
issues. Evidence for this can be gleaned from the results in 
Russia where the `Women of Russia" bloc brought together the 
Union of Russian Women, Union of Women Entrepreneurs, and Union 
of Army and Navy Women. The `Women of Russia' bloc is not a 
political party as such and has no political ambitions. Alevtina 
Fedulova, the leader of `Women of Russia', has never portrayed 
herself as a president of Russia. Nevertheless, `women of 
Russia" attracted women with an understanding of women's issues 
and problems. As noted by one journalist, the liberal-democratic 
party "Men of Russia" attracted support from young men 
terrorized by the need to earn a living with promises to 
eliminate this evil threat. The purpose of `Women of Russia" was 
simply to give hope to women that someone was concerned about 
them in that male-dominated world. 
  The poll also demonstrated that political and legal 
awareness 
is generally low in both men and women: 60.2% of the 
women in 
the poll could not differentiate between majority, proportional 
or mixed electoral systems. Nevertheless, interest in politics 
is growing despite these obstacles. 
  The study also put to rest the impression that only lonely 
women without a full life are interested in politics. Marital 
status did not influence interest in politics, and the latter 
was not a substitute for a family life. Family responsibilities 
and concerns for the future of their children actually provided 
a stimulus for political activity, an observation confirmed by 
the conference of women's organizations held in Kiev at the 
beginning of February. 
  The fact that such a conference took place--the first of its 
kind--speaks volumes. Participants in the conference included 
The Women's Union, Union of the Ukrainian Women, All-Ukrainian 
Committee for Child Care, the League of Mothers and Sisters of 
Soldiers, Ukrainian Women's Christian Party, Union of Soldiers' 
Mothers, Ukrainian Center for Women's Studies, Union of 
Multiparous Mothers, the Kremenchuk organization Our Home, and 
so forth. They discussed such critical issues as low pay, high 
prices, child health, life experiences, and the hopelesness of 
waiting for help from the `strong sex'. President Kravchuk's 
message to the conference contained the following sentiments: 
"Today, as we are engaged in state-building, Ukraine's future 
rests--without doubt--on the willpower, wisdom, and committment 
of our women!" As the consummate gentlemen, President Kravchuk 
wanted to please the ladies. But his words found fertile ground, 
the stage was set, and the women decided to present a unified 
political front in the upcoming elections. 
  A special seminar was held on selecting a slate of 
candidates 
for parliament. Current laws preclude social organizations from 
proposing candidates, but they were proposed with support from 
workers' collectives and groups of voters. For example, the 
Union of Ukrainian Women fielded more than 60 candidates, 
including its leader Maria Orlyk. Although the final figures are 
not in, out of some 5833 candidates the number of women is 
small. The female contingent includes deputy Larysa Skoryk, the 
authoress Rayisa Ivanchenko, the lawyer Lyudmyla Vansovska, and 
a number of scientists, entrepreneurs, politicians and so on. 
  In the historical sense, the Ukrainian woman has always been 
enjoyed a place of importance. When did she lose her leading 
role and how? 
  It seems the problem begins early in life. Initially girls 
assume leadership roles and do better in school than boys, but 
in time they are relegated to the back burners as they grow 
older and the social structures become more complex. Women are 
deprived of the experience and skills to advance and are limited 
to participation in the `women's movement', which elicits ironic 
complaints about `emancipation'. Still, women are allowed to 
engage in heavy physical work by the `stronger sex', its just 
that the rarefied atmosphere of high-level politics is out of 
bounds. 
  In the final analysis, women are faced with a struggle to 
regain what they lost. 
  Moreover, the concept of a `women's movement' seems somehow 
demeaning. Why is there no need for a `men's movement'? 
  The concept of quotas for women in elective offices is also 
denigrating. I agree 100% with Levko Lukyanenko who 
categorically rejected parliamentary quotas for women in favor 
of fair competition. Men have to learn to accept women who are 
politicians, directors, experts and not treat them as rare 
exceptions for whom special allowances must be made. During 
Soviet rule quotas were set for women and women simply copied 
and reflected male norms in politics. This paternalistic 
attitude must change and room made for the more caring and 
nurturing `maternal' milieu. 
  As one speaker at the conference noted, women must not 
simply 
fill positions allocated to them, but actively seek the highest 
reaches of leadership. Women and men need to combine their 
forces, energies and talents for the common good. One can 
understand why our present parliament--with only 13 women--often 
finds itself in a dead end. In Russia the creation of the `Women 
of Russia bloc has been called--by women, of course--the most 
important and positive development in recent times. Countries in 
which women hold a high political profile, such as the United 
States, Canada and the Scandinavian countries, enjoy stability 
and have better economies, health care, and social services. In 
Finland even the minister of defense is a woman, a thing hard to 
imagine happening here. She--Elisabeth Rehn--ran for the 
presidency of Finland and almost won against Martti Ahtisaari. 
Nevertheless, her defeat is still interpreted as a great moral 
victory for the Finnish people since it demonstrated that 
politicians are judged on their abilities and not sex or 
nationality (Ren is a member of Swedish National Part of 
Finland). A day after the presidential elections the Finnish 
parliament elected a 51 year old woman as its speaker, Riitta 
Uosukainen, a representative of the Conservative Coalition Party 
and minister of education, while Saara-Marja Paakkinen, a social 
democrat, was elected the first deputy speaker. There is a large 
number of women in the 200 member Finnish parliament and about a 
third of the government posts are occupied by women. 
  That is the way things are in Finland. Unfortunately, not 
too 
much can be expected from our elections on March 27. Our women 
lack the organization that the Russian women have created and 
our people lack the open-mindedness of Finns. Still, we can look 
toward the future. 

