Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ankara -- Indicating that NATO is an antiquated 
institution, Russian Ambassador to Ankara Albert Chernyshev 
said: "We do not want a new NATO. If a new security system is 
needed for Europe, then we should do this together." 
  Chernyshev stressed that, in principle, following the 
dissolution of the Warsaw Pact, NATO also should have been 
dissolved. 
  In assessing the NATO summit in Brussels, Chernyshev said: 
"If NATO expands, then in principle, the CIS might become 
tougher." 
  In replying to CUMHURIYET's questions on NATO, Chernyshev 
emphasized that the desire of the East European states to enter 
NATO has entered the agenda as a negative attitude toward them 
[Russians]. 
  Chernyshev made the following assessment on NATO 
restructuring: "We do not want a new NATO. In its present form, 
NATO is an antiquated organization. We are saying let us do it 
together. We want to establish a joint security system for 
Europe. NATO could be included, but not the only one. 
Organizations such as CSCE and the United Nations should also 
take part." 
  Stressing that NATO existed for years as a counterbalance to 
the Warsaw Pact, Chernyshev said: "In principle, with the 
dissolution of the Warsaw Pact, NATO also should have been 
dissolved, or it should have undergone a serious transformation. 
This is because old scenarios still exist in NATO, and these 
should be abandoned. After all, we have counterscenarios to 
these NATO scenarios. That is why we are calling for the 
creation of a new system." 
  Stressing that a long time is needed to create the new 
institution, Chernyshev said: "We are realists. We must do 
step by step what is required of us for a new organization." 
  Asked "would you consider imparting a new identity to CIS if 
NATO restructures itself by accepting the East European 
countries?" Chernyshev replied: "Of course, in principle that 
is what would happen. That is what would happen in response to 
that. For example, certain countries are now accusing Russia of 
being aggressive. In such a case, it would be natural for us to 
show a counter reaction. It is for this reason that I am 
calling for joint action." 
  Stressing that the European and other countries are 
overreacting in their assessment of Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, the 
leader of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia, Chernyshev 
said: "Before, we had no nationalism; it was suppressed. Now 
Zhirinovksiy has won 25 percent of the votes in the elections. 
There are politicians in other countries who also think like 
Zhirinovskiy. You, too, have such politicians. One should get 
used to this." 

