Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres by </F>
Yisra'el Segal--live] 
  [Excerpt] [Segal] Do you have any expectations or fears 
about the upcoming meeting between Clinton and al-Asad? 
  [Peres] I think we should approach the matter with an open 
mind. It makes no sense to engage in speculations, when we will 
know exactly what happened there in another three or four days. 
My impression is that a change has occurred in Syria. It would 
be wrong to say that nothing has happened or to compare the 
current situation to the past. The main question is whether 
al-Asad has indeed drawn all the conclusions from the change he 
knows has taken place and the change he has undergone. We will 
have to wait until next Sunday [16 January] or Monday to find 
out, because President al-Asad is obviously holding his cards 
very close to his chest. 
  [Segal] What are the expectations from Israel's point of 
view? Do we expect al-Asad to declare that he wants full 
normalization? He is making this conditional on a full 
withdrawal. 
  [Peres] We expect several things which, taken together, form 
a process of peace. The first concerns the nature of the 
negotiations. They cannot be confined to one narrow track 
strewn with microphones, which turns into a futile verbal 
confrontation. Negotiations must be open and broad, and should 
include higher levels and quieter channels so they can really 
take off from where they are now. 
  Second, he must seriously and fully address the question of 
peace. After all, we are being asked tangible things, and what 
they are offering us has to do with rewards, declarations, and 
atmosphere. Furthermore, if even those offers are made 
sparingly, what is the point of the whole issue? In this 
context, al-Sadat realized that he must first go for full peace, 
including embassies.... 
  [Segal, interrupting] Mr. Peres, you mention al-Sadat. We 
know -- and who knows better than you -- that such high-level 
meetings between leaders, between a U.S. President and President 
al-Asad, do not take place unless they are preceded by thorough 
and serious work in which the essence of the meeting is in fact 
assured. 
  [Peres] I do not agree with you; there is no such rule. 
Sometimes, the meeting itself is the main event, as Secretary of 
State Christopher put it. I am not all that sure that every 
summit meeting is prepared down to the last detail. 
  [Segal] Do we have any information about the issues al-Asad 
will raise? 
  [Peres] I do not think we can have such information, and I 
believe the Syrians themselves have no such information either. 
Syria is ruled by one man. He calls the shots, and he decides 
when to announce his decisions. Therefore, any speculation is 
just that. Things may turn out one way or another. Clearly, the 
Syrians have developed very high expectations of and with regard 
to the United States. The United States has so far treaded its 
way cautiously, because it does not want to raise unfounded 
expectations. Having said that, we will have to wait and see 
what happens in a few days. 
  I would like to say something of which I am certain: Israel 
truly wants peace with Syria. Basically, we do not want a 
wounded Middle East, not even in parts of it. We want to bring 
peace to the Jews and the Arabs and to stop all the wars and 
threats once and for all. We are absolutely determined and 
resolute on this issue. If we can reach peace with Syria, we 
will be very glad. [passage omitted] 
  [In a recorded interview with Peres by Itay Engel and Tamar 
Landau on Tel Aviv IDF Radio in Hebrew at 0600 GMT on 13 
January, Peres is asked whether Nabil Sha'th's proposal "to 
defer negotiations on disputed issues in order to make some 
progress" is acceptable to Israel. The foreign minister 
replies: "We are trying to make progress on a very broad front. 
There are two committees, not just one, and progress should be 
made on any issue in which progress is possible. I think Nabil 
Sha'th is wrong in thinking that the agreements or 
understandings reached in Cairo no longer exist; it is a 
mistake."] 

