BFN 

<F P=106> [By Cristina Hasbun de Merino] </F>
  [Text] San Salvador, 16 Apr (ACAN-EFE) -- Armando Calderon 
Sol, the government's candidate for the presidency of El 
Salvador, asserts that violence must be fought with "prompt and 
efficient" justice. That is why he supports the constitutional 
reforms currently being debated in the Legislative Assembly. In 
an interview with ACAN-EFE, the candidate for the rightist 
Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA), said he knew an 
"independent justice" was needed to convince Salvadorans not to 
"take justice into their own hands." 
  A special Salvadoran parliamentary commission is currently 
studying several bills to reform the Constitution, including 
several reforms to the Judicial Branch, recommended by the Truth 
Commission that investigated human rights violations that 
occurred from 1980 until the signing of the peace agreements in 
1992. 
  Calderon and Ruben Zamora, the candidate for the leftist 
coalition that includes the former guerrilla, will hold a runoff 
election on 24 April to determine who will occupy the presidency 
of the country for the next five years. A second electoral 
round is a constitutional requirement when none of the parties 
obtains an absolute majority of votes in the first round. This 
runoff must be disputed between the two parties that obtained 
the most votes. 
  "We approve of anything that will help us improve the 
administration of justice to consolidate the division of power 
in El Salvador as this is the linchpin of a democratic state," 
Calderon Sol stated. But he has also been one of the harshest 
critics of the Truth Commission's report. This organization, 
whose members were appointed by the United Nations with the 
support of the signers of the peace pacts, maintains that the 
Salvadoran judicial system is "extremely lacking" and, in 
addition to constitutional reforms at issue, recommended that 
all Supreme Court of Justice magistrates resign. But the 
magistrates continue in their posts, and if the reforms of the 
judicial system are not approved by the current Legislative 
Assembly, whose term ends on 30 April, they will be delayed at 
least four years because the reforms have to be approved by one 
parliament and ratified by the next. 
  Calderon Sol also said he was willing to back the 
postponement of the mandate of the "Joint Group," a special 
commission that investigates the existence of the "death 
squads," if it is requested, to ensure the group's 
effectiveness. At the suggestion of the United Nations, 
President Alfredo Cristiani installed the Joint Group on 8 
December, after three main leaders of the former guerrilla, 
Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front [FMLN], were murdered. 
This group investigates the political murders committed since 
the peace agreement was signed in January 1992 and must submit a 
report to UN Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali and Cristiani 
by the end of May. 
  "If they (the members of the Joint Group) ask for a 
postponement, it will have to be granted. They also have to be 
given support to increase their chances for positive results," 
Calderon, a 45-year-old lawyer and former San Salvador mayor, 
stated. He added: "We expect positive results to put an end to 
this situation, assign punishments, and clarify things. Only in 
this way will we be able to advance to freedom and democracy in 
our country. We have to ensure that the groups that engage in 
selective violence are forever eradicated in El Salvador." 
  According to the Truth Commission's report, the "death 
squads" are ultra-rightist, clandestine groups formed by or 
having links to the military and financed by powerful 
businessmen, politicians, and landowners. Leaders of leftist 
political parties and organizations have asserted those violent 
groups are linked to ARENA members, and that is why the 
government has not acted firmly in the investigations. 
Cristiani and other officials have rejected such charges. 
  Calderon Sol exhorted people to "reject violence from every 
quarter," saying that he was sure to win the new elections 
which, he said, will ensure political stability in the country. 
Likewise, he manifested his confidence that the FMLN, which has 
become into the second-ranking parliamentary force since the 20 
March elections, will mount "a loyal opposition and be able to 
show the world that it has effectively entered democratic life." 
  Calderon admitted the elections have given the former 
guerrillas "an important quota of power, as has been expressed 
in the ballot boxes, in parliamentary seats. Nobody denies the 
fact that it is strongly represented in the Legislative 
Assembly." 

