CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Husayn 'Abd-al-Razzaq: "The Party of Camp David </F>
and Humiliating Surrender"] 
  [Text] All of a sudden the rulers of Egypt--and the rulers 
of the Arabs--are hastening to establish economic relations and 
joint venture projects with Israel, all under the aegis of 
"normalization" and peace, preparatory to the abandonment of the 
Council of the Arab League's resolution to continue applying the 
boycott "at all its levels." 
  In Cairo, the "heroes" of Camp David are acting shamelessly 
and with no effort to disguise what they are doing to us and to 
the Arab nation. 
  Last October (1993), our master cancelled the security 
restrictions that had been imposed on Egyptians traveling to 
Israel, including the requirement for them to obtain prior 
permission to travel, as from the first of November. 
  Then an agreement was signed by the governments of Egypt, 
Israel, and Turkey for the establishment of a three-country 
tourism organization. 
  Ater visiting Egypt and meeting with the president and the 
minister of petroleum, Israeli energy minister, Moshe Shahal, 
announced the Egyptian Government's agreement, in principle, to 
supply Israel with nearly 250 million cubic feet of natural gas 
per day, for 25 years, beginning in 1998. 
  In President Husni Mubarak's meeting with writers and 
intellectuals at the book fair, he announced his agreement to 
sell natural gas to Israel in pipelines passing through the 
northern Sinai, and to a petroleum refining plant project worth 
$85 million, in which Israel would participate, and which would 
be supplied with Arab (Gulf and Saudi) oil. 
  In the Peoples Assembly, Dr. Yusuf Wali defended the Israeli 
role in Egyptian agriculture. 
  The "Camp David party" marketed this exuberance for, and 
surrender to Israel, with the slogan of turning the "cold peace" 
that has existed since the Camp David accords and peace treaty 
between al-Sadat and Begin (1979), into a "warm peace" in light 
of Arab and global developments, and the Israeli-Palestinian 
declaration of principles (the "Gaza-Jericho first" agreement). 
  It did not stop there. In accordance with President 
Mubarak's 
"directives," frantic steps have been taken to establish this 
"warm peace." 
  In the last week of February, talks were held in Cairo 
between Egyptian and Israeli delegations of oil experts to study 
the subject of supplying Israel with natural gas, and to make 
use of Egyptian drilling companies in the Israeli oil business. 
The talks dealt with the practical steps for extending gas 
pipelines from Port Sa'id to Israel, and funding for the 
project, which is expected to cost nearly $300 million. Funding 
will come from a new company established by the Ministry of 
Petroleum, in which the Petroleum Gases Corp. and the Italian 
firm Agip will have shares. 
  The new Minister of Reconstruction [Minister of State for 
New 
Urban Communities] Muhammad Ibrahim Sulayman has announced to 
the Housing and Reconstruction Committee in the Peoples 
Assembly, a government strategy for developing the Sinai by 
using Israeli investments. 
  The Egyptian mufti's office has been the scene of a debate 
on 
psychology, to which the Egyptian Psychology Society, headed by 
Dr. Jamal Madi Abu-al-'Azayim [name as translitrated], was 
invited, and in which a 15-member Israeli delegation took part. 
  In Casablanca, President of the Israeli Knesset Rafa'el Edri 
announced the establishment of a mixed Israeli-Egyptian-Moroccan 
company to set up an air link between Morocco and Israel through 
Egypt, to facilitate the travel of Israeli Jews of Moroccan 
origin "who wish to visit their country, Morocco." 
  Once again there is talk--insolently, this time--of 
al-Sadat's project to dig a canal through the Sinai to bring 
Nile water to Israel. 
  Western sources link the Nile canal project with the plan to 
dig a 280-km-long canal from the Red Sea to the Dead Sea--with 
the goal of raising the standard of the Dead Sea waters and 
generating electrical energy by harnessing the movement of the 
water between the two seas--and a third project for digging a 
canal from the Dead Sea to the Mediterrean Sea. These sources 
say that the Italian Government has announced its readiness to 
fund the feasibility study for the Red Sea-Dead Sea Canal 
project after Jordan, Egypt, Israel, and the Palestinian 
authority gave their consent, and the construction of a huge 
port between the port of 'Aqabah and the Eilat on the route of 
the new canal. 
  According to the Israeli study, the cost of digging the 
three 
proposed canals will range from $750 million to $1.5 billion for 
each canal. The project also includes the installation of water 
treatment stations whose cost is estimated at near $1 billion, 
which would produce nearly 1 billion cubic meters of potable 
water annually. 
  As these sources say: "The project is one of a group of 
projects studied by the World Bank, aimed at securing economic 
assimilation and interconnection in the Middle East." The World 
Bank, in cooperation with the United States and Germany, will 
take part in funding the research and feasibility studies. 
  And the frantic Egyptian rush toward normalization--or more 
accurately into the trap of linkage, assimilation, and 
interconnection with Israel and the Middle Eastern market--has 
been accompanied by a parallel Arab rush. 
  Qatar announced, through its Foreign Minister Hamad 
Bin-Jasim 
Bin-Jabbur Al Thani, that its government was holding preliminary 
talks with Israel on a huge project for exporting gas to Israel 
and to Europe through Israel. The project cost is estimated at 
nearly $2 billion. 
  Casablanca has received an Israeli delegation led by deputy 
Rafa'el Edri, president of the Israeli Knesset, to take part in 
the International Assembly of Jews of Moroccan Origin. This was 
a new step in the growing economic, commercial, and political 
relations between Morocco and Israel, especially in the areas of 
agriculture, transport, and tourism. Moroccan businessmen and 
government officials have made several visits to Israel recently. 
  Jordanian and Tunisian delegations have visited Israel to 
discuss opportunities for future cooperation. 
  Political circles expect the Arab League Council to study an 
American request this month that it lift the Arab boycott of 
Israel at the third level, which bans international companies 
from doing business with Israel. The U.S. secretary of commerce 
made this request on his visit to Cairo on 21 January. After his 
visit to to Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Israel, Ronald Brown 
announced that "Arab countries will soon announce an end to the 
boycott of Israel." 
  The fact that the secretary general of the Arab League put 
this on the agenda of the League Council for its 101st session 
(March 1994) drew mixed reactions, especially as the League 
Council had made a resolution last 22 November to maintain the 
Arab boycott of Israel at all levels. 
  This sad story concluded with Shim'on Peres' announcment, 
during the press conference he and 'Arafat held in Davos, 
Switzerland, about holding a conference in Amman, Jordan, to 
study the economic future of the Middle East. The Israeli media 
pointed out that this conference was being planned by "the 
global economic community" and the U.S. Council of Foreign 
Relations. Dennis Ross and Richard Murphy are to play major 
roles in it, and no less than 4,000 officials, managers, and 
CEOs will take part, representing the global economic elite. A 
number of heads of state may attend, among them Clinton, 
Mitterrand, Major, Kohl, and Hosokawa, as it is seen as a global 
summit conference on development in the Middle East. 
  These events, which are occurring under the aegis of 
normalization, or the Middle Eastern market, or the development 
of the Middle East, or peace, are all aimed at securing Israel's 
future in light of the American-Israeli peace imposed on this 
region, which is certainly not the just and comprehensive peace 
we speak of. 
  What is now occurring is clearly aimed at establishing a 
formula for regional cooperation at the political, cultural, and 
economic levels, not merely to achieve total Arab and 
Palestinian recognition of the legitimacy of the Israeli 
state--founded upon the usurpation of part of the land of 
Palestine in 1948--within secure and recognized borders. It 
offers Israel the elements of a life of plenty, on Arab 
resources, and imposes the establishment of a neo-colonialist 
Middle Eastern system that protects the imperialist interests of 
the United States and its allies. It safeguards Israel, for its 
part, as the pillar of these interests, and takes the place of 
the regional Arab system and the institutions of joint Arab 
action. It negates the idea of Arab nationalism and its slogans 
of unity, and the national Arab liberation movement. 
  For peace threatens the Israeli economy with collapse, 
unless 
it is saved by this new role planned for it through 
normalization and the Middle Eastern market. 
  Thus the real exchange Israel is proposing is not land for 
peace, but the part in exchange for the whole; the occupied 
lands in exchange for the exploitation of Arab lands and 
resources through normalization and the Middle Eastern market. 
  Will the party of Camp David stop seeing its surrender to 
the 
Zionists and the Americans as realistic and courageous and 
clear, as "traversing the rocky roads to peace"? 
  Will Egyptian and Arab nationalist forces call things by 
their names, and reject this shameful surrender? Will we bravely 
confront the catastrophe that is about to envelop us and our 
nation, that implants Israel as a leading imperialist state in 
the Arab region, in the name of normalization and the Middle 
Eastern market? 
  This is the question, which the Egyptian and Arab left, and 
all nationalist forces, must answer--and with deeds, not words. 

