BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Husayn-Christopher Meeting is Crowned With </F>
Satisfactory Results"] 
  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn has convinced the U.S. 
Administration of the need to address the issue of the siege 
imposed on the Port of al-'Aqabah and to stop harassing the 
port-bound ships. 
  The U.S. Administration has responded to Jordan's call for 
another method of searching vessels, one that will not harm 
Jordan's economy and trade. The U.S. Administration's 
understanding of the Jordanian position on this issue was 
evident during His Majesty King Husayn's meeting with 
Christopher in London yesterday. The U.S. secretary, who will 
start a Middle East tour following his meeting with his majesty 
the king, emphasized that Washington is seriously considering 
Jordan's desire to see a change in the method of inspecting 
Iraqi trade via Jordan and to shift inspection from sea to land. 
  This is a positive development in the U.S. position on the 
siege of al-'Aqabah. This development denotes a U.S. desire to 
see Jordan resume its role in the peace process. However, as 
His Majesty King Husayn said, the resumption of Jordan's role 
and efforts in support of the peace process hinges upon the 
outcome of Christopher's Middle East tour and his meetings with 
the officials of the Arab cordon [al-tawq] states. Jordan, as 
his majesty stressed, is keen on the success of the process, 
which should lead to a just and comprehensive peace based on 
Security Council Resolutions 242, 338, and 425 and the principle 
of trading land for peace. 
  If the U.S. secretary makes sufficient efforts during his 
Middle East tour to convince or force Israel to abide by the 
principle of withdrawal from all of the occupied Arab 
territories and on all fronts, the peace process may proceed at 
a reasonable pace and in a satisfactory manner, and negotiations 
on the four tracks will overcome the obstacles planted by Israel 
along their course. Otherwise, Israel and the U.S. 
Administration will be responsible for any failure in the peace 
process. 

