Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] With 1993 coming to an end, the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs [MOFA] has compiled its retrospective of the 
international situation in 1993, and the outlook for 1994. It 
predicts the international situation in 1994 will remain 
"untransparent, unstable, and uncertain," as in 1993 during 
which the world went through ambiguous developments in a period 
of transition, experiencing the impact of the collapse of the 
bipolar Cold War structure and global economic recession. 
  The ministry considers the following points warrant Japan's 
attention: 1) the issue of the DPRK's (North Korea) suspected 
nuclear development and its domestic political and economic 
trends; 2) action that Russian reformists will take against the 
rise of conservatives and ultranationalist forces; and 3) 
whether the PRC will make a smooth transition to a "post-Deng 
Xiaoping era." 
  Concerning foreign relations, the ministry predicts that 
Japanese-U.S. relations may become more difficult. It has 
judged that while the first turning point will be the 11 
February Japan-U.S. summit meeting, the administration of U.S. 
President Bill Clinton, which cannot help but give priority to 
domestic affairs in view of the November off-year election, will 
undoubtedly carry out a results-oriented policy toward Japan. 
The ministry has analyzed that the administration of Prime 
Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, therefore, will be pressed to 
present concrete steps toward resolving the bilateral trade 
imbalance. 
  According to MOFA, two points characterized the 
international 
situation in 1993. The first point was that there emerged a 
strong trend toward reexamining existing political and economic 
systems and traditional policies. As examples, the ministry 
cites the democratization of the former Soviet Union and Eastern 
European nations, as well as their transition to market 
economies, and changes in rule of such major industrialized 
nations as Japan, the United States, and Canada. 
  The ministry also points out that such changes were 
accompanied by growing regionalism, as seen in the enactment of 
the Maastricht Treaty, and completion of the procedures for 
enactment of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). 
  The MOFA says the second characteristic was that although 
the 
possibility of global warfare lessened, many regional conflicts 
broke out due to ethnic, religious, and territorial disputes. 
The ministry noted that, in addition, a new problem has emerged 
concerning the danger of proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction among third world countries. 
  At the same time, the ministry points out that moves have 
been noted in Europe and the Asia-Pacific region toward seeking 
the creation of new security frameworks. However, it maintains 
that since such moves are still in the embryonic stages, various 
developments will continue to take place in 1994. 

