Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Finnish Prime Minister Esko Aho began a two-day 
official visit to Estonia on Tuesday. During his talks with 
Estonian leaders the subject of a natural gas network stretching 
from the Nordic countries via the Baltic states down into Europe 
was raised by the Estonian side. Finance for the project would, 
it is hoped, come from the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development. Prime Minister Aho said that Finland was prepared 
to take part in such a project. We have this report: 
  [Correspondent] During the first day of his visit to 
Estonia, 
Prime Minister Aho delivered a speech in English at the 
University of Tartu. It is almost 30 years to the day since the 
late President Urho Kekkonen addressed an audience in the same 
place and spoke Estonian. In his speech Mr. Aho wanted to 
signal to the Estonians that the Baltic states should strengthen 
cooperation among themselves; relying on the Nordic countries 
for support was not enough on its own. Another very important 
message in the speech was that Finland had not made a mistake by 
adopting a restrained realpolitik during the process of 
independence in the Baltic Republics. 
  On Tuesday morning Mr. Aho had talks with his Estonian 
counterpart Mart Laar. The prime minister discussed the rapid 
development of trade between Finland and Estonia. Finland is 
currently Estonia's most important trading partner. Within the 
context of privatization in Estonia, the countries are preparing 
an agreement on the return of property under which Estonian 
citizens will under certain conditions regain ownership of their 
former property in Finland and Finns will have the same right in 
Estonia. 
  Estonia also brought up the subject of natural gas supplies 
from Norway via Sweden and Finland to the Baltic states and on 
southwards to Poland and Germany. The topic was also discussed 
a few days ago in a telephone conversation between the Estonian 
and Polish prime ministers. Estonia wants the Nordic countries 
to be involved in what would be an expensive project to help it 
becone independent of gas supplies supplied by Russia. 
According to the Finnish prime minister, the project would not 
be utopian. For the Nordic countries, it would be very 
important both strategically and in terms of energy policy. Mr. 
Aho believes that a decision on the natural gas project will 
emerge, but he was not willing to guess when that might happen. 
  The Finnish and Estonian prime ministers are also due to 
discuss the recent strain in relations between Estonia and 
Russia over the timetable for the withdrawal of Russian troops 
from Estonia. 

