Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Mikhail Lantsman under the rubric </F>
"Privatization": "A New National Symbol Is Being Born in Russia: 
Its Largest Enterprise--Russian EES RAO--Goes on the Block"] 
  [Text] If the owners of privatization vouchers adequately 
react to the activism of Anatoliy Chubays' agency, which has 
increased perceptibly since the beginning of the year, the phase 
of privatization of state property in Russia may be completed 
considerably earlier than its 31 June 1994 deadline. 
  As is known, in January a substantial share of stock in such 
"voucher-intensive" enterprises as Gorkiy (Nizhniy Novgorod) and 
Volzhskiy (Tolyatti) auto works have been put up to an 
all-Russian voucher auction. All records will probably be 
surpassed, however, in February and March when the largest 
production association--the Russian Power Generation and 
Electrification Joint-Stock Society (Russian EES RAO), created 
on the basis of the former All-Union Ministry of Power 
Generation and Electrification--will go through the purgatory of 
privatization. From 7 February through 28 March, a package of 24 
million shares (20 percent of the charter capital) with the face 
value of R500 each will be sold through an interregional voucher 
auction. 
  The Russian Unified Power System today includes 589 thermal 
power stations, 102 hydraulic power stations, and nine nuclear 
power stations with the total capacity of 212 million kwh, as 
well as 2.5 million kilometers of power transmission lines. It 
employs a total of 1.3 million persons. In terms of scale, only 
the U.S. power generation system can compete with it. Russian 
EES RAO functions as a holding company, whose charter 
capital--about R70 billion--consists of the share of property 
(between 49 and 100 percent) of 72 regional power generation 
systems. The capital stock is distributed as follows: 51 percent 
of shares remain for three years under state control but in 
trust, to be managed by the company; 30 percent is distributed 
among the federation components in proportion to their volume of 
power consumption. Labor collectives have a right to acquire up 
to 15 percent of preferential and privileged stock and between 1 
and 15 percent of common stock. 
  The Russian EES RAO leadership sees the main sector 
transformation task as creating a market for electric power: 
competition among its producers while at the same time retaining 
the manageability both at the regional level and within the 
framework of the unified system. According to Russian EES RAO 
President Anatoliy Dyakov, all requirements of the current 
antitrust legislation have been complied within the 
privatization documents, although a monopoly in such a strategic 
sector is quite justified and is the current state of affairs in 
all civilized countries. 
  It should be noted that of 72 regional systems operating in 
Russia, 51 experience shortages of electric power, and the rest 
produce a surplus of it. In order to maintain fairness, some 
large stations that produce surplus power have been transferred 
into direct management of the holding company. The system of 
competition among producers (the wholesale market) and suppliers 
(retail market) is structured in such a way that at any given 
second flow controllers select the cheapest power available. 
  The main monopoly tool--rates--remains in the hands of the 
state. Because of administrative regulation of rate increases, 
Russian EES RAO sustains enormous losses, since rate increases 
do not keep up with prices for hydrocarbon raw materials. Rates 
are revised quarterly by a federal commission on power 
generation, and once a month on the regional level. But even 
with the government slowing down the growth of prices for 
electric power, today the sector's arrears amount to more than 
R3 trillion. Nevertheless, the company management assures that 
debts are not going to have any effect on payment of dividends. 
They will be handled through other unrestricted line items. 
  The Russian EES RAO does not promise its shareholders high 
dividends. The management of the joint-stock society believe 
that the main attraction of its stock is that it is safe; they 
are also counting on high degree of its liquidity in the 
secondary securities market. In the not too distant future the 
Russian EES RAO intends to become as much of a national symbol 
of our country as Ford and AT&amp;T are in the United States. 

