BFN 

  [Text] Cartagena de Indias (Colombia), 14 Jun (EFE) -- 
Venezuelan Foreign Affairs Minister Miguel Angel Burelli said 
today that should Cuba want to join the OAS, it must comply with 
the rule of democracy, hold elections, and respect human rights. 
  Burelli told the media gathered at the Convention Center of 
Cartagena de Indias (Colombia), where the Fourth Ibero-American 
Summit is taking place on 14 and 15 June, "America is a 
community that has a political system established by the OAS; 
there is a government philosophy and a rule of democracy." 
  He pointed out: "For Cuba to belong to this community, it 
must comply with the rule of democracy; that is, it must hold 
elections and respect human rights." He also pointed out he 
hopes Cuban President Fidel Castro "takes the necessary steps to 
join the community that is waiting for him." 
  Answering a question on whether Castro's move from wearing 
his green military uniform to wearing a guayabera shirt could be 
interpreted as a his willingness to make changes, Burelli 
replied: "I hope so!; I hope so!" This is the first time Castro 
has dressed in something other than his uniform since the Cuban 
Revolution succeeded in 1959. The Venezuelan foreign minister 
stressed his government "is very interested" in the Cuban 
economic changes, but it hopes these changes come along with 
"political changes." 
  During the summit's first session, Venezuelan President 
Rafael Caldera said: "The time has come" for Cuba to join the 
inter-American political and judicial systems and to change its 
political system. 
  Minister Burelli said the opposite with regard to Haiti: His 
government opposes any "unilateral or multilateral" military 
action in Haiti to put and end to the bitter crisis that is 
engulfing that country. Burelli also reported his government 
has requested the inclusion of the issue of corruption in the 
summit agenda in order to issue a resolution to prevent 
"granting asylum to corrupt people, just as drug traffickers are 
denied asylum." 

