CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hasan al-Chalabi, professor of international law </F>
and chairman of the Constitution Committee in the Iraqi National 
Congress] 
  [Text] The aggression and invasions, as well as the abuse 
of security, human rights, and neighbors performed by Saddam 
Husayn's regime, have placed the Iraqi people and neighboring 
countries in the same ditch. Therefore, the continuing of this 
regime not only causes a threat to Iraq's future, but also to 
the security of the whole region. Also, therefore, ending this 
regime is of vital interest to Iraqis and to the region and its 
countries, as well as to world peace. 
  In spite of this state of affairs, since Saddam Husayn 
became 
responsible for Iraq and its destiny, the Iraqi people have 
received very little help and support from their neighbors 
throughout all the difficult times and calamities that they have 
faced. Had this treacherous and suppressive rule been related to 
the rule of the people only and thus considered as a case of 
Iraq's private affairs and its national autonomy, then there 
would have been a justification for the passiveness. But, there 
is no excuse for Iraq's neighbors; they can provide no 
justification for only being spectators regarding what is 
happening in Iraq--around them--at the time when the Iraqi 
regime has become a threat, not to Iraq alone, but, to all 
countries in the region. 
  The Iraqi regime has placed Iraqis under injustice and 
displacement and robbed them of their essential, as well as 
their most vital rights, such as the right to life, food, 
freedom, dignity, and security. Meanwhile, the neighbors around 
them are silent and see what is happening without offering the 
Iraqi people any help or coming to their rescue. The duty of 
these neighbors dictates that, in such circumstances, they 
should have interfered. However, people living in these 
neighboring countries are different from other neighbors. Though 
the Security Council's Resolution No. 688 verifies that the 
world became aware of Iraq's plight following Iraq's popular 
uprising, the surrounding neighbors remained silent viewers of 
what was befalling Iraq; the neighboring sister-country made no 
move to help or to come to the rescue of Iraq. Similarly, the 
Arab League showed no feeling for either the calamities or the 
disasters that were befalling Iraq. Besides, Iraq's neighbors 
reacted very strangely toward the Iraqi opposition when it 
started to show any practical action to rescue Iraq. Controversy 
arose among the neighbors regarding the Iraqi opposition's 
resolution, when, in the aftermath of the Iraqi invasion of 
Kuwait, it started to perform some coordinated work. It tried to 
control and reach its goals once under the guise of what was 
referred to as favoring enrollment in those branches of the 
opposition that did not carry much weight inside Iraq in lieu of 
those branches that carried much weight, and another time by 
giving either the veto or the right of rejection, with regard to 
its resolutions, to some, not to all branches. This situation 
robbed it of its independence and rendered it unable to 
accomplish the simplest of its missions. 
  This state of affairs was very apparent during the 
opposition's conference that convened in Beirut in March 1991, 
coinciding with the popular uprising against Saddam's regime. 
Those attending the conference--instead of doing what their 
responsibility and duty indicated they should do, such as 
attempting to support the uprising inside Iraq--were busy 
passing around slogans, repeating statements, and racing to 
appear on TV shows and other performances. In another incident, 
when the Iraqi opposition tried to acquire what was needed with 
regard to the independence of its resolutions and plans at the 
Vienna conference, the neighbors marked it as being an American 
agent and as having fallen under the control of the United 
States. If fairness had prevailed, the question of dealing with 
the international factor should have been considered before 
marking the opposition with this accusation so that it would 
have been clear that the Iraqi opposition was doing nothing more 
than other Arab sides when they called on the United States to 
be a guardian and partner in resolving the Middle East dispute. 
Because the Iraqi opposition is in basic need of support coming 
from the United States and the other great international powers, 
it has accepted this aid in ways that do not negatively impact 
Iraq's national and autonomous rights and do not give up any of 
Iraq's national interests. Subsequently, the famous Security 
Council Resolution No. 688 was passed and later on--within the 
Iraqi National Congress--the Iraqi opposition obtained political 
and diplomatic endorsement from the highest levels in the United 
States, Britain, and France. This endorsement represents an 
admission that the opposition is a democratic and multi-lateral 
alternative to Saddam Husayn's regime. It is beyond 
comprehension to consider this admission as both an attack 
directed to the Congress's nationalism and as a belittling of 
its legitimacy. 
  The Western-style military protection that currently exists 
in northern Iraq from within which the Iraqi opposition is 
working to secure liberation--both in essence and in reality--is 
not different from any of the disengagement forces or 
international security forces deployed in more than one area in 
the Arab world. Why should there be two standards of judgment: 
wherein protecting Iraqi Kurdistan from Saddam's regime is 
considered sinful, military protection in other areas is not? 
  When the results of elections for the Congress's structure 
were announced, the neighboring countries stated that these 
structures were not democratic; they were ethnic and sectorial: 
as if this had been done within the framework of either a state 
or a stable government. What is the stand of those who proclaim 
this state of affairs with regard to distinguishing between the 
status of a revolution and that of a state? What would be their 
stand on the preceding cases of constitutional and 
internationally known governments in contemporary Arab and 
non-Arab history which have been legitimized and, though not 
based on elections by the people, were allowed to practice their 
different functions? In order not to elaborate further on this 
topic, it could be said that the revolution jurisprudence is 
based on a coordinated democracy, while that of a state is based 
on a numerical one, where general elections are possible. 
  When it became clear that the Congress encompassed only the 
most prominent of most of the Iraqi opposition powers, it was 
declared in the neighboring countries that it was not 
representative of the opposition because it did not encompass 
all of its branches. This means that unanimity is both possible 
and necessary only for the Iraqi opposition. However, it is a 
known fact that unanimity is very difficult even when it is 
related to jurisprudence; it would be even more difficult to 
achieve, within the prevailing circumstances, when it relates to 
politics. So, in the case of the Iraqi opposition, it would have 
been crucial that the Congress include all of the Iraqi 
opposition parties, which number about 100. In other instances, 
however, it was considered enough to host a tea party in a 
London hotel, have 10 or 15 persons invited, and declare war? 
  Currently, however, the Iraqi National Congress has become a 
reality on Iraqi soil and has an effective presence inside Iraq; 
it has also gained international recognition as has been 
portrayed in the latest message of Mr. Clinton, the American 
President, to congressional leaders (AL-HAYAH, 2 February 1994). 
Ron Neumann, director of the Northern Gulf bureau at the 
American State Department, sent a report to the leaders of the 
Iraqi National Congress in Salah-al-Din, in which he stated: 
"The fact that the Congress is still functioning two years after 
its establishment makes us hope that there are Iraqi 
personalities from the opposition, who, though they have 
different tendencies, yet, after many years, can work together 
for the first time and continue to do so under difficult 
circumstances. We do not want to exaggerate their power; 
meanwhile, others should not exaggerate their weakness. We will 
continue the policy of giving strong support to the National 
Congress and will urge others to do the same." Mr. Neumann 
further clarified that President Bill Clinton's administration 
"approves of the establishment in Baghdad of a democratic 
government that represents all Iraqis and is capable of 
coexisting peacefully with the people and its neighbors." He 
further stated that "the United States is ready to cooperate 
with a replacement government as long as this new government 
abides by the United Nations resolutions." Neumann also asserted 
that the Western allied countries were very successful in 
protecting the Kurds. He added saying: "The United States played 
a leading role in this endeavor. Despite this success, this 
issue is not resolved, and our efforts will continue." He 
further made a clarification by saying: "Washington does not 
have a separate policy for Kurdistan, but has an overall policy 
for Iraq." 
  In view of all these circumstances, it is probable that the 
neighbors will change their stand vis-a-vis the Congress. We 
therefore hope that the neighbors will end their boycott of the 
Congress and accept those necessary relations that will 
safeguard the interests of all concerned parties. Those 
opposition members who are residing inside a neighboring country 
could move to the homeland, where their efforts could become 
both useful and important. Currently, because this opposition 
has no homeland, it remains just a name and a slogan. The most 
important of the Congress's achievements is its success in 
moving the opposition to the Iraqi homeland and transforming the 
region that has been liberated from Saddam Husayn's rule into a 
base for it, thus becoming a reality as well as acquiring an 
identity. 
  When a dialogue is opened with the Congress, those parties 
that carry the Arabs' worries--inside and outside of the Arab 
world--will realize that the Congress is sharing--truthfully and 
deeply--these worries. These parties will also realize that the 
federation that the Congress advocates, which is proposed for 
Iraq, aims to neither separate nor divide, but to group and form 
a powerful and precious unity. They will further comprehend that 
the Congress does not aim to make one party dominate another, 
but that it advocates and works for the establishment of a state 
that will provide equality, justice, and liberty for all. The 
Congress's intentions, aims, goals, and wishes are to liberate 
Iraq form the regime of injustice and treachery and develop it 
on the bases of values, faith, and rationality. The recognition 
of the opposition therefore denotes the recognition of the new 
unity of Iraq--both as a nation and as a people. Therefore, when 
there is reference to communication between the Congress and the 
neighbors, the intention is to bring about the necessary 
coordination between existing conditions in northern Iraq and 
all the neighboring parties surrounding it. This coordination 
aims to alleviate any threat that these neighbors fear might 
arise from the circumstances in northern Iraq and might either 
harm them or harm their interests. All fears, doubts and reasons 
for strain could be alleviated if there is communication and 
consultation between the Congress and these parties. 
  It is most probable that had this kind of coordination taken 
place at the right time, the bloody encounters and shelling that 
caused a number of deaths and a lot of damage would not have 
taken place. Besides, had this coordination taken place, there 
would not have been an empty seat in the tripartite meetings 
that were held from time to time in a neighboring country and 
dealt with Iraqi affairs and worries. How could a country's 
affairs be discussed in the absence of its people? It is 
understandable that those who held such meetings did not invite 
members of the dominating regime to their meetings, yet, what 
reasons could hinder the invitation of the Iraqi people, 
represented by the liberation movement, to these meetings? Is 
inviting the representatives of the people not a required 
legitimate action and one that serves the interests of both the 
Iraqi people and the neighbors? 

