Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Nonlinear Institute of Nice (INLN) Launched at </F>
Sophia-Antipolis"] 
  [Text] Sophia-Antipolis--The Nonlinear Institute of Nice 
(INLN), a joint research unit of CNRS [National Scientific 
Research Center] and the University of Nice, officially 
inaugurated its new Sophia-Antipolis facility on 22 November. 
  Created in January 1991, the institute headed by Gerard 
Iooss, a professor at the University of Nice-Sophia-Antipolis, 
was housed until now at the University of Nice. In attendance 
for the inauguration were CNRS director general Francois 
Kourilsky, Nice University president Michel Bornancin, Mr. 
Pierre Laffitte, a senator and president of "High Technology 
Road" (an association of provincial technology centers), and a 
number of mathematicians, physicists, and chemists including 
Ilya Prigogine (Nobel Prize for chemistry, 1977). The ceremony 
afforded Mr. Daniel Thoulouze, head of CNRS's Department of 
Physical and Mathematical Sciences, the opportunity to present 
the Center's 1993 Silver Medal to Pierre Coullet, head of the 
INLN research group studying "instability and chaos". 
  The staff of INLN, whose founders include Gerard Iooss and 
Pierre Coullet, consists now of 31 scientists and academics in 
diverse disciplines--mathematics, theoretical physics, 
experimental physics, engineering, etc.--26 graduate students, 
and 12 "visitors." It seems destined for further growth: 
Although Nice-based nonlinear phenomena researchers have 
succeeded in creating a real school, a number of similar 
laboratories have long been in existence in the United States. 
According to one expert in this domain, Albert Libchaber 
(Princeton University and NEC laboratory), "Europe is far behind 
the United States in this field." 
  INLN is divided into six groups--"instability and chaos," 
"theory of branch-points and applications," "theory of (quantal) 
fields and applications," "topological and differentiable 
dynamics," "stability and boundary control of continuous media," 
and "experimental nonlinear dynamics"--composed of 
mathematicians and physicists as well as researchers in optics, 
meteorology, and biology. Currently staying as a guest at the 
institute is Russian scientist Professor Valentine Krinsky, 
whose work focuses particularly on chaotic phenomena in 
cardiology and who might remain at INLN. 
  With this new installation, CNRS strengthens its 
infrastructural base in Sophia-Antipolis, now the site of three 
of its own laboratories, two joint laboratories, and seven 
affiliated laboratories, in addition to the 
Provence-Alpes-Cote-d'Azur [PACA] regional delegation's branch 
office for Alpes-Maritimes. 
<H5>  Nonlinear Meteorology </H5>
  In meteorology, a field marked by chaotic phenomena, 
research 
into nonlinear phenomena can help improve forecasting. For 
decades now, according to Guy Plaut, INLN's only meteorologist, 
autumns in Provence have been either unusually dry or punctuated 
by repeated "deluges." This year, between 13 September and 10 
October, downpours were truly torrential: 90mm of water on 13 
September, 50 on 23 September, 40 on 1 October. 
  Once a "cycle" of drought or very high rainfall is 
established, it tends to last a long time. There is no way yet 
to make predictions in this kind of situation, but by 
correlating precipitation readings with measurements of 
barometric pressure (at sea level and high in the atmosphere) in 
the North Atlantic, it should be possible to identify the 
critical determinants for these rains and make probabilistic 
forecasts. Doing so will require data--40 years' worth--at both 
global (hemispheric) and local levels--from the National 
Meteorological Center of Boulder (Colorado) as well as Nice's 
Meteo-France weather station, for example. 
  In future, says Plaut, it should be possible to predict by 
late August the likelihood of these autumn "deluges." In 
general, it should be possible to make probabilistic predictions 
for any such changes of broad weather pattern. 
  The study of nonlinear phenomena can also help predict 
consequences of the greenhouse effect. "We must not think about 
the greenhouse effect in linear terms," says Plaut: It could 
push climatological variables into a "sensitive" or chaotic zone 
that might lead either to warming or to cooling. "Paradoxically, 
a warming trend could in theory lead to a cooling effect." 

