BFN 

<F P=106> [By Moises Perez Mok] </F>
  [Text] Structural adjustment and refinement of the Cuban 
tourism industry reached its peak today with the promulgation of 
Decree-Law No. 147, by which a ministry was created for this 
robust sector. 
  By virtue of this legislation, Vice President Osmany 
Cienfuegos Gorriaran will be the chief of that portfolio, one of 
the three created (the others are the Economy and Planning 
Ministry and the Foreign Investment and Economic Cooperation 
Ministry) as part of the downsizing and reduction of the Cuban 
state apparatus. 
  In a recent chat with local reporters, Cienfuegos said the 
Tourism Ministry will consist of a very small apparatus 
(approximately 50 to 60 people) and will be unrelated to all 
administrative areas. 
  The ministry's main functions will be to devise the 
country's 
tourism development policy, to oversee the operations of the 
various tourism institutions, and to ensure the training of 
personnel, Cienfuegos explained. He said specialization and 
territoriality will be the basic principles that will support 
work in this area. 
  To this end, following the dissolution of the National 
Tourism Institute (Intur), Cienfuegos said three hotel networks 
will be created: Gran Caribe, Horizontes Hoteles, and Islazul. 
Maritime organizations will be grouped under the firm 
Puertosol, and hotel activity outside the mainland will be 
promoted in the territories by Rumbos Recreation Enterprises. 
There will also be a tourism company that will operate under the 
name Cubatur, in association with the Spanish air company 
Iberia, which has extensive experience and prestige in this area. 
  The defunct Intur was created in 1976 and was tasked 
exclusively with developing the incipient Cuban tourism industry 
until 1987, when the Cubanacan S.A. International Commerce and 
Tourism Corporation was created. Shortly thereafter, a third 
entity, the Gaviota S.A. Group, was added to the efforts to make 
tourism the biggest source of foreign currency on the largest of 
the Antillean Islands. Though on a lesser scale, these last two 
institutions also underwent structural readjustments this year 
aimed at achieving greater efficiency and quality in their 
endeavors. Their goal, together with the Tourism Ministry, is 
to achieve more than $1 billion in gross revenues for 1995. 
  According to Cienfuegos, last year's tourism sector provided 
the Cuban economy with between $700 million to $720 million (30 
percent more than in 1992) and brought 560,000 tourists to the 
country. This total is lower than the one foreseen but much 
higher than the total for the same previous period (488,300). 
Cuba received 243,000 tourists in 1985, 340,00 in 1990, and a 
little more than 424,000 tourists in 1991. 
  The country has approximately 24,000 hotel beds distributed 
throughout 11 tourism sites that offer the most varied 
recreation, from beach bathing, mountain climbing, and diving, 
to ecotourism and health tourism [turismo de salud]. 
  Development of the tourism industry has gained strategic 
importance, particularly at the end of the 1980's when the 
Socialist Bloc crumbled and the U.S. blockade was intensified, 
placing the island in a difficult economic situation. 
  To boost the sector's development, the Cuban Government has 
resorted to various types of associations (joint ventures, 
management contracts) with foreign companies. Up until now, 
these associations have involved businessmen from Spain, 
Germany, Canada, Jamaica, the Netherlands, Mexico, Colombia, and 
Italy. 

