Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 2 Feb (MENA)--The State Security Intelligence 
Department has identified three of the seven terrorists who were 
killed when the security forces stormed their hideout in 
al-Zawiyah al-Hamra' in Cairo yesterday. 
  A statement issued by the Interior Ministry today identified 
the first terrorist as Yasir Zaki Abd-al-Fattah Muhammad 'Ali, a 
student at the Technical Trade Institute in Asyut and a resident 
of Dayrut. He was considered a prominent leader of the Islamic 
Group al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah in Asyut. The terrorist was on 
the wanted list for several crimes, including the murder of 14 
Christians and one Muslim, shooting at a police post in Kudiyat 
Mubarak, shooting at the house of Dayrut's intelligence chief, 
and shooting at a tourist bus and killing tourist Sharon Gill, 
in addition to other terrorist crimes. 
  The second terrorist was identified as 'Abd-al-Nabi Hasanin, 
born on 20 April 1974. He was a student at the Industry School 
in Dayrut near Asyut. He was wanted for throwing an explosive 
device at a pharmacy, throwing a bomb at the Jurf Sirhan police 
post, participating in the incidents at the Murwah movie theater 
in Hulwan, assassinating Lieutenant Kamal Sha'lan, and 
assassinating assistant police officer Fikri Fadil Madi. 
  The third terrorist was identified as Tariq Muhammad 
Qurashi, 
born on 15 May 1976, unemployed, and a resident of al-Qurashiyah 
near Dayrut. He was a prominent leader of the military wing of 
the Islamic Group. He and his dead brother, Ahmad Qurashi, 
participated in the bombing of the al-Minya train as it was 
passing through Dayrut in 1992. 
  The State Intelligence Department is checking the 
fingerprints of the remaining dead terrorists to identify them. 
  The security forces seized a large quantity of weapons that 
were found in the terrorist hideout in al-Zawiyah al-Hamra'. 
They include 18 hand grenades, seven automatic weapon 
magazines, around 1,000 bullets of various calibers, an 
anti-tank projectile, an anti-personnel mine, and five 
detonators. 
  The security forces also seized two boxes of TNT, a mortar 
round inside a cloth bag, 12 electrical circuits, and four 
Taiwan-made timers. They also found a radio set belonging to 
the Baqur police post in Asyut; a cellular telephone; three 9-mm 
rifles; copper masks used to make explosive devices; one meter 
of fuse; 23,000 Egyptian pounds; and a number of documents, 
forged identity cards, and leaflets. 

