BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Caracol's 0600 to 0900" newscast] </F>
  [Text] Caracol has just obtained the text of the letter 
sent by Gabriel Silva Lujan, Colombian ambassador to the United 
States, to U.S. Senator John Kerry regarding the senator's 
repeated criticism of the surrender policy and the 
interpretation and implementation of the Penal Procedure Code by 
the Prosecutor General's Office. In a strong response to an 
article by Senator Kerry, which was published in THE WASHINGTON 
POST yesterday, Ambassador Silva Lujan has stated: As you 
acknowledge, the Colombian Government differs in opinion with 
the Prosecutor General's Office, an independent office which is 
part of the judicial branch. These differences, Ambassador 
Silva Lujan has admitted, are still significant; therefore, he 
added, de Greiff's opinions on the negotiation of sentences and 
legalization of drugs do not represent those of the Colombian 
Government. 
  As I have said in the past, Gabriel Silva added, the 
Colombian Government will oppose the surrender of drug 
traffickers under conditions that are inconsistent with their 
level of criminal guilt. Furthermore, the Colombian Government 
has not supported, does not support, nor will support the 
legalization of drugs as a strategy in the antidrug struggle. 
  We at Caracol must add that Prosecutor General Gustavo de 
Greiff's position on this topic is 180 degrees different from 
that of Colombian Ambassador Silva Lujan in that letter. 
  In his two-page letter, whose original was in English and 
whose translation was obtained by Caracol, the ambassador added 
the Cali Cartel's greatest achievement would be to provoke a 
breakdown in judicial cooperation between the two countries. In 
the letter, the ambassador also vehemently rejected the 
assertion Colombia is a narcodemocracy: Colombia, the oldest 
and most politically stable democracy in Latin America, which 
has been maintained despite the narcoterrorists' attacks. The 
Colombian people have made enormous sacrifices in defending 
their democracy. Your hasty assertions are an affront against 
courageous commitment of Colombians to their institutions. 
  In his letter to Senator Kerry, Ambassador Silva also denied 
the senator's assertion the Cali Cartel has significant economic 
interests in the banking, finance, shipping, mining, coffee, 
petroleum, and floral sectors. The ambassador has said such 
assertions are unacceptable and groundless: It is untrue the 
Cali Cartel controls the most important sectors of the Colombian 
economy. These sectors are formed by respectable businessmen and 
companies, many of which have permanent relations with the 
United States. As in other countries, including the United 
States, organized crime seeks to infiltrate certain sectors of 
the legal economy, but this does not mean it controls some of 
these sectors or that the government tolerates its presence. 
  Ambassador Silva has also said that Kerry's statement that 
the Cali Cartel controls important elements of the Colombian 
media is false: For a long time, courageous journalists have 
been at the forefront of the crusade against drug traffickers. 
Investigative journalism in Colombia has played a fundamental 
role, revealing the illegal activities of drug-trafficking 
organizations. For this reason, many journalists and media have 
been victims of the drug cartels' kidnapping, assassinations, 
and terrorist attacks. In short, you have cast an undeserved 
shadow of doubt over the integrity of the Colombian private 
sector and media. 
  The ambassador also referred to the corruption linked to 
drugs, stating this is proliferating not only in Colombia but 
also in the United States; in fact, the ambassador added, 
according to a U.S. Justice Department report, more than 5,000 
federal employees have been found guilty of corruption between 
1970 and 1990. 
  This is the vigorous official reply by the Colombian 
ambassador in Washington, Gabriel Silva Lujan, to Senator Kerry, 
who again attacked our country in an article in THE WASHINGTON 
POST yesterday. 

