Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sanobar Shermatova: "Central Asia: </F>
How Much Does Gas Cost?"] 
  [Text] President Islam Karimov of 
Uzbekistan received an award from the Kyrgyz "Rukhaniyat" 
(Spirituality) Association in a ceremony in the Kyrgyz capital's 
state philharmonic society on January 16. A white racing horse 
and complete harness set were brought out on the stage and 
presented to the award winner, along with a hunting golden eagle 
and a national robe and cap. The ceremony was broadcast over 
republic television, and the recipient, in an acceptance speech 
that was delivered in Russian and met by the audience with 
stormy applause, urged that "splendid impulses be given to the 
fatherland's soul." The Uzbek press published a telegram of 
greetings signed by President Akayev, members of the government, 
and Kyrgyz oblast officials. 
  The Uzbek President is the third "Rukhaniyat" Association 
prizewinner, after President Akayev and President Nazarbayev. It 
is symbolic that the award ceremony was held immediately after 
President Akayev's trip to Osh Oblast, where the president was 
given a restrained welcome. The reason is that Osh Oblast is 
suffering from a shortage of gas from neighboring Uzbekistan. 
The situation has been compounded by an accident at an electric 
power station and a winter with record low temperatures. 
  Immediately after the award ceremony for Islam Karimov, he 
and President Akayev signed seven documents encompassing all 
aspects of economic cooperation. Kyrgyzstan acceded to the 
treaty establishing a single economic space between Uzbekistan 
and Kazakhstan. Documents regulating trade and reciprocal 
payments were signed. Under an agreement, customs barriers 
between the two republics will be lifted as of February 1. 
Finally, an agreement was reached on the cost of Uzbek gas 
transported to Kyrgyzstan: It will be 20 percent below the world 
price. This agreement is probably the most important thing that 
Kyrgyzstan had requested from its powerful neighbor, which has 
its hand on the gas pipeline valve. 
  Relations between Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan have been frosty 
at times in recent years. Tashkent has indicated on several 
occasions that it is not pleased with the "rampant democracy" in 
Kyrgyzstan and with the fact that Uzbek dissidents have found 
refuge on its territory. The incident involving the kidnapping 
of Uzbek human rights activist Abdumannob Pulatov by Uzbek 
intelligence services, which received wide publicity, failed to 
promote mutual understanding between Tashkent and Bishkek. The 
same is true of human rights conferences held in Bishkek, at 
which "Uzbekistan's totalitarian regime" has been sharply 
criticized. This may be why President Akayev, on the eve of 
Islam Karimov's visit to Bishkek, refused to allow Tursunbek 
Akunov, chairman of a nongovernmental human rights committee, to 
hold an international human rights congress in Issyk-Kul. 
According to some reports, the president's administration is 
drafting a document calling for closer ties between Kyrgyz 
public movements and political parties and Uzbek organizations. 
  President Askar Akayev has found himself in a truly 
difficult 
situation: On the one hand, he is under pressure from his own 
human rights activists and political parties; on the other hand, 
he faces economic problems whose solution depends in large part 
on his powerful neighbor. But Kyrgyzstan is now in a situation 
in which gas, needless to say, is more important that human 
rights. 

