BFN 

<F P=106> ["E.F." report: "14-Inch Color LCD Screen Prototype in </F>
Germany"] 
  [Text] Stuttgart/Hannover--The technology developed in the 
screen-technology laboratory of Stuttgart University could, 
according to its inventor Jens Glueck, solve the current problem 
of low luminosity efficiency and the resulting high prices of 
active-matrix LCD screens. The new technology uses a 
potentially less expensive transistor matrix manufacturing 
process with four masking techniques as opposed to five or six 
for the Japanese products currently available on the market, 
while offering a comparable image quality. Again according to 
Jens Glueck, the quality would be better than that obtained with 
the two-stage masking process developed by Planecran, a 
technique that is now owned by Flat Panel Displays: "Unlike the 
Planecran approach, each pixel has its own storage capacitor. 
We have optimized the pixel design to obtain an aperture ratio 
of 60 percent and thus ensure greater brightness." The 
feasibility of the technology has recently been proven with the 
presentation of the first 14-inch color prototypes. These 
screens, with a resolution of 575 x 696 color pixels, compatible 
with video refresh rates, are not completely bug-free, however. 
Jens Glueck said: "These faults do not arise from the 
technology itself, and can be eliminated by extra research on 
peripheral devices, command circuit connections, etc." In 
addition, negotiations are underway between Stuttgart University 
and IBM which envisages launching a project for the 
industrialization of the process by its German subsidiary. 
Negotiations are in particular centered on the financing of the 
project and the possible introduction of additional partners. 
As a result, the initial screens produced using this technology 
will probably not be commercially available for another two to 
three years. 
  The technology patented by Jens Glueck is of the inverse 
grid 
type, but is simpler than conventional inverse grid technology. 
The first masking stage consists of depositing a 200 mm-thick 
layer of chromium which is then etched to produce the lines and 
lower electrodes of the storage capacitors. Four layers are 
then deposited: the grid insulator (SiNx); the undoped 
semiconductor material (noncrystalline hydrogenated silicon, 
a-Si:H); the n+ doped semiconductor material (n+ -a-Si:H) for 
the drain and source electrodes; and an aluminum/chromium alloy 
(Cr/Al/Cr) for metallization. The absence of any intermediate 
etching eliminates the losses in efficiency usually experienced 
with the inverse grid process. This method moreover protects 
column metallization and prevents short-circuiting at the 
row/column cross-over points. 
<H5>  End-of-Etching Control Without a "Blocker" </H5>
  The second masking stage consists of simultaneously etching 
the metallization and the doped semiconductor to create the 
columns, drain/source electrodes, and the upper capacitor 
electrodes, while carefully controlling the optical emission of 
the etching source (CF402 etching plasma) to avoid 
"over-etching" which would attack the layer of undoped 
semiconductor (this problem is avoided in five or six-stage 
masking techniques by using an etching "blocker" which requires 
an additional masking stage). The last two masking stages 
consist of etching the undoped semiconductor to create the 
pixel, and then depositing and etching the ITO (indium tin 
oxide) layer to make the electrodes. This layer serves both as 
an extra metallization layer and a patch for broken columns. 

