Smoothly 

<F P=102>   946B0016B Beijing RENMIN RIBAO OVERSEAS EDITION in Chinese 
30 Oct 93 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 946B0016B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing RENMIN RIBAO OVERSEAS EDITION </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Xinhua reporter Lu Yongjian [7773 3057 1696], </F>
trainee Yu Xiaokui [0151 2556 5525], and RENMIN RIBAO OVERSEAS 
EDITION reporter Xia Jun [1115 8823]: "Initial Preparations for 
Three Gorges Project Are Progressing Smoothly, Guo Shuyan [6753 
2885 6056] and Others State at a Press Conference for Chinese 
and Foreign Reporters, Static Investment for the Entire Project 
Will Require About 95.4 Billion Yuan, Open Bidding To 
Requisition Land Being Speeded Up, Resettlement in Xinjiang and 
Tibet Is Purely a Rumor, International Cooperation Will Be 
Further Strengthened, Construction of the Project Will Benefit 
the Ecology and Environment, Construction Capital Being Raised 
Through a Variety of Channels"] 
  [Text] A press conference was held on 29 October 1993 in 
the News Office of the State Council. State Council Three Gorges 
Project Construction Commission Deputy Director Guo Shuyan 
stated at the meeting that all items of initial preparations for 
the Three Gorges key water conservancy facility have begun in 
1993 and that all items of initial preparations work are 
progressing smoothly. The pace of resettlement from the dam area 
has been speeded up and resettlement program work in the 
reservoir area is now fully underway. 
  While answering reporters' questions concerning progress at 
the Three Gorges project, China Three Gorges Project Corporation 
General Manager Lu Youmei [7120 0147 2812] said that 1993 is the 
first year of preparation for construction and with an 
investment of 2 billion yuan, it will be completed. Preparations 
for open bidding for requisitioning of the land, construction of 
roads and bridges, engineering around the main project, and 
several other projects is now progressing smoothly. All of these 
will create the conditions for a comprehensive start of 
construction on the main aspects of the Three Gorges project. 
  Concerning the resettlement issue, Guo Shuyan and Three 
Gorges Project Construction Commission Resettlement and 
Development Bureau Director Tang Zhangjin [0781 4545 6930] 
refuted the rumor that China will resettle people in Xinjiang, 
Tibet, and other frontier regions. Guo Shuyan said that recently 
several news media outlets in foreign countries had transmitted 
the news that China is already resettling people in Xinjiang, 
Tibet, and other places and that this is either a 
well-intentioned misinterpretation or a pure fabrication that is 
deliberately provocative. Tang Zhangjin said that after many 
years of trials and experiments, China has accumulated rich 
experience regarding resettlement in the Three Gorges region and 
that when the project is completed 1.13 million people will have 
to be moved, with arrangements for most of them being made 
locally. 
  Concerning the prospects for international cooperation in 
the 
Three Gorges project, Guo Shuyan said that as the Three Gorges 
project gradually unfolds, international cooperation will be 
further strengthened. In November, 1993, we will invite several 
international water turbine generator manufacturers to Wuhan to 
discuss their intentions concerning cooperation, and we will 
have broad-ranging contacts with international construction 
equipment and power transmission and transformation equipment 
manufacturing companies and promote the establishment of 
Chinese-foreign joint ventures. In the area of importing 
capital, China is now studying capital-raising measures for 
importing foreign buyers' credit and issuing stocks and bonds in 
China and foreign countries at the appropriate time. He said 
that China welcomes foreign enterprises and investment 
organizations to participate in construction of the Three Gorges 
project and the Three Gorges reservoir region. 
  While answering reporters' questions concerning the issue of 
environmental protection in the Three Gorges region, Guo Shuyan 
said that construction of the Three Gorges project will have a 
beneficial effect on the ecology and environment of the middle 
and lower reaches of the Chang Jiang, especially in 
substantially improving flood control standards and making the 
water clearer. What has aroused concern in China and foreign 
countries is the reservoir inundation and resettled population 
arrangements that result from the Three Gorges project and the 
negative impact these will have on the ecology and environment. 
These have already received a high degree of attention from the 
Chinese Government and it has formulated the corresponding 
measures. He said that on the new land used for production for 
the resettled population, we will organize the building of 
rather high-level terraced fields and develop production. To 
reduce soil erosion, the State is now implementing a shelter 
forest plan for the middle and upper reaches of the Chang Jiang. 
The government will also establish several animal and plant 
protection regions to protect the valuable animal and plant 
resources in this region. Since construction of the Gezhouba 
project, we have discovered that Chinese sturgeon have 
established a new spawning ground below the dam and that the 
related areas are providing additional protection and doing a 
great deal of artificial breeding and releasing. 
  A reporter asked whether or not the investment in the Three 
Gorges project would be a factor that in causing inflation. For 
1993, investment in the Three Gorges project is 2 billion yuan 
and the average investment each year after construction of the 
project formally gets underway will be about 5 billion yuan. 
While this is a large figure, compared to China's total 
investments in fixed assets of more than 1 trillion yuan each 
year, it will only account for about 0.5 percent, so it will not 
have a significant impact or become a factor in further 
inflation. 
  Additional report: According to information provided by 
State 
Council Three Gorges Project Construction Commission Deputy 
Director Guo Shuyan, based on April 1993 price levels, the 
static investment in the entire Three Gorges project will 
require about 95.4 billion yuan renminbi. Based on policies 
already promulgated by the Chinese Government, the state will 
set aside 0.003 yuan per kWh of electricity in China, which can 
raise an average of 1.5 billion to 2.0 billion yuan renminbi per 
year. Moreover, the Gezhouba Power Station has been turned over 
to the China Chang Jiang Three Gorges Project Development 
Corporation and all the net income from the power it generates 
will be used for the Three Gorges project. These two funding 
items will provide a total of about 32.7 billion yuan renminbi 
over 11 years, equal to 62 percent of the required investment in 
the Three Gorges project over the same period. 

