Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special dispatch" from Beijing by staff reporter: "Wei </F>
Jingsheng Will Not Appear in Beijing Before the End of This 
Month"] 
  [Text] An informed source in Beijing has said that 
according to Wei Jingsheng's secretary, Tong Yi, Wei will 
probably not show up in Beijing by the end of March. From now 
until then, Wei Jingsheng will keep in touch with Tong Yi by 
phone every day. Meanwhile, an official from the U.S. Embassy 
in Beijing yesterday said the itinerary for U.S. Secretary of 
State Warren Christopher's Beijing trip has been set out, the 
focus of this mission will be on human rights issues, and if 
there are no goodwill moves on the part of the Chinese this 
week, the United States will be much more likely to implement a 
hard-line policy. 
  The informed Beijing source said Wei Jingsheng, during his 
meeting with U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Shattuck more 
than a week ago, did make some critical remarks about the 
Chinese side's human rights policy, its treatment of dissidents, 
and Deng Xiaoping's deeds. This irritated the Chinese 
leadership very much. 
  The informed source said: What has made the authorities even 
more unhappy is that the Chinese side is deeply worried that 
these dissidents will form organizations, establish ties among 
themselves, and collaborate with hostile forces and 
organizations abroad. He revealed that the Chinese side had set 
up an organization recently to investigate these organizations 
and contacts among democratic activists and dissidents, and this 
led to some strong actions afterwards. The Chinese side does 
not want to see social "stability" upset by any activities by 
these people to mark the anniversary of the 4 June Incident or 
by any related activities. Therefore, the Chinese side has made 
this move in anticipation of such a possibility, despite 
pressure from the United States. 
  The informed source said the Chinese side does not want to 
see organizations formed by these people emerge, nor does it 
like western countries exerting pressure on it under such a 
pretext, and this is why the Chinese side has made this move. 
On the other hand, the Chinese side's operations against 
subversion can be combined with its hard-line foreign policy, 
thus rationalizing the strong action it may take next at home 
and abroad under the camouflage of nationalism and patriotism. 
  Qian Yumin, a co-signatory to the Peace Charter who works 
with the Ministry of Railways, was released the night before 
yesterday [6 March]. He said he had been warned by the police 
not to make any "move" or do anything to impair the national 
interest during the current two sessions. 
  Ma Shaofang, a student leader in the 1989 democracy 
movement, 
was stopped and picked up by the police at Tianjin railway 
station en route to Beijing from Jiangsu five days ago. It is 
said that Ma Shaofang is now being kept under direct 
surveillance by the Jiangsu provincial public security bureau. 
  A U.S. Embassy official said the U.S. Government has already 
fully expressed its stand on the Wei Jingsheng case and some 
others. During his visit to Beijing, Christopher will place 
special stress on the human rights issue. The official 
maintained that if the Chinese side takes no specific action to 
improve conditions, the Clinton administration, under pressure 
at home and abroad, will take a tougher attitude toward the 
Chinese side. How the United States reacts depends on the 
Chinese side's "performance this week." 
  The U.S. Embassy official said Christopher will give a news 
conference before he leaves Beijing, and his evaluation of the 
outcome of his talks with Chinese officials and his assessment 
of human rights conditions and the other issues he will present 
will outline the Clinton administration's future China policy. 

