Cabinet 

    SUMMARY:  President Kim Yong-sam started 1994 with a virtually 
new cabinet, dubbed the "Phase-Two Cabinet" by South Korean media. 
Press reporting to date on the cabinet has focused on the 
credentials of the new appointees and on the working dynamics 
between cabinet members and the president.  Also, since this is a 
non-election year, the press expects that President Kim will seize 
this opportunity to strengthen his political stance. 

   The 29 December CHUGAN MAEGYONG reports that, of the 26 cabinet 
members, 15 are new, including the prime minister who was appointed 
on 16 December 1993.  CHUGAN notes that while President Kim was 
working on changing his cabinet, the press was kept in the dark, 
which is in line with the president's usually "secretive" way of 
handling personnel matters.  And even though there had been 
speculations about upcoming changes, the press was nevertheless 
"surprised" by the extent of the reshuffle and by several of Kim's 
nominations.  According to the 22 December CHOSON ILBO, the 
president personally contacted the new ministers on the eve of their 
appointments, while most of the former ministers learned of their 
dismissal from television reports. 

   Changes in the Blue House staff, the DLP (Democratic Liberal 
Party) leadership, and within the vice-ministers' rank subsequently 
took place, and President Kim's new team was nearly complete by the 
end of last year.  The 27 December TONGA ILBO opines that, although 
the revamped cabinet reflects Kim's determination to take a "new 
direction," it is also essentially a group of "Kim Yong-sam men with 
few technocrats," a view that is shared by other Seoul press 
sources.  TONGA notes that Kim had "hardly any insiders" in his 
"Phase-One Cabinet," but that in "phase two," he has surrounded 
himself with "insiders."  Kim has been viewed as a "one-man team" 
and the new cabinet could help change that perception, TONGA says. 
In addition, the paper foresees no major changes in political or 
economic policies this year. 

   Following the reshuffle, Seoul press sources examined the 
relationship between Kim and the new members of his cabinet and the 
reasons behind the president's selections. 

   Prime Minister Yi Hui-chang is described as a "man of 
conviction," who is  "very respected," and "popular with the 
public."  However, his appointment on 16 December came as a 
"surprise," because even though Yi could be considered a "symbol of 
reform," he did not seem to fit in the role of leader of Kim's 
"globalization and liberalization era" team.  There were two 
supposed reasons why Kim chose Yi, according to the press.  One 
reason might be that Kim wants to use Yi's "clean image and 
popularity" to pursue his own reforms.  The other reason might be 
that Kim and Yi have worked well together over the past 1O months. 
In addition, Kim reportedly respects Yi for his "honesty, judgement, 
courage," and "convictions." 

   Given Yi's recognized abilities as a judicial official, the press 
has given him "high marks" and predicts that he will be an 
"effective" prime minister, "not a yes-man," unlike his predecessors 
who acted primarily as  "f igureheads."  Yi will be expected to 
demonstrate his ability to run the government, handle political 
issues, control and work with the cabinet and bureaucrats, and help 
revive the national economy.  (Seoul CHUGAN CHOSON 3O Dec 93) 

   Deputy Prime Minister/Economic Planning Board (EPB) Minister 
Chong Chae-sok is described as a "strong-minded, scholarly 
workaholic" and is considered a welcomed addition to the EPB. (Seoul 
TONGA ILBO 22 Dec 93) 

   Chong is a "technocrat" who held ministerial posts in the Park 
Chung Hee government and was "purged" by the Chon Tu-hwan government 
in 198O.  He was a university professor when President Kim called 
upon him to be minister of transportation.  He favors less 
government control and more autonomy for the private business sector 
and has vowed to promote technological development to boost 
industrial competitiveness, train technicians, and expand social 
infrastructures. (Seoul KYONGHYANG SINMUN 23 Dec 93) 

   Chong is expected to be able to work well with the other 
ministers who handle economic issues, such as Hong Che-hyong and Kim 
Chol-su, two holdovers from the previous cabinet.  Chong has no 
personal ties with President Kim, but since he is from North Cholla 
Province, he provides "regional balance" to the cabinet. (Seoul 
CHOSON ILBO 22 Dec 93) 

   Chong's appointment to the new cabinet was a "big surprise." 
Having been away from politics for a long time, Chong seemed an 
unlikely choice to lead the national economic team. (Seoul CHUGAN 
MAEGYONG 29 Dec 93)  Furthermore, Chong had reportedly made 
"critical" comments about President Kim's new economic policies 
before he became transportation minister. (Seoul CHUNGANG ILBO 28 
Dec 93) 

   Deputy Prime Minister/National Unification Board Minister (NUB) 
Yi Yong-tok's appointment came as a "real surprise" since Han Wan- 
sang, Yi's predecessor, was not expected to be replaced, given his 
personal ties with the president.  However, because of his 
government's evolving policy toward the North, Kim needed a new 
person to lead the NUB, someone with "more realistic views" of the 
North-South relationship.  Yi is said to hold "conservative and 
hard-line views" regarding the North and seems capable of "working 
smoothly" with both the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the National 
Security Planning Board (NSP).  Yi's "realistic" outlook was 
reportedly acquired through his tenure in various administrative 
positions, including that of chief delegate to the North-South Red 
Cross Conference.  Moreover, Yi comes from the North and still has 
family members there.  Yi's appointment was generally viewed as a 
"well-made" choice.  (Seoul TONGA ILBO 22 Dec 93) 

   Minister of Home Affairs Choe Hyong-u is a five-term National 
Assembly member and a "Sangdo-tong man" (the president's private 
home is in Sangdo-tong).  He is also recognized as having a "strong 
mind" and an "exceptional" ability to get things done.  In order to 
promote "globalization and liberalization," Kim was looking for a 
"strong and efficient domestic affairs manager" and he picked Choe 
who is also a long-standing advocate of bureaucratic reform.  Choe 
is expected to carry out the government's reform policies using the 
"carrot-and-stick" method. (Seoul CHOSON ILBO 23 Dec 93) 

   Minister of National Defense Yi Pyong-tae was appointed by 
President Kim, contrary to earlier speculations that Kwon Yong-hae 
would be retained.  Because Yi is a retired Hanahoe (an elite 
private fraternal organization in the Army) general and a member of 
KMA (Korean Military Academy) Class 17,  his nomination came as a 
"surprise."  Yi hails from Kim's home province, where he and the 
president attended the same high school.  Defense Ministry personnel 
and many military observers believe that the reform-based national 
defense policy will not change under Yi's leadership.  However, Yi's 
Hanahoe membership brought up the question of whether Yi's 
appointment signals an end to the "Hanahoe purge" or whether Yi is a 
"Hanahoe executioner." (Seoul CHOSON ILBO 22 Dec 93)  Yi assumed his 
new job with "confidence," and under his direction, the Army, Navy, 
and Air Force each formed special task forces, which met separately 
for brainstorming sessions over seven days during the new year's 
holiday.  Over 1OO issues were discussed and each service has 
reported back to Yi with suggestions for further reforms. (Seoul 
HANGUK ILBO 5 Jan 94) 

   Minister of Education Kim Suk-hui was formerly the dean of the 
College of Home Economics at Ewha Women's University.  The media is 
puzzled by Kim's appointment of this nutritional scientist from a 
"well-respected," "intellectual family," who has no administrative 
background or political connections.  She got to know President Kim 
at several official functions that she attended in her capacity of 
director of the Korean YWCA. (Seoul TONGA ILBO 22 December 93) 

   Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Forestry Kim Yang-pae was 
the mayor of Kwangju City and has held various posts in his home 
province of South Cholla.  Because of his experience and proven 
abilities as an administrator, his appointment did not raise any 
questions. (Seoul TONGA ILBO 22 Dec 93) 

   Minister of National Construction Kim U-sok is from President 
Kim's home province and has been a close associate of and an aide to 
Kim.  He was elected to the 13th National Assembly. (Seoul CHOSON 
ILBO 22 Dec 93) 

   Minister of Health and Social Affairs So Sang-mok has "excellent 
academic and political credentials."  His experience in government 
and proven abilities as a politician--he was elected to the 13th and 
14th National Assemblies--made him a "good choice."  Although he is 
an economist, So has shown a keen interest in social issues, and his 
appointment was welcomed by the ministry staff. (Seoul CHOSON ILBO 
22 Dec 93) 

   Minister of Labor Nam Chae-hui is a journalist-turned-politician; 
he was a four-term National Assembly member who served on the 
Special Committee for Labor Affairs.  He is a member of the 
Democratic Justice faction of President Kim's DLP, and his 
nomination is viewed as a gesture for DLP unity.  Nam's ability was 
not in question, but the ministry staff appeared to have "mixed 
feelings" about his appointment because they did not anticipate that 
former Minister Yi In-che would be replaced. (Seoul CHOSON ILBO 22 
Dec 93) 

   Nam is expected to be able to work well with other ministers who 
handle economic affairs, and President Kim hopes that he will settle 
some labor and wage issues, and head off labor-management disputes. 
(Seoul CHUGAN MAEGYONG 29 Dec 93) 

   Minister of Transportation O Myong served both Presidents Chon 
Tu-hwan and No Tae-u, as a ministerial ranking official.  He is 
known as an "outstanding organizer" and a "hard worker" who helped 
modernize the national telecommunications industry.  The 
organizational skills and professionalism he showed hosting the 
Taejon Expo 93 reportedly impressed the president. (Seoul HANGYORE 
SINMUN 22 Dec 93) 

   Minister of Government Administration Hwang Yong-ha spent the 
last 24 years on the Board of Audit and Inspection (BAI) and was 
Prime Minister Yi's right-hand man when Yi was the BAI director. 
Hwang is described as "independent-minded." (Seoul HANGYORE SINMUN 
22 Dec 93) 

   Minister of Environment Pak Yun-hun worked at the Office of 
Legislation for 26 years before he became a university professor. 
In 1981, he was involved in drafting environmental laws, and 
subsequently, has been active in promoting environmental interests. 
He is a close associate of Prime Minister Yi, which led the press to 
speculate that it was at Yi's recommendation that he was appointed. 
The ministry staff was "surprised" by Pak's nomination, but Pak's 
knowledge of and interest in environmental issues made him a 
welcomed addition to the cabinet. (Seoul CHOSON ILBO 22 Dec 93) 

   First State Minister for Political Affairs So Chong-won is a 
journalist-turned-politician, a three-term National Assembly member, 
and a "Kim yong-sam man."  He is known as a "rational and caring" 
person, who always stands up for his own convictions.  Given his 
past "dedication" to the president, he is expected to be there to 
"protect" Kim when needed. (Seoul CHOSON ILBO 22 Dec 93; CHUGAN 
MAEGYONG 29 Dec 93) 

   Patriots and Veterans Affairs Agency Minister Yi Chung-kil is 
recognized for his "professionalism" and "efficiency."  Yi has no 
personal ties with President Kim and is a well-connected former BAI 
member. (Seoul HANGYORE SINMUN 22 Dec 93) 

                  President Kim's Cabinet List 
                         (Effective 21 December 1993) 
                              (* New appointees) 




   Prime Minister                 *Yi Hoe-chang 
   Deputy Prime Minister          *Chong Chae-sok 
   Deputy Prime Minister          *Yi Yong-tok 


Ministry                    Minister               Vice Minister 

Agriculture, Forestry       *Kim Yang-pae          Kim Tae-su 
&amp; Fisheries 

Communications              Yun Tong-yun           Kyong Sang-hyon 

Culture &amp; Sports            Yi Min-sop             *Kim To-hyon 

Economic Planning 
Board                       *Chong Chae-sok        *Han I-hon 

Education                   *Kim Suk-hui           Yi Chon-su 

Environment                 *Pak Yun-hun           Kim Hyong-chol 

Finance                     Hong Chae-hyong        Paek Won-ku 

Foreign Affairs             Han Sung-chu           Hong Sun-yong 

Govt. Administration        *Hwang Yong-ha         Sim U-yong 

Health, Social Affairs      *So Sang-mok           Chu Kyong-sik 
Home Affairs                *Choe Hyong-u          *Yi Hyo-kae 

Information                 O In-hwan              *Yi Kyong-chae 

Justice                     Kim Tu-hui             Kim Ki-sok 

Labor                       *Nam Chae-hui          *Kang Pon-kyun 

National Construction       *Kim U-sok             Yu Sang-yol 

National Defense            *Yi Pyong-tae          *Chong Chun-ho 

National Unification        *Yi Yong-tok           Song Yong-tae 
Board 

Science &amp; Technology        Kim Si-chung           Han Yong-song 

1st State Min. for          *So Chong-won          Chong Song-chol 
Pol. Affairs 

2d State Min. for           Kwon Yong-cha          Kim Chong-suk 
Pol. Affairs 

Trade, Industry             Kim Chol-su            Yi Tong-hun 
&amp; Energy 

Transportation              *O Myong               Ku Pon-yong 

Govt. Legislative           Hwang Kil-su           Pak Song-kyu 
Admin. Agency 

Patriots, Veterans          *Yi Chung-kil          Kim Si-pok 
Affairs Agency 

(AUTHOR:  TOMPKINS.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
SOUTHEAST ASIA/KOREA BRANCH AT (7O3) 733-6522). 
EAG/09FEB94/POLCHF/ASIA DIVISION/SM 09/1557Z FEB 

