Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Amy Liu] </F>
  [Text] China has shown a videotape of four prominent 
dissidents celebrating the Lunar New Year in an apparent move to 
refute Western speculation of their poor health and having been 
abused. 
  Meanwhile, police in central Xian city released another 
dissident four days ago. The release coincided with the arrival 
of United States Assistant Secretary for Human Rights John 
Shattuck in Beijing. 
  Mr Shattuck was expected to remind leaders that China is in 
danger of losing its most-favoured-nation trading status this 
year because it has so far failed to show a significant 
improvement in its human rights practices, as called for by U.S. 
President Bill Clinton. 
  The prisoners shown on the videotape were all imprisoned for 
their role in the 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy movement and 
have been top of case lists for various human rights groups. 
  The screening was arranged by the State Council, China's 
cabinet, for five American reporters. 
  The tape showed Chen Ziming and Ren Wanding celebrating 
Lunar 
New Year in prison last month with their families. It also 
showed Wang Juntao in his hospital room with his family, and Liu 
Gang celebrating his birthday with cellmates. 
  In the past two years, China has periodically released 
footage or photographs of these and other well-known dissidents 
in an effort to refute reports that they are in poor health or 
have been abused. 
  Family members have said the videotapes were staged and did 
not show how the prisoners were usually treated. 
  The tape was less than 10 minutes long and showed the dates 
the segments were shot on the screen. The dialogue was 
unintelligible. 
  Mr Chen was shown at a large round table laden with food. 
  Mr Chen's family says he is suffering from a skin ailment 
and 
stomach problems, and has not been allowed to bathe in a year. 
  Mr Wang's family says he is suffering from chronic hepatitis 
B and coronary disease. 
  In the videotape, he was shown sitting on his hospital bed 
in 
a private room eating a tangerine and chatting with his family. 
  Both are serving 13-year jail terms. 
  Mr Ren, a veteran political activist serving a seven-year 
jail term, was shown with his wife and daughter in a small 
prison room with a bed and a table. They ate a simple meal that 
included dumplings, a traditional New Year dish. 
  Mr Ren's wife says he is not receiving treatment for 
cataracts in his left eye that have reduced his vision, and that 
he also suffers from haemorrhoids, digestive problems, back 
strain and other ailments. 
  Mr Liu, sentenced to six years, was shown cutting a large 
birthday cake and talking to people. Later, he was shown 
playing at a pool table, smoking and playing cards with three 
other people. However he did not seem to know how to play either 
game. 
  Mr Liu's family was barred from visiting him for a year, 
apparently to punish them for drawing international attention to 
his case. 
  Last year, they smuggled out a 16-page letter from Mr Liu 
which described beatings, torture and denial of food rations. 
  Meanwhile, Xian police are still holding Ma Shaohua, who was 
arrested with Zheng Yuguang on 27 November after they tried to 
contact the founders of the banned group Peace Charter. 
  Mr Ma could be held longer as authorities were angered by a 
book he wrote last year on the fall of communism in Eastern 
Europe, Peace Charter members in Beijing said. 

