Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mikhail Chernyshov: "`Seriuses' Descend From </F>
Orbit. But Life in Orbit Continues"] 
  [Text] Once each of our space attainments was broadly 
discussed in the smallest detail. Now, probably, there are few 
who remember, other than relatives and workers in the 
corresponding services, that in orbit -- aboard the Mir station 
-- the "Siriuses" have already been working for several months: 
these are the cosmonauts Vasiliy Tsibliyev and Aleksandr 
Serebrov. In the course of the first two weeks after the New 
Year a different crew will take up the servicing of the station. 
This time it will consist of three persons. Most likely the the 
inhabitants of the celestial dwelling will be Viktor Afanasyev, 
Yuriy Usachev and Valeriy Polyakov. In the event of unexpected 
events three backup cosmonauts have been trained: Yuriy 
Malenchenko, Tolgat Musabayev and German Arzamazov. 
  In the course of the impending (number 15) main expedition 
the world record for spaceflight duration should be broken. The 
crews will include two physicians: Valeriy Polyarkov and German 
Arzamazov. They have long specialized on the problems involved 
in prolonged flights. They know the complexities associated with 
such expeditions. Valeriy Polyakov in the late 1980's already 
had spent 241 days aboard the station. Most likely he is to 
become a new space record holder. If everything goes as planned, 
the physician-researcher will work on the Mir not only during 
the entire fifteenth expedition, which is to end in June, but 
also on the next shift. A total of more than 420 days. 
  For what purposes are such complex experiments carried 
out? Sooner or later new flights will be made to the moon and 
Mars will be conquered. This means that it is necessary to know 
the capabilities of the human body. Well, among other things, it 
is assumed that such multisided research will advance 
fundamental science. Not so long ago in Arizona eight Americans 
spent two years in a closed surface complex. This was the major 
Biosphere 2 experiment. The American "bubble" is a gigantic -- 
measuring more than a hectare -- glass dome beneath which about 
4000 species of plants and animals were placed. The expected 
grandiose discoveries, as the specialists have written, for the 
time being have not been realized. Nevertheless, new research 
cycles under conditions of an almost closed biosphere are being 
planned. 
  Russian science leads with respect to space life support 
systems, today having the richest experience in individual 
record flights. This, incidentally, is one of the factors 
inciting the Americans and other Western countries to cooperate 
with us in the field of creating an international orbital 
station. In any case the American astronauts, not having the 
capability for particularly long flights on the Shuttles, 
already in the next few years are intending a total 24-month 
experiment with work under weightlessness conditions, 
participating in research on the Mir. 
  The agreements signed in December in Moscow by the Russian 
prime minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and the American vice 
president Albert Gore signified, it is generally held, a 
changeover from the Mir program to the Alpha stage. According to 
the testimony of Daniel Goldin, NASA administrator, as a result 
of implementation of the project the United States will save 2 
billion dollars and approximately two years in the time required 
for construction of an international orbital station. The 
participants in the project, in addition to Russia and the 
United States, also will include the countries of Western 
Europe, Japan and Canada; they note that none of them 
individually could construct a station. Now there is definite 
evidence that the circle of participants in the project, as it 
is implemented, will possibly expand. The Alpha station, having 
the Mir 2 module as its basis, will gradually begin to be 
overgrown with other components, being transformed into a major 
orbital laboratory. The duration of its operation will be 
approximately from 1997 to 2010. 
  According to the testimony of Russian government and space 
experts, those 400 million which Russia will receive in the 
first stage of work on the project will facilitate us in keeping 
the now-operating Mir in a working state and second, to some 
degree will smooth out those "troughs" which were formed in the 
fairly long drawn-out restructuring of the Russian space 
industry. 
  Vladimir Pivnyuk, an expert of the government of the Russian 
Federation, is convinced that we have no need, for example, of 
keeping up nine gyroscope plants. Nowhere in the world does such 
a thing exist. This means that it is necessary to select only 
one such plant. But it must be supplied with the most modern 
equipment, supported by government orders. All the remaining 
enterprises must become joint stock companies. 
  A search for market niches both within the country and 
abroad, however, involves great difficulties. Only a very few 
companies, such as the Khrunichev plant, the NPO Energiya and 
Prikladnaya mekhanika (communication satellites), to some degree 
can ensure themselves with ruble and a very small hard currency 
earnings. There has been no broad entry of the Russian 
rocket-space industry into the external market. 
  An international air show has just been held at Bangalore, 
where great interest on the part of potential purchasers was 
manifested, in particular, in Russian military aircraft and 
helicopters. The Indian press writes in a considerably more 
restrained manner about Russian space technology. The cracks 
arising after the unsuccessful "cryogenic deal" still exist, 
India, convinced by local space experts, may rely only on their 
own boosters, such as the Agni rocket (in its capabilities it 
already is approximately equal to the American Pershing). A 
network of enterprises has been established in the country and 
includes more than ten plants and research centers. 
  The Russian side feels that the renewal of normal trade 
relations with India in the "space" field is possible; it is 
only necessary to adhere more strictly to the terms of the 
nuclear proliferation agreement. Without question, there must be 
a special competence in this sphere: both legal and juridical. 
In Russia a large excess of intermediate- and low-thrust rockets 
has been formed, including those which can operate from mobile 
launchers. The experts feel that there is a large market in the 
world for these rockets. 

