BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Gu Zhenqiu] </F>
  [Text] Lagos, April 30 (XINHUA) -- Nigeria is ready to 
learn from China in culture, science and technology, education 
and public health, a Nigerian minister said here on Friday [29 
April]. 
  Nigerian Information and Culture Minister Jerry Gana made 
the 
remarks in a meeting with Chinese Ambassador to Nigeria Hu 
Lipeng and Cultural Counsellor in the Chinese Embassy in Nigeria 
Dai Xingyuan. 
  In particular, Nigeria wants to learn traditional medical 
science from China, he said. 
  China has done a good job in mobilizing its population of 
over one billion to solve their own problems and develop their 
own country, he said, adding that "this means China is 
successful in informational and cultural publicity. Therefore, 
Nigeria wants to learn from China." 
  During the meeting, the Nigerian minister accepted the 
invitation by the Chinese Culture Ministry to pay a visit to 
China next year. 
  His future China tour will help the two countries to further 
expand Nigerian-Chinese cultural exchanges and strengthen mutual 
understandings between the two most populous nations in the 
world [as received], he said. 
  Besides, the Nigerian minister pledged that the Nigerian 
Government will continue to carry out the projects this year 
which should have been completed last year according to the 
Sino-Nigerian program on cultural and educational cooperation 
and exchanges. 
  As part of the program, three Chinese students arrived in 
Lagos last evening to further their study of Hausa language, one 
of the three major languages in Nigeria, at Ahmadu Bello 
University in north Nigeria. 
  On the other hand, China has received 10 Nigerian students 
since last year who are studying in Chinese universities and 
colleges. 
  Speaking with XINHUA after the meeting, the Chinese 
ambassador said that they held the meeting in "a very friendly 
atmosphere." 
  Also present during the meeting were directors of major 
departments in the Nigerian Information and Culture Ministry. 
  China and Nigeria signed an agreement on cultural 
cooperation 
in September 1981. Since then, the two countries have signed 
three pacts or programs on cultural and educational cooperation 
and exchanges. 

