BFN 

<F P=106> ["Newsletter from Beijing" by staff reporter Ma Ling (7456 </F>
3781): "Disharmony in Peace--Report From Tiananmen Square"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 4 Jun (TA KUNG PAO)--Today, the weather in 
Beijing was extremely good and people felt refreshed by the blue 
skies and a balmy breeze. 
  Tiananmen Square had a hint of a "festival" atmosphere. On 
both sides of the Tiananmen rostrum, two rows of fountains were 
spurting into the air and the national flags of China and 
Cambodia had been hung on lamp posts along both sides of Changan 
Avenue, because King Sihanouk of the Kingdom of Cambodia was 
visiting Beijing. 
<H5>  A Balmy Breeze </H5>
  People can enter and leave the square at will or buy tickets 
to climb to Tiananmen Square to look far into the distance, and 
all kinds of cars could pass along Changan Avenue without any 
restrictions. Since the weather was good and the wind strong, 
many people went to the square to fly kites, and tourists from 
other parts of the country or from foreign countries had photos 
taken as mementos in a leisurely and carefree way. If one was 
tired, one could watch quietly by the roadside near the Great 
Hall of the People or the Museum of History. 
  If there was something different, so to speak, since bygone 
days when we were wandering around the square, it was the fact 
that more policemen and police cars were markedly present at the 
center of and around the square. It was interesting that such 
an intensive deployment of the police force was shown in an open 
and natural way. 
<H5>  Relaxed and Natural </H5>
  However, viewed from the feelings and expressions of the 
common people who passed by the square, it seems that the police 
presence merely served as a reminder and did not make people 
nervous, as was revealed by the people's facial expressions, 
which were relaxed and carefree. 
  However, despite all this, the square was not peaceful, and 
some people really wanted to make trouble and provoke 
disturbances. 
  At 1600 or 1700, that is, the peak hours at which people 
leave work, four (three male and one female) foreign youths 
wearing shirts printed with the words "Beijing Foreign Language 
University" and "democratism" and "democracy, liberty" in 
English and Chinese characters on the back and front, seized the 
opportunity to swagger through the eastern side of the Tiananmen 
rostrum and were immediately brought to the attention of the 
police. When asked by the police to change their clothes, they 
all held their heads high and assumed an arrogant and 
self-satisfied posture. After being urged repeatedly by the 
police, they could not but open their bags and put on the 
ordinary clothes they had prepared in advance. As pedestrians 
gathered and looked at them, one man was humming a tune while 
chewing gum, whereas another man and woman even kissed each 
other. 
<H5>  Showing Self-Satisfaction </H5>
  When a plainclothes policeman used a camcorder to record 
them 
and the crowd of onlookers exchanged whispered comments, the 
youths even looked smug, and their complacent appearance of 
"being in the limelight" was really displeasing to others. 
  The police repeatedly advised the crowd to go away, saying 
that "there is nothing worth looking at, please go home." But 
some smiling people found it interesting and were not willing to 
go. Meanwhile, some people said while leaving the scene: "This 
group of foreigners intended to create a 
disturbance...foreigners are really ardent, they are just trying 
to ask for trouble." From listening to their tone, they did not 
buy the foreigners' "democratic favor." 
  Later, a foreign-made, mid-sized van without a number plate, 
for reasons unknown, turned left at high speed from the 
northwestern side of the Great Hall of the People and 
accelerated in a hurry. The van was closely followed by two 
police cars, which again attracted onlookers' attention. Judged 
by the model of the van, which passed in a flash, and the people 
inside, it is certain that they were also foreigners. 
<H5>  Desire To See Square Plunged Into Chaos </H5>
  Hence, it is easy to raise a question: Is there really a 
group of people who wish to see Tiananmen Square plunged into 
chaos? As far as this reporter could see, all of these people 
are actually "foreigners." 
  As a matter of fact, the common people in Beijing basically 
prefer stability to chaos. As far as this reporter could see in 
Tiananmen today, Beijing people were there to see a "peep show" 
at most. 

