BFN 

  [Text] His Excellency [H.E.] Paul Keating, prime minister 
of the Commonwealth of Australia, met with H.E. Prime Minister 
Khamtai Siphandon at the Prime Minister's Office in Vientiane at 
0900 today. On this occasion, H.E. Prime Minister Khamtai 
Siphandon expressed pleasure over and highly appraised the 
official, friendly visit to the Lao People's Democratic Republic 
[LPDR] of H.E. Prime Minister Paul Keating. He said the visit 
is an event of historic significance in the friendly relations 
and good cooperation between Laos and Australia. 
  H.E. Khamtai expressed the hope that his consultative 
meeting 
and exchange of views with his excellency the Australian prime 
minister will enable both sides to understand ever more 
profoundly the internal situation and policies of each country. 
He said the understanding will serve as a firm basis for 
effective enhancement of cooperation for the benefit of the 
peoples of the two countries, and that it will also contribute 
to common trends for the establishment and promotion of peace, 
stability, friendship, and cooperation among various countries 
in the region and the rest of the world. H.E. Khamtai also 
informed his excellency the Australian prime minister about 
certain problems in the socioeconomic development of the LPDR 
which is entering the eighth year of the implementation of 
comprehensive restructuring. He said: Through the 
implementation of the restructuring policy, the national economy 
has been progressively developed; the average rate of economic 
growth per year is as high as 6.58 percent; the prices of 
commodities and the kip currency are stable; the living 
conditions and cultural life of the people have explicitly 
improved; and the assistance and cooperation given to Laos by 
foreign countries and international organizations have also 
increased. There are now as many as 410 direct investment 
projects valued at $580 million by foreign countries in Laos, 
excluding investment in large-scale hydroelectric projects. 
  Regarding Lao-Australian relations, H.E. Prime Minister 
Khamtai Siphandon noted that efforts have been made by the two 
countries to promote relations in various fields. He pointed 
out that as of now, bilateral relations between Laos and 
Australia have expanded ever more extensively and rapidly. H.E. 
Khamtai expressed gratitude to the Australian Government and 
people for their precious assistance given to the Lao Government 
and people in carrying out the socioeconomic development cause 
in the LPDR, in particular in building the communications 
infrastructure as well as training technicians of various 
branches and in community development. H.E. Khamtai reiterated 
that the LPDR is ready to increase cooperation with Australia in 
the economic, cultural, scientific, and technical fields. He 
also expressed the hope that the Australian Government will 
continue to support and encourage more and more Australian 
businessmen to invest in the LPDR. 
  Replying, H.E. Prime Minister Keating expressed thanks to 
the 
Government and people of Laos for the warm welcome accorded him 
and his delegation during the visit. H.E. Keating noted: 
Australia and Laos have maintained diplomatic relations for 
more than 40 years. It can be assured today about the great 
potential of the friendship. We are two different countries 
which have endured similar problems, for example problems in the 
areas of trade and investment, with a view to making our people 
enjoy security and prosperity. The Australian Government 
pledges to support Laos in carrying out its reform to achieve 
development in the same way other countries do. Regarding 
implementation of reform, the LPDR has put into force the law on 
investment, a law which guarantees security for foreign 
investors. Various Australian companies are now ready to invest 
in Laos. 
  In conclusion, the Australian prime minister said: We can 
contribute to the construction and development of Laos, and on 
the basis of this spirit the Australian Government has decided 
to render aid to Laos for the construction of this bridge across 
the Mekong River. In addition, beginning in 1994, the 
Australian Government has decided to set up a four-year 
assistance and cooperation project for Laos. This project costs 
more than 40 million Australian dollars. Besides, Australia has 
given Laos gratis aid in the form of food worth one million 
Australian dollars, and another one million dollars of gratis 
aid to preserve the environment in the LPDR. 
  The meeting lasted one hour. Later, H.E. Prime Minister 
Khamtai Siphandon and H.E. Prime Minister Paul Keating attended 
the signing ceremony of a Lao-Australian agreement on investment 
promotion and protection, and a memorandum of understanding on 
the development project of the Se Kaman hyrdoelectric power in 
Attopeu Province and the Namcha 1 and 2 hydroelectric works in 
Vientiane Province. Signing the agreement and the memorandum for 
the Lao side was Leun Sombounkhan, vice chairman of the Planning 
and Cooperation Committee; and signing for the Australian side 
was Michael Mann, ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary 
of Australia to Laos. Also signing the memorandum on the 
Australian side was Peter Ray, chairman of the Hag Enterprise 
Corporation Company of Australia. The agreement on investment 
promotion and protection between Laos and Australia will serve a 
significant basis in the legal aspect for the two countries to 
march forward to a new level which can bring about ever greater 
benefits to the peoples of the two countries. It will also 
serve as a basis which creates confidence for Australian 
investors to invest in the LPDR. 

