Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The war currently under way in Angola can only be 
blamed on the Popular Movement for the Liberation of 
Angola-Labor Party, MPLA-PT, of Jose Eduardo dos Santos. The 
next few days do not seem to indicate calm for northern Angola 
in general and the oil-rich district of Soyo in particular. 
This is because the Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola 
[FALA] Military Command for the Northern Front has captured a 
package of top-secret documents that provide all the details 
concerning an offensive on Soyo planned by the coalition of 
People's Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola [FAPLA] and 
South African mercenary forces. Felix Miranda, the Voice of 
Resistance of the Black Cockerel, Vorgan, correspondent in 
northern Angola, reports: 
  [Begin Miranda recording] One of the pages of the aforesaid 
document says that the (?FAPLA) General Staff has recommended 
that General Caribu move, along with South African mercenaries, 
from Cabo Ledo, where a regiment of special forces has settled. 
Those forces have been involved in landing exercises, from the 
air and sea. Within this context, the National Union for the 
Total Independence of Angola [UNITA] forces defending Soyo 
District have had the benefit of the visit by the supreme 
commander of the FALA forces for the Northern Front. He went to 
Soyo to place those forces on maximum alert. Given the 
involvement of the Union for Democracy and Social Progress, 
UDPS, a Zairian party, on the side of the MPLA-PT, the UNITA 
forces have had to redouble their vigilance along the common 
border with Zaire. [end recording] 
  The leadership in Luanda's Futungo de Belas Palace is 
preparing a major offensive against the strategic and oil-rich 
district of Soyo. The FALA Military Command for the Northern 
Front has top secret MPLA-PT documents which prove this. 
  Meanwhile, in Soyo today the Northern Front Military Command 
informed the Angolan and international communities that, for the 
first time in UNITA's history, the FALA forces have captured a 
large ship. This happened on 2 March. Felix Miranda, the 
Vorgan correspondent in the area, reports that the ship was 
sailing along the channels of Zaire River, in the vicinity of 
Soyo. 
  [Begin Miranda recording] The ship is called (Mitenupe). It 
has all the characteristics of a National Tugboat Company 
commercial vessel and it belongs to Mr. Jose Manuel Martins 
Caetano, who resides in Luanda. In accordance with the 
navigation authorization and the cargo lists, the ship left 
Luanda for Cabinda and was carrying assorted merchandise. 
Captain David Jose de Carvalho and Quartermaster Antonio Catraio 
said that when she arrived in Cabinda, she was diverted by the 
FAPLA Military Command for Cabinda and was given the mission to 
ferry fuel, uniforms, and other logistical equipment for the 
FAPLA forces. That equipment was supposed to have been 
offloaded at (Chissanda) island, after the ship had docked at 
Zaire's Matadi Harbor. 
  Meanwhile, one of the FALA units defending the Zaire River 
territorial waters used six combat boats to intercept the ship. 
After showing some reluctance to follow the orders being given 
by the captain of those forces, and after an exchange of shots, 
the 350-ton and 40 meter long ship was successfully captured by 
the FALA forces. The ship and its occupants are now in FALA's 
hands in a safe area. 
  The FALA forces will defend Soyo to the best of their 
ability. To that end, they have been working to improve their 
combat preparedness, in defensive as well as offensive terms, 
involving air, land, or sea forces. The capture of the ship 
(Mitenupe) on 2 March is further evidence of the degree of 
effectiveness of our forces. [end recording] 
  This news from the northern region is of the greatest 
importance, not just because it is marvelous but, above all, 
because it refutes international media reports that suggested 
that the FALA forces had captured a ship carrying only civilians. 

