Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Burmese Days"] </F>
  [Text] The export of revolution is taboo under the existing 
world system of nation-states. The obvious implication is that 
the non-existence of democracy in a country cannot justify 
others' refusal to maintain normal relations with it. The 
tendency to be oblivious of this logic has affected bilateral 
dealings with Myanmar [Burma] ruled by a military junta. Many in 
India as well as other democratic countries have understandably 
been outraged by the repression unleashed by the dictatorial 
regime in Yangon [Rangoon]. It has earned worldwide hatred 
particularly because of the five-year-long house arrest of the 
popular leader, Aung San Suu Kyi. It is, of course, open to any 
country or group of countries to subject the country to a degree 
of isolation as a means of forcing its military rulers to mend 
their ways. In the case of most other errant regimes, this has 
worked but not so in regard to Myanmar. The reason simply is 
that Myanmar has preferred splendid isolation right from the 
dawn of its independence. There is no evidence that the more 
conspicuous measures of boycott enforced in recent years have 
changed the insularity of the Myanmarese to any great extent. In 
fact, such penalties seem to have begun attracting the law of 
diminishing returns. 
  Apparently, this realisation was behind the recent visit of 
the US Congressman, Bill Richardson to Aung San Sun Kyi. Whether 
it will facilitate a political dialogue between her and her 
tormentors is anyone's guess. 
  But it would be wrong to assume that Washington's interest 
in 
dialogue with Myanmar's rulers is limited to political reform in 
that country. The US, for instance, has given a high priority to 
checking drug traffic originating in Myanmar. But it can do 
practically nothing in this regard without the closest possible 
cooperation of the ruling military junta. The latter knows this 
very well. It follows that it will set a price for such 
co-operation. And nothing can be a better bargain from Myanmar's 
point of view than the removal of various restrictions on trade 
and loans from international institutions. 
  Inevitably, there has of late been a shift in India's stance 
towards Yangon, too. It is no longer one of blind hostility to 
the military junta. New Delhi has no alternative but to deal 
with the authorities across the border on a regular basis to 
keep the northeastern insurgents at bay. The danger of 
increasing diversion of Myanmar's heroin through India has made 
it even more urgent for the two countries to coordinate their 
anti-drug traffic operations. A memorandum of understanding for 
this and related purposes was signed by officials of both 
countries last month. This identity of interests cannot be 
relegated to the background merely because New Delhi does not 
like the internal arrangement within Myanmar. Diplomacy is all 
about how to achieve shared aims despite divergences of other 
kinds. 

