BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Wu Yunhe: "Song Heads Team to U.S. for </F>
Technical Cooperation"] 
  [Text] State Councillor Song Jian leaves for Washington 
today on a two-week official visit that looks to enhance 
technical trade between the United States and China. 
  Song will co-chair the sixth meeting of the Sino-US Joint 
Commission on Scientific and Technological Co-operation. 
  The minister of the State Science and Technology Commission 
is the highest-ranking Chinese official to visit the United 
States since President Jiang Zemin's trip to Seattle last 
November. 
  He leads a nine-member senior delegation to the biannual 
meeting scheduled for Tuesday. 
  Song and John H. Gibbons, Assistant to the U.S. President 
for 
Science and Technology, will co-chair the commission, which was 
set up 15 years ago by senior Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping and 
U.S. President Jimmy Carter. 
  Song will focus his talks with Gibbons and other U.S. 
officials on enhancing Sino-American co-operation in such key 
areas as hygiene, environmental protection, energy and raw 
materials. 
  Both sides are expected to sign framework agreements on 
future cooperation in science and technology, the State Science 
and Technology Commission said. 
<H5>  Potential </H5>
  "There is a great potential in developing scientific and 
technological cooperation between the largest developed country 
and the largest developing country," it said. 
  China has already supplied the U.S. with more than 12,000 
scientific and technical research products on agriculture, 
contributing to American research on disease-resistant plants. 
  And the Chinese Government has signed agreements with the 
U.S. in at least 29 sectors involving education, agriculture, 
marine, hygiene, environmental protection, scientific research, 
chemicals and energy. 
  These agreements outline more than 1,000 projects in science 
and technology, with talent exchanges of more than 10,000 people. 
  After staying in Washington until Wednesday, Song plans to 
visit Boston, New York and Detroit to meet local leaders and 
businessmen, further networking for high-tech contacts. 
  Also on the trip are Hu Qiheng, Vice President of the 
Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Liu Jiang, Agriculture Minister and others 
from the State Environmental Protection Agency, the China 
National Bureau of Oceanography, and the State Science and 
Technology Commission. 

