Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Zagreb, March 10 (TANJUG)--The United States plan 
for the creation of a Moslem-Croat federation in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and its subsequent confederation with the 
Republic of Croatia is meeting with growing criticism and 
concern in Zagreb. 
  Not only the opposition, but also newspapers close to the 
ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), whose leader is Croatian 
President Franjo Tudjman, have been warning that the negative 
consequences of the Croat-Moslem "state marriage" could surface 
very soon. 
  The opposition in Croatia, which had strongly urged an 
agreement with the Moslems, now sets out that Zagreb has taken a 
rash political turn. It insists that there is no need for 
rushing into a confederation, above all because both Croatia and 
the future Moslem-Croat federation must first secure "integral 
internationally-recognized borders." 
  Commenting on the preliminary Moslem-Croat agreement signed 
in Washington last week under pressure from the United States, 
Croatian media say that everything has a "taste of punishment 
for both sides." 
  Several scores of thousands of Croatia's regular army troops 
have for over a year been aiding the Bosnian Croats in their 
battle against the Bosnian Moslems. 
  The weekly DANAS, close to the ruling HDZ, said in its 
latest 
issue that, under the Washington agreement, the central 
authorities in Sarajevo (which would be Moslem-dominated because 
Moslems are numerically stronger) would hold all vital 
departments, from the foreign affairs, national defence, 
economic policy, finance, to energy. 
  Croatian demographers set out that Croats would acount for 
4.5 million, or roughly 60 percent, of the confederation's 7.5 
million inhabitants, but that they would be faced with an 
"above-average birth rate of the Moslem population". 
  "The high birth rate, coupled with the settling of Moslems 
in 
Croatia, could very soon turn the Croats into a minority," 
demographers set out. 
  Moslems, as head of the Croatian state statistics bureau 
Jakov Gelo, himself, has said, "will spread not only on the 
territory of the federation, but also on that of the 
confederation, i.e. Croatia," and will have difficulty "fitting 
in with the Croats because of different religion, culture and 
customs." 
  Gelo said that the hitherto experiences had shown that, 
using 
the same criteria, "Croats and Serbs were more alike than Croats 
and Moslems". 

