Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Julio Armando Valdez] </F>
  [Text] Continuing with our report on currency devaluation, 
National Congress President Carlos Roberto Flores suggested a 
national plan to stabilize the lempira. The national assembly 
president believes such a plan is necessary, and is opposed to 
an official currency devaluation. Flores believes the lempira's 
interbank value should remain unaltered in order to guarantee 
the country's economic stability. 
  National Congress President Carlos Roberto Flores Facusse 
was 
asked his opinion about recent statements made by [Central Bank 
President] Hugo Noe Pino on the possibility of officially 
devaluating the national currency. 
  [Begin recording] [Flores] I believe those statements, which 
I honestly did not hear in context, were probably not 
interpreted as they were stated. Anyway, I am going to tell you 
my personal opinion. The Central Bank president will, in turn, 
have to clarify what he really meant to say. 
  I do not believe the lempira should continue to be 
devaluated. On the contrary, instead I believe the country 
should decide to adopt some decisions with respect to preparing 
a national project, which will ensure our national objectives. 
One of those objectives is currency stability. One of the 
country's main goals is to prevent any further currency 
devaluation. The only thing devaluation causes is negative 
collateral effects. For example, it generates more inflation. 
As we have already stated, inflation is one of the most vulgar 
taxes we can impose on the Honduran people. 
  In this respect, what should prevail is a willingness to 
seek 
different options, which are available to us and will provide 
more stability to the lempira. Instead of believing we are 
going to have a lempira that will be constantly devaluated, what 
we should try to ensure is a more stable currency. We should 
also seek to implement the most effective measures and join 
efforts in a national project that will encourage production, 
increase our exporting capability, stimulate investment, and 
provide more confidence to the economic sector as well as 
strengthen our markets. The objective of all of this is to more 
perfectly ensure economic stability. 
  [Valdez] The devaluation factor will be eliminated, which 
would entail an official devaluation. What is Congress' 
position with respect to this? 
  [Flores] With respect to this issue, I believe that since, 
at 
this time, the currency is subject to market fluctuations, what 
should currently prevail is an attempt to strengthen the 
currency. In other words, the fact that the National Congress 
has taken steps to approve changes in the customs devaluation 
factor is aimed more towards eliminating devaluation effects on 
the country's currency. In other words, what we are attempting 
to do is make the lempira more secure, confident, and stable. 
We must try to implement the necessary measures so as to 
provide the country with more economic stability. 
  [Valdez] Will the National Congress accept any initiatives 
aimed at devaluating the currency? 
  [Flores] National devaluation is not an initiative that must 
be presented before the National Congress. Neither is it an 
initiative which, as rumors says, the Honduran Central Bank 
expects to take. Currency devaluation occurs in terms of what 
takes place in a market, like the one that is currently 
operating, which is precisely a supply and demand market. 
  In reforming the decree, we have attempted to control the 
customs devaluation factor. We have done so to such an extent 
as to indicate that before changes are made the National 
Congress must first approve it. The objective of all this is to 
inject confidence into the market and to say that far from 
depreciating the currency, what we want is more stability. Now, 
the only way to prevent the lempira from devaluating is to 
initiate a national project with mechanisms to amend some of the 
economic problems we are currently confronting. [end recording] 

