Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] There has been a new resignation in the FNCD 
[National Front for Change and Democracy] parliamentary bloc. 
Deputy Evans Picault is pulling out of the camp of Aristide 
supporters. The deputy, disappointed with the behavior of his 
former allies and opponents, is considering turning his back on 
politics. In announcing his future withdrawal from political 
life, the deputy was not soft on the political sector, the 
international community, or the exiled president, whom he holds 
responsible for the failure of the democratic experience that 
began in December 1990. Edner Jean filed a report: 
  [Begin recording] [Jean] In his statement to Radio 
Metropole, 
Evans Picault left out no one, neither his former friends nor 
his opponents. I want to leave with a light heart and a clear 
conscience, he told us. In his farewell to FNCD, the deputy from 
Saint-Marc revealed his disgust with politics and his 
disappointments as a militant. I never thought I would reach 
such a decision, he said. But, facing the failure of FNCD in the 
management of the political crisis, Deputy Picault sees no 
alternative to turning his back on the Front under whose banner 
he was elected to the 45th Legislature. And before he closed the 
door, Picault, to avenge himself on his former leaders for 
having betrayed his political convictions, took time to rip off 
their masks. 
  [Picault, in Creole] The leaders themselves do not want 
Aristide to return. They are just playing politics; foreigners 
are leading those men. There is not one of them who does not 
have a foreigner behind him. I got involved in politics because 
I love my country and I am a young man. I see Haiti as a country 
with many problems, and I wanted to fight for democracy. 
  Then I realized that politics was a business. I told myself 
that it was out of the question for me to continue fighting in 
organizations that have no credibility or depth. Their speech is 
different from their actions. As a consequence, I cannot stay 
involved in such a thing. 
  The reason I am standing up today to announce officially 
that 
I am resigning from FNCD and Conacom [National Congress of 
Democratic Movements] is that I realize that those men are not 
democrats. How can one be part of the government of a person who 
is in exile, be fighting for his return, be a minister of his 
government, and sign something he did not sign? It is a scandal. 
It is not politics. He [not further identified] should have left 
his government first, then sign his crooked deal. 
  [Jean] Evans Picault is not, however, sweet toward President 
Aristide. In his statement, he put the former Saint-Jean Bosco 
priest on the bench of the accused, calling him an apprentice 
dictator. He wanted to fight everyone at the same time, while he 
had no concept of democracy, explains the deputy, who regrets 
that the people voted in Father Aristide. The people will pay 
dearly for their vote, exclaimed Evans Picault. 
  In addition, he condemned the embargo imposed on Haiti at 
the 
request of the president. 
  [Picault, in Creole] The first person to blame for the 
failure of democracy is Aristide. Because Aristide was not the 
person to vote in as president. Aristide lacked 
clear-headedness. When you are fighting for something, you must 
understand that the enemies you attack are more powerful than 
you. He did not use diplomacy to hold power. When he took power, 
he attacked everyone. He attacked the bourgeoisie, he attacked 
the macoutes. The macoutes are a force after 30 years of power. 
Who can overthrow the macoutes in this country? You can burn 
some little macoutes during popular upheavals but how can you 
burn up macoutes? I have never accepted this kind of thing. 
  Second point: Aristide thought that he could destroy the 
military institution with other institutions he was going to 
establish. He could have done it, with some reservations. The 
person whom you decide to attack already knows it; then you 
fail. He did not lead the struggle properly. Furthermore, 
Aristide did not have any political skill in his speeches. 
  [Jean] Deputy Picault added that Father Aristide has no 
intention of returning to Haiti; he did not see why many other 
lives must be sacrificed for a man who is enjoying comfort and 
luxury in Washington. The deputy from Saint-Marc, without regret 
or guilt, is turning a page in his life. After 14 years in 
active politics, Evans Picault hopes to complete his education 
in engineering, as soon as his mandate is over. To make sure he 
did not omit anything, he looks back on the past and looks at 
the country. 
  [Picault, in Creole] I do not see any hope for democracy in 
this country, because our enemies are very powerful. It is not 
those inside who are the most important, but those on the 
outside. [end recording] 

