Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Amudun Niyaz, chairman of the Standing Committee </F>
of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Regional People's Congress, on 
22 February; place not given -- live or recorded, in Uygur with 
superimposed translation into Mandarin; from the "Xinjiang News" 
program;] 
  [Text] Comrades: Today is the first anniversary of the 
promulgation of the State Security Law. The State Security Law, 
which was passed on 22 February 1993 at the 30th meeting of the 
Seventh National People's Congress Standing Committee after 
deliberations, is China's first special law for state security. 
Since the founding of the Republic, our struggles against 
espionage organs and various hostile forces outside China's 
territory have been acute and complicated. The State Security 
Law is a law mainly aimed at forestalling and checking 
activities outside the country or activities plotted by forces 
inside and outside the country which threaten state security. 
The promulgation and enforcement of the State Security Law will 
be conducive to the promotion of state security work, reform and 
opening up, and the creation of a good social and political 
environment. 
  Comrade Jiang Zemin demanded that we seriously enforce the 
State Security Law. Organizations at various levels in Xinjiang 
should educate the broad masses of cadres and people in studying 
hard the law so that it will be known to all. Organizations at 
various levels and people of all nationalities should vigorously 
support and facilitate state security work. State security 
organs should strictly enforce the law and consciously subject 
themselves to the public's supervision. Citizens and 
organizations supporting, assisting in, and making contributions 
to state security work should be commended and receive awards, 
whereas those who refuse to fulfill their obligations and 
obstruct state security work will have their responsibilities 
investigated according to the law. 
  It is the common duty of the entire party and people around 
the country to safeguard state security. Let us earnestly study 
and enforce the State Security Law and make greater 
contributions to maintaining state security. 

