BFN 

<F P=106> [From the press review] </F>
  [Text] AL-THAWRAH says that the peace process is still 
stalemated on all tracks, even on the one which took a separate 
course within the framework of the so-called Oslo agreement. 
The Tel Aviv rulers' maneuvers and obstructive tactics are the 
main and direct reason for the futility of this process and its 
arrival at a dead end. This Israeli policy is aimed at killing 
the peace chance and imposing the occupation status quo and its 
policy. 
  The paper stresses that after the Madrid conference and the 
convocation of 12 rounds of bilateral talks, it has been 
revealed that Israel is using the political process as a cover 
to continue and intensify settlement and aggression and to 
maintain the occupation. It has also been revealed that it is 
using the political process as a means to extort the Arabs and 
pressure them into ending the boycott and accepting Israel and 
its expansion in the region. Israel also wants to invade the 
markets of the Arab region and share with the Arabs their wealth 
and natural resources without offering them anything in return. 
  AL-THAWRAH says that although the region has entered a new 
cycle of Israeli violence and escalation, thus threatening the 
peace process, U.S. efforts are still much less than required. 
So far, the U.S. behavior is still at odds with the past and 
current U.S. Administrations' assurances and pledges to achieve 
a just, comprehensive peace based on full implementation of UN 
Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, as well as Resolution 
425. It is regrettable that the U.S. role has not gone beyond 
words, statements, and promises to the Arabs. In essence, the 
U.S. Administration maintained a stand of glaring bias toward 
Israel and of liberal support for Israel and its aggressive 
policy and practices. 
  Concluding its article, AL-THAWRAH says that the region does 
not need new shuttle tours or wishes to hold a new round of 
talks following the fashion of its precedents. What is required 
is an international and U.S. action that rises to the level of 
responsibility and the looming danger and removes all obstacles. 
What is required is to implement relevant UN [General Assembly] 
and Security Council resolutions and to make Israel comply with 
all those resolutions. Any attempt to undermine the principle 
of sovereignty and to talk about partial solutions and 
withdrawals are rejected by Syria. Peace is indivisible. 
Unless it is just and comprehensive, no peace can be durable. 

