Language: <F P=105> Hungarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Zhirinovskiy's bad behavior in Budapest has led to a 
memorandum. Istvan Kulcsar reports from the foreign affairs 
spokesman's briefing, which was held today. 
  [Kulcsar] The spokesman outlined the program of Prime 
Minister Peter Boross's visit to Paris at the end of this month. 
He will meet President Francois Mitterrand and Prime Minister 
Edouard Balladur, and will take part in a working lunch with 
Foreign Minister Alain Juppe. Answering a question, the 
spokesman said that the Hungarian Government continues to 
appreciate the Balladur plan. 
  Then Russian topics were on the news briefing's agenda. 
Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev will hold talks in 
Budapest from 21 to 22 February. He will be received by the 
Hungarian president and the prime minister as well. The 
expected topics of his talks with [Foreign Minister] Geza 
Jeszenszky are, in addition to bilateral ties, the Yugoslav 
crisis, the European situation, and Hungary's integration into 
Europe. 
  At the beginning of March the head of the Russian Church, 
Patriarch Aleksii II, will visit Hungary. 
  Janos Herman outlined the memorandum, which was addressed by 
the Hungarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Russian embassy 
in Budapest in connection with the scandal of Zhirinovskiy, who 
travelled through Budapest. It has come to the Foreign 
Ministry's notice that on 3 February 1994 Mr. Vladimir Volkovich 
Zhirinovskiy, a member of the Russian State Duma, during his 
private journey through Ferihegy Airport in Budapest, violated 
basic behavioral norms by publicly making insulting remarks 
about the Hungarian Republic and the airport staff on duty who 
were acting in accordance with regulations on passenger traffic, 
the memorandum reads. The Hungarian Republic's Foreign Ministry 
considers it unacceptable that a responsible politician and 
parliamentary deputy should express his opinion about Hungary 
and our fellow citizens in such a disreputable [meltatlan] 
manner and style. This was stated in the Foreign Ministry's 
memorandum addressed to the Russian embassy, which was outlined 
by the foreign affairs spokesman at his news briefing this 
morning. 

