BFN 

  [Text] Laos, where mountains, forests and water resources 
are in abundance, has a unique potential which is not evident in 
its neighbours for the development of hydro-power on a large 
scale. 
  In its policy on industrial development, the Lao government 
has attached great importance to the expansion of hydro-power 
plants. With its own input combined with assistance and loans 
from friendly countries and international financial 
institutions, the Lao government has in the past years tried to 
exploit this potential. This has also provided opportunities for 
investors to participate in various forms, such as joint 
ventures, build-operate-transfer projects and so on. 
  One example is the construction of a hydro-power plant at 
Seset in the southern province of Saravane. The Seset plant came 
on line a few years ago and has a generation capacity of 45 
megawatts, more than enough for domestic consumption in the 
whole south of the country. The Seset power plant is the second 
largest in the country, second only to the Nam Ngum Power Supply. 
  Last month, the state-run electricity company, Electricity 
du 
Laos, signed a contract with a French company, SOGREAH, for a 
survey to be conducted at Nam Leuk. In the same month, the 
Committee for Planning and Cooperation signed a memorandum of 
understanding with Thai company MDX Public Co., Ltd. on the 
development of the Nam Ngum Three Hydro-Power Project. The Nam 
Leuk water flows into Nam Sang and Nam Ngum, while the Nam Ngum 
Three project is located at the junction of Nam Ngum and Nam Ma. 
  The local electricity company has received a loan for the 
Nam 
Leuk project from the Asian Development Bank. Estimated cost of 
the project is U.S. $90 million. The project is expected to 
produce 40 megawatts of power. 
  As provided in memorandum of agreement for the Nam Ngum 
Three 
project, the Thai company will conduct a survey at a cost of 
U.S. $1 million. Once completed, the project will be capable of 
producing 400 megawatts of power. In this venture the Lao side 
will hold a share of 45 percent with the balance held by the 
Thai company. 
  Laos earns 800 million baht (U.S. $32 million) a year by 
selling electricity from its Nam Ngum power supply to Thailand. 
Revenue from the export of electricity represents the second 
largest source of foreign exchange for the country. 

