Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Isidoro S. Chammag] </F>
  [Text] Bontoc, Mt. Province -- Now it can be told. 
  The reason of former rebel priest Conrado Balweg for leaving 
in haste the New People's Army (NPA) group operating in Central 
Cordillera early 1986 was that he was about to be liquidated by 
his fellow rebels for acts inimical to the Communist Party of 
the Philippines (CPP). 
  This was disclosed last week by old man Mario Yag-ao, a 
native of Tinglayan, Kalinga-Apayao, during a dialogue here with 
PNP [Philippine National Police] officers. 
  Yag-ao, who was the first president of the Cordillera Bodong 
Association (CBA), an organization of tribal peace pact holders 
in Kalinga and Mountain Province which was organized by the 
Cordillera People's Alliance (CPA), arrived here with other 
Tinglayan tribal leaders to witness the surrender to the PNP of 
19 M16 rifles by CPLA [Cordillera People's Liberation Army] men 
belonging to Jimmy Sawatang's Group. 
  "Balweg committed some misgivings against the NPA movement 
and was about to be executed when he was rescued by other former 
NPA rebels and was crowned as CPLA chief on the basis of his 
being a Roman Catholic priest," Yag-ao said. 
  It was gathered from another source that during a conference 
of NPA leaders, one Ignacio Capegsan, alias "Bill Bileg," then a 
top NPA officer, reportedly slapped Balweg in the presence of 
other CPP-NPA [Communist Party of the Philippines-New People's 
Army] members for his allegedly grievous mistakes and 
insincerity. 
  Capegsan was arrested by intelligence operatives at the 
Manila International Airport in mid-1980s. 
  Balweg, through the media was later reported to have formed 
and led the CPLA, a supposedly breakaway group of the NPA. 
  However, Mailed Molina, a former NPA officer who is now an 
elected municipal mayor of Bucloc, Abra, said in a recent 
interview that he and other former NPA comrades -- not Balweg -- 
organized the CPLA. 
  Yag-ao said that Balweg showed his untrustworthiness when he 
started committing violations by deciding on matters without the 
consent of the majority of tribal leaders. 
  The Tinglayan tribal leaders denounced Balweg for virtually 
neglecting the CPLA-CBA [Cordillera People's Liberation 
Army-Cordillera Bodong Association] by concentrating on his 
treasure-hunting activities and for not accounting for the 
finances of the two organizations. 
  It was for this reason that most of the CPLA-CBA members 
broke away, leaving Balweg with less than 50 followers in the 
entire Cordilleras. 
  Meanwhile, PNP officials of the Cordillera Regional Command 
(Crecom) at Camp Dangwa, La Trinidad, Benguet also denounced 
Balweg for his continued refusal to surrender the firearms 
issued to his group. 
  Lt. Col. Rey Jucutan, spokesman for PNP-Crecom, said that 
Balweg had been issued more than 120 high-powered firearms by 
the government since the peace conference held at Mount Data, 
Mountain Province. 
  "We are puzzled by the continuous insincerity of Father 
Balweg. If his group continue to refuse to heed our pleadings, 
the full force of the law will have to be applied," he said. 

