Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Paul Jacob Jakarta] </F>
  [Text] Jakarta -- President Suharto encouraged the 
Indonesian and Singapore Armed Forces yesterday to continue 
working together, saying it was important for the two sides to 
cooperate closely and have a good working relationship. He made 
the comments to visiting Singapore Defence Minister Yeo Ning 
Hong, who paid a courtesy call on the Indonesian leader at the 
Istana Merdeka [Presidential Palace] in central Jakarta. 
  Dr. Yeo, accompanied by the Indonesian Defence and Security 
Minister, retired General Edi Sudrajat, told reporters after the 
half-hour meeting that the discussions centred on general 
defence cooperation matters. 
  While he did not go into the details he said Mr. Suharto 
gave 
his views on the importance of close cooperation between ASEAN 
member-countries. 
  This included defence ties between Singapore and Indonesia, 
which involve regular joint exercises between the air forces and 
navies of the two countries currently, as well as cooperation in 
search and rescue and anti-piracy patrols. 
  Naval and air force exercises have been held since 1974 and 
1980 respectively, but the two armies began exercises only in 
1989 when Indonesian troops were sent to Singapore. This is now 
a regular feature of bilateral cooperation with each country 
hosting the exercises alternately. 
  A 1989 agreement paved the way for such annual army 
exercises 
with benefits for both sides. Among other things, Singapore has 
access to various sites for land training exercises while 
Indonesia gains access to military technology, such as the use 
of training simulators and computer wargaming. 
  Dr. Yeo arrived here in the morning for talks with Gen. 
Sudrajat and to call on President Suharto. A Singapore Defence 
Ministry statement said the visit reflected the warm and close 
ties between Singapore and Indonesia. 
  He left this morning for the Riau provincial capital of 
Pekanbaru in northern Sumatera, where he and Gen. Sudrajat will 
witness the commissioning of an Air Combat Manoeuvring Range 
(ACMR). 
  The range, an air combat training site developed jointly by 
the Indonesian and Singapore armed forces, will be opened by 
Indonesian armed forces chief, General Feisal Tanjung, and 
Singapore Chief of Defence Forces, Major-General Ng Jui Ping. 
  Dr. Yeo, who in August 1991 attended the signing of a 
memorandum of understanding on the development of the range, 
pointed to it as one of a number of joint projects undertaken by 
the two sides over the years. 
  The air combat range augments the Siabu air weapons range, 
opened in 1989 in central Sumatera, which allows the air forces 
of the two countries to conduct air-to-ground training. 
  Dr. Yeo, who is scheduled to return to Singapore this 
afternoon, is accompanied on the Jakarta leg of his visit by the 
Permanent Secretary (Defence), Mr. Lim Siong Guan; the Chief of 
Air Force, Brigadier General Bey Soo Khiang; the Chief of Navy, 
Commodore Kwek Siew Jin; and senior ministry and SAF [Singapore 
Air Force] officers. 

