Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] If the presidential elections were held today, 
Andres Pastrana would win with a lead of over seven points ahead 
of Ernesto Samper Pizano, according to a poll by Yankelovich 
Colombia for the Pastrana campaign. The poll was released 
yesterday. 
  However, an EL TIEMPO poll arranged with the same polling 
firm, which then subcontracted the poll to the CNC [National 
Survey Center], gives different data on who the next president 
might be. These figures and the explanations of each of the 
firms--Yankelovich and the CNC--will be published by EL TIEMPO 
on Sunday. Yankelovich is now working as a polling consultant to 
the Andres Pastrana campaign, and for that reason subcontracted 
EL TIEMPO's poll to the CNC. 
  According to the poll the Pastrana campaign released 
yesterday, the total number of persons polled would vote as 
follows: 
  In the first presidential round: for Andres Pastrana, 30.5 
percent; for Ernesto Samper, 23.8 percent; and for Antonio 
Navarro, who would be third, 8.9 percent. 
  In the second round, Pastrana would also emerge as the 
winner, with a lead of almost eight points ahead of Samper. 
Pastrana would win 41.0 percent of the votes, with Samper 
getting 32.1 percent. 
  Over half of those polled, 56 percent, said they intend to 
vote. These respondents said they would vote for president as 
follows: in the first round, 36.6 percent for Andres Pastrana, 
and 29.4 percent for Samper. Antonio Navarro Wolf would be 
third, with 7.8 percent. 
  In the second round, those who said they are going to vote 
would vote as follows: for Andres Pastrana, 38.7 percent; for 
Ernesto Samper, 30.6 percent; and for Miguel Maza Marquez, 2.2 
percent. 
  To the question, "Who do you think is going to be the next 
president of Colombia, independently of whom you are going to 
vote for?" the 1,212 persons questioned answered: 38.7 percent 
said Andres Pastrana, 30.6 percent said Samper, and 2.2 percent 
chose Miguel Maza Marquez. 
  On primary elections to select the Conservative and Liberal 
Parties' candidates, the poll revealed the following: 
  In the Liberal Party, Ernesto Samper would win twice the 
number of votes as Humberto de la Calle, who would be second, 
followed by Carlos Lemos. 
  In the Conservative Party, Andres Pastrana would win 51 
percent of the votes, with Roberto Gerlein getting 4 percent. 
Juan Diego Jaramillo would be third in a Conservative primary, 
with 3.1 percent. 
<H5>  How the Poll Was Conducted </H5>
  The poll was conducted by Yankelovich for Andres Pastrana's 
campaign among 1,212 people from the lower, middle, and upper 
socioeconomic sectors in Bogota, Medellin, Cali, Barranquilla, 
Bucaramanga, Cartagena, and Santa Marta. 
  The surveys were conducted by telephone on 10, 11, and 12 
December using a random digital method. 
  The results have a margin of error of 2.8 percent for the 
total population and 3.5 percent for those who say they intend 
to vote. 

