Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 15 Mar (MENA)--Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa met 
tonight with Dr. Nabil Sha'th, head of the Palestinian 
delegation to the peace talks, and Zuhdi al-Qidrah, Fatah 
Movement's representative in Cairo. 
  Dr. Sha'th described the meeting as fruitful and useful. The 
meeting, he added, involved discussion of Palestinian 
developments following the Hebron massacre, the current talks in 
Tunisia, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin's visit to the 
United States, ways to break the current deadlock, and security 
guarantees for the Palestinian people. 
  Dr. Sha'th added that he conveyed a message from President 
'Arafat to Foreign Minister Musa. President 'Arafat and Foreign 
Minister Musa also talked on the telephone during the meeting, 
Dr. Sha'th remarked. 
  Concerning the resumption of the peace negotiations, Dr. 
Sha'th said: Certainly there will be no return to negotiations 
before the UN Security Council passes a resolution. The 
significance of such a resolution is not only that it would 
state the opinion of international legitimacy, but that the 
cosponsors of the peace conference, including the United States, 
would be committed to its implementation. Such a resolution 
would be an expression of international resolve in the form of a 
legal instrument, whose implementation should provide the 
Palestinian people with better protection, Sha'th said. 
  The Palestinians are interested in returning to the 
negotiations, Sha'th said, but on the condition that their 
demands for security measures are met. He added: Time is not 
an issue. Had the UN Security Council passed the resolution 
last Friday, as the understanding was, and had Israel introduced 
the required, logical, just, convincing, and justified measures 
last week, we would have resumed the negotiations today. 
  Dr. Sha'th said: We want measures and we want them 
implemented so that we may be able to go back to the negotiating 
table. Israel took such practical measures as banning settlers 
from carrying firearms at al-Aqsa Mosque, the Wailing Wall, and 
the al-Ibrahimi Mosque and outlawing terrorist organizations, 
but these measures are inadequate because they fail to meet the 
necessary security requirements, Sha'th declared. 

