BFN 

  [Text] Abkhazia's Defense Minister Sultan Sosnaliyev 
considers it unlikely that hostilities between the Abkhazian and 
Georgian formations will resume along the confrontation line of 
the Inguri river. "We are not moving and our opponents do not 
have enough forces to inflict a strike," Sosnaliyev declared in 
an interview with Interfax. As he said, the situation on the 
Inguri river "is very calm now." 
  Sosnaliyev pointed out that the Abkhazian army does not 
intend to cross Abkhazia's "historic border" and to occupy 
Georgian territory. At the same time he said that "as a result 
of the defeat of the Georgian army we could cross the Inguri 
river and move further on." 
  Sosnaliyev talked about the strong support given by Russia's 
Caucasian republics to Abkhazia. He said that this would not 
allow Moscow to render widescale military assistance to Georgia 
while relations with Abkhazia were not regulated. "Russia 
should bear in mind the Caucasian factor," he underlined. 
  Sosnaliyev reported that as many as 12,000 volunteers from 
the North Caucuses had been fighting on the Abkhaz side. "If it 
is necessary, this number can be increased to 50,000," he said. 
  Speaking about the situation in Abkhazia's Kondor canyon 
where Georgian armed detachments have been blocked, Sosnaliyev 
reported that no hostilities are going on there. The Abkhaz 
side proposed to the Georgian fighters to lay down their arms 
and guaranteed their safety. There was no answer to this 
proposal. 
  Sultan Sosnaliyev, aged 52, is a Kabardinian, a colonel of 
the former Soviet Army. He was commander of a regiment and then 
chief of one of the aviation colleges. 
  In August 1992 when the Georgian army entered Abkhazia, 
Sosnaliyev headed the republic's Military council. In December 
1992 he was chief of the army headquarters and in May 1993 -- 
Abkhazia's Defense Minister. In April 1993 Abkhazian parliament 
awarded him the rank of Mayor General and in December -- of 
Lieutenant General. 

