Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The handling of high-grade plutonium coming from the 
dismantling of nuclear weapons from the former Soviet Union has 
become a big issue, and the Japan Atomic Energy Research 
Institute (JAERI) has almost completed basic research on a 
"once-through type plutonium fuel" in which Pu239 is 99&percnt; 
burned 
and annihilated in existing light water reactors (LWRs) and the 
spent fuel also will have almost the same stability as natural 
ore. JAERI explained the results of its research to the Japan 
Atomic Energy Commission (JAEC). 
  The plutonium from dismantlement, which is said to be about 
200 tons, is about 94&percnt; Pu239, and whether to utilize this 
for 
peaceful uses or put them under storage and control has become a 
topic of international debate. Since JAERI's once-through type 
fuel can be manufactured easily in existing fuel fabrication 
plants without dilution, and almost 100&percnt; of the Pu239 can 
be 
annihilated without building a separate mono-fuel combustion 
reactor, it probably will draw international interest as well. 
  JAERI emphasized three points in its research: (1) the fuel 
should be once-through type, and the spent fuel should become 
high level waste while kept in coated pipes and not have to be 
reprocessed or solidified; (2) from the viewpoint of stability 
of waste and use of fuel manufacturing technology, the fuel 
should be an oxide base; and (3) for purposes of safety, the 
fusion point of the fuel should be 2,000&deg; or more. 
  From this viewpoint, two types of "fluorite oxide fuel" have 
been nominated for a fuel with irradiation stability and fission 
product solid solubility and stability: (1) Thoria base 
(compound of plutonium, thorium and alumina) and (2) 
zirconia-gadolinia base (compound of plutonium, zirconium, 
gadolinium and alumina). Data showing that 99&percnt; 
annihilation of 
nuclear weapon grade Pu239 at about 60,000 MWD/ton burnup was 
achieved for both types. In terms of void coefficient, however, 
the thoria base fuel was negative, whereas the 
zirconia-gadolinia base fuel was positive (or greater excess 
reaction). 
  With this fuel, to increase plutonium burnup, the greater 
the 
proportion of cooling water to the cubic volume of reactor fuel 
the better. Therefore, existing LWRs with a 1.9 ratio or the 
VVER-1000 are better than fast reactors, and because fast 
reactors also have the characteristic of not burning up Pu239, 
the LWR is more advantageous in practical application of this 
fuel. Although a high-temperature gas reactor could be used, its 
plutonium load is about 2 tons, and it cannot burn more than the 
LWR's 6 tons. 
  Moreover, with once-through fuel, the spent fuel has more 
weathering stability than glassified waste after reprocessing, 
and can be buried as is (radioactivity is about the same). It is 
also maintained that this fuel can be manufactured in existing 
facilities because it is an oxide. 
  JAERI already has completed the basic study, and plans to 
continue research to find the optimum composition for the fuel. 
  The purpose of the once-through type fuel is burnup and 
annihilation of high-grade (94&percnt; pure) plutonium, and it 
is not 
directly applicable to Japan's fuel recycling system. However, 
the Science and Technology Agency is hoping that this effective 
technology will be "one option" for the peaceful use of 
plutonium from dismantlement, however. JAERI plans to unveil it 
at the "7th international conference on innovative nuclear 
energy systems," which will begin on 20 September at the 
Makuhari in Tokyo. 

