BFN 

<F P=106> [By Benjamin Yeh] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, May 3 (CNA) -- Thirty-seven more Chinese 
medicine shops around the island were found illegally selling 
rhino horn or tiger bone during the second half of April as the 
Council of Agriculture continued its crackdown on the illicit 
trade. 
  Members of the council's special wildlife protection group 
visited 5,623 Chinese medicine shops in 23 cities and counties 
from April 19 through April 30, the council announced on Tuesday 
[3 May]. 
  The task force seized 349.8 grams of rhino horn and rhino 
horn powder in 15 stores and 4,424.7 grams of tiger bone in 22 
stores. 
  "The move is to display Taiwan's sincerity to protect 
endangered species," a task force member said. 
  Disguised as customers, police visited 519 herbal medicine 
shops out of 8,000 on the island in mid-March in Taiwan's first 
nationwide crackdown on the trade. In those raids, 34 stores 
were discovered to be selling tiger bone and rhino horn. 
  According to Article 33 of the revised Wildlife Conservation 
Law, those found guilty of illegally importing, exporting, or 
trading in endangered wildlife or the products gotten from those 
animals can be sentenced to up to five years in jail or a fine 
of up to NT$ [new Taiwan dollars] 1.5 million (US$56,820). 
Repeat offenders could be sentenced to up to seven years or 
fined up to NT$2.5 million. 
  US President Bill Clinton on April 11 issued an order 
prohibiting the import of legally traded wildlife specimens and 
products from Taiwan in retaliation for Taiwan's failure to stem 
the trade in rhino horn and tiger bone. 
  The sanctions will result in an estimated US$20 million to 
US$25 million in annual losses for Taiwan and will limit exports 
of farmed crocodile and snake skins, orchids and coral, local 
trade officials said. 
  The sanctions will take effect on May 11 and will continue 
until December 1994, when the US will review Taiwan's 
conservation efforts and decide whether to extend the import 
prohibition. 

