BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio interview with Aleksandra Vasilyevna Achulova, </F>
deputy chairwoman of the State Duma committee for foreign 
affairs; by Sergey Lomakin; from the "Utro" program -- live] 
  [Text] [Lomakin] Several days ago military bombing raids 
were carried out against Serb positions near the city of Gorazde 
in Bosnia-Herzegovia, and I saw it as my duty to invite here a 
person who is directly involved in foreign affairs: Aleksandra 
Vasilyevna Achulova, deputy chairwoman of the duma committee for 
foreign affairs. I would like to ask you the following 
question: We do not know very well what is going on; all we know 
is that bombing took place. What can it lead to, and what has 
it already lead to? Please give us your opinion. 
  [Achulova] Actually, I know what you and many of our 
compatriots and members of the [word indistinct] committee know, 
namely that air raids took place in the town of Gorazde in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. The natural reaction to this fact [pauses] 
the mere fact that NATO forces attempted to solve the problems 
of a conflict existing there in a unilateral fashion by 
conducting an air raid caused a certain reaction. There were 
some casualties, which is a fact that is worthy of attention in 
itself. Apart from other issues, I think this amounts to 
interference in the emerging trend in the peace process place. 
It caused diplomats to be very concerned, and I think the same 
applies to all members of the Security Council. Today, the mere 
decision to use the Air Force, that is, to use force to solve 
problems as complex as the conflict existing there may generate 
the most negative opinions, conclusions and statements, and not 
only in the State Duma which I represent, but also in all 
parliaments of the world. 
  [Lomakin] Some of the politicians wondered if Russian 
prestige has been damaged. It is no secret that we have 
significant interests in this region -- at least they should be. 
How can this affect Russian prestige? 
  [Achulova] The mere fact of what has taken place can 
naturally affect Russian prestige, but as to the moral 
responsibility of such an organization as the UN, it can also 
affect the authority of this organization. In my opinion, and 
in the opinion of many of my colleagues, the mechanism for 
adopting such decisions is incorrect. As you know, Russia itself 
was an initiator in the UN Security Council of the proposal to 
never use force to solve such problems, and naturally the use of 
force in Bosnia-Herzegovina causes a certain amount of damage to 
Russia, to Russian diplomacy. It is a separate issue that the 
procedure itself for adopting such decisions has been breached, 
and no consultations with any member of the Security Council 
were held. In other words, the right for NATO to use air 
support was guaranteed by the UN secretary general. Therefore, I 
think that naturally there was in any case some moral damage 
here because our position on this is known. On the other hand, 
I think that this causes a certain amount of damage to the UN 
Security Council. 
  [Lomakin] As far as I know, the duma adopted a statement on 
this issue yesterday evening. As I understand it, this is the 
State Duma reaction. Could you comment on the adopted statement? 
  [Achulova] Indeed, the State Duma adopted a decision on this 
issue yesterday. The State Duma calls the public's attention to 
the deep concern felt by all deputies of the State Duma over the 
air raid in the town of Gorazde in Bosnia-Herzegovina. The 
statement also emphasizes that the use of force without early 
consultations with members of the Security Council, and the 
Russian representative among them, was against the policy of the 
State Duma as expressed in both official statements and in 
speeches of deputies and representatives of various factions. 
Naturally, [the statement] stresses the need for peaceful 
settlement of this process and a return to the negotiating 
process. It also contains points clearly suggesting that the UN 
convene the Security Council to discuss extensively the 
situation created in Bosnia-Herzegovina as a result of this air 
raid. 
  [Lomakin] Let me ask you a question which you do not have to 
answer. However, if you do answer it, I will be very happy. As 
far as I understand, this is the first time that the UN used 
NATO forces. Do you not have the feeling that Russia and its 
position on this issue is being felt out, and if Russia gives in 
on some issues then, hypothetically speaking, other steps might 
follow? 
  [Achulova] You know, this statement of the State Duma does 
not contain such a position, and it has not been discussed in 
the committee for foreign affairs. However, as a deputy I can 
say that personally I do not rule out such a possibility, such a 
cause for delivering this strike because, from the logical point 
of view, carrying out such a barbarous act in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
[pauses] nevertheless, the statement notes that the State Duma 
finds it necessary to deploy UN forces in this zone, and 
emphasizes that the NATO forces were used in a unilateral 
fashion. What is more, one of the very serious problems being 
discussed in the mass media is the concept which we must join, a 
partnership we must join, a partnership which Russia must sign 
on 21 April. Nevertheless, one of the articles of this 
statement recommends, in a very proper manner, that the 
appropriate committee of the State Duma, such as the committees 
for foreign affairs, geopolitics, and security fully take 
Russian interests into consideration when working out the 
approach of the State Duma to the concept of Russian cooperation 
with NATO. I think that this was not done without a reason. 
Therefore, I think that Russian policy regarding this conflict 
must be consistent, and must in any case exclude the use of 
force to solve this very complex problem. [The statement] again 
calls warring sides to sit at the negotiating table, avoid any 
casualties, and activate the position of Russian Federation 
Foreign Ministry in order to create an effective mechanism for 
the implementation of resolutions of the UN security Council. 
  [Lomakin] Thank you, Aleksandra Vasilyevna. Like many other 
Russians, I still hope that the peacekeeping process has the 
upper hand, because there is probably no other way in Europe. 
  [Achulova] Yes, that is very important. 
  [Lomakin] We are too close to each other in Europe. Thank 
you 
again. We have talked about the position the State Duma adopted 
yesterday evening on bombing of Serb positions in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. We had with us Aleksandra Vasilyevna 
Achulova, deputy chairman of the State Duma committee for 
foreign affairs. Thank you again. 

