BFN 

<F P=106> ["Message" from Ernesto Perez Balladares, Panamanian </F>
presidential candidate of the United People alliance, in Panama 
City -- recorded] 
  [Text] Fellow citizens: I ended my political campaign by 
extending my family's pardon, as well as my own, to citizen Juan 
Bautista Zapata, because I believe reconciliation should be 
preached with examples, and because I do not want an incident 
that all Panamanians deplore to weigh heavily on my mind, or on 
the minds of those who will support me on 8 May. 
  Reconciliation is the main pillar on which our government 
program is based. It is impossible to link all of the social 
groups to the great enterprise of national reconstruction if we 
do not end, once and for all, the hatred and zeal for 
persecution that have poisoned our society. 
  The task of strengthening institutions so that no one feels 
excluded, while maintaining the rules of democracy, demands 
total dedication, and there is no time for fruitless reprisals 
or revenge. Likewise, there is no place for governments in which 
a single party monopolizes public functions. 
  Furthermore, I dare say better service is rendered to 
democracy if citizens who are not involved in political 
confrontations share the administrative responsibilities, 
particularly in posts dealing with the supreme task of managing 
justice. This is why I promised throughout the political 
campaign, which officially ends today, that before election day 
I would announce the name of the attorney general of the nation 
whom I intend to appoint from the lists I was given by the 
National Bar Association and the law school faculties of the 
National University of Panama and the Santa Maria La Antigua 
University. 
  A democratic regime must guarantee citizens the honest 
management of justice and an Attorney General's Office that 
separate itself from the passions and vicissitudes of politics. 
Therefore, it is preferable -- although the Constitution does 
not order this -- for the nation's attorney general not to 
belong to the president's party or that he share his political 
ideology. This guarantees that the post will never be used for 
political persecution or to harbor the crimes perpetrated by 
high-ranking public officials. As a citizen, I would not like 
to see investigations end at points at which they should start. 
Moreover, it would not be fitting that the state's immense 
power be used to initiate phony legal proceedings against the 
current rulers' political opponents. 
  Mercedes Arauz de Grimaldo, Wilfredo Saenz, and Jose Antonio 
Sossa offer these guarantees. They personify all of the virtues 
that should grace an attorney general of the nation -- 
education, experience, honesty, and, above all else, the desire 
to serve justice without seeking to figure prominently or to 
launch a persecution. Therefore, it is from these prestigious 
lawyers -- who will have to retire from active party membership 
-- that I will choose the nation's new attorney general and his 
two substitutes. 
  I am hereby fulfilling a campaign promise, and, with the 
same 
conviction, I reassert another equally important one -- to 
respect other people's opinions. Those who seek to rule the 
nation's destiny must be prepared to accept, with republican 
humility, criticism from any citizen -- no matter how severe 
such criticism might be -- and, moreover, accept those 
criticisms issued by the media. The media represent, in most 
cases, the eyes and ears of society. To disregard their appeals 
would show poor judgment, and attempts to silence the media run 
counter to the minimal standards of democratic coexistence. 
  With this pledge and this conviction, I want to start, along 
with all of you, a new era of hope and reconciliation. Thank 
you. 

