Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd has asserted 
that comprehensive peace in the Middle East will not be achieved 
without Jordan. This is because Jordan plays an important and 
vital role in the peace process. 
  The remarks were made in a news conference Hurd held in 
Amman 
this afternoon at the conclusion of a two-day visit to Jordan, 
during which he met with His Majesty King Husayn and the prime 
minister. Hurd also had talks on developments in the peace 
process and ways to enhance bilateral cooperation. 
  More details in the following report: 
  Hurd said his talks in Amman were positive and that Jordan 
and Britain look forward to making the peace process succeed, 
despite the existence of some difficulties, which should be 
overcome. He asserted that the peace process has passed the 
point of no return and it is impossible to go back. 
  Hurd expressed his full understanding of, and deep respect 
for, His Majesty King Husayn's view that all matters should be 
settled before any agreement with Israel is signed. He said: I 
fully understand the reasons that prompted his majesty to adopt 
this policy. He further said that much has been achieved on the 
Jordanian-Israeli track, noting that there are other things 
which should be done. 
  Hurd stressed his country's economic support for Jordan, 
saying: We have an economic aid program for Jordan and we will 
implement this program to support Jordan's needs. He pointed to 
his meeting today with the water minister and to Britain's role 
in extending aid to carry out a water project in southern 
Jordan. He also underlined the need to ease the burdens of 
Jordan's indebtedness and support its economy in facing many 
burdens as a result of the continued economic embargo against 
Iraq. He said he discussed with Jordanian officials ways to 
overcome difficulties to increase the volume of trade between 
Jordan and Britain. He added that he had discussed with 
Jordanian officials the negative impact of the economic embargo 
against Iraq, noting that Jordan feels that it bears a great 
burden as a result of this embargo, more than other neighboring 
countries of Iraq. 
  Hurd underscored his statements in the Gaza Strip yesterday 
before arriving in Amman in which he asserted his government's 
support for the Palestinian people through extending technical 
expertise directly or through the Economic Community and the 
United Nations, especially for the Palestinian self-rule region. 
He said: We cannot do more than this because the United States 
and Russia are directly responsible for the peace process. He 
asserted that the concerned parties in the region are determined 
to achieve peace and that the will for success is greater than 
failure, since failure means the return of tension to the region. 
  Hurd expressed his belief that Israel has no ambitions in 
Lebanon, pointing out that it seeks to protect its security and 
that it has no desire to annex Lebanese territory. He 
reaffirmed the need for Israel's implementation of relevant 
Security Council resolutions. He said that reaching a solution 
on the Lebanese-Israeli track can happen at the same time as 
other solutions on other tracks are being reached within a 
comprehensive solution. 
  He also expressed his belief that Arab-Israeli disputes are 
over. We are now in a stage of direct contacts and negotiations, 
which is the only course to achieve positive results and 
practical decisions and implement them. 
  He denied he was mediating between the Arabs and the 
Israelis, saying his tour of the region is aimed at listening to 
the views of the parties concerned, conveying views from one 
side to another, and helping clarify these ideas. 
  Hurd and his wife left Amman this afternoon for Malta on the 
fourth leg of his Middle East tour. He was seen off at the 
airport by Talal Sat'an al-Hasan, minister of state for foreign 
affairs; Nayif al-Hadid, the Foreign Ministry secretary general; 
senior Foreign Ministry officials, and the British ambassador in 
Amman. 

