BFN 

  [Text] Kuala Lumpur, May 6 (BERNAMA) -- Malaysia Friday 
urged Russia to adopt a firmer stand to discourage the continued 
Serb aggression on safe havens in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Foreign Minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi made the call to the 
Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Aleksandr Panov who called on 
him at his office here. 
  He said Russia's attitude, which appeared to be siding with 
the Serbs, gave them the confidence to press their onslaught on 
the safe havens. 
  The Serbs know that they will escape any action from the 
United Nations because they are backed by big powers like 
Russia, he told reporters after the 90-minute meeting. Panov 
arrived here last Wednesday on a two-day official visit to 
prepare for the official visit by Russia's First Deputy Prime 
Minister Oleg Soskovets to Malaysia in July as well as to 
discuss international issues. 
  His six-man delegation, which included a representative of 
the State Committee on Defence Industries Anatoly G. Brathucin 
[name as received], would also discuss the MiG-29 jet fighter 
deal with Defence Minister Datuk Sri Najib Tun Razak. 
  Malaysia is buying 18 of the air superiority aircraft for 
the 
Royal Malaysian Air Force. 
  Abdullah said Malaysia and tiny countries, like members of 
the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC), and Non-Aligned 
Movement (NAM), deeply wished that Russia would adopt a fair 
attitude in handling the Bosnia issue. The presence of Russian 
peacekeeping troops in Bosnia adds favouritism for the Serbs 
[words indistinct] and helped the Serbs to (?continue their 
bloody activities against the Bosnians), he added. He said 
Malaysia supported Russian President Boris Yeltsin's proposal 
that an international conference on Bosnia-Herzegovina be held 
as soon as possible to seek a settlement to the conflict in the 
former Yugoslav republic. The conference would [word 
indistinct] the difficulties faced by the UN which was hampered 
by the presence of countries which used their veto to obstruct 
its decision-making on the issue in Bosnia- Herzegovina, he said. 
  Abdullah said he also voiced Malaysia's view that the UN 
Security Council to adopt the preventive defence and diplomacy 
approach in dealing with the Bosnian situation instead of one 
where action was taken only after the commission of aggression 
which resulted in great loss of lives and property. 
  Panov reacted positively to Malaysia's call and promised to 
convey it to Yeltsin and Russian Foreign Minister Andrey 
Kozyrev, according to Abdullah. 

