BFN 

  [Text] People got the impression that the mafias had 
reduced their activities in mid-February, after personnel from 
Dinandro [Antidrug Division], the FAP [Peruvian Air Force], and 
the DEA seized 3.5 tonnes of cocaine paste in Boca Manu (Madre 
de Dios). 
  However, recent intelligence reports state that drug 
trafficking organizations are using new drug gathering centers 
in border districts, and have managed to get many miners who had 
been working on the banks of the Tambopata River to swap gold 
prospecting for the drug trade. 
  During operations carried out over the past few weeks, it 
became clear that drug traffickers have established their drug 
trade centers in the border districts of Inapari (Tahuamanu) and 
Santa Maria de Fatima (Tambopata), located 15 km from the 
Chiringayoc checkpoint. Army and police agents arrested 27 
traffickers here, among them Peruvians, Colombians, and 
Brazilians, and seized 1,051 kg of basic cocaine paste and 150 
kg of washed cocaine paste ready to be shipped to Brazil, from 
where the drug would be shipped to Colombia and the United 
States. 
  The arrested traffickers confessed that after the operation 
at Boca Manu airport they had received orders from the bosses in 
the Colombian firms to move to the town of Diamante, and were 
using the landing strip located near the old "Lagarto" naval 
base to ship the drugs abroad. Interior Ministry experts 
explained that the drug cartels, in their attempt to disperse 
and dodge the Army, Dinandro, and DEA operations, have decided 
to vary the centers to gather and ship drugs abroad and to seek 
new ones, thus dodging the authorities' surveillance and turning 
Madre de Dios into a key point for trafficking in cocaine paste 
and cocaine hydrochloride. 
  Moreover, drug enforcement forces continue to confiscate 
coca 
leaves in Cusco and Puno Departments. Traffickers have been 
transporting coca leaves in small quantities by train, truck, 
and bus from the growing centers in La Convencion, Amgaraes, 
Lares, Quispicanchis, and Inambari to the higher Puno provinces 
(Carabaya, Juliaca, and Sandia) where there are clandestine 
laboratories for manufacturing cocaine paste and cocaine. 
  Part of these drugs are smuggled out of the country through 
the Bolivian and Brazilian borders, while the rest is sent to 
Arequipa, Moquegua, and Tacna for domestic consumption and to be 
sold in Chile and Argentina. The cocaine hydrochloride is 
transported by "mules" travelling in public transportation 
facilities disguised as tourists going to Arica. 
  Some days ago Cusco and Puno drug enforcement forces seized 
one tonne of coca leaves being transported in regional buses, 
concealed under staple foods. 
  A similar quantity (900 kg) of cocaine paste, manufactured 
in 
inaccessible areas in Juliaca according to Interior Ministry 
sources, was seized in Arequipa and Tacna. 
  Intelligence agents agree that Arica has become one of the 
most important centers of the region for the "laundering" of 
narcodollars. There is proof that "mules" are paid to transport 
the drugs to Chile with modern vehicles, pickups, and other 
types of vehicles. 
  The organizations involved in illegal drug trafficking thus 
attract those who wish to become the owners of modern 
transportation means overnight, which they then give to third 
parties to run, as it is a fact that whoever engages in drug 
trafficking ends up dead. 

