Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Finance Ministry on 14 February disclosed its 
plan to reemphasize at the 26 February meeting of finance 
ministers and central bankers of the seven major industrialized 
nations (G-7) in Frankfurt, Germany, Japan's efforts to boost 
domestic demand primarily by implementing a 6-trillion-yen tax 
cut program. The ministry also plans to seek the understanding 
of member nations regarding such efforts. 
  At the G-7 meeting, the ministry also plans to express its 
concern that should the yen be left to rise sharply in the 
foreign exchange market at the current pace, it would diminish 
the effects of Japan's pump-priming package. Adjustment of the 
currency exchange rate is expected to be a major topic on the 
agenda at the G-7 meeting, and member nations are likely to ask 
Japan to make further efforts to boost domestic demand. 
  A senior Finance Ministry official has said: "On a number of 
occasions we have made large-scale public works investments, and 
the scale of tax cuts is a drastic 20 percent of the nation's 
total revenue. From the monetary aspect, the official discount 
rate is at the extremely low level of 1.75 percent per annum." 
He thus stressed Japan is doing all it can. In addition to 
this political strategy, Japan will oppose demands by other 
members of the G-7 on the basis of the existence of such 
negative economic factors as the sharp appreciation of the yen, 
and an unusually cool summer. 
  It has been reported that at the recent Japan-U.S. summit 
meeting, U.S. President Bill Clinton said: "The currency 
exchange rate is one of the objective criteria." However, a 
senior Finance Ministry official has expressed the view that 
"Japan's domestic demand and its domestic prices, and U.S. 
efforts to increase exports and its competitiveness, were cited 
among numerous factors that have a bearing on U.S. exports to 
Japan. The currency exchange rate was simply cited as one of 
these factors." 
  Meanwhile, concerning the sharp yen appreciation, Finance 
Minister Hirohisa Fujii has said: "Since the yen rate has been 
moving due to speculative factors, we will take appropriate 
measures to deal with it." He thus hinted he intends to respond 
to sharp yen appreciation via market intervention. 

