Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by USSR State Committee for Safety in Industry and </F>
Atomic Power Industry; approved by Resolution No. 7 of the USSR 
State Committee for Safety in Industry and Atomic Power Industry 
of 12 Jun 90; effective 1 Sep 90; coordinated with the USSR 
Ministry of Atomic Energy and Industry and USSR Civil Defense] 
  [Text]Contents 
  List of Abbreviations Principal Definitions 1. 
Principal Premises 2. Requirements for Ensuring Nuclear 
Safety Imposed on the Reactor and Reactor Plant Systems Crucial 
for Safety 2.1. General Requirements 2.2. 
Requirements for the Core and its Structural Members 2.3. 
Requirements for the Reactivity Control System of the 
Reactor 2.3.1. General Requirements 2.3.2. Emergency 
Reactor Protection System Requirements 2.3.3. Requirements 
for Monitoring and Controlling the Neutron Flux and 
Reactivity 2.4. Requirements for the Reactor Plant 
Monitoring and Control Systems 2.5. Requirements for the 
Primary Circuit of the Reactor Plant 2.6. Requirements for the 
Emergency Reactor Cool-Down Systems 2.7. Requirements for 
the Recharging Procedures and Devices 2.7.1. Requirements 
for the Charging Procedures 2.7.2. Requirements for the 
Recharging Devices 3. Requirements for Ensuring Nuclear 
Safety During Reactor Plant Operation 4. State Oversight 
and Monitoring of Adherence to the Rules and Responsibility for 
Their Violation Appendix: Additional Safety Requirements 
for Nuclear Stations with Most Common Types of Reactor Plants in 
the USSR 
List of Abbreviations 
  AZ--Emergency reactor protection system AS--Nuclear station 
BShchU--Generating-unit control panel OPB--General rules for 
ensuring nuclear station safety (regulatory technical manual) 
PZ--Preventive protection system RU--Reactor plant detail design 
RShchU--Back-up control panel SUZ--Reactivity control systems of 
the reactor TVS--Fuel assembly TVEL--Fuel element TOB--Safety 
feasibility analysis 
Principal Definitions 
  1. EMERGENCY REACTOR PROTECTION SYSTEM--Safety function 
amounting to rapidly switching the reactor core to the 
subcritical condition and maintaining it in the subcritical 
state; a complex of safety systems which execute the emergency 
reactor protection system function. 
  2. EMERGENCY SITUATION[.sup]1[/]--Nuclear station 
condition characterized by violation of the limits and/or safe 
operation conditions which has not evolved into an accident. 
  3. NUCLEAR STATION MANAGEMENT 
PERSONNEL[.sup]2[/]--Management officials to whom the 
authority is delegated and who have the obligation as well as 
the responsibility for the nuclear power station operation. 
  4. CORE--A reactor section which houses the nuclear fuel, 
moderator, absorber, coolant, and the means of controlling 
reactivity and the structural members intended for executing a 
controlled nuclear chain reaction and transmitting energy to the 
coolant. 
  5. INTERNAL SELF-PROTECTION OF THE REACTOR 
PLANT[.sup]1[/]--The ability to ensure safety on the basis of 
natural feedback and processes. 
  6. GROUP OF REACTOR CONTROL SYSTEM ACTUATORS--One or several 
reactor control system actuators combined with respect to their 
control function for the purpose of one-time joint movement. 
  7. DIAGNOSTICS--Technical monitoring of systems or elements 
in order to determine and/or predict the possibility of 
executing the stipulated functions on the basis of given values 
of parameters or symptoms. 
  8. OFF-DESIGN ACCIDENT--An accident caused by initial events 
not taken into account for design emergencies or accompanied by 
additional failures of safety systems over a one-time failure 
compared to design emergencies, or by execution of erroneous 
personnel decisions which may lead to severe damages or core 
meltdown whose consequences can be alleviated by controlling the 
accident and/or executing planned measures to protect the 
personnel and population. 
  9. EXTRACTION OF REACTIVITY CONTROL FACILITIES--A movement 
or 
a change in the conditions of the reactivity control facilities 
which results in introducing positive reactivity (an 
introduction of reactivity control facilities leads to an 
introduction of negative reactivity). 
  10. ACTUATING MECHANISM OF THE REACTOR CONTROL SYSTEM--A 
device consisting of an actuator, end effectors, and connecting 
elements intended for changing the reactor core reactivity. 
  11. INITIAL EVENT[.sup]1[/]--A one-time failure in power 
station systems, an external event, or personnel error which 
lead to disruptions in normal operation and may result in 
violating the limits and/or safe operation conditions. The 
initial event incorporates all dependent failures which are its 
consequences. 
  12. MONITORING CHANNEL--A combination of transducers, 
transmission lines, and signal processing and/or parameter 
display facilities intended for ensuring monitoring on a scale 
specified by the design. 
  13. SYSTEM CHANNEL[.sup]1[/]--A part of the system 
executing the function of the system on a scale stipulated by 
the design. 
  14. EMERGENCY REACTOR CONTROL SYSTEM EQUIPMENT SET--A part 
of 
emergency reactor protection system which executes the reactor 
protection system functions on a scale stipulated by the reactor 
plant design. 
  15. MONITORING--Collection, processing, and transmission of 
signals for display to the personnel and/or to control devices 
in accordance with the values of the process parameters or the 
reactor plant equipment status. 
  16. SAFETY CONDITIONS WITH HIGH 
STANDARDS[.sup]1[/]--Professional and psychological 
preparedness of all persons at which the guarantee of nuclear 
station safety is a high-priority goal and internal demand which 
leads to conscious responsibility and self-control in executing 
all operations affecting safety. 
  17. LOCALIZED CRITICALITY--Criticality reached in a part of 
the reactor core, nuclear fuel storage, or any other space 
containing nuclear fissionable materials. 
  18. MAXIMUM REACTIVITY MARGIN--Reactivity which may be 
realized in the reactor when all reactivity control systems and 
other extractable absorbers are removed from the reactor core at 
the reactor life cycle moment and reactor condition with the 
maximum value of the effective multiplication factor. 
  19. DISRUPTION OF NORMAL REACTOR PLANT OPERATION--Reactor 
plant condition characterized by violation of the operating 
limits and conditions. 
  20. INDEPENDENT SYSTEMS OR ELEMENTS[.sup]1[/]--Systems or 
elements for which failure of a single system or element does 
not result in the failure of another system or element. 
  21. NORMAL REACTOR PLANT OPERATION[.sup]2[/]--Reactor 
plant operation within the operating limits and conditions 
stipulated by the reactor plant design. 
  22. PRIMARY CIRCUIT[.sup]2[/]--A circuit together with the 
pressure equalization system through which coolant circulates in 
the reactor core at an operating pressure. 
  The reactor plant's primary circuit ensures heat removal by 
the coolant from the reactor core under normal operation, 
departures from normal operation, and design emergencies. 
  23. REACTOR CORE RECHARGING (RECHARGING)--Nuclear-hazardous 
operations at the reactor plant involving the charging, 
extraction, and movement of fuel assemblies or fuel elements, 
reactivity control facilities, and other elements which control 
reactivity in order to repair, replace, or dismantle them. 
  24. CONSEQUENCES OF A REACTOR PLANT EMERGENCY[.sup]2[/]--A 
radiation environment developing due to a reactor plant accident 
within the confines of the containment system which leads to 
losses as a result of exceeding the established limits of staff 
radiation exposure. 
  25. SUBCRITICAL CONDITION--Reactor core condition which is 
characterized by the following: a value of the effective 
multiplication factor less than unity or an absence of localized 
criticality. 
  26. LIMITS OF SAFE REACTOR PLANT OPERATION[.sup]2[/]--The 
values of process parameter values established by the reactor 
plant design whose violation may lead to an accident. 
  27. PREVENTIVE PROTECTION SYSTEM--A safety function ensured 
by the reactor plant reactivity control and monitoring system in 
order to prevent the emergency reactor protection system 
operation and/or violation of the safe operation limits and 
conditions (a total or partial decrease in power, control 
blocking, or triggering of equipment operation, a check of the 
preventive protection system settings or operation conditions, 
generation of preventive protection system signals to personnel, 
etc.). 
  28. REACTOR CONTROL SYSTEM ACTUATOR--A device intended for 
changing the position of the reactor control system's mechanical 
end effector. 
  29. PRINCIPLE OF SINGLE FAILURE[.sup]1[/]--A principle 
according to which the system must execute its specified 
functions given any initial event requiring its operation or 
given a failure of one active or passive element having 
mechanical moving parts, independently from the initial event. 
  30. INDEPENDENCE PRINCIPLE--A principle of increasing the 
system reliability by changing the functional and/or physical 
separation of channels or elements for which failure of one 
channel or element does not lead to a failure of another channel 
or element. 
  31. DIVERSIFICATION PRINCIPLE--A principle of increasing the 
system reliability by using different facilities and/or similar 
facilities in different systems (or within the same system but 
in different channels) based on different operating principles 
in order to execute a specified function. 
  32. REDUNDANCY PRINCIPLE--A principle of increasing the 
system reliability by employing structural, functional, 
information, and time redundancy relative to the scope which is 
the minimum necessary and sufficient for the system to execute 
specified functions. 
  33. DESIGN ACCIDENT[.sup]2[/]--An emergency for which the 
reactor plant design defines the initial events and final states 
of the reactor plant and stipulates control systems which limit 
its consequences within the limits established for such 
emergencies allowing for the single failure principle of the 
safety system or one human error independent from the initial 
event. 
  34. DESIGN LIMITS[.sup]2[/]--The values of the system or 
element parameters or status characteristics and the reactor 
plant as a whole established by the reactor plant design for 
normal operation, emergency situations, and accidents. 
  35. END EFFECTOR OF THE REACTIVITY CONTROL SYSTEM OF THE 
REACTOR--A reactivity control facility employed by the reactor 
control system. 
  36. END EFFECTOR OF THE EMERGENCY REACTOR PROTECTION 
SYSTEM--A reactivity control facility used in the emergency 
reactor protection system. 
  37. REACTOR--A device for executing a controlled nuclear 
chain reaction in order to generate thermal energy. 
  38. REACTOR PLANT[.sup]2[/]--A complex of nuclear station 
systems and elements intended for converting nuclear power into 
thermal power which includes the reactor and the systems 
directly related to it which are necessary for its normal 
operation, emergency cool-down, emergency protection, and 
maintenance of safe conditions provided that the required 
auxiliary and supporting functions are being executed by other 
station systems. The reactor plant boundaries are set by the 
chief designer of the reactor plant, the chief developer, and 
scientific supervisor and are submitted together with the detail 
reactor plant design. 
  39. EMERGENCY REACTOR PROTECTION SYSTEM SIGNAL--A signal 
generated in the emergency reactor protection system equipment 
set in order to trigger the emergency reactor protection system 
actuators; the signal enters the recording facilities as well as 
the generating-unit control panel and back-up control panel for 
notifying the personnel. 
  40. PREVENTIVE PROTECTION SYSTEM SIGNAL--A signal generated 
and recorded by the control and monitoring systems for 
triggering the preventive protection functions and notifying the 
personnel about the possibility of a depature from normal 
operation. 
  41. SYSTEM[.sup]1[/]--A combination of elements intended 
for executing specified functions. 
  42. SAFETY SYSTEMS OR ELEMENTS[.sup]1[/]--Systems or 
elements intended for executing safety functions. 
  43. OPERATOR INFORMATION SUPPORT SYSTEM--A system intended 
for monitoring, analyzing, and predicting the conditions and 
formulating recommendations for controlling the reactor plant 
and checking the operator actions. 
  44. REACTOR SHUTDOWN SYSTEMS--Systems intended for 
transferring the reactor core to the subcritical condition and 
maintaining it in the subcritical state with the help of 
reactivity control facilities. 
  45. REACTIVITY CONTROL SYSTEMS OF THE REACTOR--A combination 
of hardware, software, and data base support systems intended 
for ensuring safe course of the chain reaction. 
  The reactor control systems are systems which are crucial 
for 
safety and combine the functions of normal operation and safety; 
they consist of elements of control and monitoring systems and 
protective, controlling, and supporting safety systems. 
  46. REACTOR PLANT SYSTEMS OR ELEMENTS CRUCIAL FOR 
SAFETY[.sup]2[/]--Safety systems or elements as well as 
normal operation systems or elements whose failure impairs 
normal operation of the reactor plant and may lead to design and 
off-design accidents. 
  47. REACTOR PLANT CONTROL AND MONITORING SYSTEMS OR 
ELEMENTS[.sup]2[/]--Systems or elements intended for 
monitoring and controlling normal reactor plant operation 
systems. 
  48. NORMAL OPERATION SYSTEMS OR 
ELEMENTS[.sup]1[/]--Systems or elements intended for 
executing normal operation. 
  49. REACTIVITY CONTROL FACILITIES--Engineering facilities 
realized in the form of solid, liquid, or gaseous absorbers or 
moderators and reflectors whose position or conditions within 
the reactor core or reflector is changed in order to ensure a 
change in the reactor core reactivity. 
  50. FUEL ASSEMBLY--An assembly of fuel elements intended for 
charging, discharging, and placement in the reactor core. 
  51. FUEL ELEMENT (TVEL)--An individual assembly unit with 
nuclear fuel positioned in the reactor core which ensures 
generation of thermal energy, accumulation of fission materials, 
and secondary nuclear fuel. 
  52. SPECIFIC THRESHOLD FUEL ELEMENT BREAKDOWN ENERGY--Energy 
released during a short period of time within a unit of nuclear 
fuel mass with a rapid introduction of reactivity sufficient for 
destroying the fuel element. 
  53. INDICATOR OF THE WORKING POSITION OF THE REACTIVITY 
CONTROL SYSTEM ACTUATOR--A device for determining the position 
of the end effector of the reactivity control system of the 
reactor in the core. 
  54. OFF-DESIGN ACCIDENT CONTROL[.sup]1[/]--Actions aimed 
at preventing the design accidents from developing into 
off-design accidents and at alleviating the consequences of 
off-design emergencies. Any available serviceable engineering 
facility intended for normal operation or for ensuring safety 
under design emergencies as well as specifically intended for 
alleviating the consequences of off-design emergencies can be 
used for these operations. 
  55. REACTOR PLANT CONTROL--Bringing the reactor plant to a 
specified condition and/or maintaining this condition with the 
help of the facilities specifically intended for this purpose. 
  56. SAFE OPERATING CONDITIONS[.sup]1[/]--The minimum 
conditions stipulated by the design for the quantity, 
characteristics, and serviceability status and maintenance 
conditions of systems or elements crucial for safety which 
ensure the adherence to safe operation limits and/or safety 
criteria. 
  57. SAFETY FUNCTIONS[.sup]1[/]--A specific concrete 
objective and actions ensuring its accomplishment aimed at 
preventing an emergency or limiting its consequences. 
  58. OPERATING LIMITS[.sup]2[/]--The bounds of parameter 
values and status characteristics of systems or elements and the 
reactor plant as a whole specified by the reactor plant design 
for normal operation. 
  59. OPERATING CONDITIONS--The conditions stipulated by the 
design for the quantity, characteristics, serviceability status, 
and maintenance of the systems or elements crucial for safety 
under which operating limits are not violated. 
  60. OPERATING ORGANIZATION[.sup]1[/]--A state enterprise 
or association or organization set up or appointed by superior 
government control bodies for executing the activity of the 
nuclear station at all life cycle stages in selecting the site, 
designing, building, commissioning, operating, and 
decommissioning the nuclear station using its own facilities or 
with the help of other organizations or enterprises which are 
authorized by state oversight and control bodies to carry out 
this activity. 
  61. ELEMENTS[.sup]2[/]--Equipment, instruments, pipelines, 
cables, building structures, and other products which ensure 
execution of specified functions independently or within systems 
and which are treated by the reactor plant design as structural 
units for the purpose of reliability and safety analyses. 
  62. NUCLEAR ACCIDENT[.sup]2[/]--An accident involving 
damage to fuel elements which exceeds the established safe 
operation limits and/or irradiation of personnel which exceeds 
permissible limits for normal operation caused by the following 
factors: a breakdown of nuclear chain reaction monitoring and 
control in the reactor core; the development of localized 
criticality during the nuclear fuel recharging, transfer, or 
storage; and a disruption of heat removal from the fuel elements. 
  63. NUCLEAR SAFETY--A property of the reactor plant and 
nuclear station whereby there is a certain probability of 
preventing the development of nuclear accidents. 
  64. NUCLEAR-HAZARDOUS OPERATIONS--Operations at the reactor 
plant which may lead to a nuclear accident. 
Footnotes 
  1. Text of definition from OPB-88. 
  2. The definition reflects the text of OPB-88. 
  General Premises 
  1.1. These nuclear safety rules of nuclear station reactor 
plants--IBYa RU AS (hereinafter referred to as the 
rules)--extend to all reactor plants of USSR nuclear stations in 
operation, under construction, and at the design stage. 
  The necessity, deadlines, and scope of measures for bringing 
operating reactor plants and reactor plants under construction 
in conformance with the requirements of the rules herein is 
established in each specific case by the bodies which approved 
the rules. 
  1.2. The rules establish the general requirements imposed on 
the design, characteristics, and operating conditions of reactor 
plant systems and elements as well as organizational 
requirements aimed at ensuring nuclear safety during the design, 
construction, and operation of reactor plants. 
  1.3. These rules are mandatory for all ministries, 
departments, enterprises, and organizations in designing, 
constructing, and operating nuclear station reactor plants as 
well as for designing and manufacturing reactor plant elements. 
  1.4. The rules have been developed allowing for the 
requirements of the ``General Premises of Ensuring the Nuclear 
Station Safety'' and other regulatory documents in effect in the 
USSR as well as the nuclear station design, development, 
construction, and operation experience. 
  The rules elaborate on the requirements of OPB-88 with 
respect to ensuring nuclear safety. 
  1.5. The reactor plant nuclear safety is determined by the 
engineering perfection of the designs, the requisite quality of 
manufacturing, erection, adjustment, and testing of the reactor 
plant elements and systems crucial for safety, their reliability 
during operation, status diagnostics, quality and timeliness of 
equipment servicing, maintenance, and repairs, process control 
and monitoring during operation, work management, and personnel 
skill and discipline. 
  The reactor plant nuclear safety is ensured by a system of 
technical and organizational measures and is maintained due to 
the following: 
  utilizing and developing the properties of internal 
self-protection; 
  employing the concept of deeply echeloned protection; 
  using safety systems developed on the basis of redundancy 
principles, spatial and functional independence, single failure, 
etc.; 
  utilizing reliable and practically tested designs and sound 
procedures; 
  adhering to the regulations, standards, rules, and other 
regulatory and technical nuclear station safety manuals as well 
as strictly adhering to the requirements incorporated in the 
nuclear station design; 
  process stability; 
  development and implementation of safety practices with high 
standards; and 
  a system for ensuring quality at all reactor plant 
development and operation stages. 
  1.6. Additions and amendments to the rules may be made on 
the 
basis of the decisions made by the bodies which approved and 
coordinated the rules herein. 
  2. Nuclear Safety Requirements Imposed on the Reactor and 
Reactor Plant Systems Crucial for Safety 
  2.1. General Requirements 
  2.1.1. The design, construction, and operation of reactor 
plants as well as the design and manufacturing of reactor plant 
elements must be characterized by adherence to the requirements 
of the regulatory and technical manuals in effect in the USSR. 
  2.1.2. The request for proposal for designing the reactor 
plant and the reactor plant design draft must be coordinated 
with the USSR State Committee for Safety in Industry and Atomic 
Power Industry. Amendments to the composition, design, and/or 
characteristics of the reactor plant and reactor plant systems 
crucial for safety as well as amendments to the limits and 
conditions established by the reactor plant detail design must 
be coordinated with the USSR State Committee for Safety in 
Industry and Atomic Power Industry prior to their implementation 
at the reactor plant. 
  2.1.3. The detail design of the reactor plant must stipulate 
the reactor plant systems crucial for safety indicating the 
safety functions they execute and the principal characteristics, 
e.g., the functioning sequence, operating conditions, block 
diagrams, efficiency, monitoring and diagnostics facilities, 
speed of response, service life, and reliability. 
  2.1.4. In designing the reactor plant, quality control 
programs at the design, development, manufacturing, 
construction, commissioning, and operating stages must be 
formulated. 
  2.1.5. The detail design of the reactor plant must stipulate 
measures for decommissioning the reactor plant while adhering to 
the requirements of the rules herein. 
  2.1.6. The following must be stipulated by the reactor plant 
detail design: 
  normal operation systems, including reactor plant monitoring 
and control systems; 
  safety systems; and 
  engineering facilities and measures intended for controlling 
off-design emergencies. 
  2.1.7. The reactor plant elements or systems crucial for 
safety must be subjected to monitoring and testing during 
manufacturing, erection, and adjustments in order to maintain 
and confirm the design characteristics as well as periodic 
checks in the course of operation. 
  The reactor plant detail design must stipulate the fixtures, 
devices, procedures, and schedules for checking the systems 
crucial for safety to see whether they correspond to their 
design characteristics, including comprehensive tests (the 
signal transmission sequence and duration, including emergency 
reactor protection system operation, switch-over to emergency 
power supply sources, execution of safety functions, etc.). 
  The reactor plant detail design must develop the lists which 
enumerate reactor plant systems or elements whose serviceability 
and characteristics are to be checked in operating or shut-down 
reactors and indicate the conditions of the reactor plant and 
reactor plant systems crucial for safety. 
  The inspection devices and procedures should not affect the 
nuclear station safety. 
  2.1.8. The principal reactor plant nuclear safety 
feasibility 
document for each nuclear station generating unit is the reactor 
plant detail design section entitled ``Reactor Plant Safety 
Feasibility Analysis'' which must be developed by the chief 
designer of the reactor plant and coordinated with the chief 
developer of the nuclear station and scientific supervisor. 
  2.1.9. The structure and contents of the reactor plant 
safety 
feasibility analysis must correspond to the current regulatory 
technical manual entitled ``Standard Content and Reactor Plant 
Safety Feasibility Analysis.'' 
  2.1.10. The reactor plant safety feasibility analyses and 
technological regulations of the reactor plant operation which 
must be coordinated with the scientific supervisor, chief 
nuclear station developer, and USSR State Committee for Safety 
in Industry and Atomic Power Industry should be corrected by the 
chief designer of the reactor plant on the basis of the outcome 
of physical and power-generating startups as well as operating 
experience of each nuclear station generating unit. 
  2.1.11. The reactor plant safety feasibility analysis should 
demonstrate execution of the requirements of the rules hereunder. 
  2.1.12. The reactor plant safety feasibility analysis should 
contain a study of likely failures of systems or elements 
crucial for safety identifying those failures which are 
dangerous for the reactor plant and an evaluation of their 
consequences on the basis of a probabilistic safety analysis. 
  2.1.13. The reactor plant safety feasibility analysis should 
contain a list of initial events and an analysis of departures 
from normal operation, a study of design and off-design 
emergencies, and a classification of design and off-design 
accidents based on the probability of their development and the 
severity of their consequences. Accidents with a severe damage 
or reactor core meltdown should be considered among off-design 
emergencies. 
  In designing the reactor plant, one should strive to ensure 
that the probability of a severe damage or reactor core meltdown 
in the case of an off-design emergency does not exceed 
10[.sup]-5[/] per reactor per year. 
  2.1.14. The operating limits and conditions, safe operation 
limits and conditions, and design limits established for design 
emergencies must be justified and listed in the reactor plant 
safety feasibility analysis. 
  2.1.15. Each design emergency or a group of emergencies must 
be associated in the reactor plant safety feasibility analysis 
to the design limits for design accidents which should not be 
exceeded allowing for the operation of safety systems. 
  2.1.16. The reactor plant safety feasibility analysis should 
demonstrate that the maximum design fuel element damage limit 
must not be exceeded for the most severe design accidents. 
  The design fuel element damage limits for the remaining 
design accidents should be established by the reactor plant 
detail design and should have the values lower than the maximum 
design limit of fuel element damage. 
  The permissible fuel element damage limits are cited in the 
appendix entitled ``Additional Nuclear Station Safety 
Requirements for the Most Common Reactor Plant Types in the 
USSR.'' For other and newly developed nuclear station reactor 
plants, additional safety requirements must be coordinated with 
the USSR State Committee for Safety in Industry and Atomic Power 
Industry. 
  2.1.17. The reactor plant detail design must contain a 
list of nuclear-hazardous operations. 
  2.1.18. The reactor plant safety feasibility analysis must 
contain the lists of procedures and programs used for justifying 
safety and indicate their applications. The programs used must 
be certified. 
  2.2. Requirements for the Reactor Core and Its Structural 
Members 
  2.2.1. The reactor plant design and operating regulations 
must ensure that operating limits of fuel element damage are not 
exceeded during normal operation. 
  2.2.2. The core must be designed so that any change in 
reactivity under normal operation, departures from normal 
operation, and design emergencies does not lead to violation of 
the corresponding fuel element damage limits. 
  The requirements for reactivity coefficients are summarized 
in the appendix. 
  2.2.3. The reactor plant detail design must demonstrate that 
given design emergencies related to a rapid increase in 
reactivity, the specific threshold fuel element breakdown energy 
at each reactor life cycle point is not exceeded, and fuel 
meltdown is impossible, while for off-design emergencies, the 
conditions under which fuel meltdown and/or excess over the 
specific threshold fuel element breakdown energy is possible 
must be enumerated. 
  2.2.4. The reactor plant detail design must establish a 
correspondence between the fuel element damage limits and the 
primary circuit coolant activity for benchmark isotopes. In so 
doing, the requirements for the coolant purification systems 
must be taken into account. 
  2.2.5. An analysis of the thermal engineering reliability of 
the reactor core with a feasibility study of the sufficiency of 
the margins stipulated by the reactor plant detail design must 
be carried out in the reactor plant detail design in order to 
justify the execution of the requirements for not exceeding the 
safe operating limits with respect to the fuel element damage. 
  2.2.6. The reactor core must be designed and manufactured in 
such a way that given normal operation, departures from normal 
operation, and design emergencies, the corresponding fuel 
element damage limits are not exceeded allowing for the 
following: 
A. the design number of conditions and their design course; 
thermal, mechanical, and radiation-induced deformation of the 
core components; 
B. physical and chemical interaction of the core materials; 
C. limiting values of thermal engineering parameters; 
D. vibration and thermal cycling, fatigue, and aging of 
materials; 
E. effect of the coolant impurities and fission products on 
the fuel element cladding corrosion; and 
F. the effect of radiation and other factors which worsen the 
mechanical characteristics of the core materials and the 
integrity of the fuel element cladding. 
  2.2.7. The reactor plant detail design must justify and 
technically ensure the possibility of discharging the core and 
its components after the design emergency. 
  2.2.8. The core and actuating mechanisms of the reactivity 
control system of the reactor must be designed so as to 
eliminate jamming, ejection of end effectors, or their 
spontaneous decoupling from the reactor control system actuators. 
  2.2.9. The reactor plant detail design must demonstrate that 
given an unforeseen movement of the most effective end effector 
of the reactivity control system or a group of end effectors, 
the safe operation limits are not exceeded with respect to the 
fuel element damage allowing for the emergency reactor 
protection system operation without one of the most effective 
end effectors of the emergency reactor protection system. 
  2.2.10. Given normal operation, departures from normal 
operation, and design emergencies, the possibility of unforeseen 
movements and/or deformation of the core elements resulting in 
an increase in reactivity and deterioration of the heat removal 
conditions leading to a fuel element damage above and beyond the 
corresponding design limits must be ruled out. 
  2.2.11. The core and reactivity control facility 
characteristics must ensure that introduction of the reactivity 
control facilities into the core and/or reflector for any 
combination of their arrangement under normal operation, 
departures from normal operation, and design emergencies ensures 
introduction of negative reactivity at any section of their 
movement path. 
  2.2.12. The fuel assembly design must ensure that the change 
in the shape of fuel elements and other fuel assembly elements 
possible under normal operations, departures from normal 
operation, and design emergencies does not result in blocking 
the fuel assembly flow section leading to a fuel element damage 
above the corresponding limits and does not prevent normal 
functioning of the end effectors of the reactivity control 
system of the reactor. 
  2.2.13. The fuel assembly design must have distinguishing 
marks which characterize the fuel enrichment in the fuel 
elements and are distinguished visually and/or with the help of 
recharging devices. 
  2.2.14. Fuel elements with a varying degree of enrichment, 
special burnable poisons, fuel elements with burnable poison in 
the fuel, fuel elements with mixed fuel, etc., must have 
distinguishing marks which can be distinguished visually and/or 
with the help of commercial monitoring facilities during the 
fuel assembly fabrication. 
  2.3. Requirements for Reactor Control Systems 
  2.3.1. General Requirements 
  2.3.1.1. The reactor plant must contain reactivity control 
systems of the reactor intended for the following purposes: 
  controlling the reactor plant reactivity and power; 
  monitoring the neutron flux density, the rate of its change, 
and the process parameters necessary for protection, reactivity 
control, and reactor plant power control; and 
  switching the reactor core to the subcritical state and 
maintaining it in the subcritical state. 
  2.3.1.2. The makeup, structure, characteristics, and 
operating sequence of the reactivity control system must be 
substantiated in the reactor plant detail design. The reactor 
plant detail design must contain a quantitative reliability 
analysis which should demonstrate that the reactivity control 
system reliability indicators meet the requirements of the 
relevant regulatory documents. 
  2.3.1.3. The reactor plant detail design must contain an 
analysis of the reactivity control system response to external 
and internal factors (e.g., fires, flooding, induced 
electromagnetic fields, etc.), to likely faults (short circuits, 
a loss in insulation quality, voltage drops and induced voltage, 
false operations, loss of control, etc.) which demonstrate the 
absence of reactions dangerous to the reactor plant. 
  Should reactions dangerous to the reactor plant develop 
during its operation, the reactor plant must be shut down, and 
engineering measures must be taken for eliminating them and 
making relevant amendments to the reactor plant detail design in 
an established fashion. 
  2.3.1.4. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate at 
least two reactor shutdown systems, each of which must be 
capable of ensuring independently of each other the reactor core 
switch-over to the subcritical condition and maintaining it in 
the subcritical state allowing for the single failure or human 
error principle. 
  In designing these systems, it is necessary to adhere to the 
principles of diversification, independence, and redundancy. 
  2.3.1.5. At least one of the reactor shutdown systems which 
does not perform the emergency reactor protection function 
during normal operation, departures from normal operation, and 
design emergencies must be characterized by the following: 
  an efficiency sufficient for switching the reactor core to 
the subcritical state and maintaining the subcritical state 
allowing for a likely release of reactivity; and 
  a speed of response sufficient for switching the reactor 
core 
to the subcritical state without violating the design fuel 
element damage limits established for design emergencies 
allowing for the operation of the emergency reactor core 
cool-down systems. 
  2.3.1.6. The number, effectiveness, position, and makeup of 
groups, operating positions, and sequence and velocity of the 
reactor control system end effectors including the emergency 
reactor protection system end effectors as well as the number of 
reactivity control system actuators must be determined and 
substantiated in the reactor plant detail design. 
  2.3.1.7. The reactor plant detail design must define and 
substantiate the conditions for testing, substituting, and 
decommissioning for repairs the reactivity control system end 
effectors and their actuators and other reactivity control 
facilities. 
  2.3.1.8. All mechanical end effectors of the reactivity 
control system must have indicators of intermediate positions, 
end position signaling indicators, and limit switches which, if 
possible, are triggered directly by the end effector. Other 
reactivity control facilities should also be supplied with 
status indicators. 
  2.3.1.9. In the case where the reactor plant detail design 
stipulates the use of an auxiliary (in addition to the regular 
one) reactivity control system during the first physical 
startup, this system must meet the requirements stipulated in 
Section 2.3 herein. 
  2.3.2. Requirements for the Emergency Reactor Protection 
System 
  2.3.2.1. At least one of the stipulated reactor shutdown 
systems must perform the emergency reactor protection system 
function. 
  2.3.2.2. The reactor plant detail design must demonstrate 
that the end effectors of the emergency reactor protection 
system without one most effective end effector are characterized 
by the following: 
  a response speed sufficient for switching the reactor core 
to 
the subcritical state without violating the safe operation 
limits and with departures from normal operation; and 
  an effectiveness sufficient for switching the reactor core 
to 
the subcritical state and maintaining it in the subcritical 
state given departures from normal operation and design 
emergencies. In the case where the emergency reactor protection 
system efficiency is not sufficient for maintaining the reactor 
core in the subcritical state for an extended period, automatic 
engagement of another (other) reactor shutdown system (systems) 
whose effectiveness is sufficient for maintaining the reactor 
core in the subcritical state allowing for a possible release of 
reactivity must be stipulated. 
  2.3.2.3. The emergency reactor protection system must have 
at 
least two independent groups of end effectors. 
  2.3.2.4. The emergency reactor protection system must be 
designed so as to ensure that the protection response already in 
progress is executed fully and the requirements of Paragraph 
2.3.2.2 herein are taken into account and that execution of the 
emergency reactor protection system function is monitored. 
  2.3.2.5. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate the 
sequence for determining and eliminating the reasons for the 
emergency reactor protection system operation as well as the 
operating sequence of operating personnel in restoring the 
normal condition of the reactor plant after the emergency 
reactor protection system operation. 
  2.3.2.6. Upon an emergency reactor protection system signal, 
the emergency reactor protection system actuators must be 
engaged from any operating or intermediate position. 
  2.3.2.7. Introduction of positive reactivity by the 
reactivity control facilities stipulated by the reactor plant 
detail design must be ruled out if the emergency reactor 
protection system end effectors are not cocked to the operating 
position. The operating position of the emergency reactor 
protection system end effectors and the sequence of their 
retraction should be stipulated in the reactor plant detail 
design. 
  2.3.2.8. When the normal operation and emergency reactor 
protection system functions are combined by the reactivity 
control facilities, the reactor plant detail design must 
enumerate and substantiate the sequence of their actions. In so 
doing, the priority ranking of the emergency reactor protection 
system functioning must be ensured. 
  2.3.2.9. The emergency reactor protection system equipment 
must consist of at least two independent sets. 
  2.3.2.10. Each set of emergency reactor protection system 
equipment must be designed so as to guarantee that protection is 
ensured without the entire range of neutron flux variation from 
10[.sup]-7[/]% to 120% of the nominal value with 
respect to 
the following: 
  by at least three independent channels for the neutron flux 
density level; and 
  by at least three independent channels by the rate of 
increase in the neutron flux density. 
  2.3.2.11. In the case where the neutron flux density 
measurement range is divided into several sub-bands, it is 
necessary to ensure that the sub-bands overlap within at least 
one decimal order of magnitude, and automatic sub-band 
switch-over must be ensured. 
  The design must provide for the possibility of connecting a 
recording device to each neutron flux density monitoring channel. 
  2.3.2.12. Each emergency reactor protection system equipment 
set must be designed so that the emergency reactor protection 
system is ensured by at least three independent channels for 
each process parameter for which protection must be maintained 
within the entire design range of reactor plant process 
parameters. 
  2.3.2.13. The admissibility of combining in each emergency 
reactor protection system equipment set the measurement channels 
of the neutron flux density monitoring with the instrument 
channels of the rate of increase in the neutron flux parameters 
must be substantiated in the reactor plant detail design. 
  2.3.2.14. The emergency reactor protection system must be 
separated from the monitoring and control system to such an 
extent that damage or failure of any control or monitoring 
system elements do not affect the emergency reactor protection 
system ability to execute its functions. 
  2.3.2.15. Failure of the data display and recording and 
diagnostic system elements in the monitoring channel should not 
affect this channel's ability to execute its functions. 
  2.3.2.16. The design must provide for the possibility of 
checking the generation and transmission duration of emergency 
reactor protection system signals in each channel separately and 
the emergency reactor protection system equipment set as a whole 
without the operation of the emergency reactor protection system 
end effectors. 
  2.3.2.17. The emergency reactor protection system must 
provide for automatically monitoring and diagnosing the 
serviceability of sets and channels while displaying malfunction 
data and generating emergency reactor protection system signals 
indicating the failure of channels or sets. 
  2.3.2.18. The emergency reactor protection system must 
justify and enumerate the procedures for metrological 
certification and inspections of emergency reactor protection 
system equipment. 
  2.3.2.19. The admissibility and conditions for failure of 
one 
set or one channel within the emergency reactor protection 
system equipment set must be substantiated in the reactor plant 
detail design (i.e., the duration, reactor plant power level, 
condition of other sets, etc.). 
  2.3.2.20. Should one channel in one emergency reactor 
protection system equipment set fail without failure of the set 
itself, an emergency signal must be automatically generated for 
this channel. 
  2.3.2.21. Each emergency reactor protection system equipment 
set must be executed on the basis of the majority logic 
principle which is selected on the basis of the reliability 
analysis contained in the reactor plant detail design. The 
minimum majority is two out of three. Control signals for each 
set of emergency reactor protection system end effectors must be 
transmitted over at least two channels. 
  2.3.2.22. A list of parameters according to which emergency 
reactor protection must be executed, the settings, and emergency 
reactor protection system operating conditions as well as the 
duration of signal transmission to the emergency reactor 
protection system end effectors must be substantiated in the 
reactor plant detail design. The settings and emergency reactor 
protection system operation conditions must be selected so as to 
prevent violation of safety operation rules. 
  2.3.2.23. A list of original events which require the 
emergency reactor protection system operation must be cited and 
justified in the reactor plant detail design. The emergency 
reactor protection system must operate at least in the following 
cases: 
  upon reaching the emergency reactor protection system 
setting 
for the neutron flux density; 
  upon reaching the emergency reactor protection system 
setting 
for the rate of increase in the neutron flux density or 
reactivity; 
  upon disappearance of voltage in any emergency reactor 
protection system equipment set and power supply buses of the 
reactivity control system of the reactor; 
  given a malfunction or unserviceable condition of any two of 
the three protection channels for the level or rate of increase 
in the neutron flux density in any emergency reactor protection 
system equipment set; 
  when the process parameters for which protection must be 
executed reach the emergency reactor protection system settings; 
and 
  when the buttons intended for triggering the emergency 
protection system operation are depressed. 
  2.3.2.24. It is permitted to use the preventive protection 
system when normal operation is violated but operation of the 
emergency reactor protection system is not required. 
  2.3.2.25. The emergency reactor protection system must be 
designed so as to ensure that its hardware eliminates the 
possibility of engaging the elements which activate and 
deactivate the emergency reactor protection system channel, 
unforeseen by the reactor plant detail design and the operating 
regulations and changes in setting without notification of the 
staff and without the operation of the emergency reactor 
protection system end effectors. 
  2.3.2.26. Execution of the emergency reactor protection 
system function should not depend on the availability and 
condition of power supply sources. 
  2.3.3. Requirements for the Neutron Flux and Reactivity 
Monitoring and Control 
  2.3.3.1. In order to monitor the neutron flux, the reactor 
must be equipped with monitoring channels so that monitoring is 
executed by at least the following devices within the entire 
variation range of the neutron flux density in the reactor core 
from 10[.sup]-7[/]% to 120% of the rated value: 
  by three independent neutron flux density level measurement 
channels with display instruments; and 
  by three independent channels measuring the rate of change 
in 
the neutron flux density. 
  2.3.3.2. The admissibility of combining the instrument 
sections of the neutron flux density level monitoring channels 
with the instrument parts of the channels measuring the rate of 
change in the neutron flux density must be justified by the 
reactor plant detail design. 
  2.3.3.3. At least two of the three neutron flux density 
monitoring channels must be equipped with recording devices 
capable of connecting to any neutron flux density measurement 
channel and ensuring measurements without the entire design 
neutron flux density range. 
  2.3.3.4. The neutron flux density monitoring channels must 
be 
calibrated within the entire design range of thermal reactor 
power. The reactor plant detail design must justify and define 
the procedure and sequence of carrying out such calibration and 
its intervals in the course of reactor plant operation. 
  2.3.3.5. In the case where the neutron flux measurement 
range 
is divided into several sub-bands, the design must provide for 
overlapping sub-bands within at least one decimal order of 
magnitude in measurement units of the neutron flux density and 
for automatic sub-band switch-over. 
  2.3.3.6. If the neutron flux density monitoring channels 
stipulated in Para. 2.3.3.1 herein do not ensure neutron flux 
monitoring during the core charging or recharging, the reactor 
must be equipped with an additional monitoring system. This 
system must be detachable and installed for the duration of the 
reactor core charging and recharging and must contain at least 
three independent neutron flux density monitoring channels with 
displaying and recording devices. 
  2.3.3.7. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate a 
reactimeter with devices which display, record, and 
automatically switch the neutron flux and reactivity measurement 
sub-bands in order to monitor reactivity variations. 
  2.3.3.8. The technique for, errors in, measuring the 
reactivity (i.e., the number and positioning of transducers, 
calculation algorithms and constants, and measurement errors and 
ranges) must be substantiated in the reactor plant detail design. 
  2.3.3.9. The reactivity monitoring channels must be equipped 
with automatic serviceability checking devices and warning 
alarms indicating malfunction. 
  The reactor plant detail design must justify and summarize 
the techniques for metrological certification and testing of the 
reactivity monitoring channels. 
  2.3.3.10. The reactor plant detail design must establish and 
substantiate the characteristics of the automatic reactor plant 
power control system which ensure the reactor plant operation 
without exceeding the operating limits. 
  Permissible reactor plant power levels during failures of 
the 
automatic control system and the possibility of the reactor 
plant operation without the automatic power control system must 
be justified in the reactor plant detail design. 
  2.3.3.11. When several measurement channels are connected to 
the input of the automatic power control system, the design must 
stipulate a device for obtaining a signal from the operating 
instrument channels so that disconnection or failure of one of 
these channels does not lead to changes in the reactor power 
under the effect of the automatic control system. 
  2.3.3.12. Technical measures must eliminate the possibility 
of introduction of positive reactivity simultaneously by two or 
more regular reactivity control facilities as well as 
introduction of positive reactivity by the reactivity control 
facilities during the fuel charging and discharging. 
  2.3.3.13. The rate of increase in reactivity due to the 
reactivity control facilities should not exceed 
0.7_b_[.sup]ef[/]/s. For reactivity control system end 
actuators with an efficiency of more than 0.7_b_[.sup]ef[/], 
introduction of positive reactivity should be stepwise, in 
increments of no more than 0.3_b_[.sup]ef[/] (and supported 
by technical measures). The reactor plant detail design must 
stipulate the step size, the interval between the steps, and the 
rate of reactivity increase. 
  2.3.3.14. Before the reactor startup, the emergency reactor 
protection system end effectors must be cocked to the operating 
position. 
  The reactor core subcriticality at any reactor life cycle 
time after cocking the emergency reactor protection system end 
effectors to the working position with the remaining end 
effectors of the reactivity control system inserted into the 
reactor core must be at least 0.01 when the reactor core is 
characterized by a state with the maximum effective 
multiplication factor. 
  2.3.3.15. Failure of the channel for monitoring the neutron 
flux density level and/or rate of change must be accompanied by 
generation of alarm signals to the operator and recording of 
failure. In so doing, the preventive protection signal informing 
about this channel failure must be generated. 
  2.3.3.16. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate the 
requirements imposed on the facilities which ensure the on-line 
computer-aided measurement and recording of the current 
reactivity margin value in the reactor core during operation, 
on-line measurements of reactivity, total efficiency of 
reactivity control facilities, the efficiency of the emergency 
reactor protection system end effectors, the efficiency of the 
end effector groups of the reactivity control system, and the 
reactivity coefficients with respect to the parameters which 
affect reactivity (power, coolant temperature, moderator 
temperature, dissolved absorber concentration, etc.). 
  The procedure for, and measurement errors in, determining 
these values must be substantiated in the reactor plant detail 
design. 
  2.3.3.17. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate for 
the facilities and techniques for monitoring the reactor core 
subcriticality. 
  2.3.3.18. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate for 
the facilities for measuring the energy release nonuniformity in 
the reactor core as well as indicate the requirements for the 
facilities of on-line analysis of the burnout/dryout/DNB margin. 
  For reactor cores for which the absence of neutron flux 
density fluctuations cannot be proven, the design must stipulate 
facilities for monitoring and controlling the neutron flux 
density fluctuations and indicate the procedure of controlling 
the fluctuations without violating the operating fuel element 
damage limits. 
  2.4. Requirements for the Reactor Plant Monitoring and 
Control System 
  2.4.1. The reactor plant detail design must summarize and 
justify the requirements for the makeup, structure, principal 
characteristics, quantity, and layout conditions of monitoring 
and control systems or elements as well as reactor plant 
diagnostic systems. 
  2.4.2. The reactor plant detail design must justify and 
summarize the following lists: 
  monitored parameters and signals about the reactor plant 
status; 
  controlled parameters and control signals; 
  settings and conditions for the preventive protection 
system; 
  locations of reactor plant diagnostic transducer positions; 
and 
  the parameters necessary for safety system operation. 
  It must demonstrate that the reactor plant monitoring and 
control systems do indeed monitor the operating condition and 
ensure safe reactor plant control during normal operation, 
departures from normal operation, and design emergencies. 
  2.4.3. The reactor plant detail design must summarize and 
justify the lists of interlocking and reactor plant equipment 
protection as well as specifications for their triggering 
conditions. 
  2.4.4. The reactor plant monitoring and control systems and 
safety systems must stipulate the devices for generating the 
following signals: 
  emergency notification (a siren with a distinct sound tone) 
in the cases stipulated by the reactor plant detail design; 
  alarm (light and audible) when the parameters reach the 
settings and emergency reactor protection system operation 
conditions; 
  warning (light and audible) upon departure from normal 
reactor plant system and element operation; and 
  notification about the presence of voltage in electric power 
supply circuits, equipment and device status, etc. 
  2.4.5. The design must stipulate for reactor plant control 
and monitoring system diagnostics. 
  2.4.6. The monitoring systems must be designed so as to be 
able to identify the initial accident events, establish the 
actual reactor plant system operation algorithms crucial for 
safety, and deviations from regular algorithms and operating 
personnel actions. To this end, a recording system which should 
record the following must be provided: 
  the parameters and symptoms of the status characterizing the 
initial events or the parameters which make it possible to 
determine the initial event unambiguously; 
  control signals; 
  a change in the parameters which characterize the status of 
reactor plant systems crucial for safety; 
  a change in the parameters in response to which protection 
systems are activated; 
  a change in the parameters characterizing the radiation 
environment; and 
  operating staff conversations over intercom systems. 
  The scope and scale of recording must be justified and 
summarized in the reactor plant detail design. 
  The recording system must maintain serviceability and ensure 
data integrity under the conditions of design and off-design 
accidents ("black box"). 
  2.4.7. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate the 
following: 
  permissible reactor plant power levels as a function of the 
reactor plant monitoring and control system serviceability with 
a partial loss of performance; and 
  the conditions for decommissioning and repairing the reactor 
plant monitoring and control systems. 
  2.4.8. The ranges and rates of change during normal 
operation, departures from normal operation, and design 
emergencies must be justified for the controlled and monitored 
parameters. 
  2.4.9. The reactor plant control and monitoring systems and 
elements should pass metrological expert examination and 
certification. 
  2.4.10. The reactor plant detail design must contain an 
analysis of the reactor plant control and monitoring system 
response to external and internal factors, to likely failures 
and malfunctions (short circuits, loss of insulation quality, 
voltage drops and crossovers, false operations, loss of signals, 
etc.) and to failures of the principal reactor plant equipment 
which demonstrate the absence of reactions dangerous to the 
reactor plant. 
  Should reactions dangerous to the reactor plant be 
identified 
in the course of operation, the reactor plant must be shut down, 
and technical measures must be taken for eliminating them and 
for making the corresponding amendments in the reactor plant 
detail design in an established fashion. 
  2.4.11. The reactor plant and its systems must be controlled 
from the generating-unit control panel, and if necessary, from 
local control stations. 
  2.4.12. In addition to the generating-unit control panel, 
each generating unit must be equipped with a back-up control 
panel from which the reactor core can be switched to the 
subcritical state and from which emergency generating unit 
cooldown can be executed; it can also be used for monitoring the 
process parameters necessary for the reactor plant safety if 
this cannot be done from the generating-unit control panel for 
whatever reason (fire, etc.). 
  2.4.13. The requirements for the equipment makeup and 
devices 
of the generating-unit control panel, back-up control panel, and 
local control stations must be stipulated in the reactor plant 
detail design. 
  Signals indicating the status of systems and individual 
reactor plant system elements which, as a minimum, should 
include the following, must be displayed on the back-up control 
panel: 
  the level of neutron flux density in the core; 
  the parameters of the coolant and systems participating in 
the emergency cooldown; 
  indicators of the intermediate and end positions of the 
reactivity control system end effectors; 
  indicators of the reactivity control facility status (the 
state of valves, pumps, and elements which uniquely determine 
the readiness of the reactivity control facilities to execute 
their functions in the event of their operation as well as the 
absorber status parameters, such as the temperature, pressure, 
concentration, etc.); and 
  indicators of the valve position and status of the cool-down 
support systems. 
  2.4.14. The possibility of failure of the generating-unit 
control panel and back-up control panel monitoring and control 
systems due to a common reason should be ruled out when the 
initial events are taken into account, and the possibility of 
execution of simultaneous control from the generating-unit 
control panel and back-up control panel for each specific 
element should also be ruled out by the hardware. 
  2.4.15. Hardware for monitoring the concentration of neutron 
absorber isotopes in the liquid or gaseous absorber (should they 
be used) mustbe provided in the reactor plant and emergency 
absorber storage tanks during the reactor plant operation. 
  2.4.16. Incoming inspection of the concentration of neutron 
absorber isotopes used in the reactivity control facilities to 
ensure that they correspond to the design characteristics must 
be ensured by hardware or organizational measures. 
  2.4.17. Each emergency liquid absorber solution storage tank 
must be equipped with at least two level monitoring systems 
and/or pressure monitoring systems which generate a warning 
signal to the generating-unit control panel and back-up control 
panel. 
  2.4.18. The reactor plant monitoring and control system must 
be equipped with an operator information support system. 
  2.4.19. Given normal operation, departures from normal 
operation, and design emergencies (including the total 
de-energizing condition), the control and monitoring system must 
be supplied with reliable power supply on a scale stipulated by 
the reactor plant detail design. 
  2.4.20. The reactor plant monitoring and control systems 
should contain commercial television facilities and 
communication gear for linking with the generating-unit control 
panel and back-up control panel and local control stations 
(telephone, public address, radio communication, etc.). 
  2.4.21. The reactor plant monitoring and control systems 
must 
be equipped with the facilities for transmitting signals to or 
from the off-design emergency control center(s). 
  2.4.22. Organizational and/or technical measures must be 
taken for eliminating unauthorized access to the reactor plant 
monitoring and control systems. 
  2.5. Requirements for the Primary Circuit of the Reactor 
Plant 
  2.5.1. The primary circuit boundaries must be defined in the 
reactor plant detail design. 
  2.5.2. The reactor plant detail design must demonstrate that 
the primary circuit elements and systems operate reliably during 
the design service life allowing for the corrosion, chemical, 
thermal, power, and other exposures likely under normal 
operation, departures from normal operation, and design 
emergencies. The number and character of the factors taken into 
account in determining the design service life must be 
summarized in the reactor plant detail design. 
  2.5.3. The reactor plant detail design must demonstrate that 
the strength of the reactor vessel under normal operation, 
departures from normal operation, and design emergencies are 
ensured in accordance with the strength standards during the 
entire reactor plant operation period. 
  2.5.4. The equipment layout and primary circuit 
configuration 
of the reactor plant must ensure the conditions for developing 
natural coolant circulation in the primary circuit with a loss 
or absence of forced circulation, including design emergencies. 
  2.5.5. The primary circuit pipelines of the reactor plant 
must be equipped with special devices for preventing 
unacceptable movements under the effect of reactive forces 
developing as a result of ruptures. 
  The reactor plant detail design must substantiate the 
strength and effectiveness of these devices under design 
emergencies. 
  2.5.6. The heat exchange equipment serving for transporting 
heat from the primary reactor plant circuit must have a heat 
exchange surface margin for compensating for the deterioration 
of its heat conducting characteristics during operation. 
  2.5.7. Should forced circulation pumps be used for 
facilitating this circulation, these pumps must have sufficient 
inertia in the case where they lose electric power supply and 
the emergency reactor protection system operates at any reactor 
power level so as to ensure forced coolant flow rate in the 
primary circuit until the moment when natural circulation 
ensures the removal of residual heat release without exceeding 
the operational fuel element damage limits. 
  2.5.8. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate the 
following facilities: 
  automatic protection from unacceptable increases in pressure 
in the primary circuit under normal operation, departures from 
normal operation, and design emergencies; 
  facilities for compensating for the changes in the coolant 
volume due to temperature variations; 
  and facilities for compensating for the coolant losses in 
the 
case of leakage (the maximum leak rate which compensates for 
these facilities is established by the reactor plant detail 
design). 
  2.5.9. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate 
installation of leakage arresters in the pipelines branching off 
from the main circulation pipeline. Failure to install the leak 
arresters must be justified in the reactor plant detail design. 
  2.5.10. The primary reactor plant circuit elements must be 
equipped with devices which lower the effect of seismic shocks. 
  2.5.11. The quality and chemical composition indicators of 
the coolant as well as the requirements for the means of 
maintaining them during operation, including coolant 
purification to remove radioactive fission and corrosion 
products, must be included in the reactor plant detail design. 
  2.5.12. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate the 
engineering measures aimed at preventing the primary circuit 
from a coolant drainage unforeseen by the reactor plant 
operation regulations. The admissibility of deliberate partial 
draining during repair works and recharging must be justified in 
the reactor plant detail design. 
  2.5.13. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate for 
the resources and methods of detecting with the justified 
precision the location and rate of the primary circuit coolant 
leakage. 
  2.5.14. The liquid absorber concentration stipulated by the 
reactor plant detail design must be ensured in the reactor and 
primary circuit. 
  2.5.15. Engineering measures must be taken to eliminate 
unforeseen ingress of clean condensate and liquid absorber 
solution with a concentration below that permitted by the 
operating regulations into the primary circuit coolant and other 
systems which, according to the reactor plant detail design, 
must be filled with the liquid absorber solution. 
  2.6. Requirements for the Emergency Core Cool-Down Systems 
  2.6.1. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate 
emergency core cool-down systems. 
  The composition, structure, and characteristics of the core 
emergency cool-down systems must be justified in the reactor 
plant detail design. 
  2.6.2. The emergency core cool-down systems must be designed 
allowing for the principles of independence and redundancy and 
must be capable of executing their function of preventing 
departures from design fuel element damage limits under design 
emergencies allowing for the principles of one-time failure or 
human error. 
  2.6.3. The list of parameters, settings, and emergency core 
cool-down system operation conditions must be determined by the 
initial events of design emergencies and must be justified in 
the reactor plant detail design. 
  2.6.4. The admissibility and conditions for shutting down 
one 
emergency core cool-down system channel must be justified in the 
reactor plant detail design. 
  2.6.5. The reactor plant detail design must take into 
account 
all likely effects on the reactor plant systems or elements 
related to the activation and operation of the emergency core 
cool-down systems. 
  2.6.6. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate 
engineering measures aimed at preventing unauthorized access to 
the emergency core cool-down systems. 
  The reactor plant detail design must contain a quantitative 
analysis of the emergency core cool-down system reliability. 
  2.6.7. Should the reactor core be in the subcritical state, 
the activation and operation of the emergency core cool-down 
system should not lead to altering its subcritical state. 
  2.6.8. The emergency cool-down systems must ensure the 
cooldown and be able to maintain the reactor core at the coolant 
parameter values justified in the reactor plant detail design 
for an extended period. 
  2.7. Requirements for the Recharging Procedures and Devices 
  2.7.1. Requirements for the Recharging Procedure Sequence 
  2.7.1.1. The following must be justified in the reactor 
plant 
detail design: 
  the methods of carrying out recharging; 
  the recharging frequency, scope, and regulations; 
  the hardware and organizational measures to ensure nuclear 
safety during recharging, including neutron flux density 
monitoring; and 
  the working liquid absorber solution concentration (in the 
case where it is used), sampling locations, and the facilities 
of monitoring it and maintenance methods. 
  2.7.1.2. Likely charging or recharging errors and their 
consequences must be considered as the initial events in the 
reactor plant safety feasibility analysis, and measures aimed at 
eliminating errors must be developed. 
  2.7.1.3. The sequence of carrying out the reactor core 
recharging is determined by the program, working schedule, and 
recharging charts compiled by the nuclear station personnel 
approved by the chief engineer of the nuclear station and 
coordinated in an established procedure. 
  2.7.1.4. During recharging and repair operations, 
organizational measures and, if possible, technical facilities 
must be employed to prevent accidental ingress of extraneous 
objects into the inner space of the primary circuit. 
  2.7.1.5. In the reactors where recharging is carried out 
with 
decoupling of the reactivity control system end effectors, 
recharging must be carried out with the reactivity control 
system end effectors and other reactivity control facilities 
inserted into the core. In so doing, the minimum reactor 
subcriticality during the recharging process should be at least 
0.02 allowing for possible errors. 
  2.7.1.6. In reactors where recharging is carried out with 
decoupling of the reactivity control system end effectors and 
where reactivity is compensated for by a liquid absorber 
solution, recharging must be carried out with the reactivity 
control system end effectors and other reactivity control 
facilities inserted into the reactor core. The liquid absorber 
solution concentration must be brought to a value at which a 
reactor subcriticality of at least 0.02 is ensured allowing for 
possible errors but without taking into account the inserted 
reactivity control system end effectors. 
  2.7.1.7. In the reactors in which the necessary 
subcriticality during recharging is ensured by the liquid 
absorber solution, engineering and organizational measures must 
be stipulated to ensure that delivery of clean condensate to the 
reactor and primary circuit are ruled out during recharging. 
  2.7.1.8. In pressure vessel reactors with a top reactivity 
control system actuator positioning, the reactor and reactivity 
control system end effector design must ensure that the 
reactivity control system end effectors are in the uncoupled 
state when the top module is removed; in this case, the 
diagnostic facilities must record the decoupled state. 
  2.7.1.9. Fuel recharging in a shut-down pressure-tube 
reactor 
must be carried out with the emergency reactor protection system 
end effectors cocked. In so doing, the minimum reactor 
subcriticality during the recharging process must amount to at 
least 0.02 allowing for possible errors. 
  2.7.1.10. For the reactor plants in which fuel recharging is 
carried out during the reactor power operation, the reactor 
plant detail design must justify and define the permissible 
operating reactor plant conditions (e.g., power, coolant rate, 
etc.) during the recharging process as well as justify the 
efficacy of the facilities used for suppressing excess 
reactivity whose introduction is possible due to recharging 
errors or reactivity effects. 
  2.7.1.11. If recharging is carried out during the reactor 
power operation, the primary reactor plant circuit 
pressure-tightness must not be violated, and facilities must be 
stipulated for checking the absence of coolant leaks from the 
primary reactor plant circuit. 
  2.7.1.12. After the end of recharging, tests must be carried 
out to confirm the principal design and theoretical neutron 
characteristics of the reactor core. 
  During the tests, it is necessary to check whether the 
experimental test findings are consistent with the theoretical 
parameters according to the criteria established by the reactor 
plant detail design. 
  2.7.2. Requirements for Recharging Devices 
  2.7.2.1. The reactor plant detail design must justify and 
enumerate the makeup of the recharging devices as well as the 
requirements imposed on them; compliance with these requirements 
must ensure fuel assembly handling safety during recharging, 
including the cases of failures and damage to the fuel 
recharging devices. 
  2.7.2.2. The reactor plant detail design must stipulate the 
engineering facilities for ensuring heat removal from the fuel 
assemblies being recharged. 
  2.7.2.3. The recharging devices must be designed so that 
normal reactor plant and nuclear fuel storage operation 
conditions are not violated in the cases of their normal 
performance or damage. 
  2.7.2.4. The reactor plant detail design must contain the 
requirements imposed on the erection, operation, and periodic 
inspection of the recharging devices as well as the requirements 
for their reliability. 
  2.7.2.5. The recharging devices must be designed 
(constructed) in such a way so as to ensure access during 
inspections, repairs, tests, and maintenance and servicing. 
  2.7.2.6. In designing the recharging devices, measures must 
be stipulated aimed at preventing the fuel assemblies from 
damage, deformation, breakdown, or falls as well as application 
of impermissible forces to the fuel elements during their 
extraction or installation. The values of the maximum 
permissible force must be summarized in the reactor plant detail 
design. The use of recharging facilities not stipulated by the 
design is prohibited. 
  2.7.2.7. In designing the recharging devices, it is 
necessary 
to stipulate that interruptions of power supply do not result in 
fuel assembly falls. 
  2.7.2.8. The reactor plant detail design must justify and 
establish the permissible velocities at which the fuel 
assemblies are moved by the recharging devices. 
  2.7.2.9. The design must stipulate protective devices which 
ensure the movement of recharging devices within permissible 
limits. 
  2.7.2.10. In the cases of recharging device failure or 
departures from their operating conditions, the reactor plant 
detail design must stipulate equipment for reliably transferring 
fuel to safe locations. 
  2.7.2.11. The recharging devices must be equipped with 
panels 
or boards for displaying data on the fuel assembly and grip 
position or condition and orientation. 
  2.7.2.12. The movement of recharging devices at the moment 
of 
their coupling with the process channel or during the fuel 
assembly insertion into the reactor core must be eliminated. 
  2.7.2.13. Interlocking must be provided for preventing the 
movement of the recharging devices when the fuel assemblies are 
in an off-design position. 
  2.7.2.14. The plant must be equipped with a closed circuit 
TV 
system for monitoring the recharging process. The reactor plant 
detail design must stipulate a list of recharging operations 
monitored using closed circuit TV. 
  2.7.2.15. The draft design of the fuel recharging devices 
must be coordinated with the USSR State Committee for Safety in 
Industry and Atomic Power Industry unless it has been 
coordinated as a part of the reactor plant detail design. 
  3. Requirements for Ensuring Nuclear Safety During Reactor 
Plant Operation 
  3.1. The principal document which defines safe reactor plant 
operation is the reactor plant detail design which contains the 
rules and basic safe operation principles as well as the general 
procedure of carrying out the operations related to the reactor 
plant safety and the limits and conditions of safe operation. 
  The reactor plant process operation regulations, the reactor 
plant equipment servicing and maintenance regulations, and the 
regulations for checking and testing reactor plant systems 
crucial for safety are developed by the chief designer of the 
reactor plant on the basis of the reactor plant detail design. 
  3.2. Reactor plant operation must be based on the reactor 
plant operating manual and reactor plant system and equipment 
operation instructions developed by the nuclear station 
personnel on the basis of the design and development 
documentation and reactor plant operation process regulations 
corrected on the basis of the outcome of physical and power 
startups and operating experience. 
  The reactor plant operating manual must be coordinated with 
the chief designer of the reactor plant, scientific supervisor, 
and chief developer of the nuclear station and must be approved 
by the chief engineer of the nuclear station. 
  3.3. Amendments made in the design documentation and reactor 
plant equipment configuration which affect nuclear safety, 
including those based on the outcome of physical and power 
startups, must be substantiated by the chief designer of the 
reactor plant, scientific supervisor, and chief developer of the 
nuclear station and coordinated with the USSR State Committee 
for Safety in Industry and Atomic Power Industry and approved by 
the operating organization prior to implementation at the 
reactor plant. 
  Nuclear station operation is permitted after the issuance of 
a reactor plant certificate by the USSR State Committee for 
Safety in Industry and Atomic Power Industry and an operating 
permit obtained from the USSR State Committee for Safety in 
Industry and Atomic Power Industry. Changes in the parameters 
stipulated in the reactor plant certificate call for issuing a 
new certificate. These amendments must be coordinated beforehand 
with the scientific supervisor and chief designer of the reactor 
plant. The certificate format and the scope of the information 
contained in it are established by the USSR State Committee for 
Safety in Industry and Atomic Power Industry. 
  3.4. Based on the design documents and allowing for the 
requirements on the reactor plant operation process regulations 
and reactor plant maintenance and repair regulations, the 
nuclear station management must set up the development and 
production of the following documents for the systems crucial 
for safety: 
  inspection and test manuals; 
  servicing and maintenance, preventive maintenance, and 
overhaul schedules for the systems and elements; and 
  schedules for carrying out tests and inspections of the 
safety system performance. 
  3.5. The state of the reactor plant systems and the 
conditions under which startup and operation of the reactor 
plant are permitted should be justified by the reactor plant 
detail design and enumerated in the process regulations for the 
reactor plant operation. 
  3.6. Any reactor plant tests not stipulated by the reactor 
plant operation process regulations and reactor plant system and 
equipment operation manuals must be carried out according to the 
programs and procedures which contain nuclear safety feasibility 
and measures to ensure nuclear safety of these tests coordinated 
with the scientific supervisor, chief designer of the reactor 
plant, chief developer of the nuclear station, and the USSR 
State Committee for Safety in Industry and Atomic Power Industry 
and approved by the operating organization upon obtaining 
permission from the USSR State Committee for Safety in Industry 
and Atomic Power Industry and the operating organization. 
  3.7. Should operating limits be violated by operating 
personnel, a certain sequence of actions established by the 
reactor plant detail design and aimed at returning the reactor 
plant to normal operation must be carried out. 
  Should it be impossible to restore normal reactor plant 
operation, the reactor plant must be shut down. 
  3.8. Should an emergency situation develop at the reactor 
plant, the causes for its development must be identified and 
eliminated, and measures must be taken for restoring normal 
reactor plant operation. Reactor plant operation may be 
continued only after establishing and eliminating the causes for 
the emergency situation development upon written permission of 
the chief engineer of the nuclear station. 
  3.9. The operating organization must develop a list and 
sequence of reports about normal operation violations, emergency 
situations, and accidents indicating the forms, deadlines, and 
organizations to which these reports are forwarded. The list 
must be coordinated with the USSR State Committee for Safety in 
Industry and Atomic Power Industry. 
  3.10. The nuclear station shift supervisor must report to 
the 
senior management of the nuclear station about each case of 
normal operation violation. 
  3.11. The reactor plant operator has the authority and 
obligation to shut down the reactor independently in the cases 
stipulated by the process regulations if subsequent operation 
threatens the safety of the nuclear station. 
  3.12. In the case of design emergencies (including a nuclear 
accident), personnel actions must be governed by the Instruction 
for Remediating Accidents at Nuclear Stations developed by the 
nuclear station management on the basis of the reactor 
plant safety feasibility analysis and nuclear station safety 
feasibility analysis. The instruction must consider design 
emergencies and develop measures for remediating the accident 
aftermath. The instruction must be coordinated with the 
scientific supervisor, chief designer of the reactor plant, and 
chief developer of the nuclear station. 
  3.13. A special manual must be developed in accordance with 
design documentation for controlling off-design emergencies; it 
should be coordinated with the scientific supervisor, chief 
designer of the reactor plant, and chief developer of the 
nuclear station. 
  3.14. Accident-prevention training sessions must be 
conducted 
with nuclear station personnel. Their frequency and procedure 
are approved by senior management of the nuclear station. 
  3.15. The nuclear station accident remediation manual should 
indicate the sequence for activating the plans of measures to 
protect the personnel and population should an off-design 
emergency develop. 
  3.16. Between the start of the emergency and the start of 
the 
investigation carried out by the commission to identify the 
causes of accidents, it is strictly prohibited to open the 
instrumentation and devices and to change the emergency and 
preventive signaling and protection system settings. 
  Organizational and technical measures must be stipulated to 
eliminate the possibility of losing recorded data and 
unauthorized access to the devices and elements, data bank, and 
archives of control and monitoring systems which recorded the 
reactor plant situation before the onset of the accident and 
during the ensuing period. 
  3.17. The operating conditions of the shut-down reactor with 
fuel in its core, including the charging and discharging 
conditions, must be substantiated in the reactor plant detail 
design and listed in the reactor plant operation process 
regulations. As a minimum, the following must be determined for 
these conditions: 
  the scope of monitoring pursuant to the requirements of 
Paragraphs 2.3.3.1, 2.3.3.3, and 2.3.3.6 of the rules hereunder 
with mandatory monitoring of the neutron flux density and liquid 
absorber solution concentration if such is used in this type of 
reactor plant; and 
  requirements for the readiness of the reactor plant systems 
crucial for safety. 
  3.18. During the charging and recharging as well as during 
tests and repair operations conducted on the primary reactor 
plant circuit, the reactor, primary reactor plant circuit, and 
related systems must be filled with a liquid absorber solution 
at a concentration not dropping below that stipulated by the 
reactor plant detail design. 
<H3>  Notes: This requirement pertains to the reactors in which 
charging and recharging is carried out with the reactor and 
reactor plant systems filled with a homogeneous liquid absorber 
solutions. </H3>
  3.19. Based on the design documents and operating 
experience, 
senior nuclear station management must develop a list of 
nuclear-hazardous operations. 
  3.20. Operations with systems or elements crucial for safety 
which involve decommissioning, repairs, and recommissioning as 
well as testing not stipulated by the process regulations of the 
generating unit or reactor plant operation and reactor plant and 
system and equipment operation manuals are nuclear-hazardous. 
  3.21. Nuclear-hazardous operations must be handled upon a 
special engineering decision or program approved by senior 
nuclear station management. 
  The engineering decision or program must contain the 
following: 
  the objective of carrying out nuclear-hazardous operations; 
  a list of nuclear-hazardous operations; 
  engineering and organizational measures to ensure nuclear 
safety; 
  the criteria and monitoring procedures for establishing 
whether nuclear-hazardous operations have been completed 
correctly; and 
  an indication about designation of a person responsible for 
the conduct of nuclear-hazardous operations. 
  Nuclear-hazardous operations must be carried out, as a rule, 
on a shut-down reactor. 
  3.22. In the course of nuclear-hazardous operations, the 
subcriticality of the shut-down reactor must be at least 0.02 
for the reactor core state with a maximum effective 
multiplication factor; for pressure-tube reactors, the emergency 
reactor protection system end effectors must be cocked while the 
remaining reactivity control system end effectors must inserted 
into the core. 
  3.23. After completing repairs of the reactor plant 
equipment 
and systems crucial for safety, the characteristics of these 
systems must be checked to see whether they correspond to design 
parameters. The inspection must be carried out according to the 
program developed by senior nuclear station management and 
compiled on the basis of the regulations developed by the chief 
developer of the nuclear station and chief designer of the 
reactor plant and coordinated with the scientific supervisor. 
  3.24. During any tests of systems crucial for safety, it is 
necessary to check whether the test outcomes correspond to the 
criteria established by the reactor plant detail design. The 
test outcome must be recorded in an official document. 
  4. State Oversight and Monitoring of Adherence to the Rules 
and the Responsibility for Violating Them 
  4.1. State oversight of nuclear safety is carried out by the 
USSR State Committee for Safety in Industry and Atomic Power 
Industry (USSR Gospromatomnadzor) in accordance with the 
statutes governing it based on the rules and safety standards 
for nuclear power. 
  4.2. The operating organization is obligated to carry out 
constant monitoring of the adherence to the requirements 
hereunder during the commissioning, operation, and 
decommissioning of the reactor plant. 
  4.3. The operating organization is responsible for 
developing 
the necessary management structure at the nuclear station which 
would ensure adherence to the requirements hereunder at the 
nuclear station. 
  4.4. The operating organization must organize periodic (once 
every one-to-two years) inspections to monitor adherence to the 
requirements hereunder at the nuclear station and submit the 
findings of these inspections to the USSR State Committee for 
Safety in Industry and Atomic Power Industry. 
  4.5. An internal commission must be appointed periodically 
(at least once a year) by a decree of nuclear station senior 
management for checking the state of nuclear safety at the 
nuclear station, including adherence to the requirements 
hereunder. The commissioner report should be approved by senior 
nuclear station management. One copy of the report shall be 
submitted to the USSR State Committee for Safety in Industry and 
Atomic Power Industry. 
  4.6. The organizations, enterprises, and departments, which 
are involved in designing the nuclear station or reactor plant, 
developing the equipment, manufacturing it, and constructing and 
operating the nuclear station or the reactor plant must submit 
information to the bodies of the USSR State Committee for Safety 
in Industry and Atomic Power Industry upon their request; this 
information shall be in the form of design documents, research 
and analysis findings, operating and repair manuals, reports 
about completed tests and system or element inspections, data on 
the element manufacturing quality control, personnel training 
reports, data on the system or element operation, element 
failures and the results of their analysis, etc. 
  4.7. The officials and engineering and technical personnel 
at 
the enterprises and organizations guilty of violating the rules 
hereunder are held responsible pursuant to existing legislation. 
  4.8. Management at design and development, science and 
research, construction and erection, adjustment, and repair 
enterprises and organizations as well as representatives of the 
equipment manufacturers are obligated to monitor adherence to 
the requirements hereunder during the design and development 
stage, in the course of construction and erection, adjustment, 
and repair operations, and in manufacturing the reactor plant 
equipment. 
  4.9. Senior nuclear station management is responsible for 
ensuring nuclear safety, organizing and carrying out efforts to 
ensure safe operating conditions of the reactor plant and 
nuclear station, and personnel training. 
  Senior nuclear station management must determine the 
responsibility of the specific officials and nuclear station 
personnel for adherence to the nuclear safety requirements at 
the shop, shift, and other nuclear station subdivision levels 
and at specific work stations in accordance with the authority 
vested in it by the operating organization. 
  4.10. Nuclear accidents must be investigated in accordance 
with the special document developed by the operating 
organization and coordinated with the USSR State Committee for 
Safety in Industry and Atomic Power Industry. 
  Appendix: Additional Safety Requirements for Nuclear 
Stations 
with Most Common Reactor Plant Types in the USSR[.sup]1[/] 
  1. Nuclear Stations With Water-Moderated, Water-Cooled Power 
Reactors 
  1.1. The operating fuel element damage limit due to the 
development of microcracks with gas leakage-type cladding 
defects should not exceed 0.2% of fuel elements and 
0.02% of 
fuel elements with direct nuclear fuel contact with the coolant. 
  1.2. The safe operation limit with respect to the number and 
magnitude of fuel element defects is 1% of fuel elements 
with 
gas leakage-type defects and 0.1% of fuel elements where 
there 
is direct coolant contact with nuclear fuel. 
  1.3. The maximum design fuel element damage limit means that 
the following parameter limits should not be exceeded: 
  a fuel element cladding temperature of 1,200C; 
  a local fuel element cladding oxidation depth of 18% 
of the 
initial wall thickness; 
  and a reacted zirconium proportion of 1% of its mass 
in the 
fuel element cladding. 
  1.4. The values of reactivity coefficients for the specific 
coolant volume, coolant temperature, fuel temperature, and 
reactor power should not be positive within the entire reactor 
parameter range under normal operation, departures from normal 
operation, and design emergencies. 
  2. Nuclear Stations With Uranium-Graphite Heterogeneous 
Single-Loop Boiling-Water Reactors (RBMK) 
  2.1. The operating fuel element damage limit due to the 
development of microcracks should not exceed 0.2% of fuel 
elements with gas leakage-type defects in the cladding and 
0.02% for fuel elements with direct nuclear fuel contact 
with 
the coolant. 
  2.2. The safe operation limit with respect to the number and 
magnitude of fuel element defects is equal to 1% of fuel 
elements with gas leakage-type defects and 0.1% of fuel 
elements in which there is direct coolant contact with nuclear 
fuel. 
  2.3. The maximum design fuel element damage limit means that 
the following parameter limits must not be exceeded: 
  a fuel element cladding temperature of 1,200C; 
  a local fuel element cladding oxidation depth of 18% 
of the 
initial wall thickness; and 
  a reacted zirconium proportion of 1% of its mass in 
the fuel 
element cladding. 
  2.4. The values of the reactivity coefficients with respect 
to the specific coolant volume, fuel temperature, coolant 
temperature, its steam content, and power should not be positive 
within the entire reactor parameter range under normal 
operation, departures from normal operation, and design 
emergencies. 
  3. Nuclear Stations With Fast Neutron Reactors 
  3.1. The operating fuel element damage limit due to the 
development of microcracks with respect to the number and 
magnitude of defects is equal to 0.05% of fuel elements 
with a 
gas leakage and 0.005% of fuel elements with direct fuel 
contact with the coolant. 
  3.2. The safe operation limit with respect to the number and 
magnitude of fuel element defects is equal to 0.1% of fuel 
elements with a gas leakage and 0.01% of fuel elements 
with a 
direct fuel contact with the coolant. The fuel element cladding 
temperature should not exceed 800C. 
  3.3. The maximum design fuel element damage limit is defined 
as failure of all fuel elements in seven fuel assemblies within 
a localized core volume while exceeding the safe operation 
limits for fuel element damage within the remaining core volume. 
  3.4. The reactivity coefficients with respect to the coolant 
temperature and specific volume, fuel temperature, and reactor 
power must be negative within the entire reactor parameter range 
under normal operation, departures from normal operation, and 
design emergencies. 
  4. Nuclear Stations With Nuclear Heat Supply Plant-Type 
Reactor Plant 
  4.1. The operating fuel element damage limit and the 
permissible primary circuit coolant activity level shall be 
justified and established by the reactor plant detail design. 
  4.2. The safe operation limit with respect to the number and 
magnitude of fuel element defects is equal to 0.1% of fuel 
elements with gas leakage defects and 0.01% of fuel 
elements 
with direct coolant contact with nuclear fuel. 
  4.3. The maximum design fuel element damage limit denotes 
that the following parameter limits must not be exceeded: 
  a fuel element cladding temperature of 1,200C; 
  a local fuel element cladding oxidation depth of 18% 
of the 
initial wall thickness; 
  and a reacted zirconium proportion of 1% of its mass 
in the 
fuel element cladding. 
  4.4. The values of the reactivity coefficients with respect 
to the coolant volume, fuel temperature, coolant temperature, 
and reactor power should not be positive within the entire 
reactor parameter range under normal operation, departures from 
normal operation, and design emergencies. 
  4.5. The nuclear station structures and systems with nuclear 
heat supply plant-type reactors[.sup]1[/] must be positioned 
and designed allowing for the external factors caused by falling 
aircraft and explosions likely to occur at adjacent enterprises, 
passing vehicles, etc. Moreover, safety criteria should not be 
exceeded. 
  The following design parameters of a falling aircraft are 
used: 
  a mass of 20 t, an impact velocity of 700 km/h, and a load 
applied to a circle with a 7 m[.sup]2[/] area. Fuel ignition 
after the crash must be taken into account. 
  The shock wave design parameters are up to 0.5 
kg/cm[.sup]2[/] with a duration of action of up to 1 s. 
  At least one protection system channel and one barrier or 
channel of the accident containment system must not be destroyed 
and must maintain serviceability under the effect of the design 
shock wave or falling aircraft. 
Footnotes 
  1. For water-cooled, water-moderated power reactors, 
uranium-graphite heterogeneous single-loop boiling-water 
reactors, and nuclear heat supply plants, the above fuel element 
damage limits are cited for fuel element cladding materials made 
from the zirconium + 1% niobium alloy. For other types of 
reactors and fuel elements from other materials, the fuel 
element damage limits must be justified in the reactor plant 
detail design. 


