Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev -- As Yuriy Serheyev, head of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs' Information Directorate said at a news 
conference on 11 January citing U.S. Senator Albert Gore [name 
and title as received], a definitive text of the trilateral 
negotiations document has not been drawn up in Washington. 
During Bill Clinton's meeting in Kiev, the main subject of the 
consultations will be a discussion on a wide range of issues 
concerning bilateral relations. "Taking into account that Bill 
Clinton's visit to Kiev will be short, the signing of a document 
is not envisaged either," said Serheyev. 
  During their stay in Washington, members of the Ukrainian 
delegation headed by Deputy Prime Minister Valeriy Shmarov met, 
in the White House, U.S. President Bill Clinton; Anthony Lake, 
adviser to the president on issues of national security; and R. 
Nicholas Burn, special assistant to the president and senior 
director, Russian, Ukrainian and Eurasian affairs. The issue of 
expanding both countries' economic relations, problems of a 
military and political nature, and the issue of international 
security were discussed during the meeting. 
  At the U.S. State Department, the Ukrainian delegation held 
negotiations with State Secretary Warren Christopher, First 
Under Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, and Under Secretary of 
State Lynn Davis concerning issues of developing economic 
cooperation between both countries. The U.S. side expressed 
readiness to help economic reforms in Ukraine, in particular to 
grant aid for the implementation of the government's market 
reform program. 
  Considerable attention was devoted to discussing the program 
of negotiations by a Ukrainian Government economic delegation 
that will visit Washington at the end of January. The Ukrainian 
delegation also held consultations at the U.S. Department of 
Defense where its members met William J. Perry, first deputy 
defense secretary and John Shalikashvili, chairman Joint Chiefs 
of Staff. During the meeting the sides discussed cooperation 
between both countries in the military sphere, in particular in 
the sphere of disarmament and conversion of Ukraine's defense 
complex. The signing of a bilateral statement on the principles 
relating to the creation of a U.S.- Ukrainian committee on 
conversion of the defense industry took place in the Pentagon. 

