BFN 

  [Text] Guangzhou, June 22 (XINHUA) -- Jiang Zemin, general 
secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC), said that 
Special Economic Zones [SEZ's] and the relatively developed 
coastal regions should contribute to the development of a 
unified socialist market economy in China. 
  In a recent tour of south China's Guangdong Province, Jiang 
visited Guangzhou, Foshan, Zhongshan, Zhuhai, Shenzhen and 
Meizhou cities, accompanied by Guangdong Provincial Party 
Secretary Xie Fei and Governor Zhu Senlin. 
  Jiang said the establishment of Special Economic Zones 
reflected an important decision made by the CPC Central 
Committee and the State Council, advocated by comrade Deng 
Xiaoping. 
  He said that in the past 15 years, the development of 
Special 
Economic Zones, including Shenzhen and Zhuhai, had accumulated 
valuable experience and contributed to China's reform and 
opening to the outside world. 
  He noted that practice had shown that the establishment of 
the Special Economic Zones was correct. 
  He called for a close cooperation between the Special 
Economic Zones and other regions of the country, the areas on 
the Pearl River delta, the Chang Jiang River delta and the area 
along the Bohai Bay, the coastal and interior regions, and 
central and western parts of the country. 
  He said that all regions should develop their strengths and 
complement each other so as to achieve a coordinated development. 
  He pointed out that central government's determination and 
policies for the development of the Special Economic Zone will 
remain unchanged; the position and role of the Special Economic 
Zones in China's reform, opening-up and modernization drive 
would remain unchanged. 
  He rejected the view that the role of the Special Economic 
Zones would be weakened by China's opening to the world in an 
all-around way. 
  Jiang said that the Special Economic Zones should accumulate 
more experience for China's establishment of a socialist market 
economy, involving accelerated transformation of the management 
system of state enterprises, setting up a modern enterprise 
system, cultivating the market system, formulating a fair income 
system and improving the social security system, and taking part 
in international economic cooperation and joining in the world 
market. 
  The Special Economic Zones should maintain fast and stable 
economic growth through deepening of reform and expanding 
opening to outside world, he added. 
  Jiang called on the zones to make efforts to develop new and 
high-tech industry, enhance management and further improve the 
investment environment. 
  He said that Shenzhen and Zhuhai are expected to make more 
contributions to the resumption of China's sovereignty over Hong 
Kong and Macao and the maintenance of Hong Kong and Macao's 
prosperity. 
  Jiang also gave directions on the ethical and cultural 
development in the Special Economic Zones. 
  During Jiang's inspection of Guangdong, some areas were hit 
by floods. He expressed great sympathy and solicitude time and 
again for the people in the flood-stricken areas. 
  During his stay in Zhuhai city, a workshop of a textile 
plant 
collapsed. Jiang went to hospital to visit the injured workers. 

