BFN 

<F P=106> [Michael Bond article: "Poisonous Trail of the Toxic </F>
Cowboys"] 
  [Text] One day at the end of last summer a small container 
ship edged quietly out of Tilbury docks in Britain and headed 
across the Atlantic for South America. Its decks were laden 
with dozens of metal barrels filled with 300 tonnes of what the 
labels innocently referred to as agricultural nutrients for soil 
treatment. 
  But when Customs officers inspected the ship as it docked in 
Brazil they discovered that the barrels were packed full, not of 
harmless fertilisers but of highly toxic chemicals such as lead, 
mercury, cadmium and arsenic. 
  Fearing that this cargo with its cancer-causing ingredients 
would end up, like dozens before it, dumped in a secluded spot 
in the Brazilian countryside, the officers refused to allow it 
ashore. The freighter, its cover blown, was forced to chug back 
to Britain fully laden. 
  Such shipments have always been unwelcome, and often 
clandestine, but no one knew for certain that they were illegal. 
Companies could export toxic waste for "recycling," but there 
was no effective check on whether the destination countries had 
necessary facilities. 
  But in March this year an attempt was made to close the 
loophole. The 127 signatories to the 1989 Basel Convention 
outlawed the dumping of any toxic waste by the industrialised 
nations on their most regular victims -- non-members of the 
Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in 
the developing world like Brazil and Indonesia. But in view of 
the time it takes to build waste-disposal plants, the new rules 
do not take effect until 1997. 
  Police are now concerned that the threat of tighter 
regulations will tempt companies to find cheaper, illegal ways 
of disposing of their waste. Indeed, the loudest applause for 
the new ruling will have come from organised criminal groups, 
some of which are already being paid vast sums of money by 
European and U.S. companies to dispose of their waste overseas. 
The ban opens up whole new areas of profitable operations for 
the smugglers of poison. 
  The accepted safe methods of disposal -- incineration or 
burying in specially sealed containers -- are complex and, at 
$400 a tonne, expensive. Denied the opportunity to dispose 
legally and easily of their material, companies will be more 
prone to enlist the aid of gangs to do the job. 
  Jim Puckett of Greenpeace in Amsterdam, said: "The ban will 
succeed in closing most of the legal loopholes, but the illegal 
waste trade will become immensely profitable. The cost of 
disposing of waste in Europe by legal methods has sky-rocketed, 
and it will be easy for a firm to pay criminals a few dollars a 
barrel to get around it." 
  It is already profitable enough for organisations like the 
Mafia to have moved in. A company based in northern Italy, with 
confirmed Mafia connections, was paid by several Italian firms 
to get rid of huge quantities of toxic waste. A large part of 
it was dumped in Somalia, the rest in Vietnam and Cambodia. 
According to one investigator on the case: "The company signed 
contracts with waste producers to get rid of the stuff. When it 
was prevented from dumping all of it in Somalia, it had to find 
other places. But international contacts are no problem for 
these people." The firm's boss has since fled abroad. 
  The German Federal Criminal Bureau (BEA) is looking into 
dozens of cases in which criminal gangs are suspected of taking 
waste from industrial firms and dumping it in lakes and quarries 
in East Europe, which will be paying the price for decades to 
come. Children searching smouldering dumps for anything they can 
sell -- a common sight from Romania to the Philippines -- have 
no way of knowing that their health is being destroyed by the 
detritus of an Essen factory. 
  Every year thousands of tonnes of waste containing 
incinerator ash, old car batteries, tyres, solvents, paints, 
out-of-date pesticides and toxic heavy metals are dumped in such 
countries. 
  Germany, the world's largest exporter of toxic waste, sent 
1,370,892 tonnes of toxic waste and other hazardous rubbish to 
non-OECD countries between 1989 and 1993. Some of this was 
legally exported, under the old rules, for "recycling" to 
Indonesia and East Europe, but much was shipped in under false 
labels or simply dumped by unscrupulous German waste operators. 
  Romania, Albania, Poland, and the former Soviet Union are 
the 
most popular dumping grounds. In 1992, 500 tonnes of 
out-of-date pesticides from East Germany were discovered near 
the town of Sibiu in Romania. 
  They had been tipped there illegally over a period of two 
years after being carried across the border labelled as 
"humanitarian aid -- for use in agriculture." 
  In March this year the German Government agreed to pay for 
the removal of 400 tonnes of old pesticides which had been sent 
to Albania by a German company in March 1992 labelled as 
"humanitarian aid." Two years after it had arrived the 
consignment was still sitting on the train in which it had 
arrived -- dubbed the "death train" by Albanian newspapers -- at 
Bajze near the border with Montenegro, and much of it was 
leaking. 
  According to John Arans, a Greenpeace investigator who 
worked 
as a detective in the Netherlands for 22 years, criminal 
networks stretching from Italy to Russia are secretly funding 
illegal waste companies in Europe. "The export of illegal waste 
is related to the drugs and arms trades" he said. "The same 
names keep coming up again and again during investigations into 
these activities." 
  Italian police also claim that the Mafia has infiltrated the 
waste industry, charging companies for taking toxic waste off 
their hands and disposing of it in quarries or even on 
roadsides. Italy produces 15 million tonnes of toxic waste each 
year but has the capacity to treat just 1.5 million tonnes 
safely. 
  Europe's waste disposal industry this week joined 
environmentalists in calling for tighter controls on movements 
of toxic waste. Dieter Vogt, of the European Association of 
Waste Disposers, said: "We have more than enough regulations on 
toxic waste, but not enough is being done to implement them. It 
is up to governments to make them stick." 
  The police are not prepared to wait. Teams of detectives are 
already being assembled to track and stop the smugglers. 
Whether they can stem the toxic tide remains to be seen. 

