BFN 

<F P=106> [By Louis Won] </F>
  [Text] About 1,200 demonstrators took to the streets 
yesterday to call for the immediate release of jailed Hong Kong 
journalist Xi Yang and protest against China tampering with the 
freedom of the press. 
  The protesters gathered at Chater Garden where they sang in 
support of press freedom in Hong Kong and chanted slogans 
backing Xi, whose appeal to the 12-year jail term was rejected 
on Friday. 
  In Beijing, Xi's father, Xi Linsheng expressed distress at 
the court's decision and asked that his son be placed in a jail 
close to the Chinese capital. 
  Speaking at his Beijing home, Mr Xi broke down in tears when 
he was asked about the future of his family. 
  He said he never had wild hopes about the appeal. "But I 
still feel distressed . . . It is a heavy blow (to me)," he 
said. 
  ''I try to calm down and not make my heart problem worse. 
  "I'll give my best efforts to help him (Xi Yang) to regain 
his freedom," Mr Xi said. 
  Yesterday's rally was organised by the "Operation for Saving 
Ming Pao Reporter, Xi Yang", a group representing more than 120 
organisations. 
  The marchers included legislators, journalists, 
pro-democracy 
activists, social workers and students. 
  They walked to the Xinhua (New China News Agency) office at 
Happy Valley, escorted by 185 police. 
  Chinese officials watched from the building as the crowd 
arrived at about 5 pm. 
  The police initially allowed the petitioners to sit only on 
the pavement outside the Queen Elizabeth Stadium and did not 
allow the protesters' truck, fitted with loudspeakers, to stop 
in the east- bound lane of Queen's Road East, opposite the 
Xinhua building. 
  After a short negotiation, the police sealed off two of the 
three east-bound lanes. 
  United Democrat legislator Szeto Wah said if a country did 
not have press freedom and an independent judiciary, everyone 
would be "walking towards a dark hell". 
  He also criticised the Chinese Government for saying no one 
should interfere with another nation's sovereignty and demanded 
the release of Xi. 
  He said sovereignty did not belong to a government which 
turned a deaf ear to the people. 
  Mr Szeto said "today's Xi Yang was tomorrow's Hong Kong 
people". 
  "We have to fight to the end for the release of Xi Yang, for 
freedom of press and for an independent judiciary in China," he 
said. 
  Daisy Li Yuet-wah, chairman of the Hong Kong Journalists' 
Association, said Xi had become a scapegoat for the Chinese 
Government to give a warning to the already-fragile press 
freedom in Hong Kong. 
  Noting that journalists were prepared to face more pressure 
as 1997 approached, Ms Li said: "But we never expected that we 
would need to contend with the Chinese Government for the next 
12 years because of one Hong Kong reporter." 
  Dissident Lau Shan-ching, who was jailed in China for 10 
years for "counter-revolutionary activities", recalled his 
experience of being secretly arrested and tried in China. 
  He said he was questioned every night and the interrogators 
always tried to lead or force him to admit crimes he had never 
committed. 
  Mr Lau said he was given a so-called "open trial" but his 
parents were not allowed to attend. 
  "It was like a theatre where the Government arranges some 
people to come to the court room just to show that it was an 
open trial," he said. 
  Yesterday's rally ended at about 6 pm. 
  A candlelight vigil will be held on Saturday outside the 
Cultural Centre in Tsim Sha Tsui. 
  Meanwhile, pro-China legislator Tam Yiu-chung yesterday 
responded with reservation to a proposal by United Democrat 
Yeung Sum that the Legislative Council should debate the Xi case. 
  Mr Tam said the incident was a matter for China's judiciary 
and there was a limit to what local legislators could do. 
  Mr Tam said: "If we are to have a motion related to the 
press freedom of Hong Kong in the future, fine. But there will 
be not much to debate on the Xi Yang case." 
  A delegate to the National People's Congress, Lee Lin-sang, 
said the Xi Yang case was closed and there was no need for the 
congress Standing Committee to set up a special committee to 
look into the issue. 
  Mr Lee reiterated that the case was an individual one with 
nothing to do with press freedom in Hong Kong. 

