BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 20 Apr (ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE)--The State 
Administration of Import and Import Commodities Inspection and 
the Ministry of Finance jointly released the other day the 
"Procedures for the Assessment and Management of 
Foreign-Invested Assets," which take effect on 1 May. 
  It is understood that there are over 170,000 
foreign-invested 
enterprises in China, with about $60 billion in foreign funds 
actually absorbed. In recent years, the proportion of foreign 
businessmen investing in kind has been rising continuously. 
Taking advantage of the weak points where some Chinese 
enterprises do not know the international market prices and lack 
experience, some foreign businessmen have sought illegitimate 
rights and interests. Their principal methods are as follows: 
1) Quoting higher prices for cheap equipment invested; 2) 
practicing fraud by substituting old and inferior equipment for 
the new and good. Furthermore, there are also the phenomenon of 
foreign businessmen quoting low prices for their assets. These 
problems have to a certain extent affected the sound and smooth 
development of foreign-invested enterprises. Therefore, making a 
fair and accurate assessment of the value of foreign-invested 
assets has become an important measure for protecting the 
legitimate rights and interests of all investment parties. 
  Consisting of five chapters and 28 articles, the assessment 
and management procedures to be implemented have made explicit 
provisions on various issues, such as the purpose of formulating 
the procedures; the scope of their application; the competent 
assessment organs, assessment contents, methods, and procedures; 
and legal responsibility. 
  In light of actual conditions, newness, performance index, 
and technical parameters of foreign-invested assets and their 
profit- making ability, the State Administration of Import and 
Export Commodities Inspection will make assessments according to 
the methods laid down in the procedures, such as on-the-spot 
inspections technical detection, and value assessment, as well 
as other relevant provisions. The value assessment method 
includes the market method, the cost method, and the yield 
method. 
  In line with the assessment and management procedures, the 
State Administration of Import and Export Commodities Inspection 
will assess the value of assets according to the current market 
prices of the same or similar assets. It may redetermine their 
actual value according to actual conditions and length of use of 
the assessed assets, taking into account changes in their 
functions and other factors. Moreover, it will also calculate 
the current value of the assessed assets according to their 
rational estimated profit-making ability and appropriate 
depreciation rate. 

