Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Natan Zablotskis, Scientific Research Institute </F>
of the Russia Federation Ministry of Internal Affairs, and 
Dmitriy Oreshkin, Institute of Geography of the Russian Academy 
of Sciences: "Another Base for Drug Trade?"] 
  [Text] Russia possesses an enormous potential for drug 
production. Areas occupied by wild hemp and opium poppies 
comprise more than 1 million hectares with a yield of up to 1 
tonne of raw material per hectare. Actually, in Russia the 
number of drug users is increasing more rapidly than the 
population and by the year 2000 will reach 5-7 percent of the 
country's population. 
  At the same time, in the next 10-15 years Russia will not 
play a noticeable role in the import and export of drugs on the 
world market. This is associated primarily with the fact that 
the quality and accordingly the price of drugs traditionally 
mass-produced and used in Russia are considerably lower than in 
Europe or America. Therefore, and also in view of Russia's rapid 
development of economic ties with other countries, Russia is 
being allotted the role of a transshipment base in world drug 
trade. This is also helped by the fact that traditional drug 
transit routes from countries of the "Golden Triangle" (Iran, 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan) and the "Golden Crescent" (Southeast 
Asia), such as the so-called Balkan route, are beginning to be 
controlled successfully by law enforcement agencies. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-TDD-003LC-41A>           Map - Drug Routes </FIG>





    As far as the distribution of drugs within Russia is 
concerned, it is primarily emigres from Azerbaijan who play and 
will play the main role here. In virtually all major industrial 
cities, including in Siberia, and in the Far East, there are 
groups well organized according to the community principle that 
are engaged in the distribution of drugs. On the other hand, an 
active transit of drugs is being accomplished from Afghanistan 
through Tajikistan, and it is not likely that this avenue will 
be taken under strict control in the next few years. 
  Drugs will be transported across the border not over exotic, 
secret paths, but through central international airports under 
the guise of respectable goods produced under the roof of joint 
ventures and even state structures. 
  Zones of special activeness of the "shuttles" are the 
extreme 
west (Lithuania, Latvia, Kaliningrad Oblast) and the extreme 
east (Sakhalin, Primorye). In time, the "southern hub" in the 
republics of the former Soviet Central Asia will increasingly 
make its presence felt. 

