Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [TEXT]By the end of 1992, there were 1,200 wind power 
installations in Germany. Rated output: 180 MW. Since 1974, the 
Federal Ministry for Research and Technology [FMRT] has promoted 
the use of wind energy, about 30 million marks are made 
available for this purpose annually. This makes a total of about 
300 million German marks thus far--120 marks for large and 100 
for small and mid-size installations, the remainder for R&amp;D 
projects. Goals: acceptable costs for energy production with 
wind power, a noticeable contribution to the supply of 
electricity, reduction in energy imports, a broadening of the 
foundation of the energy supply, and a search for alternatives 
for the Third World. Through continued development in the 
technology of wind power installation, wind power generated 
current should become competitive by the end of the millennium. 
  Improvement in the technical availability of wind power 
installations is at the heart of the federal promotional program 
offered by the FMRT since 1989--"250 MW Wind". A good half of 
the installations within the scope of this program are operated 
by commercial enterprises, 30&percnt; by private investors, 
almost 
15&percnt; by farmers, and 3.5&percnt; by local authorities and 
associations. Together with a scientific measurement and 
evaluation program (SMEP), the data from the promoted 
installations will be collected for ten years and evaluated. As 
an incentive for their participation in the general test, 
operators of the windmills will receive from the FMRT a subsidy 
of six to eight pfennigs per kWh, plus 16.6 pfennigs for wind 
power generated current. Because of this promotional program, in 
1992 growth in wind power installations was for the first time 
greater in Germany than in Denmark, the European leader (320 MW 
from nearly 2,300 installations). Worldwide about 2,300 MW are 
currently generated by from wind power. The USA has 15,000 wind 
installations with 1,600 MW in operation. In the EC countries 
the wind capacity is currently about 1,000 MW. The EC 
demonstration program THERMIE--which runs from 1991 to 
1994--places emphasis on those energy technologies which would 
counteract the looming greenhouse effect through a reduction in 
CO&lt;inf&gt; 2&lt;/inf&gt;  emissions. It is supposed to promote the market 
introduction of improved energy technologies and encourage 
cooperation across national borders. The energy research program 
JOULE II (Joint Opportunities for Unconventional or Long Term 
Energy Supply) also runs until the end of 1994. Within the scope 
of this program, a new generation of large wind turbines of 
optimal size and technology is supposed to be developed. Seven 
projects, two of them German, have gearless 1 MW installations 
as their goal. 

