Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Daniel Kwan] </F>
  [Text] China has set 1995 as the target year to eradicate 
polio but its efforts have been hampered by the country's large 
size and an increasingly mobile population, an official said 
yesterday. After a cheque presentation ceremony in Hong Kong 
yesterday, Guo Xianzhi, a deputy director of the Ministry of 
Foreign Trade and Economic Co-operation, said another problem 
was insufficient vaccine production capacity. "The Chinese 
Government is making every effort to achieve the eradication of 
polio by the year 1995 ... That's the guarantee made by the 
Chinese Government not only to children in China but also to 
children of the world," said Mr Guo. 
  The Ministry of Public Health estimated China would need 
about $530 million to eradicate polio. As much as $460 million 
will be used to purchase vaccine. Mr Guo said although 
impressive results had been achieved in the fight against polio, 
the next two years would be critical. "From several thousand 
cases down to 1,000 cases is a little easier. However, for the 
last few hundreds, if you consider China's large area and 
population ... it could be no easy job." 
  China has reported a steady decline in polio in the past 
three years. In 1990 it registered over S,000 cases of polio 
and the figure dropped to 1,191 last year. However, it is 
believed cases of polio could be many times higher than those 
reported. 
  Under the present plan a nationwide polio eradication 
campaign will be launched in early December, when every child 
under the age of four will be given one pill of vaccine. A 
second pill is to be administered early next spring. "At the 
moment we have about 100 million children who are under four 
years old, so you can imagine the efforts, the cost and 
resources involved in this are very immense," Mr Guo said. 
  In addition, the Government also needs to provide vaccine 
for 
the 20 million newborn babies each year. By 1989 China had 
received over $150 million from the United Nations to improve 
its vaccine storage facilities. 

