BFN 

<F P=106> [By Bruce Gilley and Rain Ren] </F>
  [Text] A senior Chinese official died in Hong Kong on 
Thursday while on a secret mission to the territory. 
  Deng Qiang, 62, the deputy director of the Hong Kong 
Economic 
Affairs Department of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office 
(HKMAO) under the State Council, was admitted to Queen Mary 
Hospital on Tuesday after suffering a brain haemorrhage the day 
before. He died early on Thursday morning after emergency 
surgery. 
  Deng was heading a delegation of five State Council 
officials 
sent to investigate property speculation by Chinese companies in 
Hong Kong. The issue was raised last month by the HKMAO 
director, Lu Ping, who said it was unfair that companies funded 
from the mainland used state money to make profits in Hong Kong 
without worrying about risks. The State Council delegation led 
by Deng arrived in the territory two weeks ago and was scheduled 
to return to Beijing this Wednesday. 
  Deng was also dealing with the new airport financing 
arrangements as well as the forthcoming meeting of the economic 
sub-group of the Preliminary Working Committee. "He was so 
active only a week ago and now he's gone," a Chinese official in 
Hong Kong said last night. 
  China has made no announcement of the death, but is expected 
to make a statement today. 
  Deng's wife, Mo Ruanqiong, the director of the Macao Affairs 
Department of the HKMAO, arrived in Hong Kong on Friday to 
handle funeral arrangements with Deng's former boss in Beijing, 
Chen Zuoer, now one of China's representatives on the Joint 
Liaison Group. Neither Zhou Nan, the director of the Hong Kong 
branch of the New China News Agency (Xinhua), nor his wife, 
Huang Guozeng, visited the ailing Deng while he fought for his 
life in the hospital. Chinese officials said this reflected the 
frosty reception Zhou usually affords the HKMAO, which is his 
shadow boss. 
  Deng was one of many cadres promoted in the recent reshuffle 
of the HKMAO, having served as a deputy director of the First 
Department, which was renamed the Hong Kong Economic Affairs 
Department. He was one of the longest serving and 
most-respected officials in the HKMAO. Colleagues said that 
they had long expected he would die "in the line of duty". 

