CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  Development of Smooth-Running High-Efficiency Motor </H5>
<H5>  Fierce Competition Among Auto Manufacturers </H5>
  The electric car has many major auto manufacturers fighting 
furiously among themselves to develop a future vehicle that can 
meet strict environmental standards. Some of the heat from that 
competition is directed at us, QM Software Co., Ltd., a 
developer and manufacturer of computer application equipment 
located in Onga-machi, Fukuoka Prefecture. There is no end to 
the visits paid to our company by people from other companies 
wanting to see the electric vehicle that 31-year-old Eiko Sato 
and his staff have been developing. 
  The reason for these visits has to do with the drive motor 
that QM developed in-house. Unlike conventional electric 
vehicles, the car which we developed is equipped with an AC 
rather than a DC motor. We solved the major problem surrounding 
the AC motor which had been weak rotational force. A high degree 
of stability is assured now when the electric car is accelerated 
or when it starts up a hill, shown by the fact that the car can 
travel from 0 to 50 km/hr in 5 seconds. 
<H5>  More Work Needed on Riding Comfort </H5>
  Sato is the leader of a young staff of researchers. The 
staff 
has been working on the electric car for the past year and a 
half. Other than having installed an AC drive motor once in a 
50cc motorcycle, this was the first time to install such a motor 
in a car. 
  Sato and his staff got into this for the fun of it in the 
beginning, but no sooner had the research got underway when they 
discovered that they were able to produce a cheaper and a 30 
percent more energy-efficient electric car than other auto 
manufacturers. 
  With this motor, the battery does not need to be recharged 
as 
much, which was a complaint often heard about the electric car, 
so it is actually quite heartening to think that a product we 
made could actually contribute toward the widespread use of the 
electric car. 
  Although the performance of the motor is as good as 
anticipated, it is still hard to achieve smooth starting and 
stopping when applying the accelerator and brake, so riding 
comfort is not yet what it could be. 
<H5>  With No Textbook, Work Done by Trial and Error </H5>
  Prior to this project, Sato and his staff had been working 
on 
an industrial robot research project entitled "Making Machines 
Move Faster with Greater Precision." 
  An automobile takes ambiguous human commands (analog 
signals) 
such as pressure on the accelerator, and converts these to 
computerized digital signals. This information in turn is 
conveyed to the tires to make fine movements. 
  My role in this has been to make sure we could achieve the 
same riding comfort as a gasoline-powered car, and see to it 
that human commands (analog signals) can be communicated to the 
high-performance motor. 
  There have been no textbooks available to teach us how to 
build the electric car, and there has been very little 
information available publicly, so everything we have done has 
been by trial and error. 
<H5>  Wanting To Be a Global Player </H5>
  Sato and others in charge of this project firmly believe 
that 
the day will come when the electric car is widely used 
throughout Japan, which is poor in natural energy resources. 
They also envisage a day in the future when our children will 
point at the electric car and say that we had a hand in building 
that car. 
  Since we can set the number of rpms at which the control 
motor runs based on the distance between the car and on objects 
in front of the car as detected by sensors, there is a growing 
possibility that sometime in the future we will see a driverless 
electric car. 
  That is why there is so much research being done on 
recharging methods. One of the sources of headaches is the 
limited number of places where cars can be test driven. We are 
getting more confident, however, over the fact that major car 
manufacturers have shown a great deal of interest in the 
technology we have developed. 
  Sato and his research staff say that their research has only 
just begun. The problem with that, however, is that we are still 
just a small company and they cannot hope to suddenly jump up 
and become a major global player. 

