Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Vladimir Nevelskiy: ``The Radiation Echo of the </F>
Komsomolets Tragedy Has Apparently Been Exaggerated''] 
  [Text] St. Petersburg -- The third expedition in two years 
on board the scientific research ship ``Akademik Mstislav 
Keldysh'' has completed its work in the area where the nuclear 
submarine Komsomolets foundered. We asked Doctor of Medical 
Sciences Prof. I. Lisovskiy, member of the Russian Scientific 
Commission for Radiation Protection, to talk about the research 
that had been carried out. 
  Lisovskiy: ``The expedition in which I had 
occasion to participate had two main tasks: to evaluate the 
radiation and ecological situation at the scene of the disaster 
and to obtain data on whether it is advisable to raise the 
submarine.'' 
  ``We were able to carry out the necessary research primarily 
with the help of the ship's two `Mir' deep-sea submersibles. 
These miniature submarines are highly mobile, autonomous, and 
capable of operating at great depths for days (the working depth 
is up to 6,000 meters).'' 
  ``During the very first reconnaissance descent I found that 
deep-sea work near the sunken submarine was perfectly safe. 
Background radiation there was extremely slight, of the order of 
four microroentgens per hour. In the course of subsequent 
investigations over the past two years we have obtained no data 
showing any change in the radiation situation or possible 
deterioration in the future. There is every reason to believe 
that the site is safe from the radiation viewpoint and that the 
panic predictions of imminent, major radiation contamination of 
the northern seas were based on unreliable supposition.'' 
  ``During the latest expedition I was able to discuss the 
alarming conclusions drawn on the basis of theoretical 
calculations by certain scientific organizations in our country 
following the loss of the Komsomolets with Dutch Government 
expert Prof. A. van der Veyer [last name as transliterated], who 
was also participating in it. Although he was the 
representative of an interested party, he did not accept the 
alarming forecasts and also denied the possibility of events' 
taking a disastrous turn.'' 
  ``One year ago, using the most up-to-date equipment, we 
discovered for the first time and were now able to confirm that 
a slight amount of cesium-137 was escaping from the nuclear 
reactor. It was found only around the submarine's hull and could 
only be detected by highly sensitive direct gamma-spectrometry 
methods. The point is that the level of cesium-137 near the 
Komsomolets was approximately one-thousandth of the permissible 
level in drinking water that is consumed, for example, by the 
population of St. Petersburg.'' 
  ``One can add to this the fact that when we made similar 
measurements in the Baltic on the way back we established that 
deep in its waters the level of cesium-137 was 100 times higher 
than in the place where the nuclear submarine went down.'' 
  ``According to the engineers, including naval experts, the 
boat is rather badly broken, with its forward compartment 
particularly badly affected, and there is really no question of 
raising the Komsomolets intact. Any attempt of this kind could 
result in the submarine's simply breaking up. Experts are 
continuing to discuss the possibility of bringing the torpedo 
tubes together with the torpedoes, which contain the nuclear 
warheads, to the surface. But this operation is also too 
complex, expensive, and dangerous.'' 
  ``The only option under discussion at the moment which would 
not make the radiation situation worse is that of sealing the 
submarine with a chitin biopolymer (chitosan) or some other 
sealant. In particular, the chitin which is the main 
constituent of the integument of crustaceans, absorbs heavy 
metals, including radionuclides. A biopolymer based on it might 
well completely neutralize the Komsomolets' radioactive remains, 
if it were possible to pack its compartments with the 
substance.'' 
  ``One particular feature of the latest expedition was that 
it 
involved raising the rescue chamber of the Komsomolets in which 
several crew members had tried to escape. One man did escape. 
The rest died, because on surfacing the chamber immediately 
sank to the bottom.'' 
  ``The bell-shaped chamber lay approximately 300 meters from 
the submarine.'' 
  ``For over 1.5 km the raising procedure went according to 
plan, but when it got to within 100 meters of the surface the 
cable suddenly snapped.... So the fears of experts who believe 
that the removal of parts of the submarine could have serious 
consequences are warranted.'' 

