BFN 

  [Text] Phnom Penh, June 16 (AFP) -- A fresh attempt to 
negotiate an end to Cambodia's civil war ran into the sands 
Thursday, as talks between the government and the radical Khmer 
Rouge made no headway on even fundamental issues, officials said. 
  "There was no positive result from the meeting," the 
undersecretary of information, Ing Teasean, said after the 
second fruitless day of talks. 
  The meeting was the second round in the bid to end the Khmer 
Rouge's guerrilla conflict, which has sapped the government that 
emerged from UN-sponsored elections last year. 
  Ing Teasean said the Khmer Rouge "still don't accept a 
proposal for a ceasefire date" set for June 30 by King Norodom 
Sihanouk. "They are still being evasive." 
  The Khmer Rouge spokesman, Mak Ben, retorted: "We want a 
true ceasefire. We shall avoid a ceasefire which cheats one 
another and misleads national and international public opinion." 
  Officials said the two approaches were entirely at odds with 
each other. The government has insisted that Khmer Rouge agree 
to a truce before it makes a major political concession, by 
handing cabinet posts to guerrillas deemed "acceptable." 
  But the guerrillas say the plan is only acceptable provided 
the new power-sharing arrangement is introduced before the 
ceasefire. 
  They are also demanding that the existing government and 
parliament are scrapped -- a position that government officials 
say would utterly destroy the UN-led process of democratisation. 
  The Khmer Rouge -- blamed for the death of a million 
Cambodians in a reign of terror in the 1970s -- boycotted last 
year's UN-supervised polls and have since continued a guerrilla 
struggle against the government installed by the polls. 
  They control between 10 and 15 percent of the country, and 
stage hit-and-run raids on towns held by Cambodian armed forces, 
a ramshackle and poorly equipped alliance of former 
comrades-in-arms to the Khmer Rouge. 
  Under King Sihanouk's proposals, the ultra-nationalist 
guerrillas would surrender the land under their control, and 
merge their fighters with the Cambodian army. 
  Few in Phnom Penh were surprised by Thursday's deadlock. 
  A previous round hosted by King Sihanouk at his residence in 
North Korea last month also failed to make progress -- and on 
Wednesday, the monarch warned through his representative at the 
talks, Nhoek Chulong that he would not bother to organise 
further sessions if there were no headway. 
  Co-premier Hun Sen said earlier this week that he saw "no 
hope" for the negotiations and suggested the Khmer Rouge problem 
could be solved through a combination of social development and 
military pressure. 

