CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Sergey Grigoryants by Marina </F>
Pavlova-Silvanskaya; date and place not given: "Extraordinary 
Mission"] 
  [Text] At the request of Crimean leaders, well-known 
Soviet dissident Sergey Grigoryants had a meeting with Chairman 
Mustafa Dzhemilev of the Crimean Tatar National Assembly and 
Rukh leader Vyacheslav Chornovilov. 
  [Pavlova-Silvanskaya] What kind of relationship do you have 
with Mustafa Dzhemilev and Vyacheslav Chornovilov? 
  [Grigoryants] All of us were political prisoners at one 
time, 
and although I was never incarcerated with either of them, we 
were members of the same small segment of society and had a 
common cause in the 1980s. 
  [Pavlova-Silvanskaya] What connection do you have to Crimea 
and its present leaders? Why did you agree to mediate? 
  [Grigoryants] Oh no, I have no special connection to Crimea, 
other than sentimental feelings and ties of friendship. I was 
asked to do it by Ye. Saburov, who has been my friend since we 
went to school together. He named me Yu. Meshkov's political 
adviser (because the Crimean Constitution does not provide for 
the office of foreign minister). He came up with a conclusive 
argument: "Do you want another Karabakh there?" Although, if the 
disagreements of politicians there should lead to a conflict, 
God forbid, it will be more like Yugoslavia than Karabakh. 
  [Pavlova-Silvanskaya] When did the idea of this 
extraordinary 
mission come up, and who came up with it--Ye. Saburov or Yu. 
Meshkov? 
  [Grigoryants] It was Saburov. When Meshkov came to Moscow 
soon after the election, he asked him to head the Crimean 
Government and also agreed to my participation in it. After that 
Saburov and I went to Crimea. I visited Dzhemilev in 
Bakhchisaray on the very first day and then spent five days 
meeting with Chornovilov, Tanyuk, Kuchma, and 
Altunyan--representing the whole range of Ukrainian 
politicians--and with the Russian and French ambassadors. The 
newspapers were right to underscore my meetings with Dzhemilev 
and Chornovilov, however, because it was the Ukrainian 
nationalists and the Crimean Tatar groups that aroused the 
apprehensions of Meshkov and Saburov. I feel there are no 
particular reasons for this, with the possible exception of 
Stepan Khmara's party. In spite of the fact that I have known 
him a long time, I did not have a meeting with him. 
  [Pavlova-Silvanskaya] In a recent interview in our newspaper 
a Crimean politician had this to say in reference to the results 
of the presidential election in Crimea: It would be wrong to 
consider the opinions of only Dzhemilev's followers because his 
assembly has not won the undivided support of the Crimean 
Tatars. Their position grew stronger at the time of the last 
election, however. Was your mission a signal that Meshkov and 
Saburov want to "build bridges" with the assembly after the 
earlier exclusive affiliation with Kiev and the Rukh? 
  [Grigoryants] I went there before the election, but you 
should not assume that Meshkov and Saburov have the same policy 
line: Their objectives do not always coincide. During my very 
first conversation with Saburov, I was surprised by precisely 
the position you mentioned. That is why Meshkov intends, they 
say, to include two of the Tatars from the opposition to the 
assembly in the government. This is one of the "convenient" 
options in the style of Gromyko and Razumovskiy, the standard 
Soviet policy of finding collaborationists who demonstrated 
their inefficacy long ago. The Tatars are the only deported 
nationality that spent decades preparing its youth to return to 
their homeland. We have to negotiate with the people who 
represent the Crimean Tatars and their strength, and not with 
turncoats who have no influence there. 
  [Pavlova-Silvanskaya] Were you able to convince Saburov? 
  [Grigoryants] It was easy to change his mind.... 
  [Pavlova-Silvanskaya] What about Meshkov? 
  [Grigoryants] He also agreed right away. Of course, they did 
not believe that an amicable conversation with Dzhemilev was 
possible, but the talks could not have been more friendly. 
Dzhemilev also had his doubts about the possibility of 
negotiating with Meshkov, although the Crimean president's 
acknowledgement of the need to seek a new option indicated the 
opposite. 
  The underestimation of Dzhemilev's amicability and good 
sense 
could be a major mistake. The Tatars have several different 
affiliations, and these go beyond the communists and Dzhemilev. 
Besides this, we have to remember that more than 6 million 
people who call themselves Crimean Tatars are living in Turkey. 
This is a serious political situation, and the low number of 
Tatars in Crimea (250,000) is no reason to give them less 
consideration than the Ukrainians or the Russians. I think this 
is a significant force with a remarkable leader. 
  [Pavlova-Silvanskaya] How would you describe the political 
results of these talks? 
  [Grigoryants] I feel that the danger of war, which I was 
warned about in Moscow, does not exist at this time. There are 
no forces that want to fight with the Russians: At most, the 
Tatars will resort to civil disobedience, and the Ukrainians 
simply do not have the time or energy for this right now. They 
have extremely urgent problems of their own. There are a few 
small extremist groups, but no influential political current of 
Rukh's statute is planning any kind of aggressive actions 
against Crimea. If Simferopol does want to choose the correct 
pattern of economic development, which will lead to prosperity, 
there will be no objections. In particular, I found out 
something I did not know in Moscow: The killings in Crimea that 
we called political were actually a result of unscrupulous 
commercial activity. 
  [Pavlova-Silvanskaya] Does that include the murder of Yuriy 
Osmanov? 
  [Grigoryants] Yes, it includes all murders verging on 
political assassinations when they are connected with money. 
Today people can work peacefully in Crimea, but there are 
serious potential dangers. The primary one is the deployment of 
two armies on the peninsula: the Russian Navy and the fairly 
sizable Ukrainian Army, which takes orders from Kiev. The second 
danger is the resistance of at least two nationalities--the 
Tatars and the Russians, who might have serious objections to 
any attempts to change the present status of Crimea. The 
Russians there are people who were raised on the military 
traditions of the Russian Navy. Although the Sevastopol Naval 
Academy was always supposed to be an all-union institution, half 
of its cadets always came from the local population. The final 
and third danger is the prospect of unfavorable developments in 
the relations of Russia, Ukraine, and Turkey, each of which has 
its own interests in the Black Sea region. 
  [Pavlova-Silvanskaya] You returned.... 
  [Grigoryants] After a clash with the Crimean administration 
(I am not referring to Saburov). These people do not understand 
how to build political relations with other countries. They will 
not be able to pursue the policy I regard as the correct one. My 
meetings did not do much good: The Crimean administrators 
disavowed what I said with their own statements and actions. 
  [Pavlova-Silvanskaya] Do you mean that your mission will not 
be continued? 
  [Grigoryants] Probably not. I do not see any real chance of 
this. 

