BFN 

  [Text] Stockholm, May 9 (XINHUA) -- West European 
governments and business communities should seize the 
opportunity to boost their share of the China market, a visiting 
Chinese leader said here today. 
  Li Ruihuan, chairman of the National Committee of the 
Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), made the 
call in a speech to Swedish entrepreneurs and businessmen. 
  According to Li, the two-way trade between China and Western 
Europe topped 29.5 billion U.S. dollars in 1993. By June 1993, 
China had 2,146 projects using West European funds, with 5.7 
billion U.S. dollars pledged and 2.25 billion dollars utilized. 
  However, Li said, "Western Europe's shares of China's 
commodity and investment markets are not commensurate with its 
real strength." He added that China is a huge market and its 
economy is growing at a pace rarely seen in the world. 
  Therefore, he said, "We hope that West European governments 
and business communities will not miss the opportunity to boost 
their share of the China market." 
  The CPPCC leader said China will accelerate the improvement 
of its investment environment, including the legal framework 
concerning foreign businesses, with a view to effectively 
protecting the legitimate rights and interests of foreign 
investors. 
  Li expressed the hope that Western Europe will open its 
market wider to China in an effort to seek a mutually beneficial 
cooperation. 
  On Sino-Swedish relationship, Li said, "There is a great 
potential for our economic cooperation and scientific, 
technological and cultural exchanges." 
  Trade between the two countries reached 900 million dollars 
in 1993, marking a 43.7-percent increase over the previous year. 
  According to Li, Swedish investment in China has also made 
remarkable progress. Swedish firms like Ericsson, Atras Copco 
and Volvo have built up a reputation in China. Products of 
Sino-Swedish Pharmaceuticals Corp. and Kanthel Ltd. are selling 
well. 
  Li arrived in Sweden on Friday for a five-day official 
visit. 

