BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Oded Granot: "Born This Week: A Palestinian </F>
Shin Bet"] 
  [Text] Last Monday [16 May], shortly before he took off to 
Cairo, en route to Gaza, many friends came to Muhammad Dahlan's 
home in Tunis to bid him farewell. They clapped him on the 
shoulder, kissed him on both cheeks, and congratulated him 
warmly as a worthy man who is about to be given an important job 
in the homeland. 
  Between hugs, Dahlan apologized to his guests saying he must 
make several urgent phone calls, and then rushed to meet 
"President 'Arafat" for final instructions before getting on his 
way. 
  Dahlan is 33; no longer a child. Before he was deported from 
Israel in 1986, he was the head of the al-Shabibah, the Fatah 
youth movement in Gaza and the scare of the Strip. Now, that he 
is returning there as the head of the local security apparatus, 
he is excited like a child, nearly bursting into tears, just as 
he was several months ago when he heard the bad news of the 
elimination of six of his comrades, the Fatah Hawks from 
Jabalyah. 
  "Tomorrow morning, Tuesday," he told me on the phone from 
Tunis, "you will find me at the Rafah border crossing. A new 
era begins." 
  On the same Monday, several streets away from Dahlan's home, 
Jibril al-Rujub packed his bags, preparing to fly to Jordan, on 
his way to Jericho. Jibril is a tough man who spent nearly 17 
years of his life in Israeli prisons before being deported in 
1988. 
  Since then, from Tunis, he has never stopped activating 
terror groups in the occupied territories where he was in charge 
of the western sector. He wears a mustache, is well built, and 
has a low voice that goes soft suddenly when he talks about his 
imminent encounter which his wife and children, and the field 
activists. This time, he is not going there as a terrorist, but 
as the man in charge over security in the West Bank. 
  "On Tuesday," al-Rujub promised over the phone, "I will be 
at 
the Allenby Bridge, kissing the soil of the homeland. My six 
years in exile were a thousand times more difficult than the 17 
I spent in the Israeli prisons. The goal for which I had fought 
is almost attained. This is the happiest moment of my life." 
  Last Tuesday, the two former deportees and senior Fatah 
members crossed through the Allenby Bridge and the Rafah 
crossing into the territories, and at once became the heads of 
the Palestinian Shin Bet in the territories. At once, they 
changed their status from one of men wanted by the Israeli 
security services to one of heads of "a friendly intelligence 
service." 
  The Israeli negotiators, headed by Major General Amnon 
Shahaq, were worried over security and ways to foil acts of 
terror against Israel from within the territories Israel will 
evacuate. The new reality dictated a need to immediately locate 
Palestinian power brokers who could assume overall 
responsibility for domestic security [in the territories], which 
the Shin Bet and the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] will be unable 
to do from now on. 
  In one of the early meetings, Palestinian delegate Hassan 
'Asfur marked Muhammad Dahlan as a strong man "with a great 
future." Dahlan "was around" the Palestinian delegation during 
the Taba talks but, due to Israel's objections, he was left out 
of the delegation, staying on as an adviser. Two months after 
the Washington signing, Amnon Shahaq was introduced to Jibril 
al-Rujub, 'Arafat's assistant on West Bank affairs. "We did not 
choose them," a Jerusalem source said, "'Arafat did and sent 
them to us. All we can do now is see whether we can work 
together." 
  In their external features, there is no semblance between 
Dahlan and al-Rujub. Dahlan is thin, muscular, and fidgety and 
his eyes do not stop moving. Al-Rujub is heavy set, mustached, 
and tall. There is almost 10 years difference between them and 
the Gazan considers the Hebronite his teacher. 
  But beyond the external differences, they have a lot in 
common: both are central Fatah activists and both are very close 
to 'Arafat. Both were deported from the territories and both 
have a history of terrorist attacks, which made them local 
heroes and gave them a stronghold on the ground. Both never 
desisted from using violence in order to achieve their aims, 
including removing of political rivals. 
  Dahlan was born and raised in the Khan Yunus refugee camp. 
Some of his brothers were killed during Israel's occupation of 
the Gaza Strip. He position in Gaza is based on the 
al-Shabibah, the Fatah youth movement he set up. He was 
expelled from the Gaza Strip at the start of the intifadah, but 
continued to build up power in Tunis as 'Arafat's personal aide. 
He issued the orders to the Fatah Hawks to act against the 
Israeli occupation and to get rid of his enemies. Several months 
ago, his name was linked to the killing of two of the leaders of 
the rival camp in the strip. He did not admit to it. 
  Whatever the case, he had a good teacher in terrorist 
methods. For two years in Tunis, he learned from Abu-Jihad 
[Khalil al- Wazir], the person who headed the attacks on the 
western sector, until he was killed. 
  Jibril al-Rujub is the more important of the two. He comes 
from the village of Dura, south of the Hebron hills. In 1970, 
he was detained for operational activity within the Fatah 
framework, which included at least 10 attacks, and was sentenced 
to life in prison. In jail he quickly became a leader of the 
prisoners and of the committees which implemented the death 
"sentences" of suspected collaborators with Israel. It was also 
there that he wrote his book "Cell 704 -- The Experience of 
Prisoners at Nafha." 
  He was freed in the Jibril deal of 1985, again detained, and 
in 1988 was deported to Lebanon, and from there made his way to 
Tunis. His wife, Hiba, and his two children, remained here. In 
Tunis, he became Fatah commander of the West Bank, and was 
provided with bodyguards. It was there that he conscripted in 
1991 Refa'el Avraham of Rishon Leziyyon to assassinate Shamir 
and Sharon. "I was a terrorist, I am not ashamed of it," he 
says. 
  Despite the initial hesitations, Israeli elements slowly 
became convinced that the two are capable of controlling the 
area, influencing events, and setting up an efficient security 
apparatus. "The psychological block with Dahlan was easier to 
overcome than with al-Rujub," a security source in Israel admits. 
  The meetings with al-Rujub and Dahlan became more frequent 
the closer the date for the Gaza-Jericho agreement became. Most 
of the meetings were held in Europe. Once in Rome and once in 
Geneva. Several meetings were held in Cairo and Tunis. They 
dealt with finding solutions for the problems cropping up in the 
negotiations, such as the release of security prisoners, the 
return of deportees, etc. 
  In most of the meetings, except for Tunis, Israel was 
represented by three people: Amnon Shahaq, the Shin Bet chief, 
and Jacques Neriya, the prime minister's political adviser. 
These meetings helped Israel to get to know the two and the 
relations became informal, almost friendly. Press reports said 
the Shin Bet head visited Cairo on the eve of the signing 
ceremony on the pullout in order to meet al-Rujub and Dahlan and 
was received by them with hugs and kisses. 
  Al-Rujub was often seen on the 10th floor of the 
Intercontinental Hotel where the Israel delegation stayed in 
Cairo. He often moved between that floor and the Palestinians' 
floor. On one of those strolls, he encountered Shahaq talking 
with one of the members of the Israeli delegation and was 
curious. "What are you discussing?" he asked. There was 
silence. "It is not nice to have secrets," he edged them on in 
fluent Hebrew and smiled. For those who heard him and nearly 
keeled over because of his Hebrew, he had a ready-made immediate 
response: "I studied at your academy, at an Israeli jail." 
  Within the coordination efforts prior to their entry into 
the 
field, al-Rujub and Dahlan made sure they worked out with the 
Israelis the admission of people close to them. Most are former 
deportees and people suspected of hostile activities, who now 
make up the infrastructure of the security system to be set up 
on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. 
  Whoever thinks the two will have an easy time does not know 
what he is talking about. Their most urgent mission is to make 
their clout felt and their decisions implemented inside Fatah 
circles in the territories not keen about the new appointments. 
In Gaza, the Fatah Hawks have been unruly for months, and now 
is the time to see how Dahlan will bring them back into the fold. 
  Jibril al-Rujub is facing Fatah opposition groups inside the 
territories and outside them. He will need a great deal of 
energy, and may be a lot of gunpowder, to make sure all know he 
is boss. Later, the division of power with the Palestinian 
police, and especially, the issue of who has the last word on 
the ground, will crop up. 
  The most important test for Israel is naturally how the 
Palestinian Shin Bet deals with Hamas [Islamic Resistance 
Movement] and the other organizations in the territories which 
oppose the agreement. To the outside, al-Rujub and Dahlan can 
claim that there is no problem and that Hamas will not try to 
enter into a conflict with the autonomy's new security 
apparatus, but they know full well that they will straight away 
have to look for terrorists trying to infiltrate into the queue 
of laborers leaving for work in Israel. 
  Israel has been given an ambiguous promise that the moment 
the Palestinian Shin Bet apparatus starts operating in the 
territories, all those who oppose the agreement will be 
disarmed. "We will wait and see," Israeli sources said. Proper 
handling of Hamas and the detention of people suspected of 
trying to act against Israel will force al-Rujub and Dahlan to 
face a double test: on the one hand, with the Israeli Shin Bet, 
and on the other, the local population. They will have to tread 
very gently between the land mines. 
  Israel knows where mutual interests will cease and the real 
rivalry will start: The Israeli Shin Bet will not give way on 
its right to independently gather preventive intelligence. 
Al-Rujub and Dahlan know that. "I have no doubt that they will 
try to uncover our agents and collaborators in order to prove 
that they are running the show," an Israeli source said. 
  We should not envy any agent who is caught. Al-Rujub and 
Dahlan declare that from now on they will act only under the 
law, but nobody knows how long it will take them to get rid of 
their old habits: boiling plastic poured into the ear and 
interrogation under torture, methods the Shin Bet has never 
practiced. Will Israel be able to intervene and will it want to 
do so? 
  Al-Rujub and Dahlan entered the territories on Tuesday and 
set up the Palestinian Shin Bet, Lots of bodyguards came with 
them. An hysterical reception was prepared for them in Gaza and 
Jericho. Some people fired in the air out of joy, some out of 
fear. 

