BFN 

  [Excerpts] Berlin, 23 Jun -- The two-day meeting of the 
11th session of the joint Saudi-German Committee for Economic 
and Technical Cooperation opened in Berlin today. [passage 
omitted] 
  Afterward, Finance and National Economy Minister Muhammad 
al-'Ali Aba-al-Khayl delivered a speech expressing thanks for 
the reception and hospitality extended to the Saudi delegation. 
He also expressed delight at the participation of German 
Economic Affairs Minister Guenther Rexrodt in heading the German 
side at the session for the first time. [passage omitted] 
  Aba-al-Kyayl added that the series of agreements drafted 
during years of cooperation will be completed by the endorsement 
of the final draft of investment protection and encouragement 
agreement between Saudi Arabia and Germany during these 
meetings. 
  Aba-al-Khayl reviewed the economic prospects of Saudi 
Arabia. He said that Saudi overall economic growth rate for 
1993 was estimated at 1 percent and that the private sector was 
growing at a high rate reaching 5.1 percent compared to last 
year. Moreover, this growth rate had been achieved 
simultaneously with the stabilization of prices. He said the 
increase in the cost-of-living standard did not exceed 8 percent 
in comparison with the previous figure for 1992. Moreover, he 
said the volume of the kingdom's economy was 26th in the world, 
adding that the Saudi economy was also the largest in the Middle 
East region and that the kingdom occupied 20th place in the 
world vis-a-vis the volume of its trade. 
  He made clear that the kingdom had reduced government 
expenditures in the 1994 budget by 20 percent compared to last 
year in all sectors with no exception, pointing out that the new 
budget reflected the government's strong commitment to maintain 
the overall economic balance the kingdom enjoyed for many years. 
[passage omitted] 
  He said Germany was one of the kingdom's main trade partners 
and was fourth among countries exporting to the kingdom in 1992 
and 1993. He said during the last 10 years Germany had exported 
goods to the kingdom worth over 19 billion dollars. During the 
same period, Germany maintained a trade balance surplus with the 
kingdom that reached about $10 billion. He said German partners 
were undertaking implementation of 65 joint projects in the 
kingdom, with an overall capital of about 1.4 billion Saudi 
riyals, the equivalent of 600 million German marks, according to 
the current exchange rate. 
  His Excellency Aba-al-Khayl said that through the 
committee's 
joint efforts, two establishments have been set up to promote 
joint Saudi-German projects. These are Sageco, the Saudi-German 
Company for Development and Investment, and the Businessmen's 
Dialogue, a group of Saudi and German businessmen who hold 
meetings to discuss issues of common interest. 
  Minister Aba-al-Khayl said that the German-Saudi joint 
committee was facing the huge challenge of preserving the strong 
ties between the two countries and has served its individual 
interests positively during previous years, thus extending the 
framework of these ties. Therefore, every possible effort 
should be made to bolster relations between the two countries, 
Aba-al-Khayl said. [passage omitted] 
  The opening session was then concluded and the specialized 
committees started their meetings. These are the scientific and 
technical cooperation committee, the economic cooperation 
committee and the vocational training and cooperation committee. 
Meetings of the Businessmen's Dialogue also started between 
businessmen from the two countries. 

