BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, May 4 (XINHUA) -- Egyptian President Husni 
Mubarak described the new PLO-Israeli agreement on Palestinian 
autonomy in Gaza and Jericho signed here today as a 
"revolutionary transformation" in relations between Israel and 
the Palestinians. 
  The agreement, signed by Palestinian leader Yasir 'Arafat 
and 
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin, deals with details of the 
implementation of Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and 
the West Bank's Jericho area, including the Israeli troops 
withdrawal and the establishment of Palestinian autonomy 
authority in the two areas. 
  Palestinian autonomy in the two areas was provided for in 
the 
PLO-Israeli peace accord signed in Washington on last September 
13. 
  Speaking at today's signing ceremony, Mubarak said, "we have 
witnessed a historic event which will have its effect on the 
future and destiny of the area for hundred years to come." 
  "This event is a landmark on the road of realizing a great 
dream and a unique vision of the makers of peace whose faith has 
not been shaken, in spite of difficult circumstances, for the 
sake of peace and its sublime aim and noble goal," he added. 
  Hence, he said, the moment of the signing of the new 
agreement was a historic moment that will not be obliterated by 
the passage of time. 
  Mubarak also reviewed the difficult and strenuous efforts of 
many parties for Palestinian-Israeli peace. 
  He said peace is the ultimate goal of all peoples and war is 
a meaningless endeavor regardless of any tentative victory or 
illusionary security. "It is the just and honorable peace alone 
that represents the right path to a life of security and 
happiness." 
  He said, "the Egyptian people have never hesitated for a 
moment to sacrifice their souls, daily bread and blood for the 
sake of a just and comprehensive peace to be enjoyed by all the 
peoples in the area." 
  He stressed, "any unilateral peace between Egypt and Israel 
or between any country of the confrontation countries with 
Israel will not establish permanent and just peace in the entire 
area. More than that, even if peace is realized between all 
confrontation countries and Israel without a just solution to 
the Palestine problem, this will never establish durable and 
just peace on which the entire world insists today." 
  He said, "despite the fact that we still have ahead of us 
several steps to establish a comprehensive peace to which we are 
committed, the step which has just been realized and the 
achievement we have just reached are important enough as they 
lead to further steps along the path of peace." 
  He also urged people to implement the new agreement "in the 
spirit of goodwill and in all honesty despite all difficulties 
that may arise in the process of implementation, difficulties 
which we consider are part of the nature." 

