Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 20 
March ROK vernacular newspapers comments on the breakup of the 
19 March North-South contact of working-level delegates for the 
exchange of special envoys. 
  The conservative CHOSON ILBO carries a 1,000-word article on 
page 3 by reporter Pak Tu-sik entitled "Prospects of North-South 
Relations." The article first says that the "breakup of the 
contact was predicted from the beginning" and that North Korea's 
assertion that it would "respond to war with war" will result in 
"fierce confrontation" between the North and South in the 
international arena. 
  The article goes on to say that the International Atomic 
Energy Agency will "definitely" refer the North Korean nuclear 
issue to the UN Security Council, adding that this means that 
the conflict over the North Korean nuclear issue is now 
"entering into a `phase of sanctions' from a `phase of 
dialogue.'" 
  The article states that there is a "very slim possibility" 
that North Korea will change its attitude. It adds: "The 
hibernation of North-South relations or North-South 
confrontation can be indefinitely prolonged beyond our 
imagination." 
  CHOSON ILBO also carries a 1,000-word editorial on page 3 
entitled "Policy Toward North Korea Must Be Fundamentally 
Reexamined." The editorial first says that the breakup of the 
contact again proved that North Korea's view on South Korea has 
not changed, and it adds: "It is time we map out a new policy 
toward North Korea based on a `correct view on North Korea.' We 
must no longer cling to the exchange of special envoys or summit 
talks. Rather, until North Korea requests an exchange of special 
envoys and summit talks both in name and reality, we must beef 
up our capabilities to handle domestic and foreign problems and 
build a generally acknowledged legitimate political system on 
the Korean peninsula. This is a shortcut to reunification." 
  The moderate TONG-A ILBO carries a 1,000-word editorial 
entitled "North Korea Acts Recklessly." The editorial first 
expresses its regret over North Korea's breakup of the contact 
and says that the "principle is that the North Korean nuclear 
issue must be referred to the UN Security Council to make North 
Korea fulfill its obligations under international law." The 
editorial goes on to say: "If the North Korean nuclear issue is 
referred to the UN Security Council, this means the issue will 
be a matter to be decided by the United Nations. And, then, not 
only we but the United States will have no choice but to follow 
any decision of the international organization. If we step back 
and hesitate at such a time, the international alliance 
[kukchejogin kongjocheje] will break up. We must further 
consolidate the international alliance." 
  The editorial also says: "We must strengthen ROK-U.S. 
relations and renew relations of close cooperation between our 
two countries. We hope the United States will again stress 
President Clinton's commitment that any aggression against the 
ROK will be considered to be an aggression against the United 
States." 
  The moderate KYONGHYANG SINMUN carries a 1,000-word 
editorial 
entitled "Threatening To `Turn Seoul Into a Sea of Fire.'" 
  The editorial says that "it is time the government boldly 
revise its policy toward North Korea," And it adds: "It is 
necessary to further strengthen the international alliance to 
ensure that North Korea receives another round of inspection." 
  The pro-government SEOUL SINMUN carries an 800-word 
editorial 
entitled "Like a Thief Turning on the Victim." 
  The editorial first says that North Korea must know it "will 
not be safe either, and will meet its end if it provokes a war." 
The editorial then asks the ROK Government to "revise its 
policy toward North Korea," "resume the Team Spirit exercise," 
and "positively examine the deployment of Patriot missiles" 
because the contact for the exchange of special envoys broke up. 
The editorial concludes by saying that the "North Korean 
authorities must know that unless the nuclear issue is resolved, 
not only its economy but also its system will collapse." 
  The left-leaning HANGYORE SINMUN carries a 1,200-word 
article 
by reporter Kang Tae-ho entitled "Prospects of Relations Between 
North and South Korea, Which Parted With Each Other With No 
Promise To Meet Again." The article first says that the breakup 
of the North- South contact for the exchange of special envoys 
means the "loss of the only remaining channel of dialogue." 
After describing in detail the remarks by North and South Korea 
at the contact, the article says that it will be difficult for 
the time being to find an "way out" from the North-South 
deadlock and that North and South Korea will "go separate ways." 
That is, South Korea will resume the Team Spirit exercise and 
North Korea will reject another round of inspection. 

