BFN 

  [Text] President-elect Ernesto Perez Balladares has 
expressed his agreement with the bill on constitutional 
amendments that President Guillermo Endara presented this week 
to the plenum of the Legislative Assembly. Those amendments 
include proscribing the army and giving the Electoral Tribunal 
(TE) more financial and administrative autonomy. 
  Perez Balladares pointed out the need to give the National 
Police a legal reference point for regulating that profession 
and the institution through constitutional means and thus 
eliminate all vestiges of the former National Guard from the 
Constitution. 
  "Preserving the Panamanian state's right to defend itself, 
we 
agree with eliminating all references in the constitution to the 
National Guard, an institution we will not allow to be 
resurrected," Perez Balladares added. 
  In the same manner, he said that it should be understood 
that 
the elimination of the national army is linked to the 
elimination of any other foreign army from our soil, this in 
reference to the Southern Command. 
  Perez Balladares also agreed with the proposed amendments 
granting the TE more administrative and economic autonomy. He 
stressed this is the only way to guarantee to the people that 
the 1999 elections will be as free and honest as the 8 May 1994 
elections. 
  Last Monday the Executive Branch, through Government 
Minister 
Jacobo Salas, presented two bills to the plenum of the 
Legislative Assembly on eliminating the Army from the 
Constitution and seeking autonomy for the TE to guarantee free, 
honest, and efficient elections. 
  Meanwhile, PRD [Democratic Revolutionary Party] Legislator 
Gerardo Gonzalez disagreed with the approval of those 
amendments, saying they are part of a "package" of 
constitutional amendments rejected in the latest referendum. 
  Perez Balladares, who will take office on 1 September, said 
that his administration's relations with the United States will 
not be affected by the death of U.S. soldier Zak Hernandez, 
because no crime has been confirmed. 
  Perez Balladares added that the Panamanian judicial system 
will be the only entity charged with clarifying that incident, 
which occurred on 10 June 1992, and that he will accept the 
decisions resulting from the investigations, without any foreign 
pressures. 
  Gerardo Gonzalez also said that the PRD will not approve 
constitutional amendments on electoral matters that do not have 
the consensus of various political groups and much less if they 
endanger the existence of small parties. 
  Gonzalez, who is also president of the PRD, said his party 
agrees completely with reforms giving the TE more autonomy but 
rejects changes to Article 141 of the Constitution with regard 
to the Legislative Assembly's configuration. 
  According to the proposed amendments to Article 141, members 
of the Legislative Assembly would be elected only for specific 
circuits [circuitos uninominales], which would exclude a 
proportional representation system that favors small parties. 
  "That change to Article 141 has not been discussed by the 
political parties. This is something unexpected that will cause 
problems in this legislative period and in the Assembly to be 
isntalled on 1 September," he stressed. 
  Gonzalez recalled that in 1983 the PRD recommended that the 
1984 elections be based on specific districts, but because of 
protests by representatives of small parties, the system of 
voting for a party slate [plurinominal] was instituted. 

