BFN 

  [Text] The agreement between the Energy Secretariat, headed 
by Carlos Bastos, and the National Commission for Atomic Energy 
[CNEA], headed by Manuel Mondino, materialized in a sort of 
legal document establishing the steps to be taken for the 
transformation of nuclear activities, particularly those having 
to do with the generation of electricity. The following is the 
text of this document, which constitutes an inarguable victory 
for the privatization drive pursued by the Economy Ministry: 
  "The CNEA needs streamlining and reorganizing to adapt to 
the 
(electricity) market. This demands splitting two large areas of 
activity -- namely the control and licensing of nuclear power 
plants, and production, research, and development activities -- 
into different organizations. 
  "For the former it would be possible to establish a unit 
that 
would come under the jurisdiction of the federal government, 
with resources from the National Treasury plus the fees or 
royalties that this unit would charge to companies subject to 
control. 
  "The other activities would be entrusted to one or more 
joint 
stock companies subject to commercial laws. In other words, 
they would act as individuals under private law, and would 
therefore be affected by the bankruptcy act. 
  "Initially, all the shares of these companies will belong to 
the state. 
  "The preceding paragraph means that the state will not 
contribute -- through the Treasury -- funds to finance any 
expenditures to be incurred by these companies. 
  "The Treasury will contribute the necessary funds to 
conclude 
the construction of the Atucha-2 power plant, according to a 
budget that will be put together in the future. 
  "The shares, which will initially be controlled by the 
state, 
will be sold to private investors on the stock exchange at a 
later stage (same procedure as YPF [Government Oil Deposits]). 
  "The expansion of the nuclear sector will be accomplished 
through private investments in new power plants. 
  "Once the unit responsible for the control of nuclear power 
plants is operational, current and future power plants will be 
subject to the same control provisions." 

