CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrey Illarionov: "How the Reduction of the </F>
Administrative Apparat Is Understood in Novosibirsk"] 
  [Text] In recent months the mayor's office in Novosibirsk 
has cut the administrative apparat by one-quarter. This 
happened, strange as it may seem, quietly, perhaps because it 
was drowned out by the noisy events of September-October in 
Moscow. And then by the elections to the federal and local 
assemblies. 
  Studying the structure of the mayor's office, I was quite 
puzzled. The basic functional subdivisions pretentiously called 
departments all the same correspond, in my opinion, to the 
present basic tasks of the city executive authority for managing 
economic and social life. But the "mayor's department" caused 
considerable doubt. Why, I wondered, turn the necessary and 
practical managerial secretariat into some kind of apparat over 
the apparat or department over the departments? We must give due 
credit to I. Indink, mayor of Novosibirsk at the time, whose 
initiative it was to establish this department. The mayor was 
objective and self-critical enough to eliminate it himself. 
  Another thing which struck me in the former structure of the 
Novosibirsk mayor's office was the inventiveness of its authors 
in the names of sections and officials. For example, there is 
the interaction and ties with organs of local government section 
or the economic advisor-chief of the 
organizational-administrative section. Today, the functions of 
the sections have been clarified as personnel have been reduced. 
There are fewer advisors and consultants, who were more likely 
to consult with their own highly competent managers. 
  The reductions for the most part affected those associates 
of 
the mayor's office who did not live up to the expectations of 
them. And some of them very sensibly quit, without waiting for 
it to be suggested to them. The present mayor, V. Tolokonskiy, 
must be given due credit for his practical and consistent 
approach to implementing this delicate and difficult measure. 
  Can one say that the mayor's office is closer to the optimum 
model after the reductions? There are no miracles: even 
administrative structures, especially in a time of transition, 
are doomed to constant and acutely painful refinement. So it is 
in Novosibirsk too. Essentially structural changes were 
suggested and made back before the reductions in personnel were 
completed. For example, the architectural construction and power 
engineering departments were combined into one. This was 
obviously dictated not so much by the need to save money as the 
need to get away from primitive cliches. 
  It is very difficult today for great Siberian science. And 
in 
the mayor's office the question has arisen of creating a small 
but qualified group to see to its survival. Today this is very 
important for Russia, and for the oblast, and for the city. 
  The next thing is creation of the apparat of the Novosibirsk 
oblast administration. The development of the corresponding 
program is being completed. It is a different matter that the 
search for the optimum structure of the mayor's office or the 
administration would better be made not through trial and error, 
but on the basis of competent scientific recommendations, and to 
do that Russia needs scientific collectives which have mastered 
the problems of organization of the work of the administrative 
apparat. 

