CSO 

  [Text] Not all the present government's actions have 
attracted the same amount of media attention. Actually, some 
have slipped by almost unnoticed. This is true of the reforms 
covering intellectual property, trademarks, and patents. In the 
last two years a group led by the Superintendent of Industry and 
Commerce, Jose Orlando Montealegre, has been modernizing the 
standards and procedures governing intellectual and industrial 
property, a process that has moved Colombia several years 
forward in this field. We need cite just one example: While 
renewing a trademark took an average of 208 weeks in 1992, with 
the present Integrated Industrial Property System it takes only 
three weeks. 
  This computer-based reform has greatly simplified the 
process. The same thing is true of the organizations handling 
patents and trademarks. In 1993, 29,015 trademark applications 
were published, while in 1992 the number was just 3,093. The 
time required to process a patent application has been cut from 
an average of 60 months to just 24. In the same way, registering 
a trademark, which used to take a massive length of time--40 
months--can now be done in 120 days. Industry has been quick to 
take advantage of this improvement: last year 13,270 trademark 
registrations and over 800 industrial patent applications were 
filed. 
  The improvements in this area are not limited just to 
computerizing the proceedings. In more substantive aspects, a 
great leap forward has been made, leaving behind over two 
decades of protectionist legislation. The most significant 
advance for Colombia and the Andean Group countries was Decision 
344 of the Cartagena Pact Commission, which brings intellectual 
property legislation into line with GATT's international 
standards and with regulations prevailing in more highly 
developed nations. 
  The decision includes some innovative features like the 
patentability of biotechnology, which differs from essentially 
biological processes used to obtain animal breeds and species. 
Furthermore, it allows the registration of patents for 
inventions related to nuclear and fissionable materials, and 
opens up an immediate possibility of patenting pharmaceutical 
products. It sets a 20-year term for all patents, eliminates the 
system of extensions, and strengthens legal protections for 
intellectual property in business. And in the area of 
trademarks, it ratifies the majority of the provisions now in 
force, simplifies registration procedures, and grants greater 
protection to well-known trademarks. 
  Perhaps the most attractive aspect of this reform is the 
adoption of the new industrial secrets system, which was 
nonexistent before. Although the text of this change is general 
in nature, it establishes protection for industrial secrets, 
which are defined as information not known or easily obtainable 
about productive activities that have an actual or potential 
commercial value, information which is held secret and 
consisting of documents or any other physical form of 
information storage. This will help to attract foreign 
investors--who have traditionally been reluctant to set up 
operations in countries where their rights are not fully 
protected--and allow the transfer of foreign technology. 
  Because of all this, Colombia has now become a model in 
Latin 
America for intellectual and industrial property. Its 
computerized handling of these matters has drawn praise from 
WIPO [World Intellectual Property Organization], and offers have 
been made to export this software to Brazil and to the rest of 
the Andean Pact member nations. In the eyes of businessmen, 
Colombia now offers its investors legal protection. An avalanche 
of new patents may well be seen this year. 

