Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ovidio Bellando] </F>
  [Text] Argentine Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella yesterday 
held an unscheduled meeting in London with British Foreign 
Secretary Douglas Hurd. 
  The meeting was arranged during Di Tella's stay in Madrid. 
Thus, at the end of President Menem's visit to the Spanish 
capital, Di Tella traveled to Great Britain. 
  In response to a question by LA NACION on the reasons for Di 
Tella's visit to London, Argentine Vice Foreign Minister 
Fernando Petrella said that "bilateral issues were discussed 
during the 80-minute meeting." 
  The meeting had not yet been set by last week when Di Tella 
left for Spain with Menem and very few people knew about the 
possibility of holding it. 
  Petrella noted that "because of the advantage of being only 
a 
few hours of flight away (between Madrid and London), the 
meeting was arranged." He reiterated that Di Tella and Hurd had 
discussed bilateral issues, but he did not specify which issues. 
<H5>  Diplomatic Actions </H5>
  The Di Tella-Hurd meeting may not be unrelated to the turn 
the British position has taken regarding certain Chilean 
sectors, namely the area of defense. 
  Petrella returned yesterday from Santiago, where he had also 
discussed the issue with Chilean Foreign Minister-designate 
Carlos Figueroa. 
  Regarding the British attitude, British diplomats have 
unofficially told some reporters that the long visit made to 
London about 20 days ago by Chilean Defense Minister-designate 
Perez Yoma was prompted by his longtime links with British 
sectors, which invited him to visit "when the electoral victory 
of Eduardo Frei, with whom Perez Yoma is closely associated, was 
announced." 
  The same sources have reported that Baroness Margaret 
Thatcher will visit Santiago 20-23 March, but that she will not 
go to the Malvinas Islands, a possibility mentioned by the 
Chilean press. 
  The British Embassy has reported that Thatcher, who will 
come 
to Chile from Brazil, will go to Mexico after leaving Santiago. 
  It has also been reported by Argentine official sources that 
Thatcher plans to hold a news conference in Chile, to present 
her recently published book, and to meet with some Chilean 
officials in light of her connections with British high-tech 
arms manufacturers. 

