BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by M.P.: "Rich Men's Club Opens Its Door; Poland To </F>
Be in OECD in Two Years?"] 
  [Text] The OECD has expressed its consent to accept 
four new countries as members: Poland, Hungary, the Czech 
Republic, and Slovakia (those countries have already submitted 
their applications for membership). An agreement on cooperation 
with Russia was also signed, whose goal is to support the 
economic reforms taking place in that country. 
  Ministers of the most developed countries who gathered in 
Paris on Wednesday particularly strongly stressed the need to 
support free-market reforms in the countries of East Europe, 
through their inclusion in the OECD. The organization was 
established in 1960 to replace the Marshall Plan. 
  I am convinced that the exceptional capabilities of the OECD 
render the organization an ideal means for widening our 
integration into the world in the post-Cold War era, just as the 
previous measure--that is, the Marshall Plan--was a model for 
West Europe in the first years of the Cold War, said U.S. 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher. The OECD can currently 
contribute on a larger scale to finalizing the process of 
postwar reconstruction by helping an increased number of 
countries around the world join the group of highly 
industrialized countries. 
  The OECD also agreed to begin negotiations with South Korea 
concerning its joining the organization. The possibility of 
rapprochement with China is also being considered, but that 
would take place within a cooperation agreement rather than 
within membership. Observers say that the process of obtaining 
full membership by countries who desire it is a question of not 
more than two years' time. I think the issue is about 15-18 
months, says Canadian Foreign Minister Andre Ouellet. But other 
participants of the debate stressed that negotiations could go 
on for longer than that because of the economic difficulties 
East European countries are experiencing. 
  The participants of the meeting are particularly happy 
because Russia, which in the postwar period refused to join the 
Marshall Plan, has now agreed to sign an agreement with the 
OECD, an organization that for a long time was criticized as a 
rich men's club. 
<H5>  [Box, p 1] </H5>
  In a communique announced after the Paris meeting, the OECD 
ministers, among other things: 


    -  Declare that there are more and more signs of an 
improved economic situation. 
  -  Reject protectionism in any 
form. 
  -  Declare the need to implement macroeconomic policies that 
would support strong and inflation-free economic growth. 
  -  Stress 
the importance of reductions of budget deficits over the medium 
term. 
  -  Appeal for increased flexibility of the labor 
market. 
  -  Agree to defend the principles of free trade. 


