CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ye. Vasilkova, `Do Not Get Sick! How Many </F>
Healthy Ones Left?'] 
  [Text] The birth rate in Russia has dropped from 17 to 12 
per thousand residents while mortality rose from 10.5 to 11.4. 
More than 40% of children are born with various defects. 
Significant health deficiencies are found in 75% of 
schoolchildren. 
  In Russia, three million people don't show up for work every 
day due to illness while 20-25 million are in pre- or 
post-illness state. More than 70% of the able-bodied 
population 
is suffering from various disease by the time they reach pension 
age, and this is despite the fact that here people retire 5-10 
years earlier than abroad. The life expectancy of our citizens 
is 10-14 years shorter than in the United States, England, 
France, Germany... 
  Only 20% of the Russian population is healthy. 
  Professor A. Razumov, director general of the Moscow Health 
Problems Center at the Moscow City Government, cited these 
disturbing statistics at the founding meeting of the Russian 
section of the International Academy of Sciences. And he 
explained the principal reason for such an alarming outcome: our 
public health system has always focused on the disease and the 
patient. And they should have preserved the health of the 
healthy. It is still not too late to arrest this troubling 
national degeneration trend, but this calls for urgently 
changing the old concept and developing a new direction of 
medical and social prevention and health protection. 
  Henceforth, this will be the responsibility of the 
International Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine. 
Representatives from our and foreign medical establishments and 
the parliamentary deputies as well as the Russian Federation 
Minister of Public Health participated in the founding meeting. 
  In the words of the Public Health Minister E. Nechayev, ``it 
is hard to imagine that one institute will be able to solve all 
problems which took decades to accumulate; regional branches of 
the institute will be necessary.'' Recently, we encountered the 
following problem: not a single medical expert could answer the 
question of how many healthy people were living in their 
district. Yet they could name without hesitation the number of 
patients with ulcer, cardiac disease, diabetis... So much for 
our psychology. 
  Yet we have been involved in prevention for a long time. 
Back 
in 1847, the book entitled ``Occupational Diseases and Their 
Prevention'' was published in Russia. And after the revolution, 
the outpatient institute was even set up in 1923. 
  Well, one will have to hope that the new institute will help 
all of us to reevaluate ourselves and treat our health as the 
most precious gift. 


