BFN 

<F P=106> [FINSKA NOTISBYRAN report: "We Must Be Self-Reliant"] </F>
  [Text] Foreign Minister Heikki Haavisto (Center Party) 
thinks that Finns must have self-confidence if our country is to 
do well as a member of the European Union [EU]. At the Center 
Party's Europe seminar in Helsinki on Saturday [21 May] Haavisto 
said that we have to build up enough national self-confidence in 
order to be able to promote our objectives even after we become 
a member of the EU. 
  "That is what our influence is dependent on in the final 
analysis, at both the individual and national levels," Haavisto 
said. 
  According to Haavisto, EU membership would give Finland a 
new 
framework for activities in the field of foreign policy. 
Membership would increase Finnish influence and scope for 
action. He stressed that as a member Finland can pursue an 
active policy in pursuit of its own national objectives. 
According to Haavisto, in the future too the central objective 
for Finland is the strengthening of stability and security in 
northern Europe. 
  Haavisto reminded his audience that the EU countries' common 
foreign and security policy also brings with it obligations. On 
the other hand, Finland can expect solidarity from the other EU 
members at the same time as we ourselves will be able to take a 
constructive part in the EU's activities. 
  "Finland has much to contribute to the development of the 
EU's future policy. As far as the EU's relations with Russian 
and the Baltic region are concerned much is expected of Finland." 
  In a speech in Oulu later in the day Haavisto stressed the 
importance of information in the lead-up to the referendum. He 
called for information about both the negative and positive 
effects of EU membership. 
  "Only an open debate, in which we respect the right to put 
forward arguments both for and against membership, will produce 
an acceptable referendum result. Whatever the result is, it 
must not be allowed to divide our people. We Finns need 
unanimity to succeed both inside and outside the EU," Haavisto 
stressed. 
  On the eve of one of the most important decisions in 
Finland's era of independence we must have a clear view of the 
issues. 
  "The political and economic decisionmakers in Finland must 
prepare themselves for membership by building greater national 
consensus," Haavisto said. 

