Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yves Petroff, director of the European </F>
Synchrotron Radiation Facility, by unidentified questioner: "The 
Best Source in the World" -- date and place not given] 
  [Text] [SCIENCES ET AVENIR] The synchrotron is working, the 
very first experiments are taking shape; what is your 
appreciation of the qualities of the ESRF [European Synchrotron 
Radiation Facility]? 
  [Petroff] Our machine will be the best synchrotron radiation 
source in the world for several years to come. A machine of 
equivalent efficiency will only be available in another three 
years' time in the United States (in Argonne, with a 7-GeV 
[giga-electron Volt] synchrotron) and in four years' time in 
Japan (the 8-GeV Spring Height facility). Current tests show 
that we have exceeded our aims in terms of beam quality: 
duration (27 hours instead of the forecast eight), intensity 
and brilliance, stability, and availability. The ESRF 
represents a real leap forward for European research workers. 
We are going through a very exciting period offering new 
prospects in physics and new fields of exploration. 
  [SCIENCES ET AVENIR] What are your forthcoming deadlines? 
  [Petroff] We are now installing the first of the 30 
high-performance synchrotron light lines, fed by undulators and 
wigglers which make the electrons oscillate and make it possible 
to multiply the brilliance of the beam by up to 1,000 times. We 
will open eight lines in September 1994, 10 lines a year later. 
They will on the whole be used by the scientific communities of 
the 12 countries which built the ESRF. To date, decisions have 
been made on 23 lines out of a possible 29 or 30, although some 
have been frozen for a year due to an eight percent budget cut. 
Other light lines will be installed on curvature magnets and 
purchased by organizations or countries which will have 
two-thirds of the beam time, the other third being reserved for 
the use of the ESRF. Five have already been allocated and are 
being installed (Italy, Switzerland/Norway, two for France, and 
another Italian line for an original nuclear physics 
experiment). There are therefore a dozen remaining. In all, we 
will have between 45 and 47 lines. 
  [SCIENCES ET AVENIR] Who will come to work at the ESRF? 
  [Petroff] There are many potential users; Europe is strong 
in 
this field. The first users will be the ESRF's researchers, who 
will be in charge of specialized-light lines. Of course they 
will play host to teams, but they will also have their own 
research subjects. You will not get good people if they can not 
carry out their own work. You do not develop a new piece of 
equipment, a detector, unless you yourself have an idea for an 
experiment in mind. This is the only way to avoid stagnation. 
Working at full capacity, the installation will be able to host 
around 220 research workers per week (the average duration of an 
experiment). We hope to have the machine working for 6,000 
hours per year, in other words round the clock for over eight 
months. Between 2,000 and 2,500 researchers will be able to 
share this time, which will be allocated by program committees 
mostly made up of scientists from outside the facility on the 
basis of the scientific interest of the experiments proposed, 
but avoiding too great a distortion between the country's share 
of the funding and the time allocated. 
  [SCIENCES ET AVENIR] To what scientific advances can we look 
forward? 
  [Petroff] The quality of the source is such that it makes it 
possible to envisage experiments which have been impossible 
until now. We have been able to focus the optical beam down to 
an area measuring a few square microns. We are now able to 
reproduce in the laboratory pressures of 2 million atmospheres, 
which are found at the center of the Earth or on some planets. 
However, this means working on volumes of a few cubic 
microns...hence the optical beam of a few square microns. Our 
aim is thus to tackle experiments where the material to be 
studied is of a very small size. This is often the case of 
protein crystals, of which the study by diffraction will be one 
of the ESRF's major tasks for the coming years. We have also 
been able to show that if a monochromatic beam from one of the 
ESRF's undulators is passed through a hole three microns in 
diameter, it becomes extremely coherent, featuring properties 
similar to those of a laser with a wavelength in the visible 
spectrum. This opens up new possibilities for research into 
phase transitions in alloys, surfaces, and liquids. 

