Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "News at Ten" program] </F>
  [Text] His majesty the king said Jordan was following 
developments in the case of the assassinated Jordanian diplomat, 
Na'ib al-Ma'ayitah, and highly evaluated the Lebanese 
Government's efforts with regards to the ugly crime. Speaking 
to reporters at the Prime Ministry, the king expressed hope for 
a quick solution to the Yemeni crisis, and said Jordan would be 
honored to host its leaders to sign a reconciliation accord. 
His majesty also said Jordan would always support the 
Palestinians to regain their legitimate rights on their national 
soil. However, the king said, coordination with the 
Palestinians was not yet satisfactory, unlike that with Syria 
and Lebanon. 
  His majesty told the "News at Ten" of his absolute 
confidence 
in the prime minister and the cabinet: 
  [Begin Husayn recording, in progress] ... the meeting and I 
had the pleasure of speaking with the ministers of all that 
happened during the period when I was away, and in the same time 
hearing from them some of their views, and having an idea about 
what they were meeting to accomplish in this very day, and to 
reemphasize my complete confidence in the prime minister and in 
every minister for their efforts. And my hope that they will 
not lose heart, but that they will keep going in serving this 
country to the best of their abilities in the times ahead. 
Hopefully, the same case will apply to the parliament, the 
legislative branch, and the cooperation will further solidify 
the foundations that are paved in this country in terms of 
democracy and respect for human rights. [end recording] 
  The king had earlier chaired part of today's Cabinet meeting 
and discussed recent developments in Jordan as well as his 
majesty's visits to the United States, Austria, and Croatia. 
  The king, who was accompanied by His Royal Highness Crown 
Prince Hasan and the chief of the Royal Court, reaffirmed the 
importance of the human element, particularly with regards to 
food and medicine. 

