Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial from 16 March NHAN DAN: "Vietnamese-Thai </F>
Relations of Friendship and Cooperation Are Developing"] 
  [Text] Thai Prime Minister Chuan Likphai's official 
friendship visit to Vietnam today follows the recent visit to 
our country by Singapore Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong. It is 
significant that the prime ministers of two ASEAN countries are 
paying official visits to Vietnam in a short period of time. 
This is yet another manifestation of the common aspirations of 
Vietnam and other friendly countries to accelerate bilateral 
relations and promote cooperation in the region in accordance 
with the trend of peace, stability, and development in Southeast 
Asia and the Asia-Pacific region. 
  Thailand, a beautiful country with a long traditional 
culture, is enjoying rapid economic growth. Over the past 
several years, the government of Prime Minister Chuan Likphai 
has led the Thai people in overcoming numerous difficulties, 
stabilizing the political situation, and accelerating economic 
reform. In 1993, Thailand attained a GDP increase of 7.7 
percent and was ranked among the countries of the world with a 
rapid developmental pace. Its industrial production increased by 
10 percent; agriculture by 2.3 percent; exports by 12.8 percent; 
tourism by 13 percent; investment in the government sector by 54 
percent; and investment in the private sector by 85.7 percent. 
Its foreign currency reserves reached $25 billion, and it was 
ranked among the 10 countries in the world with the highest 
foreign currency reserves. Thailand's per capita income is 
$1,660. Given this development pace, Thailand's economy will 
certainly grow by 8.3 percent this year. 
  Vietnam and Thailand are two close neighbors with 
longstanding cultural ties. The two countries established 
diplomatic relations in 1976. In recent years, relations 
between the two countries have developed favorably, especially 
in the economic and cultural domains. Various bilateral 
agreements have been signed in the fields of trade, economic and 
scientific-technological cooperation, aviation services, and 
promotion and insurance of investments. The two countries have 
established joint committee for economic cooperation and have 
reached an agreement on avoiding double taxation. These 
bilateral agreements are being effectively implemented, thus 
creating a good basis for achieving high results in economic and 
trade cooperation between the two countries. The value of 
two-way trade in 1993 increased by $200 million, compared to $12 
million in 1988. 
  Today, Thailand has 43 investment projects in Vietnam with a 
total capital of $149 million -- third among the ASEAN 
countries. The Thai Government has also helped Vietnam with the 
purchase of essential equipment and in education and training. 
  The Vietnamese people would like to thank the Thai 
Government 
and people for their high appraisal of Vietnam's achievements in 
the renovation undertaking, their special attention to 
accelerating relations of friendship and cooperation with 
Vietnam, and their readiness to share with Vietnam their 
experiences in national development. 
  Through recent visits and meetings between Vietnamese and 
Thai leaders, the two countries have expressed a common desire 
to resolve various outstanding problems and create an atmosphere 
of peace and stability in the region, thereby creating favorable 
conditions for multifaceted cooperation between the two nations. 
Thailand encourages and supports Vietnam to participate in 
various ASEAN development programs and join the organization, so 
as to contribute to restoring peace, stability, and development 
in the region. 
  During his official visit to Thailand in October 1993, party 
General Secretary Do Muoi expressed an earnest wish to see 
Vietnam and Thailand further expand their multifaceted 
cooperation based on the principles of mutual respect, 
noninterference to each other's internal affairs, equality, 
mutual interest, and good neighborliness. 

