BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Moscow Ostankino Television First 
Channel Network in Russian at 0600 GMT on 22 May 1994 broadcasts 
the 30- minute "Test Range" program entitled "How To Stay 
Afloat," which reports on the apparently successful efforts of 
St. Petersburg's Zvezda Association, which produces ship 
engines, to survive in the absence of orders from the Russian 
Navy. This it achieved by laying off half its work force and 
soliciting orders abroad. The program includes extensive video 
of the factory's workspace, as well as footage of a 5000 hp 
engine, described as unique by the factory's chief designer, and 
a high-speed coastal patrol vessel named `Zubr' being built 
along with the Almaz Works. 
  While the focus was on Zvezda, the theme of the program was 
the decline of the Russian Navy and the advances of its' U.S. 
rival. 
  The voiceover introduced the program thus: "At the start of 
the last decade our country had the reputation of being a great 
naval power and possessed -- after the United States -- the 
second most powerful navy. People were afraid of us and 
therefore respected us. Now they are not afraid and have no 
respect. Otherwise, our submarines would not run into American 
submarines off our northern shores, Japanese fishermen would not 
catch fish in our territorial waters, and the Chinese would not 
set a new demarcation line at their discretion on the Amur 
border river." 
  During the program, the following snippets of information on 
the dire state of the Russian Navy entitled "for your 
consideration" were displayed on-screen at intervals: 
  "The Russian Navy's share of the military budget is 50 
percent less than that of the French Navy, a factor of 2.5 less 
than that of the British Navy, and a factor of four less than 
that of the U.S. Navy." 
  "In the opinion of specialists, the level of the fall in 
ship-building production during the implementation of conversion 
programs should not exceed eight to 10 percent a year. 
Production in Russia has fallen by more than 40 percent. This 
threatens the fleet with losses." 
  "Russia's shipyards have not begun building any new surface 
vessels in two years. Submarines are being scrapped that have 
done 15 years' service instead of the requisite 25. The number 
of submarines has been halved over the last six years. The 
Mediterranean and Indian Ocean squadrons have ceased to exist." 
  "In the opinion of U.S. specialists, the military capacity 
of 
the Navy will double by the year 2000 in comparison with 1993 as 
a result of ship perfection. In Russia, out of the 548 ships 
that made up the military structure of the Navy in 1992, there 
will remain 300 obsolete ships by the year 2000." 

