Language: <F P=105> Danish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Ulla Jepsen report: "Muslim Fundamentalists Operate From </F>
Denmark"] 
  [Text] Copenhagen -- Denmark is a base for Muslim 
fundamentalists trying to overthrow the Egyptian government and 
turn the country into an Islamic state. 
  Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim, one of the leaders behind the 
fundamentalist groups in Denmark, instigates acts of terrorism 
-- including those against Danish firms and Danish tourists in 
Egypt -- from his home in the Copenhagen area. 
  He is under sentence of death for his part in the 
assassination of the Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat in 1981. 
The Egyptian state has requested his extradition from Denmark, 
but Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim has been granted political asylum in 
Denmark and cannot, therefore, be handed over to Egypt. 
  "Kill the infidels and join the fight for an Islamic state 
in 
Egypt," Islamic fundamentalists urge in mosques throughout 
Denmark. 
  For Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim and the other fundamentalists the 
purpose of the terrorism is to create economic chaos and social 
unrest in Egypt, so as to overturn President Mubarak's moderate 
government. 
  "The radical Islamic fundamentalists are dangerous, and can 
easily plan and carry out acts of terrorism from Europe," one 
Islamic expert predicts. 
  But the Danish asylum authorities have no opportunity of 
assessing whether or not those seeking asylum are members of 
international terrorist organizations. The asylum authorities 
may not check the identity of those seeking asylum either with 
Interpol or with the police in their country of origin. 
  In Egypt he is considered to be one of the leaders behind 
the 
extremist Islamic groups which, with their bases outside the 
country, attempt to overthrow the Egyptian Government and set up 
an Islamic state. He himself does not hide his links with 
al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah [Islamic group], one of the most violent 
and fundamentalist Islamic groups in Egypt. 
  The left-wing Egyptian newspaper AL-AHALI recently published 
an interview with Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim, [see p. 39 of 6 October 
1993 Terrorism Report] in which he made threats against foreign 
tourists and investments in Egypt, including Danish firms such 
as A.P. Moeller, F.L. Smidth, and Aarhus Flydedok, which operate 
in Egypt, and the 2,000 or so Danish tourists who holiday there 
each year. 
  "Tourism is a non-Islamic source of income which helps keep 
the present government in power, and foreigners have been warned 
to stay away from Egypt," Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim told the Egyptian 
paper. 
  "The radical Muslim leaders such as Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim 
living in various places in Europe and the United States pose a 
very real threat to their countries, and it is easy for them to 
send orders for actions, money, or tapes with religious 
propaganda to members of the fanatical groups in Egypt, for 
example," Hesham Mubarak, a lawyer currently writing a book on 
radical Islamic groups and their international network, told 
POLITIKEN. 
  Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim is a well-known figure in fundamentalist 
circles. In 1981 he was arrested as one of the leaders of the 
banned fanatical group Jihad (Holy War), which later that year 
was behind the assassination of President Anwar al-Sadat. In 
1989 he succeeded in escaping while being moved with other 
prisoners. Via the Sudan and Peshawar in Pakistan, he reached 
Afghanistan where, in the same way as Sheik 'Umar 
'Abd-al-Rahman, thought to be the brains behind the World Trade 
Center bombing, he was one of the leaders behind the Muslim 
fundamentalist volunteers who helped the Afghan Mojahidin in the 
fight against the occupying Soviet power. 
  The Egyptian authorities have requested that Denmark hand 
over Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim, but he need not fear ending his days 
on Egypt's gallows. [see p. 21 of 28 December 1993 Terrorism 
Report] 
  "People who have obtained asylum in Denmark are not returned 
to their own country if there is a death sentence awaiting 
them," Justice Minister Erling Olsen said. 

