Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by Salimah Rashid, assistant secretary for </F>
women's affairs, at the General People's Congress in Surt -- 
live] 
  [Text] The General People's Congress [GPC] -- the meeting 
of the people's congresses, the people's committees, union, 
syndicates, and professional associations -- that is being 
convened in the town of Surt in the period 10th to the 17th 
Sha'ban since the death of the Prophet, corresponding to 22-29 
January 1994, stresses the attachment of the Libyan Arab people 
to its right to the legitimate defense of its freedom, honor, 
choices, and respect for its sovereignty and laws in accordance 
with the UN Charter, and it stresses its commitment to 
international charters and the bases that govern relations 
between states, all of which confirm that disputes should be 
solved by peaceful means, negotiations, dialogue, and discarding 
the methods of use of force or the threat to use force. 
  It rejects the serious trend to which some Western powers 
have been pursuing, in the coercive use of some of the 
provisions of the UN Charter and involving the Security Council, 
in an issue that is not of its concern. 
  The Libyan Arab people feel the persecution that has been 
meted on it by Europe and America, a persecution that has 
historical roots. The campaigns of the crusaders, the Normans, 
the Spaniards, the Vandals, and other successive campaigns 
followed by the tyrant Italian colonialism. Those campaigns 
resulted in thousands of victims, kidnapped and banished people. 
  While the General People's Congress -- the meeting of the 
people's congresses, people's committees, unions, syndicates, 
and professional associations -- mentions this, it recalls with 
pain the U.S. aggression, the raids it carried out, and the 
victims it made among children, women, and old people during a 
tyrannical, unjust, and unjustified aggression, in addition to 
harming the integrity of the Libyan Arab soil and its 
territorial waters, and shooting down aircraft and sinking 
ships, as well as criminally kidnapping Libyan Arab nationals 
who were imprisoned in Chad. The United States is directly 
responsible for those who were killed, wounded, and those who 
deviated or were misled. 
  The Libyan Arab people were expecting apologies from Europe 
because of their unjust campaigns against it, especially Italy, 
to expiate its crimes during its occupation of the Libyan Arab 
lands. 
  The Libyan Arab people were expecting the United States to 
apologize for its air raid, aggressions, and violations of the 
Libyan Arab waters. However, the Libyan Arab people were 
surprised at the deliberate persistence in pursuing its 
oppression instead of receiving an apology. This entrenched the 
feeling of being oppressed among the masses of this steadfast 
people. This feeling of oppression was exacerbated by the 
tangible effects and sufferings due to the embargo and siege [as 
heard] resolutions, and the sanctions unjustly imposed on it, 
thus causing the death of hundreds of people and the loss of 
billions in revenue. All this is aimed at having the sons [the 
two Lockerbie suspects] of the Libyan Arab people handed over, 
to treat its sovereignty and laws with disdain, without any 
consideration for international laws and conventions. 
  While the GPC stresses the spontaneous mass rallying of the 
Libyan Arab people around its leader in huge and unprecedented 
popular gatherings, and its strong commitment to the principles 
of the great al-Fatih [1 September] revolution and its eternal 
human objectives that call for stressing human rights, it 
stresses the fact that the masses of the Libyan Arab people have 
become fully convinced that the governments of the Western 
countries have obstructed all efforts aimed at reaching a 
solution to the crisis and arriving at the truth, despite the 
fact that the Great Socialist People's Arab Libyan Republic has 
taken enough measures and decisions to implement Security 
Council Resolution No. 731. This was given a positive response 
and welcomed within the Security Council itself that barred the 
way before the intransigent stances of the three Western 
countries [France, the United States, and Britain] and their 
deliberate disregard of this positive response. 
  While it has followed with great anxiety the escalation of 
the unjust mandatory sanctions against the Libyan Arab people, 
and while it recalls its previous resolutions and statements on 
this issue, the GPC stresses once more that the Great 
Jamahiriyah will not spare any efforts or means to affirm its 
eagerness for the implementation of justice and to abide by 
international law, in the framework of dialogue and 
understanding, far removed from the language of threat. 
  The Great Jamahiriyah was expecting that its initiative 
would 
find the response of the concerned parties. However, the 
governments of the three Western states have continued in the 
language of threat and provocation in a way that does not serve 
international peace and security, and does not respect 
international principles and conventions and states' 
sovereignty, and does not enable one to reach peaceful solutions 
that are satisfactory to all parties. This was called for by 
all international and regional organizations, particularly the 
Arab League, the OAU, ICO [Islamic Conference Organization], the 
AMU [Arab Maghreb Union], the nonaligned countries, parties, 
popular organizations, and unions of the world. All these have 
stressed their consideration for the stance of the Great 
Jamahiriyah and the initiatives it has put forward in order to 
solve the crisis peacefully. 
  While it expresses its deep regret for and indignation at 
the UN Security Council's submission to the pressures of the 
three Western states -- who have adopted the method of force, 
warning, threat, and blockade as the only means in its dealings 
with the Great Jamahiriyah, aimed at making this conflict last 
longer in order to cause the biggest damages to the Libyan Arab 
people and at achieving other aims that have no relation with 
the issue of the dispute -- the GPC clearly highlights the use 
of a double-standard policy when implementing international 
resolutions. 
  The GPC has decided to send Libyan Arab delegations to 
various world states in order to explain the dimensions of the 
sequence of aggression against Libya and its continuation for 
centuries, as well as the deep feelings of oppression that 
Libyans have. The GPC draws the attention of the international 
community to what follows: 
  First: The enormity of the damages caused to the Libyan Arab 
people as a result of the implementation of the UN Security 
Council's resolutions that have encompassed all sectors and 
caused the deaths of hundreds of innocents, and these damages 
have also affected neighboring and other states. 
  Second: The seriousness of the state of international 
relations, as this crisis has confirmed, that whenever Britain, 
the United States, and France agreed on some matter, they are 
able to impose it on the international community that bears the 
consequences of material and human losses resulting from this. 
  Third: The seriousness of the stage lived by the peoples of 
the world amidst the international changes with their negative 
effects on the Third World and small states. These changes 
contain within themselves possibilities that are carried through 
under various slogans, the most dangerous of which are what are 
called: land for peace, the elimination of the Palestinian 
issue, and other liberation causes. This constitutes a 
dangerous precedent that is in contradiction of the UN Charter 
and all international principles, laws, and conventions that 
forbid and consider the occupation of others' land by force as a 
crime. 
  A just, comprehensive, and durable solution of the 
Palestinian issue can only be achieved by returning all the 7 
million Palestinian people to their land and the setting up of a 
democratic Palestinian State, in which Palestinians and Jews 
born in Palestine would coexist, ending the state of the Zionist 
entity and removing its mass destruction weapons. 
  The GPC reiterates the Libyan Arab people's faith and 
commitment to the unity of the Arab nation in order that the 
latter will possess the constituents of power and development. 
The GPC stresses the Libyan Arab people's commitment to the 
Arab League Charter and the importance of enforcing and 
developing its role, in order that this will be the instrument 
of Arab joint action and bring nearer the day of comprehensive 
Arab unity. 
  The GPC stresses its condemnation of the violations of the 
Arab League Charter and resolutions, particularly the resolution 
of Arab boycott of Zionist aggression. The GPC stresses that 
the changes in our world today, and the frustration and 
bitterness they cause, are scientific proof of the triumph of 
people's revolution and the green Jamahiri thought at 
international level in response to the downfall, decline, 
injustice, grief, oppression, and tyranny from which mankind 
suffers, as the great al-Fatih revolution has become a new 
reading of history and modern times, and a help not only for the 
Arab nation alone but for mankind as a whole. 
  By the General People's Congress, on 17 Sha'ban 1403 after 
the Prophet's demise, corresponding to 29 January 1994. 

