Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Nikolay Drozd: "The Chairman of the Central </F>
Electoral Commission Refutes the Statement of CSCE Observers. He 
Acknowledges `Merely Isolated Violations of the Election Code'"] 
  [Text] Not long before the elections, Karatay Turysov, 
chairman of the Central Electoral Commission, said at a news 
conference that he would not be afraid of the foreign observers, 
because they were "all proper people." 
  But postelection reality quickly forced him to alter his 
opinion. The news conference held in the Central Electoral 
Commission on 10 March was devoted practically entirely to a 
polemic against the conclusions of the CSCE parliamentary 
mission delegation, which evaluated the Kazakhstan elections as 
not entirely democratic or fair. Journalists' questions were 
answered by Tuleutay Suleymenov, minister of foreign affairs, 
Justice Minister Nagashbay Shaykenov, Press Minister Altynbek 
Sarsenbayev, and Procurator General Zharmakhan Tuyakbayev, 
together with the leadership of the Central Electoral Commission. 
  Mr. Turysov, who was the first to speak, said: "It is my 
pleasure to share with you the preliminary election results. 
Unconditionally democratic free elections were held in 
Kazakhstan. Despite skeptics' forecasts, the data at our 
disposal at this time indicates that no less than 75 percent of 
the electorate of the republic took part in the elections. 
Almost 7 million persons went to the polls. We may now say that 
the elections were held in all 135 head-to-head constituencies. 
In some oblasts the public displayed an enviable assertiveness: 
There was a turnout of more than 80 percent of eligible voters 
there. Only in Karaganda Oblast did this indicator constitute 
less than 60 percent." Having touched on the qualitative 
indicators of the future parliament, Mr. Turysov adduced certain 
figures. Thus, the new parliament will have 14.5 percent women, 
which is not bad if compared with the analogous figures in the 
parliaments of other former Soviet republics, and 172 
deputies--the vast majority--have higher education. Turysov 
highlighted particularly the presence among the future members 
of parliament of 18 "pure" lawyers and 15 "pure" economists, 
which, in the opinion of the chairman of the Central Electoral 
Commission, points to the significant professional potential of 
the future Supreme Council of Kazakhstan. 
  Mr. Turysov dwelt on the political orientation of the future 
legislators. Seventy-five deputies representing public 
associations had been elected to parliament altogether, 
according to him. Thus, the seats are distributed among them as 
follows: the SNEK [Union of People's Unity of Kazakhstan], 30 
seats; the Federation of Trade Unions, 11; the People's Congress 
of Kazakhstan, 9; the Socialist Party, 8; the Harmony Public 
Movement, 4; the Republican Party, 1; and the Democratic 
Committee for Human Rights, 1. Several seats were obtained by 
veterans and other less politically engaged public associations. 
The figures cited by Turysov did not take account of 
independents or the official slate. Altogether, the chairman of 
the Central Electoral Commission estimated, the SNEK could 
control in the future parliament approximately 45 seats. At the 
same time the future parliament, according to the information of 
the Central Electoral Commission, will have quite a sizable 
opposition stratum. 
  Speaking of the national composition of the future 
parliament, Karatay Turysov adduced the following figures: 58 
percent of the future deputies will be Kazakhs, and the national 
representation of other nationalities is exceptionally broad: 49 
members of parliament are Russians, and there are 10 Ukrainians, 
3 Germans and Jews, and representatives of the Tatars, Ingush, 
and other nations of Kazakhstan. 
  Having done with the figures at his disposal, the chairman 
of 
the Central Electoral Commission turned to the polemic with the 
members of parliament of the CSCE. He said: "I would first of 
all like to thank all the international observers for their 
assistance and recommendations in the organization of the first 
free parliamentary elections in independent Kazakhstan. I would 
like to make particular mention of the work of the 
representatives of the International Democratic Institute of the 
United States, who spent the most strenuous pre-election time 
with us." He then dwelt directly on the work of the CSCE 
delegation. First of all, Mr. Turysov highlighted the 
statements, which came as a surprise to him personally, made by 
the European members of parliament. He emphasized: "We invited 
them. They were guests, and there are elementary ethics 
preventing guests from passing remarks without having forewarned 
the hosts." The chairman of the Central Electoral Commission 
went on to observe that there is the Foreign Observers Statute, 
which does not allow them to hold such news conferences. 
  Mr. Turysov also harshly criticized all 10 observations of 
the CSCE. Concerning the lack of time for democratic choice, he 
called attention to the fact that two months had been allotted 
for the elections in Russia compared with Kazakhstan's three and 
that "the CSCE did not deem this a violation," and the local 
election code was adopted by parliament entirely in accordance 
with the letter and spirit of the law, of which there was not a 
trace in Russia, what is more. Mr. Turysov also rejected the 
charges of complexity and arbitrary action in the registration 
of candidates and parties. 
  Everything, according to him, was done fully in accordance 
with the election code, and the Ministry of Justice was not in 
the course of preparation for the elections required to register 
anyone. "It is hard to escape the feeling," Mr. Turysov said, 
"that the CSCE observers were guided not by knowledge, but by 
conjecture." "In addition, I see in the fact that more than 700 
candidates were registered here elements of a strengthening of 
democracy and the formation of a genuine multiparty system. The 
assertion that an official slate is exclusively a Kazakhstan 
phenomenon is wrong also." This was employed, according to Mr. 
Turysov, both in Poland and in Romania (the chairman of the 
Central Electoral Commission forgot to mention, it is true, that 
there the electorate could reject such a list and cast its vote 
for the slate of parties or public organizations). In addition, 
as the chairman of the Central Electoral Commission believes, it 
was far harder for the candidates on the official slate than for 
the candidates from head-to-heat constituencies--considerably 
more people had to vote for the former. Karatay Turysov rejected 
the charges that the press had not had an opportunity to engage 
in campaigning. He was supported here by Mr. Sarsenbayev, 
minister for the press, who noted that all the newspapers of 
political parties and independent newspapers continued to appear 
unimpeded, whereas the official press, as a consequence of 
printing difficulties, had switched to publication three times a 
week. He also rejected the allegations that the observers had 
not been accorded access to the closed stations. "They did not 
apply to us. We would have agreed," the head of the Central 
Electoral Commission declared. 
  Mr. Turysov emphatically rejected the assertions that 35 
percent of the vote was obtained as a result of "family" voting, 
when one person voted for the whole household, saying that 
conclusions for the whole republic cannot extrapolated from 
several stations. The chairman of the Central Electoral 
Commission also called attention to the fact that the native 
voter is qualitatively different from the Western voter. "It is 
impossible to change the mentality in three months," he said. 
There was mention also of differences in the evaluation of the 
elections within the CSCE delegation itself. Thus, the Turkish 
representative has already stated his disagreement with the 
overall assessments of the parliamentary assembly. Nor was the 
representative of France in agreement with everything. 
  By the time of the meeting with the press, the Central 
Electoral Commission had received 57 complaints pointing to 
violations in the course of the elections, they had all, 
according to Mr. Turysov, been most carefully studied, and an 
appropriate response to each will be forthcoming. 
  Concerning the technical deficiencies in the organization of 
the ballot, Mr. Turysov observed that everything had been done 
precisely in accordance with the law and that there had only 
been isolated violations. The 10 percent reserve of ballots 
which had been given the district commission over and above the 
electoral roll was, in Mr. Turysov's opinion, a pronounced step 
forward compared with the 40 percent given in the stagnation 
times. 
  Minister of Foreign Affairs Tuleutay Suleymenov attempted to 
tone down the sharpness of some of the opinions of the chairman 
of the Central Electoral Commission, noting the usefulness of 
the institution of observers for the future of Kazakhstan 
democracy. If out of the 12 persons, five or six said that not 
everything was to their liking, this by no means signifies that 
contacts with the CSCE need to be abandoned. He insisted that 
the statement made by the European observers was the consequence 
of a well-meaning error, not of a biased attitude toward 
Kazakhstan. 

