Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Search for Denouncers"] </F>
  [Text] The letters were posted in Wiener Neustadt -- which 
is where [imprisoned neo-Nazi leader] Kuessel's gang, the 
Volkstreue Ausserparlamentarische Opposition (VAPO) 
[Extraparliamentary Opposition Loyal to the People] continues to 
have a functioning "squad." The sender [of the letters]: a 
"Vienna initiative of students for democracy close to the 
people" with a false address. The envelopes were understamped, 
the addressees, student representatives in and around Vienna, 
had to pay a surcharge if they wanted to read the truly delicate 
contents. 
  Inside the letters were: the first issue of a new neo-Nazi 
gazette with the title ALBUS 9/11: NEWS FROM THE WHITE 
RESISTANCE. The neo-Nazi newsletter (masthead: NSDAP/AO, 
Lincoln, Nebraska) is far worse than similar products on the 
scene. Nazi humor of the kind "you are unemployed -- join those 
who survive the holocaust!"; expert instructions for the mixing 
of Molotov cocktails (do-it-yourself "Molie"); all kinds of 
racial theory; and one page of legal advice (ideological terror: 
"Arrested -- What Now?" are the headlines of the luxuriously 
laid out smearsheet). 
  According to the paper, the author of the legal advice page, 
highly topical after the recent series of letter-bomb attacks, 
is a "Graz policeman." Mere provocation -- or further evidence 
of neo-Nazi cells inside the police? 
  As early as 1991, worried policemen from Vienna filed a 
complaint: In the telephone exchange of the police building at 
Rossauer Laende a socialist trade union election poster was 
"embellished" with anti-Semitic and Nazi slogans by unknown 
persons. The room is in a "closed area" and is accessible only 
to officers on duty. Despite the immediate report and the 
intervention of Department 1 (state police), investigations came 
to nothing. 
  Texts inspired by right-wing radical ideology even showed up 
at the Interior Ministry. Officials have said that some time 
ago, a racist smearsheet ("Application for Asylum") was 
displayed on the board on which the personnel office usually 
affixes its news. 
  When, last week, PROFIL reported right-wing extremist 
activities and other defects in the police machinery, the 
responsible officials at police headquarters on Schottenring 
started hectic activities. Leading officials rushed from one 
crisis meeting to the next, concentrating their search on the 
leaks inside the police authorities. That police officer who 
does not conceal his right-wing radical convictions and indulges 
in loyal German activities in league with his subordinates in 
the Lower Austrian Waldviertel area, has gone on sick leave. 
Other officers decided to use their accumulated overtime as 
compensatory time. Meanwhile one has started to go through the 
files of the security alert department -- an enclave of radical 
right-wing "hardliners." 
  In connection with the incipient investigations it has 
become 
public that last summer one officer defected to Croatia and 
joined the fascist HVO [Croatian Defense Force] militia. The 
man is said to have taken along a prohibitively expensive night 
vision system from the security alert department. The problem 
is that his colleagues must be cautious and not talk too much 
about it because the high tech equipment had been bought without 
the mandatory invitation to bid. 
  Yet an increasing number of policemen are venting their 
pent-up irritation and frustration about the conditions in the 
security machinery. They are hoping that right-wing radical 
activities in the police will now finally be "stopped." 
  Guenther Marek, vice president of the Vienna police, has not 
spotted "any signs of right-wing extremism," of course. He 
simply refers to his "33 years of experience in the police": 
Some of the young whippersnappers among the officers were 
sometimes going "a bit too far." In a handout, last week the 
trade union group AUF [Action Group for Independents and 
Liberals], close to the Freedom Party of Austria [FPOe], 
rejected the "denunciations" within the police. Is keeping 
one's mouth shut the police officer's supreme duty? 
  Certainly not. State police officers in Klagenfurt were more 
talkative. The student union there recently received right-wing 
extremist propaganda material, some revisionist stuff, from 
Spain -- sent to "Juergen Hatzenbichler, student." This man 
used to be a member of Gerd Honsik's National Front in 
Carinthia, wrote for Walter Ochensberger's SIEG gazette, and is 
now writing for AULA, IDENTITAET, and JUNGE FREIHEIT. 
  The people from the student union passed the material on to 
the Klagenfurt division of the state police. 
  The officers acted as postmen and handed the letter over to 
Hatzenbichler, not without mentioning from whom they had gotten 
it. The addressee expressed his thanks -- to the student union. 

