CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "New Energy Foundation and 14 </F>
Companies Conceptualize Ocean-Floating Energy Base"] 
  [Text] To float a huge solar battery with a diameter of 3 
km in the Pacific Ocean to supply energy equivalent to a large 
nuclear power plant is the concept which the New Energy 
Foundation (Toshikazu Hashimoto, chairman), an auxiliary organ 
of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), has 
incorporated into a project to construct an "ocean-floating 
energy base" jointly with 14 companies including construction 
companies. The power generated will be converted to hydrogen, 
transported to Japan, and used as a substitute fuel for oil and 
natural gas. The floating base can make full use of solar rays 
on the ocean, and emits zero carbon dioxide which has become the 
chief instigator of global warming. Issues for further 
examination such as construction costs remain, but the view of 
the Foundation is that "realization is possible in 2010." 
  Besides the New Energy Foundation, four general contractors 
including Obayashi-Gumi, Ltd., the Shimizu Construction Co., 
Ltd., and 10 engineering companies including Toshiba and Tokyo 
Gas are participating in the project. Because there are many 
issues concerning the preservation of the global environment and 
protection of resources related to an energy supply system that 
depends upon thermoelectric power stations and nuclear power 
generation, an ocean-floating power base as a large-scale energy 
supply source is being set forth as an alternative. 
  The man-made island will be built in the central Pacific 
Ocean at 10 to 20 degrees northern latitude and 150 to 160 
degrees eastern longitude. The project will create a circular 
"solar island" 3 km in diameter (7 square kilometers in area) by 
hooking together about 3,000 hexagonal buoys densely covered 
with solar battery panels on the surface. Because the ocean site 
is close to the equator, the sunlight is strong, and the 
efficiency of the solar batteries will be raised to a level 
which could supply Japan twice over, and the power generation 
capability will correspond to one nuclear power station at 
860,000 kilowatts. 
  Because transporting power to Japan by transmission lines is 
a disadvantage cost-wise with power loss along the way and the 
cost to lay the power transmission lines, the energy will be 
converted to hydrogen by electrolysis of water, liqueied, and 
transported to Japan by tanker. 
  A plant island (0.2 square kilometers in area) next to the 
solar island will be in charge of processsing and storing the 
hydrogen. With 50 return trips a year between it and Japan by a 
large liquid hydrogen tanker, the solar island can supply about 
200,000 cubic meters of liquid hydrogen. Converting this to 
liquid natural gas (LNG), it can supply energy equivalent to the 
volume consumed by two or three large thermoelectric power 
stations. 

