BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with special envoy Yuriy Dubinin, chief Russian </F>
delegate at negotiations with Ukraine, by Andrey Sharyy in the 
"Diplomatic Paths" column: "Misfire" -- place and date not 
given; first paragraph is introduction] 
  [Excerpts] The main diplomatic path of the day leads us 
from Moscow to Kiev. The talks in Sevastopol on the fate of the 
Black Sea Fleet have ended in scandal. Yet special envoy Yuriy 
Dubinin, head of the Russian delegation at the negotiations with 
Ukraine, whom ROSSIYA's correspondent asked to comment, prefers 
not to dramatize what has happened. 
  [Dubinin] The aim of the negotiations, as is known, was 
defined by the presidents of the two countries in a special 
agreement. Concrete provisions were formulated on which accord 
was to be reached: separate basing of the navies and the 
proportions of sharing out the battleships and vessels. It 
cannot be said that the negotiations in Sevastopol were 
completely without result. Pavel Grachev showed maximum 
flexibility, and as a result parameters bearing on the division 
of Black Sea Fleet ships and vessels were defined. As far as 
navy basing is concerned, however, the actions of the Ukrainian 
delegation, regrettably, fully deviated from the instructions by 
the Ukrainian president. 
  [Sharyy] To what do you attribute this? 
  [Dubinin] Let the Ukrainians straighten this out themselves. 
I would like to confine myself to stating the fact. 
Incidentally, lying in front of me is a report from Kiev about 
a statement made by Kravchuk after the negotiations: "I am for 
a Russian Navy base to be created in Sevastopol in accordance 
with international legal norms." But apparently certain forces 
in Ukraine do not like presidential orders. [passage omitted] 
  [Sharyy] The development of relations between the two 
fraternal peoples is nonetheless proceeding against a rather 
negative backdrop, accompanied by an endless chain of incidents: 
Crimea, the Black Sea Fleet, the gas pipeline, nuclear problems, 
and once again Crimea and the fleet. Maybe Russia should take a 
tougher line? 
  [Dubinin] I do not think that this is the hope that should 
feed us. After all, politicians exist not in a vacuum, but in a 
broad sense their actions are subordinated to the will of the 
people. The more misfires -- as long as we are doomed to have 
them -- the more clearly the public opinion of both countries 
sees the reasons behind the problems, the more clear-cut will be 
their assessment, and the quicker the will of the people will be 
expressed. [passage omitted] 
  [Sharyy] In its time Russia stated the need to prepare and 
sign a public-political treaty with Ukraine that would regulate 
all spheres of bilateral relations. When could such a document 
appear? 
  [Dubinin] We have accumulated a fairly rich material. 
Nearly 80 intergovernment and interdepartmental agreements have 
been signed, which substantially facilitates work on the text of 
the treaty. But such documents are signed only after the field 
of relations between the countries has been cleared. Then law, 
the political will of the people, and actual reality can be 
adjusted to each other. Any, even the most important, document 
is an intermediate stage in these relations, but hardly a point 
of their departure. If everything depended only on Russia we 
would be within arm's reach of the result. But Moscow cannot 
conclude a treaty with itself and naturally we do not posses all 
the information about the sum total of "inputs" on the Ukrainian 
side. 
  [Sharyy] From the professional, diplomatic point of view, 
what are the difficulties in the negotiations with the 
Ukrainians? 
  [Dubinin] First of all, psychological difficulties arise, 
because with a whole number of our current partners we were 
familiar also yesterday, when we worked in almost adjacent 
offices. Some Ukrainian representatives are displaying certain 
peculiarities that are rather unusual in diplomatic practice. 
If they do not like a member of the Russian delegation, they 
seem to be doing everything to remove him: They apparently 
believe that the fate of the talks depends on a particular 
individual, not on the country's position. Sometimes there are 
unnecessary emotional outbursts, as was the case with the 
detention of Pavel Grachev's plane in Sevastopol. What did the 
Ukrainian colleagues want to achieve? After all, Ukraine hardly 
needs two defense ministers. But all of this can be overcome. 
When we begin to work with a common aspiration to achieve a 
goal, we find a common language quickly. [passage omitted] 

