Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu] </F>
  [Text] Many changes took place last year at home and 
abroad. At home the civilian-led government was inaugurated and 
new policies and reform were promoted. Internationally, 
important changes and progress also continued. 
  In particular, as part of the international society, our 
country's position and role were newly established. I also 
believe it was a year in which we were able to feel skin-deep 
our international responsibility. 
  Our government established a broad and future-oriented 
diplomatic line of the so-called "new diplomacy," and promoted 
various diplomatic policies according to it. In the past, our 
diplomacy concentrated only on survival and security. However, 
our diplomacy deviated from it and is now unfolding our 
diplomacy so that we can actively take part in matters of 
interest and concern to the world and resolving international 
issues as well as working for our welfare. President Kim 
Yong-sam's central role at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
[APEC] summit and the dispatch of our engineer corps for UN 
peacekeeping operations symbolically show our new diplomatic 
efforts. 
  It is important to view the international environment which 
we are faced with when we once again assess the direction of our 
diplomacy for the new year 1994. In a nutshell, while the world 
is becoming smaller it is moving toward a peaceful period but of 
fierce competition. 
  The world is becoming smaller because of developments in the 
technology of transportation and communication as well as the 
enhancement of mutual dependency among the countries. Now the 
world is literally becoming a global village, and it has become 
an era in which no country in this world can live without 
interchange with other countries. 
  After the end of the Cold War, international society was 
able 
to free itself from the fear of a great nuclear war which can 
destroy the whole world, thus making it possible for 
international society to all the more actively promote peace and 
reconciliation. Therefore, the interest of the countries are 
naturally leaning toward the development of the economy and 
society which gives priority to prosperity and welfare, rather 
than politics and security. As a result, competition among the 
countries in the field of economy and communications is becoming 
fiercer with each passing day, and an era of "unlimited 
competition" has emerged as the rules for competition has been 
laid down as a result of the Uruguay Round [UR] negotiations. 
  Amid this kind of international environment, we can view 
some 
essential points on what direction our diplomacy must move 
toward for 1994. First of all, we can now embody on a 
full-scale our "new diplomacy" which has established its frame. 
The five bases of the new diplomacy is globalization, 
diversification, pluralism, regional cooperation, and 
future-orientation. The reliability of the five bases is 
enhancing with the current international trend. Last year was 
the first year of the new diplomacy. We especially concentrated 
on globalization. I believe that 1994 will emerge as year in 
which regional cooperation and pluralism will be important tasks. 
  A few years ago the arrival of the Pacific era of the 21st 
century seemed only a figure of speech. However, with the rapid 
emergence of the Asia-Pacific region, it has now become a fait 
accompli. 
  The Asia-Pacific region's cooperation is approaching as our 
top priority. 
  The Asia-Pacific cooperative system made steady headway at 
the Seattle APEC summit. Our country is already playing an 
initiative role. Also, through the Indonesia APEC summit which 
is to take place this year, APEC will become our core diplomatic 
arena. Here we will pursue "open regionalism" and will continue 
efforts to strengthen cooperation on both sides of the Pacific. 
  The diplomacy of regional cooperation is important in the 
field of security. We will participate in the security dialogue 
which is being carried out centering on the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN] and will actively participate in 
the "multi-faceted security dialogue of Northeast Asia" put 
forth by us. Countries in this region agree that an 
institutional device is necessary for cooperation in the 
security field of this region. When pending issues such as North 
Korea's nuclear issue is resolved can this kind of cooperation 
be accelerated. 
  Strengthening the economic and communications diplomacy is 
especially important in the process of diversifying the matter 
of interest and concern of our diplomacy. The World Trade 
Organization will be inaugurated as a result of the settlement 
of the UR. Here, we must concentrate our diplomatic strength 
and play an active role. This is a follow-up measure of the UR. 
In the process of dealing with various trade issues, our 
diplomacy in this field is important in reflecting our national 
interest to the utmost, but it is also necessary in preparing 
for possible international negotiations such as environmental 
issues in the future. 
  The economic diplomacy must also place emphasis on assisting 
the strengthening of our economy's international 
competitiveness. To achieve this we must actively use the 
economic cooperation dialogue organization established with the 
United States and Japan as a result of last year's summit 
diplomacy, and exert efforts in the diplomacy for exchange of 
science and technology and for cooperation in resources. 
  Amid the worldwide trend of openness, our diplomacy must 
play 
the role of being helpful in the internationalization of our 
overall society. Cultural diplomacy that can promote cultural 
and human exchanges with various countries and diplomacy to 
assist Koreans residing overseas are also important. In 
particular, since this year is "Visit Korea Year," this must be 
actively used not only in promoting our tourist business but 
also in cultural exchange and in internationalization. 
  In unfolding diplomacy according to this kind of direction, 
we must further strengthen relations with the four big powers as 
well as our allies and promote friendly cooperation will 
countries of all regions including Asia, America, Europe, the 
Middle East, and Africa. Also at time when the role of the 
United Nations is increasing, we must actively participate in 
the multifaceted diplomacy centering on the United Nations. We 
must actively assist and participate in international efforts to 
jointly deal with worldwide interests such as human rights, 
wiping out drugs, and assisting refugees. I believe that 
efforts on the government level as well as through private 
activities such as by the international cooperative group are 
important. 
  There are other pending issues that our diplomacy must 
resolve. A main example is North Korea's nuclear issue. North 
Korea's nuclear issue is the greatest barrier in promoting our 
future-oriented new reunification diplomacy. This must be 
urgently resolved for peace and security on the Korean peninsula 
as well as on the whole area of Northeast Asia. I hope that in 
the new year such South-North relations can be overcome so that 
we can move toward the road of peaceful co-existence and 
reunification. 
  Frequently people compare today's international situation on 
the Korean peninsula to the situation of the late Yi dynasty. 
If we can learn a lesson from history it will be that of not 
repeating our wrongdoings. We failed to make a wise selection 
at the crossroads of opening up and closing our doors to the 
outside world. We paid a dear price from the late 19th century 
to the early 20th century. We are faced with another selection 
with the opportunity of making a leap forward. We must wisely 
and courageously move toward openness and internationalization 
to choose a bright future for our nation. 

