Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by A. V. Yablokov: ``Five Aspects of the No. 1 </F>
Problem''; based on his speech at the plenary session of the 
international seminar ``Radioactive Waste: Assessing Its Risk, 
Minimizing Its Formation, and Processing and Storing It,'' held 
in Moscow 13-17 September 1993] 
  [Text] The consistent results of the analysis of the 
country's environmental situation over the past three years 
indicate that the country's radioactive contamination is the 
environmental ``No. 1 problem'' for Russia. 
  ``The peasant doesn't cross himself until the thunder 
sounds.'' And so, that problem has become plainly urgent only 
today, when the consequences of the impact of radiation, which 
has no taste, color or smell, have become clear. Consequences 
that manifest themselves, to a considerable extent, not right 
away, and sometimes only after generations. 
  Radiation has played a dirty joke on humanity, which to this 
day has not listened to the ominous warnings of specialists. Did 
humanity listen to the warnings of Vladimir Ivanovich Vernadskiy 
that were made back in the 1920s? Or to the warnings voiced by 
Curie, Sakharov and many other of the most highly qualified 
professionals dealing with radiation? 
  And what about the impenetrable system of general secrecy 
that for decades surrounded former Soviet and now Russian 
nuclear-radiation problems (and still surrounds them, albeit 
granted, to a lesser degree)? After all, even in 1988-1989, 
three years after the proclamation (our 
emphasis--Eds.) of glasnost, orders were being issued making the 
consequences and details of the Chernobyl disaster secret, and 
even directly forbidding physicians (in violation of their 
Hippocratic Oath) to establish a connection between illnesses 
and radiation injury. Even this year, just several months ago, 
the Ministry of Atomic Energy (in my opinion, in circumvention 
of the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Natural 
Resources, or in any event, in direct contradiction to existing 
legislation on access to environmental information) managed to 
persuade the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet to adopt a special 
decree blocking the declassification of its past departmental 
documents. Can this possibly enhance our national security? I am 
afraid that just the opposite is true. 
  It is fundamentally clear that radiation contamination in 
Russia is the No. 1 form of pollution. Chernobyl fallout covers 
thousands of square kilometers, of which many have been taken 
out of economic use for a long time to come. 
  Vast territories have been contaminated or subject to 
contamination in the Southern Urals as a result of a number of 
radiation accidents and the discharge of highly radioactive 
effluent into the Tobol basin. Radiation has also scorched 
Russian lands adjoining the Altay with the Semipalatinsk proving 
ground. The Novaya Zemlya proving ground is a major source of 
radioactive contamination on a Russian-wide scale. The results 
of the long-past above-ground and atmospheric tests there will 
be felt for a long time still to come through the biological 
accumulation of radionuclides in the North's ecosystems. 
  And what about the contamination of the Yenisey over a range 
of hundreds, possibly thousands of kilometers as a result of the 
production of weapons-grade plutonium at Krasnoyarsk-26? Or the 
contamination of the underground environment as a result of the 
pumping of liquid radioactive waste into it at Krasnoyarsk-26 
and Tomsk-7? Or the nearly 100 underground nuclear explosions 
``for peaceful purposes'' that have left radioactive pockmarks 
across practically the whole country? 
  But all this contamination may seem a trifle in comparison 
to 
the daily, already familiar radiation danger that we face from 
the hundreds of thousands of instruments containing radioactive 
isotopes and are used with sometimes criminal carelessness; from 
the ``background-radiating'' urban developments where the walls 
of many buildings have been made, like those in Omsk; out of 
radioactive crushed stone, from radioactive roads, the beds of 
which contain radioactive crushed stone and slag; from unmarked 
former radiation graveyards; from the numerous dumps on the 
sites of the former processing of uranium and thorium ores; or 
from the insufficiently responsible attitude toward the use of 
radiation technologies in medicine, science and technology? 
  In the past decade, more than 600 sites of radioactive 
contamination were found and eliminated on the territory of 
Moscow. But that is not reassuring, since another 50-60 such 
places are found here every year, and by no means all of 
Moscow's territory has been adequately studied in this respect. 
Moreover, even in the largest cities, the existing monitoring of 
radioactive contamination is incapable of rapidly giving us 
comprehensive and objective data. 
  Numerous problems of the country's radioactive contamination 
are connected with radioactive waste in the broad meaning of the 
term. And without ``teaching the scientists'' who are 
professionally concerned with the problems of radioactive waste, 
let me note for them and a broad circle of ZELENYY MIR's 
readers--from the viewpoint of an ecologist and a 
politician--just a few aspects of the problem that are, as a 
rule, considered either extremely rarely or merely in passing, 
and then only by specialists. 
  First of all, a word about the professional responsibility 
of 
scientists connected with the nuclear industry. How could they 
have developed for the economy technologies that did not wind up 
with, figuratively speaking, the ``cleaning up of the work 
place''--elimination of the radioactive contamination, which 
(they knew!) inevitably accompanies the technologies they 
developed? When the active construction of nuclear power plants 
began in our country and abroad, specialists essentially brushed 
off the question of the problems of radioactive waste: ``Don't 
prevent us from working for the good of civilization; the 
questions of radioactive waste will be solved in the next few 
years!'' Several decades have passed, and where is that 
fundamental solution? Vitrifying radioactive wastes or hardening 
them with bitumen or cement, or pumping them under the ground, 
or discharging them into the world's oceans cannot be considered 
such a solution. Larger and larger territories are having to be 
set aside for radiation graveyards. It now appears that we 
intend to shift the solution of the problem of radioactive waste 
onto the shoulders of future generations. 
  Why have specialists only now started talking seriously 
about 
plans to dismantle and take out of service nuclear power plants 
that have outlived their normal lifetimes? Can it be that 40 
years ago developers did not know that the lifetime of power 
stations was limited? They knew, but they did not show the least 
concern for preparing plans for rehabilitating the environment 
following their operation. 
  The second aspect of the ``No. 1 problem'' is closely 
connected with the first and also rarely discussed by 
specialists--it is the problem of public trust. 
  Our nuclear-industry leaders repeatedly talked about the 
absolute safety of the RBMK [uranium-graphite channel-type] 
reactor. And perhaps only Academician A. P. Aleksandrov has 
publicly repented for what he did, speaking at a general meeting 
of the USSR Academy of Sciences. And what about the rest of the 
general and head designers and other persons who made the 
extremely dangerous decisions that resulted in many billions' 
(of dollars) worth of losses and the ruined health of thousands 
of our fellow citizens? 
  I speak of the need to repent because only that can result 
in 
the CLEANSING, after which TRUST can come. 
There will be no TRUST without REPENTANCE 
and the admission of MISTAKES. Incidentally, the 
precise determination of the causes of the emergence of the 
problem of radioactive waste, which is closely bound up with the 
admission of past mistakes in the nuclear and radiation 
technologies that were developed, would also be of great help in 
choosing courses of effective action today. Without public 
trust, the development of the nuclear industry will be made more 
difficult or will be altogether impossible, no matter what 
decisions the Council of Minsters takes. 
  At present the Ministry of Atomic Energy is giving a lot of 
attention to restoring public trust: in the form of colorful 
booklets on nuclear power plants, the establishment of 
public-relations units, and an active campaign in the press. But 
all that is not enough, because the society is not hearing 
penitence, or repentance, or the open and honest analysis of 
mistakes from them. 
  Is it possible that anyone seriously thinks that the 
questions of building interregional radiation graveyards on 
Novaya Zemlya or the Kola Peninsula, or the question of building 
a storage facility for the plutonium from dismantled nuclear 
warheads can be solved at this time in the quiet of Moscow 
offices? Glasnost with regard to plans, a respectful and 
constructive dialogue with citizens who think differently than 
the developers of nuclear technologies--that is the only way to 
overcome the distrust of society. 
  The third aspect of these reflections concerns the 
legitimacy 
of actions. We dream of living in a rule-of-law state and are 
trying to build one as soon as possible, but in our practical 
activities we shamelessly ignore or violate the laws. 
  The law has determined (whether this is good or bad, it has 
determined) that radioactive materials may not be shipped in 
from abroad, that radioactive waste may not be discharged into 
the sea, and that radioactive waste may not be disposed of in 
space. The first and second provisions are constantly violated, 
and serious discussions are constantly being held about 
violating the third--conferences are held and resolutions are 
adopted. What are, for all intents and purposes 
CRIMINAL activities are openly planned and carried 
out! Think about it, you nuclear specialists, so that later some 
of you will not end up in the defendant's dock. 
  A law on the handling of radioactive waste has already 
passed 
on first reading in the Supreme Soviet. It is distressing to 
realize that it is only the first legislative act specially 
regulating radiation safety. Our nuclear specialists, who very 
vigorously emphasize their complete observance of all the 
recommendations of the IAEA [International Atomic Energy 
Agency], have for some reason failed to follow a single one of 
the IAEA's main recommendations to any state planning the use of 
nuclear energy--BEFORE building nuclear power plants 
and introducing nuclear technologies, ADOPT NATIONAL 
LEGISLATION! Let's be candid: Unquestionably, the absence 
of such legislation and adherence only to semisecret or 
completely secret departmental instructions, going splendidly 
hand in hand with the aforementioned secrecy, which sometimes 
even now assumes paranoid forms, were advantageous to many 
people. 
  The fourth aspect of the problem, which is also of great 
practical importance, is overcoming the departmental syndrome, 
which can be briefly formulated as follows: ``The interests of 
the department come first.'' 
  It has developed historically that the Ministry of Atomic 
Energy is a kind of state within a state, a supermonopoly in 
many spheres of the use of nuclear energy. And according to the 
classical laws of state bureaucracy, any department acts first 
and foremost in its own interests. But the interests of such an 
immense department as the Ministry of Atomic Energy may 
dangerously diverge from the interests of the state and society. 
For example, there exists a new, unusual method of hardening 
liquid wastes that is several times as effective as and less 
costly than the existing methods for vitrifying them or 
hardening them with bitumen or cement; it was developed outside 
the Ministry of Atomic Energy by a group of ``solar'' scientists 
and practitioners from Berezniki. The need to more rapidly and 
efficiently cleanse the country's territory of radioactive waste 
would seem to be obvious (given the colossal budget deficit), as 
would the necessity of promptly checking out that proposal, and 
if its effectiveness is confirmed, shifting to that method. But 
that is apparently not the case: for a year the inventors have 
been asking the Ministry of Atomic Energy to conduct an expert 
review of their studies and proposals! 
  It will be difficult to overcome the Ministry of Atomic 
Energy's dangerous departmental syndrome, but it is essential to 
do so. And in solving the problem of radioactive waste, a good 
possibility for that already exists. The draft State Program on 
Radioactive Waste that spent several years wandering the 
hallways is reaching the home stretch--it is being considered in 
the government and will be handed over for approval by the 
legislative branch. So let us try to open financing for that 
program on a competitive basis, and not according to the 
directives of the Ministry of Atomic Energy. Experience in 
developing and operating such nondepartmental specialized funds 
has been fairly well developed in the world--it can and should 
simply be borrowed. 
  The fifth aspect is the acceptability of the risk of any 
given technology for society and the state. We in Russia have 
lagged seriously behind many industrially developed countries of 
the world in developing the whole concept of risk and safety, 
and its central component--the concept of acceptable risk. At 
present, unfortunately, many people find this risk absolutely 
unacceptable in practically all the main areas of the nuclear 
industry. Therefore, it should be no surprise that the 
development of the branch has turned out to be unstable. 
  The Interdepartmental Commission for Environmental Safety 
that was recently established as an agency of the Russian 
Federation Security Council has decided to consider, among its 
top-priority problems, various aspects of environmental danger 
associated with solving the problem of radioactive wastes in the 
country. And as chairman of that commission, I make the 
following request to all qualified specialists, of which there 
are a good many among the readers of ZELENYY MIR: formulate and 
convey through the editors proposals that may subsequently be 
discussed in the commission and the Security Council in order 
that specific managerial solutions in this area that is of vital 
importance for the state, society and each one of us may be 
proposed to the president and the government. 

