BFN 

  [Text] According to a regional meeting held today to 
commend those who had made contributions to anti-smuggling work, 
success has been achieved in rounding off a stage of the 
anti-smuggling operation which the region launched in 1992 on 
instruction from the party's central authorities and the State 
Council. Now large-scale maritime smuggling activities have 
been basically quelled in the region. Over the past two years, 
a total of 236 smuggling cases were cracked, in which more than 
500 million yuan worth of smuggled goods were seized. 
  The purpose of this commendation meeting sponsored by the 
regional leading group for anti-smuggling operation is to sum up 
experience gained from anti-smuggling work in this region over 
the past two years, to commend those who performed 
outstandingly, and to further forward the anti-smuggling 
struggle in the region. Commended at the meeting were the Beihai 
customs office and 17 other outstanding collectives, as well as 
Peng Zhonglian and 46 other outstanding individuals. 
  Cheng Kejie, chairman of the regional government; Ding 
Tingmo, deputy secretary of the regional party committee; Yuan 
Zhengzhong and Liu Hong, vice chairmen of the regional 
government; as well as the person-in-charge of the National 
Anti-Smuggling Office, attended and addressed the meeting. 
  Chairman Cheng Kejie noted: Now the situation is excellent 
in reform and opening up in our region, and the region is 
enjoying social stability. In order to keep this trend, we must 
continue to do a good job in anti-smuggling work. It is 
necessary to uphold a resolute attitude in the anti-smuggling 
struggle, to make sure that investigations into major and 
important cases are precise, and to work together to push ahead 
the anti-smuggling struggle in this region by encouraging the 
public to report smuggling cases and by counting on the close 
support from departments concerned. 
  In their speeches, Deputy Secretary Ding Tingmo and Vice 
Chairman Liu Hong expressed full appreciation of the 
achievements made by the region in the anti-smuggling struggle. 
They stressed that leading people at all levels must have a 
thorough understanding of the role of the anti-smuggling 
struggle as an important, long-term, and complicated task, place 
anti-smuggling work on the order of the day, and strengthen 
leadership over the task. In this connection, it is necessary 
to launch and step up a comprehensive anti-smuggling operation 
by administrative, legal, economic, and educational means, to 
intensify operations, and to speed up investigations in major 
and important cases. Law-enforcing departments, such as the 
customs, border defense, and industrial and commercial 
administration sectors, must give full play to their respective 
functions, cooperate more closely with each other, and join 
forces in the anti- smuggling operation. 
  According to a plan mapped out by the National Leading Group 
Against Smuggling, an operation will be launched in the near 
future to examine the enforcement of anti-smuggling laws. The 
anti-smuggling sector and other related judicial departments in 
the region must play an active part in and give support to this 
operation. 
  During the meeting, Vice Chairman Yuan Zhengzhong briefed 
the 
participants on the progress the region has been making in 
reform and opening up, and on the development of various fields 
in the region. 
  Also present at the meeting were principal leading people of 
prefectures, cities, and counties along the border and the coast 
of the region, and people-in-charge of member units of the 
regional anti-smuggling leading group, the Liuzhou railway 
bureau, and the departments concerned directly under the 
regional authorities. 

