Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arno Noeldechen: "Hoechst AG Is Gambling on </F>
Process Engineering and Chemical Research Projects With 
Fullerenes; Hopes for a Future Market, but Up to Now Still No 
Commercial Applications Feasible; Cooperation With University 
Research Laboratories"] 
  [Text] Frankfurt--According to Utz-Hellmuth Felcht, a 
member of the board of directors of Hoechst, Inc., who is in 
charge of research, economic successes, or even breaking even on 
costs, is not the goal of the company's current activities in 
this field of research. But now, in a generally poor economic 
situation, the chemical company is making an effort to learn to 
understand a very promising, potential material of the future in 
terms of its reactions and to keep in mind applications of it 
that will prove interesting for the company in the long run. 
  The company at present produces worldwide fullerene C-60 and 
C-70 in lots of several kilograms for many universities and 
industrial research laboratories. In so doing, the process that 
Wolfgang Kraetschmer and Donald R. Huffman developed in 1990, 
with graphite electrodes in an arc light, is used. 
  The company generally asks for a "cost contribution" for 
very 
pure fullerene (99.4 percent pure) of $135 per gram; the 
contribution for larger quantities is negotiated or they are 
given away if a financially badly off university laboratory 
decides to collaborate with the company. The current production 
of fullerenes is certainly not yet a cost-effective business. In 
this way, Hoechst wants to ensure the later commercial 
evaluation of the possibly useful results of its research. 
Twenty university teams are at present collaborating with 
Hoechst in Germany, as the company recently let us know. 
  Comparable collaboration between universities and industry 
is 
rare in this country. But chemists do not find it so difficult, 
since they themselves are scarcely in a position to make use of 
their inventions and discoveries under their own control. The 
chemical company had no difficulty in incorporating test lot 
production into its Knappsack plant as early as in 1992 with a 
converted plasma unit. Since then, it has developed an improved 
separation process that should be ready for patenting, the 
capacity of which in continuous operation is close to the limit 
of the currently required amounts of fullerene. 
  Fullerenes are completely new materials with properties that 
neither graphite nor diamonds, as pure modifications of carbon, 
exhibit. Moreover, the ball-shaped fullerene molecules are 
extremely stable from the kinetic point of view, but then again 
very unstable in thermodynamic terms. And because of their 
thermodynamic behavior, they can be readily transformed into new 
kinds of compounds. 
  As explained by Swiss Prof. Francois Diederich of the Swiss 
Technical College in Zurich, because of their hollow, 
ball-shaped structure, fullerenes can be modified in four 
different ways, all of which they have already been able to 
verify with experiments. In the process, the inclusion of 
molecules in the cavity itself did not prove to be very 
effective since they are hardly ever released again. 
  The cage-like structure on the existing double bonds of the 
carbon atoms can be forced open and then many other molecules 
can be incorporated into and added onto it. Individual carbon 
atoms can also be successfully replaced with other atoms, boron, 
for example. As a fourth possibility, new atoms can be packed in 
between the cavities of the fullerene balls, which are only a 
few nanometers in size, and new kinds of crystalline compounds 
obtained. Scientists are today already speaking of a "fullerene 
chemistry," with which dozens of possible applications are 
heralded in at least the fields of electronics, chemistry 
itself, and new materials. 
  Because of their physical properties, chemically altered 
fullerenes can lead to new kinds of semiconductors in molecular 
or nanoelectronics. Because of their electrical and nonlinear 
optical properties, photoconductors and utilization of their 
optical-electrical behavior are conceivable. Fullerenes are 
genuine electron conductors that, unlike other organic 
molecules, transmit charges via defective electrons, so-called 
electron holes. That is why they are regarded as electrolyte and 
electrode materials for lightweight accumulators and batteries. 
Light activates fullerenes and the electron conduction leads to 
a useful electroluminescence. They are also studying their 
superconducting properties. But the results of this research are 
not yet far enough advanced to arouse hopes for a new class of 
high-temperature superconductors. 
  In the field of chemisty fullerenes can be readily altered 
to 
become catalysts. Because of their molecular size, which is 
equivalent to that of anthracene molecules and is in the 
nanometer range, luminous new colors for printing or 
photocopying technology are especially conceivable. 
  Up to now several pharmacological effects of fullerenes have 
been noted. With attached active groups, they can also be used 
for new medicines on the molecular biological scale or only as 
carrier molecules for radio isotopes or other active substances. 
  Encapsulated, in the form of so-called nanocapsules, they 
appear to be less well-suited to this because their molecular 
structure is probably too stable, which is why the encapsulated 
active substances are hardly released again. But precisely 
because of this, they are well-suited to the production of new 
kinds of contrast agents for X-ray diagnosis or tomographic 
display procedures. Antiviral and antibacterial action, which 
can, morever, be controlled by light induction, opens up new 
ways of creating antibiotics. Fullerenes or their crystal 
compounds, fullerides, with metals or other elements, will 
probably not appear on the market so quickly as new kinds of 
active substances since they would have to be produced cheaply 
in large quantities for that purpose. And that has not yet 
become apparent for the moment. 
  Some of the application possibilities fall within Hoechst's 
own production categories and will possibly open up new fields 
of operation for the company, in pharmaceuticals or antibiotics. 
Hoechst, which with sales volumes of more than DM8 million 
(first half of 1993: DM4.523 million) occupies a leading 
position in the world market for pharmaceuticals, is on the 
lookout for new pharmacological substances. 
  To be sure, Hoechst today already supplies high-temperature 
superconductors for research and industry but, if it is 
demonstrated that fullerenes can be produced more cheaply and 
can retain their superconducting state under the influence of 
magnetic fields as well--as scientists think they will on the 
basis of the initial experiments--market opportunities clearly 
exist in this field. 
  Because of the wealth of possible applications, it is still 
too early to determine which fullerene compounds they will 
actually be able to market as well in 10 or more years time. But 
the company does have good prospects of becoming a leading 
supplier. 

