BFN 

  [Text] Zhengzhou, June 22 (XINHUA) -- Construction is to 
start soon on an irrigation and power-generation project on 
China's second-longest river, the Yellow River [Huang He]. 
  The Xiaolangdi Multipurpose Project is claimed to be the 
second-largest water-conservancy scheme after the Three Gorges 
Dam on the Chang Jiang river. 
  There will be a 154-m-high dam with 15 large tunnels and a 
spillway to divert the river, handle floods, generate power and 
control sediment. 
  In April this year the World Bank approved a loan of 570 
million U.S. dollars for the project, which will take nine years 
to complete. 
  Flooding problems along the Yellow River date back thousands 
of years, as do China's efforts to harness the river. 
  Each year 400 million tons of silt is deposited downstream, 
raising the riverbed. 
  It took half a century for experts on water conservancy to 
identify Xiaolangdi, where the middle and lower reaches meet, as 
the ideal place for a dam to harness the Yellow River. The 
project got the go-ahead from China's National People's Congress 
in 1991. 
  Located about 130 km downstream from the Sanmen Gorges Dam 
in 
central China's Henan Province, the Xiaolangdi Reservoir will 
have a designed storage capacity of 12.6 billion cu m. 
  Zhu Yunxiang, who oversees the entire project, said that 
when 
completed, the dam, together with other reservoirs nearby, will 
enable the lower reaches of the river to withstand floods of a 
magnitude that occurs only once in 1,000 years. 
  In the first 36 years after it is put into use the dam will 
be able to prevent 7.3 billion tons of silt from flowing 
downstream, reversing the present buildup trend. 
  The project will also help control the ice jams which occur 
every spring downstream. 
  The reservoir will pump an additional four billion cu m of 
water a year for agricultural and industrial use along the lower 
reaches. It will generate up to six billion kwh of electricity a 
year. 
  The Xiaolangdi Dam is one of the most costly projects funded 
by the World Bank, which since 1988 sent 15 delegations to 
conduct assessments before giving it the nod in April this year. 
  In May this year two Chinese, one French and one Italian 
company won bids to construct the three main parts of dam. 
  Zhu Yunxiang said, "for all competitors, the huge investment 
is a money-making opportunity." 
  Zhu added that there are complicated technical problems in 
the construction of the mammoth project. 
  Preparatory work, which cost about 1.2 billion yuan (about 
137 million U.S. dollars), was completed last month after two 
years' effort by a workforce of 15,000. It includes facilities 
for transportation and telecommunications, water and electricity 
supplies and accommodation for workers. 

