BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Army General Raul Castro, minister of the </F>
Revolutionary Armed Forces, FAR, to close the plenum of FAR's 
national committee of civilian workers; date and place not given 
-- recorded] 
  [Text] Dear Comrades: As I said earlier, I will be brief. 
We have always believed that the endeavors of the union of 
civilian workers of the FAR are not only compatible with the 
principle of a unified command but are also an irreplaceable 
tool to an army such as ours, the Cuban people in uniform. The 
fact that this union has had a productive existence of over two 
decades, and the accomplishments of this last period that you 
have summarized and studied in depth at this meeting, confirm 
our conviction. 
  At a recent FAR military council, I termed colossal the work 
carried out and the results achieved over the past three years 
by the FAR. Thanks to these achievements, the special period has 
not reduced our capabilities or our combat-readiness. The abrupt 
cutoff of Soviet supplies and the drastic reduction of resources 
allocated from the national economy did not intimidate us, nor 
did it render us content to remain as we were. Had we not 
drafted plans to resist a military blockade in case of war? Was 
that an exercise in rhetoric, or did it express our commitment 
to confront the worst, resist, and triumph? We tackled the 
special period in peacetime with the same commitment with which 
we would have shouldered the hard trials of war. 
  The unbelievably difficult situation was a foothold for 
strengthening the concept of the War of the Entire People and 
redoubling efforts, unleashing creative initiatives, and 
encouraging the boldness of millions of patriots involved in 
defense tasks in different ways. Among these are the civilian 
workers of the FAR and their union. You deserve part of the 
credit, and it pleases us to say so at this meeting with the 
national committee of the civilian workers of the FAR. 
  What has been accomplished should never cause us to become 
smug or complacent, for what remains to be done exceeds what has 
been done. It is true that our food production has been growing 
at an annual rate of 30 percent. We should not decrease the rate 
of growth, however, until we achieve full self-sufficiency in 
food for our troops and civilian workers. What's more, we ought 
to produce enough to be able to allocate a modest amount of food 
and other essential products to the families of career military 
and civilian cadres. We are not satisfied with what we have 
attained. We will try to provide more each day to every member 
of the FAR, including, as is logical, its civilian workers. 
  Every one of us has to become convinced that every component 
will have what it is able to attain through its efforts. Work, 
the only source of wealth, ought to be the main factor 
determining who will have more, and who will have less, food, 
high-demand items, and services of every kind. Parallel to this 
in-house effort to free up resources previously allocated to us 
by the national economy, we have the growing efforts of the 
Youth Labor Army, its members, and its laborers at the 
self-contained farms, who struggle to produce food for the 
population in the savannas and mountains: in sugarcane and 
coffee fields; and production of tubers, vegetables, grains, and 
citrus. This is an extraordinary contribution, as the demand for 
a labor force reaches its peak. 
  The officers and soldiers of regular units, and Camilitos 
and 
civilian workers from military schools and academies, are also 
marching to the fields. A good example of this is the Labor Feat 
banner just received from Comrade Pedro Ross, secretary general 
of the Cuban Workers Federation [CTC], by a detachment that, 
representing the FAR, worked in the fields in Pinar del Rio and 
Havana Provinces. The task of reshaping and perfecting the 
structure of the FAR, which we have undertaken in order to bring 
it into line with our economy's current possibilities, could not 
have been achieved in such a short period of time and with such 
quality without the full support of every soldier and civilian, 
from the generals to the soldiers and from the union leaders to 
the very last worker. 
  We are not deceiving ourselves, nor are we trying to deceive 
the enemy, when we affirm that we are today more powerful and 
undefeatable because we rely on our own resources and have 
developed and strengthened the doctrine of the War of the Entire 
People. We are not the armed forces with the most active 
resources. Nevertheless, we can affirm that we have the 
best-prepared armed force on the continent, and therefore the 
one with the most vitality, the one capable of emerging from the 
bowels of the earth following massive surprise air raids and 
making any enemy trying to invade Cuba pay an immense price. Any 
invaders who, at an elevated cost, might manage to occupy 
portions of our territory will feel the earth shake beneath 
their feet. 
  They would have not a single moment of respite. 
  A hornet's nest of millions of men and women fighting in 
every corner of the fatherland would force them to desist from 
such a criminal attempt, take their tens or hundreds of 
thousands of casualties, and learn, finally, that anyone trying 
to take over Cuba, will harvest the dust of its soil drenched in 
blood, or die in the struggle, as General Antonio Maceo once 
warned on behalf of Cuba and for all time. 
  During the same period that we worked at the aforementioned 
tasks, other no less important or difficult tasks have been 
carried out, such as preserving and maintaining equipment and 
weapons and preparing the theater of military operations. In 
these tasks, the contributions of the civilian workers of the 
FAR and all workers nationwide, through the National Association 
of Innovators and Efficiency Experts and the Technical Youth 
Brigades, have been significant. 
  The CTC and its unions have worked systematically at 
mobilizing workers to build people's tunnels. They have done 
this quietly. The number of kilometers they dig every day in the 
soil of the fatherland to ensure that it will always be free and 
sovereign are figures we do not publicize. However, we can 
publicize and stress this: Over 30 million pesos are donated 
annually to support the Territorial Troops Militia. How noble 
are today's workers, the historical heirs of the tobacco workers 
of Tampa and Key West who gave Marti, the delegate of the Cuban 
Revolutionary Party, 10 percent of their measly salaries to buy 
weapons for the Mambi Army! 
  Such efforts in the military aspect have helped sustain the 
work that we began seven years ago and which was the main focus 
of our previous congress. Many of the results the FAR have to 
show, particularly in production and services, are owed in great 
measure to the improvements made in the enterprise system begun 
back then, which also included budgeted units. I remember all 
the time we devoted to this issue during the fifth congress, the 
enthusiasm which with the delegates welcomed the idea, and all 
the progress made since 1987, unhurriedly, consolidating every 
inch of the way. 
  The contributions of the civilian workers of the FAR and its 
union organizations have been decisive to everything that has 
been attained on this economic front. We are aware that there 
are still problems that need to be solved. Nevertheless, we are 
convinced that civilians and military together, we will solve 
them one step at a time -- including the farming enterprises, 
where it is more difficult and complex to consolidate the 
structures, stabilize the work force, and become profitable. 
  The reduction of the expenses of the active FAR and the 
increase in profitability of our enterprises are the main 
pillars of our goal to make the FAR financially self-sufficient. 
This is the road we are following and we are exactly half-way 
there: This year, our budget was reduced by 50 percent. This was 
a concrete contributionm to correct the nation's financial 
imbalance, one of Cuba's main goals, as expressed in the recent 
resolutions of the National Assembly of the People's Government. 
This is also a reflection of the will of the peoples' vanguard 
as expressed in the Parliaments in the Workplace assemblies that 
gathered more than 3 million workers so as to hear their 
opinions and have them discuss the most crucial of the nation's 
problems, mobilize their enormous reserves of patriotism, and 
strengthen their revolutionary awareness. 
  We could talk about many other issues but this is not 
necessary, since they have been discussed extensively. Today, 
you have issued the call to the Sixth Congress of the Union of 
Civilian Workers of the FAR. The agenda contained in the summons 
is a broad one, and covers the main issues. Therefore, extensive 
study prior to the discussions and discussions at the base and 
middle levels will help not only to clarify the essence of these 
problems but also to mobilize everyone's will to promote 
solutions, as well as to increase political awareness. You can 
count on the utmost support of our commands, the political 
bodies and organizations of the Communist Party of Cuba, and the 
Union of Young Communists in the FAR. 
  The Sixth Congress is our congress, our civilian workers' 
most important event. The congress will be held in 1995, 100 
years after that congress at which the fatherland was reborn 
with a new call to arms for freedom, 100 years after the death 
in combat of Jose Marti and the epic war of independence headed 
by Antonio Maceo and Maximo Gomez. 
  Fidel taught us how to commemorate national centennials. One 
hundred years after Marti's birth, he organized us and headed 
the assault on the Moncada Barracks. Let us pay a worthy homage 
to Marti's centennial, and to those heroic, sublime, and sacred 
moments of the fatherland's through an exemplary congress of the 
civilian workers of the glorious FAR. 
  I urge you to use all your intelligence and to work 
energetically and boldly during the next 12 months in order to 
attain that goal. We will meet at the Sixth Congress, but also 
before. Thank you very much. [applause] 

