Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yang Hui (5017 1920): "China's Taxation Black </F>
Box"--the writer Is a Mainland Chinese With a U.S. Doctorate in 
economics] 
  [Text] Editor's note: Of late, the authorities 
of Mainland China are taking a host of measures to rectify the 
financial order by readjusting their financial policy. This has 
attracted widespread attention. However, another bottleneck in 
China's economic reform, namely taxation and the reform of the 
tax system, has all along been overlooked by the media. Last 
August the World Bank published an evaluation report on China's 
current economy. In an unequivocal manner, it told the Mainland 
Chinese authorities that tax reform should be an urgent task in 
China's economic restructuring. In this context, we have 
arranged to publish the following special-topic article for our 
readers: [end of editor's note] 
  "The Kuomintang is known for its numerous taxes; the 
Communist Party is noted for its countless meetings." This was 
once an often-quoted saying. As time has passed by, however, 
this once-prevailing saying has taken on a new version: "The 
Communist Party has even more taxes than its meetings." This is 
really a dramatic change in the state of affairs. 
  If we pick up a newspaper or a magazine, we will see it is 
full of astonishing news: The taxation department in such and 
such a place was under attack, and its tax officials were beaten 
up. Farmers in Sichuan and Guizhou staged massive riots because 
of the unbearable taxes and other levies imposed by various 
levels of officials. In the past, streets were flooded with 
posters and signs reading "class struggle, once grasped, will 
work wonders." Now, this slogan has been replaced by "Resolutely 
Strike at Tax Evasion!" Despite this change, the relentless 
atmosphere remains the same. 
  Zhou Enlai served as premier for many years. While no 
comprehensive marriage law was worked out during his tenure, a 
tax law was enacted as early as 1950. It has been over a decade 
since the reform and open policy was put into force. However, no 
media law has been promulgated, nor is there a comprehensive law 
on banking. On the other hand, there are close to 30 tax laws of 
one kind or another. It goes without saying that all rulers in 
history used taxes to squeeze out the people's money. The 
Communist Party is no exception to this. 
  In the West, paying tax is known as paying "the price for 
civilization." If tax is collected and used in the proper way, 
it is, of course, helpful to the progress of society. Let us see 
if the Chinese Communist Party's tax laws and the revenue from 
taxes have served the purpose of promoting social progress; in 
other words, if the price paid by the people is worthwhile. This 
is a subject of great interest. 
<H5>  There are innumerable taxes, big and small. </H5>
  The current taxes in China are so numerous as to make the 
people confused. 
  The following is a case in point (the person's name is 
pseudo): 
  Hu You and his four friends set up a small neighborhood 
wholesale store in a medium-sized city in southern China. The 
store's business was to supply goods to individual small 
businessmen. After one year, they earned 150,000 yuan in gross 
profit, which was a pretty good return. Both Hu You and his 
employees were happy. They intended to use part of the profit to 
expand their business. Beyond their expectation, however, when 
the tax official came to assess the taxes, they found that they 
could not spare a single penny. Worse still, they even had to 
borrow money from the bank for next year's operations. The 
following is a summary of their accounts: 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Gross profit             |150,000                  |                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Expenditures             |                         |Balance                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Business tax             |15,000                   |135,000                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Costs                    |30,000                   |105,000                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Wages                    |40,000                   |65,000 (net profit befor-| 
|                         |                         |e tax)                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Income tax (48%)         |31,200                   |33,800                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Urban construction tax   |2,184                    |31,616                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Energy tax               |3,380                    |28,236                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Education surtax         |150                      |28,086                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Bonus tax                |20,000                   |8,086                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total                    |141,914                  |8,086                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                         |including 77,914 of taxes|                         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  After seeing the tax official's calculation, Hu You and his 
employees were shocked. Only a few thousand yuan would be left 
after the tax payment. What is more, they had to pay the levies 
imposed by the local government. As a matter of fact, they had 
planned to satisfy the demands of the local government and 
neighborhood officials in the hope that they could do their 
business without impediment next year. Now that they found they 
had practically no money left in hand, their dismay can be 
imagined. 
  China's tax system is most complicated, overloaded with 
trivial details, and quite confusing. Not only are there 
numerous categories of taxes, but some of them overlap each 
other. As pointed out frankly in Contemporary China, 
a series of books with Deng Liqun as the editor-in-chief, the 
Chinese tax system is a "multi-level and multi-link compound tax 
system marked by a large variety of taxes collected on numerous 
occasions." Complicated and confusing as the system is, its 
purpose is quite clear: The more tax revenue, the better. And it 
doesn't matter whether or not the tax imposed is conducive to 
production and social progress. The following joke is 
representative of the Chinese people's view on the tax system. 
  A famous acrobatic troupe came to a place to give 
performances. In one of the performances, a Hercules-type 
performer squeezed a lemon dry with his hands. Then, he 
announced that the troupe would give a 100-yuan prize to anyone 
who could squeeze out one more drop of juice from the lemon. 
Encouraged by the handsome prize, several vigorous young guys 
mounted the stage one after another, but none of them could 
squeeze out a single drop of juice from the lemon no matter how 
hard they tried. At this time, everyone extolled the performer. 
Suddenly, an old man mounted the stage, his advanced age and 
thin physique drawing laughter from the audience. Acting slowing 
with full confidence, this old man, whose hands were wizened, 
squeezed out a spoonful of juice from the lemon. With his eyes 
glaring and voice trembling, the performer asked the old man: 
"What is your occupation?" "I work with the tax bureau," replied 
the old man unattentively. 
  If we look into the procedure that a product goes from the 
factory to the customer, we will see the layer upon layer of 
taxes that have to be paid and the overlapping of these taxes. 
Take steel products as an example. The factories and mines are 
required to pay a resource tax and a product tax. The wholesale 
dealer must pay a certain industrial and commercial tax. When 
the product reaches the retail store, a business tax has to be 
paid. If other taxes levied on these three tiers (such as those 
listed in the above table) are taken into account, certainly 
there is no profit to make from the product. 
  People cannot help but feel surprised at the large variety 
of taxes currently in effect. Now, there are nearly 30 different 
taxes in the industrial and commercial tax category. These, plus 
the customs duty, agricultural tax, and other special taxes give 
a total number of no less than 50. This is really a case most 
suitably described by the saying: If you don't calculate it, you 
won't know it; once you calculate it, you'll be shocked. 
  It should be noted that China replaced the profit-delivery 
system with the tax-payment system as late as 1983. The 
appearance of so many taxes in such a short period of time makes 
people surprised at the work efficiency of the Chinese bigwigs. 
Matter-of-factly, however, this high efficiency is 
understandable if we look into how the Communist Party has 
amassed money since it seized the reins of government. When the 
Communist Party took over Mainland China, the 
several-decade-long civil war had just ended and the country 
could hardly regain its breath. Then, the Chinese Communist 
regime blatantly joined the Korean War. Facing the requirements 
of supporting a big war machine on the one hand and 
consolidating the fledgling political power on the other, the 
Communist Party could do nothing but squeeze out as much as 
possible from the national product. Unlike all newborn feudal 
regimes in history which, as a rule, implemented a rest and 
recuperate policy, the Chinese Communist regime totally followed 
the example of the wartime communist economic policy pursued by 
the [former] Soviet Union. It put all revenues and expenditures 
under its control, exercised military-style financial and tax 
management, and proceeded step by step to eliminate practically 
all private industries and businesses. At that time, only two 
categories of industries and businesses were allowed to exist, 
namely, state-owned enterprises and collective enterprises. This 
way every penny earned by the enterprises could be put into the 
"State Treasury." In agriculture, it nationalized every piece of 
land so that it could impose a high agricultural tax with no 
loophole for tax evasion. During the years of Mao Zedong, the 
nation's revenue budget accounted for some 40 percent of the 
national income, the highest percentage being 45 percent. Given 
such a high accumulation rate, we can imagine that every penny 
saved by the people after meeting their subsistence was taken 
away by the Chinese Communist regime. This is why even the 
Chinese Communist regime itself later acknowledged that it "owed 
too much" to the people. After the start of the economic reform, 
the profit-delivery system could no longer meet the needs of a 
modern economy, and with the implementation of the tax system, 
the only way to get more revenue is to impose a large variety of 
taxes on the people. 
  As revealed by an article in JINGJI CANKAO BAO, a survey of 
183 state-owned enterprises shows that 81.6 percent of their 
1989 net income was turned over to the state in the form of tax 
payment and 10.2 percent was used to pay off loans, leaving only 
8.2 percent that could be retained by the enterprises. The tax 
burden on private enterprises owned by individuals was even 
heavier. Their tax payment accounted for more than 85 percent of 
the profits, and this did not include their individual earnings 
regulatory tax. 
<H5>  There are innumerable overt and covert taxes. </H5>
  The above-mentioned taxes are specified by law and are known 
as central government taxes. In fact, they are not the only 
taxes that taxpayers are required to pay. Besides central 
government taxes, there are local taxes and various kinds of 
levies not specified by law. 
  Now, in China, all levels of government can formulate 
quasi-tax policies to boost their revenues. For example, in 
addition to regular taxes, the central government is collecting 
construction funds for key energy and transportation projects, 
budget adjustment funds, and an education surcharge. Following 
the central government's steps, local governments are collecting 
three to five different kinds of funds--even as many as eight 
kinds of funds in some cases--plus a variety of fees. Examples 
of the funds collected are education funds, civil affairs funds, 
aid-to-the-poor funds, telecommunication development funds, 
family planning funds, and water and soil preservation funds. A 
real estate company in a county in Sichuan wanted to erect three 
buildings as a business project. The budget was 4 million yuan, 
but it was required to pay as many as eight kinds of fees, 
totaling 1.023 million yuan. These included the new area 
development fee, network construction fee, auxiliary urban 
construction fee, educational facility fee, garbage 
transportation fee, and construction management fee. 
  In a certain sense, fees collected from individuals by local 
governments and administrative organs at various levels are a 
form of tax revenue. For instance, many city governments in 
Guangdong Province have imposed a fee on new households moving 
into their respective cities with amounts ranging from 3,000 to 
10,000 yuan. For Shenzhen City, the fee is 10,000 yuan, and for 
Zhuhai and Guangzhou cities, it is 5,000 yuan. A county 
education bureau in Guangdong requires a payment of 7,000 yuan 
from each teacher who wants to change his or her job from 
teaching to other professions. In fact, there are fees of all 
descriptions. If you want to marry, you have to pay a marry 
registration fee of 80-300 yuan. If you want a government office 
to affix its seal on a document, you have to pay 10-20 yuan. If 
you have a new baby and want to include him or her in your 
household residence record, there is a fee of 300 yuan. Even in 
the case of distribution of the "relief grain subsidy," a 20 
percent handling fee has to be deducted from the subsidy. This 
really makes the people indignant. 
  The numerous levies are another form of tax. According to a 
newspaper report, a survey covering 523 private enterprises in 
Henan Province shows that they are required to pay more than 50 
kinds of levies and fees. This is 120 percent more than the 
taxes specified by law. A town in Guangdong's Shunde county is 
collecting as many as 38 kinds of levies from private 
enterprises. A survey conducted in a county in Jiangsu Province 
shows that 92 party and government organs and institutions were 
collecting money from the three county-owned factories. There 
were 52 different kinds of levies, totaling 820,000 yuan. 
  The heaviest levies are those imposed on farmers. Usually, 
there are very few industrial and commercial enterprises in the 
area administered by the grassroots rural government. So the 
only way to get an extra revenue is to impose more levies on 
farmers. Now, most local governments have imposed over a dozen 
kinds of levies on farmers. Since the agricultural tax and other 
levies imposed on farmers take away more than 50 percent of 
their income, farming has become a nonprofitable undertaking. 
For this reason, many farming families in Guangdong have left 
their land idle and moved to other places to do sideline work. 
Knowing this, we should not be surprised that farmers in 
Fengyang County, Anhui Province, have made the following remark: 
"Now, we are short of nothing but Chen Sheng and Wu Guang [Chen 
Sheng and Wu Guang were two farmers who led a revolt against the 
Qin Dynasty in Chinese history]. 
  At this point, we cannot help but admire the wisdom of 
Buddhism. Many Buddhist temples hang a couplet, one part of 
which reads: "Seeing that there is no definite law in this 
world, we know that all man-made laws are unlawful." 
<H5>  What is the result of heavy taxation? </H5>
  Everyone knows that China's current tax system is irrational 
and cannot meet the requirements of modern economic development. 
Can the numerous taxes bring a large tax revenue to the Chinese 
Government? In fact, the answer is negative. According to the 
China Statistic Yearbook for 1992, the 1991 revenue 
was 361 billion yuan (of which more than 80 percent is tax 
revenue), which accounted for only a little more than 18 percent 
of the GNP. Compared with the 31 percent registered in 1978 
before the replacement of the profit delivery system by the tax 
payment system, apparently this meant a big drop in the 
proportion of state revenue in the national economy. In 
developed countries, the state revenue averages 40 percent of 
the GNP. Sweden's state revenue even accounts for more than 60 
percent of the GNP. In China, which is a developing country, a 
drop in such percentage means that less funds are available for 
investment in expanding reproduction--an unfavorable situation 
for national economic development. 
  How can such heavy taxes yield only low revenue? According 
to 
the well-know Laffer Curve in the tax theory, a heavy tax burden 
has an adverse effect on production, and the result is a low tax 
revenue. In China, however, the situation is different. The only 
explanation for the low tax revenue is low efficiency in tax 
management--that is, a large amount of tax revenue has been lost. 
  In China, a lot of money is spent for tax management. Now, 
the country has an excessively large tax work contingent. There 
are as many as 600,000 tax workers. The money spent each year 
for their salaries, bonuses, and welfare benefits amounts to 4 
billion yuan, and the administrative expense is as high as 2.3 
billion yuan. The tax management expenses are equivalent to more 
than 2 percent of the net tax revenue. This percentage is more 
than twice as much as that in developed countries. Moreover, 
this does not include other related expenses and the cost of 
time consumed by enterprises in preparing tax reports. 
  The heavy tax burden has created lots of instances of tax 
evasion because enterprises would make no profit if they fully 
complied with the tax laws. According to statistics compiled by 
China's department concerned, the nation's loss of tax revenue 
is at least some 100 billion yuan per year, exceeding one-third 
of the annual net tax revenue. As for the extent of tax evasion, 
state-owned enterprises evade 50 percent of their tax liability, 
township enterprises 60 percent, self-employed workers and 
businessmen 80 percent, and individuals 95 percent. Enterprises 
have all kinds of strange tricks to evade taxes, two methods 
commonly in use being forging accounting records and 
fraudulently exaggerating costs. An enterprise in Shenzhen had 
an annual business volume of some 3 million yuan, but falsified 
its records to show 700,000 yuan in order to pay less tax. Some 
enterprises even submit fraudulent tax reports to show losses 
instead of profits. A private workshop in Henan's Shangqiu city 
did contract work for a military plant between 1986 and 1992. It 
committed tax evasion in the amount of some 1.6 million yuan by 
forging receipts and invoices and by issuing so-called "big head 
and small tail" invoices. There are lots and lots of cases like 
these, and what have been discovered are but a drop in the 
ocean. In addition, many officials have taken advantage of their 
positions or easy access to market information to engage in 
stock trade, particularly stocks issued for in-house 
shareholders. By buying and reselling such stocks, they can earn 
several dozen thousand yuan in profit, but they do not pay a 
single penny of income tax. 
  Of course, there must be a favorable environment for the 
existence of so many tax-evasion cases. Tax officials take 
bribes from tax evaders to line their pockets. Not only do they 
turn a blind eye to acts of tax evasion, but some of them even 
help taxpayers to unjustifiably reduce their tax liability or 
get a tax refund. In Guangdong, many grassroots tax cadres never 
have to pay by themselves when eating out. All that they need to 
do is to tell the restaurant to charge the account of such and 
such an enterprise. This is already an open secret. In a county 
town in Guangdong, a number of new storied houses have been 
built by private owners. Most of the owners are party and 
government cadres, of whom 20 percent are tax cadres. So the 
area is called a "villa of thieves" by the local people. A real 
estate company in Guangdong earned an annual profit of 3 million 
yuan and had to pay an income tax of 1.65 million yuan according 
to the tax law. In fact, it only paid 200,000 yuan to the 
government after spending nearly 100,000 yuan bribing the tax 
officials. In China where "the embezzlement trend at the end of 
the century" is becoming increasingly pronounced, no matter how 
many laws are enacted, they are but scraps of paper. The local 
governments and tax cadres can do whatever they like. For their 
own interests, they can formulate tax-reduction and exemption 
policies that are inconsistent with the tax laws. Some 
economists have sounded the alarm that with the tax laws and 
regulations badly marred by local governments and enterprises, 
China's tax system has practically collapsed. 
  The heavy tax burden has evoked strong resistance from the 
people. The past few years have seen a lot of instances where 
people revolted against heavy tax burden. Statistics compiled by 
the China State Administration of Taxation show that between 
1987 and 1991 there were 14,176 anti-tax revolts, including 
1,916 cases in which tax organs were stormed. The 1993 massive 
anti-violence action staged by farmers in Sichuan was a powerful 
reaction to the government's excessive taxes. According to 
statistics, more than 200 such collective and organized anti-tax 
activities were staged by farmers last year. The increasing 
number of smuggling cases may be perceived as activities derived 
from the anti-tax action. As revealed in a report submitted by 
the General Administration of Customs to the State Council in 
1991, each year the state lost about 30 billion yuan in customs 
duty and 8.5 billion yuan in industrial-and-commercial taxes as 
a result of the increased smuggling activities. 
  Another effect of the current tax system is the 
intensification of inequality in society. The layer upon layer 
of taxes have distorted the prices of commodities. Let us still 
take steel products as an example. When a product has reached 
the consumer, three layers of taxes have been paid. To make a 
profit, the enterprises must shift the tax burden to the 
consumer. Because of this, the price of the product reaching the 
consumer has been distorted again and again and increased by a 
big margin. Ultimately, the tax burden is not on the enterprises 
but on the people at large. On the other hand, those who get an 
extra income are not effectively taxed. This means that the 
current distribution of tax burden is in the nature of a 
regressive tax rate; in other words, the poor are required to 
shoulder a heavier tax burden, while the tax burden on the rich 
is lighter. An example is the above-mentioned stock traders who 
can earn several hundred thousand yuan but pay no income tax at 
all. Meanwhile, the government is indifferent to this phenomenon 
and is not playing an effective role in adjusting the income 
distribution. As a result, some people are taking advantage of 
their power to create more and more wealth or to earn an 
increasing amount of capital gains, while the income of the poor 
is becoming less and less. This has aggravated the unequal 
distribution of wealth and added to unfairness in society. 
  A conclusion derived from the above is that China's tax 
system is inefficient and unfair. 
<H3>  Who are the guests at the ball and feast financed with tax 
revenue? </H3>
  Who are to enjoy the cake of tax revenue? Who are the guests 
at the tax feast? 
  With the collapse of the myth of being a "great, glorious, 
and correct" party, there is a doubt about the way it uses the 
tax revenue. Modern Western economics represented by Niskanen 
has an incisive thesis on the waste of a nation's assets by the 
government acting as a monopoly power collective. Chinese 
economist Qian Jiaju has also made an estimate of the waste 
caused by China's planned economic system. According to his 
estimate, of the more-than-1.2-trillion-yuan fixed assets owned 
by the state, some 600 billion yuan worth of assets are left 
idle. As can be seen, the huge amount of fixed assets created by 
the all-people ownership system, though praised by hack 
economists, is actually a big waste. 
According to data published in the 1992 China Statistic 
Yearbook, the nation's main expenditures other than capital 
construction investment and education spending were as follows: 
The administrative expense accounted for 10 percent of the total 
spending. The price subsidy was also close to 10 percent of the 
total spending. Subsidies to loss-incurring enterprises was 
equivalent to 17 percent of the net tax revenue. 
  A report by the CPC Central Discipline Inspection Commission 
reveals that the nation's public funds spent each year for 
banquets and travels have exceeded 120 billion yuan. This is 
more than one-third of the net tax revenue. Quite obviously, a 
considerable amount of the tax revenue is used by public 
servants. At present, the number of "financial work" cadres is 
increasing by 1 million each year. On the average, each province 
now has some 70 departments and bureaus, and 30 percent of them 
are unnecessary. A prefecture or a city has about 50 party and 
government organs, of which 40 percent are unnecessary. A county 
has 45 organs, and actually 25 percent of them are not required. 
Each year the tax cadres use a large amount of the people's tax 
money for extravagant feasting and wining. Of course, they want 
to have more new taxes to collect. 
  Subsidies to loss-incurring state enterprises and to extra 
low prices account for one-third of the nation's expenditure 
budget. Money used in this way is an ineffective and wasteful 
spending. According to statistics, over 30 percent of the 
state-owned enterprises are suffering losses. The economic 
reform has been conducted for so many years, but the problem of 
loss-incurring enterprises has as yet to be tackled. So far the 
only thing that the government has done in this regard is using 
the people's tax money to fill the bottomless pit. 
  The greatest state expenditure is capital construction. 
Apart 
from the great waste of investments under the present system as 
pointed out by Qian Jiaju, another problem is that not all 
investments are in the interest of the people at large. As a 
matter of fact, investments are dictated by the result of power 
struggle. Sometimes, a large-scale investment project in a 
locality can only increase the revenue of the local government, 
create job opportunities for the local people, and spur the 
development of other undertakings in that particular locality. 
For example, the Three Gorges Project--a 
several-hundred-billion-yuan project under planning--will have 
no direct benefit to Guangdong, Guangxi, Inner Mongolia, and 
Xinjiang, and much less will it do any good to Hainan. But this 
investment project will use the money of the people throughout 
the country. As another example, if a national stock exchange 
center is established in Shanghai, the city will become a 
national financial center, and its service trade and other 
related industries will be stimulated. Here, of course, the 
greatest beneficiary will be Shanghai--a much greater tax 
revenue for its government and much more job opportunities for 
its people. But there will be no benefit at all for the remote 
provinces. If we understand this, we will see why all localities 
have a "thirst for investment." Now, the disbursement of state 
funds is not to ensure a balanced development across the 
country, but represents the result of trials of political power. 
According to someone's estimate, during the past years, 
investments in Beijing and Shanghai have accounted for about 40 
percent of the nation's total investments. Apparently, the 
political forces representing these two cities are very strong 
in the power trials at the central level. The Shanghai people 
often complain that during the past years a large part of their 
revenue has been taken away by the central government. Actually, 
however, the central government has made the largest amount of 
investment in Shanghai. The investment in the Baoshan Iron and 
Steel Complex is equal more or less to the several decades' 
investment that the central government made in a remote 
province. As another example, while recently the central 
government has requisitioned funds from the southern provinces 
to cope with the current financial crisis, Jiang Zemin and Zhu 
Rongji have privately made "an exception" in favor of Shanghai. 
This is a result of the trials of power. In contrast, the 
central government has required Guangdong Province to contribute 
an additional 4 billion yuan. Such a requirement is a kind of 
extortion in view of the fact that up to 1985 Guangdong's quota 
of contribution to the central government had been less than 8 
billion yuan a year. It is, therefore, quite clear that the 
chief guests at the tax feast are the bigwigs who can in no way 
stand for the interests of the people of the entire country. 
  From the above analysis, we can draw a conclusion: China's 
tax system is complicated and burdensome, inefficient and 
unfair. Moreover, a lot of tax revenue is wasted. Long ago, some 
Chinese economists noted that the tax system must be reformed. 
However, under the present circumstances where the price system 
has yet to be rationalized and the legal system is still 
unsound, tax reform cannot make any progress. 

