BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow June 17 TASS -- ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA on 
measures to combat banditry and organised crime. 
  "The state should have a single economic space and single 
legislation. The purpose is on that basis to tap the unique 
potentialities of each part of Russia," the newspaper quotes 
President Boris Yeltsin as saying at a meeting with the Tuva 
leadership during his three-day working tour of Blagoveschensk, 
Kyzyl and Novosibirsk. The tour ended on Thursday. 
  The newspaper carries an interview with police Major-General 
Gennadiy Chebotaryov, first deputy head of the Russian Interior 
Ministry's main department for action to combat organised crime. 
He comments on President Yeltsin's decree on the protection of 
the population from banditry and other manifestations of 
organised crime. 
  Chebotaryov said considerable resources have been brought 
into use of late to combat organised crime. Following the 
presidential decree, this work will be stepped up, he said, 
giving Interior Ministry data that the number of organised 
criminal groups in the country has increased from 785 in 1990 to 
5,600 by now. 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA, in an article headlined "a cavalry 
attack on crime. The State Duma prepares a tougher law on 
action to combat organised crime than is provided for in 
President Yeltsin's decree", points out that a bill to this 
effect envisages rather long prison terms ranging from three to 
thirty years. 
  In another article, the newspaper points out that "Russia 
will not be able to bust crime until all legal foundations of a 
democratic state are restored..." 
  ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA quotes Leonid Cheshinsky, president of 
the 
federal Roskhlebproduct Bakery Product Contract Corporation, as 
saying tht "Russia will not buy grain abroad this year". 
However, he believes, bread prices will go up in the middle or 
end of summer as a consequence, primarily, of the purchases of 
grain in the country on credit at bank discount rates. The 
prices of bread will grow by 20 percent a month on average, he 
said. 
  ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI runs an interview with Boris Nemtsov, 
governor of Nizhny Novgorod and member of the Federation 
Council, who believes that in agriculture "the key task for the 
government, the president, the State Duma and the Federation 
Council is to carry out a land reform on a voluntary basis". 
  "If the principle of voluntary participation is observed to 
the end, a land reform will last ten-fifteen years in Nizhny 
Novgorod and in Russia", Nemtsov maintains. 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA (RED STAR), in an article headlined "the 
state promised to protect us reliably from disasters. Is this 
task practicable?", writes about last year's growth of the 
number of breakdowns connected with discharges of toxic and 
radioactive substances into the atmosphere. 
  There were 1,180 emergency situations in Russia last year, 
with 10,133 people affected and 1,224 of them killed. The 
newspaper runs excerpts from this year's May governemnt 
resolution "On the protection of the life and health of the 
population of the Russian Federation in the event of an outbreak 
and elimination of the aftermath of emergency situations caused 
by natural calamities, industrial breakdowns and disasters". 
The resolution provides for the establishment of an all-Russia 
service for the provision of medical aid in the event of 
disasters. 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA runs an interview with Admiral Vladimir 
Yegorov, commander of the Baltic Fleet. Now that Lithuania and 
Byelorussia have become independent states and the territorial 
isolation of Kalinigrad region from the rest of Russia has 
become a reality, "it is urgently necessary to have a logistical 
base for stockpiling and the preparation of reserves on Russia's 
main territory. The Baltic Fleet will play precisely such a 
role of the Navy's logistical base," Yegorov said. 
  TRUD interviewed State Duma Speaker Ivan Rybkin who believes 
that Russia has now already passed the "point of no return" with 
regard to her totalitarian 70-years-long past, notwithstanding 
by-effects and losses. "There is only one road now -- to a 
civilised future worthy of her people", Rybkin said. 
  In KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA, Valentin Stepanov, head of the main 
directorate for space rocket technology of the Russian State 
Committee on the Defence Industry, describes the problems of 
Russian aid to North Korea in the development of its nuclear 
programme and how a mass departure of Russian missile technology 
researchers and their families to that country at the end of 
1991 was prevented. 
  RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA raises the subject of growing unemployment 
in Russia, tracing how funds exacted from people in the form of 
two- percent insurance tariff are being used. The newspaper 
notes contradictions in jobless accounting methods which do not 
reflect an actual situation, and the lack of a federal 
employment programme up to now. 
  PRAVDA maintains that the number of strikes staged in the 
first quarter of this year in Russia, including those in 
Siberian regions, was larger than in the entire 1993. 
  In view of the threat of unemployment and mounting 
discontent 
of Siberian workers, regional trade union organisations have 
dissociated themselves from the treaty on social accord, the 
newspaper writes. 

