Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Edyth Bulbring and Ray Hartley] </F>
  [Text] ANC [African National Congress] Women's League 
[ANCWL] president Winnie Mandela emerged as the most popular 
woman candidate on the ANC's national list of 200 candidates for 
Parliament presented at the organisation's nominations 
conference this weekend. 
  The ANC's national executive committee ruled that her 
kidnapping conviction would be classed as a political offence 
and she was therefore eligible to stand for Parliament. 
  More than 500 delegates from the ANC and its Patriotic Front 
allies met at a Johannesburg hotel yesterday to cast their final 
vote for national representatives to stand in the April 27 
election. 
  The ANC's list of 200 candidates, which was compiled in 
December last year, will be altered slightly to accommodate 
candidates proposed by the Patriotic Front organisations. 
  The list of national candidates was drawn up after months of 
branch and regional conferences involving thousands of 
ANC-alliance members. The process cost over R[rand]2-million. 
  The ANC's list shows overwhelming support for the ANC 
negotiators and has a strong racial and language mix. 
  ANC president Nelson Mandela tops the provisional list. 
International relations head Thabo Mbeki, secretary general 
Cyril Ramaphosa, SACP [South African Communist Party] chairman 
Joe Slovo, former Cosatu boss Jay Naidoo and senior negotiator 
Mohammed Vallie Moosa are in the top 10. Other candidates who 
received popular support were Transkei military leader 
Major-General Bantu Holomisa, Natal Midlands leader Harry Gwala 
and former Youth League president Peter Mokaba. 
  In addition to Mrs Mandela, women candidates with much 
support were former Women's League secretary general Baleka 
Kgositsile, Hilda Ndude and Adelaide Tambo. Popular Western 
Cape executive member Cheryl Carolus, who was mooted as a 
possible Health Minister in a future cabinet, this week withdrew 
her name from the list saying she wanted to work on health 
issues. 
  In addition to finalising the list of 200 candidates for the 
national assembly, the ANC has drawn up a list of 200 regional 
representatives for the national assembly and its list of 
candidates for the provincial legislatures. 
  Seven candidates for the provincial premierships have 
already 
been decided, but contenders still have to be chosen for the 
Western and North West. 
  In the Western Cape, Umkhonto weSizwe [Spear of the Nation; 
MK -- ANC military wing] militant Tony Yengeni and the more 
moderate Dr Allan Boesak are set to fight it out for the ANC 
nomination today. 
  Dr Boesak is expected to trounce Mr Yengeni. 
  The Western Cape premier nominations have been the scene of 
continuing battles between pragmatists who see Dr Boesak as the 
organisation's best chance to capture coloured voters and 
militants who see him as too moderate and unattractive to voters. 
  Mr Yengeni, an MK hardliner who is close to Mrs Mandela, was 
deposed as ANC Western Cape secretary last year after a fiery 
battle at the organisation's regional congress. 
  North West nominee Essop Pahad declined to stand this week, 
saying he felt he would not be the best person to attract ANC 
votes in the province. However, ANC sources have suggested the 
SACP secretariat instructed him to turn down the nomination. 
ANC election official Popo Molefe is being mooted as a possible 
candidate in Mr Pahad's place. 
  The ANC's deputy secretary-general Jacob Zuma is the ANC's 
choice for premier in Natal after beating the militant Natal 
Midlands leader Harry Gwala and southern Natal chairman Jeff 
Radebe. 
  The other candidates for premierships are Tokyo Sexwale for 
the PWV [Pretoria, Witwatersrand, Vereeniging], former UDF 
[United Democratic Front] secretary general Terror Lekota for 
the Free State, the late Oliver Tambo's speech writer Ngoako 
Ramatlhodi for the Northern Transvaal, legal department head 
Matthew Phosa for the Eastern Transvaal, Mane Dipico for the 
Northern Cape, and SACP central committee member and former 
Robben Island prisoner Raymond Mhlaba for the Eastern Cape. 
  Despite the voting at this weekend's conference, the ANC's 
national executive could make further changes to the list this 
week if they wish to include more women or candidates from areas 
which are not well represented. 

