Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Dec 29, BNS -- The Privatization Agency 
with its relatively limited number of staff is unable to carry 
out the privatization in due time and with sufficient expertise. 
Therefore it would be advisable that the preparation of some of 
the companies under the Ministry of Economics for privatization 
be referred to the ministry, which has the necessary 
specialists, the ministry says. 
  The Ministry of Economics in a survey of the country's 
economy for 1993-1994 says the privatization process needs more 
decentralization. Also experts from the ministry, as well as 
members of state company boards and other specialists in the 
respective fields should be given a greater role in the process, 
the document suggests. 
  The ministry contests demands by the country's farm sector 
to 
have the priority right for the purchase of food companies from 
the state. The survey says farm unions and associations often 
prove unable to avoid early bankruptcies of these companies or 
sell them to other buyers soon. 
  The survey warns that selling shares in state companies to 
private individuals for the compensation bonds instead of money 
may lead to a conservation of the present structure of the 
economy. The document says supporting institutions able to 
contribute to the concentration of capital, such as stock 
exchanges, investment funds etc. must be developed to avoid this. 
  The Economics Ministry report shows the situation in the 
country's retail sector in October 1993 as follows: 54 percent 
of stores were in private hands, 30 percent were owned by 
cooperatives, and only 8 percent remained state-owned. Also more 
than 80 percent of the service and catering enterprises were 
privatized by October. 
  Estonia sold about 36.5 million kroons worth of state 
companies into private hands in 1991 and 1992 together. The 
sales price of businesses privatized in the first 11 months of 
this year amounted to more than 350 million kroons. The total 
240 different companies and facilities sold under the so-called 
small privatization scheme accounted for 125 million kroons of 
the revenue. 
  In addition to this, the new owners have taken the 
obligation 
to put 154.5 million kroons into investments and retain 6,755 
jobs. 

