CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  The Positive Use of Plutonium From LWRs Is Inseparably </H5>
Connected to the Fuel Cycle 
  Currently, within Japan, active discussion is going forward 
between groups such as the Atomic Energy Commission, the 
government, the utility companies, and the Power Reactor and 
Nuclear Fuel Development Corp. (PNC) regarding the future 
development of Fast-Breeder Reactors (FBR). We are publishing in 
this edition an extract of a portion of an article "Future FBR 
Topics -- FBR and Plutonium Utilization Technology," by Yoshiro 
Takahashi, deputy chairman of the PNC's Development Promotion 
headquarters. This article was taken from the proceedings of the 
"Reports and Lectures Meeting" which was carried out last month 
by the PNC. PNC has completed the prototype reactor "Monju," 
utilizing independent technology from the beginning of the 
development of this FBR. 
<H5>  The Appeal of FBRs </H5>
  First, from the standpoint of effective utilization of 
uranium resources, FBRs possess superior characteristics when 
compared to other types of reactors. 
  Chart No. 1 (below) shows an example of, when plutonium-fuel 
recycling is used, an appraisal of the relationship between the 
percentage composition of plutonium isotopes (as shown on the y 
axis) and the number of times the plutonium fuel is recycled (as 
shown on the x axis) for both Light-Water Reactors (LWR) and 
FBRs. Compared to LWRs, when recycling is done in an FBR, even 
if the number of recyclings is increased, the percentage of 
isotopes which can cause fission, in other words the amount of 
fissile plutonium, does not decrease significantly. In other 
words, if recycling is done in an FBR, it is possible to carry 
out the recycling countless times, and the problem of plutonium 
aging does not exist. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-015L-61A>      Chart No. 1. Changes in the Composition of Pu Isotopes </FIG>


  Another appeal of FBRs is that elements such as minor 
actinides, which were hitherto considered waste materials, can 
be used as fuel in this type of reactor, and therefore, the 
burden placed on the back end can be reduced. Therefore, through 
burning the plutonium produced at LWRs and FBRs, this weak point 
of nuclear power utilization can be effectively utilized as a 
valuable resource. 
  Finally, because of FBR's superior rate of thermal 
efficiency, waste heat can be reduced to the utmost. This is an 
outstanding characteristic from the point of view of 
environmental protection. 
<H5>  Scenario for Bringing FBRs Into Actual Use </H5>
  Up until now, nuclear power utilization has developed 
relying 
on LWRs. In order to utilize FBRs, it is necessary to bring into 
harmony, and unify, LWR recycling technology and FBR recycling 
technology. When economic assessments are discussed, it is not 
fitting that just FBRs are talked about. Rather, the debate 
should include the evaluation of LWRs, FBRs, and recycling 
technology in general. We will show that the best scenario is 
for us to move, as quickly as possible, to discard the systems 
using mainly LWRs, and gradually move toward systems which rely 
on FBRs. 
  Chart No. 2 below shows the relationship between total 
free-world uranium demand and resource volume through around the 
year 2030, at which time the total demand will approach the 
total amount of resource supply. Because the percentage of 
facilities cost as a part of the total construction cost is 
high, if nuclear power plants are not used for their entire 
durability life-span, they are not economical. In fact, because 
fuel supplies are secured by long-term contracts which last for 
20 years, if you consider the amount of uranium secured by 
contract in 2030, the amount of uranium required will clearly 
exceed the total demand amount shown below. Therefore, it is 
possible that there could be a failure of the uranium supply 
balance before 2030. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-015L-62A>      Chart No. 2. Free-World Uranium Demand </FIG>


  On the other hand, if new uranium resources are discovered, 
the urgency of this trend will be relieved. There are those who 
take the optimistic view of this situation, saying, "If the 
uranium supply balance breaks down, then the development of new 
uranium mines will proceed. Therefore, for the time being, there 
is no urgency with regard to uranium resources." This attitude 
of doing nothing while simply waiting for such good fortune is 
nothing more than underestimating the urgency of the uranium 
supply situation. No one can guarantee the discovery of new, 
large-scale uranium reserves. 
  To prepare for the urgent uranium supply situation, it is 
exceedingly important to prepare the technological systems 
required to make possible the utilization of FBR plutonium 
recycling by about 2030. 
  As long as uranium is used in LWRs, it is inevitable that 
plutonium will be produced. As stated above, it is FBRs that can 
make use of this plutonium and effectively utilize uranium 
resources. Next, I will explain why it is so important to 
introduce FBRs as quickly as possible. The following is an 
example of analysis showing just how much FBRs can contribute to 
the power supply, assuming the plutonium recycling technology 
system is prepared and FBRs are introduced into the system 
starting in 2030. 
  Chart No. 3 (below) shows the results of analysis based on 
the supposition of the high case as shown above, wherein Japan's 
nuclear power plant capacity at the end of 2030 tops 100 million 
kilowatts, and where the rate of growth experienced between 2010 
and 2030 continues after 2030. This analysis was based on the 
following suppositions: an annual amount of reprocessed spent 
fuel from LWRs, based on uranium mass conversion, of 1,600 tons, 
a life-span for LWRs and FBRs of 40 years, an FBR breeding ratio 
of 1.2, and an out-of-reactor fuel cycle duration of three years. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-015L-62B>      Chart No. 3. Estimate of Nuclear Power Plant </FIG>


   Even in a case where FBRs are introduced, all of the spent 
fuel from LWRs and FBRs is rapidly reprocessed, and all of the 
plutonium recovered is utilized, after 2030, even if FBRs are 
introduced to their greatest possible extent, FBRs alone will 
not be able to keep pace with anticipated demand, and therefore, 
it will be necessary to build new LWRs. 
  Introduction of new LWRs now means that there will be no 
surplus of plutonium after 2030. In other words, this shows 
that, until around 2070, there will be inadequate supplies of 
plutonium to meet growing demand; plutonium for the FBRs which 
will replace the LWRs that have passed their life-spans. 
  Nobody is arguing the fact that we will need FBRs in the 
future, but we still rely on LWRs today. If we stop turning the 
spent fuel from these LWRs into waste, and instead recycle that 
fuel, it can become a stable energy supply for the future. The 
plutonium balance is currently being debated. There are many 
people who are of the opinion that, because of economic 
considerations, the bringing into actual use of FBRs should be 
pushed back later and later. It can be said, however, that the 
best way to bring this reactor technology into actual use is to 
build the reactor while making improvement after improvement, 
and while considering the pursuit of economic characteristics, 
steadily developing a demonstration reactor, and then a 
commercial reactor, while maintaining the plutonium balance. 
  Based on this analysis of an FBR introduction scenario, at 
an 
early period of FBR commercialization, it is necessary to 
increase the breeding ratio and decrease the time of the 
out-of-reactor cycle in order not to overuse FBRs at the 
beginning. Of course, if abundant supplies of uranium resources 
were available, then it would be possible to consider a more 
relaxed introduction scenario, however, based on the development 
efforts, it is important to utilize plutonium in FBRs at an 
early date. 
  Furthermore, when the FBRs have reached maturity, it is 
important to adjust their breeding ratio and, when mankind 
changes over to another energy source, to remove plutonium from 
the face of the earth. In other words, it is necessary to 
eliminate all of the plutonium. The development of technology 
which will make these things feasible is an obligation which has 
been placed upon the developers of today. With that, let's 
undertake this new duty in cooperation with countries such as 
the United States and France. 
<H5>  The Status of "Monju" </H5>
  Regarding the current status of FBR development, our country 
has completed the reactor "Monju," and we are at the stage where 
we can pursue the implementability and economic viability of a 
plant system that can extract heat as energy. 
  Currently, at "Monju," preparations are moving steadily 
forward in preparation for the first criticality of the reactor, 
which is scheduled for April of next year. After that, tests 
will take place on the reactor physics, the nuclear superheat, 
and output tests. If things go smoothly, the plant is planned to 
enter regular operations in the end of 1995. 
<H5>  Prospects for Commercialization </H5>
  Japan's demonstration reactors have entered into a stage 
where they can be steadily improved, based on "Monju." In order 
for FBRs to come into actual use, across the board improvements 
need to be planned in areas such as reactor safety and 
reliability along with reactor economy. Furthermore, it is also 
necessary to increase the level of acceptance for these reactors 
within society before the time of their commercialization around 
2030. In order to do this, it is necessary to steadily proceed 
with the construction operations of a demonstration reactor 
following after "Monju," and to carry out experimentation for 
the accumulation of technology and experience, and aimed at 
developing technology needed to bring FBRs toward future 
commercialization. 

