Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by JB: "Coordinator Wants Fair Competition" first </F>
paragraph is FLUG REVUE introduction] 
  [TEXT] In Bonn, Dr. Reinhard Goehner, federal coordinator 
for aeronautics and aerospace, has proposed a program designed 
to help improve conditions for the aeronautics and aerospace 
industry in Germany as a business location. 
  The parliamentary state secretary in the Ministry of 
Economics took responsibility for the policy leading to the most 
recent decisions by Deutsche Aerospace AG (DASA), which will 
result in the loss of more than 10,000 additional jobs by the 
end of 1996. At the same time, however, he declared that 
industry is responsible for establishing a productive and 
competitive corporate structure, and that the federal government 
neither can nor will interfere in corporate decisions. 
  The state secretary added that the federal government has 
provided this technologically important branch of industry with 
considerable startup money, and over the past few years has 
supported the aircraft industry alone with more than 10 billion 
German marks [DM]. Now it is a matter of improving the general 
conditions within the industry. The Eight-Point Program 
emphasizes the necessary conditions for this: 
  1. The German government strongly supported a multilateral 
GATT aircraft agreement designed to bring the widely diverse 
terms of competition within the manufacturing countries closer 
together and ward off future subsidy races. 
  2. The German government is pressing for strict adherence to 
existing international commitments, particularly the US-EC Large 
Aircraft Agreement. 
  3. The German government will adjust its industrial aid 
practices to current international conditions. Goehner announced 
a "German Regulation on Aeronautical Research Policy and 
Technology Policy," to take effect in early 1994. The objective 
is a new, more effective, industrial support structure designed 
to support future research and development projects within the 
aircraft and aerospace industry. 
  4. The German government urges the EC to take aeronautical 
engineering into greater account in its fourth General Research 
Program. It would like to see an autonomous research and 
technology support program within the framework of this general 
program. 
  5. Goehner encouraged the retention of a minimum capacity 
within the defense industry. Apropos to this, he recommended 
that the German policy on the export of armaments and export 
permits be reviewed. In the course of ongoing negotiations, the 
German government has been urging that European policy on 
dual-use products be harmonized. 
  6. Goehner also supported the idea of contracting out 
Luftwaffe maintenance work to the aircraft industry. He 
applauded initiatives already taken to this end by the Federal 
Ministry of Defense. 
  7. With regard to the aerospace industry, the German 
government will support the expansion of satellite-supported 
telecommunications, navigation, and Earth observation, 
particularly for the augmentation of the national infrastructure. 
  8. The coordinator announced a public forum on Aeronautics 
and Aerospace, to be held in early 1994. This forum is to 
address the importance of the aircraft and aerospace industry to 
Germany as a business location and the long term chances for 
growth. 
  The federal coordinator acknowledged special responsibility 
for the industry in those areas in which the government acts as 
the client. This is particularly true in defense and space 
research. In both of these areas, the industry had requested 
concrete planning figures -- regarding the mass production of 
the Eurofighter 2000 or support of aerospace projects, for 
example. 
  Goehner does not believe that the current administration is 
solely to blame here, however. The opposing party must also 
accept some responsibility. No one who shoots down long-planned 
projects should complain in the same breath about the subsequent 
loss of jobs. 

