BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Grigoriy Arslanov] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 12 Apr -- Russo-Chinese consultations on 
bilateral and international issues were held in Beijing on 10-12 
April. The Russian delegation was headed by Russian Deputy 
Foreign Minister Aleksandr Panov and the Chinese delegation by 
PRC Deputy Foreign Minister Dai Binggau. Igor Rogachev, Russian 
Federation ambassador to the PRC, attended the consultations. 
The head of the Russian delegation was received by Qian Qichen, 
vice premier of the State Council and PRC foreign minister. 
  The sides held an in-depth exchange of views on a wide range 
of issues in bilateral and international cooperation. Practical 
preparations for the visit to the PRC by Viktor Chernomyrdin, 
chairman of the Russian Federation Government, were started. 
Prospects for the further expansion of high-level exchanges and 
contacts between Russia and China were discussed. Both sides 
expressed a wish to develop good-neighborly, friendly relations 
between the Russian Federation and the PRC, which are an 
important factor for stability in the Asian-Pacific region and 
the world as a whole. 
  There was a constructive discussion of international issues 
of interest to both sides, with the accent placed on the 
situation in the Asian-Pacific region and the Korean peninsula 
in particular. The sides agreed to continue close consultations 
on these and other bilateral and international questions. 
  In an interview with an ITAR-TASS correspondent, Panov said 
that relations with China were unquestionably one of the 
priority areas in Russian foreign policy. It is very 
gratifying, he said, that an intense, high-level summit dialogue 
will take place this year. It is also pleasing that our new 
parliament has begun to pay a great deal of attention to China. 
State Duma Speaker Ivan Rybkin plans to visit the PRC. 
Parliament will hold hearings at the end of April on 
Russo-Chinese relations. 
  So active are the high-level contacts that, for Russian 
diplomacy, this year will be the year of Russo-Chinese 
relations, as it were. Panov said that this scale of bilateral 
contacts is not planned with any other country. This truly is 
very important for us, since China is not only a neighbor, but 
also Russia's partner in economic matters and in the 
international arena. For this reason, it is extremely important 
for us to synchronize watches and positions on the main aspects 
of bilateral and international relations. He noted that this 
will enable us to plan our further moves more confidently. 
  During the second meeting with Minister Qian Qichen and at 
the consultations, Panov said, we had a detailed discussion 
about North Korea's nuclear program. The Russian Federation and 
the PRC agree that this problem must be solved, first and 
foremost, through talks, without pressure, without exacerbating 
the situation. Both sides advocate that the Korean peninsula 
should be nuclear-free and that the military confrontation 
should be reduced. Our aims in this respect are identical. At 
the present stage, the Chinese side believes that priority 
should be given to talks among four partners: the United States, 
the DPRK, the Republic of Korea, and the IAEA [International 
Atomic Energy Agency]. However, the leadership of the Chinese 
Foreign Ministry does not rule out the possibility that an 
international conference, as proposed by Russia, could play a 
role at some stage in the future. 
  We also believe in trying out various different channels for 
resolving this problem, the Russian diplomat stressed. If the 
problem cannot be resolved bilaterally, we believe that the 
international channel could be used, Panov said. 

