Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by R. Winkel: "And Then There Was One ..."] </F>
  [Text] Brussels -- When Prime Minister Lubbers was asked 
point blank at the end of last year whether he wanted to become 
European Commission president, he did not give a direct answer. 
I know two candidates who are better qualified than I am, was 
his cryptic reply. 
  He revealed nothing about the identity of his dream 
candidates. But it can be assumed that one of them was Spanish 
Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez. Like Lubbers, it has been 
suspected that for many years he has wanted to swap the hard 
life of a prime minister for the busy, but less taxing, job in 
Brussels. 
  Since Monday [10 January] Gonzalez has no longer been in the 
running, however. At the last European summit, he had stated 
that the damp climate of the European capital was not to his 
taste. Now, in an interview with a number of Spanish 
journalists on the fringes of the NATO summit, he has said quite 
directly that to his mind there is just one candidate -- his 
Netherlands colleague. 
  In contrast to the noncommittal Lubbers, Gonzalez has 
revealed all. This is notable for more than one reason. When 
asked, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl has said that Lubbers would 
be an excellent candidate, but this holds rather less weight. 
It would be difficult for Kohl to say that he found his 
immediate and loyal neighbor -- who also comes from a party of 
the same political persuasion -- anything but suitable. 
  With Gonzalez the situation is rather different. Although 
political opponents like to compare him to Thatcher, Gonzalez is 
in the socialist camp. And, what is much more significant in 
Europe, Lubbers is a representative from the chilly north, who 
is keeping a tight grasp on the domestic purse strings and, in 
foreign affairs, wants to be carried along on the uncertain 
waves of free trade. 
  Given this, the fact that the Spanish prime minister has set 
the lobby moving to install Lubbers in Brussels is indeed 
notable. There are probably sharks in the waters which would 
cause much more concern to the Latin member states. British 
European Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan is unashamedly interested 
in the job, and Sir Leon has the knack of getting what he wants. 
Perhaps Chancellor Kohl -- who is rumored to want a European 
cushion on which to lay his weary head -- is also considered by 
Spain as tending a little too much toward "Mitteleuropa." 
  But there may be another reason for Gonzalez' open campaign 
in favor of Lubbers. On Monday he confirmed that the Twelve 
government leaders had decided two years ago to recruit the next 
Commission president from among their own number. With the 
Treaty of European Union, Europe was to enter a new and more 
glorious stage in its development. An "ordinary" former 
minister (such as Jacques Delors), therefore, would no longer be 
able to call the shots. 
  But, in the meantime, the tide has turned. In the storm over 
Maastricht, it was principally the Commission which suffered the 
heavy damage. The trend -- already present in the Treaty -- of 
giving more power to heads of government has been reinforced. 
This is very clearly apparent in the conclusions of the latest 
EC summit. They are all about the member states and the European 
Council. The Commission is presented as a service bureau which 
may prepare reports for the technical preparation, but must 
remain well clear of any political decisionmaking. 
  Seen in this light it becomes less evident than two years 
ago 
to give the Commission president the halo associated with former 
premiership and -- because the shine has worn off -- also much 
less likely that a former prime minister will be interested in 
the job. Who -- apart from Wilfred Martens, who is still waiting 
in line after a difficult career in national politics -- would 
want to manage a European house of mourning? 
  Yet Gonzalez apparently prefers a man with the authority of 
Lubbers rather than a southerner whom the northern countries 
would take less seriously. He has not taken the semirefusal of 
Lubbers as a veiled invitation ("I would like to, but only if I 
am asked"), but as a genuine expression of reluctance. Lubbers' 
wife has also left this impression in the gossip columns. The 
campaign to "Pull Lubbers over the line" has begun, but success 
is far from assured. 

