BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 10 KYODO -- The following is the full 
text of policy speech delievered by Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata 
at the Diet on Tuesday [10 May]: 
  I have been appointed as the prime minister of Japan. At 
this juncture in time, when we face difficult issues, both at 
home and abroad, I intend to brace myself to pour every effort 
into this endeavor. 
  Before making my policy remarks, I would like to express my 
sincere condolences to the victims and bereaved families of the 
tragic China Airlines accident of 26 April, and to the injured, 
who remain hospitalized, I would like to express my heartfelt 
wishes for their full and speedy recovery. The government will 
make thorough efforts to promptly discover the cause of the 
accident, and will take every possible measure to ensure that 
such a tragic incident is not repeated. 
  The Hosokawa coalition government, borne on the shoulders of 
the great support of the people and carrying a standard of 
reform, proceeded forward in earnest, but unfortunately resigned 
before the task could be completed. The duty I have been 
assigned is, firstly, to take up the standard of reform, to 
position it firmly once again, and to continue to bear it high. 
  I come from the Shinshu region, whose great literary son, 
Toson Shimazaki, once issued in his hometown of Magome the 
profound words, "lively hometowns, warmhearted hometowns, 
your-own-language hometowns." I long ago paraphrased these 
words into a slogan which reads, "lively politics, warmhearted 
politics, plain-language politics." In proceeding with reform, 
I intend to give importance to frankly discussing matters in 
plain language, enhancing understanding and walking together. 
  I intend to add respect for the spirit of coordination to 
the 
standard of reform, and thus bear the standard of politics of 
reform and coordination. Recently, we have experienced an 
unfortunate process among the parties of the coalition 
government, resulting in some groups leaving the cabinet. 
However, I personally intend to listen even more attentively to 
the opinions of both the ruling and opposition parties, and 
there is not even the slightest uncertainty in my decision and 
my oath to proceed with politics on the basis of as wide an 
agreement as possible. Fully aware of the gravity of the 
premiership and the pride of our nation, I intend to stand at 
the forefront, unwaveringly facing the difficult matters ahead, 
as I take up future-oriented issues and share both the pain and 
the joy of the people living in today's Japan. 
<H5>  Firmer Political Base To Escape From Confusion and Advance </H5>
Reforms 
  The birth of a coalition government last summer, after 38 
years of political monopoly by Liberal Democratic Party 
administrations, has brought a breath of fresh air to the 
political methods of Japan. I believe that it is of great 
historical significance in that it has given birth to new 
interest in and expectations for politics among the people, and 
in that it has generated great momentum for a review of the 
causes of stagnant administrative and socioeconomic practices. 
  Driven by the winds of a new era, the coalition government 
has devoted its utmost efforts to three reforms -- political 
reform, economic reform and administrative reform. These 
efforts by the coalition government have earned it support from 
a great many people, and it has succeeded in setting out clear 
directions for the various areas of reform, including passage of 
the laws related to political reform. Though attained over a 
period of just eight months, I trust that these and other 
achievements will be well received. While the new cabinet is 
setting out with a new line-up, we will not forget the 
aspirations at the outset of the coalition government last 
summer, and, building on the experiences so far, will manage the 
affairs of state with a renewed determination. 
  The current state of affairs -- in which Diet consideration 
of the fiscal 1994 budget is stalled, there are difficulties in 
resuming the Japan-U.S. framework talks and the situation on the 
Korean peninsula is uncertain -- is not normal, and I am keenly 
aware of my responsibility as a politician to respond to these 
issues. At no other time has the need been so great for 
political leadership to move towards resolution of these issues 
in order to sweep away the concerns of the people and their 
distrust of politics. I will make my most sincere efforts to 
fulfill the heavy requirements of the person charged with 
ultimate responsibility for the government of Japan. 
  The first task required of the new cabinet is to lead Japan 
out of such difficulty and to place it, as quickly as possible, 
on the path to a more certain future. To achieve this, the 
cabinet is prepared to act in unison in searching for solutions 
to pending issues, and I would also like to request particular 
cooperation from the Diet so that fruitful political discussion 
may take place. 
  A political regime in which policy debate plays a central 
role is essential to ensure that Japan does not take the wrong 
path as it confronts the many issues that will determine its 
future. We cannot allow the steady flame of political reform to 
be extinguished, and I am determined to continue to pursue it as 
an issue of the highest priority. To regain the people's trust 
in politics, concrete action must be taken with the intent of 
severing the roots of political corruption. In the pursuit of 
reform, a number of key issues must still be tackled, and as a 
first step, the new cabinet, respecting the advisory report of 
the council to work out electoral districts for members of the 
House of Representatives, will promptly submit the related bills 
to the Diet, and will strive to enact said bills as early as 
possible so that the next general election can be held under the 
new system. 
  Today, Japan stands at a major historical crossroads. 
Both at home and abroad, it is being pressured to determine what 
type of society it will build for the twenty-first century and 
from what position it will contribute to peace and prosperity in 
the international community. Looking down the road at what is 
to come, reforms of Japan's political, administrative and 
socioeconomic structures are part of a momentous historical 
trend and are issues that it is destined to face. Yet since 
reform inevitably involves clashes with existing interests, 
courage and enthusiasm are necessary to overcome the great pains 
and difficulties that accompany the implementation of such 
reform. At this time, it is thus most important that efforts be 
taken to gain the understanding and support of the people about 
what type of society to pursue and what path to follow in the 
journey. With a strong commitment to open policy 
decision-making and through an active exchange of opinions with 
the people, I intend to seek out the direction for Japan's 
future course. Under the national consensus thus formed, I am 
determined to promote reforms aimed at the creation of a more 
prosperous and secure society and Japan's becoming a country 
trusted by the international community. 
<H5>  Construction of a More Prosperous and Secure Society </H5>
  We remember clearly that at the peak of the bubble economy 
just a few years back, many people were under the illusion that 
everything was headed in the right direction and that this 
situation would continue indefinitely. Thereafter, however, we 
experienced the painful reality of history's iron rule that 
overconfidence is the start of failure. 
  Amidst such developments, the Japanese economy has 
experienced sufferings previously unknown, and has even gone to 
the point of shaking our confidence about future prospects. 
However, I am confident that new avenues of development will 
naturally swing open if we avoid sinking into pessimism and step 
forward with a progressive spirit towards definite goals for the 
future, learning from past errors and leaving behind past 
baggage and the burden of habit. There is no doubt that the 
Japanese economy has the energy and strength to carry this out. 
  Fortunately, we are already seeing bright signs in some 
sectors of the economy, and it is important that these 
improvements be connected to a steady process of recovery. The 
prolonged delay in enacting the fiscal 1994 budget at this 
critical juncture is alarming, and could threaten to interfere 
with the economic recovery and thereby have a serious impact on 
people's lives. The new cabinet will maintain support for the 
fiscal 1994 budget proposed by the previous cabinet, and will 
work responsibly for its implementation. To further consolidate 
the steps towards economic recovery, I would like to strongly 
appeal for full cooperation in the earliest possible passage of 
the budget for the new fiscal year and of bills and items 
already submitted to the Diet. 
  Bringing the Japanese economy onto a solid path to recovery 
and fostering the seeds of future development will also require 
that the private sector be encouraged to take on new challenges 
and make investments for the future. To accomplish this, the 
government must set an outlook for the future and take the 
initiative in making reform certain. I intend to do my utmost 
for the steady implementation of the various reforms -- 
including economic reform, administrative reform, fiscal reform, 
tax reform and the promotion of decentralization -- proposed by 
the previous cabinet and still at an intermediate stage. 
  In terms of economic reform, while striving to effect a 
transition in the nature of the economy through the cultivation 
of new industries from a new perspective, including those 
industries in the information telecommunications sector as well 
as environmentally friendly industries, and through the 
promotion of further activation of small- and medium-size 
enterprises, which despite experiencing the difficulties of the 
wave of restructuring are aggressively taking a stand in 
developing new businesses, and promotion of the relaxation and 
abolition of regulations to reactivate the economy, efforts will 
be made with the cooperation of the private sector to reduce 
price differentials between domestic and overseas markets, to 
promote the reactivation of the market and to promote 
internationally harmonious economic activities. Moreover, I 
firmly believe that such efforts will definitely contribute to 
improving the lives of the people. 
  In order to respond to the advent of the aging society, 
while 
promoting stronger welfare policies encompassing employment, 
pension, health care and nursing with a view to giving greater 
weight to improving the lives of the people, we will also 
promote living environment improvements including housing, 
transport and sewerage. As regards the difficult issue of 
agriculture, which we face currently, the government will 
expeditiously establish fundamental measures to reinvigorate 
agriculture and will make every effort to revitalize 
agricultural, mountainous and fishing village areas, taking 
fully into account the effect of the Uruguay Round agreement on 
Japanese agriculture. Further, we view education and science 
and technology as investments in the future, and aim to achieve 
a society in which diverse individuality is respected and new 
forms of cultural and economic activities are brought forth. 
  In particular, the government will take a comprehensive 
approach to cultivating a society in which men and women can 
participate in concert so that women can take part in all 
sectors of society on an equal basis with men. 
  Among the tasks we must address, realizing sweeping tax 
reform is an important matter which cannot be postponed in order 
to actively develop welfare policies with the aim of achieving 
an abundant aging society, while giving consideration to 
improving the fiscal structure, which is in a truly dire state, 
and in order to ensure fiscal sources to support tax reduction, 
and we must create a balanced tax system. The Government of 
Japan, respecting the points confirmed in the platform of the 
establishment of the new coalition government, and in line with 
Diet resolutions, with the understanding and cooperation of the 
members of all the parties and groups, will draft a concrete 
plan during June and will make maximum efforts to ensure that it 
realizes tax reform by the end of the year, with the 
understanding of the people. 
  I recognize that administrative reform and decentralization 
are issues for all of the people of Japan, and I am determined 
to act with resolution as politician in order to adjust them to 
meet the needs of the times. In terms of administrative reform, 
we aim to achieve simplification and increased efficiency and 
transparency of the administration by breaking away from 
regulations and protective administration, as well as through 
the reorganization of ministries and agencies of the central 
government, the removal of defects resulting from 
over-compartmentalized administration, the streamlining of 
special public promotional corporations, the review of 
subsidiaries and the civil servants system, the reinforcement of 
the information disclosure system and the enhancement of 
administrative monitoring system. By enacting legal measures to 
advance decentralization, the government will strive to correct 
the unipolar concentration in Tokyo and to create appealing 
regional communities with unique characteristics by 
reinvigorating the special histories, cultures and local flavors 
of the different regions of Japan. 
<H5>  Establishing an Active Foreign Policy for Trust and </H5>
Cooperation 
  Next year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the 
Pacific war, and we are aware that Japan's past actions have, in 
addition to causing great sacrifice among the people, left great 
scars which remain even today in the hearts of the peoples of 
neighboring countries. The pain and anger of the peoples of 
neighboring countries caused by the recent remarks by a cabinet 
member shows this clearly, and although the remarks were 
retracted, it is truly regrettable that such a situation arose. 
I would thus like to take this opportunity to renew the 
recognition that Japan's past actions, including aggression and 
colonial rule, caused unbearable suffering and sorrow for many 
people. Communicating this to future generations, the path 
which Japan must take, based on its deep remorse, is to do its 
utmost towards the creation of peace and towards the 
construction of a bright future for the Asia-Pacific region. As 
the political creed of the new cabinet, I would like once again 
to state my oath that I will proceed with politics bearing this 
constantly in mind. 
  From the end of the war until quite recently, Japan was 
enveloped in the firm bipolar Cold War structure which stood 
between the United States and the Soviet Union. For that 
reason, I believe that it is an undeniable fact that Japan 
tended to be an onlooker to the developments of the 
international community. However, diplomacy and external 
relations are like interpersonal relations -- they are issues 
which cannot merely be taken care of with numbers or by going 
through superficial niceties. Indeed, the essence of these 
tasks is building relations of trust, which is the key to 
success therein. 
  The Cold War structure has now collapsed and the 
international community is now making paramount efforts to build 
a new order. During the long vacation, I visited the Republic 
of Italy, the French republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, 
the Kingdom of Belgium and other places. At a time when the new 
admission to the European Union of four countries was pending, 
president of the European Commission Jacques Delors and other 
leaders talked enthusiastically about the need for a new 
framework for peace and stability, and I witnessed their sincere 
endeavor to realize this hand-in-hand despite the many 
difficulties they faced. I once again keenly felt the greatness 
of the expectations which these nations placed on Japan, and the 
importance of international coordination. During this trip, the 
opening ceremony of the channel tunnel was held, which impressed 
me not only as a momentous undertaking adorning the end of the 
twentieth century, in which the United Kingdom and the continent 
were connected, but also as an event which symbolized the 
growing linkage of the international community. Japan must make 
efforts to promote Official Development Assistance (ODA) and to 
solve such global issues as the global environment by fully 
utilizing the technology and knowhow that it has thus far 
accumulated in its pursuit of the path of peace. Japan also 
needs to move onto center stage, play an active role for world 
peace and prosperity and earn the trust of the international 
community. In order to achieve that, we must tenaciously appeal 
for understanding for Japan's principles and for the role which 
it can play. At the same time we must coordinate with the 
developments of the international community, make painful 
decisions when necessary, and at other times maintain our 
determined position with fortitude. 
  Throughout the past half century, Japan has consistently 
been 
dedicated to peace and the United Nations has always held a high 
place in Japan's foreign policy. Recent developments in the 
international situation convince me that such a stance, rooted 
in the Constitution of Japan, has proven correct and, indeed, 
has been gaining ever-growing importance. Such achievements 
Japan has thus far made render our nation the grounds to strive 
for settling regional conflicts and promoting arms control and 
disarmament. On the same grounds, Japan should actively 
participate in United Nations peace activities. Further, I 
believe that Japan should positively engage itself in 
strengthening the functions of the United Nations, in 
particular, the Security Council, and should do all it can to 
discharge its responsibilities. 
  Further, the cornerstone of Japan's foreign policy lies in 
maintaining the alliance based on the Japan-U.S. Security 
Treaty; and, on that foundation, further developing the close 
cooperative relations between Japan and the United States and, 
as one member of the Asia-Pacific region, contributing to the 
stability and development of this region. Still, while certain 
serious economic issues remain unsolved between Japan and the 
United States, the situation on the Korean peninsula is unclear, 
and we are faced with issues that could threaten the future of 
our nation if we err in our diplomatic judgment. I will exert 
all our diplomatic efforts with a strong determination, in order 
to overcome this difficult period. 
  Recently, we have seen a series of seeds of trade friction 
between Japan and various foreign countries. This situation 
exists against the background of the prominence of Japan's 
current account surplus in the world. While this current 
account surplus has arisen as a result of the untiring efforts 
of the people within the rules of international free trade, for 
one nation to continue a huge surplus cannot but invite the 
criticism of its trading partners. Further, considering that 
criticism of the closed nature of Japan's markets continues 
unabated, it is important to make efforts, intending to achieve 
a phased reduction of the current account surplus, to change 
Japan's economic structure so that it is internationally 
harmonious. In this undertaking, we must change our way of 
thinking and, not because we were told to do so by other 
nations, but for our own good, we must take the initiative in 
promoting large-scale economic reforms, including further 
improvement in market access centering on deregulation and other 
means, and the establishment of domestic demand-led economic 
management. From this perspective, we will bring to fruition 
the recently announced outline of external economic reform 
measures. Through such efforts, I strive to reopen the 
Japan-U.S. framework talks and intend to make efforts to build 
even sounder Japan-United States relations. 
  As regards the entry into force of the Uruguay Round 
agreement, which is the fruit of the collective efforts of the 
international community to strengthen the free trading system, 
it is a common goal of the Uruguay Round participants to bring 
the agreement into force on 1 January 1995. It is the Japanese 
Government's responsibility to submit the agreement and related 
implementation bills to the Diet this year and to strive towards 
their expeditious approval. Furthermore, it is important that 
we develop discussion with other countries on issues in new 
areas, such as trade and environment, and trade and investment, 
to further strengthen the free trading system. 
  The current issue concerning suspicions about the 
development 
of nuclear weapons in North Korea is a challenge to the efforts 
of the international community for nonproliferation, and is 
contrary to Japan's ideal of eventually abolishing nuclear 
weapons. This is also an issue which could jeopardize the 
security of the Northeast Asian region, of which Japan is a 
part. In order to ensure that North Korea is not isolated 
internationally, the Government of Japan tenaciously pursues the 
solution of this issue through dialogue, together with the 
United States, the People's Republic of China, the Republic of 
Korea and other neighboring nations, and intends to make maximum 
efforts to realize the prevention of nuclear weapons development 
and the denuclearization on the Korean peninsula. At any rate, 
in the event that the direction of policy is decided upon in the 
United Nations, Japan will naturally respect that direction. 
Further, the government will prepare for an emergency situation 
in accordance with the Constitution of Japan, and will deal with 
this issue in close coordination and cooperation with the United 
States and the Republic of Korea. Coordination will also be 
made, if necessary, with the countries concerned of Asia. 
  Foreign policy is like a living creature: while maintaining 
an unflinching stance, there are times when one must make the 
most appropriate decision for the future, flexibly in response 
to the situation at hand. For that reason, now is the time when 
political leadership is in question. In order to make our Japan 
a nation trusted and loved in the international community, I 
intend to engrave this into my heart and soul and to remain 
keenly aware of this, as I am determined to solve the future 
foreign policy issues we will face. 
<H5>  Conclusion </H5>
  We currently find ourselves in the midst of a swell of large 
and turbulent change in both the international community and the 
Japanese community, where the old order has collapsed and yet 
the new order is still not in sight. 
  As such things happen, people are seized with uncertainty 
and 
a sense of crisis. However, depending on our state of mind, we 
can turn this age into one of creativity, which will open new 
possibilities towards a better world and towards a better 
society. Merely striving against the flow to no purpose would be 
fruitless, and similarly, merely letting ourselves be carried 
with the flow would result in our losing sight of the future. 
  At times such as now, we must uphold a clear vision for the 
future, muster our courage and act. I firmly believe that 
nobody would be opposed to our goals: Japan's actively 
contributing towards building a peaceful world, creating a 
society in which the people can experience the true meaning of 
abundance as we maintain our beautiful environment to ensure 
that our children will be bequeathed that legacy, creating a 
simple and wise government, fostering an active economy and 
protecting the weak. As we approach the twenty-first century, 
we are at a time when thorough discussion between the government 
and the people and in the Diet must be held in order to achieve 
this, and we must give clear shape to our vision and bring it to 
fruition. We can no longer afford to take a roundabout route. 
  Talking in plain language about politics, I intend to work 
to 
create a country, together with the people, in which anyone can 
live without concern and a country in which we can be proud to 
the world that we are Japanese. 
  In concluding, let me ask once again from my heart for the 
understanding and support of the people and of their 
representatives in the Diet. 

