BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Army General Pavel Grachev, Russian Federation </F>
minister of defense, under the "At First Hand" rubric: 
"Military Doctrine and Russia's Security. Nuclear Weapons Are 
a Means of Deterring Any Aggression Against the Russian 
Federation"] 
  [Text] From the moment of their adoption, the "Basic 
Provisions of the Russian Federation Military Doctrine" have 
been actively discussed in various political circles and on the 
pages of the Russian and world press. 
  Given this constant interest, I deem it expedient to explain 
to the public in more detail the essence of the most important 
doctrinal provisions and the characteristics of our state's 
contemporary military-political and geostrategic position, which 
determine the fundamental approaches to ensuring Russia's 
national security. 
  As we know, following the collapse of the Soviet Union and 
the formation of a number of independent states on its 
territory, Russia's state-legal status has changed radically. 
It has become an autonomous subject of international relations, 
the USSR's successor as permanent member of the UN Security 
Council, and one of the five world nuclear powers. 
  The cardinal changes in the geopolitical and military 
strategic situation in the world, the new nature and system of 
international relations, and the creation of Russian Armed 
Forces have put before Russia the task of elaborating and 
adopting a fundamentally new national military doctrine. 
  On the one hand, the end of the confrontation which had 
proceeded under the sign of the struggle between two systems, 
with its projection onto all aspects of international life, has 
not only reduced the threat of global war but has laid down the 
preconditions for establishing constructive cooperation between 
states which were previously confronting each other and for a 
fundamentally new relationship between Russia and the world 
around it. 
  However, it must be clearly understood that these new 
relations do not by any means rule out the emergence of 
differences and contradictions, which at times are quite sharp. 
  The main thing, in our view, is that they should be resolved 
and settled within the framework of normal collaboration between 
states, with the specific nature of national interests taken 
into account. 
  On the other hand, attention must be paid to the relatively 
high level of tension in individual regions of the world. The 
probability of local and regional wars continues to exist, as 
well as of armed conflicts within individual states on the basis 
of national-ethnic, territorial, religious, and other 
contradictions. A particularly dangerous challenge to regional 
and international stability is the presented by the growth of 
aggressive nationalism in various regions of the world. 
  From the very beginning of work on the military doctrine it 
was absolutely clear that what had to be done was not simply to 
amplify military-doctrinal views which existed in the Soviet 
period but to elaborate fundamentally new stances and approaches. 
  Essentially for the first time we stated that we would 
protect not the ideology but the vitally important interests of 
the country, which do not affect the security of other states in 
any way and are ensured within the framework of mutually 
advantageous interstate relations based on equal rights. 
  The cornerstone of our military doctrine is the provision 
that Russia does not regard any state as its enemy. This has 
brought about the need for a radical review of approaches to the 
entire spectrum of problems of military-organizational 
development. 
  During the elaboration of the doctrine's provisions and the 
determination of the Armed Forces' tasks the country's real 
possibilities at the current phase of its development were taken 
into account to the maximum degree, as well as Russia's 
international commitments to the reduction of nuclear and 
conventional weapons and its participation in peacekeeping 
operations. 
  All this taken together has exerted a considerable influence 
on the formation of Russian military doctrine. 
  In accordance with concepts which exist in our country, the 
military doctrine represents a system of views, officially 
adopted in the state, on wars, armed conflicts, their 
prevention, military-organizational development, the preparation 
of the country for defense, the building and training of the 
Armed Forces and other Russian Federation troops, and the 
procedure and methods for using them to protect the vitally 
important interests of the Russian Federation. 
  Naturally, the listed questions are reflected in the 
country's Constitution, laws, decisions, and decrees of the top 
organs of state power and are fleshed out in concepts and plans 
for the organizational development of the Armed Forces, 
regulations, manuals, and other documents. 
  The "Basic Provisions of the Russian Federation Military 
Doctrine," which are of a most general and conceptual nature, 
have made it possible to unite all these legislative acts and 
departmental documents in a single whole, a kind of "military 
constitution." For the first time in our country's history, 
this document was thoroughly examined at a number of sittings of 
the Russian Federation Security Council and ratified by Russian 
President B.N. Yeltsin. Thus the "Basic Provisions of Military 
Doctrine" are an official normative-legal document, a 
constituent component of the Concept of Russian Federation 
Security, and represent a "document of the transitional 
period -- the period of the formation of Russian statehood, the 
implementation of democratic reforms, and the formation of a new 
system of international relations." In other words, the 
adopted Basic Provisions of Military Doctrine constitute not 
dogma but a document open to relevant revision as the 
military-political situation develops. It is intended to ensure 
the implementation of a minimum of two basic functions. 
  The main function is normative. The Basic Provisions of 
Military Doctrine are very close to and in a number of spheres 
coincide with the category of juridical law, since they are 
binding on all organs of state power and administration which 
take part in ensuring the country's defense capability. The 
doctrinal provisions determine the state's tasks in the sphere 
of ensuring military security, the aims and tasks of using the 
Armed Forces, and other questions. Apart from that, they aim 
the country's economy, particularly its defense sectors, toward 
providing for the needs of the Armed Forces and other troops and 
determine the priority spheres for developing science and 
technology in the interests of defense, the preparation of the 
population and the state as a whole to repel aggression, and 
also a number of other measures relating to this sphere. 
  Another function, the informative function, is also highly 
significant. The military doctrine enables the peoples of our 
country and the world community to correctly understand Russia's 
aims and tasks in the sphere of the struggle to avert possible 
armed conflicts and wars and in preparations for repulsing 
possible aggression against Russia and protecting its vital 
interests. 
  Structurally speaking, the Basic Provisions of Military 
Doctrine are made up of a preface, political, military, 
military-technical, and economic sections, and also a concluding 
section. 
  The political principles of the military doctrine reflect 
two 
interconnected tasks -- the prevention of war, and readiness to 
repulse an aggressor. 
  Russia rejects any war, use of military force, or threat of 
force as means of achieving political, economic, and other aims. 
It advocates the adoption of commitments by all states not to 
use military force first and adheres to the principles of the 
inviolability of state borders and noninterference in the 
internal affairs of other states. All questions under dispute 
should be resolved only by political and diplomatic means. 
  As I have already noted, the political principles of the 
military doctrine indicate for the first time that the Russian 
Federation sees no state as its enemy. I will say 
frankly that for us the professional military, who have gotten 
used to having the most specific of guidelines, this turn of 
events has created a lot of additional difficulties. Primarily 
we had to retune ourselves psychologically, but there were also 
difficulties of what I would call a technical nature. This 
primarily concerns questions of strategic planning, the 
instruction and training of cadres, and, finally, the 
determination of the defense budget. Today we are building our 
defense policy, gearing ourselves to taking existing and 
potential threats into account. These are expounded fairly 
fully in the doctrine. While Russia has no enemies, like any 
state, it has its vitally important interests. We are capable 
and prepared to protect them. 
  Now, something about nuclear weapons. This 
section, as might have been expected, has generated heightened 
interest and the greatest number of opinions. 
  It must be noted that one of the paradoxes of the nuclear 
age 
is the fact that nuclear weapons, accumulated in the arsenals of 
the opposing sides in the Cold War, have transferred to a new 
form of existence as a political instrument of mutual 
deterrence against the unleashing of large-scale war. The 
inevitability of a world catastrophe occurring if the 
accumulated nuclear arsenals are put into operation is 
universally recognized. But imposing certain rules in the game 
of nuclear weapons on each other, like their selective, group, 
or demonstrational use, has proved to be an insoluble task for 
political strategies. Nuclear deterrence itself is 
essentially based on the scale of uncertainty concerning a 
nuclear response to aggression. 
  Following the end of the Cold War, when significant changes 
occurred in the disposition of geopolitical forces in the world, 
particularly in the Eurasian area, the policy of nuclear 
deterrence has been gaining new substance for Russia, and indeed 
for the United States and NATO. 
  The military confrontation between East and West, vastly 
inflated by the arsenals of strategic and operational-tactical 
nuclear weapons that were among those formed in the course of 
the Cold War years, has objectively been cancelled out. With 
the destruction of the bipolar geostrategic structure of the 
world, the question arose for Russia on the one hand and the 
United States and NATO on the other hand of transforming their 
own nuclear concepts and strategies. 
  Furthermore, in the present conditions the problem of 
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and other types 
of mass destruction weapons has also arisen sharply. At 
present, apart from the five nuclear states which have 
officially enshrined their status as possessors of nuclear 
weapons in the Nonproliferation Treaty, there are somewhere in 
the region of 10 countries in the world which are on the 
threshold of producing them. As a rule, they are countries 
which are located in regions with an unstable military-political 
climate. The advance of these countries toward nuclear weapons 
is accompanied by the concentration of their efforts on the 
acquisition of rocket and aviation technologies with the aim of 
creating delivery vehicles. If this process is not stopped, 
then soon we may see real rather than potential possessors of 
nuclear arsenals who are seriously impressive by regional 
yardsticks. 
  In this connection I consider it necessary to stress that 
the 
countries of the unpublicized "nuclear club" form a fairly dense 
half-circle, embracing, from the south, the geostrategic space 
occupied by Russia and its closest neighbors, creating a vague 
zone of "nuclear risk." That is why Russia's policy of nuclear 
deterrence must fully meet this circumstance. 
  Furthermore, it is necessary to bear in mind that with the 
contemporary development of means of armed struggle, including 
precision weapons, even with the use of conventional weapons our 
nuclear potential could be reduced in warfare to a level whereby 
it could not carry out its deterrent role. 
  This was reflected in the section of the doctrine devoted to 
nuclear weapons, where it says that "the aim of the 
Russian Federation's policy in the sphere of nuclear weapons is 
to eliminate the danger of a nuclear war by deterrence against 
the unleashing of aggression against the Russian Federation and 
its allies." 
  In full accordance with the aforementioned aim, we do not 
view nuclear weapons as a means of conducting military actions, 
but as a means of deterrence against the unleashing of 
aggression. Russia has not resolved to confirm the commitment on 
non-first use of nuclear weapons which the Soviet Union had 
declared in the past. This commitment contradicts the task of 
deterrence. I would like to stress once again that a rejection 
of no-first use of nuclear weapons in no way means a switch to 
the concept of the preemptive use of nuclear weapons but 
demonstrates a resolve to avert the unleashing of a large-scale 
war against the Russian Federation and its allies. I quote: 
"The Russian Federation will not use its Armed Forces and 
other troops against any state except for individual or 
collective self-defense if an armed attack is carried out 
against the Russian Federation, its citizens, territory, Armed 
Forces, or other troops, or its allies." That is why there can 
be no question of any first use of a preemptive nuclear strike, 
since the strategic nuclear forces are a constituent component 
of the Armed Forces. 
  The military doctrine also contains the following 
provisions: 
  "The Russian Federation will not use its nuclear weapons 
against any state participating in the Treaty on the 
Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons dated 1 July 1968 which does 
not possess nuclear weapons except in the following cases: 
  a) an armed attack by that state, linked by an alliance 
agreement with a state possessing nuclear weapons, against the 
Russian Federation, its territory, Armed Forces, and other 
troops, or its allies; 
  b) joint actions by such a state with a state possessing 
nuclear weapons to implement or support an invasion or an armed 
attack on the Russian Federation, its territory, Armed Forces, 
and other troops or allies." 
  What do we have in mind here? First of all, when adopting a 
decision to begin aggression against Russia it is necessary for 
any state, including a non-nuclear state, to think about the 
possible consequences of this step. 
  Second, it is necessary to restrict to the maximum degree 
the 
possibility of an expansion in the scale of aggression against 
Russia, including doing so by means of the participation of 
nonnuclear states in it. 
  References to states possessing nuclear weapons are included 
in both cases because at present and in the foreseeable future 
there is not a single nonnuclear state in the world whose 
autonomous aggression would constitute a serious danger to 
Russia. 
  In a number of countries there are concerns that Russia may 
make first use of nuclear weapons even in a very restricted 
conflict. This is not true! Russia is categorically opposed to 
any use, even the restricted use, of nuclear weapons in warfare 
even by one of the sides, which "may provoke the mass use 
of nuclear weapons and cause catastrophic consequences." 
Furthermore, the document stresses that Russia "aspires to a 
reduction in nuclear forces to a minimum level, which would 
guarantee the prevention of a large-scale war and the 
maintenance of strategic stability and, in the future, to the 
complete elimination of nuclear weapons." From the 
political viewpoint, the principle of the use of nuclear weapons 
expounded in the document places Russia on an equal footing with 
other nuclear countries and will serve as an incentive for the 
further reduction and nonproliferation of nuclear weapons. 
  In respect of other types of mass destruction weapons, 
Russia's policy remains unchanged and is aimed at promoting the 
full implementation of the Convention Prohibiting Chemical and 
Biological Weapons as well as at preventing the production of 
new types of mass destruction weapons. 
  In accordance with the doctrine, the Russian Federation's 
military security is ensured by the totality of the means at its 
disposal. And although, as I have already said above, priority 
is given to political-diplomatic and other peaceful methods, the 
Russian Federation deems it necessary to possess Armed Forces 
and deems it lawful to use them for the protection of the 
Russian Federation's sovereignty, territorial integrity, and 
other vitally important interests in the event of aggression 
being committed against it or its allies. In the present 
conditions, in our opinion, political efforts can be effective 
only if they are supported by a military might that is 
sufficient for defense. 
  According to our assessment, there is practically no direct 
military threat today. But a military danger remains. This is 
confirmed by an analysis of the existing and potential sources 
of it and reasons for it. 
  The basic spheres and principles of ensuring the Russian 
Federation's military security are determined on the basis of 
the given analysis. 
  They are: 
  -- the development of a system of bilateral and multilateral 
agreements between states, and Russia's membership in collective 
security structures, or the establishment of cooperation 
relations with such structures; 
  -- the improvement of existing international mechanisms for 
the monitoring of the proliferation of mass destruction weapons 
and delivery vehicles and the creation of effective new 
mechanisms; 
  -- the creation of conditions for the permanent action of 
the 
Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons and also the 
adoption of measures to expand the number of participants in 
that treaty; 
  -- the expansion of confidence-building measures in the 
military sphere, including the exchange of information of a 
military nature on a mutual basis and the coordination of 
military doctrines and plans for military organizational 
development with allies and partners. 
  Special attention is being paid to implementing the Treaty 
on 
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe dated 19 November 1990 and 
giving assistance to the inclusion of Asian states and states in 
other regions in the world in the process of restricting and 
reducing armed forces and weapons. 
  I particularly want to talk about the latter problem. Let me 
remind you that the CFE Treaty was formulated in conditions of 
inflexible confrontation between two systems. That is why 
provisions regarding regional partition and flank restrictions 
on weapons and hardware were incorporated in it. 
  The main idea of the treaty was geared toward reducing the 
dangerous concentration of weapons along the line of contact 
between the Warsaw Pact and NATO groupings. However, with the 
breakup of the USSR the situation changed dramatically owing to 
the distribution of weapons levels stipulated by the treaty 
among the successor states. Now the terms of the treaty dealing 
with flank restrictions have not only lost their political and 
military significance but have in fact taken on a discriminatory 
character with respect to Russia. For example, they directly 
affect the state's security interests in the south. 
  Instability in the Caucasus and neighboring regions and the 
growth of separatism and extremism necessitate a significant 
Russian military presence in the North Caucasus region in order 
to prevent and deter potential conflicts and insure against 
destabilization of the situation on the European continent as a 
whole. At the same time Russia needs flank restrictions in 
order to concentrate the bulk of its weapons and military 
hardware along an "East-West" line, as during the Cold War and 
the confrontation between the two blocs. 
  Russia's proposals to resolve the problems of flank 
restrictions do not prejudice the security of any European 
state, and they are in keeping with the treaty principle of 
equal rights and responsibilities for all signatories. 
  I believe that Russia is entitled to expect a different 
attitude to Paragraph 5 of the CFE Treaty. However, the lack of 
a solution to the problem of flank restrictions can be viewed as 
evidence that by no means everyone has yet jettisoned the 
bloc-style thinking of the Cold War era. 
  Russia believes that the main principles for resolving its 
military security problems are the maintenance of stability in 
the regions adjoining its borders and compliance with 
international commitments. At the same time the doctrine 
indicates that Russia's security should be protected without 
prejudice to other countries' security or the security system as 
a whole. 
  Regarding the matter of maintaining international peace and 
security and preventing wars and armed conflicts, the Russian 
Federation views as partners all states whose policies do not 
prejudice its interests or contradict the UN Charter. A 
priority for us is to establish cooperation within the CIS -- 
cooperation with its members in resolving problems of collective 
defense and security and coordinating military policy and 
defense building. 
  At the present time we are formulating a blueprint for 
collective security within the CIS framework. The basis for 
this is the Collective Security Treaty. It is becoming 
increasingly evident that no state in the Commonwealth can 
develop normally in various spheres without close integration. 
And there is no sense in looking for the notorious "hand of 
Moscow" or a new "imperialist thinking" on Russia's part. This 
is an objective assessment of present realities. We favor an 
equal pooling of efforts by all CIS member states in order to 
resolve problems that arise. 
  On a regional level, Russia is implementing cooperation 
with CSCE member countries and other states and 
military-political structures in adjacent regions which have an 
existing or nascent collective security system. But here too 
there is a major peculiarity. Russia is not just a European but 
also an Asian state. Consequently, in order to protect our 
security and vital interests we cannot retire into Europe alone; 
we must make efforts to establish collective security systems in 
other regions too, including the Asia-Pacific region. 
  On the global scale, Russia cooperates with all UN member 
states, primarily within the framework of the UN Security 
Council, on the basis of the principles and norms of 
international law. 
  The doctrine also confirms that Russia is carrying out its 
international commitments as regards providing military 
assistance to allied countries and participating in peacekeeping 
operations. The Russian Federation believes that implementing 
the actions of the UN Security Council and other collective 
security organs with regard to maintaining or restoring 
international peace is an important task. It is in Russia's 
interests that armed conflicts which flare up in the world 
should be averted by political means or halted at the earliest 
possible stage of development. Here it is apposite to note that 
we are keen to formulate a contractual and legal basis for 
relations with NATO in the spheres of averting crises and 
peacekeeping, primarily with regard to the problem of adopting 
coordinated decisions to use peacekeeping forces, and also 
regarding other aspects of practical military cooperation with 
the alliance. 
  And now to the actual military side of the doctrine. At the 
present time and for the foreseeable future, the likelihood of a 
nuclear war or conventional world war breaking out has been 
significantly reduced. But the possibility of armed conflicts 
and local or regional wars flaring up not only remains but is 
unfortunately growing. Under certain circumstances such 
conflicts could escalate into a large-scale (world) war. 
  The military doctrine therefore defines it as the main 
objective of the use of the Russian Federation's Armed Forces in 
armed conflicts and local wars to rapidly localize a source of 
tension and stop hostilities at the earliest possible stage in 
the interests of creating prerequisites for settling a conflict 
by peaceful means in line with Russia's interests. 
  We are particularly concerned by the continuing possibility 
that wars waged merely with conventional weapons will escalate 
into wars where nuclear weapons might be used. Factors which 
could exacerbate this danger are first and foremost premeditated 
actions by an aggressor designed to destroy or disrupt the 
functioning of strategic nuclear forces, missile attack early 
warning systems, nuclear power industry installations, and 
nuclear and chemical facilities. Apart from the strategic 
significance, the destruction of such targets could have 
irreparable environmental consequences. This could mean not one 
but hundreds or thousands more Chernobyls. 
  The tasks of the Armed Forces and other Russian Federation 
forces are set out in the fundamental principles of the 
doctrine. It is important to note at this point that alongside 
traditional tasks such as participation in averting wars and 
armed conflicts, deterring potential aggressors from starting 
wars, and repulsing aggressors, for the first time the document 
formulates a number of new tasks. 
  These are, first and foremost, carrying out peacekeeping 
operations in line with decisions by the UN Security Council and 
other collective security organs, or under other international 
commitments if these do not contradict the interests of the 
Russian Federation. 
  Responsibility for future peace and the success of the 
economic and political reforms that have been initiated is 
prompting the Russian Federation to step up its participation in 
the process of settling crisis situations. The political need 
for this aspect of Russia's activity stems primarily from its 
interest in developing into a sovereign, independent, democratic 
state. Russia also recognizes its own special responsibility 
for ensuring peace and security, imposed on it by its permanent 
membership of the UN Security Council. Russia fully endorses 
and supports the Security Council recommendation that all states 
should view their participation in international operations 
designed to maintain peace as an element of their foreign and 
national security policy. 
  In accordance with this, the main objective of Russia's 
peacekeeping activity is to protect its national security 
interests through encouraging the establishment and maintenance 
of peace and stability both on the planet as a whole and in 
various regions. 
  In realizing this objective, Russia firmly adheres to the 
generally accepted norms and principles of international law as 
well as the specific norms and rules for carrying out 
peacekeeping activity. The latter category includes: 
  -- matching the form and content of peacekeeping steps to 
the 
situation to be resolved; 
  -- giving priority to political over military ways and means 
of settling a situation; 
  -- strictly observing and protecting human rights; 
  -- using military contingents of peacemaking forces only 
with 
the consent of the opposing sides and with the approval of the 
international community. 
  In the context of the said norms and principles the leading 
areas of the Russian Federation's peacemaking activity are: 
  -- mediating in settling crisis situations and preventing 
the 
escalation of conflicts; 
  -- influencing the conflicting sides by diplomatic means 
above all but also, in extraordinary circumstances, by military 
means with a view to ensuring the fair and peaceful resolution 
of disputed issues; 
  -- taking measures to preserve peace by disengaging the 
conflicting sides by using military contingents of the Russian 
Federation Armed Forces operating under UN auspices or sent into 
the crisis zone with the consent of the conflicting sides within 
the framework of the Collective Security Treaty; 
  -- determining and supporting structures which seek to 
strengthen peace and to prevent the emergence or the 
continuation of a conflict. 
  Thus it is possible to maintain that there is nothing in 
Russia's peacemaking activity or in the tasks entrusted to its 
Armed Forces that runs counter to the fundamental, universally 
recognized norms and principles of international relations. 
  All this confirms once again Russia's desire to be a full 
and 
equal member of the world community in the resolution of 
international peacekeeping questions. 
  The second fundamentally new task for us is to assist 
internal affairs organs and internal troops of the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Internal Affairs in localizing and 
blocking regions of conflict, ending armed clashes, and 
disengaging opposing sides and also to defend strategically 
important installations according to the procedure laid down in 
existing legislation. 
  The possibility of fulfilling such tasks is provided for in 
the legislation of many countries. It is not a question of the 
Armed Forces' assuming any special internal functions but of the 
possibility of additionally involving forces and equipment in 
halting bloodshed. It must be realized here that it is just as 
legitimate to come between, let us say, Ossetians and Ingush who 
have taken up arms as between Serbs and Muslims in Bosnia. 
  What is new is the provision that "the security 
interests of the Russian Federation and other CIS states might 
require the stationing of troops (forces) and means outside the 
territory of the Russian Federation". 
  This provision has elicited a highly ambivalent response 
abroad, particularly in certain "near" countries and in East 
Europe. Such a reaction, however, is, rather, nothing but an 
attempt at political speculation. Because the same paragraph 
unequivocally states that "the conditions for such 
stationing and manning are defined in the appropriate 
international legal documents". In other words, these 
questions are in full accordance with the universally recognized 
norms of international law. 
  The need for military bases outside Russia's territory is 
dictated, above all, by the interests of maintaining stability 
in individual regions. Their deployment is initiated primarily 
by those states that are in need of additional stability factors. 
  As regards military installations, the need for these 
outside 
Russian territory is determined in some cases by their purpose 
(for example, missile attack early warning system radar 
stations) and in other cases by their technical uniqueness and 
by the impossibility of creating a replacement of equal worth on 
Russian territory in the very short term. 
  In all cases military bases and installations are deployed 
outside Russia by mutual agreement between the sides. 
  Here I would like to dwell on the thesis, which is being 
greatly exaggerated by certain people, that Russia is 
supposedly ready to interfere in its neighbors' internal 
affairs. I will cite from the doctrine: "The 
Russian Federation abides by the principles of the peaceful 
settlement of international disputes, respect for a state's 
sovereignty and territorial integrity, noninterference in its 
internal affairs, inviolability of state borders, and other 
universally recognized principles of international law." 
This is set forth in the military doctrine's political 
fundamentals, which take priority over its other constituent 
parts. 
  But the military doctrine's military part proper 
is the basis for the military building of Russia as a whole, the 
elaboration of the concept of building the Armed Forces, the 
strategic planning of their use, and the planning of the use and 
organization of cooperation among other troops in the interests 
of ensuring security. 
  The chief aim in building the Russian Federation Armed 
Forces is to create and develop troops (forces) capable of 
ensuring the defense of the country's independence, sovereignty, 
and territorial integrity, the security of citizens, and other 
vital interests of society and the state in keeping with the 
military-political and strategic situation in the world and with 
the Russian Federation's actual potential. 
  The Basic Provisions record the principles of building the 
Armed Forces. I will venture to draw attention to just a few of 
them: 
  -- organs of military management and officials are under the 
control of the top organs of state power and the Russian 
Federation Council of Ministers-Government; 
  -- general civil political rights and freedoms are observed 
and social protection is provided for servicemen in accordance 
with the specific nature of military service; 
  -- the organizational structure, effective combat strength, 
and numerical strength of troops (forces) correspond to the 
tasks entrusted to them and to the legislation, international 
commitments, and economic potential of the Russian Federation; 
  -- regard is paid to the country's geopolitical and 
geostrategic position; 
  -- Russian and world experience of military building are 
utilized. 
  These basic principles reflect modern conditions and 
determine the thrust of the building of Russia's Armed Forces. 
  The building and development of the Russian Federation Armed 
Forces are conducted in accordance with the concepts of their 
building according to coordinated and concerted programs and 
plans. At the same time the doctrine defines for the Russian 
Federation Armed Forces the following main tasks for the period 
through the year 2000: 
  through 1996: 
  -- the creation of groupings of troops (forces) on the 
territory of the Russian Federation in accordance with their 
purpose and tasks; 
  -- the improvement of the troops' branch structure; 
  -- the completion of the withdrawal of the troops stationed 
outside Russia to its territory; 
  -- the continuation of the switch to a mixed system of 
manning which combines voluntary service -- under contract -- 
with service based on the drafting of citizens for military 
service in accordance with the principle of extraterritoriality 
[voyennaya sluzhba po eksterritorialnomu]; 
  -- the reduction of the Armed Forces' numerical strength to 
the prescribed level. 
  During the period 1996-2000: 
  -- the completion of the reorganization of the Armed Forces' 
structure, the switch to a mixed system of manning, and the 
creation of groupings of troops (forces) and the military 
infrastructure on the Russian Federation's territory. 
  It cannot be ruled out that these tasks and their number and 
timing will be corrected in accordance with the actual 
development of the situation in the country and in the world. 
  The military-technical and economic fundamentals of the 
military doctrine set forth the aims and tasks of 
military-technical support for the Russian Federation's military 
security. They formulate the main areas of development of the 
country's defense industry potential and also of 
military-technical cooperation with foreign countries. 
  The chief aim of military-technical support for the Russian 
Federation's military security is the timely equipping of the 
Armed Forces and other troops of the Russian Federation and 
their material provision with efficient arms systems, military 
and special hardware, and property in quantities necessary and 
sufficient for the guaranteed defense of the vital interests of 
society and the state. 
  At the same time the doctrine defines for the first time 
that 
the needs of the Armed Forces and other troops for armament, 
military hardware, and property will be met with due regard for 
the country's scientific, technical, and economic potential. 
  A few words about military-technical cooperation with 
foreign countries. 
  Whereas military-technical cooperation in the former Soviet 
Union was aimed at supporting welcome regimes and, as is known, 
was more ideological in nature, today Russia regards it as, 
above all, a constituent part of the balanced support for its 
own economic interests. Therefore continued trade in arms and 
military hardware will be one of the elements of activity in 
this sphere. But, at the same time, what is new is the 
emergence in the military doctrine, as one of the basic 
principles of Russia's policy, of the following: "The 
inadmissibility of deliveries of arms and military hardware 
which might exacerbate a crisis situation, undermine regional 
stability, or violate embargoes or other corresponding 
international accords to which the Russian Federation is a 
party." 
  In addition to sales of weapons, it is also planned to 
expand 
contacts with regard to training foreign servicemen, above all 
from CIS countries, in Russian educational institutions. 
  The final section of the "Basic Provisions of Military 
Doctrine" states that the Russian Federation guarantees the 
fulfillment of the provisions of this document. At the same 
time it will strictly abide by the UN Charter and by universally 
recognized international legal norms and principles. 
  This is a brief resume of the crux of the main doctrinal 
provisions aimed at ensuring Russia's security and the defense 
of its vital interests. 
  Like the whole world, Russia is now going through an 
extremely difficult and crucial historical period. It is a 
period of the creation of a new world order. To all 
appearances, its character will predetermine the destiny of 
mankind in all countries and peoples for many decades. It is in 
precisely this world-historical context that the search must be 
made for the role and place of the Russian state in the 
still-evolving and largely contradictory and impermanent 
geopolitical balance of forces and interests. 

