BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 14 KYODO -- A key ruling coalition 
official proposed Thursday [14 April] holding a joint meeting of 
party chiefs and secretaries general to break a deadlock on the 
nomination of a successor to outgoing Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa. 
  Yuichi Ichikawa, secretary general of Komeito, told 
reporters 
he made the proposal at a meeting of coalition executives 
Thursday morning. 
  New party Sakigake, headed by Chief Cabinet Secretary 
Masayoshi Takemura, boycotted the morning session. 
  Sakigake has insisted that party leaders, and not the party 
executives, should discuss the framework of a new coalition 
government and a candidate to succeed Hosokawa. 
  Heads of the Social Democratic Party (SDP), the Democratic 
Socialist Party (DSP) and Sakigake agreed earlier in the day 
that a breakthrough should be sought through a meeting of party 
chiefs, SDP Secretary General Wataru Kubo told a news conference. 
  The three parties earlier called for a forum of the seven 
coalition party leaders to select a new premier but Shinseito, 
Komeito, and Hosokawa's Japan New Party (JNP) rejected the bid. 
  Kubo said he reported Sakigake's renewed call for a meeting 
of coalition heads to the other secretaries general at Thursday 
morning's gathering. He said the executives will resume talks 
on the selection of a new premier in the evening. 
  The secretaries general of the ruling parties had earlier 
agreed to avert a split in the eight-month-old coalition and 
form a new government under the present framework. 
  Following that agreement, Foreign Minister and concurrently 
Deputy Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata emerged as the most likely 
successor to Hosokawa. Hata heads Shinseito, a key party in the 
coalition. 
  Takemura, however, has expressed dissatisfaction with the 
proposed selection process. 
  He said in TV interviews Wednesday night that he considered 
it important to establish a democratic system of decision-making 
within the coalition. 
  Takemura also urged the coalition partners to synchronize 
their basic policies, decide on the framework of a new coalition 
government, and select a candidate for the premiership. 
  Differences have surfaced between Takemura and Shinseito 
Secretary General Ichiro Ozawa, who is regarded as the 
behind-the- scenes strategist of the coalition. 
  Hata is in Marrakech, Morocco, for a ministerial meeting 
that 
will conclude with the signing of a treaty on the Uruguay round 
of talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. 
  He told reporters on his way there that the coalition is 
moving to maintain the coalition framework, and said the next 
prime minister will be selected in the Diet early next week. 
  Hosokawa, 56, suddenly announced his resignation last Friday 
after Diet debate on the fiscal 1994 budget broke down over 
allegations of financial impropriety by the premier. He will 
remain in office until a replacement is picked. 

