Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> ["Regulations" under the rubric "In the Cabinet of Ministers </F>
of the Latvian Republic," "No. 29 (Protocol No. 4, #22), Riga, 
dated 11 January 1994: 'On the State Border of the Latvian 
Republic', Issued in Accordance with Procedure Prescribed by 
Article 81 of the Satversme"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Section 1. General Provisions </H5>
  Article 1. State Border of the Latvian Republic 
  The state border of the Latvian Republic (henceforth in this 
text--"State Border") is the line and vertical plane coinciding 
with this line which separates the land and water territory of 
the Latvian Republic, its subsurface depths, and its airspace, 
from neighboring states and the neutral waters of the Baltic Sea. 
  Article 2. Determination of the State Border and 
Provision for Its Defense 
  The State Border is defined by bilateral agreements and 
ratified interstate treaties concluded by the Latvian Republic 
prior to 16 June 1940, and also by bilateral agreements 
concluded later with neighboring states on the restoration or 
designation of borders. 
  In places where the State Border does not conform to 
interstate treaties concluded prior to 16 June 1940, it is 
considered a temporary line of demarcation until conclusion of a 
new interstate treaty. All norms included in this regulation 
which have entered into force with respect to the State Border 
are applicable to such a line of demarcation. 
  The Cabinet of Ministers undertakes measures within the 
framework of its authority to defend the State Border and the 
territory of the country. 
  Article 3. Designation of the State Border 
  Unless otherwise prescribed by an interstate treaty 
concluded 
by the Latvian Republic, the State Border is designated as 
follows: 
  1) on land--by characteristic terrain features and clearly 
discernible reference points; 
  2) in the Baltic Sea--by the outer limit of Latvian Republic 
territorial waters; 
  3) in the Irves Strait and Gulf of Riga--in accordance with 
bilateral agreements with the Estonian Republic; 
  4) on navigable rivers--along the river's main channel; on 
nonnavigable rivers (streams)--along their centerline or center 
of the main fluvial branch; on lakes and other bodies of 
water--along a straight line connecting two points at which the 
State Border emerges on the shore of the given lake or other 
body of water. 
  When passing along a river, stream, lake, or other body of 
water, the State Border does not change when the configuration 
of the shores of the body of water changes, or when a river 
(stream) changes its course; 
  5) on bridges and other structures that intersect border 
sections designated over water--along the centerline of these 
bridges and structures, or along their technological axis. 
  The State Border is designated on terrain by clearly 
distinguishable border markers, whose form, size, and 
installation procedure are determined by the Cabinet of 
Ministers based on interstate treaties. 
  Article 4. Territorial Waters of the Latvian 
Republic 
  Territorial waters of the Latvian Republic are the waters of 
the Baltic Sea extending a distance of 12 nautical miles from 
the line of maximum ebb tide along the Latvian shore (with the 
exception of the Irves Strait and Gulf of Riga). 
  Article 5. Internal Waters of the Latvian Republic 
  The following constitute the internal waters of the Latvian 
Republic: 
  1) the waters of ports of the Latvian Republic, bounded by a 
straight line connecting those point locations of hydrotechnical 
or other structures situated on opposite sides of a particular 
port, which project the farthest towards the sea; 
  2) in the Irves Strait and Gulf of Riga--the waters bounded 
by a line which connects the base line passing through the 
southern part of the Cape Lode cliff and the center of Cape 
Ovishrags. The Irves Strait and Gulf of Riga are the common 
internal waters of the Latvian Republic and Estonian Republic. 
The configuration of the State Border in the waters of the Gulf 
of Riga is determined by interstate treaty between the Latvian 
Republic and the Estonian Republic; 
  3) the waters of those rivers, lakes, and other bodies of 
water whose shores belong entirely to the Latvian Republic. 
<H3>  Section 2. Operating Regime of the State Border and Border 
Zone </H3>
  Article 6. Operating Regime of the State Border 
  The Operating Regime of the State Border: 
  1) determines the procedure for maintenance, security, and 
crossing of the border, determines procedure for entry, 
presence, and performance of work in the border strip, and in 
border rivers, lakes, and other bodies of water of the Latvian 
Republic, and determines the control procedures for compliance 
with such; 
  2) determines the procedure according to which aircraft and 
other flying objects cross the airspace of the State Border; 
  3) at the maritime border, determines the procedure 
according 
to which surface platforms may enter or be present in the 
territorial and internal waters and ports of the Latvian 
Republic. 
  The Operating Regime of the State Border is regulated by 
these regulations, legislative acts of the Latvian Republic, and 
interstate treaties concluded by the Latvian Republic. 
  Article 7. The State Border Strip 
  With the aim of ensuring proper order on the State Border, 
the State Border Strip is established along the State Border. 
The State Border Strip is a strip of land of predetermined width 
adjoining the State Border, in which the Operating Regime of the 
State Border is exercised. The State Border Strip is determined 
by the Cabinet of Ministers in accordance with interstate 
treaties that have been concluded. 
  Article 8. Crossing the State Border 
  All types of communications and dislocation across the State 
Border are effected at border crossing locations determined by 
the Cabinet of Ministers in accordance with the laws of the 
Latvian Republic and interstate treaties concluded by the 
Latvian Republic. 
  Seagoing and river vessels, naval warships, and other 
surface 
platforms cross the State Border in accordance with legislative 
acts and regulations of the Latvian Republic which have been 
published according to established procedure. 
  Aircraft and other flying objects cross the State Border 
through specially determined air corridors in accordance with 
legislative acts and regulations of the Latvian Republic which 
have been published according to established procedure. 
  Crossings are permitted outside the boundaries of these air 
corridors only upon authorization of the Cabinet of Ministers. 
  Article 9. Take-Off and Landing of Aircraft and Other 
Flying Objects 
  Aircraft and other flying objects take off from the Latvian 
Republic and land upon arrival in the Latvian Republic only at 
airports and airfields prescribed for international flights, 
which incorporate border control stations. 
  Procedure for take-off and landing is determined, and 
changes 
made thereto, by the Cabinet of Ministers and its subordinate 
structures. 
  If a forced landing is necessitated, aircraft and other 
flying objects may effect emergency landing at other airports 
and airfields that do not have border control stations. 
  Article 10. Procedure for Visits of Foreign Vessels and 
Other Surface Platforms in the Territorial and Internal Waters 
of the Latvian Republic and Port Calls at Latvian Ports, and 
Procedure for Their Departure 
  Any foreign ship has the right to enter the territorial 
waters of the Latvian Republic for the purpose of crossing 
without entering internal waters, of entering internal waters or 
ports, and of heading out to the open sea, observing the 
principle of nonstop peaceful passage. 
  Foreign naval warships may enter the territorial waters of 
the Latvian Republic in accordance with procedure determined by 
the Cabinet of Ministers. Foreign submarines may be located in 
the territorial waters of the Latvian Republic only in the 
surface mode and flying the flag that indicates their state. 
  Visits by foreign ships and other surface platforms and 
their 
presence in the territorial waters, roadsteads, and ports of the 
Latvian Republic are effected in accordance with procedure as 
determined by resolutions of the Cabinet of Ministers and 
international treaties. 
  Article 11. Control of Crossings of the State 
Border 
  Persons, all varieties of means of transportation, cargo, 
and 
other property crossing the State Border are subject to border 
crossing control in accordance with these regulations, 
legislative acts of the Latvian Republic, and international 
treaties concluded by the Latvian Republic. 
  Control of State Border crossings is exercised at border 
control stations and border crossing points established by the 
Cabinet of Ministers and state treaties. 
  Border control at border control stations is carried out by 
border guards and customs agents. Medical quarantine, 
veterinary, plant quarantine, and other control is also effected 
at border control stations if necessary, as well as control of 
the removal of cultural treasures. 
  Border control at border crossing points is carried out by 
border guards only. Persons and means of transportation have the 
right to cross the State Border at these points in accordance 
with procedure determined by the Cabinet of Ministers and 
interstate treaties. 
  Article 12. Passage of Persons, Means of 
Transportation, Freight, and Other Property Across the State 
Border 
  Persons, means of transportation, freight, and other 
property 
are granted passage across the State Border by Border Security 
Forces when properly drawn up documents are presented affording 
the right to cross the State Border. 
  Article 13. Operating Regime of Border Control 
Stations 
  In order to establish and maintain necessary conditions for 
the activity of border control stations related to the passage 
of persons, means of transportation, freight, and other property 
across the State Border, an operating regime is instituted at 
these border control stations regulating the procedure by which 
persons and means of transportation are held and transferred and 
other activity is carried out related to the passage of persons, 
means of transportation, freight, and other property across the 
State Border. 
  The operating regime of border control stations is 
established by the Cabinet of Ministers. 
  Border Security Forces at border control stations determine 
the premises and territory in which border control is effected. 
To prevent access by unauthorized persons to border control 
areas and means of transportation crossing the State Border, 
Border Security Forces may stipulate additional regulations with 
respect to the operating regime of these premises and 
territories. 
  The operating regime of the border control station extends 
to 
the entire territory of the regime of the transportation 
establishment (airport, seaport, railroad passenger terminal, 
seaport terminal, etc.). 
  Ensuring compliance with the operating regime of the border 
control station is the mission of the Border Security Forces 
jointly with the administrations of international seaports, 
airports, and railroad stations, and with cooperation from the 
police and Home Guard. Decisions of the Border Security Forces 
are determinate in this cooperative effort. 
  Article 14. Economic Activity at the State Border 
  Any economic activity at the State Border is carried out in 
accordance with decrees of the Cabinet of Ministers and 
interstate treaties. 
  Article 15. Temporary Closing of the State Border 
  If the danger exists that infectious disease might be spread 
in the territory of the Latvian Republic or that of a 
neighboring state, Border Security Forces may, by decree of the 
Cabinet of Ministers, temporarily restrict or terminate 
communications across the State Border in areas exposed to the 
danger, or establish quarantines for people, livestock, freight, 
seeds, seed stock, seedlings, and other livestock and plant 
products. 
  Article 16. Violators of the State Border 
  The following are violators of the State Border: 
  1) persons who cross or attempt to cross the State Border 
outside border control stations and border crossing points; 
  2) persons who fail to observe the procedure established at 
border control stations and border crossing points of the 
Latvian Republic; 
  3) ships and other surface platforms that enter the 
territorial or internal waters of the Latvian Republic or border 
rivers, lakes, or other bodies of water of the Latvian Republic, 
in violation of procedure for crossing the State Border; 
  4) aircraft and other flying objects that cross the State 
Border without appropriate authorization or otherwise violate 
the regulations for crossing the State Border. 
  Crossing the State Border is not recognized as unlawful if 
the crossing takes place by mistake or under pressure (in the 
event of an accident, natural calamity, or breakdown), if the 
crew (passengers) of a vessel, aircraft, or other means of 
transport are threatened by danger, or if such crossing is 
necessary to convey rescued persons or render urgent medical aid. 
  Article 17. Authorized Representatives of the Latvian 
Republic Border 
  In order to resolve issues related to maintaining the Regime 
of the State Border and to manage border incidents, the Cabinet 
of Ministers appoints authorized representatives of the Latvian 
Republic border from among the officer corps of the Border 
Security Forces for specific sectors of the State Border. 
  Authorized representatives of the Latvian Republic border 
observe the laws and other normative acts of the Latvian 
Republic and the provisions of international treaties in the 
performance of their duties. 
  Issues not regulated by authorized representatives of the 
Latvian Republic border are resolved through diplomatic channels. 
  Article 18. The Border Zone and Border Strip 
  In the security interests of the Latvian Republic, the 
Cabinet of Ministers may establish a border zone along the land 
portion of the State Border at least 15 kilometers wide, and a 
border strip--an integral part of the border zone--not more than 
two kilometers wide. 
  Article 19. Regime of the Border Zone and the Airspace 
Above It. Regime of the Border Strip 
  Depending on political, economic, and ecological 
circumstances, on the crime situation, population density, and 
other factors, the Cabinet of Ministers may establish in the 
border zone and airspace above it an appropriate regime of the 
border zone and airspace above it. 
  In the security interests of the Latvian Republic, the 
Cabinet of Ministers may stipulate additional regulations with 
respect to the regime of the border strip. 
  In the border zone, all types of measures carried out in 
cooperation with structural elements of the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs and Home Guard are conducted upon coordination with the 
Border Security Forces. 
  The leadership of the appropriate border battalion must be 
informed of any movement or activity of armed formations of the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, Customs Service, or Home Guard in 
the border strip. 
  In the execution of their official duties, Border Security 
Forces in the border strip, in the territory of border control 
stations, and at border crossing points are not subordinate to 
the police, customs authorities, Home Guard, or security 
services of airports and seaports. 
  Article 20. Responsibility for Violations of 
Legislative Acts on the State Border 
  Persons violating or attempting to violate the State Border 
or regime of the border, border strip, or border control 
stations, and persons rendering assistance to border violators 
bear liability in accordance with legislative acts of the 
Latvian Republic. 
<H3>  Section 3. Authority of Institutions of State Government and 
Other Organizations in the Sphere of State Border Security </H3>
  Article 21. Authority of Institutions of State 
Government of the Latvian Republic 
  (1) The Cabinet of Ministers provides funding for the 
acquisition of arms and material resources necessary for border 
security and for establishment of the infrastructure. 
  (2) The Ministry of Foreign Affairs: 
  1) carries out interstate negotiations, based on a decree of 
the Saeima [parliament] or Cabinet of Ministers, on the 
determination and ratification of the State Border, and on 
establishment of the Regime of the State Border; 
  2) draws up for Latvian Republic citizens, foreign citizens, 
and stateless persons, within the framework of its jurisdiction, 
documents attesting to right of entry into the Latvian Republic 
or right of exit out of it; 
  3) decides matters relating to introduction of the Regime of 
the State Border and resolves border incidents not managed by 
authorized representatives of the Latvian Republic border. 
  (3) The Ministry of Defense: 
  1) bears responsibility for security of the State Border on 
land, in the air, and at sea; 
  2) resolves, within the framework of its jurisdiction, 
incidents related to violation of the Regime of the State Border; 
  3) plans matters related to armament, weapons, means of 
communications, means of transportation, material-technical 
support, construction of facilities, and establishment of 
infrastructure necessary to the Border Security Forces; 
  4) ensures that the missions of the Border Security Forces 
are executed. 
  (4) Defense Forces Headquarters, jointly with the Home Guard 
Headquarters, and with the participation of appropriate services 
of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Finance, and 
Ministry of Communications, develops and coordinates a draft 
plan for security of the State Border. 
  (5) The Ministry of Internal Affairs provides information 
and 
support to Border Security Forces in the conduct of border 
security measures, in efforts to combat illegal activity in the 
border zone, in the search for violators of the State Border, 
and in the discovery and verification of circumstances 
concerning violations and perpetrators. 
  (6) State institutions of the Latvian Republic that exercise 
customs, medical quarantine, veterinary, and plant quarantine 
control, control over conveyance of cultural treasures, and 
other types of control: 
  1) organize and carry out measures with the aim of 
protecting 
the economic interests of the state and providing ecological, 
sanitary, and other protection, in accordance with legislative 
acts; 
  2) within the framework of their jurisdiction, publish 
normative acts mandatory in their application to all juridical 
and physical persons in the territory of the Latvian Republic; 
  3) effect cooperation with the Border Security Forces and 
provide them support. 
  Article 22. Participation of the Home Guard in the 
Security of the State Border 
  Procedure with respect to involvement of the Home Guard in 
the security of the State Border is determined by the Cabinet of 
Ministers. Participation of the Home Guard in the accomplishment 
of tasks of border security and cooperation with the Border 
Security Forces is coordinated on the state and regional level. 
  The Home Guard Headquarters participates in development of 
the plan for security of the State Border. 
<H5>  Section 4. Security of the State Border </H5>
  Article 23. Role of the System of Security of the State 
Border in the Defense of the State 
  The system of security of the State Border must guarantee 
the 
inviolability of the State Border on land, at sea, and in the 
air. 
  In peacetime, the land portion of the State Border is 
protected by the Border Security Forces, the sea portion--by the 
Navy, and the airspace portion--by the Air Force. 
  Article 24. Legal Basis of Activity of the Border 
Security Forces 
  The following comprise the legal basis of activity of the 
Border Security Forces, Navy, and Air Force (henceforth in these 
regulations--"the Border Security Forces") with respect to 
security of the State Border: the Satversme, the Law "On Defense 
of the State," the Law "On the Defense Forces," these 
regulations, and other laws and normative acts of the Latvian 
Republic. 
  Article 25. Main Duties of the Border Security 
Forces 
  The main duties of the Border Security Forces are: 
  1) to secure the State Border, protect border markers and 
other installed border structures; to prevent any attempts to 
change the location of the State Border on the ground; 
  2) to prevent and repulse armed incursion into the territory 
of the Latvian Republic, into its territorial or internal 
waters, or into its airspace, to eliminate armed provocation on 
the State Border, and to protect residents of the border zone 
and their property from such criminal encroachment; 
  3) to observe the land territory, waters, and airspace 
adjacent to the State Border; 
  4) to prevent any crossing of the State Border by persons, 
means of transportation, freight, or other property outside the 
confines of locations designated for this purpose or effected in 
some other unlawful manner; to detect and arrest violators of 
the State Border; 
  5) to organize the operation of border control stations and 
border crossing points; 
  6) to provide work space at border control stations for 
other 
institutions, and for institutions, enterprises, and private 
individuals engaged in the control of border crossings or other 
matters determined by law, or in rendering services to persons 
crossing the border; 
  7) to exercise border control according to procedure 
prescribed by normative documents of the Border Security Forces 
and allow passage across the State Border of persons, means of 
transportation, freight, and other property, when properly drawn 
up documents are presented affording the right to cross the 
State Border; 
  8) to prevent the illegal movement across the State Border 
of 
explosive, poisonous, radioactive, and narcotic substances, as 
well as of other prohibited contraband items, weapons, and 
ammunition, in accordance with procedure prescribed by normative 
documents of the Border Security Forces, either independently or 
jointly with customs authorities; 
  9) to maintain the State Border, border strip, border 
control 
stations, and border crossing points in accordance with 
procedure prescribed by normative documents of the Border 
Security Forces; 
  10) to ensure and monitor compliance with the Regime of the 
State Border, border zone, border control stations, and border 
crossing points, either independently or jointly with the 
administrations of international ports, airports, seaports, and 
railroad stations, in cooperation with the police, Home Guard, 
and local self-government; 
  11) to render necessary assistance to specially empowered 
state institutions of the Latvian Republic in monitoring the 
preservation of natural resources and the observance of 
regulations governing economic activity, in protecting the 
environment from pollution, fighting fires, and eliminating the 
consequences of natural disasters in the border zone; 
  12) to ensure the fulfillment of obligations stipulated in 
international treaties concluded by the Latvian Republic on 
matters concerning the Regime of the State Border; 
  13) to engage the Investigative Service of the Border 
Security Forces in studying, analyzing, and forecasting the 
situation with respect to crime, with the aim of uncovering the 
illegal activity of criminal groups or individuals on the State 
Border; 
  14) to ensure that preventive measures are taken with 
respect 
to violations of the law concerning crossing of the State Border. 
  Article 26. Rights of the Border Security Forces 
  The Border Security Forces, throughout the entire border 
zone, at border control stations and border crossing points, and 
the Navy--in territorial waters of the Latvian Republic and 
internal waters adjacent to the border, have the right: 
  1) to set up markers; to effect unimpeded movement in the 
performance of their official duties; to verify documents of 
individuals; to control means of transportation and their 
freight; 
  2) to check in accordance with established procedure the 
identity documents of all persons crossing the State Border, 
make necessary annotations in these documents, and when 
necessary withdraw them temporarily; to inspect all means of 
transportation crossing the State Border; 
  3) to detain, in accordance with procedure established by 
law, and take into custody for 24 hours: 
  --persons suspected of having committed a crime or 
administrative legal violation related to violation of the State 
Border, of failure to comply with the regime of the border zone 
or border control station, or of crossing the State Border using 
false documents; 
  --persons attempting to illegally convey across the State 
Border substances, articles, objects, or documents prohibited 
from being brought into the Latvian Republic or from being taken 
out of it, as well as items of contraband; 
  --persons under investigation, means of transportation under 
investigation, and persons proceeding in transportation under 
investigation; 
  4) to confiscate, in accordance with established procedure, 
objects prohibited from being brought into the Latvian Republic 
or being taken out of it, found in the possession of persons 
crossing the State Border; 
  5) to restrict or stop entirely movement across the State 
Border, in connection with natural disasters and especially 
dangerous infectious diseases; 
  6) to utilize means of communications and transportation 
belonging to juridical persons in the pursuit or detention of 
violators of the State Border and in repulsing armed incursion 
into the territory of the country; 
  7) in instances where an investigation is being conducted or 
people or means of transportation being detained in connection 
with violation of the State Border, the Border Security Forces, 
when necessary and in cooperation with police and the Home 
Guard, exercise the rights afforded them in the territory of the 
Latvian Republic beyond the boundaries of localities determined 
by this article; 
  8) to conduct reconnaissance and gather information in the 
interests of security of the State Border; 
  9) in the pursuit of border violators or violators of the 
regime of the border zone or border control station, to enter 
the premises and buildings of state institutions and premises 
and buildings that are privately owned. 
  Article 27. Rights of the Navy in Security of the State 
Border 
  Prior to entry into force of the Law "On the Navy," the 
rights and duties of the Navy in the security of the State 
Border are established by the Cabinet of Ministers. 
  Article 28. The Air Force has the right: 
  1) to exercise control of the airspace, and engage other 
state institutions in clarification of the situation and 
identification of aircraft in the airspace of the state; 
  2) in instances where danger of illegal crossing of the 
State 
Border arises, to prohibit or restrict aircraft flights in 
certain regions of the state's airspace; 
  3) to demand that crews of aircraft illegally crossing the 
State Border land their aircraft in the territory of the Latvian 
Republic to explain the circumstances and reasons behind the 
illegal crossing of the State Border. 
  Article 29. Use of Physical Force, Dogs, and Special 
Means for Security of the State Border 
  The Border Security Forces have the right, in the execution 
of their official duties, to use physical force, special means 
(handcuffs, billy clubs, electric shock devices, tear gas, 
chemical paralysis-inducing substances, means of halting 
transportation, etc.), and dogs, with the aim of: 
  1) repulsing an attack upon border guards or other persons 
executing their duties on the State Border; 
  2) detaining violators of the law who maliciously refuse to 
subordinate themselves to border security personnel or who put 
up resistance; 
  3) repulsing attacks against buildings, individual premises, 
and means of transportation under the guard of border security 
personnel, and liberating these facilities in the event they 
become occupied by armed individuals. 
  Prior to the use of physical force or special means, a 
person 
(persons) must be warned of the intent to use such, except in 
instances where delay in the use of physical force or special 
means would cause a direct threat to the health or lives of 
border security personnel or could entail other grave 
consequences, or if such warning is impossible in the particular 
situation. 
  The type of special means used is determined by the nature 
of 
the physical violation and the particular individual features of 
the violator. When special means are used, it is necessary to 
limit the damage caused by these means to the maximum extent 
possible, and to ensure that medical assistance is rendered to 
victims when necessary. 
  If as a result of the use of physical force or special 
means, 
an individual sustains injury or dies, the border guard involved 
is obliged to so inform his immediate superior at once. The 
latter then conveys this information to the procurator of the 
district in question. 
  It is prohibited to use fighting (combat) techniques, 
handcuffs, billy clubs, electric shock devices, tear gas, 
chemical paralysis-inducing substances, or dogs against women, 
persons with evident injuries or disabilities, or minors, except 
in instances where their actions threaten the health of other 
persons and where they put up physical resistance. 
  Procedure for the storage, carrying, and use of special 
means 
is prescribed by directive of the Ministry of Defense. 
  Article 30. Use of Firearms in Security of the State 
Border 
  Shoot to kill is acknowledged as the technique of 
application 
of firearms in security of the State Border. 
  Military servicemen of the Border Security Forces have the 
right to retain and carry a service firearm on a permanent 
basis. Procedure for retaining and carrying firearms at their 
disposal is determined by directive of the Ministry of Defense. 
  A military serviceman of the Border Security Forces is 
authorized to use his firearm with the aim of: 
  1) repulsing armed attack against the territory of the 
Latvian Republic or terminating the armed resistance of 
attackers; 
  2) arresting a violator of the State Border in the absence 
of 
other ability to detain him; 
  3) repulsing attack and terminating resistance, including on 
the part of unarmed individuals, if a real danger threatens the 
lives of border security personnel or other persons and it is 
impossible to avert this danger by other means, and also with 
the aim of preventing attempts to forcefully gain possession of 
his firearm; 
  4) detaining a means of transportation by inflicting damage 
against it, if the driver is creating a real threat to the lives 
and health of the border guard or other persons by virtue of his 
actions and is not responding to the demands of the serviceman 
to stop the means of transportation, and if there is no other 
way of detaining it. 
  A military serviceman of the Border Security Forces has the 
right to use his firearm to signal distress or to summon 
assistance. 
  The use of firearms is prohibited: 
  1) against women, persons with evident injuries or 
disabilities, and minors, except in instances where their 
actions threaten the lives of other persons, when they are 
putting up armed resistance, and when they are carrying out an 
armed attack; 
  2) in instances where other persons may be injured as a 
result of their use. 
<H5>  Section 5. Service in the Border Security Forces </H5>
  Article 31. The Border Guard 
  The border guard is an armed military serviceman of the 
Latvian Republic who has been called to perform state service, 
has taken the oath as a military serviceman of the Latvian 
Republic, has passed a course of special border security 
training, occupies a certain position in the Border Security 
Forces, and has a military rank. 
  Article 32. Recruitment in the Border Security 
Forces 
  Recruitment for the Border Security Forces is effected from 
among citizens of the Latvian Republic in accordance with the 
Law "On Defense of the State." 
  A border guard must have mastery of the state language and 
be 
able to communicate with the populace in the language of primary 
use in the region of assignment. 
  Article 33. Responsibility of the Border Guard 
  A border guard bears responsibility for unlawful actions in 
accordance with procedure prescribed by the laws of the Latvian 
Republic. If a border guard has not observed the legal rights of 
other persons and has caused them material damage, the Border 
Security Forces are obliged to take measures to restore these 
rights and compensate for the damage. 
  Article 34. Legal Protection and Guarantees of Border 
Guard Activity 
  In carrying out his official duties, a border guard is a 
representative of the state power of the Latvian Republic. 
  A border guard falls under the protection of the state. His 
honor and dignity are protected by law. 
  In the border zone at border control stations and border 
crossing points, all physical persons are obliged to fulfill the 
demands and directives issued by a border guard in the 
performance of his official duties. 
  A border guard is not responsible for physical or property 
damage caused a violator of the law who shows insubordination or 
puts up resistance at the time of arrest, if in fulfilling his 
official duties the border guard has committed no violation of 
his entrusted authority. 
  Injury inflicted to the health of a border guard or his 
close 
relatives and damage caused to his property in connection with 
the performance of his duties is subject to compensation from 
state budget funds in the full amount. 
<H3>  Section 6. Financial and Material Support for the Border 
Security Forces </H3>
  Article 35. Financing of Border Security Forces 
  Border Security Forces are financed out of the state budget 
of the Latvian Republic. 
  Article 36. Material-Technical Support for Border 
Security Forces 
  Material-technical support for the Border Security Forces is 
provided by the Ministry of Defense. 
  Article 37. Provision of Official Premises to the 
Border Security Forces 
  State institutions and institutions of local self-government 
render assistance to the Border Security Forces in providing 
them official premises. 
<H5>  Section 7. Transition Regulations </H5>
  Article 38. With Entry Into Force of These Regulations, 
the Following Are Declared No Longer In Effect: 
  The Law "On the State Border of the Latvian Republic" dated 
20 December 1990; 
  The Law "On the Introduction of Amendments and Additions to 
the Latvian Republic Law 'On the State Border of the Latvian 
Republic' dated 20 December 1990," dated 1 October 1991. 
  [Signed] Prime Minister V. Birkavs 
  Minister of Defense V. Pavlovskis 

