BFN 

  [Text] On the morning of 25 May, Mayor Zhang Lichang 
presided over the 22d routine meeting of the municipal people's 
government to hear the report given by the municipal 
investigation and study group on the experience gained in the 
pilot work of conducting reform in the medical insurance of 
staff members and workers and the report given by the leading 
group in charge of coastal area development on the plan for 
developing key coastal regions and the neighboring areas of 
coastal regions. 
  It was agreed in principle with at the meeting the opinions 
provided by the investigation and study group with regard to 
first conducting the pilot work of medical insurance in the 
municipality, trying to find out experience, gradually 
broadening the range of insurance, and finally having the 
medical insurance be fully underway. 
  During the meeting, Zhang Lichang stressed: The pilot work 
of conducting reform in medical insurance has a bearing on the 
personal interest of the broad masses of staff members and 
workers and on social security. This is an important work 
concerning policies and involving in the whole people. Efforts 
should be made to enhance the leadership over the pilot work of 
conducting reform in medical insurance so as to enable the 
medical insurance system to enter a way of benign cycle. 
  During the meeting, the participating personnel approved in 
principle the plan put forward by the leading group in charge of 
coastal area development with regard to developing coastal 
regions and the neighboring areas of these regions. The plan 
draws up the development work of the following three aspects: 1) 
The development of coastal regions. 2) The development of the 
neighboring areas of coastal regions. 3) The 10-year development 
targets for the neighboring areas of coastal regions. 
  During the meeting, Comrade Zhang Lichang pointed out: 
Developing the neighboring areas of coastal regions by means of 
the development of these regions represents a measure with 
strategic nature. The obviously strong points in communications 
and [words indistinct] possessed by the neighboring areas of 
coastal regions in the municipality are more than those 
possessed by other provinces across the country. Therefore, in 
building up the neighboring areas, it is necessary to (?conduct 
reform and opening up; to achieve development group by group;) 
and to bring the enthusiasm of various social circles into play. 
To be successful in this regard, efforts should be made to 
master the plan; to study the policies; and to successfully 
foster coordination to promote development. We should correctly 
study the policy of utilizing foreign capital and carry forward 
the existing good trend. We should grasp the work in this 
regard more intensively than before. Only by uniting as one 
and making all-out efforts to work hard will units from top to 
bottom across the municipality totally be able to turn the 
neighboring areas into new economic growing points. 
  Lastly, Zhang Lichang stressed: In fulfilling the annual 
tasks, time has almost come to a half. Success or failure in 
the first half has a direct bearing on the development in the 
second half and on the people's confidence in accelerating the 
development in Tianjin. A good job must be done in conducting 
work in various fields with a high standard and a strict demand 
and in ensuring the work in various fields to reach a new level. 

