BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Muhammad Salim Basindwah by </F>
'Abd-al-Wahhab al-Mu'ayyad, in Sanaa; date not given] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Al-Mu'ayyad] Do you expect 
that 'Ali Salim al-Bid to succeed in his plan for the state he 
has declared? 
  [Basindwah] Of course not, for several reasons. The most 
important of these reasons are: First, the nations of the 
world, both fraternal and friendly states, consider what is 
going on an internal Yemeni affair. These states find 
themselves obliged to support Yemen's unity, especially since 
unity embodies the Yemeni people's will and choice. The best 
proof of this is the U.S. Administration's stand. Second, 
al-Bid cannot take valiant Aden as the capital of his 
secessionist state. How can he impose this state which he has 
dreamed up when he does not have any control over the capital 
Aden? Third, the escape of al-Bid and his closest entourage to 
Hadhramaut does not at all mean that he can impose his powers on 
the Hadhramaut Governorate because its citizens have suffered a 
great deal from them. Undoubtedly, the forces of legitimacy 
will pursue them to the farthest point in the homeland. Fourth, 
most of the forces of the Yemeni Socialist Party [YSP] have 
either joined the forces of legitimacy, or have been completely 
destroyed. Regardless of the attempts of al-Bid and his group to 
establish new forces, they will never be able to stand fast in 
front of the forces of legitimacy, which are supported by the 
people. Fifth, al-Bid has now destroyed his credibility on the 
popular level both inside and outside the country. The battle 
now is not between al-Bid and President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih. 
Neither is it between the YSP and the General People's 
Congress, but between him [al-Bid] and his group on the one 
hand, and the people on the other, including large sectors of 
the YSP itself. So, how can he win the battle? [passage omitted] 
  [Al-Mu'ayyad] What do you expect 'Ali Salim al-Bid to do 
with 
his plan for the state he has declared after he has lost most of 
his military forces, along with the battles in the three 
governorates surrounding Aden? 
  [Basindwah] I believe that from the very beginning, his plan 
was aimed at establishing a state in Hadhramaut and al-Mahrah. 
I sensed this long ago. In fact, I used to accuse him of this. 
One day, he attacked me for accusing him of this. Now, time 
has confirmed my intuition and expectations. However, this 
dream will never come true. This is because the citizens in 
Hadhramaut and al- Mahrah themselves do not support him, but 
rather, they are in favor of unity. 
  [Al-Mu'ayyad] On what basis did you judge al-Bid as not 
being 
a unionist from the very beginning? 
  [Basindwah] I had the feeling that al-Bid joined the unity 
against his will, and that he has always thought of separation, 
even after he agreed on unity. He wanted to wait, however, 
until after he found a way out of the impasse the former South 
Yemen found itself in as a result of the lack of world support 
after the changes Gorbachev introduced in the former USSR's 
policy, and the collapse of the communist regimes. Al-Bid was 
also trying to contain the possibilities of confrontation with 
his opponents inside the country and in the region's states to 
which the leadership of the ruling party in Aden had been 
hostile with for two decades. 
  The actions of al-Bid and his group since the establishment 
of unity have showed that they are neither concerned about unity 
nor do they have faith in it. It is true that they used to brag 
about unity, but their actions were secessionist. This applies 
to the democracy whose rules and results they continued to 
reject. Had al-Bid been faithful to unity, he would have 
settled the crisis when he obtained concessions beyond his 
expectations. However, although he was a vice president, he 
continued to act as if he was another president of the state. 

