Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] AUSTRALIA has expressed interest in acceding to the 
ASEAN's Treaty of Amity and Co-operation (TAC) in talks with 
Foreign Minister Prasong Sunsiri, according to a Foreign 
Ministry statement yesterday. 
  Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans raised the issue 
during his meeting with Prasong, who is on three-day official 
visit to Australia. 
  Prasong had said he would raise the matter the other members 
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations -- Brunei, 
Indonesia, Singapore, the Philippines, and Malaysia -- the 
statement said. It gave no further details. 
  Australia is already a dialogue partner of ASEAN. Acceding 
to the Treaty of Amity and Co-operation in Southeast Asia (TAC) 
would be a necessary step towards membership of the regional 
grouping. However, ASEAN leaders cannot agree on the need to 
expand the 1976- Bali treaty to include countries outside 
Southeast Asia. 
  The treaty calls for the peaceful settlement of regional 
conflict and provides for setting up a high council to settle 
disagreements. Some ASEAN states fear the council could be 
dominated by non- Southeast Asian regional players if they are 
allowed to accede to the treaty. 
  Priority is clearly being given to links with the other 
Southeast Asian nations: Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos and Burma. 
  Laos and Vietnam have observer status and have already 
acceded to the treaty. The United Nations in 1992 adopted 
resolutions endorsing the TAC's guidelines and principles as a 
code of conduct for relations between countries in the region 
and as a mechanism to settle disputes. 
  The statement said Evans also proposed that the first 
meeting 
of the ASEAN Regional Forum [ARF] discuss the setting up of two 
or three working groups. 
  It said Evans and Prasong agreed that the first ARF meeting 
should promote friendliness and confidence-building among the 18 
attending foreign ministers as a foundation for co-operation in 
ensuring peace and stability. 

