BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Salwa al-Ustuwani in Damascus: "Syria Strongly </F>
Criticizes Inclusion of Its Name in the Terrorism List"] 
  [Excerpts] U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is 
due in Damascus this evening and will go from there to Jerusalem 
in an attempt to bridge the Syrian and Israeli views on the 
question of a peace agreement. 
  On the eve of Christopher's arrival, Syria yesterday 
vehemently criticized the U.S. State Department's statement on 
terrorism and the inclusion of Syria's name in that statement. 
It saw it as incomprehensible and unjustified conduct on the 
eve of the U.S. official's visit to the region and the start of 
a new round of talks on peace. [passage omitted] 
  Referring to the U.S. statement on terrorism, responsible 
Syrian sources told AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT that it was a violation of 
diplomatic and political tradition, unless Washington was no 
longer in control of its own decisions regarding its own purely 
national interests. 
  They added that that statement defied logic and was 
arbitrary 
in its classification, based on a warped and fanatical political 
premise which could only be Israeli. The sources added that 
anyone who examined the timing of the statement would feel that 
Israel was not uninvolved in it, or rather that it co-wrote or 
was even its sole author because it wanted to create a political 
problem for the U.S. Administration -- which is what it achieved. 
  The sources said that the seriousness of the statement lay 
in 
the fact that it was issued on the eve of Christopher's visit to 
the region to resume his tour and dialogues on peace, with 
Damascus as a main or rather the main party in any dialogue or 
breakthrough in the peace process. The sources wondered how the 
United States could hold a dialogue with "terrorist" Syria, the 
pivot and the main party in the process. Was it generally 
logical to talk to a terrorist about peace? Did that not 
represent a dilemma for the United States, and was the U.S. 
Administration not being openly blackmailed into itself openly 
blackmailing Syria for concessions in the peace process in 
Israel's favor? 
  The Syrian press also strongly attacked the U.S. State 
Department's statement on terrorism. [passage omitted] 

