Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Nuri Najm al-Marsumi: "The Embargo and the </F>
Aggression; A Look Into What has Happened, and Into Available 
Options"] 
  [Text] On 6 August 1990, and per Resolution 661, the UN 
Security Council imposed an economic embargo against Iraq. 
Paragraph 1 of the resolution states in no uncertain terms that 
the resolution shall go into effect if Iraq does not honor the 
provisions enshrined in Paragraph 2 of UN Security Council 
Resolution 660 of 2 August 1990, which calls for the withdrawal 
of Iraqi troops from Kuwait. From a legal point of view, this 
means that the fact that Iraqi troops were withdrawn from Kuwait 
requires the world to revoke the economic embargo clamped on 
Iraq, because the (apparent) reasons and justifications for 
instituting the embargo in the first place have been removed and 
the root cause of the conflict has been resolved by this very 
troop withdrawal. Nonetheless, the United States has not allowed 
the UN Security Council to simply stop at the limits of its 
relevant resolutions. For, since 26 February 1991, when Iraq, of 
its own volition and in accordance with its own strategic 
calculations, decided to withdraw its troops from Kuwait, these 
resolutions should have been relegated to oblivion. Since then, 
the United States has continued to pursue Iraq, even after the 
halt to hostilities and after a cease-fire came into effect. It 
forced the UN Security Council to pass Resolution 687, which 
contains the terms of a cease-fire between Iraq and the hostile 
military coalition that carried out the aggression. 
  On 1 March 1991, a new phase in the U.S. policy on Iraq was 
heralded. Since then, the United States has exploited the 
international changes in the aftermath of the collapse of the 
former Soviet Union and the disintegration of the Warsaw Pact to 
continue to pursue Iraq politically and economically, and to 
intervene in its domestic affairs. This is because the United 
States was not content with the colossal damage it caused to 
Iraq and with the immense strategic and financial gains it made 
in the form of cash payments from Germany, Japan, Saudi Arabia, 
and Kuwait, or in the form of sales and investment contracts it 
has concluded with the Arabian Gulf regimes. The United States 
is not content with all this. It believes that the continued 
pursuit of the Iraqi political regime, which has held out 
against U.S. aggression and colonialist policies, is the basic 
guarantee to safeguard these gains. It also believes that the 
continued pursuit of a policy aimed at subjugating and 
dominating the Middle Eastern regimes that took part in the 
anti-Iraq aggression requires a weak and "powerless Iraq." 
  That is why the Americans have moved the goalposts and 
fabricated pretexts and excuses to perpetuate the embargo and 
thwart efforts to lift it, either partially or entirely. 
  Early on, when the U.S. arms scandal known as Irangate, 
surfaced during the Iraq-Iran war, the Iraqi leadership realized 
that the United States does not want a powerful Iraq. It has 
done, and is sill doing, all it can to weaken Iraq, either 
through the continuation of the war with Iran or through 
fabricating excuses and pretexts to attack it militarily, in 
cooperation with the Zionist entity, in order to destroy the 
components of its industrial and military renaissance. This 
approach became clear after Iraq achieved its decisive victory 
over Iran, thus putting an end to the eight-year war. 
  Iraq's awareness of the intentions of the United States and 
the Zionist entity and their schemes, has prompted Iraq to react 
in a manner aimed to foil the U.S.-Zionist schemes against Iraq 
and its national and pan-Arab regime. Therefore, the struggle 
has continued because Iraq has adhered to its territorial 
integrity and independence and has opposed attempts at 
encroaching on its sovereignty, represented by the exclusion 
zones and attempts by the inspection committees of the Special 
Commission to exceed the limits of their missions in Iraq. Iraq 
has also rejected every proposal that could harm the dignity of 
Iraq and its people. Therefore, threats to mount aggression 
continued and Iraq was exposed to two treacherous aggressions on 
13 January 1993 and on 27 June 1993. 
  In addition to Iraq's steadfastness and obvious political 
stand, the Iraqi leadership has continued to conduct itself in a 
logical, clear, legal, and principled manner, enabling Iraqi 
diplomacy to present its case in a clear and flexible way that 
has won it a respectable position in the UN lobbies and in world 
public opinion. Iraq has not been obstinate in its stand toward 
the Security Council and its unjust resolutions despite the fact 
that as originally claimed, these resolutions were connected 
with Iraq's presence in Kuwait, a matter that was decided when 
Iraqi units withdrew from Kuwait. Iraq completely implemented 
the Security Council's demands as enunciated in its resolutions, 
especially Resolution No. 687 related to the chemical, 
biological, and nuclear weapons, and missiles with a range 
exceeding 150 km. Iraq also agreed to abide by the contents of 
Resolution 715 related to the future monitoring of weapons 
manufacturing. 
  One after another, the inspection committees reaffirmed that 
Iraq extended assistance and facilities to enable them to carry 
out their missions after they themselves adhered to their limits 
and respected Iraq's dignity and requirements of sovereignty. 
There are no commitments remaining for Iraq to implement. 
Therefore, the Security Council, in accordance with Paragraph 
22 of Resolution No. 687, should announce that Iraq has 
implemented what it was asked to implement and that the ban on 
basic commodity imports and on exports of Iraqi-source products 
and the ban on financial transactions connected with Iraq as 
stated in Resolution 661 of 1990 are now invalid as clearly 
stipulated in Paragraph 22. 
  Iraq has also been able to avert attempts to "develop" the 
U.S. conditions and reacted with evidence and documents against 
these attempts. The latest U.S. setback was represented by the 
announcement of the special investigation committee on the use 
of chemical weapons in southern Iraq, in which the committee 
found no evidence to support claims that Iraq has used such 
weapons. 
  The Americans now have no excuse or any logical 
justification 
left to convince anyone. The discussion on Iraq between the 
head of the Europe and the Middle East subcommittee of the House 
of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee and Robert 
Pelletreau, assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern 
affairs, is a clear indication of the total lack of reason in 
the U.S. Administration's rationale. Pelletreau stated that 
"the international alliance continues to be firm in supporting 
the Iraqi embargo," that "the embargo helps put pressure on the 
Iraqi government," and that "in any case, Iraq continues to 
violate all Security Council resolutions, and therefore, the 
conditions for lifting sanctions on this or that issue is too 
early to consider and should not be discussed." 
  Congressional Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Hamilton 
asked the assistant secretary of state: What is required from 
Iraq in order to lift oil embargo? Pelletreau replied: I am 
hesitant to give a reply because this is premature as long as 
Iraq has not done anything in the first place. 
  Hamilton replied with another question: Does the U.S. 
Administration want something more than abidance by the UN 
resolutions on the destruction of weapons of mass destruction 
before lifting the oil embargo? 
  Pelletreau answered: This subject concerns the allied states 
as a whole, and I want to say that I am not sure that it is wise 
to start discussing the subject of when to lift the embargo. 
  Hamilton said: I have a big problem in understanding what is 
required from Iraq in order to secure the lifting of the oil 
embargo. If I have such a big problem, it is possible that Iraq 
also has a problem in understanding your position. 
  Pelletreau failed to specify what is required from Iraq 
after 
the resolutions it implemented, and he emphasized the importance 
of maintaining the unity of the alliance. Hamilton asked: How 
can we maintain the alliance's unity if we do not have a clear 
position? How can we convince the other members of the alliance 
if you are unable to convince me of what Iraq should do to 
secure the lifting of the oil embargo? 
  This is an example of the discussions taking place in the 
United States. Such discussions emphasize that, in its position 
on Iraq, the United States has only political slogans that are 
not based on legal justification or logic. The only thing it 
wants to do is harm Iraq and to use the international community 
in general, and the Security Council in particular, to continue 
to harm Iraq. 
  The failure of U.S. pretexts during the previous stage was 
accompanied by a serious fissure within the anti-Iraq alliance. 
There are several reasons for these changes, including the 
following: 
  - The alliance's main countries became aware of the serious 
harm they suffered as a result of the U.S. policy before, 
during, and after the military aggression against Iraq, 
especially after the U.S. endeavor to tighten its grip on oil 
resources and to link Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and other countries 
with agreements that secure U.S. control without considering the 
interests of its alliance partners. 
  - Most of the republics of the former Soviet Union and the 
East European countries became aware of U.S. attempts aimed at 
marginalizing and impoverishing them to take revenge on their 
peoples, along with Russia's reemergence as a power with 
international weight and influence. 
  - The U.S. policies failed in attempts to foster its slogans 
about its unilateral leadership of the world, especially after 
dealing with the foreign problems in Europe, Africa, and Latin 
America. 
  - The United State fabricated a number of economic problems 
with Japan and Europe and tried to solve its internal economic 
crisis at the expense of the peoples of Europe, Japan, etc. 
  When the peoples of the world began to view Iraq as the 
victim of a real colonialist game with no legitimate moral 
motives, it simply entrenched the fissure within the antagonist 
alliance. The Iraqi ability to defend the homeland and to 
reconstruct what the aggressors destroyed, and the sound 
policies adopted by Iraq in dealing with the crises created 
directly by the United States and the Security Council, won it 
the confidence and respect of the reasonable states and 
political and social forces in the world, including certain 
powers and movements that, until recently, were viewed as part 
of the antagonist alliance. 
  Given all this, one can say that the current international 
and regional circumstances have consolidated Iraq's position and 
legitimate cause, and provided a serious and true opportunity 
for lifting the unfair embargo clamped upon it. At the same 
time, however, these circumstances are causing the enemies, 
whose interests have been served by the aggression and the 
embargo, to suffer from a hysteria that could push them into 
adventures, or to continue to take positions that conflict with 
the principles of fairness and justice when the embargo is 
reviewed by the UN Security Council. The U.S. Administration is 
confused. It has nothing left except hostile political slogans. 
It is persisting with these slogans, aided in this by certain 
Arab rulers who are suffering from serious domestic crises. 
These rulers believe that the lifting of the embargo could 
accelerate their downfall if their domestic crises remain 
unresolved. 
  The principles and constants that have governed Iraq's 
conduct during the recent past will remain unchanged. 
Nonetheless, this conduct must reflect an understanding of what 
has been achieved, and the changes that have taken place in the 
region and the world. 
  To begin with, the lifting of the embargo must be Iraq's 
prime objective, given that the embargo is a continuation of the 
military aggression, albeit harsher and more harmful. Now that 
Iraq has met all the obligations enshrined in the relevant UN 
Security resolutions, and that the root cause of the conflict, 
which was behind the deluge of resolutions, has been resolved, 
the UN Security Council is required to revoke in a clear 
resolution all embargo measures, declaring that this is prompted 
by Iraq's compliance with relevant UN Security Council 
resolutions. 
  Heated and contentious debates are expected to be held at 
the 
UN Security Council's closed and open meetings. It is true that 
most permanent and nonpermanent members of the UN Security 
Council are for lifting the sanctions, either partially or 
entirely. However, the U.S. Administration is expected to wield 
the big stick to prevent the UN Security Council from taking a 
fair and reasonable resolution lifting the embargo. One cannot 
rule out the likelihood that the U.S. Administration or its 
agents in the region might create incidents to form a negative 
political climate in order to influence the UN Security Council 
deliberations. Hence, we need to be alert, watchful, and ready 
to handle incidents as they unfold in accordance with their 
importance and seriousness. Likewise, we must draw the world's 
attention to the fact that Iraq is serious about its efforts to 
lift the embargo, that it is capable of acting to protect the 
homeland and safeguard the future of its generations, and that 
the Iraqi national struggle will take whatever form will ensure 
the achievement of the prime objective. 
  We urge the UN Security Council members to examine the issue 
of lifting the sanctions, and to seriously comply with relevant 
resolutions this time. For Iraq will not remain idle when it 
sees the continued harm and aggression mounted against it, and 
Iraqis, of all categories and social strata -- be they in 
northern Iraq, southern Iraq, eastern Iraq, or western Iraq -- 
are currently rallying around their historic leader Saddam 
Husayn to thwart the aggression once and for all, and achieve 
the decisive victory. 

