Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Mafia Drug Roundup in Milan and </F>
Palermo"] 
  [Text] Milan, 16 Feb (ANSA) -- Fifty people were in jail 
this afternoon after a police launched a major roundup in Milan 
and Palermo of Sicilian and Calabrian crime figures in the 
international drug trade early this morning. 
  Milan Chief Prosecutor Francesco Saverio Borrelli and Milan 
police chief Achille Serra said the operation, which they were 
calling Costanza, had identified the key underworld figures 
responsible for several hundred kilos worth of cocaine traffic 
last year. 
  Milanese investigators were able to trace the ties between 
the Palermo Mafia and Calabrian 'Ndrangheta and their Colombian 
partners in Medellin, arresting nine persons in Palermo and 41 
around Milan. Twenty-nine persons already in jail on other 
charges were served further warrants while about 30 persons 
under indictment escaped capture this morning. 
  Among those arrested in Milan, Serra said, were members of 
some of Italy's top crime clans, including Salvatore Enea, 
Guglielmo and Stefano Fidanzati and Rocco and Antonio Papalia. 
He said they shipped cocaine from Colombia to Spain, then 
brought the drug into Italy by automobile. 
  The group also imported cocaine via Amsterdam, using 
couriers 
who carried the drug in plastic capsules they swallowed, as well 
as heroin from Turkey. 
  "Clean Hands is not the only investigation underway in 
Milan," said prosecutor Borrelli, adding that his office was 
strongly committed to battling organized crime. The office of 
the district anti-Mafia prosecutor was recently strengthened for 
just that reason, he said. 
  Police in Milan discovered the cocaine ring in 1992, after 
they searched a neo-Nazi headquarters in the Lombard capital and 
discovered that the brother of one of the members of that far 
right group was working as a drug courier from Amsterdam. The 
investigation, headed by Milan assistant prosecutor Armando 
Spataro, relied on the cooperation of several veteran Mafia 
informers, along with an "independent" drug trader who supplied 
information while maintaining contacts with the Mafia. 

