BFN 

<F P=106> [By So Song-mun: ``Offices Worse Than Streets''] </F>
  [Text] Watch out for those stoves and cooking ranges. 
While the heat is warming our bodies, our bronchi are battling 
with nitrogen dioxide. 
  According to research on nitrogen dioxide density conducted 
by the Paedal Environmental Federation, upon the request of SISA 
JOURNAL, higher rates were shown in office buildings, offices 
with gas stoves, and areas closer to stoves than those shown in 
streets, offices without gas stoves, and areas further away from 
stoves. 
  On 25 March, the nitrogen dioxide density of an office near 
Socho high school in Socho-tong was 79.2 ppb [parts per 
billion]. This is the second highest reading among over 400 
areas inspected. The reading on streets and a subway station 
near the same area on the same day was 32 and 64 ppb, 
respectively, lower than the one in the office. 
  During the first inspection, a heating system was on in the 
office. In order to measure the effect of heaters, we took a 
reading a second time on 14 April. A stove was on that day and 
the nitrogen dioxide density reached 110.7 ppb. 
  The density of nitrogen dioxide was higher when the stove 
was 
on because the flame produces more pollutants. The stove in the 
office was using liquefied petroleum gas. The density was 96 
ppb beside the stove, 67 ppb a little further from the stove, 
110.7 ppb and 99.8 near the windows, and 38.4 ppb at the 
entrance. 
  It was understandable that the density reading next to the 
stove was high, but it was unexpected that the highest reading 
was next to the window. It is believed that the pollutant 
produced by the flame expanded in the form of nitrogen monoxide 
and later it combined with the oxygen near the window to become 
nitrogen dioxide. Nitrogen monoxide is an unstable material. 
  On the other hand, the nitrogen dioxide density was the 
lowest at the entrance. This was because the entrance was far 
from the stove and the air circulated whenever the door was 
opened. 
  Contrary to this example, three points distant to each other 
in one office without any stove showed a much lower and even 
density at 43, 51, and 52 ppb, respectively. This was because 
there was no particular pollutant source such as a stove. 
However, the office still showed an equal or higher density 
than the ones in the streets nearby. This means that nitrogen 
dioxide pollution is more serious indoors. 
  The research illustrates the importance of air circulation 
in 
order to keep indoor air clean. However, this is meaningless 
when the air outdoors is polluted. Air has no bounderies and 
indoor air is eventually affected by air pollution. Therefore, 
the alternative is to widen exhaust ports and use fans to 
circulate indoor air. Using an air cleaner to filter pollutants 
from outdoor air is also a good idea. 
  However, there is a limit to air cleaners. When not properly 
managed and watched, they may have reverse effects by 
accumulating dust or pollutants full of bacteria in the outlets 
or in filters. This is the same reason why the nitrogen dioxide 
density in subway stations are twice as high as the streets 
above. 
  The research focused on nitrogen dioxide but there are 
various pollutant and pollution sources of indoor air. There 
are countless sources and pollutants around us: gas ranges and 
gas stoves which produce nitrogen dioxide, oil burners which 
produce sulfurous acid gas and cancer-causing (?forum) aldehyde, 
briquet holes and briquet heaters which produce carbon monoxide, 
radon and asbestos from construction materials, and (?forum) 
aldehyde from furniture and clothes. Nevertheless, studies or 
measures on this are far from sufficient. 
  Advanced countries have been aware of indoor pollution since 
the early seventies. Studies and regulation of such pollutants 
are active. In some countries, there are even departments fully 
in charge of indoor environment. According to Professor Kim 
Yun-sin, head of the Environmental and Industrial Medical 
Science Center of Hanyang University, in the United States, 
Congressman Joseph Kennedy submitted a bill on indoor air last 
year strengthening various regulations on indoor pollutants and 
detailing preventive and substitute measures. 

