Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Commentary" by ITAR-TASS correspondents Andrey Palaria and </F>
Vladimir Smelov] 
  [Text] Moscow February 28 TASS -- The spy scandal that has 
broken out after the arrest of a senior CIA agent on charges of 
spying for the Soviet Union -- and then for Russia -- for nearly 
a decade has led to a traditional "exchange of figures" between 
Moscow and Washington. 
  The United States has expelled Russian foreign intelligence 
service official Aleksandr Lysenko who worked as a counselor of 
the Russian Embassy in Washington. Russia retaliated on Monday 
by expelling his CIA counterpart James Morris who worked under 
diplomatic cover in Moscow. 
  The arrest of Aldrich Ames, 52, and his wife is not the 
first 
in the history of intelligence. The world knows many such 
affairs. However lately Russia and the U.S. have tried to hush 
up such incidents, to say nothing about bringing them to 
inter-state level. But this "biggest spy scandal," as the Ames 
affair has been dubbed in the U.S., did not pass unnoticed and 
attracted the attention of U.S. President Bill Clinton who 
described it as a "very serious case." 
  "The psychological drama" caused by the failure in the 
Central Intelligence Agency was followed by an urgent trip of 
CIA officials to Moscow to "settle scores" and "persuade" the 
Russian side to "admit its guilt" in the Ames affair by ordering 
Lysenko to leave the U.S. and keep the whole incident away from 
the press. 
  However, the Russian side made it clear that such issues 
should be settled by respective intelligence services of the two 
countries which must stick to certain rules in their activity. 
Otherwise would run counter to the principles of partnership 
between the Russian and American intelligence services which are 
actively cooperating in fighting illegal drug trafficking, 
terrorism and organised crime. 
  However, the Ames affair has shown that this partnership is 
still far from being ideal. Perhaps, as far as the accusations 
against Aldrich are far from being true. 
  Indeed, American intelligence bodies do not have proof of 
his 
guilt so far, according to the U.S. press. American newspapers 
have picked up again the once-forgotten image of "the Russian 
bear" and other Russian "intrigues" threatening national 
security of the United States. Some speculations border on the 
absurd as their authors are trying to persuade American tax 
payers that they are supporting Russian spies. 
  Many in Moscow are surprised by such open politicisation of 
the Ames affair. Observers do not rule out the possibility that 
this can be connected with the success of Russian diplomacy in 
Bosnian settlement and the desire of certain American circles to 
get a time- out in relations between Russia and America. Even 
more so because many members of the U.S. Administration are 
calling for support for Russian reform and assistance to Russia. 
  Western experts, many of whom are professional intelligence 
officers, believe that Russia has sharply stepped up 
intelligence activity in the United States lately. However, no 
one can deny that after the collapse of the Soviet Union Western 
secret services, including the American CIA, have boosted their 
work in ex-Soviet republics, primarily Russia. 
  Examples abound. Those include the arrest of a top-level 
agent and several attempts to recruit high-ranking Russian 
officials. Last year alone, 20 people were arrested in Russia on 
charges of espionage. But, unlike the Ames affair, none of 
these cases caused any demarches or protests at the inter-state 
level. 
  Recent U.S. moves can be interpreted in different ways. This 
is the prerogative of specialists, but even a dilettante 
understands that Russia has as much right to conduct 
intelligence activity in America as the U.S. has in Russia. At 
least until Russian Foreign Intelligence Service Chief Yevgeniy 
Primakov's call for discontinuing spying against each other is 
answered. 

