CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Tbilisi Police Administration Chief Major </F>
General Demur Mikadze by Guliko Markozashvili: "Professionalism 
and Discipline Are the Foundation of Law and Order": place and 
date not given] 
  [Text] AS WE KNOW, RECENTLY DEPUTY INTERNAL AFFAIRS 
MINISTER MAJOR GENERAL DEMUR MIKADZE TOOK CHARGE OF THE CAPITAL 
CITY'S POLICE ADMINISTRATION. OUR CORRESPONDENT ASKED HIM A FEW 
QUESTIONS. 
  [Markozashvili] Batono Demur, what was your first order of 
business? 
  [Mikadze] Organizational business. First you have to find 
out 
who does what. We created a collegial leadership body in order 
to deal promptly with various issues in a collegial manner. Most 
important, we are paying special attention to discipline, which 
is the foundation of any good effort. Without strict discipline, 
especially in an organization like ours, we cannot be 
successful. That is why we have given such priority to 
discipline. The principal function of the police is to prevent 
anticipated crimes and solve crimes that have been committed. 
For this reason, we demand that every unit chief see to it that 
every crime is registered and solved as far as possible. 
  [Markozashvili] Law and order in the city has definitely 
improved. Both motorists and pedestrians are obeying the law 
more. Although we do see infractions. 
  [Mikadze] That's right. In the past while, passport 
regulations have been almost out of control. The city has many 
refugees, and unfortunately there are unscrupulous individuals 
who use the refugees' names to commit crimes. Units created 
specially to deal with this are stepping up their efforts, and 
very soon things ought to fall into place. And there are other, 
no less urgent problems, for example the fact that people are 
selling gasoline anywhere they please, and that is also against 
the law. For this reason, we urged the Mayor's Office to see to 
it that such sales be carried out in specially designated 
places. This way we can facilitate unimpeded traffic in the 
city. We think that the way things are being done on Railway 
Station Square is worth emulating: sales booths have almost all 
been cleared from the area. This is the kind of law and order 
that should be instituted everywhere. 
  [Markozashvili] What are relations like between the Defense 
Ministry, the Security Ministry, and the Police? 
  [Mikadze] The first thing I did on becoming chief was to 
hold 
an expanded meeting with the Collegium of the Defense Ministry. 
The garrison, legion, and personnel of the capital city's Main 
Administration of Police will have to find a common language 
with all the legal armed formations. We started this with the 
Defense Ministry, and we passed a joint "Appeal of a Joint 
Conference of Representatives of the Defense Ministry of the 
Republic of Georgia and the Main Administration of Internal 
Affairs of the City of Tbilisi to All Members of Armed 
Formations and Other Armed Persons in Georgia." 
  As for the Security Ministry and its head man, Igor 
Giorgadze, it is ready to engage in worthwhile cooperation. We 
are placing big hopes on this joint effort. 
  [Markozashvili] What changes are to be expected in your 
service? 
  [Mikadze] We will start with cadre policy, of course, 
because 
it is the nucleus of the Internal Affairs Ministry. Persons who 
can meet today's requirements will stay on, but persons who are 
professionally unfit will have to leave. 
  Another thing. It is our desire that Tbilisi be served by 
Tbilisians. Residents of the city will serve on the city's 
police force. We want the police and the inhabitants of the city 
to be one indivisible entity and to stand by one another. We 
want them to fight crime together and maintain law and order in 
their city. We will try to see to it that the police are 
provided with all the essentials--transportation and equipment. 
We want every police officer to be morally clean, so that the 
city knows that it has a faithful protector that cares about it. 
  I give my fellow residents my solemn promise that I will 
always protect their peace and safety. The only reason I have 
taken on the job of Tbilisi's police chief is that I want every 
Tbilisian to live in a city that is exemplary. I believe we can 
do it. 

