Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [NHAN DAN 2 March Editorial: "Strengthen the </F>
Vietnam-Singapore Relations of Friendship and Cooperation"] 
  [Text] At the invitation of Vietnamese Prime Minister Vo 
Van Kiet, Singaporean Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong is paying an 
official friendship visit to Vietnam today. Following the 
official friendship visit to Singapore by party General 
Secretary Do Muoi and Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet, the official 
visit to Vietnam by the Singaporean Prime Minister is a new, 
important event asserting the common aspiration of the two 
countries' leaders in strengthening the bilateral relations of 
friendship and cooperation, thereby contributing to restoring 
peace and stability and promoting cooperation and development in 
the Southeast Asian region. 
  We share Singapore's pleasure with its great achievements in 
national construction. During the past 30 years, through 
various creative development programs, the Singaporean 
Government and people have led the small country, with a sparse 
population and minimal natural resources, to advance to a 
developmental peak and become a world renowned economic, trade, 
and financial center. 
  In 1993, Singapore attained 9.8 percent economic growth 
compared with 5.6 percent in 1992. The electronic industries 
increased by 25 percent and the vessel building industry by 18.8 
percent; about 6.4 million tourists visited the country last 
year, increasing national income by 6.9 percent. Singapore's 
per capita income now reaches $18,000 [as heard]. 
  Vietnam and Singapore are close friends who have maintained 
diplomatic relations since 1973. Since Singapore lifted its 
trade embargo on Vietnam in 1991, Vietnam-Singapore economic 
and trade cooperation has developed vigorously. Today, 
Singapore is one of Vietnam's biggest trade partners. The 
two-way trade value in 1993 reached $1.4 billion compared with 
$110 million in 1980. Up to January this year, Singapore has 54 
projects in Vietnam with an investment capital of $431 million. 
In this, it leads the ASEAN countries and is ranked sixth among 
foreign investors in Vietnam. Various bilateral agreements on 
civil aviation, shipping, sea transportation, trade, investment 
insurance, and protection of the environment are being 
satisfactorily implemented. 
  We sincerely thank the Singaporean Government for attaching 
importance to promoting relations with Vietnam, especially in 
the trade and economic domains. We appreciate Singapore's 
efforts in sharing with Vietnam its rich experiences in economic 
management and national development. 
  During his official visit to Singapore in October last year, 
General Secretary Do Muoi asserted that Vietnam and Singapore 
have many firm bases for strengthening bilateral relations. The 
Vietnamese and Singaporean peoples share the same spirit of 
maintaining national independence, promoting self-reliance, and 
upholding the national characteristics. They also share a 
common wish to develop the general trend of peace, stability, 
and development in the region and the world. 
  We are confident that the official friendship visit to 
Vietnam by Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong will significantly 
contribute to promoting mutual understanding and trust and 
expanding the multifaceted cooperation between Vietnam and 
Singapore. 

