Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] At a Tuesday news conference at the Russian State 
Duma the leader of the Liberal-Democratic Party Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy declared his determination to fight against 
"Kazakh, Uzbek, Kirgiz fascism and defend the Russian-speaking 
population." He promised to respond "with such a blow that 
those countries will forget what civilization is" because they 
will be turned into "scorched wasteland with nobody to save." 
Only in this way will they learn not to humiliate Russians and 
pay for all their atrocities at once. 
  Zhirinovskiy emphasized that with the present attitude to 
Russians in Kazakhstan he would never let President Nursultan 
Nazarbayev "even approach the border of the Russian state." He 
called Nazarbayev a representative of a pseudo-state and said he 
would never sign any treaties or agreements with the man. 
  Speaking of the work of the Liberal-Democratic group in the 
Duma Zhirinovskiy described as its achievement the adoption of 
the amnesty decision. He was sorry, however, that he did not 
receive any official thanks from the former vice-president 
Aleksandr Rutskoy, the former security minister Viktor 
Barannikov or the former deputy interior minister Andrey Dunayev 
who were released from Lefortovo prison as a result of the 
amnesty. 
  Zhirinovskiy claimed that he received an expression of 
gratitude from the leader of the Russian National Unity movement 
Aleksandr Barkashov, the head of the Officers' Union Stanislav 
Terekhov and General Vladislav Achalov. "Not everyone proved 
thankful, perhaps someone should have been left in jail." 
  Zhirinovskiy claimed the credit for the latest foreign 
policy 
successes of the country related to the prevention of the 
bombings of Serbian positions around Sarajevo. He threatened 
the Foreign Ministry, which he described as a nest for CIA 
agents, that he would hold diplomats responsible for what they 
have done in the past two or three years. 
  He went on to accuse other parties in the Duma of stealing 
votes from his party during the elections. He claimed that at 
least 25 percent of votes were stolen at polling stations and 
given over "to such pseudo-parties as Russia's Choice and the 
Yavlinskiy bloc." According to Zhirinovskiy, some votes were 
also stolen from Communists, but while Communists are ready to 
forgive that, Liberal- Democrats will not. In the future he 
promised to hold politically responsible those who collected 
votes by fraud. 
  Zhirinovskiy forecast that in the 1996 parliamentary 
elections Liberal-Democrats would get not less than 300 out of 
450 seats (40 percent lawyers, 40 percent economists, 20 percent 
Army and Navy representatives). 
  Zhirinovskiy invited all newspapers and broadcasting 
corporations as well as all political parties and movements to 
the congress of his party in Moscow this weekend. He estimated 
that the congress would cost Liberal-Democrats some Rbs 60 Mn. 
  Answering a question on why he insisted on the release of 
all 
inmates of Lefortovo, even though his potential rival in the 
presidential elections Aleksandr Rutskoy was among them, 
Zhirinovskiy said that he needs a strong competitor. "If there 
is no one beside me, there is no one to fight against and I get 
sour," the Liberal-Democratic leader said. 
  However, he did not think many people would vote for Rutskoy 
because he "constantly changes his political image and has 
betrayed his stand four or five times." 
  Zhirinovskiy stressed that the president should have given 
the party that won the elections the right to form a cabinet a 
long time ago. He claimed that cabinet members Chubays, 
Shokhin, Kozyrev and Shakhray are right in their fears about his 
possible transition to the Kremlin. 
  "On 12 December we already received a mandate to the 
Kremlin," he said. 
  Answering a question about Liberal-Democratic deputies 
Viktor 
Kobelev and Aleksandr Pronin, Zhirinovskiy said that last month 
both were expelled from the party and the party group in the 
Duma. He said that the party is not threatened with a split, 
and the fact that three or four people leave the party every 
year is a normal process. 
  "Annually all intelligence services of the world are trying 
to infiltrate us. This is an indicator of our strength," 
Zhirinovskiy believes. 
  He said the party is ready to sign the memorandum of accord 
proposed by the president, but the document is more likely to 
have a moral significance and it would be naive to think that 
civic peace will be restored immediately after its adoption. 
  Zhirinovskiy announced that during the first half of the 
year 
he plans to visit Norilsk, Yakutia, Magadan, Kamchatka, Sakhalin 
and the Far East as well as Finland and Strasbourg. 

