Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with A. Yakovlev, head of the Federal Service of </F>
Russia for Television and Radio, and chairman of the Russian 
State Radio and Television Company Ostankino, by ARGUMENTY I 
FAKTY editor in chief Starkov: "A. Yakovlev: `The Time Has Come 
for Pragmatists....'"] 
  [Text] A conversation with the leader of the Federal 
Service of Russia for Television and Radio Broadcasting, and 
chairman of the RG TRK [Russian State Radio and Television 
Company] Ostankino, A. Yakovlev. 
  [Starkov] Aleksandr Nikolayevich, a scandal has broken out 
around the document concerning the conspiracy against the 
president that is supposed to be in the making. What do you have 
to say about this event? 
  [Yakovlev] There is a kind of logic here. There was one 
putsch--an unsuccessful one. There was the threat of the 
president's being overthrown in the second half of last year. 
But that led to the October events. None of these attempts 
produced any results. But the people who have failed to gain the 
power are getting itchy fingers. They need a new tactic. Because 
it is no accident that the provinces did not even stir in 
response to the Moscow events, either in 1991 or last year. 
There was nothing except perturbation. And the people who want 
to interrupt the course of the reforms understand that a 
military putsch is no longer feasible. Therefore, some are 
writing a new program, others are changing their stripes, and 
still others are getting rid of the image of far left, 
arch-leftist radicals, since this is no longer a convenient 
thing to be. I see in the paper that appeared a desire to get on 
the leaders' nerves once again. To cause them to suspect one 
another. And I do not think this will be the last time. 
  [Starkov] But it is surprising that this "version" of the 
conspiracy mentions even a person so close to the president as 
V. Chernomyrdin. 
  [Yakovlev] I think that there are now people who would like 
to start a quarrel between the chairman of the Council of 
Ministers and the president. This would be very bad for the 
country. And this is also one of the versions of the so-called 
putsch--"driving in a wedge." All these are political "toys" 
with which our society is not familiar but which, alas, we have 
to get used to. But actually I think we now have a possibility 
of stabilizing the situation, especially if we get down to work. 
The government and the president and the local administration. 
Incidentally, the power is now shifting to the localities, and 
this is good. 
  It is interesting that they are resolving for themselves 
many 
issues that we once resolved in the Politburo. And they are 
doing it correctly and wonderfully! And the regions, with all 
their power and strength, have no intention of breaking apart 
and scattering. So perhaps during these two years we should 
reach an agreement and simply work. 
  [Starkov] The communists are calling for the same thing. 
  [Yakovlev] The communists have no other way out. They have 
already organized two putsches, and society could call them to 
account. 
  [Starkov] From all this it follows that you are proposing a 
difficult but at the same time temptingly clear path of peace 
and harmony. And you look with optimism on the present 
development of the situation. And yet I recall that half a year 
ago you were the one predicting an imminent cataclysm: Men, hide 
your families--and through the snowdrifts. Do we have this 
"snowdrift situation" now? 
  [Yakovlev] Not now. I guessed it the last two times. But I 
was in Austria recently, and they are saying almost in a panic: 
You gave them amnesty, this means is the onset of 
communism....but I have the feeling that something has shifted 
in the society and the clock has turned in the proper direction. 
  Yes, we have Zyuganov, Baburin, and Umalatova, but something 
has changed. We must remain vigilant, we must not allow the kind 
of dim-wittedness that is so pervasive in the democratic forces. 
But nonetheless, after these two putsches the authority of the 
people behind them has dropped sharply. Not because we democrats 
have turned out to be so intelligent (on the contrary, we have 
done everything possible to help our opponents) but because of 
objective circumstances. And the people are simply tired of all 
this; they understand that anyone who cares about the people 
will not go on the attack. 
  [Starkov] But this "peaceful" development of events has its 
own danger hidden within it: In the localities through local 
elections they can remove democratic forces from power and 
gradually return the old nomenklatura to the ministerial posts 
in the center. And this is already happening.... 
  [Yakovlev] Yes, indeed they are appointing and will appoint 
professionals as opposed to nonprofessionals. But here is the 
question: Should we be afraid of these professionals? Some of 
them--yes, but some we should not. I have had contacts with 
these people. They say: "Why do you think we are 
Red-and-brownshirts? We have been politically neutral for a long 
time. We are ready for a market economy, for a new regime of 
power, we are ready to participate in elections. But we do not 
agree with what the government is doing or the way it is doing 
it. And that is all." Why should we not assume that these 
statements are sincere? If they are, that is wonderful. We will 
always part ways when it comes to methods; otherwise there will 
be no pluralism. The main thing is not to diverge when it comes 
to objectives. In general I think that the age of the pragmatist 
has now come. And where will we find them? For now the only 
place to find them is in the nomenklatura, whether we like it or 
not. And if we find there not ideologized politicians but people 
who are devoted to their profession, let them work. 
  I think the society now needs some kind of brief respite. 
Just a breather. And for the next stage of our development, we 
must see what kind of functions our president should have. 
Ultimately, I think we will reach the conclusion that our 
president should be like an arbitration figure: He should have 
dealings with the Army and foreign affairs--and that is all. Let 
everything else be done by professionals in the parliament and 
in the Cabinet of Ministers. But they must also be responsible 
for their own affairs. 
  [Starkov] Can we really so easily turn our legacy of the 
past 
into something good? After all, there are some absolutely 
unacceptable things that we inherited from Bolshevism. 
  [Yakovlev] Yes, and one of the unpleasant features of 
Bolshevism was living not life but an imitation of life. This is 
a strange problem that has been inherited almost everywhere by 
the present bureaucracy as well. It is reflected primarily in 
the fact that we generate an endless number of appeals, 
competitions, and resolutions. Resolutions of the Politburo, 
resolutions of the Secretariat, resolutions of the government, 
the boards of the ministries, various other state organizations, 
resolutions of the bureaus of the obkoms [oblast committees], 
kraykoms [kray committees], and raykoms [rayon committees]. All 
of these resolutions are like a black cloud hovering over our 
life. Why did this happen? In general this is a fairly 
comprehensible phenomenon. When you cannot really resolve 
certain of life's problems, you must replace them with an 
imitation of life. And people lived in an unreal world of false 
hopes. 
  [Starkov] That works, incidentally. 
  [Yakovlev] And how! Otherwise, Bolshevism would not have 
lasted for 70 years. And it is still living to this day. Because 
even today among the resolutions of the most diverse levels 
again 10 percent come from real life and 90 percent are 
stillborn. The chief of the administration of one oblast showed 
me a file of resolutions he had accumulated and said: "I do not 
need this, I have a different life." He finds nothing for 
himself there. It is an ongoing imitation of life. The director 
of a hog farm near Moscow said that it was more advantageous for 
him now to slaughter all the hogs and sell them, and he would 
have 3 billion rubles, and if he were to put them in the bank 
then all the workers of this hog farm would receive twice as 
much in wages and not do anything. He asks: What kind of economy 
is this? 
  [Starkov] Let us speak about the capabilities of the 
administration. You are probably one of the most experienced 
politicians of the present day. And you have constantly been 
risking your career, your family's well-being, and even your 
life. Wherein, in your opinion, lies the art of leadership? 
  [Yakovlev] It is important always to have a sense of what 
needs to be done. But there are certain periods in history when 
it is even more important to know for certain what should not be 
done. For example, I never engaged in arguments with the 
Politburo regarding the dead, empty questions that were 
frequently raised there. The questions were very large ones and 
I should have participated in the discussion, but I remained 
silent because I sensed that they were dead. I can honestly say 
that this is a feeling. To separate the "dead" questions from 
the "living" ones takes some kind of internal mechanism that 
works in me. 
  Further. Gather the patience to listen to people. I have had 
many cases when a person will come to me and talk and talk.... I 
finally respond to him that I cannot do anything. And he says to 
me: "Yes, I know, but thank you for listening, anyway." For some 
reason in our society it has turned out that we are unable to 
listen to people as to human beings. Second. I would advise an 
upcoming bureaucrat never to promise anything. This is deception 
in which we have been engaging up to this point, that is, we 
want to replace one deception with another one. If you can do 
something, do it, and the person will be grateful. If you do it 
without promising to, the gratitude will be much greater. 
  Now, when I read in others' memoirs the kinds of complicated 
political operations and intrigues that are sometimes attributed 
to us, I sometimes start to get a swelled head. But, alas, 
nothing of the kind happened. We should not be regarded as such 
intelligent people. 
  [Starkov] You were a member of the Politburo, a person who 
was not simply in with the authorities, but one who was at the 
helm of power. Do you not get the feeling that the people 
sitting in the Kremlin today, where the Politburo used to sit, 
are still wet behind the ears and what they are doing is 
nonsense.... And this pertains not to you personally, but to the 
entire country. The plants are on the verge of shutting down, 
the coal miners are striking. One gets the feeling that this 
never happened when you were in power. 
  [Yakovlev] No, I do not have that feeling in the slightest 
degree. I am a fatalist, and I think that things are the way 
they ought to be. Nobody actually drove us out of our positions. 
We had a dacha, and a car, and a guard. We started it all 
ourselves. Many people do not understand this now. A power that 
was enlightened but still totalitarian could have been 
different. Gorbachev was quite suited for this. And one must 
give him his due; he also in some ways moved toward the breakup. 
And he turned over a great page in history. Because it would 
have been possible to hold out a little longer, well, 10 years, 
but still it would have ended with a social upheaval. 
Inevitably. Even then we were moving toward collapse. The 
stabilization that was created out of petrodollars had ended. 
And thank God the energy for the disintegration came from within 
ourselves and was not imposed on us from outside. Then there 
would have been a complete collapse, all-out war.... 
  [Starkov] Let us return to the present day. It seems to me 
that you have been fairly closemouthed in the press about your 
work in your new position as chairman of Ostankino. How did the 
appointment itself come about? You probably did not make any 
promises to Boris Nikolayevich. 
  [Yakovlev] When they were putting out feelers, I refused. 
And 
then I refused a second time. There was nothing in it for me. I 
would rather write another book....after all, I was getting into 
something that would be the shortest path to the loss of my 
reputation. But in a later conversation I told Boris 
Nikolayevich that, in the first place, nobody could interfere 
with my work, that it was to be a presidential structure. And if 
anybody wanted to give me orders I would leave. Second--I laid 
out for him the Ostankino ideology as I conceived it. The 
essence was this. We had gotten people upset. The horse had 
reared up, it was still standing on its hind legs, and was it 
not possible to get it back on all fours? To try through 
television to bring society out of this reared-back condition. 
It is necessary to see shortcomings and criticize them. Our 
television commentators are always asserting: We are on the edge 
of an abyss, there is just one step left. And I tell them: For 
three years now, we have not taken this step. Why are we marking 
time? (Laughs.) I ask the question: How many enterprises do we 
have that are in a financial position where they owe nobody 
nothing and nobody owes them anything? It has turned out that 30 
percent of them are like this. If only they had discussed just 
one of them!... 
  [Starkov] But in general and on the whole, you have still 
taken a completely new and unusual position: They say that you 
do not interfere with the preparation of programs or the work of 
the studios. This is the approach of a commander in chief who is 
developing a strategy, and not someone who wants to inspect to 
see whether a soldier has a clean collar or has tied his shoes 
correctly. 
  [Yakovlev] No, I do not want to interfere with the programs. 
This might seem to be a shortcoming, but I do not even look at 
the programs that play on one day or another. That is not my 
business. There are people who are responsible for this. I can 
not insist, say, on covering such subjects as the property 
owner, the bureaucrat, the farmer, the office worker, or small 
business. Which version, which form--that is not my business. I 
want the subjects to be heard about now, but let the 
professionals who are in charge of this find for themselves 
which programs and what to say on them. 
  [Starkov] How did you act in the extremely serious situation 
with the Ministry of Communications? After all, there was the 
threat that television was about to be shut down. 
  [Yakovlev] I said that if the government shut down 
television, another government would start it up again. I gave 
orders not to interfere. One cannot place oneself in the 
position of a supplicant. Let them try to shut us down. I follow 
the government's orders, it pays me. I did not go to the 
government meeting regarding this, and I let them know that I 
would not go there holding my hand out. 
  Now I am reproached for one thing--why was I so calm? They 
were threatening not to give us any money, to raise havoc 
throughout the press in the near future, to put out twice as 
much negative information about me. I knew why it would appear. 
I had issued orders concerning the prohibition of barter and 
centralization of advertising. 
  [Starkov] And what next? 
  [Yakovlev] Let the studios be privatized and compete, making 
their way onto the air. We will buy programs. And we will sell 
advertising if we buy the program. I think we will divide up the 
advertising like this: Of 100 percent, 40 percent will be 
centralized, 40 percent will go to the studio, and the remaining 
20 percent will be distributed by the expert artistic council 
according to ratings. 
  [Starkov] Incidentally, many of the latest ratings do not 
put 
Ostankino in first place at all but, for example, NTV. 
  [Yakovlev] I think that is normal. Anything that is new will 
have higher ratings. Let us wait half a year. 
  [Starkov] Are you not sorry that such powers as Mitkova and 
Keselev have left? After all, they could be on your team. 
  [Yakovlev] I feel ambiguous. On the one hand, I am sorry. I 
would be glad if they were with us, but since they have gone 
there, where they are paid more and where they feel better 
psychologically, I am glad for them. I have good relations with 
both Keselev and Mitkova. And you cannot demand real work from 
people when you pay them a pittance. That is degrading. 
  [Starkov] People are now saying that two state television 
companies are too many, that perhaps we should keep either one 
or the other. What will you do with GTV [state television]? 
After all, even a rich country cannot allow itself two state 
BBC's. 
  [Yakovlev] I agree, we really should have one state company, 
and for the other we should look for forms for attracting 
national capital. For example, the present Ostankino could 
become a part of a future joint-stock company. But it is not 
only a matter of finances. In the first place, Ostankino still 
means all of the former Soviet Union and the whole world. In the 
second place, I personally think that Ostankino should have its 
own image, and we should not exactly duplicate another 
television company. 
  [Starkov] You know, Aleksandr Nikolayevich, a person really 
can understand those who are surprised by your cold-bloodedness. 
Where did you get this unhurried reasonableness which has helped 
you to solve a multitude of problems and, I hope, will help with 
the problems of the television company as well? This 
philosophical calm? 
  [Yakovlev] What has helped me to have a healthier attitude 
toward things?... Well, I was not educated by Soviet power. I 
was educated by my father--even politically. I recall how they 
arrested him, how he hid, who warned him about this and how. I 
saw all this. I recall when, in 1941, there was an announcement 
from TASS about Germany, and my father, with four years of 
education, said: "That is it, son, there will be war" when 
everyone around was saying they would not attack. I remember 
when my father removed the portraits of Stalin and then 
Khrushchev. He was the first chairman of the kolkhoz--and then 
he left it, saying that people had started to work less. And 
that meant there would be trouble. A simple answer, right? If 
they started to work less there would be trouble. He alone, 
thinking in simple, common-sense categories, not suspecting that 
it was philosophy, instilled them in me. 
  [Starkov] Well, since we have touched upon the distant past, 
tell me how many years you spent in Canada? 
  [Yakovlev] Ten years. 
  [Starkov] Did you have an interpreter? 
  [Yakovlev] The first year, for insurance. So that there 
would 
be a person who could confirm that I did not say something. The 
remaining nine years I got by without an interpreter. 
  [Starkov] How many years did you study at Columbia 
University? 
  [Yakovlev] A year in graduate school. 
  [Starkov] Along with Kalugin? 
  [Yakovlev] Yes. 
  [Starkov] When you went there, did you understand that you 
would "tarnish" your biography, that that would be some kind of 
blemish on your resume? 
  [Yakovlev] Yes, I understood that, and Kryuchkov took 
advantage of this blemish. Although of my 17 acquaintances who 
went there with me, 14 were not from science or, rather, they 
were from a science of a different profile. 
  When the procuracy filed a criminal case against me, all the 
documents were brought up. But they found nothing except two 
denunciations. Oleg Kalugin granted an interview regarding my 
case, and he was officially interrogated. They also interrogated 
Gorbachev, Bakatin, and Chebrikov. 
  [Starkov] Who made the denunciations? 
  [Yakovlev] Resident agents. And these denunciations were 
simply because of my statements: I had criticized the work of 
the KGB. 
  [Starkov] And what were you doing at Columbia University? 
  [Yakovlev] I was writing a dissertation on historiography of 
American foreign policy. 
  [Starkov] What kind of incomes do you live on? You 
personally. 
  [Yakovlev] I finally received wages from Ostankino of about 
300,000 rubles. And I have a pension of 112,000 as a disabled 
war veteran. 
  [Starkov] And as a member of the Politburo. 
  [Yakovlev] When I approached pension age I submitted all the 
documents to the rayon social security division; let them figure 
it out according to the law. At that time they assigned me 400 
rubles. Two pensions--civilian and military. I have been 
receiving the military pension since I was 20. When Politburo 
members went on pension they received 500 rubles. Boldin was 
disturbed and reported to Gorbachev. How could it be--I went to 
social security! 
  [Starkov] Do your books bring you any income? 
  [Yakovlev] I have calculated (the publishing house gave me 
complete accounts of state revenues from the books) that if they 
had given me all that money, it would have been more than my 
wages--both in the Politburo and before then. 

