Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Hanna Gronkiewicz-Walc, governor of the </F>
Polish Central Bank, by Francoise Delstanche; place and date not 
given: "Continuity in Polish Budget Policy"] 
  [Text] With an economy in transition, Poland cannot count 
on the panoply of instruments used in the West to pursue its 
economic policy. What is more, as Hanna Gronkiewicz-Walc, 
governor of the Polish Central Bank, explained to us, monetary 
policy alone cannot overcome inflation, which, in Poland, is not 
purely a monetary phenomenon. This is a task her country can 
pride itself on carrying out successfully, she explained to us 
in an interview. It can do so despite the fact that, by 
European standards, the inflation rate of 37 percent obtained in 
1993 is obviously still very high and despite the fact that she 
admits that the objective set--namely, to reduce this increase 
in prices to 23 percent at the end of the year--is still fairly 
ambitious. 
  You have to look at the starting point. Indeed, the increase 
in prices reached 2,000 percent in 1989 and 600 percent in 1990, 
dropping to 70 percent in 1991 and 44 percent in 1992. The 
trend is therefore a good one. And the little hiccup recorded 
at the end of last year should not be too much of a worry. For 
Hanna Gronkiewicz-Walc, this increase was caused by the 
expectations created following the change of government majority 
and by a fairly classic end-of-year phenomenon. 
  Moreover, the January figures confirm that there was no need 
to overdramatize the situation, the head of the issuing 
institute thinks. At 2 percent, the inflation rate corresponds 
to forecasts, which has convinced the National Bank that there 
was no need to increase interest rates. 
<H5>  Budget: Better Than Expected </H5>
  However, inflation is only one of the criteria used by the 
IMF to judge whether pledges are being honored. Other factors, 
like the budget deficit or the foreign trade balance, are also 
closely followed by the institution. 
  Poland is about to receive a visit from an IMF mission, 
which 
is to assess last year's "standby" program and start 
negotiations with a view to reaching a new agreement that will 
cover one year or 15 months. Three years would be too long for 
an economy in transition, the governor of the Central Bank 
explained. 
  "We have fulfilled all of our pledges," Hanna 
Gronkiewicz-Walc said with satisfaction, adding that her country 
has not had to use the last installment of credit promised by 
the IMF for 1993. In the budgetary sphere, she added, the 
target has been exceeded because the deficit, set at 5 percent 
of the GDP, in the end did not exceed 3.5 percent. 
  This is logical. "We did not find sources of finance," she 
said, because the financial markets are still insufficiently 
developed. It is therefore the Central Bank that guarantees a 
large part of the budget deficit: 30 to 35 billion zlotys [Z] 
out of a deficit of Z83 billion. 
  As for the change of political majority, she notes that it 
has so far not brought any fundamental change to the budget 
strategy, although promises were made during the election 
campaign. There was no significant progress in social spending, 
Hanna Gronkiewicz-Walc said, at least no more than had been 
planned by the previous government. And she concluded that "the 
voters will be disappointed." 
  On the other hand, the trade balance is still incurably in 
the red, showing a deficit of more than $2 billion last year. 
This despite the third devaluation (of 8 percent) in the zloty, 
introduced in August 1993, and the "crawling peg" policy, which, 
it is true, has been somewhat slowed down because of the 
reduction in inflation. 
  Despite that, the contributions of foreign capital have made 
it possible to increase the currency reserves by approximately 
$200 million. Thus, at the end of last year, they totaled $4 
billion. 
<H5>  Refinancing the Banks </H5>
  Although part of the IMF funds set aside for last year was 
not used, the same should not be the case in 1994. "I think it 
will be necessary," Hanna Gronkiewicz-Walc explained, adding 
that Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak is negotiating with the 
European Union the granting of a loan of some $500 million to 
support the balance of payments. 
  As for the World Bank, the government intends to cancel some 
of its loans of a social nature. Others, however, like the loan 
($450 million) intended to help the bank recapitalization 
program, are highly appreciated in Warsaw. 
  The government is in fact engaged in a wide-ranging program 
to help public banks that are threatened by an accumulation of 
dubious credits to enterprises. 
  The program started last year and consists of helping the 
banks improve their balance sheets before privatization. In 
addition to support from the World Bank, this plan should also 
be funded by the money that had previously been intended for the 
zloty stabilization fund. This fund of $600 million has never 
been used, and the Polish authorities requested that the money 
supplied by the Western countries for this purpose should be 
used to fund this program to help the banks; the request was 
granted. 
  The Polish authorities last year devoted, at the expense of 
the budget and the Central Bank, some Z11 billion to this 
initiative, which started in 1993. They are due to spend Z16 
billion this year. 
  It is difficult to say whether that will suffice, the 
governor admits. But she notes that the dubious credits have 
nonetheless already been reduced. 
  The fact remains that, although the emergency measures have 
been conclusive, it is only in a few years' time that it will be 
possible to restore full health to these banks. 
  And that leaves the problem of the private banks (there are 
more than 70), which generally have very modest capital. 
  The Central Bank has already taken two fairly large ones 
under its protection. On the other hand, two cooperative banks 
and one private bank have gone into liquidation. 
  "It is called the hospital," Hanna Gronkiewicz-Walc 
explained, and she expects to take more institutions under her 
wing. 
  The intention is not to keep them but to resell them via the 
Stock Exchange. However, their accounts must first be balanced. 
  Because one of the problems of these private institutions is 
their small size, the Central Bank has already imposed a minimum 
capital of 5 million ECU's [European Currency Units] as against 
1 million previously. But the government is also trying to 
negotiate with the European Union for permission to use some of 
the funding devoted to PHARE [Economic Reconstruction Aid for 
Poland and Hungary] to save these private institutions for which 
no program has so far been set up. 

