BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Sulayman al-Najjab, PLO Executive </F>
Committee member, "who returned to Jericho today after 20 years 
of exile," by Sa'id Mu'addi in Jericho on 28 June; from the 
"With the Events" program -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Mu'addi] Mr. Sulayman al-Najjab, PLO Executive 
Committee member, God be praised for your safe return. You are 
welcome to Jericho. 
  [Al-Najjab] Thank you, Sa'id. 
  [Mu'addi] Twenty years after deportation, you have now 
returned to the Gaza and Jericho autonomous areas although you 
are not member of the Palestinian administration. What is your 
comment? 
  [Al-Najjab] I have returned to the homeland. Our stand on 
the Cairo agreement is well-known. Therefore, we have not 
participated in the government. However, I believe that our 
work to implement Resolution 242 in all its provisions and 
ensure the Israeli withdrawal from our occupied territory can 
also be done from the autonomous areas. This, of course, is not 
confined to areas from which the Israeli Army has withdrawn so 
far. I mean quote, withdrawn, unquote, of course. 
  We are proud of the role that we as a party have played 
within the PLO to reach the declaration on the well-known 
Palestinian peace initiative in 1988 when the PLO's official 
policy became the policy of working to reach a political 
settlement based on implementing Resolution 242. 
  [Mu'addi] Then will you join the factions that are opposed 
to 
the Israeli-Palestinian agreement? 
  [Al-Najjab] We will not join factions opposed to 
negotiations. We are constructive opposition. We support 
negotiations and a political settlement. Our opposition differs 
from the other factions that refused the participation in Madrid 
conference and that rejected the Oslo agreement. But we also 
differ with the Palestinian factions that signed the Cairo 
agreement. Our differences and our rejection of the Cairo 
agreement basically stems from our serious work to reach a firm 
political settlement. I do not believe that it is possible to 
reach such a settlement by ignoring the Palestinian people's 
rights and circumventing the resolutions of international 
legitimacy. 
  [Mu'addi] What will be the basis of your political activity 
in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to promote the aims of the 
political trend you represent? 
  [Al-Najjab] We consider that the aim of realizing 
Palestinian 
national independence through a political settlement continues 
to be our basic aim. Our stand toward the Palestinian authority 
is contingent on the stand and work of this authority to realize 
this objective; namely, independence. We support the authority 
in all its steps that serve this objective. We, along with all 
the Palestinian national forces, are working to solve problems 
that the agreement has not succeeded in solving. Foremost of 
these problems now is the issue of the detainees and political 
prisoners. It has transpired that the agreement's provisions on 
this issue have failed to solve it. All the political detainees 
and prisoners must be released if the peace process is to gain 
credibility among the Palestinian people. 
  [Mu'addi] Thank you, Mr. Sulayman al-Najjab, and God be 
praised for your safe return. 
  [Al-Najjab] Thank you, and before I end this interview I 
would like to reiterate that the continuation of the siege on 
Jerusalem and attempts at changing the reality there and the 
attempt to expand the settlements will not serve the peace 
process. They do not conform to peace at all. Postponing these 
two issues to the final phase of the negotiations does not mean 
giving the Israeli side a free hand to impose new realities that 
will affect the final result of the negotiations. 
  [Mu'addi] Thank you very much. 
  [Al-Najjab] Thank you, Sa'id, thank you. 

