CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V.P. Gumnitskiy, candidate of technical </F>
sciences, Yuzhnoye Design Office; UDC 621.548] 
  [Abstract] In view of the shortage of conventional energy 
sources and constant increase in power generation facilities, 
researchers are devoting a great deal of their attention to wind 
power systems. The main advantages of such systems are that 
their production is economically pure and, unlike conventional 
and nuclear power plants, they do not require the use of 
expensive and scarce fuels. At present, the main directions in 
the use of wind are the production of mechanical and thermal 
energy to meet the electricity needs of small enterprises and 
institutions and the construction of wind power plants (both 
self-contained plants and plants that are components of power 
systems). In many countries throughout the world, significant 
funds are being allocated to R&amp;D directed toward creating 
wind 
power plants. Low- and medium-capacity wind power plants have 
gained the greatest popularity to date. Megawatt-class units are 
less prevalent; however, a great deal of R&amp;D is being 
focused on 
their development. Plant designs with horizontal windmill blade 
rotation axes are favored over designs with vertical axes 
because of the complex theoretical and practical problems 
entailed in using vertical axes. Virtually all wind power plants 
designed with a horizontal blade rotation axis have the windmill 
located in front of the tower. Most towers are made of metal 
(some are made of plastic), and windmills may be made of wood, 
steel, aluminum, or plastic. Windmills used to be built without 
any basic research. As wind energy continues to gain popularity, 
however, increasing progress is being made in the areas of 
researching their mechanics, the strength and stability of their 
design, and their aerodynamics. Increasing attention is being 
paid to their effect on the environment. According to various 
data sources, at the beginning of the 21st century, wind power 
plants will produce from 1-2 to 15-20 percent of all energy 
produced. The following are among recent directions/results of 
research in the area of designing and using wind power plants: 
use of an Intel 8036 16-bit microprocessor in the system to 
control the power output of the induction generator included in 
wind power plants, development of a nomogram for graphic 
determination of a wind power plant's design power factor (the 
ratio of the average power developed by the wind power plant in 
a selected time period to its rated capacity), studies of the 
characteristics of the turbulence at the site of the WTS-4 
megawatt-class wind power plant along the height of the windmill 
to determine the fatigue strength of wind power plant elements 
and related studies of the stresses in the root sections of 
windmill blades, use of a laser anemometer to optimize the loads 
of wind power plants' generators as a function of wind velocity, 
development of a simple method of calculating the 
characteristics of a windmill with a horizontal rotation axis, 
and use of specially developed equipment to study the 
aerodynamics of wind power plants. The problem of calculating 
the energy characteristics of a wind power plant is extremely 
complicated and continues to command a great deal of 
researchers' attention. The use of nonmetallic materials in wind 
power plants is also receiving a great deal of attention. A 
10.7-m-long wooden ship was equipped with a wind power plant 
with a three-blade windmill measuring 3.96 m in diameter 
installed at a height of 5.49 m on the ship's mast. A running 
motor operating on the energy supplied by a wind power plant has 
produced ship speeds of 7.3 km/h, and with a head wind, speeds 
of 56.6 km/h have been reached. 

