Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "The Untold Story of the Minor </F>
Pilgrimage"] 
  [Text] The king's visit to Saudi Arabia was the result of a 
an initiative by Yemeni Vice President 'Ali Salim al-Bid. The 
Yemeni official expressed a desire to visit Saudi Arabia and 
meet with King Fahd following the signing of the Yemeni 
reconciliation agreement in Amman [on 20 February]. King Fahd 
personally spoke on the phone to al-Bid, in the presence of King 
Husayn who was visiting his guest al-Bid at al-Hashimiyah Palace 
in Amman. 
  Al-Bid conveyed to King Fahd greetings from King Husayn, who 
was at his side. When he heard words of welcome from King Fahd, 
al-Bid informed him of King Husayn's desire to speak with him 
and gave the receiver to King Husayn, who expressed a wish to 
visit the holy places to perform the minor pilgrimage. 
  Thus, the Yemeni initiative and the Jordanian desire began 
to 
materialize. 
  During his visit to Saudi Arabia, al-Bid placed on his 
agenda 
the task of paving the way for king Husayn's visit. He 
suggested to King Fahd a meeting with King Husayn. King Fahd 
answered as follows: This requires a decision from the "family" 
and I have no means of making that decision now. 
  The visit was not intended to carry out a religious duty and 
continue a tradition the king has followed for many decades 
during Ramadan, which he was forced to stop following the dire 
consequences and ramifications of the Gulf war over the past 
three years. King Husayn chose to perform the minor pilgrimage 
this year knowing that neither King Fahd, nor Crown Prince 
'Abdallah, nor the second deputy prime minister, Prince Sultan, 
would receive him. 
  The chief of protocol, Ayman al-Majali, went to Saudi Arabia 
and was welcomed by the Saudi authorities. He brought with him 
the program of the visit that contained brief arrangements for 
performing religious rites but contained no meetings with any 
Saudi officials. The official reception at the airport and the 
mission of honor to accompany the king would be confined to 
Prince Sa'ud Bin-'Abd-al-Muhsin Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz. 
  Some tried to use their good offices to promote the visit by 
making it an end to the estrangement, and by including Riyadh in 
it. The Jordanian side refused to continue this discussion after 
hearing of conditions that can be mildly described as unjust, 
encroaching on the credibility of the Jordanian stand. The 
required apology would have been correct if one side erred 
against another. In the case of Jordan we cannot be held 
responsible for something that cannot be applied to us. Even if 
the results were in the interest of the [Gulf war] alliance, 
this does not mean they were right in their stand. The facts 
confirm the credibility of the Jordanian position and its option 
not to approve of external intervention, which would bring only 
evil to all the Arab sides, not only Iraq. Iraq lost its 
resources and its ability, which had been a deterrent to the 
others who had been trying to commit aggression against the 
Arabs. The loss also covered the Gulf people who lost their 
savings and resources of their future generations and have 
become captives of foreigners in terms of their sovereignty, 
policy, finance, and economy. 
  To cut a long story short, the mediators failed, but the 
king 
insisted on making the visit and the pilgrimage and to hope for 
a surprise and an initiative at the eleventh hour. The king 
made his decision for more than one reason: 
  1. The king wanted to continue his tradition of performing 
the minor pilgrimage after it stopped following the Gulf war 
disaster. He chose this year to restore this tradition 
exploiting the state of relative ease in ties between Riyadh and 
Amman. 
  2. To end the deadlock with an initiative that would force 
the Saudis to shoulder their moral and political 
responsibilities toward the Jordanian stand, especially since 
Jordan has taken the first step and particularly now, after King 
Fahd has already received Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat, 
who was accused of being biased toward the just Iraqi stand. It 
is known here that the Saudi monarch's reception of Yasir 
'Arafat took place upon a U.S. recommendation that was discussed 
between 'Arafat and Christopher at the U.S. ambassador's 
residence in 'Abdun in Amman. Fatah Central Committee Member 
Faysal al-Husayni paved the way for the visit by responding to a 
Saudi invitation that has been kept on hold for two years at the 
instructions of President 'Arafat, who finally allowed the visit 
after he was certain that it would be the first step toward his 
own visit to Riyadh and to his being received by King Fahd when 
he performed the minor pilgrimage. Thus, 'Arafat's visit to 
Riyadh set a precedent for ending the estrangement between 
Riyadh and those Arab parties that rejected the Hafr al-Batin 
logic, the Desert Storm scenario, and the U.S. and foreign 
interference in our region. From this premise, King Husayn 
sought to test the programmed Saudi estrangement in order to 
test the credibility of relations with the United States and 
U.S. promises and claims that it is eager to lift the political 
and economic siege that is imposed on Jordan. 
  3. King Husayn chose his visit to the Islamic holy places on 
Saudi territory to be part of the challenge and to clarify 
things, lest the option of Jordanian-Saudi relations at present 
and in the future emerge as the option that should be adopted. 
But, the exceptional situation that resulted from the Gulf 
crisis imposed itself on this visit. 
  Those who are conversant with what is going on attribute the 
interruption in the trend toward ending the estrangement and 
restoring the relations between Riyadh and Amman to foreign 
interference. It is the same interference that still imposes a 
political and economic siege on Jordan, and carries out 
instigations against Amman, not only because of its stands on 
the Gulf crisis and its results, but because of the Jordanian 
refusal to sign a draft peace treaty with Israel. U.S. 
President Clinton officially asked King Husayn during the 
latter's recent visit to Washington to reach a draft peace 
treaty with the Israelis. However, Jordan did not budge from 
its explicit and firm stand that there will be no peace treaty 
with the Israelis before the others, and that if they do not all 
sign at the same time, then Jordan will be after them. This 
Jordanian stand has its consequences. Do the Jordanians have 
the requisites to stand fast in the face of the pressure, 
blackmail, and all forms of siege? 

