Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Japan's long-term recession, considered the worst 
since the end of war, combined with this year's unusually cool 
summer, has substantially slowed down demand for electrical 
power; this is especially true of industrial demands. In terms 
of medium- and long-range growth, however, a steady annual 
growth rate of 2% is predicted. Ensuring the supply 
capacity 
sufficient to meet such a steadily growing energy demand will be 
the biggest problem facing the electric power industry today. 
For this reason, the industry is making every effort to build up 
nuclear power, the type of energy considered ``pivotal'' by the 
industry. The industry also is working on the optimal 
combination (the best mix) of diverse energy sources, including 
hydraulic and thermal power. At new power plant construction 
sites, on which success of electric power companies' effort will 
hinge, difficulties appear to be mounting nationwide. Unless 
something is done to change this situation, a ``power crisis'' 
in the near future will be a real possibility. Deeply concerned 
over the situation, Japanese government, as a part of its 
overall energy policy, has launched a provision of a support 
system designed to appropriate funds even to potential power 
source sites still in early stages and have yet to be designated 
as ``important power source requiring government support.'' We 
have, therefore, decided to investigate existing conditions and 
problems associated with important power sources. Our 
investigation primarily deals with nuclear energy but thermal 
and hydraulic types also are covered when required. Our findings 
will be presented in a series. (9 articles in a series, each 
published on the Friday issue). 
  According to the long-range power development plan 
established by the Electric Power Development Coordination 
Council (Prime Minister's Advisory Council) in July, total power 
demand, except independent power plants, during the next ten 
years beginning in 1993, will register an average of 2.5% 
growth a year. This means that demand will reach 905.6 billion 
kW by the year 2002, registering an increase of approximately 
28% over the total demand recorded for 1992. In order to 
deal 
with this, the council established a goal for starting 
additional power generation operations to achieve an additional 
capacity of 84.52 million kW. 
  Of these, nuclear power plants are aiming for operation of 
approximately 20 reactors generating about 20 million kW. At the 
present time, the total number of commercial nuclear reactors in 
operation is 45 with an output of 37.196 million kW. Its future 
growth, including estimated output from new construction sites, 
however, will be no more than 46 million kW. It is anticipated 
that this will cause a considerable delay in achieving 
development target for the year 2000 (50.5 million kW) 
established in accordance with a long-term energy demand and 
supply estimates of the Advisory Committee for Energy. 
  Because of this, the roles of coal-fired power and liquefied 
natural gas (LNG) in a basic power supply are reexamined. 
Accordingly, electric power companies in succession have begun 
making new plans. Unfortunately, because of environmental 
restrictions imposed on construction of new thermal power 
plants, lead time for starting operations increasingly is 
becoming lengthy. Especially hard hit in this respect are 
nuclear power plant construction sites. 
  Of the ten locations where electric power companies are 
planning to construct new plants, seven of them, namely, 
Ashihama (Mie Prefecture: Chubu Electric Power; Koura (Wakayama 
Prefecture: Kansai Electric Power); Hiokigawa (Wakayama 
Prefecture: Kansai Electric Power); Hiokigawa (Wakayama 
Prefecture: Kansai Electric Power); Kumihama (Kyoto-fu: Kansai 
Electric Power); Kamizeki (Yamaguchi Prefecture: Chugoku 
Electric Power); Namie, Odaka (Fukushima Prefecture: Tohoku 
Electric Power); and Sasu (Ishikawa Prefecture: 3 electric power 
companies, viz., Hokuriku, Chubu, and Kansai Electric Power), 
have yet to obtain the consent of locals after more than 20 
years of negotiations. 
  Especially at Ashihama, where construction was planned in 
1963, faced with the strong opposition of local fishermen, Chubu 
Electric Power ran into a snag. The deadlock still continues, 
now entering the 31st year. On its first nuclear power reactor, 
Shika No.1, Hokuriku Electric Power spent 17 years on the 
``initial stage'', beginning with the selection of a planned 
construction site and ending with the implementation of 
environmental survey with the consent of locals. It took the 
company a total of 26 years before its commercial operations 
began finally at the end of July 1993. 
  Koji Kaibe, head of Construction Site Environment Division, 
The Federation of Electric Power Companies (FEPCO), attributed 
the difficulties chiefly to the following factors: ``The general 
public does not agree completely that nuclear power generation 
is something which the country must have, and added to the 
deep-rooted distrust and anxiety created by their concept of 
nuclear power itself, it has become increasingly difficult to 
achieve unified opinion among insiders of the Fishermen's 
Cooperative Association.'' 
  As fishing environment deteriorates--partly because of a 
decrease in the number of young people who want to pursue 
fishery--fishermen were split into two groups, a group made up 
of those who wanted to call it quit and those who wanted to 
continue. This affected the amount of compensatory payment 
demanded by fishermen. As the local needs became more 
sophisticated and diversified, subsidies allotted by electric 
power development measure legislated by three laws concerning 
electric power sources, which at one time had been a big 
incentive, has lost its effect. 
  Sensing a crisis situation which a future power shortage 
will 
bring, the government installed in March 1993, Electric Power 
Plant Construction Site Subcommittee under the Electric Power 
Development Coordination Council. Stating that ``the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industries no longer can deal with the 
problem of electric power development alone,'' in addition to 
those extremely knowledgeable in this field, the council 
marshalled bureau-class chiefs from 12 ministries and agencies 
to provided needed support and to promote important electric 
power developments in their initial stages. 
  Moreover, with respect to the country's power source sites 
in 
their initial developmental stages (which are yet to be 
designated as ``important power sources designated for 
development,'') the country is strengthening its support system 
treating them as ``projects which should be supported fully by 
the country.'' At the same time, MITI has launched a substantial 
expansion of power source regional development policy using the 
fund from its 1993 budget. Its attraction is the establishment 
of ``Emergency Subsidy for the Promotion and Establishment of 
Regional Symbiotic-type Nuclear Power Generation Facility.'' In 
the past, the position of an electric power company was 
described as follows: ``In the beginning, there was a power 
plant.'' The concept of regional symbiotic power plant was 
developed in an effort to solve the question of ``how a power 
plant itself can contribute to the well-being of the region 
involved.'' Moreover, the 1994 budgets of both MITI and Science 
and Technology Agency (STA) reflect a substantial expansion of 
their support policies currently being planned. However, since 
electric power companies are the ones directly responsible for 
power development, they should not be wholly dependent on 
government support but rather should actively engage themselves 
in the promotion of regional development, securing understanding 
and support of regional self-governing bodies. 
<H5>  Construction Will Begin at Higashidori in 1998 </H5>
  Aomori Prefecture's Shimokita Peninsula is located at the 
northernmost tip of Honshu. Although it is blessed with abundant 
natural beauty, its winter is extremely severe. Even in 
summertime, it is not free from hazards of a cold weather when a 
Yamase wind, a characteristic of the Pacific Coast, blows down 
from over the mountains for any length of time and reducing the 
number of hours of dry weather. Because of the decline in 
coastal fishery, many seek work away from home, thus 
accelerating the region's depopulation trend. This is about to 
be changed as the region is transformed into Japan's foremost 
nuclear power base. 
  First to emerge is Rokkasho Village where nuclear fuel 
recycling facilities will be constructed. This recycling 
undertaking, which will become Japan's first commercial 
facilities, according to Kiyoshi Nozawa, president of Japan 
Nuclear Fuel, Ltd. (JNF), ``represents a double-edged sword of 
Japan's nuclear policy--development of nuclear power on one hand 
and recycling of plutonium on the other.'' It is a huge project 
in which the electric power industry is pouring its resources, 
investing a total of &yen;1.25 trillion. 
  Inheriting the research result produced by The Power Reactor 
and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation (PNC) and purchasing 
from Mutsu Ogawahara Development Co. a land in Rokkasho Village, 
measuring approximately 7.4 million square meters in area, JNF 
launched construction of three types of facilities to deal with 
uranium enrichment, reprocessing, and disposal of low-level 
radioactive wastes. In March 1992, the company began operation 
of its uranium enrichment plant. It plans to make a first 
shipment of product uranium to Tokyo Electric Power sometime 
during 1993. The plant is planning to expand its facility every 
year until its annual production capacity reaches 1,500 tons SWU 
(separated work unit). 
  The low-level radioactive waste disposal center began 
operations in December 1992. The company has decided the final 
scale of storage space to be approximately 
600,000m[.sup]3[/], which is sufficient to store 
approximately 300 200-liter drum cans. In the meantime, it has 
embarked on construction of an intermediate storage facility 
which can handle high-level radioactive wastes returned from 
overseas. Its completion is expected in 1995. Construction of 
the remaining reprocessing plant began in April 1993. The 
company is aiming for the operation of the plant to begin by the 
year 2000. Its maximum processing capacity, when converted into 
the amount of uranium, will be 800 tons a year. Thus the company 
has begun moving toward the establishment of a cycling business. 
Since the new Hosokawa Government's policy is to continue this 
national policy, the problem facing the electric power industry 
is one of ensuring safety of the cycling facility and of finding 
ways in which it can coexist with a regional community involved 
and contribute to revitalization of the region. 
  At a Higashidori Village location, where both Tohoku and 
Tokyo Electric Power companies are planning to construct nuclear 
power plants (boiling light water reactor = BWR) in a vast area 
of approximately 9.1 million square meters (Tokyo Electric Power 
has approximately 4.2 million square meters and Tohoku Electric 
Power, approximately 4.9 million square meters). Since this 
location was selected as a construction site at the invitation 
of locals, Aomori Prefecture took charge of land acquisition 
work with both electric power companies cooperating with the 
prefecture. Although most of land purchase was completed in 
1977, the companies ran into one difficulty after another during 
the course of negotiations with the local fishery industry over 
the matter of compensation. Finally at the end of August 1992, 
an agreement was reached on the compensatory payments to both 
Shiranuka and Odanozawa Fishermen's Cooperative Associations, 
both of which own the fishing right at the frontal sea zone. 
  Subsequently, in June 1993, negotiations on compensation to 
be paid to [Shiriro] and Sarugamori Fishermen's Cooperative 
Associations located in the surrounding area were concluded. 
Once those with the remaining Oibekawa [uchimen] and Kashi 
Fishermen's Cooperative Associations have been concluded, the 
construction plan most likely will have smooth sailing from 
there on. ``Finally, 28 years after the village assembly passed 
the resolution to invite the companies to this region, we have 
the prospect of seeing the preparation for plant construction 
sites begin.'' (Shinnosuke Ohi, head of Higashidori Nuclear 
Power Plant Preparation Office, Tohoku Electric Power). 
  During the first phase, plans call for construction of two 
1.1 million kW capacity reactors by each company. The packaged 
proposal submitted to the Electric Power Development 
Coordination Council shows construction of four reactors on the 
agenda in March 1995. Construction of No.1 reactor will be 
undertaken by each company in 1998. Both companies are planning 
their No. 1 reactors to begin operating by the year 2004. In 
terms of the availability of construction site, this location 
has enough space to accommodate as many as twenty 1 million kW 
reactors. 
  In order to submit a proposal to the Electric Power 
Development Coordination Council, a company involved first must 
obtain agreement from a local community, conduct an 
environmental survey, and complete the first open hearing. When 
the acquisition of a building lot almost has been completed and 
the matter of fishing right ironed out, then a company is said 
to be ready to submit a proposal to the Electric Power 
Development Coordination Council. Of these factors involved, the 
concept of fishing right is quite alien to foreign countries. 
Although it has been recognized from the standpoint of a custom 
in Japan, enactment of Fisheries Act in 1949 (put into effect in 
March 1950) made it a legal right, thereby providing fishermen 
with legal protection. It turned out that this became the 
biggest bottleneck in developing sites of electric energy source. 
  Like most other plans of a similar type, the Electric Source 
Development Co.'s plan to construct a nuclear power plant in 
Ohmamachi, currently in progress, is facing difficulties. The 
nuclear reactor which will be used at Ohma location is a 
validation reactor (6.6 million kW capacity) of the advanced 
thermal reactor (ATR) developed by PNC using domestic 
technology. This is the first nuclear reactor the company has 
developed. The amount of compensation offered by the company in 
September 1992 became a turning point, almost sixteen years 
after the town's Chamber of Commerce and Industry made a move to 
invite the company to the region (in 1976). 
  The amount of compensatory payment offered by the company to 
the local Ohma and Okudo Fishing Cooperatives was &yen;8 
billion, to which &yen;3 billion was added to fund 
revitalization of the local fishery industry, which makes the 
amount of total payment &yen;11 billion. It is unprecedented 
that such a huge sum is offered to compensate fishermen in order 
that a utility company can proceed with the construction of one 
nuclear reactor in the region. In addition, the company is 
offering a complete cooperation to the local government, 
demonstrating how a power plant and a community can work 
together for the benefit of both. At the same time, the local 
government, doing its part, will announce a 10-year development 
plans for the region and fishery industry. A total of &yen;28.4 
billion will be spent on the project. This is the first time 
that the packaging of a development by involving both parties 
has been attempted in Japan. 
  However, with respect to compensatory payments, the amounts 
paid to Ohma-machi and Okudo Fisheries Cooperative Associations 
by Electric Source Development Co. were less than those received 
by Higashidori Fisheries Cooperative when calculated in terms of 
a simple average per member payment. Moreover, the amounts paid 
to Ohma-machi and Okudo Fisheries Cooperative Associations were 
not identical. As a result, many dissatisfied members have 
chosen to block a cooperative's general meeting which would 
decide the fate of the project. In order to break the deadlock, 
both cooperatives requested the town authorities to act as an 
intermediary when they request Electric Source Development Co. 
to increase the amounts of compensation payments. The town 
authorities, in turn, asked the prefecture to act as an 
intermediary, and with this development, the negotiations will 
now enter a new phase. 
  The company already has acquired over 90% of a 
building lot. 
In fact, the company itself intends to respond favorably to the 
cooperative's request, as stated by Tadao Miyamoto, Executive 
Director in charge of Ohma Construction Site Headquarters, 
Nuclear Power Development Headquarters, ``we want to have our 
proposal ready for submission to the Electric Power Development 
Coordination Council so that it can be placed on the agenda 
before the end of this year.'' 
<H5>  Interview with Mr. Hiroyasu Kanazawa, Mayor of Ohma-machi </H5>
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN: Your reason for inviting 
Electric Source Development Co. to construct a nuclear power 
plant in Ohma-machi and what thus far has taken place? 
  Kanazawa: As a part of regional development plans, 
we wanted to invite a company to establish business here. 
Unfortunately, because our infrastructure, such as roads and 
waterworks, was not up to the standard, we had not been 
successful. We decided then that the appropriate course of 
action would be to invite a large utility company to set up a 
power plant here. Following the adoption of a petition filed in 
1976 with the town assembly, requesting for an environmental 
survey, the town's chamber of commerce and industry in May 1978 
requested Electric Source Development Co. to conduct a land 
survey to determine whether our town could be used to construct 
a power plant. At the end of 1984, the town assembly voted in 
favor of having the company set up a nuclear power plant. 
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN: Why have you selected the 
nuclear power industry? 
  Kanazawa: Basically, we wanted to bring into the 
region the state of the art science and do what is best for our 
town, something which really can contribute to regional 
revitalization. Also, we wanted a reputable company to come in 
with a big-scale project. That is why we asked Electric Power 
Development Co., a company closely connected with our region 
through its work in the construction of Hokkaido-Honshu linked 
power transmission lines. 
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN: Both here and abroad, it 
increasingly is becoming difficult to acquire nuclear power 
plant construction sites. 
  Nakazawa: There is not a single case of physical 
injury sustained at nuclear power plants in Japan. This supports 
the high scientific standard achieved by the Japanese nuclear 
power industry--the reason why we have a complete trust in 
Electric Power Development Co. We made a point of inspecting 
pilot sites and found this to be the best method of gathering 
vital information. At the same time, we attended a number of 
lectures and study sessions. Because we spent time and effort to 
make ourselves well informed on the fact of nuclear power, the 
local residents, including those in the adjacent Sai and 
Kazemaura Villages, stopped questioning the safety of nuclear 
power. The Shimokita Peninsula will become one of the foremost 
nuclear power bases in Japan. We very much wish to utilize this 
opportunity as a braking mechanism--a device to be used in 
halting the regional depopulation trend while, at the same time, 
creating jobs and working toward achieving higher earnings for 
the residents, as well as their well being. 
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN: In September 1992, when the 
town authorities announced the amounts of compensation payments 
offered to local fisheries cooperatives by Electric Power 
Development Company, didn't they also reveal their plans for 
revitalization of fishing industry and the region? 
  Kanazawa: In order to achieve an amicable 
settlement, we presented fisheries and regional development 
plans to be packaged with compensation payments Electric Power 
Development Co. offered to the fisheries cooperatives. The 
company, in total agreement with our approach, is formulating a 
policy of cooperation with us. It appears that Electric Power 
Development Co. also is working hard at the development of 
[three other towns and villages] to achieve a regional symbiotic 
type power plants. We are very grateful for their efforts. I 
have no special requests to make of Electric Power Development 
Co., the country, or the prefecture. 
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN: By the way, the problem of 
compensation to the fisheries cooperatives still is far from 
being resolved, isn't it? Do you expect it to be solved any time 
soon? 
  Kanazawa: Although the fisheries cooperatives want 
the construction to begin as soon as possible, they were not 
happy with the figures presented to them. So they approached us, 
requesting that we act as an intermediary in negotiating for 
more money. We, in turn, asked the prefecture to mediate. Since 
Electric Power Development Co. expressed its willingness to 
offer more money, we hope that the matter will be settled soon. 
Decline in coastal fishery, including that of kelp, is 
accelerating the pace of economic downward trend in our region, 
which in turn drives our young workers to leave the region, 
seeking employment elsewhere. This has been creating a serious 
problem of shortage of successors. That is why we want to start 
working on fishery (improving coastal fishery) and regional 
development as soon as possible. 

