BFN 

<F P=106> [CHINA DAILY Commentary: "Environmental Defence"] </F>
  [Text] Tomorrow (June 5) is World Environment Day. It is 
a day aimed at increasing people's awareness about the 
importance of environmental protection around the globe. 
  China, with its vast territory and large population, has a 
duty to keep the air fresh and water clean in this part of the 
world. 
  Back in 1973, China convened its first national conference 
on 
environmental defence. In the early 1980s, environmental 
protection was made a basic concern of the State. Since then 
China has paid close attention to environmental protection while 
developing its economy. 
  Over the last 12 years the economy has grown rapidly yet its 
environment has not deteriorated. This has brought great 
benefits to the people. 
  Realizing the importance of a concerted effort in the battle 
to protect the environment, China has forged close relations 
with relevant world bodies. 
  In response to the call of the Earth Summit, held in Rio de 
Janeiro in 1992, China published a white paper earlier this year 
entitled: "Population, Environment and Development in the 21st 
Century." Dubbed "Agenda 21," the proposal lists 63 projects, 
including the cleaning of smokestacks, saving farm land from 
soil erosion, protecting endangered species, and the development 
of sustainable oil reserves. 
  In February, China endorsed three international resolutions 
banning the disposal of radioactive and industrial wastes at sea. 
  Laws and regulations have been adopted, creating a legal 
framework for environmental protection. 
  The Chinese Government has vowed to further strengthen 
legislation and increase investment in this regard to help bring 
about sustained economic development. 
  Spending on environmental protection is to be raised from 
the 
current 0.7 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP), or 20 
billion yuan ($2.3 billion), to 1 percent of GDP by the year 
2000. 
  Like other developing countries, China still has a long way 
to go before radically improving its environment. 
  Despite efforts made, factories in China are discharging 
6.85 
million tons of sulphur dioxide annually, the second highest 
amount in the world. Six billion tons of solid waste are piled 
up across the country and soil erosion caused by the misuse of 
land affects almost 20,000 square kilometres a year. 
  Because many people continue to be indifferent to 
environmental defence, laws and regulations are often not 
implemented and in some cases simply ignored by some local 
authorities. This is one of the main problems faced by those 
carrying out China's environmental protection work. 
  A tightening-up of the issue is needed. Enterprises which 
actively treat their pollutants should be commended while those 
who refuse to do anything about it should have their operations 
shut down and their management fined. 
  In its bid to protect the environment, China has received 
foreign help. In the past decade, the World Bank, the Asia 
Development Bank, and global environmental foundations have 
provided over $1 billion in grants or low-interest loans to 
finance China's environmental protection projects. 
  Such help is much appreciated. 
  As envisaged by "Agenda 21," industrial pollution in China 
will be completely controlled by the year 2000. Such an 
achievement will be an important contribution to the world. And 
China will not relax until it has succeeded in its task. 

