93) pp 7, 81-84, 133- 138--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 947F0047B </F>
<F P=104>  Minsk CHERNOBYLSKAYA KATASTROFA: PRICHINY I 
POSLEDSTVIYA </F>

 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Table of Contents, Conclusion, General Findings and </F>
References from book Chernobylskaya Katastrofa: Prichiny I 
Posledstviya (Ekspertnoye Zaklyucheniye). V Chetyrekh Chastyakh. 
Chast II. Mediko- Biologicheskiye i Geneticheskiye Posledstviya 
Chernobylskoy Katastrofy (The Chernobyl Disaster: Causes and 
Consequences [Expert Conclusion]. In Four Parts. Part II. 
Medical-Biological and Genetic Consequences of Chernobyl 
Disaster), Minsk, Test, 1993, 3100 copies, 137 pages; UDC 
621.311.25:621.039.586(477)] 
  [Text] Contents 
  Section 1. Concerning the Health of Persons Subjected to 
Irradiation as a Result of the Accident at Chernobyl Nuclear 
Electric Power Plant I. Introduction8 II. Analysis of 
Morbidity of Those Taking Part in Cleaning Up the Aftermath of 
the Chernobyl Disaster10 III. State of Health of Children 
Exposed to Radiation as a Result of the Accident at Chernobyl 
Nuclear Electric Power Plant54 IV. State of Health of 
Adult Population Residing on Territories Contaminated as a 
Result of the Accident at Chernobyl Nuclear Electric Power 
Plant54 V. Concerning Some Particulars of the Effect of 
Low-Intensity Irradiation (Concept of Damaging Action of Low 
Doses of Irradiation)69 VI. IAEA Experts Concerning 
Medical Consequences of Accident at Chernobyl Nuclear Electric 
Power Plant76 VII. Conclusion81 
  Section 2. Genetic Consequences of Accident at Chernobyl 
Nuclear Electric Power Plant I. Introduction85 II. 
Procedure of Estimating Genetic Risk of Human 
Irradiation86 III. Cytogenetic Examination of Populace 
Affected by Chernobyl Disaster96 IV. State of Health of 
Pregnant Women and Neonates Following Chernobyl 
Disaster116 V. IAEA Experts Concerning Genetic 
Consequences of Chernobyl Disaster127 VI. 
Conclusion130 General Findings133 References135 
  Conclusion 
  a. Concerning State of Health of Cleanup Crew 
  As a result of our radiation-epidemiological examination of 
those taking part in cleaning up the aftermath of the accident, 
estimates have been obtained for the dynamics of general somatic 
morbidity for 1987-1991. 
  A statistically reliable general increase in morbidity was 
found, as well as a dose-dependent increase in number of the 
following illnesses among cleanup personnel: 
  1. diseases of the nervous system; 2. mental disorders; 3. 
diseases of the blood and circulatory organs; 4. diseases of 
organs of digestion; 5. sympathovascular dystonia 
  The dose-effect curve for these illnesses is bimodal: 
indices 
of morbidity in the group exposed to a dose of less than 5 cGy 
show a statistically reliable difference from the frequency of 
illnesses for the group irradiated with a dose of more than 30 
cGy, suggesting that the increase in the number of these 
illnesses is associated with the fact of irradiation and those 
induced by it. Based on our study of medical aspects of the 
consequences of the accident at Chernobyl Nuclear Electric Power 
Plant, and data of examination of victims under conditions of 
the clinic of military-field therapy of S. M. Kirov Military 
Medical Academy, we can conclude that among persons taking part 
in cleaning up the aftermath of the accident at Chernobyl 
Nuclear Electric Power Plant, not only was there an increase in 
frequency of some disorders, but there was also found to be a 
unique evolution and course of pathological processes: 
  1. Presence of a variety of clinical-hematological disorders 
in the form of isolated or combined cytopenias. The degree and 
dynamics of these disorders differ among the studied contingents 
of victims: those taking part in cleanup of the aftermath of the 
accident in 1986-1987; residents evacuated from the 30-km zone 
during the first 7-10 days; residents remaining in radioactively 
contaminated localities. After five days, we continue to observe 
disorders of bone-marrow hemogenesis, including cellular 
differentiation. 
  2. Evolution and unusual course of illnesses of the 
gastroenteritic tract with manifestation of gastrointestinal 
syndrome during the early months following the accident, and 
atrophic erosive hypochlorhydric and achlorhydric gastritides, 
ulcers and stomach polyps. 
  3. Development of pathology of the cardiovascular system 
among a considerable number of victims. Rapid escalation of 
functional disorders into organic shifts is observed 
(neurocirculatory dystonia of various types into hypertonia and 
ischemia), early development of atherosclerotic shifts. 
  4. Occurrence of pathology of the orl-organs and organs of 
respiration from the first days of staying in the zone of the 
accident with subsequent development of atrophic processes of 
the mucous upper respiratory passages. 
  5. Occurrence of disorders of the central nervous system in 
the form of asthenic and vegetative manifestations among most of 
those taking part in cleanup of the aftermath of the accident. 
Subsequently there is a rapid progression of disturbances of 
marrow hemogenesis. In isolated cases, shifts of mental state 
are observed. 
  6. Skin disorders in the form of beta-dermatitides of the 
lower extremities and face. 
  The cause of these disorders was not only the effect of 
external beta and gamma radiation, but also incorporation of 
radionuclides and other harmful substances, which was confirmed 
by mass-spectrometric studies (presence of long-lived 
radionuclides: nuclear fuel fragments, boron, lanthanides and so 
on). 
  b. Concerning State of Health of Juvenile Population 
  The overall morbidity of children on 
radionuclide-contaminated territories increased until 1989. In 
the structure of morbidity, a leading place belongs to diseases 
of the respiratory organs, infectious and parasitic, diseases of 
the organs of digestion, the endocrine system, blood and 
hemogenic system (especially iron-deficiency anemias), and 
neuropsychiatric disorders. 
  All republics show an increase in the group of chronically 
ill children, especially with respiratory illnesses. Among 
children of the younger age group who were born to mothers 
pregnant at the time of the accident, the number of acute 
respiratory illnesses is doubled on average. 
  An increase is observed in the specific weight of kidney 
disorders in 1986-1990. There is an increase in frequency of 
abdominal pain, gastritis and dyspancreatism. There is an 
increase in the frequency of astheno-neurotic syndromes. 
  Children exposed to irradiation show high prevalence of 
functional deviations of the cardiovascular system, functional 
cardiopathies. Three fourths of children show sympathovascular 
dystonia, disturbances of sympathetic regulation, and so on. 
Children of preschool age receiving a high dose on the thyroid 
gland may be categorized in the cardiovascular pathology risk 
group. 
  Large shifts are observed in the frequency and severity of 
endocrinological disorders. Aggravation of the course of endemic 
diseases is noted: doubling of the growth of goiter, an increase 
in the number of children suffering from thyrotoxicosis. There 
is an increase in prevalence of hyperplasia of the thyroid 
gland, especially among children exposed to irradiation at the 
age of 1-3 years (three times as often as among other groups). 
Studies of hormonal status indicate the highest degree of 
radiation illness of the thyroid gland for children aged younger 
than three years. 
  There was an increase, especially in Belarus, in the number 
of children with cancer of the thyroid gland; for example, 51 
cases were diagnosed in 1990-1991, of which 29 were children 
from Gomelskaya Oblast. The data of analyses were verified not 
only in the Soviet Union, but also in special clinics of Germany 
and other nations. 
  A study of the immune state showed some reduction of 
cellular 
and humoral immunity, especially among children of women who 
became pregnant three months after the accident. This group of 
children is characterized by an increased number of anomalies of 
development. 
  On territories contaminated by radionuclides there are signs 
of an altered course as compared with the usual for some 
illnesses: bronchopulmonary pathologies and allergic disorders. 
Pneumonia among children shows a tendency toward a more severe 
and protracted course, and less sensitivity to antibiotics. 
  All children living on territories with elevated radiation 
background may be categorized in the group of risk with respect 
to development of unusual post-vaccination complications. 
  Thus, most significant is the change of the symptom complex 
in illnesses of children, and a more severe course of illnesses 
with greater difficulty of treatment. 
  These shifts are similar on radionuclide-contaminated 
territories in Russia, Belarus and Ukraine, and give evidence 
that the Chernobyl accident has impacted on the health of 
children. 
  c. Concerning the State of Health of the Populace 
  Examination of the population of radionuclide-contaminated 
territories of Belarus, Ukraine and Russia revealed a 
significant growth in frequency of some diseases (both absolute 
and relative). This applies to illnesses of the blood and 
hemogenic organs, endocrine disorders, diseases of the 
gastroenteritic tract and urogenital system, neural and mental 
disorders. Illnesses assume a more severe and protracted nature, 
and are more difficult to treat. An increase is observed in the 
number of malignant tumors, especially cancerous diseases of the 
thyroid gland. 
  In Gomelskaya, Mogilevskaya and Bryanskaya oblasts, a 
special 
epidemiological examination revealed a statistically significant 
increase in the incidence of leukemia and other hemoblastoses in 
older age groups in 1988-1989 (mainly with chronic course). 
  Examination of the population of radionuclide-contaminated 
territories of Belarus, Ukraine and Russia revealed a 
significant growth in frequency of some diseases (both absolute 
and relative). This applies to illnesses of the blood, diabetes 
for Bryanskaya Oblast, neuropsychiatric disorders, diabetes, 
chronic lympholeucosis for Gomelskaya and Mogilevskaya oblasts, 
cardiovascular and neuropsychiatric disorders for Ukraine, 
cancer of the thyroid gland for Belarus. 
  Thus, the results of examination of the cleanup crew and of 
the juvenile and adult population residing on contaminated 
territories have shown the detrimental impact of the Chelyabinsk 
accident on state of health. 
  General Findings 
  1. After analyzing the materials of various medical 
institutions, statistical data of the Ministries of Public 
Health of Belarus, Russia and Ukraine, USSR and republic 
registries, it can be stated that the Chernobyl accident has had 
a detrimental impact on the state of health of the population 
residing on radionuclide-contaminated territories and of those 
taking part in cleanup of the aftermath of the accident. In all 
cases, an increase is observed in general morbidity, and in some 
cases in relative morbidity, a reduction in the number of people 
acknowledged as healthy, intensification of severity of 
illnesses and extension of its duration, and less sensitivity of 
disease to the action of medication. There is an increase in the 
number of diseases of the blood and hemogenic organs, 
endocrinological diseases, diseases of the gastroenteritic tract 
and urogenital system, nervous and mental disorders. For many 
cases, it is found that the number and severity of diseases 
depend on the dose of irradiation. There is an increase in the 
total number of oncological patients due to an increase in the 
number of cancerous diseases of the thyroid gland, 
lympholeucoses, and non- Hodgkin's lymphomas. 
  2. Persons taking part in cleanup of the aftermath of the 
accident and residents of radionuclide-contaminated regions show 
elevation by several times in the level of aberrations of 
chromosomes in lymphocytes of the peripheral blood that is 
uniquely related to irradiation dose and dose rate. A tendency 
is noted toward an increase in the level of aberrations of 
chromosomes in time among children permanently residing on 
territories with an elevated level of radiation. An elevated 
level of aberrations of chromosomes in lymphocytes of the 
peripheral blood is evidence of real genetic injury of cells of 
the human organism due to the Chernobyl disaster. 
  In regions most contaminated with radionuclides, an increase 
is observed in intrauterine losses during pregnancy, most of 
which have genetic etiology. 
  A statistically significant increase is observed in the 
frequency of congenital anomalies in close follow-up in regions 
most highly contaminated with radionuclides as compared with the 
period prior to the accident. This is also a consequence of 
injury of genetic material among persons residing in regions hit 
by the Chernobyl disaster. 
  A considerable fraction of the genetic damage due to the 
Chernobyl disaster is anticipated among the progeny of 
irradiated parents in the form of multifactor hereditary 
diseases that show up throughout a person's lifetime, chiefly 
during middle and advanced age. 
REFERENCES 
  1. Burlakova, Ye. B., text of report at Sakharov Lectures, 
1991. 
  2. Dubinin, N. P., ``Genetic Risk of Ionizing Radiation,'' 
DOKLADY AKADEMII NAUK, Vol 314, No 6, 1990, pp 1491-1494. 
  3. Dubinin, N. P., Arsenyeva, M. A., Glembotskiy, Ya. L. et 
al., ``Genetic Effect of Small Doses of Ionizing Radiation'' in: 
``Materialy Tretyey Mezhdunarodnoy konferentsii OON po 
ispolzovanii atomnoy radiatsii v mirnykh tselyakh'' [Materials 
of Third International UN Conference on Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Radiation], Geneva, 1964. 
  4. Kosenko, M. M., Izhevskiy, P. V. et al., ``State of 
Progeny of Population Exposed to Irradiation in Consequence of 
Discharges of Radioactive Wastes Into Tech River in Southern 
Urals,'' MEDITSINSKAYA RADIATSIYA, No 1, 1992, pp 51-53. 
  5. ``International Chernobyl Project, General Overview'' in: 
``Informatsionnyy byulleten, Radiobiologicheskoye Obshchestvo 
SSSR'' [Information Bulletin, Radiobiological Society of the 
USSR], No 4, Pushchino, 1991, pp 3-76. 
  6. Shevchenko, V. A., ``Assessment of Genetic Consequences 
of 
Irradiation of Man in Connection With the Accident at Chernobyl 
Nuclear Electric Power Plant'' in: ``Problemy bezopasnosti pri 
chrezvychaynykh situatsiyakh'' [Problems of Safety in 
Extraordinary Situations], No 12, Moscow, 1990, pp 54-58. 
  7. Shevchenko, V. A., Akayeva, E. A., Yeliseyeva, I. M., 
Yelisova, T. V., Iofa, E. L., Nilova, I. N., Rubanovich, A. V., 
Semov, A. B., ``Using Method of Biological Radiation Monitoring 
Under Conditions of Accident at Chernobyl Nuclear Electric Power 
Plant'' in: ``Problemy bezopasnosti pri chrezvychaynykh 
situatsiyakh,'' No 12, Moscow, 1990, pp 64-90. 
  8. Shevchenko, V. A., Pechkurenkov, V. L., Abramov, V. I. et 
al., ``Study of Genetic Effects Initiated in Populations by 
Radioactive Products of Nuclear Fission of U-235. Report II. 
Forecast of Genetic Effectiveness of Irradiation at Low Dose 
Rates,'' GENETIKA, Vol 14, No 4, 1978, p 622. 
  9. Abramov, V. I., Fedorenko, O. M., Shevchenko, V. A., 
``Genetic Consequences of Radioactive Contamination for 
Populations of Arabidopsis,'' THE SCIENCE OF THE TOTAL 
ENVIRONMENT, 112 (1992), pp 19- 29. 
  10. Allan S. Krass, ``Consequences of Chernobyl Accident,'' 
Working Paper of Institute for Resource and Security Studies, 
December 1991, p 38. 
  11. ``BEIR Report. The Effects on Populations of Exposure to 
Low Levels of Radiation,'' National Academy of Sciences. 
National Research Council. Washington, D.C., 1980. 
  12. Cook-Mozaffari, P. J., Darby, S. C., Doll, R. et al., 
``Geographical Variation in Mortality From Leukaemia and Other 
Cancers in England and Wales in Relation to Proximity to Nuclear 
Installations, 1969-1978,'' BR. J. CANCER, Vol 59, 1989, pp 
476-485. 
  13. Evans, J. S., Moeller, D. W., Cooper, D. W., ``Health 
Effects. Model for Nuclear Power Plant Accident Analyses,'' 
NUREG/CR, 4241, 1985. 
  14. Gardner, M. J., Hall, A. J. et al., ``Follow-Up Study of 
Children Born to Mothers Resident in Seascale, West Cambria 
(Birth Cohort)'', B. MED. J., Vol 295, 1987, pp 822-827. 
  15. Gardner, M. J., Snee, M. P. et al., ``Results of 
Case-Control Study of Leukemia and Lymphoma Among Young People 
Near Sellafield Nuclear Plant in West Cambria,'' BR. MED. J., 
Vol 300, 1990, pp 423-429. 
  16. Graeub, R., ``The Petkau Effect. Nuclear Radiation, 
People and Trees. Four Walls Eight Windows,'' New York 1992, p 
232. 
  17. Petkau, A., ``Radiation Effects With a Model Lipid 
Membrane,'' CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMISTRY, Vol 49, 1971, pp 
1187-1196. 
  18. Pohl-Rulin, J., Haas, O. et al., ``The Effect on 
Lymphocyte Chromosomes of Additional Radiation Burden Due to 
Fallout in Salzburg (Austria) From the Chernobyl Accident,'' 
MUT. RES., Vol 262, 12991, pp 209-217. 
  19. Stephan, G., Oestreicher, U., ``An Increased Frequency 
of 
Structural Chromosome Aberrations in Persons Present in the 
Vicinity of Chernobyl During and After the Reactor Accident. Is 
This Effect Caused by Radiation Exposure?,'' MUT. RES., Vol 223, 
1989, pp 7-12. 
  20. ``The International Chernobyl Project: (STJ/Pub/884; 
STJ/Pub/885; STJ/Pub/894),'' Vienna, 1991. 
  21. Ujeno, Y., ``Carcinogenic Hazard From Natural Background 
Radiation in Japan,'' J. RAD. RES., Vol 19, 1978, pp 205-212. 
  22. ``United Nations. Ionizing Radiation: Sources and 
Biological Effects. United Nations Scientific Committee on the 
Effects of Atomic Radiation, 1982, Report to the General 
Assembly, with annexes,'' United Nations sales publication 
E.82.IX.8, United Nations, New York, 1982. 
  23. ``United Nations. Genetic and Somatic Effects of 
Ionizing 
Radiation. United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of 
Atomic Radiation, 1986, Report to the General Assembly, with 
annexes,'' United Nations sales publication E.86.IX.9, United 
Nations, New York, 1986. 
  24. ``United Nations. Sources, Effects and Risk of Ionizing 
Radiation. United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of 
Atomic Radiation, 1988, Report to the General Assembly, with 
annexes,'' United Nations, New York, 1988. 
  The following were used in preparing the report: 
  materials of statistic reports of 1986-1991, USSR Ministry 
of 
Public Health and Ministries of Public Health of Republics (CIS 
nations); materials prepared by USSR, UkSSR, BSSR and RSFSR 
Ministries of Public Health on the state of health of victims of 
the accident at Chernobyl Nuclear Electric Power Plant in 
1986-1990 requested by the Commission of the Supreme Soviet of 
the USSR; 
  materials of all Soviet, Republic (CIS nations), regional 
and 
International (held on territory of CIS nations) conferences and 
symposiums devoted to problems of the Chernobyl disaster, 
1987-1992, reports of Institutes, including: 
  Scientific Research Institute of Maternity and Childhood, 
Belarus Ministry of Public Health; Scientific Research Institute 
of Congenital and Hereditary Pathology, Belarus Ministry of 
Public Health; Belarus Scientific Research Institute of Oncology 
and Medical Radiology; Institute of Radiobiology of Belarus; 
Scientific Research Institute of Radiation Medicine of Ukraine; 
Medical Institute, Ministry of Public Health of Armenia; Moscow 
Scientific Research Institute of Diagnostics and Surgery, RF 
Ministry of Public Health; Gamaley Memorial Institute of 
Epidemiology and Microbiology; 
  materials of First All-Union Congress of Radiobiologists; 
  materials of volumes 1, 3 and 4 of book ``Chernobyl 
Disaster: 
Causes and Consequences''; 
  materials presented in report by A. F. Tsyb, V. K. Ivanov, 
S. 
A. Ayrpetov et al., ``Radiation-Epidemiological Analysis of Data 
of State Registry of Persons Exposed to Radiation as a Result of 
the Accident at Chernobyl Nuclear Electric Power Plant''; 
  text of letter addressed to UN Secretary-General sent by 
USSR 
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and representatives of BSSR, 
RSFSR and UkSSR on 9 July 1990. 
  materials of ``Resolution of Board of USSR Ministry of 
Public 
Health'' dating from 10 April 1991 ``On the Course of State 
Programs Carried Out by the USSR Ministry of Public Health, the 
USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, and the Ministries of Public 
Health of RSFSR, UkSSR and BSSR on Alleviating Medical 
Consequences of the Accident at Chernobyl Nuclear Electric Power 
Plant, and Supplementary Measures to Implement Them''; 
  materials published by officials in the public and special 
press (e.g. by Minister of Public Health of Russia A. I. 
Vorobyev, MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI, No 33, 18 August 1991; Chairman 
of USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology Yu. A. Izrael, 
PRAVDA, No 100, 26 April 1991); 
  available monographs dealing with problems of Chernobyl, 
including those by Dzh. Medvedev, G. Hofman, reports of IAEA, 
UNSCEARRERF, ICR, and so on; 
  results of observations and research by the authors of the 
report. 

