BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Winfried Muenster: "A High Price for Harmony </F>
With Brussels"] 
  [Text] Brussels, 5 Jun -- Current Dutch Prime Minister 
Ruud Lubbers taking the presidential chair of the European 
Commission would agree with Germany's economic policy interests 
in the European Union [EU], but it would not fit in with 
France's interests. Therefore, Chancellor Helmut Kohl may once 
again have committed himself to his most important partner when 
he agreed with French President Francois Mitterrand to Belgian 
head of government Jean-Luc Dehaene as EU chief. This time, 
however, he is not just paying the usual economic price for the 
unbroken German-French harmony. He is also harming his 
country's other interests in European policy and he is even 
harming European integration. 
  In the Netherlands, citizens of every political color and 
interest now feel offended. As a small member country they see 
themselves constantly pushed aside by the "big ones" anyway. 
This time they see themselves particularly neglected by the 
Germans, on whom they depend economically. Therefore, they 
would rather deserve polite political attention. Certainly, the 
Dutch were rude in the process of German reunification. 
However, if the chancellor had used the opportunity to say: 
"Let us forget that. They want to provide their undisputed 
best man to Europe, and therefore we are taking him," he would 
have put them to shame and could have made great profit for the 
good-neighborly relations. Instead, one is now gathering 
negative points in the bilateral relations and for the entire 
EU, because the distrust that the small member states, above all 
the Netherlands, have for the "Bonn-Paris" axis can only grow, 
as Lubbers openly admits. 
  The Dutch have been thinking for quite some time and 
increasingly loudly about the value they are supposed to give to 
a community in which, as they can see, things are done more in 
line with the German-French tune than in line with common 
discussions and decisions. Thanks to the French power of 
prevailing, this community is, in addition, developing in a way 
that the Dutch do not like at all: bureaucratically and 
centralistically. In addition, just to strengthen German-French 
harmony by a hardly measurable quantity, the chancellor caused 
problems for British Prime Minister John Major. Since the 
Englishman, in contrast to Kohl, honors the economic policy 
harmony with Lubbers, he supports him. London's diplomats in 
Brussels unanimously predict that, because of his constant 
struggle with the "Eurorebels" in his own party, he cannot 
afford to give in to the French and the Germans. Thus, the 
forthcoming EU summit is threatened with a public display. 
Jacques Delors' successor is to be elected unanimously at this 
summit. The heads of government had promised that he will come 
from their own ranks. Now, against all expectations, they have 
two candidates and, promptly, they cannot agree on one? This 
would be an unprecedented embarrassment. In Brussels there are 
already bets that this embarrassment will lead to a compromise 
candidate, who will not come from among the persons attending 
the summit -- for instance, Peter Sutherland, the current GATT 
secretary general, a former commissioner in Brussels, and an 
Irishman. 
  In Brussels it is being assumed that the chancellor prefers 
Dehaene, because he finds Lubbers too difficult and independent. 
The Belgian would be better at running on the long leash of the 
chiefs in Bonn and Paris. If this is true, the European Kohl 
would have unmasked himself. Lubbers as head of the Brussels 
Commission would doubtlessly give a new value to the Commission. 
It is conceived as the motive force of European unification. 
However, the Dutchman's strength would probably be too much for 
the chancellor. 
  Not least, also in politics, much is a question of style. In 
the race for the European central bank, the Dutch were defeated 
by the Germans. Kohl could now have paid them back. This was 
all the more advisable since the Netherlands is the only 
founding member of the European Community that has not yet been 
permitted to provide a full-time president. 

