BFN 

<F P=106> [By Annie Thomas] </F>
  [Excerpts] Nairobi, May 16 (AFP) -- Rwandan rebels sealed 
the road from the embattled capital Kigali to Gitarama, where 
the government fled last month as ethnic carnage engulfed the 
country, a UN official said Monday [16 May]. 
  The army denied that their foes had seized control of a 
stretch of the road from Kigali to Gitarama, 40 kilometres (25 
miles) to the southwest. But Abdul Kabia, executive director of 
the UN Assistance Mission in Rwanda, said the rebel Rwanda 
Patriotic Front (RPF) had cut the road as they tightened their 
grip on Kigali, which they have sealed off on three sides. 
Kabia said government forces now controlled only the western 
part of Kigali and the rebels were trying to sever their supply 
lines. 
  The RPF, dominated by the minority Tutsi tribe that has 
borne 
the brunt of six weeks of bloodletting in which 200,000 people 
have been butchered, claimed responsibility Monday for shooting 
at an army-escorted convoy carrying former French humanitarian 
minister Bernard Kouchner on a mercy mission. [passage omitted 
covered in referent items] 
  Kouchner left Rwanda on Monday after spending five days 
trying to persuade both sides to allow civilians trapped in the 
capital and still being massacred by death squads to leave via 
"humanitarian safe corridors" which he wants the army and rebels 
to keep free from fighting. 
  Kouchner was still trying to secure an agreement to begin 
evacuating civilians Monday, but UN sources said his mission 
could still produce results. 
  Sporadic firefights broke out in different areas of Kigali 
on 
Monday as rain lashed the surrounding hills, once green with 
banana trees but now brown and barren, stripped by hungry 
displaced people. It was a relatively quiet day after 10 days of 
fierce artillery duels, said UN spokesman Moctar Gueye, who was 
slightly hurt when bullet fragments struck his face during the 
attack on Kouchner's convoy. "Everyone's waiting," Gueye said. 
  The UN has protested to the rebels over the shooting, and 
has 
also complained to the army over its failure "to ensure the 
security" of Kouchner. 
  The UN Security Council is preparing to approve 
Secretary-General Butrus Butrus-Ghali's call for the UN force in 
Rwanda to be increased to 5,500, according to reports from New 
York. [passage omitted] 
  French officials said several African countries including 
Tanzania, Ghana and Nigeria were willing to contribute troops to 
a strengthened UN force. 
  Eleven UN peacekeepers have been killed in the past six 
weeks 
in Rwanda, 10 of them Belgian soldiers allegedly murdered by the 
presidential guard. 
  Most of the 200,000 Rwandans butchered with machetes or 
clubbed to death with wooden stakes were Tutsis or opposition 
supporters from the majority Hutu tribe. 

