BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 26 May (MTI) -- The Social Democrats have 
a program that offers an alternative to Central and Eastern 
Europe, struggling with the difficulties of transformation. 
Accordingly, Socialist International intends to devote greater 
attention to the region in the future, and it has already 
created successful cooperation with the two Hungarian 
member-groups of the organization, the Hungarian Socialist Party 
(MSZP) and the Social Democratic Party of Hungary. The above 
was stressed by Socialist International (SI) General Secretary 
Luis Ayala at the closing press conference of the organization's 
Central and Eastern European Committee session held in Budapest 
on Thursday [26 May]. The conference was attended by 
representatives of 30 parties. 
  The co-chairman of the committee, Piero Fassino, said that 
the Socialist International Council will hold its next general 
assembly in Budapest in October or November. 
  In answer to a question from the press, the MSZP executive 
in 
charge of foreign affairs, Laszlo Kovacs, said his party does 
not wish to change the priorities of Hungarian foreign policy. 
However, it does wish to devote equal attention to western 
integration, relations with Hungary's neighbors, and enforcing 
the rights of Hungarians living beyond the borders. 
  Kovacs said a pressing task of Hungarian foreign policy is 
reconciliation with the country's neighbors. If the MSZP is 
elected to run the next government, it would focus on empathy 
and initiating readiness to open discussion, rather than 
exerting pressure on the neighbors and exercising attempts at 
slowing down their European integration. 
  The politician also said that the socialists do not consider 
signing basic agreements with neighbors as a goal, but rather as 
a means. They expect these agreements to intensify stability, 
build confidence, and improve the situation of the minorities. 
Basic agreements that include confirmation of borders and 
enforcement of minority rights do not contradict Hungarian 
interests, and this would serve the stability of the region, he 
said. 

