CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Kucherenko: "How Does Russia Trade in </F>
Weapons?"] 
  [Text] There is probably no area that's a 
greater mystery to the layman than this. We all wholeheartedly 
believe that Russia and its powerful military-industrial complex 
are capable of conquering world markets, putting an end to the 
shameful dependence upon raw material exports. But should we 
console ourselves with illusions? 
<H5>  Weapon Exports Comparable to Chocolate Imports </H5>
  By October of last year a large group of experts from the 
Council of Ministers, the Central Bank, the Ministry of Security 
and the Interdepartmental Commission to Combat Corruption ended 
their inspection of the manner in which our foreign trade 
organizations are selling arms beyond the border. And at the 
same time, the manner in which orders of the president and 
government of the Russian Federation are being fulfilled. 
  As it turns out, the latter have been ignored. Trade in 
weapons and combat equipment proceeded unsupervised, as a result 
of which there was "significant political and economic damage to 
the state interests of Russia and, most importantly, its 
taxpayers." 
  The dramatic changes in policy and military doctrine that 
occurred since 1990, the collapse of the Warsaw Pact and the 
USSR, and the money reforms rended military-technical 
cooperation with 30 countries. In comparison with 1991, arms 
exports fell by a factor of three in 1992, to $2.3 billion. In 
1993 this indicator was barely over 2 billion. A figure close to 
that of exports of Mars and Snickers bars to Russia last year. 
In the opinion of the inspectors, under these conditions the 
leadership of the MVES [Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations] 
was unable to enter the new world markets and sell the 
accumulated reserves of defense goods. 
  From press files: "In 1993 the USA's share in exports 
of arms and military equipment to developing countries reached 
57 percent. Russia's was 5.5 percent."--KOMMERSANT WEEKLY, 8 
March 1994. 
  In the meantime, the work of Spetsvneshtekhnika and 
Oboroneksport--organizations subordinated to the MVES--was not 
subjected to any coordination. Unlawful acts were committed with 
the complicity of executives of the Ministry of Foreign Economic 
Relations, the then Vice-Prime Minister G. Khizha and his staff, 
and former executives of Spetsvneshtekhnika and 
Oboroneksport--S. Krasnov and S. Karaoglanov. 
<H5>  Even Though the Arsenals Were Stuffed Full </H5>
  Krasnov and Karaoglanov proposed including manufacture of 
new 
lots of arms for export in the state defense order, even though 
the storage depots were stuffed full with the same weapons, and 
no contracts had been signed for their purchase. For example, 
Spetsvneshtekhnika and Oboroneksport ordered products amounting 
to $5.4 billion. This order was approved by a 17 March 1992 
decree of the Council of Ministers, signed by Gaydar. However, 
the military-industrial complex managed to produce only 3.1 
billion worth of the "articles," of which only 1.1 billion worth 
were delivered abroad. For practical purposes, the other $2 
billion were pulled out of the pockets of taxpayers and 
deposited in arsenals in the form of guns and tanks. The budget 
deficit was increased. The inspection noted in this case that 
the MVES never did pay the plants in full for their work. 
  Whatever happened to these 2 billion? Three hundred 
eighty-two T-72S and T-80U tanks, 194 MSTA-S and Giatsint 
self-propelled guns, 16 Uragan and Smerch multiple rocket 
launchers, 12 Tunguska self-propelled SAM launchers, and 16,000 
missiles of different types and classes--enough to create a 
reserve for a good army. Add to this that by that time, the 
balance sheet of the MVES's foreign trade associations showed 
half a billion dollars' worth of unexported armament. 
Oboroneksport alone had 50 tanks, 1,800 missiles, 10 ships, 6 
MiG-29s, small arms and ammunition, and spare parts for 
airplanes. At that moment ship builders were building four ships 
for export valued at $70 million on the basis of orders of 
merchants from the MVES, at the same time that six finished 
vessels of the same class were standing around with nothing to 
do. 
  Even though it was unable to sell off these reserves, 
Oboroneksport once again placed orders in 1993 for 8 Uragan 
systems and 20 Shturm-S antitank systems, unsupported by 
contracts signed with buyers. 
  The inspectors reached the following conclusion: "In the 
last 
few years...the profit losses exceeded $2.6 billion." The amount 
lost was almost as much as had been promised to us by the G7 in 
support of the "radical reforms." As much as the price of 20 
million tonnes of oil. The conversion program in Omsk Oblast is 
"sucking up" the equivalent of $200 million. And completion of 
the nuclear-powered vessel "Ural," which ground to a halt at the 
building dock, will take 8 billion rubles, or $5 million. 
<H5>  Azeri Rockets and Shturmoviki Sukhogo </H5>
  Besides these, there are also some other losses that are 
harder to reckon. Because cases were revealed in which weapons 
were manufactured "under the table," circumventing state defense 
orders, contrary to Decree No 517, 24 July 1992, of the 
Government of the Russian Federation. 
  Thus, in April 1992 air force commander P. Deynekin and 
then-First Deputy Minister of Industry V. Glukhikh (now the 
chief of the Roskomoboronprom [Russian State Committee for 
Defense Industry]) signed an agreement in Russia's behalf to 
produce 180 type Kh-29 air-to-ground missiles in Azerbaijan, 
allegedly on the basis of an order from the Ministry of Defense 
for Su-25 ground-attack aircraft. An order amounting to 153.4 
million of the old rubles was placed with the Iglim Association. 
This decision was illegal at least because Azerbaijan was not in 
the CIS at that time. Deynekin further violated the law "On 
Deliveries of Products and Goods for State Needs" by signing a 
decision on the basis of which manufacture of the Kh-29 was paid 
for not by the Ministry of Defense but by a certain small 
enterprise called Ekooptimum, which had no right to engage in 
such transactions. Moreover, there has been no demand for such 
missiles for several years already, which is why the Ministry of 
Defense had no plans for ordering them. 
  Iglim made them. Though not for our air forces, but for 
export. In this case Ekooptimum paid for a total of 10 units. 
By as early as February 1993 Deynekin and A. Bratukhin, the 
first deputy chairman of the Roskomoboronprom, once again signed 
a similar agreement with the Azeris, which was approved by the 
then-Vice Prime Minister G. Khizha. This time the object was 320 
Kh-29s for 312 million, and once again, in circumvention of the 
state defense order. In violation of the 27 March 1993 
presidential edict, deliveries of these missiles were later 
freed from payment of customs duties without a ruling by the 
Foreign Exchange and Economic Commission, the Ministry of 
Defense and the MVES. 
  Iglim managed to manufacture 175 missiles, which were then 
fitted out by over 40 Russian state-owned plants. Their 
ownership was then transferred to a limited partnership--the 
Shturmoviki Sukhogo Concern, headed by V. Babak. Obtaining 
financing from the budget, it was this concern that paid the 
Azeris for their work. It also signed an unlawful agreement with 
Iglim, also disadvantageous to Russia, to export the Kh-29s and 
divide the hard currency profits--60 percent to Azerbaijan and 
40 percent to the concern. But they were unable to sell any of 
the missiles, and the money diverted by Shturmoviki Sukhogo 
became frozen in these goods. 
<H5>  The Mechanics of Enrichment </H5>
  Yes, we did sell weapons abroad, but in all cases through 
middlemen. And the money that could have been gone to the 
hard-up military-industrial complex and budget wound up in the 
pockets of dubious dealers. 
  From the files of NOVAYA YEZHEDNEVNAYA GAZETA: "...The 
inspection established that in many cases foreign trade 
organizations of the Russian MVES sold arms and military 
equipment through Russian and foreign middlemen in violation of 
presidential edicts...No 507, 12 May 1992...and No 1621s, 24 
December 1992.... Some high-placed officials in a number of 
ministries and in the Government of the Russian Federation were 
unfortunately drawn into these unlawful actions.... Commercial 
organizations were enriched at the expense of state 
resources." 
  In October 1992 Spetsvneshtekhnika, which was headed by 
Major 
General V. Braylovskiy, sold the latest model of the T-80U tank, 
the Tunguska SAM launcher and other equipment worth $10.7 
million to the Liberian firm A. Bidner, Inc. with the support of 
Vice-Prime Minister Khizha, receiving $1.1 million in 
commissions for this. This equipment was to be subsequently 
delivered to England. What was it, we wonder, that kept 
Braylovskiy from selling the goods directly to the British, 
without giving the lion's share of the profits to a middleman? 
In this case Spetsvneshtekhnika siphoned off a considerable 
amount of money to the Russian Military-Industrial Association, 
supposedly to fund the search for a customer. Does this mean 
that the deal now involved two middlemen? To make matters worse, 
this association is a purely commercial venture, and it has no 
right to engage in military-technical cooperation. 
  On the other hand, Braylovskiy and Khizha violated Yeltsin's 
Edict No 1621, according to which export of the T-80U was to be 
strictly prohibited prior to 1993, while export of the Tunguska 
was not foreseen at all. 
  Here is another example. With the assistance of Glazyev, the 
head of the MVES, and that same Khizha, and jointly with our 
MiG-Servis firm, the Main Administration for Collaboration and 
Cooperation (GOSK), headed by V. Trofimov, who was subsequently 
dismissed from his position, sold aviation property and 
documentation (for the MiG-23 and MiG-29) to the 
Russian-Singaporean venture Remora Ltd. for a total of $5 
million. All of this was shipped to Angola. 
  As it turned out, MiG-Servis is a limited partnership 
established by the MiG Joint-Stock Scientific Production 
Complex, the GUSK and Spetsvneshtekhnika; it possesses a 
negligible amount of as yet unpaid authorized capital totaling 
R2 million. Moreover, because the GUSK and Spetsvneshtekhnika 
are state-owned organizations, what we have here is 
commercialization of the work of public officials--officials who 
enjoy a profit from something that they are supposed to do 
anyway by the nature of their work. 
  What is remarkable is that in selling goods to Remora, this 
firm was actually concluding a deal with itself. Because Remora 
is an offshore organization off the Isle of Man, 40 percent of 
which is owned by MiG-Servis. (The remaining 60 percent are 
owned by Singapore's CMI Impax.) 
  The inspection established that MiG-Servis appeared on many 
licenses and customs declarations as the manufacturer and 
shipper of the fighters, which did not correspond to reality (it 
did not even have the right to participate in military-technical 
cooperation). On the other hand, Remora did not have a permit to 
purchase goods from either the Angolans or the English. So it 
happens that by channeling state property to its offshore 
middleman, MiG-Servis unlawfully received a quarter of a million 
dollars. 
  By the same means MiG-Servis sold state property to Germany 
in 1993 to reequip the Bundeswehr's MiG-29 regiment. According 
to data of the Russian Federation's Foreign Intelligence Service 
and the Counterintelligence Directorate of the Ministry of 
Security, M. R. Valdenberg (the general director of MiG-Servis) 
allegedly purchased an aircraft repair plant in Dresden, on the 
basis of which the firm Elbe Flugzeugwerke was established. In 
the meantime, the FRG's federal department for military 
equipment purchases did not authorize MiG-Servis to purchase 
spare parts for MiG-29s in Russia. We note in this case that 
despite the fact that around 500 warplanes were idling at our 
air force bases, permission to export only four MiGs was given 
by a 12 May 1992 order of the RF Government! 
  More than enough interesting things were discovered. There 
was also the fact of the unlawful issuance of a license by 
Deputy Minister V. Shibayev of the MVES for delivery of two 
portable Igla surface-to-air systems together with 60 
125-millimeter projectiles to the Germans through the Liberia's 
EBC Investment Corp. and Germany's GLS. And there is the fact 
that five Gardeniya-IFU ECM stations went to Egypt by way of 
Bahrain's Continental Trading Center with the blessing of MVES 
GUVTS [Main Administration for Military-Technical Cooperation of 
the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations] chief Kotelkin. 
  With the connivance of its officials, Russia turned its 
profit over to numerous resellers who, according to the 
inspection data, had neither permits from the governments of the 
importing countries to make military purchases, nor end-user 
certificates. Unfortunately, these are not isolated facts. 
<H5>  The Old With a New Face? </H5>
  This is only a small fraction of what is happening in our 
arms trade. But what are the authorities doing to curb this 
lawlessness? 
  Spetsvneshtekhnika, Oboroneksport, and the GUSK [Main 
Administration for Collaboration and Cooperation] of the MVES 
were abolished, and the monopoly on arms trade was transferred 
to the state-owned company Rosvooruzheniye (RV). Will this make 
things better for us? 
  It would be worthwhile to acquaint ourselves with the 
executive leadership of the new company. 
  From press files: "The founders of the state-owned 
company Rosvooruzheniye are people known in the country: 
Vladimir Shumeyko (who pushed through the edict establishing 
Rosvooruzheniye), Oleg Soskovets (who approved the edict in 
behalf of the government), and Viktor Chernomyrdin (who approved 
the company charter)"--KOMMERSANT WEEKLY, 8 March 1994. 
  Supervision over observance of the interests of the state in 
the company was assigned to A. Korzhakov, the chief of the 
president's secret service. We must give Korzhakov's talents 
their due: He commands the secret service, and somewhere he 
picked up on the fine points of international arms trade. This 
normally requires graduating from an economic VUZ, 
familiarization with international law, and experience in 
foreign trade. But he managed to do all of this quite easily, as 
a second job to protecting the president. 
  Marshal Ye. Shaposhnikov was appointed B. N.'s 
representative 
at RV in February. 
  Obviously the two of them will easily replace the entire 
staff of specialists from the disbanded Interdepartmental 
Commission to Combat Crime and Corruption, and at the same time, 
manage to get on with it in the absence of a state concept of 
military-technical cooperation in Russia. And this concept is 
exactly where those infamous state interests which Shaposhnikov 
and Korzhakov are called upon to protect are supposed to be 
expounded. 
  From press files: "...Rosvooruzheniye intends to carry 
out its activities through authorized banks--Menatep, Mostbank, 
Intermed, Moscow National...."--KOMMERSANT WEEKLY, 8 March 
1994. 
  Once again, familiar structures, which spare no efforts for 
the good of the motherland. 
  We can say with confidence that the structure of RV is 
imperfect. For example, the company has been granted the right 
to export some military products without having to draft special 
government permits, and on only on the basis of coordination 
with Grachev's department. With its recently created Unified 
Automated System for Supervising Strategic Exports, the MVES has 
completely distanced itself from this work. Nor has anything 
been said about the role to be played in this by the Federal 
Service for Supervision of Foreign Exchange, to which the 
Council of Ministers delegated its rights of implementing 
general state foreign economic policy. Won't this once again 
lead to lack of supervision? After all, RV will begin setting 
the rules of armed trade and acting as a merchant itself. 
  On the other hand, RV has been proclaimed to be a 
state-owned 
enterprise, one which can establish subsidiary companies not 
only in Russia but also abroad--investment, insurance, dealer 
(trade), trust and other kinds of companies. Attraction of 
foreign middlemen to consummate the deals is also foreseen. At 
the same time the company has the right to issue permits for 
export of military products. Doesn't this perpetuate the 
possibility for public officials to finance private middlemen 
under the table? After all, RV is a cumbersome organization, and 
consequently it wouldn't be difficult at all for its workers to 
establish a firm for themselves somewhere on the Isle of Man or 
in Liberia, and sell state-owned weapons through it, depriving 
the country of hard currency profits; in the exact same way that 
the firms MiG-Servis and Remora Ltd. did. 
<H5>  Strengthening Statehood While Dispensing With Supervision? </H5>
  In general, although RV is considered to be a state-owned 
company, the rights it has been granted are purely those of a 
private company. And its general director operates as the sole 
and absolute owner. Thus, the state is not responsible for the 
obligations of state-owned RV, and it is given the right to 
dispose of its property and profits, and acquire and alienate 
property. Moreover, "other rights may also be granted to the 
company by the government of the Russian Federation." RV has 
also managed to acquire the possibilities for creating funds 
that are not called for directly by its charter. But isn't this 
legalization of that absence of supervision that last year's 
inspection revealed?! 
  For example, RV is endowed with the right not only to 
maintain a monopoly on trade in products of the 
military-industrial complex, but also to invest into its 
development. This combination of functions, plus the absence of 
supervision, makes it possible for officials to siphon profits 
from the sale of public wealth into subsidiaries, especially 
foreign subsidiaries. And if the authorities do in fact wish to 
strengthen statehood and put things in order, it would be more 
reasonable to make Rosvooruzheniye only a merchant that would 
transfer the profits strictly into the federal budget--under the 
watchful eye of the authorities. These resources should be 
invested only by an entirely different state structure, one not 
associated with RV. Separation of functions creates an obstacle 
to embezzlement of state property. 
<H5>  Who Stands to Gain From a Monopoly? </H5>
  In this case, Rosvooruzheniye enjoys a complete monopoly 
over 
export of military equipment. At the same time, the procedure 
currently effective in the USA is as follows: After filling a 
state order, a military-industrial company can then proceed to 
work independently. Most importantly, as long as it does not 
violate the state concept of military-technical cooperation, the 
law, and international agreements signed by the government. And 
of course, the buyer must have an end-user certificate and a 
permit from the government of its country allowing it to engage 
in such transactions. 
  Russian weapon manufacturers--the immediate producers, who 
have established regional associations--also demand the same 
procedure. After all, their enterprises are perishing from 
poverty, the collectives are falling apart, and cities in which 
defense industry is located are suffering. But those in Moscow 
who are working to strengthen statehood have no wish to grant 
them this right. This is not to mention the fact that we do not 
have a concept of military-technical cooperation! 
  Why is one needed? A monopoly on trade, you see, is a unique 
possibility for unconscientiously plundering the manufacturer, 
for imposing low purchase prices on him, or for raking in an 
ungodly percentage for intermediary services. And the 
manufacturer can do nothing about it--he himself is prohibited 
from engaging in trade. You see, an official who markets the 
goods of some tank plant across the border has to make some 
money for himself, and for his subsidiary organization, and for 
the Western middleman. What is left in this case for the labor 
collectives? And it looks like when the military-industrial 
complex descends to abject poverty, the middlemen will come to 
it as its privatizing saviors; with wallets bulging at the 
expense of the plants. 
  This future is a fully possible one. In March 1992 Volskiy's 
experts, who analyzed the behavior of the military-industrial 
complex under the conditions of the Gaydar-supervised 
disintegration, established that defense plants could not enter 
the foreign market because the commissions foreign trade 
organizations were demanding were too high. Describing the 
woeful situation resulting from the severing of ties in the 
former USSR, in spring 1993 V. Mashits, chairman of the 
Committee for Economic Cooperation with Commonwealth Member 
States, noted that state-owned intermediaries, which had 
cornered all of the quotas and privileges in advance, were 
demanding up to 25 percent of the amount of a transaction! 
  One could, of course, also understand the proponents of the 
monopoly enjoyed by RV. It is needed in order that independent 
merchants would not get in each other's way in foreign markets, 
bringing down prices and inflicting damage on the country. But 
then a strictly fixed low percentage for intermediary services 
needs to be legislated, and a judicial mechanism needs to be 
foreseen concurrently. One which would make it possible for the 
weapon manufacturer to go to the Antimonopoly Committee, and 
make the foreign trade worker live up to his responsibilities in 
the event of his negligence or acts of extortion. But it's 
somehow hard to believe that the present government will do this. 

