BFN 

<F P=106> [By David Chazan] </F>
  [Excerpts] Kigali, June 3 (AFP) -- Rebels closing on the 
government seat in southern Rwanda captured a nearby town as 
United Nations forces came under fire while evacuating civilians 
from battle zones in Kigali Friday [3 June]. 
  The rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front (RPF) seized the town of 
Kabgayi, five kilometres (three miles) south of government 
headquarters at Gitarama Thursday, UN officials said. 
  A mortar shell meanwhile slammed into a market in a 
government-held area of Kigali Friday, killing at least four 
people and wounding about 50, Red Cross officials said. They 
expressed fears that the death toll might be much higher. The 
shell was presumably fired by the rebels, UN officials said. 
  The capture of Kabgayi, about 45 kilometres (27 miles) south 
of the embattled capital, marked a further advance by the mainly 
Tutsi rebels against the battered and demoralised forces of the 
Hutu government, which fled to Gitarama two months ago as ethnic 
carnage engulfed the capital. Witnesses said pro-government 
militiamen had taken out and massacred about 500 Tutsis and Hutu 
opposition supporters last weekend from the Kabgayi monastery, 
where 35,000 displaced people are sheltering. The rebels may 
have stepped up their advance on the town to stop the killings, 
UN officials said. [passage omitted] 
  A UN team sent to Kabgayi this week to investigate the 
reports of mass slaughter said there had been killings, but not 
on the scale first believed. Relief officials, however, cast 
doubt on their conclusions. UN officials said privately that 
the fact that the observers were escorted by government soldiers 
when they visited Kabgayi may have intimidated witnesses to the 
killings whom they interviewed at the monastery. 
  The rebels have also cut the government's possible escape 
route south from Gitarama to the town of Butare, which they have 
also captured, according to unconfirmed reports. "They're 
getting closer to Gitarama every day," a UN military observer 
said. 
  UN officials say the well-disciplined rebels are advancing 
steadily, but that fighting may drag on for a long time. 
  UN soldiers meanwhile came under fire Friday while trying to 
evacuate civilians trapped behind hostile lines despite promises 
of safety from the rebels and the army, a UN spokesman said. 
  It was the first humanitarian operation in Kigali since 
fighting forced the UN to suspend food distribution and 
evacuations four days ago. 
  A convoy ferrying civilians to government-held territory 
from 
the Amahoro stadium behind rebel lines was shot at while driving 
through the notoriously dangerous Kadhafi Crossing on Kigali's 
northwestern outskirts, UN military spokesman Major Jean-Guy 
Plante said. Nobody was hurt. "The convoy made it through, 
dropped off the civilians, and was then shot at again on the way 
back," Plante told reporters. Plante said further evacuations 
and food distribution had been suspended until both sides 
guaranteed security. 
  "Discussions have been held today with both sides, mainly 
the 
(rebel) RPF, and we are expecting an explanation from the RPF 
commander," Plante said. 
  The shooting came a day after rebel and army commanders 
meeting for UN-mediated truce talks promised to cooperate with 
the UN in humanitarian operations. 
  Another convoy meanwhile safely delivered 180 civilians 
stranded in Kigali's Sainte-Famille church, where up to 8,000 
displaced people are encamped in squalor, to the rebel-held town 
of Kabuga, about 15 kilometres (nine miles) east of the capital. 
The army has repeatedly accused the rebels of firing at 
evacuation convoys. 
  The UN has ferried about two thousand civilians to safety in 
Kigali, but thousands more are still trapped with little food or 
water. 
  Thirty-one seriously wounded children were to be flown to 
Nairobi Saturday and then on to France for medical treatment, 
Plante said. "This is one of the first evacuations of children 
and we hope to see many more," he said. 

