Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Duanmu Laidi (4551 2606 0171 1229)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 20 Feb (XINHUA) -- Guided by the 
"supply-oriented" policy which the Taiwan authorities came up 
with early this year for Taiwan's economic development, relevant 
departments in Taiwan have drawn up the "Plan for New Scientific 
and Technological Development Zones in the Taiwan Region," the 
"Medium and Long-Range Industrial Zone Development Plan," and 
the "Water Resources Development Plan" in an effort to 
revitalize Taiwan's economy which has become potentially more 
worrisome each year. 
  After six months of research, Taiwan's "Council for Economic 
Planning and Development," maintaining that the high output 
yielded by scientific and technological industries can create 
more jobs, increase incomes, and create more business 
opportunities, has come up with these plans: 1) Expanding the 
Xinzu [Hsinchu] Scientific and Industrial Park in northern 
Taiwan to cover parts of Xinzu and Miaoli Counties; and building 
a new, 300-hectare scientific and industrial park in Guiren 
[Kuijen] township in Tainan, southern Taiwan, and making it a 
high-tech zone for the development of biotechnology, precision 
instruments, and aviation and space industries. 2. Establishing 
one software industrial zone each in Taibei [Taipei], Taizhong 
[Taichung], and Gaoxiong [Kaohsiung]. 3. Establishing one 
scientific and technological industrial zone each in northern 
Xinzu in northern Taiwan, in Yunlin County in central Taiwan, 
and in Annan district in southern Taiwan. 
  On this basis, Taiwan's "Economic Affairs Ministry 
Industrial 
Bureau" has come up with the "Medium- and Long-Range Plan for 
the Development of Industrial Zones in the Taiwan Region." 
Included in the plan is the establishment of additional 
software industrial zones, a center in Gaoxiong for disposing of 
industrial wastes in southern Taiwan, and a center in the 
Zhanghua [Changhua] Industrial Zone for disposing of industrial 
wastes in central Taiwan in order to reduce pollution caused by 
industrial wastes. According to the "Industrial Bureau," the 
plan is meant for bringing about an even development in Taiwan, 
and correcting the shortcomings of uneven economic development 
caused by the establishment of the majority of 
scientific-technological industrial zones in the north. 
  Of the 140 industrial zones with a total area of 30,761 
hectares designated to be developed, the development of 78 with 
a total area of 13,108 hectares, has been completed; and nine 
industrial zones with a total area of 5,687 hectares are being 
developed. Since land acquisition has become increasing 
difficult in Taiwan, relevant authorities in Taiwan are 
encouraging land owners and private enterprises to take part in 
the development of industrial zones so the construction process 
can be expedited. 
  Moreover, in view of the fact that Taiwan's water resources 
are deteriorating and water shortages have become increasingly 
serious, the "Council of Economic Planning and Development" has 
completed its "Plan for the Development of Water Resources," 
deciding that, during the next 20 years, 381.4 billion Taiwan 
dollars will be raised for the construction of 18 dams with an 
estimated effective capacity of 187,000 tonnes [figure as 
received], which is precisely the total capacity of the existing 
40 dams in Taiwan. These dams will be developed by stages to 
provide the water needed for daily and industrial consumption. 
On the average, these dams will be able to increase water 
supply by 3.28 billion tonnes of water annually. 
  Meanwhile, Taiwan is continuing with its six-year "national 
construction plan," focusing on 12 construction projects, 
including the renovation and construction of secondary and 
primary school facilities, the construction of parks and sports 
facilities, the construction of local and community cultural 
software and hardware facilities, the development of new urban 
areas and "national housing" projects, the construction of new 
roads and parking lots in residential areas, the construction of 
business districts, the construction of north-south expressways, 
a mass transit system in the Gaoxiong Metropolitan district 
(traffic improvement project), the construction of subways in 
Taizhong and Tainan cities, and the construction of garbage 
incinerators and landfill yards. 

