BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Slavyanka" program of the Russian Defense </F>
Ministry] 
  [Text] We are changing our usual program schedule today. 
We normally give over our Saturday broadcast to military news 
from the countries of the Near Abroad. The significance of 
today's Russian Federation events compels us to change this rule. 
  Today is the second anniversary of the day that Russia's 
President Boris Yeltsin announced the creation of the Russian 
Federation Armed Forces. The head of the Russian Federation 
Defense Ministry has issued the relevant festive decree, and at 
a news conference in the Defense Ministry Army General Pavel 
Grachev summed up some results. 
  [Begin Grachev recording] For us military men, the last two 
years have been extremely full of events, facts and deeds, and 
have undoubtedly been most difficult from all points of view, 
economic, political, and purely military and -- I stress in 
particular -- from the morale and psychological point of view. 
I am confident that over these two years we military men have 
very clearly realized, probably as never before, what special 
responsibility lies upon the Army and servicemen. One of the 
main results of the two years we have lived through, I believe, 
consists in the fact that our Armed Forces have become a 
reliable institution of the state, a guarantor of stability in 
society, and play an important role in maintaining the integrity 
and security of Russia. All this cannot but bear testament 
above all to the maturity of the absolute majority of servicemen 
and their understanding of their vocation and of those difficult 
processes that are today taking place in the Army, and indeed, 
in society as a whole. 
  It is in the Army, in these conditions, that genuine 
patriots 
of our motherland are now serving, the flower of our society, 
serving conscientiously, for love of the fatherland, for love of 
their native country, and not for rubles and dollars. Such is 
the reality and truth. No matter what difficulties Russia may 
now be experiencing, no matter what at times unresolved problems 
confront the Army, the Armed Forces -- thank God, and a big 
thank you for this steadfastness and understanding to our 
soldiers, noncommissioned officers, officers, and generals -- 
remain wholly combat ready and controllable [upravlyayemyy]. 
[end recording] 

