Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Colonia del Sacramento, Uruguay, 17 Jan (EFE) -- 
Bolivian President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada, speaking about 
Latin American integration today, said: "We have failed and we 
must recognize it in our lack of political willingness to 
eliminate borders because they exist more in the minds of our 
countries' leaders than in geography." 
  Sanchez de Lozada spoke before his Argentine, Brazilian, 
Paraguayan, and Uruguayan counterparts to thank them for the 
invitation to participate as an observer in the fifth Mercosur 
[Common Market of the South] summit. The Bolivian president 
said: "Our peoples have always considered themselves brothers 
and members of a greater Latin American family. In this process 
of advancing behind an ideal, we have fallen and risen many 
times, but we are learning." 
  "The new international reality has a dizzying dynamism. The 
EC is practically a reality. There are new and powerful 
economies in Asia and the Chinese giant seems to be awakening," 
Sanchez de Lozada said. 
  "With our past experiences and the demands of the world 
today 
we, Latin Americans, are taking the challenge of integration 
more seriously, and Mercosur is proof of that," Sanchez added. 
  "We, Bolivians, are convinced that undertakings such as 
Mercosur, the Andean Pact, or the Group of Three have the common 
objective of advancing behind a larger and broader sub-regional 
integration ideal, which will be followed by a regional and then 
a continental integration process," the Bolivian president said. 
  "We congratulate ourselves for the implementation of NAFTA 
not only because it represents an important step forward in the 
economic relations of friendly countries, but also because 
Mexico's participation establishes new and promising terms for 
our intercontinental economic and trade relations." 
  Sanchez stressed: "We must direct all our integration energy 
toward convergence and direct all our bilateral and subregional 
efforts toward a regional economic area." 
  The Bolivian president said this integration must be based 
on 
three basic pillars: free trade with productive investment, 
international equality, and social well-being "because the 
economy must serve man and not simply the statistics." 
  Sanchez de Lozada said: "Bolivia has a role in this process 
of articulation and contact. We are ready to play our role in 
American integration. We have a deep belief in integration and 
we will play our role in the River Plate area, or the Andean, 
Amazon, Pacific, or Atlantic regions." 
  Sanchez de Lozada concluded by saying: "Bolivia is a 
privileged country in the Latin American region because of its 
geographical position, its clarity, the continuity of its 
economic policy, and, above all, because of its unfailing 
integrative political will." 

