CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Marton Kozak: "Backfiring Propaganda; Radio and </F>
TV Remain the Citizens' Main Source of Information"] 
  [Text] At the time of the change of political systems, 
people trusted the media the most. By now that trust has been 
deeply shaken. But it will be appropriate to draw the same 
distinction between the media that also the government has 
made--namely, to distinguish between the print media and the 
electronic media. (In practice, the electronic media in Hungary 
mean state-run radio and television.) According to the results 
of a recently conducted poll, mistrust of the electronic media 
is greater than of the print media: 26.7 percent of the 
respondents did not trust radio and television at all, as 
compared with 17.9 percent who mistrusted the print media. But 
even though they have lost much of their credibility, radio and 
television remain the population's main source of political 
information. After all, nearly 70 percent of the population 
listens to or watches news programs on radio or television, 
whereas only every other family learns about the political 
situation from the print media. 
  Formally, of course, everything is in order. Jozsef P. 
Szabo, 
who is responsible for Hungarian Radio's election-related 
programming, said before the 4 March dismissals that Hungarian 
Radio had reached agreement with the political forces inside and 
outside parliament, to everyone's satisfaction. The participants 
(representatives of the six parliamentary parties) in the 
debates broadcast every Sunday afternoon on the 
Visszaszamlalas '94 [Countdown '94] program determine 
by lot the sequence in which they speak; each one may speak for 
the same length of time; the parties chose jointly the topics 
for discussion; and they reached a consensus on who would be the 
hosts moderating the debates. After the purge on 4 March, 
however, this no longer seems possible, and not just because the 
events that had taken place a week and a half before Freedom of 
the Press Day [15 March] nullified the already reached 
compromises. Jozsef P. Szabo, who earlier had been acceptable to 
everyone, no longer enjoys the support of every political force; 
and Laszlo Rapcsanyi, who has been designated to host the 
all-day election program on 8 May, is in the same situation. 
Because they were chosen by consensus, none of the 
Visszaszamlalas '94 hosts has been fired, but one of 
them has handed in his resignation as an expression of his 
indignation. In spite of all this, the fact remains that 
Hungarian Radio's news broadcasts still exceed by far the news 
programs on MTV [Hungarian Television] in terms of credibility 
and objectivity. At least for the time being. Because in MTV's 
case there was never even any illusion of credibility and 
objectivity. It will be remembered that Foreign Minister Geza 
Jeszenszky was the first to use the expression "[military] 
position" three years ago, when he was talking about there being 
on MTV also programs that were not government-unfriendly (read: 
programs that refrained from even mild criticism of the 
government). Occupying these positions--the most important news 
programs, in other words--Vice President Gabor Nahlik was better 
able than Laszlo Csucs, his counterpart at Hungarian Radio, to 
banish quickly and with less trouble every possible 
characteristic of a public-service institution. Since then MTV, 
transformed in compliance with the letter of the law, has been 
functioning as the freely elected government's propaganda organ. 
Months go by without the viewers being able to watch a debate in 
which representatives of parties holding contrasting views are 
participating; without any opportunity for the leaders of the 
opposition to speak out. 
  But that world will soon be coming to an end. As Election 
Day 
approaches, willy-nilly also other parties will have to be given 
a role. For even if the spirit of the laws attempting to set the 
competitive multiparty system's rules of the game has completely 
failed to interest, respectively, the management of MTV and the 
government, which in 1974 reserved for itself supervision of 
that institution, it does not behoove them even these days to 
thumb their noses at the letter of the law. Indeed, for the 
duration of the election campaign, Vice President Nahlik has 
ordered the establishment of a programming bureau and operations 
committee, as a sort of example of the application of the 
otherwise scarcely used BBC Code of Ethics. The task of the 
committee will be, among other things, to coordinate and control 
the elections-related duties of the MTV, and to maintain contact 
with the political parties. The chairman of the six-man 
committee is Laszlo Juhasz, the news director. Among its members 
we find Istvan G. Palfy, Istvan Petak, Teletext editor in chief 
Gabor Szucs, Emil Tallos and Balazs Varkonyi. From this list it 
is obvious that the vice president made no attempt to balance on 
an apothecary scale the committee's composition, in accordance 
with the political sympathies and antipathies of its members. 
Two distinct views have emerged regarding how the elections 
might be affected by the transformation of Hungarian Radio and 
MTV into the government's propaganda institution. For that is 
what they have become, and the fact that before 8 May also the 
representatives of other parties will be allowed to go before 
the microphones and face the TV cameras does not alter the 
situation. 
  One view holds that occupation of the state-controlled 
electronic media was a mistake even from the viewpoint of the 
occupiers' self-interest. Actually, this view finds support in 
two axioms of communications theory. The first axiom states that 
the mass media are suitable for reinforcing, rather than 
changing, views that have already been formed. In other words, 
the mass media are able to reinforce the sympathizers' sympathy 
and escalate the activists' activity to ecstasy, but they are 
unsuitable for reversing a generally negative attitude. 
According to the other axiom, even if the mass media happen to 
change an opinion, the changes can apply only to things outside 
the scope of the recipient's direct experience. And it is very 
likely that the hammering in of opinions which are in conflict 
with everyday experience, "the propaganda of successes," will 
backfire. 
  The view, generally accepted among media experts, that 
isolation from information and contrasting opinions is a 
prerequisite for successful brainwashing bodes a dismal future 
from the government's point of view. Yet dependence on state-run 
television is declining practically day by day because, during 
nearly a third of their total viewing time, TV viewers watch 
satellite- or cable-TV programs, rather than those of the MTV. 
The standpoint of those who claim that the government-run media 
are ineffective appears to gain support from another view which 
holds that, by occupying the electronic media, it is possible to 
influence only those for whom radio and television are the only 
source of information. But specifically this stratum comprising 
persons with a low educational level is less interested in 
politics and, very likely, will not even bother to vote. It will 
be remembered that the highest voter turnout to date is around 
66 percent, and the turnout in May is unlikely to be any higher. 
  Thus, based on our knowledge of communications theory, it 
can 
be said that the victory won in the media war will prove a 
Pyrrhic one. Taking also considerations of social history and 
social psychology into account, however, no one can be very 
certain of that. The main message from forcing radio and 
television to their knees is demonstration of who is master in 
the house. From this point of view it is not really essential 
whether or not the voters are able to acquaint themselves with 
the political parties; whether they are able to confront the 
government with its promises; and how many whole-evening Boross 
interviews there are for every opportunity to read Horn's lips 
or for each one-minute appearance by Kuncze. What will be 
decisive in the end is whether Hungary's citizens will be 
willing to accept the old cast. It would do no harm, of course, 
if we were able to learn that also from radio and television. 

