Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Miliam Fejziu, chairman of the Democratic </F>
Forum for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms, by 
Abdylnaser Sinani on 1 December 1993; place of interview not 
given: "The Rights of Albanians Are Not a Minority Issue"] 
  [Excerpts] Ever since it began its activity three 
years ago, the Democratic Forum for the Defense of Human Rights 
and Freedoms [FDMDLNJ] has investigated and provided evidence of 
a multitude of cases of violation of rights and freedoms of 
Albanians in Macedonia and has continued to inform international 
organizations in this area. By means of the photographs provided 
by the Democratic Forum, international public opinion has been 
informed about violations of human rights and freedoms in 
Macedonia and international convictions and opinions have been 
formed on the basis of this information. International Human 
Rights and Freedoms Day, 1 December, served as an occasion for 
us to talk with Miliam Fejziu, the chairman of the Democratic 
Forum. [passage omitted] 
  [Sinani] Is International Human Rights Day a good time for 
an 
institutional overview of human rights and freedoms here in 
Macedonia? 
  [Fejziu] [passage omitted] It must be said that Albanians in 
Macedonia are mistreated and even when Albanians are in the 
majority they are dominated by the Macedonian minority. In these 
cases, it is not a matter of the violation of the rights and 
freedoms of the Albanians but of constant repression. Albanians 
are mistreated in the health system, in education, in the armed 
forces, in the press, and in politics. The current Macedonian 
government has the political will to destroy the cultural and 
historical heritage of the Albanian people. Physical force has 
been used against Albanians in Macedonia and there are 
increasing cases of psychological and physical mistreatment, 
beatings and raids, detention and imprisonment for 
transgressions and penal acts, and even loss of life without the 
necessary official explanations of the government organs. Since 
this interview is taking place on International Human Rights 
Day, it is appropriate for me to stress that the issue of the 
juridical and political position [of the Albanians] does not lie 
solely in the human rights sphere. Upto now, Europe and the 
United Nations have been treating the issue of Albanians in 
Macedonia improperly, as a matter of concern for an institute 
for human rights and freedoms in the framework of minority 
mechanisms. 
  [Sinani] What are the work methods of the Democratic Forum 
and how does this forum actually operate? 
  [Fejziu] During the past three years, despite the fact that 
it did not have sufficient experience in work methods, the 
Democratic Forum used the contacts established with sister 
organizations, especially the councils for human rights in 
Kosovo and in Albania, and its cooperation with international 
organizations, to create the methodology to accompany cases of 
violations of rights and freedoms. During this period, one of 
the main tasks was the collection of documentation of the cases 
and events brought about by the Macedonian government which 
resulted in flagrant violations against the Albanian population, 
denying them their rights as individuals and their collective 
rights. Among the most flagrant violations of rights, the 
Democratic Forum cited the cases occurring in Ladorisht, Dibra, 
and Bit Pazar, the events in the Idrizova and Shutka jails, the 
arrest and detention of several Albanians in the recent weapons 
case. The necessary documentation was collected on all these 
cases and presented to public opinion in the country and in the 
world. It should be emphasized that, after the Bit Pazar case, 
the Democratic Forum presented documents to the regional 
prosecutor's office dealing with transgressions carried out by 
representatives of the Ministry of Interior of Macedonia, 
pointing out that a large number of representatives of this 
ministry, headed by Minister Ferchkovski, took part in these 
transgressions. Although the documents were submitted in March, 
so far, the regional prosecutor's office has remained silent, 
even after several communications in writing. We are not 
demanding a positive response but we would like evidence, a 
response which we will be able to use in an appeal to the 
International Court in The Hague. 
  [Sinani] The photographic exhibition held in honor of 
International Human Rights Day and the videocassettes dealing 
with special events give the impression that in Macedonia, three 
years after the arrival of the democratic processes, the rights 
and freedoms of the Albanians are still being seriously 
violated. 
  [Fejziu] This is the first time that the Democratic Forum 
has 
organized a presentation of the documentation collected during 
the three-year period, for the general public, in which the most 
extensive violations of rights and freedoms of Albanians, both 
individual and collective, can be seen. This documentation 
contradicts the assertion of the current government that 
Albanains in Macedonia have more rights than they deserve. It 
should be stressed that this is the evaluation of the Macedonian 
government while we have the case of the atrocious strangulation 
of Halil Halili from Gercec in Skopje and the strangulation of 
Nazmi Jusufi from Luboteni in Skopje, who were strangled in the 
police station along with two cases where Albanians were 
murdered in prison with the explanation that they committed 
suicide or died from heart attacks. This documentation clearly 
shows that Albanians are being deprived of their lives so that 
this government will be able to continue the repression which it 
is carrying out against the Albanians and so as to create the 
image of Albanians as a destabilizing element and, on the other 
hand, to present itself to the Albanian population as a strong 
force which must be obeyed. 
  [Sinani] According to what you have said, it seems that the 
Albanians are the only ones whose human rights are being 
violated. 
  [Fejziu] During the three years of activity of the 
Democratic 
Forum, in addition to the violations against Albanians, we also 
found proof of some instances of violation of the rights and 
freedoms of Turks in Macedonia, such as the case in Zhupa in 
Dibra. where Turkish pupils are not allowed to have their mother 
tongue as the language of instruction. The Democratic Forum 
reported this situation promptly. 
  [Sinani] You believe that both the collective and the 
individual rights of Albanians in Macedonia are being violated 
and denied. In which areas of life is this situation most 
serious? 
  [Fejziu] The current repression which the Macedonian 
government is exerting against the Albanians is a continuation 
of the anti-Albanian policy inherited from the past. At present, 
Albanians in all the lands of the former Yugoslavia are 
experiencing a grave denial of human rights and freedoms. 
Albanians in Macedonia are subject to unprecedented 
discrimination in all spheres of life, especially in education, 
in the media, and in the institutions of the system. Many 
foreign observers who have been here report on the flagrant 
violation of the basic human rights and freedoms of the 
Albanians. For example, in the area of culture, Albanians are 
not allowed to found institutions or bodies which would preserve 
their cultural heritage. The goal is for Albanians to lose their 
cultural identity as a collective in Macedonia. 
  [Sinani] How does the Democratic Forum cooperate with 
political subjects and associations in Macedonia and with 
international organizations in this domain? 
  [Fejziu] We must say that cooperation with political and 
nonpolitical subjects in Macedonia is not at the level required 
by current needs. There is a need for closer cooperation because 
the Democratic Forum, in the documentation which it prepares on 
a regular basis, has kept the Albanian associations informed and 
has asked for assistance in solving various cases but, often, 
this cooperation has been lacking. One of the main tasks of the 
Democratic Forum is to expose the repressive policy of the 
current Macedonian government since our political subjects have 
not fully exploited the policy of the government. It is 
essential that this cooperation be raised to a higher level and 
there must be a more serious approach to the problem of the 
political-juridical position of the Albanians in Macedonia. We 
can say that cooperation with international human rights 
organizations is fruitful and close. We have been able to have 
frequent contacts with delegations of international 
organizations such as Amnesty International in London, the 
International Federation for Human Rights in Frankfurt, Helsinki 
Watch and the Free Foundation of the American Congress, and the 
European Assembly for Human Rights.... We cooperate with these 
organizations in various forms, by sending delegations out in 
the field to get information on specific occurrences and by 
providing information to these organizations. On the basis of 
this cooperation, recently, the violations of rights and 
freedoms of Albanians in Macedonia have been included in the 
annual reports of a number of international organizations. When 
these reports are sent to the government of Macedonia, the 
government either rejects them as untrue or denies them in their 
entirety. International organizations have often protested this 
behavior through official channels in Macedonia but the 
Macedonian government continues to ignore these reports. 
  [Sinani] Recently, there has been a decline in the activity 
of the Democratic Forum, which was noted in its annual report. 
What are its causes? 
  [Fejziu] We are only partially satisfied with the activity 
of 
the Democratic Forum because during the past year the Forum's 
activity has decreased, both on the organizational level and on 
the functional level. During this period, there were concrete 
tasks but they were not all carried out. This situation must be 
corrected by a reinvigoration of the leadership of the Forum and 
of other activists. 

