Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Vadim Bardin: "The Ministry Is Busy Strengthening </F>
Its Own Positions"] 
  [Text] Over the past week the MVES [Ministry of 
Foreign Economic Relations] collegium met twice. KOMMERSANT 
reported on the first meeting on Friday; the second took place 
off schedule, on Saturday. It approved the ministry's plan of 
work for the current year, the main emphasis in which is on 
boosting MVES activities involving the preparation of various 
legislative acts on regulation of foreign economic activities. 
In addition, the ministry will be concentrating in its hands the 
most important economic levers of regulating foreign economic 
activities. 
  Minister of Foreign Economic Relations Oleg Davydov, who was 
absent from the collegium on Thursday, apparently decided to 
catch up on lost time and held the collegium meeting on a day 
off--otherwise there is simply no explanation for holding two 
collegium meetings in one week. Besides, under consideration on 
Saturday were not some urgent problems but a seemingly routine 
topic: MVES actions with respect to the development of foreign 
economic activities in 1994. 
  The minister's plan of action gives one an idea of not only 
the priorities in MVES work but also of the coming changes in 
the mechanism of regulating foreign economic activities in 1994 
as a whole. Here are the main milestones set by the collegium: 
legislative support for a unified foreign economic policy; 
expansion of the regional base of foreign economic activities 
(free trade and special economic zones, programs for attracting 
foreign investment); liberalization and support of exports 
(limiting the range of goods subject to quotas; development of a 
mechanism for quota apportionment through competitive bids; 
creating a system of financing exports); foreign currency 
control (interactive information exchange between the MVES and 
the Central Bank; checking licenses for exports of strategic 
commodities issued in 1993-1994; developing measures preventing 
unsanctioned re-export of Russian goods to third countries). 
  The ministry sets for itself large-scale tasks, not limiting 
its activities to planning. Already this year, after registering 
a special exporter statute with the Ministry of Justice, the 
MVES brought under its control special exporters' foreign 
currency earnings from export of goods on the strategic 
commodities list (see KOMMERSANT 13 and 20 January issues). In 
addition, the MVES acted as a main lobbyist for setting up the 
Roseximbank [Russian Export-Import Bank], which will have the 
task of providing preferential ruble financing for production of 
industrial goods intended for export. It is assumed that 
financing will be provided for a term of six to 10 years, with 
the repayment rate below Central Bank's refinancing rate. 
Setting up this new bank fills the void that has existed until 
now in the system of state support for exporters. 
  Roseximbank will become an intermediary in kind between the 
budget and the exporter. If we add to this the fact that Viktor 
Shilin, who is still Oleg Davydov's deputy, has been appointed 
its president, and the minister himself, together with Sergey 
Dubinin (Ministry of Finance) and Vladimir Sokolov (Federal 
Property Fund), represent in Roseximbank the state, which holds 
51 percent of its stock, the MVES voice in the bank's operations 
will be decisive. Thus, the ministry not only participates 
actively in the development of foreign economic policy but is 
also concentrating in its hands the most important levers of 
regulating foreign economic activities. 


Draft Legislative Acts MVES Is Developing 

Document                                   Brief Contents 

Law on foreign economic activities         Coordination of federal and 
                                           regional bodies of authority in 
                                           foreign economic activities 

Interdepartmental agreements on            Preventing dumping 
limitation of exports of certain goods 

Government decrees on financing of         Creating a system of financing and 
export production                          insurance for production of goods 
                                           intended for export 

Interdepartmental protocols                Reducing the list of goods subject 
                                           to quotas and developing a 
                                           mechanism for quota allocation 
                                           through competitive bids 

Multilateral agreements                    Preventing unsanctioned re-export 
                                           to third countries 



