Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Ki"-signed report: "Labor Market Plans Under Fire"] </F>
  [Text] Bonn -- The coalition government's plans for the 
labor market are arousing strong feelings: The German 
Federation of Trade Unions (DGB) wants to stage protests against 
private employment agencies. Plans that, under certain 
conditions, unemployed people can in the future be made to 
perform harvest work have been described as a social policy 
"climatic disaster" by the Trade Union for Public Services, 
Transportation, and Traffic (OeTV). The German Salaried 
Employees Union has been talking of a "revival of the labor 
service" practiced in the Third Reich. The Bundestag will 
discuss the package of proposals today. 
  Until now, unemployed people could only be urged to take up 
seasonal work in farming and forestry, as well as fruit and 
vegetable processing, if the wages paid were higher than the 
level of unemployment benefit. In general, however, the wages 
paid in agriculture were lower. The result was that in 1993, 
for example, 180,000 foreigners, mainly from Eastern Europe, 
came to Germany to perform such work. 
  Under the Bonn bill, employment agencies are to pay 
recipients of unemployment benefit "supplementary payments" 
amounting to 25 German marks (DM) per day for a minimum of six 
hours work and DM150 weekly for at least 36 hours work. If the 
total, composed of wages for seasonal work and the supplementary 
payment, exceed the level of unemployment benefit, such work has 
to be accepted -- the work is considered acceptable. If such 
work is rejected, then no unemployment benefit will be paid by 
municipal agencies for a period of three months. In the past, 
farmers associations have been extremely skeptical about how 
successful having German unemployed people performing harvest 
work would be. 
  With this solution, the coalition is, above all, focussing 
on 
the 45 percent of unskilled workers among the unemployed. 
According to the "priority principle," foreigners can only 
obtain a work permit if no German or EU workers are available. 
  A poll conducted by the Dortmund Forsa Institute indicates 
that 55 percent of Germans approve of the plan. Among FDP [Free 
Democratic Party] supporters, the level of support was 71 
percent. As for supporters of Alliance '90 and the Greens, the 
result was a stalemate. 
  Controversy has also been fueled by the plans, backed by the 
FDP above all, not to limit the procurement of employment to 
state employment agencies, but to permit the operation of 
private agencies throughout the country without any kind of 
trial period. While DGB Deputy Chairman Engelen-Kefer expressed 
criticism, stating that the imbalance between the 3.7 million 
unemployed and the 220,000 registered job vacancies cannot be 
corrected "through ideologically motivated privatization," the 
Association for the Unemployed has announced that it will file a 
complaint with the Constitutional Court. The associations also 
says that unemployed people should boycott seasonal work. 

