Language: <F P=105> Kazakh </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The decree of the president of Kazakhstan on 
rendering assistance to agricultural enterprises in 1994 says: 
  First. In order to improve the financial 
situation of agricultural enterprises, long-outstanding debts of 
agricultural goods' producers of all forms of ownership to banks 
in the form of loans should be deferred, with the exception of 
targeted credits granted to replenish working assets given at 
the expense of the centralized crediting resources of the 
national bank of the republic of Kazakhstan as of 1 January 1994; 
  Redemption of the abovementioned debts will begin on 1 
January 1999 in equal, interest-free installments over 5 years. 
  Second. In order socially to support workers of 
collective and state farms and other state-owned agricultural 
enterprises, the national bank of the republic of Kazakhstan 
should, under the guarantee of the Government of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, via commercial banks, issue credit aimed at 
redemption of the debts resulted from paying wages and made 
before 1 January 1994. These debts should be paid back on 25 
December 1994. The aforementioned loan should be given with 25 
percent annual interest. Banks should have granted all loans by 
1 March 1994. 
  Third. The Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan until 25 March 1994 should find foreign loans and 
credits in the amount necessary to finance the measures 
indicated in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this decree. 
  Fourth. Commercial banks should be made 
materially responsible for three times the amount of loans 
deferred without reasonable grounds. The Ministry of Finance 
together with the State Financial Control Committee under the 
Cabinet of Ministers should fine commercial banks for deferring 
loans without reasonable grounds, crediting the fine to the 
republican budget. 
  Fifth. This decree has the force of a law and is 
valid from the moment of being published and will be valid until 
the newly elected Supreme Kenges of the republic passes a 
relevant law. 
  [Signed] President Nazarbayev 
  [Dated] 24 February 1994, Almaty 

