BFN 

  [Text] The director general in the Department of Defense, 
Retired Major (Sheku Kande), has told SLENA [SIERRA LEONE NEWS 
AGENCY] in an interview that the rebels have lost all their 
command and capability and are now in disarray. In a 
wide-ranging interview, Maj. (Sheku Kande), noted that the 
situation on the ground is now of high expectations and that 
government troops are now deployed in all strategic sectors in 
the country. He said their dispositions have increased 
tremendously and a rapid buildup has been implemented with the 
ability to conduct search-and-destroy missions. He disclosed 
that the principal aim of the rebels is to terrorize the 
civilian population by burning down villages and killing 
innocent and defenseless men, women, and children. 
  The director general noted that the Army has an answer to 
what he called the tactic-to-rule and strategic [word 
indistinct] and that a new concept has been developed which will 
soon be implemented. He expressed the belief that all 
peaceloving Sierra Leoneans will definitely be proud of the 
performance of the Armed Forces. Maj. (Kande) noted that the 
successful implementation of the NPRC [Provisional National 
Revolutionary Council] plan will finally see the end of the 
rebel war and added that government troops should continue to 
maintain the rhythm of their advances which will force the 
rebels to surrender. He said that there is every indication 
that the situation in Suri, Makali, and the Bo-Kenema highway 
has improved tremendously and stressed that we should however 
remember that we are [words indistinct] fighting a war against 
the most reckless and unpredictable enemy in the subregion. 
  Maj. (Kande) said we are not taking any chances and that 
every effort is being made to maintain security throughout the 
country. He urged all to report suspicious movements of people 
to the authorities as vigilance should be the country's 
watchword. In what he called a message of hope to both 
civilians and soldiers, Maj. (Kande) assured them of 
government's total commitment to ending the rebel war in the 
shortest possible time to ensure a new lease of life for all. 
He said the NPRC government counts on their loyalty and [word 
indistinct] and urged them to become watchdogs for the 
administration so that the principles on which the April 29 
revolution was born will continue to be implemented for national 
development. He later paid tribute to those who have lost their 
lives in the defense of Sierra Leone. 

