BFN 

  [Text] The Cyprus report UN Secretary General Butrus-Ghali 
submitted to the Security Council has been assessed at a 
high-level dinner meeting under the chairmanship of President 
Rauf Denktas and with the participation of Turkish Foreign 
Ministry officials. Republican Assembly Speaker Ayhan Halit 
Acarkan; Assembly Deputy Speaker Olgun Pasalar; Prime Minister 
Hakki Atun; Ozker Ozgur, state minister and deputy prime 
minister; Atay Ahmet Rasit, foreign minister and defense 
minister; Tugay Ulucevik, Turkish Foreign Ministry deputy under 
secretary; and Turkish-Greek Desk Director Ertugrul Apakan 
participated at the dinner meeting held at 1345. Turkey's 
Ambassador in Lefkosa [Nicosia] Cahit Bayar and Turkish Embassy 
Under Secretaries Ethem Tokdemir and Berki Dibek were also 
present at the meeting. 
  In a statement after the meeting, Denktas said the talks 
have 
not stopped and will continue, adding that the Turkish Cypriots 
will wait for the Security Council resolution. Stating that a 
diplomat had admitted that the Vienna meeting was a maneuver 
aimed at getting the Turkish Cypriots to accept the map, Denktas 
said: This is a disgrace. 
  Pointing out that talks had gone on until midnight and that 
the impression given was that New York was waiting for the 
conclusion of the discussions, Denktas added: Nonetheless, 
Butrus Butrus-Ghali issued a report dated 30 May, which is 
obviously a biased report. We will resist coercion, Denktas 
said, adding: We have no other choice. Pointing out that the 
talks will not stop and will continue, Denktas said the Turkish 
Cypriots will await the Security Council's resolution. 
  Denktas noted that the approval of the Turkish Cypriot side 
is necessary for the extension of the UN peacekeeping force's 
mandate. 
  Pointing out that there is a Turkish community in Cyprus 
whose people have a democratic will, Denktas concluded by saying 
that it is not fitting for the Security Council to adopt a 
coercive approach which disregards the democratic will of the 
Turkish Cypriot and to say that punishment will follow if the 
decisions of the Security Council are not carried out. 

