BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ronaldo Brasiliense] </F>
  [Excerpts] The Environment and Legal Amazon Region Ministry 
is threatening to dismantle six national parks, three biological 
reserves, seven national forests, two environmentally protected 
areas, and four rational exploitation reserves. As these units 
have not been legally registered within the period contemplated 
in the laws, their status will become void. This is an 
unprecedented retrograde step in the Brazilian environmental 
policy. Two of the threatened units are in Rio de Janeiro: the 
Tingua biological reserve, which was created on 23 May 1989; and 
the Mario Xavier national forest, which was created in October 
1989. 
  In accordance with Article 10 of Decree 3365 dated 21 June 
1941, the legal registration of these units, which were created 
by the federal government, "must be made effective through 
agreements or obtained judicially within five years of the date 
on which the decree is published. At the end of this period, 
the terms of the decree become void." When this happens the 
unit can only be the object of a new decree after one year. 
  The Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Renewable 
Natural Resources (Ibama)--which is responsible for the 
administration, preservation, and maintenance of the 
preservation units--allegedly has no funds to finance the legal 
registration of these units that were created at the end of Jose 
Sarney's administration and the beginning of Fernando Collor 
administration. Several areas were created as an ecological 
marketing strategy a few days before the UN Conference on 
Environment and Development (Rio-92) in an attempt to show the 
world that Brazil--which had been harshly criticized 
internationally for deforestation and clearing land by fire in 
the Amazon Region--was concerned about environmental 
preservation. 
  Research by Ibama experts before Rio-92 showed that the 
government would have to invest $1.2 billion to legally register 
the land on which Brazilian national parks, biological reserves, 
ecological stations, national forests, environmentally protected 
areas, and rational exploitation reserves are situated. 
  The first warning of the threat that has been affecting 
these 
units was made by Atanagildo Matos, aka Gatao, who is the 
president of the National Council of Rubber Tappers. Gatao is 
the successor to ecologist Chico Mendes. He reported that five 
rational exploitation reserves created during the Collor 
administration are threatened with being dismantled because of 
Ibama's negligence in legally registering the expropriated areas. 
  On 10 May, Atanagildo Matos and Federal Deputy Sidney de 
Miguel (Green Party-Rio de Janeiro) met Environment Minister 
Henrique Cavalcanti and called for urgent measures to prevent 
Brazil from losing these units which are important for the 
preservation of the national flora and fauna. Their loss would 
be a tremendous blow for the Brazilian environmental policy. 
[passage omitted] 
  The National Center for Sustained Development of Traditional 
Peoples succeeded in legally registering 2.1 million hectares of 
the Alto Jurua and Chico Mendes rational exploitation reserves 
in Acre State; the Cajari River reserve in Amapa State; and the 
Ouro Preto reserve in Rondonia State. The Chico Mendes rational 
exploitation reserve in Xapuri and Brasileia counties, with 
970,000 hectares, shelters 7,500 people and was demarcated with 
the assistance of the Army Cartographic Service. The land of 
the Cajari River reserve, with 481,000 hectares and 5,000 
inhabitants, still has not been totally registered because the 
Jari Project is questioning its legality in the courts. 
  The nine rational exploitation reserves created by the 
Brazilian Government cover an overall area of 2.2 million 
hectares and have 28,460 inhabitants who live basically on 
rubber gathering, Brazil-nut harvest, and babassu exploitation. 

