Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 5 (XINHUA) -- The coming second 
session of the National Committee of the Eighth Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) should be democratic, 
practical, united and inspiring, Li Ruihuan, chairman of the 
CPPCC National Committee, said here today. 
  He said so at the fifth meeting of the Standing Committee of 
the CPPCC National Committee, which was preparing for the coming 
session and adjourned today. 
  Li said the coming session has to be democratic, for the 
CPPCC itself, as an organization through which the system of 
multi-party co-operation and political consultation under the 
leadership of the Chinese Communist Party can be achieved, is an 
important part of socialist democracy. 
  Furthermore, he said, the annual CPPCC session has become a 
big event in the national political life. It was only by 
following strictly the democratic procedures and creating a 
solid democratic atmosphere at the session that the principle of 
the people as the owners of the country could be truly embodied. 
  In building a socialist market economy, China will encounter 
many new and complicated issues, which demand all-round 
consideration, Li said. Various factors, whether favorable or 
unfavorable, and points of view, whether of the majority or of a 
small group, must be duly considered. 
  Li pointed out that only by taking a scientific attitude and 
a responsible approach could the CPPCC play a fair role in 
political consultations. 
  On the question of unity, Li said that since democracy has 
been stressed for the coming session, there might be different 
opinions and debates. Criticism and counter-criticism are 
unavoidable. 
  He said that all those are necessary, for the differences 
and 
debates are for seeking truth and solving problems. 
  He called for starting from a wish for unity and reaching 
the 
objective of unity. 
  He said that the People's Political Consultative Conference 
represents unity and the session of the CPPCC should display 
unity and promote unity so as to promote the unity of the people. 
  Talking about the guideline of "inspiration", Li Ruihuan 
said that since China adopted reforms and opening to the outside 
world, the country had achieved remarkable progress and at 
present, the situation in China was good. 
  But, he noted, since China is a large country with large 
population, the unprecedented reform in China was an arduous 
task. It has a positive side with success, inspiration and 
beauty, but also it has a negative side with mistakes and 
worries. 
  He called for a cool head for the objective phenomena in 
social life so as to make a complete analysis, accurate 
judgement and good management. 
  He said that the objective of criticism and exposition is to 
study and solve problems. 
  Li pointed out that the guidelines should be completely 
understood. Democracy and being realistic should be helpful to 
unity and inspiration, while stressing that unity and 
inspiration should promote democracy and being realistic. 
  He noted that the guidelines were formulated in 1990 for the 
plenary session of the National People's Congress (NPC) and the 
plenary session of the CPPCC. 

