BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Philippe Marcovici] </F>
  [Text] By wishing in Parliament yesterday that an 
international peace conference on Bosnia could be chaired by 
Europe on an equal footing with the United States, Russia, and 
the United Nations, Alain Juppe implicitly acknowledged that the 
European Union, and therefore also France, does no longer play a 
leading role in the peace process. 
  And yet, France has spared no effort to convince its -- 
wavering -- allies of the need for a tougher stand. It was 
France that made NATO decide to issue an ultimatum to the Serbs 
after the Sarajevo market square massacre. It was France's 
threats that achieved the reopening of Tuzla airport. It was 
France, also, that pushed twice for a warning strike against the 
Serbs in Gorazde. To the French Government, the use of force is 
not an end in itself, but a means to an end. The idea is to 
exert pressure on the warring factions to make them agree to 
reciprocal concessions at the negotiating table. In other words, 
the goal is to achieve peace through the use of weapons. 
  It is too early to tell whether this policy, adopted since 
the government change in France, is going to be successful. But 
its drawbacks are already apparent. Because France does not 
have the means to implement such a policy, whether alone or even 
with its European partners, it had to ask NATO's -- that is, 
America's -- help. Since Washington's major concern is to 
placate Moscow, Russia was able to make a dramatic entrance onto 
the Bosnian stage. This return to old-style East-West dialogue 
could only take place at the expense of Europe, and especially 
France, which for the last three years has shouldered the major 
part of the Yugoslav burden. Cruel paradox: The United States, 
which has no soldiers in Bosnia, has seized the political lead, 
whereas France, whose own soldiers are being killed, has lost 
the initiative. Yesterday, French diplomacy attempted to get 
out of this trap by proclaiming out loud that, without Europe, 
there cannot be a peaceful solution in Bosnia. True enough, but 
did the statement not come a little late in the day? 

