Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Green Light for War of Aggression" -- KCNA headline] </F>
  [Text] Pyongyang, March 2 (KCNA) -- NODONG SINMUN today 
brands the "Recommendation on International Security" (draft) 
providing for the overseas dispatch of the "Self-Defence Forces" 
(SDF) for military operations, worked out by Japan's influential 
think-tank, the strategic study centre, as designed to give the 
green light to the Japanese reactionaries in overseas aggression. 
  The news analyst says: 
  The "recommendation" reveals the true color of Japan as a 
bellicose state, not a "peaceful state." The document is very 
dangerous because it is highly probable that Japan will take the 
afore-said course guided by it in shaping state policies. 
  The document recommends that "to preserve the international 
order through its participation in the operations for 
international security" in the form of "U.N. forces" or 
"multinational forces" should be defined as one of the "main 
tasks" of the Japan "SDF"; military preparations should be made 
for dispatching a combat unit to any part of the world; the 
constitution banning war should be revised; and the domestic 
system should be readjusted so as to mobilize everything in war 
institutionally. 
  This reveals the wild ambition of the Japanese reactionaries 
to play the part of Interpol through military intervention in 
war and disputes, big and small, in the world and join in the 
scrambles for world supremacy. 
  Japan takes the DPRK as a major target of its attack in 
order 
to begin with the Korean peninsula in its Asian reinvasion. 
  The "recommendation" lays special emphasis on an armed 
conflict in the surroundings of Japan, which implies a war in 
Korea. 
  The Japanese bellicose elements' hysteric military exercises 
simulating a Korean war and their outcries for "special 
inspection" and "sanctions" against the DPRK are all intended to 
find a pretext for reinvasion. 
  The Japanese reactionaries must act with discretion, mindful 
that aggression and war will lead them to self-destruction. 

