Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Nanning, February 16 (XINHUA) -- Construction is due 
to start on the Longtan Hydroelectric Power Station, on the 
Hongshui River in southwest China's Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous 
Region. 
  Cheng Kejie, chairman of the region, told reporters that the 
hydropower station is believed to be second only to the 
projected Three Gorges Hydropower Station in scale, and when it 
is completed it will be the second-biggest in Asia. 
  During the first-phase construction, a water control dam 
with 
a height of 375 m [meters] will be built, and seven generating 
units with a total generating capacity of 4.2 million kw will be 
installed. When this phase is completed the hydropower station 
will generate 15.67 billion kwh of electricity a year, according 
to Cheng. 
  During the second-phase construction, two more generating 
units, with an aggregate generating capacity of 5.4 million kw, 
will be installed. 
  The entire project will require a total investment of 30 
billion yuan (about 3.448 billion U.S. dollars), of which 970 
million U.S. dollars will be provided in the form of World Bank 
loans. 
  The chairman explained that the station will not only 
provide 
more electricity for Guangxi, but also play a positive role in 
fighting flooding on the lower reaches of the Hongshui River. 
  He said that the new hydropower station will be jointly 
built 
by the State Energy Investment Corporation, Guizhou and 
Guangdong Provinces and Guangxi. 
  Guangxi will bear 25 percent of the total investment needed 
and will be able to use 50 percent of the electricity to be 
generated. 
  The Hongshui River abounds in hydroelectric resources. The 
State Council has approved the building of ten stepped 
hydropower stations, with a total generating capacity of 11 
million kw. 
  Construction has started on most of these hydropower 
stations; four of them have finished their first phases and are 
already transmitting electricity. 
  The chairman added that local departments are already busy 
with the preparatory work, including the building of highways 
leading to the construction site, for the formal launching of 
the Longtan Hydropower Station Project. 

