Language: <F P=105> Greek </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Stavros Liyeros: "Blockade and Dialogue"] </F>
  [Text] The diplomatic tug of war concerning the Greek 
countermeasures against Skopje [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia--FYROM] is in full swing, and the exact extent of 
western pressure on Athens is not completely clear. At the 
tactical level, this political battle will be judged by the 
government's resistance to western pressures, which is related 
to its ability to handle and blunt them. At the strategic 
level, though, the political battle will be judged by 
Papandreou's political ability to maneuver so as to capitalize 
on the negotiating advantage that has been gained with the 
implementation of the countermeasures, in order to get the best 
possible--and, above all, comprehensive and final--solution to 
the problem. 
  As is known, Athens has made lifting the blockade and 
resuming the dialogue conditional on Skopje's concessions on the 
issues of their flag, constitution, and propaganda. The 
negotiations over the name must result in erasing the term 
"Macedonia." That is why some government circles have made it 
clear that they would prefer an endless dialogue, with the Greek 
side insisting that "neither the term Macedonia nor its 
derivatives" are acceptable. But this short-sighted policy is 
tantamount to a "de facto" acceptance of the current name since, 
despite our nonrecognition, bilateral relations would be 
normalized. 
  Athens has every reason to seek a package solution, and 
[FYROM President Kiro] Gligorov wants this too. Greece could 
accept a resumption of the dialogue, even if Skopje does not 
give in to its conditions, but with the strict condition that 
the blockade will continue undiminished. In this way, the 
countermeasures will work as a strong lever, not only on the 
secondary issues (the flag and constitution), but also for the 
main bone of contention--Greece's demand that Skopje change its 
name. 
  Furthermore, this maneuver would present Greece in a 
conciliatory light and ease the pressure on it, since the 
international community has a tendency to pressure for talks 
without preconditions. The dilemma will be Gligorov's, who will 
either persist in his position of refusing to negotiate before 
the lifting of the blockade or will negotiate under the pressure 
of the blockade. In both cases, the Greek side will have the 
advantage. 

