Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Complete text of article obtained through NIKKEI BIZ </F>
DATABASE] 
  [Text] Ebara has formed a comprehensive partnership in the 
area of the environment with Lulugi (based in Frankfurt; 
president: Jan Peter Shaefer), a large engineering company in 
Germany. First, a subsidiary is expected to be established by 
the end of the year to decontaminate polluted soil in Japan 
using the technology provided by Lulugi. It is also planned to 
establish a subsidiary to burn waste plastic for power 
generation in Germany using Ebara's technology. 
Environment-related business is to be promoted collaboratively 
in Japan and Europe through the exchange of environment- related 
technologies of Japan and Germany. 
  The partnership between Ebara and Lulugi in the area of the 
environment consists of the establishment of subsidiaries, the 
cooperative development of new technologies, and mutual 
technological transfer involving their group companies. The new 
company to be established in Japan will remove hazardous 
materials in the soil using the technologies of Lulugi, which 
has been involved in decontaminating the soil at plant sites in 
Germany. Its capital is expected to be between &yen;100 and 200 
million, of which 51 percent will be financed by Ebara and 49 
percent by Lulugi. The new company will begin operation next 
year. 
  Another subsidiary will be established in Germany using 
Ebara's technologies and financed over 50 percent by Lulugi. The 
company will examine the construction of incineration facilities 
for waste plastic for power generation. 
  Ebara and Lulugi will promote cooperative research in the 
areas of waste sorting, energy collection by waste incineration, 
and the treatment of organic compounds, as well as on materials 
that are difficult to degrade. The companies have already begun 
to examine utilizing environment-related technologies already 
developed. Ebara plans to provide waste gas and water processing 
technologies. 
  Lulugi is an engineering company specializing in waste 
treatment as well as in the construction of chemical and 
metallurgical plants, with annual sales amounting to 2.5 billion 
German marks (approximately &yen;160 billion). 
  In the area of environment-related business, Mitsubishi and 
Mercedes-Benz, also Japanese and German firms, have formed a 
partnership for waste automobile recycling and plan to establish 
a subsidiary. Cooperation among companies of different nations 
based on the mutual use of their technologies will be 
accelerated. 

