BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Erik Bjorn Moller and Hendrik Qvortrup: "The </F>
Christian Democrats Hold the Balance"] 
  [Text] The strategy is clear. 
  The Christian People's Party intends to copy the Radical 
Liberals' old trick. The Christian People's Party is about to 
try to become the party that holds the balance of power. 
  For if one thing was clear after last week's many 
maneuverings at Christiansborg, it was the Christian People's 
Party's great need to underline its freedom. And therefore its 
influence. 
  And in Kolding this line was given the full backing of the 
party's national conference that has just come to an end. 
  For while no one has any doubts at all about the Radical 
Liberals' wholehearted ties with Nyrup Rasmussen, the Christian 
People's Party's leading politicians are now consciously 
avoiding choosing sides prior to the upcoming Folketing election. 
  Poul Nyrup Rasmussen (Social Democratic Party) must take 
nothing for granted -- nor should Hans Engell (Conservative 
People's Party) or Uffe Ellemann-Jensen (Liberal Party) for that 
matter. 
  The advantage of this tactic is obvious -- just ask the 
Radical Liberals: If you have not taken sides in advance it is 
easier to make demands. 
  On Saturday [30 April] the Christian People's Party drew an 
advance on the profits from its newly proclaimed key position in 
Danish politics. 
  With self-confidence and boldness the party's leading 
politicians put the Social Democrats and Prime Minister Poul 
Nyrup Rasmussen under pressure when they issued an ultimatum in 
BERLINGSKE TIDENDE demanding concessions in the field of child 
care in return for continued support for the Social Democrat-led 
government. 
  The question is whether throughout a long election campaign 
the Christian People's Party will be able to remain firm on not 
giving the voters a clear answer to the question of where its 
loyalties lie. In the past -- in the run-up to the election in 
1988 -- the Radical Liberals have learned the painful lesson of 
what happens when you do not make your position very clear in an 
election campaign. 
  Henning Lysholm Christensen, the Christian People's Party's 
Folketing group chairman, admits that it could be difficult: 
  "We will without doubt be subjected to great pressure to 
make 
our position clear -- but we will hold out," he said by way of 
guarantee. 
  The party will now use the next month to bring to a close 
the 
Folketing year and consequently round off the work of the 
present government. 
  After that political work will in reality come to an end -- 
and then the election campaign can begin in earnest. Then it is 
simply a case of making the party visible to the voters. 
Particularly in Ribe and Ringkobing districts where Christian 
People's Party skepticism toward government cooperation with the 
Social Democratic Party has been greatest. 
  The new Christian People's Party demand for changes in the 
field of child care is therefore unlikely to be the last issue 
on which the little center party adopts a position of its own. 
More demonstrations are to be expected -- and of each one of 
them it will be possible to say with complete certainty: They 
will definitely not make life easier for Poul Nyrup Rasmussen. 
  Even if the prime minister has not as yet commented on the 
various statements from the Christian People's Party, there can 
be no doubt that the party's behavior is being analyzed 
thoroughly at the Prime Minister's Office. 
  There was an indication recently that leading Social 
Democratic ministers have respect for the little party with its 
four Folketing seats when after several months of pressure 
Justice Minister Erling Olsen (Social Democratic Party) bowed to 
Merethe Due Jensen and Inger Stilling Pedersen who pushed 
successfully for a new law against child pornography. 
  In doing so the minister made himself very unpopular with 
one 
of the other small parties in the government, the Radical 
Liberals. 
  However, Erling Olsen made no secret of the fact that the 
change in the law is due to consideration of the Christian 
People's Party in particular. 
  It is particularly significant that the Social Democrats are 
doing a lot to comply with the Christian People's Party. They 
are doing so to maintain the links with the Christian People's 
Party, which at regular intervals has voiced doubts about 
government cooperation. 
  The Social Democrats know from bitter experience that the 
Christian People's Party is a much more uncertain partner than 
the Radical Liberals. [Radical Liberal leader] Jelved's troops 
thus now seem to be more determined than ever to continue the 
close cooperation with the Social Democratic Party. And Nyrup 
Rasmussen does not therefore need to expend so much of his 
energies in that quarter. 
  There can be no doubt that Jann Sjursen, the Christian 
People's Party chairman and energy minister, will now use the 
coming months up to the election to take soundings to find out 
who will help his party to get the largest number of their 
flagship issues implemented. 
  For once election day is over, the young party leader will 
in 
all probability find himself in the stressful situation of 
having to decide in a matter of a few hours which prime 
ministerial candidate the party will back. 
  And then what's done is done. 
  And then the little party's freedom will be nothing to write 
home about. 

