Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by re: "Corrosion Research Can Help Avoid Billions </F>
in Damage"] 
  [Text] Frankfurt--Each year corrosion causes losses 
amounting to about 100 billion German marks [DM] in Germany. But 
a large part of the damage could be avoided if the existing 
knowledge were correctly used. Dechema Deutsche Gesellschaft 
fuer Chemisches Apparatewesen, Chemische Technik und 
Biotechnologie eV, Frankfurt, is drawing attention to this on 
the occasion of the Corrosion and Corrosion Protection Research 
and Development Program (FEKKs), which is now being held in 
Leipzig (22 to 25 November) concurrently with the Innomata '93 
international exhibition meeting for materials technology and 
materials applications. 
  A 20 to 30 percent share of the corrosion damage cannot be 
avoided, however, because it is the result of our technical 
development. Primarily the use of new or further developed 
materials and the use of known materials for new applications 
always leads to unexpected corrosion damage from previously 
unknown corrosion mechanisms. 
  The research program on corrosion protection, which has been 
under way for 20 years, with more than 500 individual projects, 
is estimated by experts to have contributed benefits worth 
billions. It is also said to be the basis for solving future 
tasks. Through the intensive coordination and cooperation 
between materials producers and users and research institutes, 
the knowledge about corrosion processes and corrosion protection 
has grown tremendously and has today been included in the 
standards. 
  As Dechema further reports, there are also examples of 
direct 
conversion of the know-how. Thus, a patent for the production of 
aluminum-rich surface layers on steels is being used by a small 
enterprise to protect flaps and shafts which are under extreme 
thermal stress in engine control systems. 
  In the last few year corrosion experts have devoted 
themselves in detail to the problems of construction with 
concrete. It has been possible to develop an electrochemical 
method for localizing places in the concrete where the 
reinforcing steel corrodes. It was further possible to 
demonstrate that it is electrochemically possible to realkalize 
concrete while simultaneously extracting the 
corrosion-triggering chloride. With this process the original 
protective effect of the concrete can be restored. The 
experience and success of the now concluding program have, in 
Dechema's opinion, shown how important long-term, continuous 
support in the field of corrosion research is. The emergence of 
new technologies continuously makes new demands on corrosion 
protection, it was further said. For example, completely new 
concepts and methods of study are necessary for microtechnology, 
because corrosion rates on the order of microns a year are not 
tolerable, while in classic equipment engineering materials with 
such rates are classed as "stable." 
  The importance of microbiologically induced corrosion as a 
cause of damage has only really been recognized in the last few 
years. In this field as well, interdisciplinary cooperation 
between microbiologists and materials and corrosion experts and 
other disciplines must be strengthened in the future. 

