Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Thailand will continue implementing Asean's 
constructive engagement policy towards Burma, which has shown 
positive signs of returning to democracy, Foreign Minister 
Prasong Sunsiri said. 
  Rangoon had also expressed an interest in participating in 
Asean activities, including the Asean annual conference in July 
next year. 
  "Thailand's foreign policy for 1994 will continue give 
priority to neighbouring countries, particularly Burma, as the 
situation in the other countries such as Cambodia is improving 
to a satisfactory level," the minister said. 
  He repeated his earlier assertions that Laos, Vietnam, Burma 
and Cambodia should become more involved in the Asean forum. 
Laos and Vietnam have observer status; Cambodia was invited as 
"guest" to last year's Asean meeting in Singapore. 
  There was strong opposition within Asean until recently to 
Thai proposals to invite Rangoon to the annual meeting of the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations in Bangkok in July, due 
to its record of human rights violations and refusal to hand 
over administrative power to a government elected in the May 
1990 general polls. 
  According to Prasong, Singaporean Prime Minister Goh Chok 
Tong, during his recent visit to Bangkok, had shown a "positive 
response" to Bangkok's move to invite Rangoon to the July 
meeting. He did not elaborate. However government spokesman 
Aphisit Wetchachiwa told reporters during Goh's visit that 
Singapore preferred the issue be considered by the Asean senior 
officials meeting. 
  Prasong unofficially invited Burma to attend the annual 
Asean 
meeting as a "guest" during an official visit to Rangoon in 
September to co-chair the first Thai-Burma Joint Commission 
meeting. Burmese leaders said then they needed more time to 
consider the matter. 
  The minister, a former head of the National Security 
Council, 
reiterated his belief that a constructive engagement policy is 
more effective than trade sanctions as a means of encouraging 
Burma towards democracy. 
  The House Committee on human rights and justice recently 
sent 
a letter to members of Asean's Inter-Parliamentary Organization 
(IPO), asking them to push their governments to set conditions 
before accepting Burma into the six-nation regional grouping. 

