Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Pamela Gill] </F>
  [Text] Bridgetown, Barbados, Nov 26, CANA -- Barbados, 
trying to control an outbreak of the mosquito-borne disease 
dengue fever, has 13 confirmed cases, senior medical officer Dr. 
Ronald Knight reported Friday. 
  Dr Knight told CANA at least 100 people have been tested for 
the disease. He added that over the past week, one or two 
persons have been coming forward daily to be tested. 
  "We have already had 100 cases for confirmation and out of 
that 100, we have had 13 confirmed cases. The people that are 
coming forward are those who feel they are displaying symptoms 
of the disease and are requesting confirmation of the disease," 
Dr Knight said. 
  The senion medical officer said that while there have been 
general reports of the disease around the island, the outbreak 
is increasingly being reported in larger heavily populated areas. 
  "Generally, the majority of cases are being reported in the 
areas of St. Michael, St. James, and to a lesser extent Christ 
Church, and these areas will obviously be the focus of the 
eradication programme," he said. 
  Against this backdrop, Dr Knight said the Ministry of Health 
was stepping up its eradication and control programme to stem 
the spread of the disease. 
  He said: "We are targetting households in those affected 
area 
with the objective of cleanin up those areas where the 
mosquitoes are likely to breed. We are also stepping up our 
public education drive to sensitise the general public about the 
disease." 
  The senior medical officer expressed optimism about 
controlling the outbreak. 
  "I am very optimistic, that we will be able to control this 
outbreak and that it will not last for very long," he said. He 
added that Barbados had had previous outbreaks of the disease 
which did not last very long. 
  Dr. Knight attributed the outbreak to some extent on the 
"rainy season," noting that an outbreak of dengue fever and 
other communicable diseases often coincide with the rainy season 
in the Caribbean. 

