BFN 

  [Text] A loud explosion rocked a guarded area in downtown 
Zamboanga City late last night wounding at least 20 people. A 
report quoted by the Philippines News Agency said the explosion 
occurred in front of the Lehan Ice Cream House at about 1335, 
the place -- a large area of Zamboanga City -- under total 
darkness. 
  Police said most of the victims of explosion have been 
rushed 
to the nearby Zamboanga City Medical Center for treatment of 
shrapnel wounds. Chief Superintendent Roberto Lastimoso, 
Philippine National Police Regional Command 9 commander, said 
the explosion could have been a spillover of the ongoing 
military operations against the Abu Sayyaf group in Patikul, 
Sulu. 
  Meantime, a morning daily in Manila quoted the Zamboanga 
police as saying that the car where the bomb was apparently 
hidden was a total wreck. 
  Land mines planted by Muslim guerrillas, by the Abu Sayyaf, 
had slowed down a government assault on the bandits' stronghold 
in Patikul, Sulu. The military said that none of the marines 
advancing towards the main rebel camp in Patikul have been hit 
by the land mines. 
  Maj. Gen. Orlando Soriano, Southern Command chief, said the 
rebels are determined to put out their last stand on Mount 
Patikul. He said that the rebels have ignored appeals by Muslim 
civilian officials to give up. 
  The fighting has so far claimed the lives of 35 rebels and 
seven government troops. General Soriano said the military will 
continue to pursue the Moro bandits, adding that the rebels have 
run out of ammunition. 
  The Abu Sayyaf group is being held responsible for the 
series 
of killings and kidnappings-for-ransom in Mindanao. The group 
has also opposed peace talks and a cease-fire between the 
government and the Moro National Liberation Front, which has 
kept a hands-off policy on the military offensive. 
  The military assault began early Friday morning with about 
3,000 troops backed by tanks, navy gunboats, and helicopter 
gunships launching land, sea, air raids to flush an estimated 
140 guerrillas from their mountain hideout. 
  There are still no word on Abu Sayyaf Chieftain Abdul Rajik 
Janjalani, against whom an order of capture -- dead or alive -- 
has been issued. 

