Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lorenz Winter: "ACRI Plans to Market Own First </F>
Supercomputer Model in 1996"; Subheadline: "Former Bull Director 
Stern Is Company's Owner"] 
  [Text] Paris--By mid-1995, the 
Advanced Computer Research International [ACRI] firm, 
headquartered in Lyon, intends to unveil the initial prototype 
of the supercomputer it will have developed. When Jaques Stern 
first announced his objective in 1989, it was pretty risky 
business wanting to be on a par with companies like Cray, NEC, 
Hitachi or IBM. 
  Because of some skillful maneuvering by ACRI's founder, 
however, the project finally won credibility in recent months. 
In early 1993, for instance, DEC, Bull, France Telecom, energy 
supplier EDF, the holding industry of France's atomic energy 
commission and two banks invested FF40 million (approximately 
DM13 million) in Stern's company. Company spokeswoman, Anne 
Schroeder believes: "That will help us to narrow the gap with 
other European developers like Meiko in England, Parsytec in 
Germany or even Archipel and Telmat in France, and even to 
outstrip some of them before too long." 
<H5>  Cray Minority Participation Conceivable </H5>
  In the February operation, none of the partners was supposed 
to have acquired more than seven percent in ACRI. A second 
capital increase is supposed to follow this autumn. According to 
Stern, it will be "broader and more international in scope" than 
the first one. That would make ACRI more extensively secure 
financially, but its owner will then have to forgo his present 
capital majority. 
  Fifty percent of the firm's initial capital came from Stern 
SA trust assets, 25 percent took the form of a French government 
loan and the remaining 25 percent came from the European 
Community's [EC] Esprit program. 
  Shortly after the initial injection of capital, Stern came 
to 
an agreement with DEC, whereby, except for a processor it 
developed on its own, ACRI will also use the U.S. Alpha-Reduced 
Instruction Set Computer [RISC] Central Processing Unit [CPU] 
and its UNIX version for its computers. 
<H5>  Sales Offices Planned for U.S. and Europe </H5>
  In April, then, there was an additional technology 
partnership with Cray. Under its terms, the French and Americans 
established the Acset company in Belgium to develop a common 
compiler for both companies' equipment. Nearly 20 of ACRI's and 
Cray's engineers and technicians are also supposed to be 
cooperating via Acset on the portability and optimization of 
applications programs. According to Stern, subsequent minority 
participation by Cray in ACRI is "not inconceivable." 
  ACRI currently employs a total of 160 employees. Even before 
yearend, the number of jobs is supposed to climb to 200. The 
company is already scouting out new spaces downtown, in 
preparation for production of the initial small series run. 
Company spokeswoman Schroeder opines that, after the 1995 
prototypes, a final entry-level model and a range of 
modular-construction computers can be expected. 
  Initially, about 10 preliminary installations are planned 
among a number of preferred customers in French and European 
industry. Supercomputers are used in the petroleum sector and 
the auto industry for modeling of products and processes. Stern 
believes that now, biochemistry, pharmaceuticals, banking and 
insurance are also appropriate users. In industry, mainframes 
are mostly obsolescent. Yet, the penetration of scientific 
methods in corporate management is rapidly creating demand for a 
new generation of large computers. 
  ACRI is already planning to set up a sales representation to 
market its products in the U.S. and another one for the European 
market. As Stern emphasizes: "not necessarily headquartered in 
France." 

