Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] French Cooperation Minister Michel Roussin 
arrived in Bangui this morning for the implementation of backup 
measures concerning the devaluation. Soon after he arrived, Mr. 
Roussin went to meet the country's authorities, particularly 
President Ange-Felix Patasse, who granted him a very lengthy 
audience late this morning. At the end of the audience, the 
French minister expressed satisfaction with the resumption of 
school activities and work in the public sector. He also 
reiterated his country's stand towards Africa by stating that 
France is not abandoning Africa. He redefined the orientation 
of French aid, and referred to the 30-billion French franc 
package allocated to banks in the franc zone. Here is Mr. 
Roussin responding to questions from the press. 
  [Begin recording] [Roussin] Whenever France makes 
commitments it honors them. When Africa makes certain decisions 
France remains loyal to it. When it is said here and there that 
France is ditching Africa, France is abandoning its friends, and 
that a new page has been turned -- that is all baseless. You 
are not abandoning your friends when you give 30 billion francs 
to help them go through a delicate transition for the 
relaunching of real growth and development. That is not true. 
So, indeed, not only have we taken considerable measures -- 
during a difficult period for us -- to support this courageous 
decision from the African countries -- and it will be seen 
within a few months that all of us within the franc zone made a 
good decision -- but even the backup measures have to be 
negotiated between the various parties. 
  We have also put strong pressure on international 
institutions so that everybody, taking into account the efforts 
made by Africa, in turn, comes to Africa's aid. On 22 February, 
I will be going to Brussels to see EC chief Jacques Delors and, 
there too, champion Africa's cause and explain the efforts that 
have been made, so that Europe can also participate in assisting 
Africa. You talked about the backup measures [words indistinct] 
minister with whom we met this morning, well, France will make 
additional efforts. You know, in addition, we have constituted 
a special fund to help -- in countries where this will be 
necessary -- the most underprivileged people during this 
transition period following the devaluation decision, until the 
point arrives where economies start picking up again under the 
new conditions. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] You talked about 30 billion 
francs, how will these funds be distributed among the various 
countries? 
  [Roussin] These 30 billion francs represent general aid from 
France. In effect, it constitutes the cancellation of Africa's 
debt. Africa owed France 25 billion francs, and we are 
canceling that debt. There is 5 billion in project assistance 
-- France wants to keep this rate up in cooperation efforts, 
efforts made by the government and which are accepted by the 
National Assembly and the Senate -- which is continuing. In 
addition, we have this special social assistance fund. [passage 
omitted] Therefore, France does not intend to ditch Africa. 
France without Africa would not be the same. We are bound, we 
are united. The success of these current operations will be the 
success of Africa, it will be that of the Central African 
Republic, and also that of France. We are closely bound within 
the franc zone family and nobody can [words indistinct]. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Correspondent] [passage indistinct] 
  [Roussin] I know that on 15 February an agreement was signed 
between the appropriate minister and the head of mission. I 
myself have signed other agreements that [words indistinct] were 
very considerable and that apparently have been disbursed. The 
French Cooperation Fund has been given very specific directives. 
The Cooperation Mission has been given very specific 
directives. The IMF has committed itself. The World Bank has 
committed itself -- the first disbursements of the World Bank 
for some countries are already under way -- and we have never 
joined hands as much as now in order to manage a problem of such 
dimensions. [passage omitted] [end recording] 

