BFN 

<F P=106> [Shandong government work report delivered by Zhao Zhihao, </F>
governor of Shandong, at the second session of the eighth 
provincial people's congress on 28 February] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies: 
  On behalf of the provincial people's government, I will now 
present a government work report to this session for discussion. 
Members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference [CPPCC], other personnel attending as observers 
please give your opinions. 
  1. Shandong Fulfilled the Second 100-Percent-Increase Target 
of the Economy Ahead of Schedule in 1993 To Lay a Foundation for 
Basically Achieving Modernization. 
  The past year was one when Shandong's reform, opening up, 
and 
modernization drive were further accelerated and other 
undertakings developed vigorously. Under the leadership of the 
party Central Committee, the State Council, and the provincial 
party committee, governments at all levels united and led the 
people across the province to conscientiously implement the 
guidelines of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's important speeches and the 
14th party congress, to resolutely carry out the series of 
central principles, policies, and measures for deepening reform, 
speeding up development, and strengthening and improving 
macroeconomic regulation and control, to make earnest efforts to 
do practical work, to go all out to pioneer the way forward, and 
to successfully fulfill the 1993 work tasks defined at the first 
session of the eighth provincial people's congress. An 
encouraging situation characterized by economic development, 
political stability, unity of the people, and social progress 
emerged provincewide. 
  We maintained the good trend of rapid development in the 
economy and achieved increases basically at the same pace in 
growth rate and efficiency. The annual gross domestic product 
totaled 270.09 billion yuan, up 24.2 percent from the preceding 
year, marking the largest annual increase since reform and 
opening up started. The rural economy developed in all sectors, 
with agricultural output value totaling 99.4 billion yuan, up 
14.3 percent; grain output hit an all-time high despite 
catastrophic disasters to reach 41 million tonnes; and forestry, 
animal husbandry, sideline production, fishery, and township 
enterprises grew at a high speed. Industrial production 
registered a substantial increase and improved efficiency, with 
output value totaling 598 billion yuan, up 57.2 percent. 
Industrial enterprises at and above the township level 
registered a 35.7-percent growth rate, increased the marketing 
rate of their products to 95.9 percent, achieved a 43.2-percent 
increase in profits and taxes, and made their overall index of 
economic efficiency 98.7 percent, up 8.7 percentage points. The 
Jinan- Qingdao Expressway, the first-phase work of Qingdao's 
Qianwan Port, the Dongming Bridge across Huang He, and other key 
construction projects were completed and commissioned to further 
improve infrastructural facilities and the investment climate 
and effect a new change in urban and rural outlook. The 
financial situation took a turn for the better, and revenues 
increased by a large margin. Shandong's local revenue totaled 
19.44 billion yuan, up 38.8 percent, thus achieving a balance 
between the revenue and the expenditure of the year. Markets 
thrive. Retail sales of commodities totaled 99.38 billion yuan, 
up 24.8 percent, and the retail price index rose by 10.7 
percent. Living standards were further improved. Urban 
people's per capita cost of living income was 2,338 yuan, and 
peasants' per capita net income was 953 yuan, up 11.1 and 6.1 
percent, respectively, when allowing for price rises. Urban and 
rural people's savings deposits showed an increase of 23.4 
billion yuan over the figure registered at the beginning of the 
year. 
  We facilitated overall reform and opening up, which played a 
notably greater role in promoting development. All levels in 
the province emancipated the mind, sought truth from facts, and 
began to develop in both range and quality the reform designed 
to establish the socialist market economy system. By 
implementing the "enterprise law" and "regulations," enterprises 
made new headway in transforming their operating mechanism. A 
major breakthrough was achieved in the experiment with the 
shareholding system. Shareholding enterprises at and above the 
county level throughout the province increased to 1,101 of which 
five had their shares listed; and shareholding cooperatives 
increased to 59,000. We stepped up efforts to establish the 
market system and the social security system, added impetus to 
the price reform, and further deepened reforms in the 
macroeconomic regulation and control system. Reform of 
government organizations and the transformation of government 
functions was accelerated. The reform of organizations at 
county and township levels was basically completed. Enough 
preparations were made for the reform of organizations at the 
provincial, city, and prefectural levels. The level of opening 
to the outside world was enhanced, and the scale expanded. The 
number of cities that established friendly ties with foreign 
cities reached 50, and grass-roots non- governmental units that 
established friendly ties with foreign units reached 119. 
Foreign economic relations and trade developed further. Import 
and export trade rose substantially. The province as a whole 
earned $5.98 billion in foreign exchange from exports, an 
increase of 27.1 percent over 1992. In 1993, a total of 8,012 
foreign-invested projects were approved, an increase of 72.3 
percent; and a total of $2.26 billion in foreign funds were 
actually utilized, up by 64.2 percent. A marked increase was 
effected in infrastructure, tertiary industry, and projects with 
a huge amount of investment and advanced technology. Of these 
projects, 257 each involved $10 million yuan in investment. New 
headway was made in international economic cooperation, the 
contracting of labor service abroad, and tourism. 
  New progress was made in science, technology, education, and 
other social undertakings, and the building of the spiritual 
civilization was enhanced continuously. In 1993, the province 
achieved a total of 2,858 major scientific research results and 
popularized and applied 2,263 results. Construction of high and 
new technology development zones was accelerated. All levels 
and all kinds of education developed in a relatively rapid 
manner. The enrollment rate of school-age children was 98.7 
percent, and the number of students attending ordinary 
institutions of higher learning increased by 22,000 persons and 
reached 152,000 persons. Adult education and workers' education 
were valued and a good beginning was made in encouraging society 
to run adult and workers' education. Family planning witnessed 
a remarkable result. The natural population growth rate was 
dropped to 3.71 per thousand, and the rate of family planning 
was enhanced to 88.4 percent. Environmental protection and land 
management were strengthened. New results were achieved in 
culture, public health, sports, press and publication, radio, 
film, television, social welfare, nationalities, religion, 
Taiwan affairs, overseas Chinese affairs, aged people, history, 
and archives. The building of democracy and the legal system 
was strengthened. Severe blows were dealt to all kinds of 
crimes. Comprehensive management of social order was 
strengthened, and social order was relatively good. Remarkable 
results were achieved in dealing blows to smuggling. The 
anti-corruption campaign was deepened gradually and soundly. Of 
the total 5,856 cases of various kinds were investigated and 
handled, 382 were major and appalling cases, and of the 3,974 
cadres who were punished, 44 were at or above the county and 
section levels. The sense of being clean and honest and being 
strict with oneself was strengthened at cadre levels. The 
spreading trend of some negative and corrupt phenomena was 
checked at the start. This basically met the anticipated 
demands of the central authorities and the provincial party 
committee. 
  Fellow deputies, here I want to happily announce the fact 
that thanks to the arduous work of the people throughout the 
province over the past dozen of years, the GNP in 1993 was 
already 4.3 times that in 1980, fulfilling the quadrupling task 
7 years ahead of schedule, and successfully accomplishing the 
first-step development objective of the province's three-step 
strategy. This shows that the province's modernization has 
embarked on a new period. This is a great historical 
achievement that all the people in the province can be proud of! 
  In the review and summary of government work in the past 
year, we paid attention to the following several points: 
  First, we kept a clear head and positively and soundly 
strengthened and improved overall control. All levels of 
governments in the province conscientiously implemented the 
guidelines of the central instructions, combined overall control 
with the invigoration of the economy to resolve the 
contradictions and problems emerging in economic development, 
and made great efforts to deepen reform, thus effecting a series 
of basic changes in economic life. Confusion in the financial 
order, that once existed has taken a noticeable turn for the 
better. The trend of investment in fixed assets increasing at an 
excessively rapid speed was brought under control. The 
phenomenon of providing "IOU" notes to farm and sideline produce 
sellers was basically eliminated. Not only was the 
macroeconomic environment improved but the high national 
economic growth trend continued to be maintained. Second, in 
line with the implementation of the "3321" project, we paid firm 
attention to the weak links and upgraded the quality of economic 
operation. We concentrated capital to ensure the development of 
a group of key technological transformation projects. The 
investment in technological transformation increased by 79 
percent during the year. We continued to relax policies and 
vigorously developed the tertiary industry and the private and 
individual sectors of the economy. The increase rate of the 
tertiary industry reached 32.5 percent. The proportion of the 
individual and private sectors of the economy in the economy of 
the province rose. Economically powerful counties and townships 
continued to bring their leading roles into play. The province 
had 11 counties (cities and districts) each creating over 10 
billion yuan in industrial and agricultural output value. Nine 
counties with financial subsidies comprehensively experimented 
with reform and opening up. The areas where the economy was not 
well developed further enhanced their development vitality. 
Great headway was made in building Shandong on the sea and 
developing the Huang He delta. Third, we paid attention to 
persisting in the principle of taking a two-hands approach and 
being sure that both hands are tough in strengthening the work 
in the ideological and political sphere. The broad masses of 
cadres and people were organized to conscientiously study the 
third volume of the "Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping" and the 
guidelines of the third plenary session of the 14th party 
Central Committee, attended to both ideological and political 
work and economic work, further emancipated the mind, and were 
mobilized with enthusiasm. We persistently did administrative 
work according to laws and accelerated the pace of making 
economic laws. Nine local rules and regulations were reported 
to the provincial people's congress and its standing committee 
for examinations and approvals and 16 regulations of the 
provincial government were issued. The education on national 
defense and the militia reserve service was strengthened. We 
positively launched the activities of supporting the army and 
giving preferential treatment to families of revolutionary 
martyrs and servicemen, supporting the government and cherishing 
the people, and mobilizing the army and the people to develop 
spiritual civilization. Thus, the unity between the army and 
the government and between the army and the people was further 
consolidated. Fourth, we further changed the functions, 
intensified service, and strengthened the self-construction of 
governments. All levels paid attention to linking the central 
policies and principles with the local actual conditions, 
strengthened investigation and study, firmly attended to the 
implementation of policies and principles, and upgraded the 
policy-making level and the work efficiency to a new height. We 
conscientiously solved the problems of wantonly collecting 
funds, apportioning expenses, and collecting charges that the 
grass roots and the masses had strong complaints on and 
corrected the unhealthy trends within trades. We adopted 
effective measures to reduce the peasants' burdens. The 
provincial government formulated regulations to cancel 75 items 
on collecting charges. Simultaneously, all cities, prefectures, 
and counties canceled a number of charge collection items. What 
we should especially point out is: Some localities across the 
province were hit by extraordinarily serious floods and 
waterlogging disasters last summer. The party Central Committee 
and the State Council showed cordial concern to us. The broad 
masses of cadres and people in the disastrous areas were 
mobilized to combat the disasters and provide relief on their 
own. The officers and men of the People's Liberation Army units 
and the armed police forces were fighting in the forefront of 
dealing with the emergency. All localities and units and the 
broad masses of cadres and people donated more than 100 million 
yuan worth of money and materials and helped the disastrous 
people restore production and rebuild their houses. A 
magnificent song was composed. Practice showed again that as 
long as we unite as one and fight in a unified way, we will 
overcome all difficulties and be ever-victorious. 
  Fellow deputies, although we achieved great achievements in 
our province's various undertakings last year, we still have to 
face many difficulties and restraining factors in the course of 
development. The agricultural foundation is weak, the 
comparable returns are low, cotton production has greatly 
declined, the burdens of peasants in some localities have 
remained heavy, and the increase in the actual income of 
peasants is not rapid. The progress of economic structural 
readjustment is slow, the advantages for developing leading 
industries have not been formed, brand-name and competitive 
products are few in number, and tertiary industry has remained a 
prominent and weak aspect. The problem of low economic 
efficiency has not been fundamentally tackled, some enterprises 
are poorly managed, deficits have increased, and the efficiency 
of funds is not high. The problem of uneven regional economic 
development is quite prominent, some localities in the western 
part of the province have to face many difficulties in economic 
development, the corrupt phenomena of using public funds for 
wining and dining and sending gifts, using public funds for 
travelling, engaging in extravagance and waste, and abusing 
one's powers to seek personal gains still exist in some 
localities and units and among a small number of people. There 
are some public security problems which we must not neglect. 
The number of major and appalling cases have increased in some 
localities, some repulsive social phenomena have become frequent 
occurences, and serious smuggling activities have occurred in 
some coastal areas, bringing great harm to the province. We 
must pay great attention to these problems and rely on the great 
support and active participation of the people across the 
province and various social sectors to solve them more rapidly 
and successfully. 
  2. We Should Clearly Define This Year's Principles and Tasks 
for Economic and Social Development and Push the Modernization 
Drive to a New Stage 
  The year 1994 is an important year for reaching the Eighth 
Five-Year Plan ahead of schedule on the basis of achieving a 300 
percent increase in Shandong's economy and accelerating the 
establishment of the socialist market economic structure, 
therefore, the reform and development tasks will be very 
arduous. To analyze the economic development trend and 
international and domestic conditions, we realize that we are 
facing not only a good opportunity but also a severe challenge. 
After two years of rapid development, some conditions for 
economic development have been used and some new restraining 
factors have emerged. However, a new group of basic industries 
and infrastructure facilities have started to show efficiency; 
the steady increase in investment and consumption will expand 
market demands; the opportunity for international trade and 
investment and cooperation will noticeably increase, and, in 
particular, the issuance of a series of important reform 
measures will greatly strengthen the vitality for economic 
development. Judging from the overall situation, our province 
still has conditions for maintaining a fairly rapid economic 
growth, and will face hard-earned good opportunity for reform 
and development for a considerable long period of time to come. 
We must seize the opportune moments to push the modernization 
drive to new heights. Meanwhile, we should remain clear-headed 
to note that competition at home and abroad becomes increasingly 
intense, and that we are in a crucial period for reform and 
development, during which no progress or small progress means 
retrogression. In the new year, in line with the general demand 
for "seizing the opportunity, deepening reform, opening wider, 
promoting development, and maintaining stability" as put forward 
by the party Central Committee, we should take Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the party's basic line as the guide, 
thoroughly implement the guidelines of the 14th party congress, 
the third plenary session of the 14th party Central Committee, 
and the sixth provincial party congress, persistently emancipate 
the mind and seek truth from facts, facilitate reform in an 
all-round manner, open wider to the outside world, accelerate 
scientific and technological progress, greatly adjust the 
structure, improve economic efficiency, achieve substantial 
progress in establishing the basic framework for the socialist 
market economy system, maintain sustained, rapid, and healthy 
economic development, and promote social stability and overall 
progress. 
  The basic tasks of our economic and social development for 
this year are as follows: 
  We should maintain sustained, rapid, and healthy economic 
development. We should take economic construction as the 
central task, firmly embrace the guiding thought that 
"development is the essential criterion," do our best, act 
according to our capacity, and greatly develop any item for 
which there is a market, has good efficiency, is good in 
structure, has full capacity for sustained development, and is 
export-oriented. After taking all factors into consideration, 
we plan to arrange a 12-percent increase in the gross domestic 
product, which, translated, will be a 4-percent increase in the 
primary industry, a 13-percent increase in the secondary 
industry, and an 18-percent increase in the tertiary industry. 
  We should make a substantial step in reform and opening up. 
Following the state's unified arrangements and focusing on 
establishing the modern enterprise system and promoting the 
reform of the financial, tax, banking, investment, foreign 
trade, housing, state property management systems, we should 
conduct reform in rural areas and in social security, science 
and technology, education, and culture in a coordinated manner 
and do a good job in establishing the market system. We should 
speed up the integration with the international economy and make 
our economy more export-oriented. We should make the growth 
rate in exports for earning foreign exchange higher than that in 
the entire economy to reach 16 percent, and efforts should be 
exerted to make it 20 percent. We should strive to increase the 
three newly approved types of foreign-funded enterprises to over 
10,000 and to increase by more than 50 percent the actual amount 
of foreign capital used in the year. 
  We should improve the entire quality of the national economy 
to a new level. We should correctly handle relations between 
growth rate, structure, and efficiency and improve the quality 
of economic development. We should continue to adjust the 
proportions of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries 
and their respective structures and, while strengthening the 
primary industry and improving the secondary industry, greatly 
expand the tertiary industry to increase its proportion to the 
gross domestic product by 2 percentage points. We should 
restructure investment, increase the investment in energy, 
transportation, telecommunications, water conservancy, and other 
basic industries, and greatly increase the proportion of the 
investment in technical transformation. We should strive to 
raise economic efficiency and achieve a 20-percent increase in 
the profits and taxes of the industrial enterprises at and above 
the township level, a 6-percent increase in labor productivity, 
and a 10-percent increase in revenue. 
  It is necessary to promote coordinated economic development 
of the eastern and western parts of the province. We should 
further implement the principle of the eastern and western parts 
of the province making concerted efforts to develop together and 
learn from each other's advantages. The eastern area should 
upgrade standing and technological levels and promote the 
development of the economy along with the requirements for high 
layers and export orientation. The western area should continue 
to vitalize itself, go all out to seek prosperity, define 
development ideas, accurately select breakthrough points, 
further lay a good foundation, expand the scale of development, 
and make improvements. In the course of deepening reform, we 
should study and formulate the new ideas and methods for helping 
the economically underdeveloped areas in the financial and tax, 
monetary, and investment spheres by providing them with skilled 
persons; expand the dynamics of support; and conscientiously 
attend to the implementation of these new ideas and methods. 
The number of economically underdeveloped counties whose trial 
reform and opening up are directly grasped by the province 
should increase to 25. These counties should be supported 
simultaneously by economically powerful counties and provincial- 
level departments. The remaining economically underdeveloped 
counties should be assisted by cities and prefectures to which 
they belong. Through overall support measures, we should 
promote rapid development of the western area. 
  It is necessary to comprehensively develop all social 
undertakings. It is necessary to handle the relationship 
between economic growth and social development; pay attention to 
spiritual civilization; and promote the fast development of 
scientific and technological, educational, and cultural 
undertakings. Achievements in family planning work are 
necessary. The natural population growth rate should be 
controlled within 6 per thousand. Achievements in work for the 
elderly are necessary. On the basis of developing the economy, 
we should continue to improve the people's livelihood. The per 
capita spendable income of urbanites and the net income of 
peasants should respectively increase by 18 percent and 16 
percent. 
  It is necessary to continuously maintain social stability. 
Stability is a necessary condition for economic development and 
smooth reform. So, we must conscientiously handle the 
relationship between stability, development, and reform. The 
work in these three aspects should equally be taken into 
consideration and promote one another. In carrying out the 
reform that is closely related to the benefits of the masses, we 
should take into full consideration the capacity of all fronts 
and steadily and positively promote reform. It is necessary to 
control currency inflation and to keep price hikes under 10 
percent or so. We should pay attention to and appropriately 
handle hotly-debated issues and difficulties that the masses are 
concerned with, alleviate various kinds of contradictions, keep 
social stability, and create a relaxed environment for reform 
and development. 
  3. We Should Further Intensify Agriculture's Role as the 
Foundation of the National Economy, Optimize Structure, Upgrade 
Efficiency, and Promote Faster and Better Economic Development. 
  To fulfill 1994's economic and social development tasks, we 
must make unified arrangements, make focal points stand out, and 
focus our efforts to grasping the work in the following eight 
spheres: 
  A. We should intensify agriculture's role as the foundation 
of the national economy and comprehensively develop the rural 
economy. 
  Agriculture, rural areas, and the peasants are great issues 
related to economic development, the improvement of the people's 
livelihood, and social stability. All levels should firmly 
foster the strategic idea of taking agriculture as the 
foundation of the national economy, stabilize the basic policies 
toward the rural areas, deepen rural reform, focus agricultural 
and rural work tasks on increasing the peasants' income and the 
supply of farm products, positively promote intensive farming, 
and accelerate the development of the rural economy according to 
market demands and the modernization of the rural economy. 
  We should continue to readjust rural economic structure and 
vigorously develop high-yield, good-quality, and highly 
efficient agriculture and market agriculture. Grain output 
increased by a big margin last year. This year, we should 
strengthen measures and strive to maintain the 1993 grain 
production volume or register a slight increase. We should 
exert great efforts to change the cotton production decrease 
situation, further perfect policies, realistically solve the 
problems in the links from growing to purchasing, assign cotton 
sown areas, increase per unit yield, and ensure that the cotton 
production will restore to the normal level as soon as possible. 
We should continue to comprehensively develop agriculture and a 
diversified economy; vigorously develop animal husbandry, 
aquatic product industry, and forest fruit industry; and 
increase their proportion in the total agricultural output 
value. We should accelerate the cultivation of rural markets 
and guide peasants to organize production in line with the 
demands of the market economy and the orientation of 
specialization and industrialization. It is necessary to 
further improve the rural socialized service system, organize 
the establishment of "dragon-head" enterprises and production 
bases, and accelerate the building of storage, processing, and 
circulation facilities for farm products. We should 
conscientiously grasp the "nonstaple foods" project and improve 
urban and rural market supply. 
  We should increase investment in agriculture, science, and 
technology. The investment in agriculture and the amount of 
agriculture-oriented funds and loans should show an increase 
over the previous year. We should develop and improve the 
foundation for rural cooperation and extend the rural 
shareholding cooperative system from the secondary industry to 
the primary and tertiary industries. Strenuous efforts should 
be made in farmland capital construction with water conservancy 
as the focus, in alleviating the contradiction of the shortage 
of water resources, doing a good job in managing water diversion 
and storage projects, paying attention to saving water, 
accelerating the harnessing of key rivers and the reinforcement 
of dangerous reservoirs, and further improving production 
conditions. We should continue to support the poor areas and 
accelerate the pace of making poverty-stricken areas shake off 
poverty and become prosperous; combine agriculture with science 
and education, actively invigorate agriculture with science and 
education, strengthen the ranks of scientific and technical 
workers in rural areas, improve rural science and technology 
dissemination network and service organs, and accelerate the 
development, popularization, and application of high and new 
agricultural technology; support and protect 
agriculture-oriented industry and do a good job in organizing 
and supplying the agricultural means of production. 
  We should gradually resolve the problem of low comparative 
returns in agriculture. Beginning from the time when new grain 
and cotton are distributed for sale in the markets, we should 
raise the grain purchasing price and the cotton contract 
purchasing price; strengthen management over the prices of major 
means of production for agricultural use; establish the grain 
and oil-bearing crops storage system and the grain and 
oil-bearing crops risk-taking fund system; persist in making 
unremitting efforts to reduce the burdens of peasants, overcome 
the lax mood, strengthen supervision and inspection, and 
guarantee that relevant central and provincial stipulations will 
be implemented where needed. 
  We should strive to simultaneously increase the rate and 
efficiency of township enterprises. With the comprehensive 
promotion of the shareholding cooperative system as the 
emphasis, we should make use of the advantage of the flexible 
mechanism of township enterprises to lay a foundation for 
township enterprises to come to the fore for the second time. 
We should persist in giving simultaneous attention to 
development and improvement, encourage and guide township 
enterprises to cooperate with large enterprises, scientific 
research units, and institutions of higher learning, adopt new 
technology, and raise technology quality and product grade; 
encourage and guide township enterprises to strengthen 
scientific management and carry out intensive management; 
encourage and guide township enterprises to introduce foreign 
capital and to conduct grafting and transformation, actively 
participate in international competition, and increase foreign 
exchange earnings through export; and encourage and guide them 
to optimize the organization structure, develop enterprise 
groups, and raise the efficiency of scale. It is necessary to 
combine development of township enterprises with the 
establishment of small cities and towns, promote the transfer of 
rural labor forces, and accelerate the process of integrating 
urban and rural areas. 
  B. We should regard technological progress, structural 
readjustment, and strengthening of management as the main 
orientation and raise the overall quality of industry and 
competitive ability. 
  Based on our advantage of producing finished products, we 
should accelerate technological transformation to bring along 
readjustment and optimization of industrial structure and the 
updating and upgrading of all products. The provincial 
authorities will continue to grasp the 100 key technological 
transformation projects, support 50 large and medium-sized 
enterprises to establish technology development centers and 
intermediate experimental bases, enable specialized scientific 
research organs to enter enterprise groups in a planned and 
step-by-step manner, and make key products enter a higher grade 
and key industries enter a higher level. All localities should 
carry out a number of key technological transformation projects. 
Guided by the market, we should implement the "product project" 
and "brand-name strategy," give priority to developing a number 
of competitive products with good prospects, expand mass 
production, strive to gain initiative when patterns of 
consumption change, and strive to make more products gain 
footholds in the domestic and international markets and be very 
competitive with a larger market share in an effort to bring 
along the formation of new leading industries. We should 
continue to actively develop enterprise groups, encourage 
enterprise amalgamation and cooperation, expand the scale, 
improve functions, intensify their radiation and stimulation 
power, and promote the readjustment of the organizational 
structure of enterprises. 
  Focusing on improving economic efficiency, we should carry 
out in-depth activities of increasing production, practicing 
economy, increasing income, and reducing expenses and strengthen 
enterprise management. We should improve basic work and 
strictly enforce labor discipline and various regulations and 
systems to comprehensively improve enterprise quality. We 
should strengthen technical supervision to further upgrade 
product quality. We should reduce production costs to the 
minimum and speed up the turnover of funds. We should attach 
importance to and achieve success in production safety and 
eliminate hidden danger to reduce job-related accidents. We 
should tap enterprises' internal potential, emphasize the work 
to end deficits and increase profits, help major loss makers on 
a priority basis, and adopt comprehensive measures to help them 
end deficits within a fixed time. 
  We should approach the work to explore the market and 
strengthen sales from a strategic viewpoint, attach importance 
to it, put promotion of sales in the leading position in 
organizing industrial production, improve the contingents of 
advertising and sales personnel, and stabilize and improve sales 
promotion policies to raise the marketing rate of our industrial 
products to the country's advanced level. 
  C. We should further lift control to invigorate and greatly 
develop the tertiary industry. 
  The development level of the tertiary industry is an 
important indicator of the modernization level. We should 
continue to relax policies, persistently develop state-owned, 
collective, individual, private, and foreign-funded economies 
simultaneously, develop urban and rural areas simultaneously, 
establish development mechanisms whereby various ownerships 
coexistent and are full of vigor, achieve a substantial step 
forward each year, and make the growth rate of the tertiary 
industry notably higher than that of the entire economy. 
  We should further intensify construction of infrastructural 
facilities to meet the need for accelerating development. We 
should improve transportation and telecommunications development 
plans and build a number of large key projects based on a high 
starting point to gradually alleviate "bottleneck" restrictions. 
At present, we should step up the establishment of local 
shareholding aviation companies, open more air routes and flight 
services, expecially do a good job in improving auxiliary 
facilities and management of the Jinan and Qingdao Airports, and 
be determined to change Shandong's backward aviation 
undertakings. 
  Without a perfect market to serve as the carrier, great 
development of the market economy will be out of the question. 
We should further enliven commodity distribution and expedite 
the building of commercial units, with the focus on building a 
number of large and high-grade commercial and service facilities 
with a strong radiating capacity. We should develop and improve 
the market system more expeditiously, with the focus on 
developing the markets for money, technology, labor forces, 
property rights, information, and other essential elements of 
production, and greatly develop accountants', lawyers', and 
auditors' offices and notarial, property appraisal, and other 
intermediary service organizations. We should strengthen market 
management, encourage competition, and resolutely crack down on 
manipulation of the market, production of fake and inferior 
products, and other illegal activities. As Shandong's real 
estate business is still in its initial stages of development, 
we should strengthen guidance on it, standardize its development 
and exchange activities, and facilitate its rapid and healthy 
development. 
  D. We should implement the strategy of promotion through the 
export-oriented economy in an all-round manner and develop the 
export-oriented economy. 
  Opening to the outside world is an important way to improve 
the overall quality of the economy and accelerate the 
modernization drive, and only with large-scale opening up can we 
achieve large-scale development. We should make continuous 
efforts to emancipate the mind and have the courage to compete 
internationally. We should enhance the sense of overall opening 
up, expand overseas propaganda, further improve the investment 
climate, accelerate the process to integrate with the 
international economy, and promote faster and better development 
in Shandong's economy. 
  We should stimulate the enthusiasm of all quarters and adopt 
every means to expand exports. We should actively implement the 
strategy of diversifying the market and winning through quality, 
accelerate the adjustment of the export commodity mix, develop 
imports and exports simultaneously, expand the scale through 
good efficiency, ensure good efficiency through the scale, 
increase export capacity, and enhance the strength for sustained 
development. Integrated industrial and foreign trade companies 
outside the province should continue to play their role as the 
major force, and cities, prefectures, counties, and enterprises 
with decision-making power in exports should also apply pressure 
on themselves and hold the responsibility for earning more 
foreign exchange for the state. We should organize a number of 
enterprise groups to integrate industrial, agricultural, 
commercial, and technological enterprises with foreign trade 
enterprises. We should regard the export of foreign-funded 
enterprises as the focus of our endeavor to expand export and 
strive to increase its proportion to the total export of the 
province by more than 10 percentage points over the preceding 
year. 
  We should invite traders and bring in capital from all 
directions and on a large scale, widen the investment sphere, 
and increase overall economic results. We should intensify the 
orientation guiding industrial policies; focus on inviting 
traders and bringing in capital for the technological 
transformation and the graft transformation of existing large 
and medium-sized enterprises, basic industries, and leading 
industries; and make a breakthrough in developing large 
projects. The province should continue to simplify the 
procedures for handling affairs, upgrade the efficiency of 
handling affairs, also set up a system of management of key 
projects involving foreign capital and a system of dividing 
administrative levels to hold talks with foreign traders, decide 
to hold regular economic and trade symposiums attended by 
traders from Taiwan and the ROK, and strive to make great 
achievements in using foreign capital. We should particularly 
pay attention to increasing the amount of capital that has been 
put in place, the number of projects involving foreign capital, 
and the foreign exchange earnings through exports. We should 
strengthen, according to law, the management of the enterprises 
with foreign investment. We should make efforts to run well the 
economic and technological development zones and bonded areas 
and bring into better play their "show-window," experimental, 
and influential functions. We should bring into full play the 
role of the Singapore-Shandong economic and trade council to 
make great realistic achievements in promoting the mutual 
economic and trade cooperation and to further invite more 
foreign businessmen and bring in more foreign capital from other 
countries. 
  We should positively pioneer international economic and 
technological cooperation spheres. We should reform and perfect 
the management of overseas contract projects and labor service 
cooperation, make efforts to upgrade the layers of cooperation, 
and increase economic results. We should steadily develop 
overseas investment, encourage the running of various types of 
overseas enterprises, and gradually perfect the province's 
overseas networks for promotion of sales, capital circulation, 
technological cooperation, and information. 
  E. We should optimize the investment structure and ensure 
the 
construction of key projects. 
  Maintaining a reasonable scale of investment in fixed assets 
and rationalizing the fixed assets investment structure is an 
important condition for making fast and highly efficient 
economic development. The investment in fixed assets of society 
is planned at 110 billion yuan, an increase of 26 percent over 
the previous year. Of this, the investment in capital 
construction of local state-owned units should increase by 36 
percent and the investment in equipment renewal and 
technological transformation should increase by 54 percent. We 
should strengthen the regulation and control of the investment 
in fixed assets and link the expansion of scale with the 
optimization of structure; concentrate energy to ensure the 
construction of key projects; realistically develop energy 
resources, transportation, postal and telecommunications, and 
water conservation facilities; vigorously cultivate leading 
industries and new high technology industries, and accelerate 
the construction of Shandong on the sea and the development of 
Huang He delta. This year, the province should grasp the 
construction of the Shandong section of the Beijing-Jiulong 
railway line, the Jinan-Handan railway line, the Jinan-Dezhou 
high-grade highway, the Jinan- Liaocheng high-grade highway, 
coastal ports, and the power projects with 1 million kw 
installed capacity. We should adopt forms to conduct 
cooperation with domestic large enterprises and use foreign 
capital to build iron and steel and vehicle industrial projects. 
Technological transformation should realistically be regarded as 
a strategic measure. It is necessary to increase the proportion 
of investment in technological transformation; to mainly rely on 
science and technology; to persist in high starting points, high 
standing, and high efficiency; and neither to increase input nor 
to develop low-quality projects. The strain on capital is a 
prominent factor restricting the investment in fixed assets, 
particularly the construction of key projects. We should 
extensively open channels for capital, adopt flexible forms to 
circulate capital, and attract increasingly more foreign traders 
and social investment. 
  F. We should realistically increase revenues and reduce 
expenditures and ensure a balance between revenues and 
expenditures. 
  After the setup of the new financial and tax system, whether 
or not revenues can be increased in a sustained and steady 
manner and the province can strike a balance between revenues 
and expenditures is a great matter that will effect economic 
development and the social stability. Last year, there were 
some incomparable factors for the higher increase in the 
province's revenues, and simultaneously, the basic figures of 
expenditures relatively increased. This year, the revenue 
increase tendency is relatively weakened, and there are great 
difficulties in balancing revenues and expenditures. To suit 
the changes in the revenue structure after the implementation 
of the tax assignment system on the basis of a rational 
division of power between central and local authorities, we 
should set up, as soon as possible, the local financial resource 
system with great and stable reserve strength; strengthen the 
management of tax revenues according to law; and strive to 
increase revenues. We should pay particular attention to 
achieving the work of turning enterprises' deficits into 
profits, which is closely related to the local revenues and 
regard the development of the tertiary industry as an important 
factor for increasing revenues. We should strictly enforce 
financial and economic discipline, manage the extra-budgetary 
funds well, and make good use of them. In financial 
expenditure, we should give priority to guaranteeing wages for 
personnel and the basic maintenance funds, and increase input in 
agriculture, science, technology, education, and public 
security. It is necessary to promote the spirit of managing all 
undertakings diligently and thriftily, reduce normal 
administrative expenditure, expand the reform measures on the 
use of expenditure and on optimizing the structure, and 
guarantee a balance between financial revenue and expenditure 
during the year. Places where the financial situation is fairly 
good should further strengthen financial and taxation work and 
make new contributions to steadily increasing the whole 
province's financial revenue. Places with difficult financial 
situation should study and explore ways to accelerate economic 
development and to increase financial revenue under the new 
systems, and extricate themselves from a difficult position as 
quickly as possible. 
  G. We should continue to regard science, technology, and 
education as a matter of strategic importance and 
comprehensively implement the principle of "invigorating 
Shandong with science and education." 
  On the basis of building a new mechanism which is closely 
integrated with the economy and compatible with the 
self-development law, we should also deepen reform of the 
scientific and technological system. It is necessary to 
accelerate the development of technology markets, further 
decontrol scientific research units and their personnel, 
encourage people-run scientific and technological enterprises to 
turn themselves into high-technology and export-oriented 
enterprise groups. We should strengthen basic research, applied 
technology research, and popularization of scientific and 
technological findings, and raise our province's comprehensive 
scientific and technological level. Efforts should be made to 
comprehensively implement the project on invigorating 
agriculture, industry, aquatic product industry, tertiary 
industry, and high and new technology industry with science and 
technology, manage the high and new technological development 
zone well, and strengthen the pulling force for economic growth. 
We should strengthen the establishment of scientific and 
technological development and popularization networks, 
encourage areas with favorable conditions, key enterprises, and 
large enterprises to establish all sorts of technology 
development and popularization centers. 
  We should comprehensively implement the "outline on China's 
educational reform and development," deepen reform of the 
educational system, and form a pattern with government efforts 
to run schools as the mainstay while pooling the efforts of all 
social sectors to jointly or cooperatively run schools. It is 
necessary to optimize the structure, improve the teaching 
content and methods, and raise educational quality, working 
efficiency, and the efficiency of running schools; actively 
implement nine-year compulsory education, pay attention to 
raising the school entrance rate of school-age children in the 
poverty-stricken areas, reduce the number of dropouts, and 
gradually wipe out illiteracy among young people and people in 
the prime of life. Active efforts should be made to develop 
vocational education, adult education, and special education, 
pay attention to training on science, technology and 
professional skills among workers and peasants, and enhance the 
scientific, technological, and cultural quality of all laborers. 
In higher education, we should regard internal upgrading as the 
main task and run more schools to cultivate more good and 
qualified specialized personnel. We should conscientiously 
implement the "teachers' law," raise the quality and status of 
teachers, gradually improve their working and living conditions, 
and allow no delay of wages for teachers. We should strengthen 
management and check the unhealthy trend of unwarranted pooling 
of funds, arbitrary requisition of donations and exaction of 
fees. 
  H. We should strictly control population growth and 
strengthen environment protection and land management. 
  It is necessary to unswervingly grasp the three basic 
national policies and unceasingly make new progress in this 
aspect. Continued efforts should be made to firmly grasp family 
planning work, conscientiously implement the principle of 
"paying main attention to propaganda and education, to regular 
work, and to contraception," strictly implement the system of 
assuming responsibility over the management of the population 
target, strengthen the management of family planning of rural 
population and transients, promote healthy births and healthy 
upbringing, control population, and raise the population 
quality. We should enhance the sense of environment of all the 
people, strictly enforce environmental protection laws and 
regulations, perfect the responsibility system, and strengthen 
supervision and inspection. Continued efforts should be made to 
implement the principle of "simultaneously designing, building 
and putting into operation the main construction project and 
pollution prevention facilities," accelerate the disposal of 
"three industrial wastes," improve the key polluted areas and 
the polluted sources in the southern four lakes, Xiaoqing He, 
and Dongping Lake, pay attention to resolving the air pollution 
problems in Jinan and other major cities, and attend to 
preventing and disposing inshore pollution. We should 
comprehensively improve the urban and rural environment, do a 
good job in protecting and using water and soil resources, 
firmly grasp tree planting and afforestation, guard against soil 
erosion, strengthen the building and development of nature 
reserves, and further improve the ecological environment. It is 
necessary to earnestly implement the "land management law," 
reform the land utilization system, cultivate and standardize 
the land market, realistically manage and use the land well, and 
forbid the arbitrary occupation of cultivated land. 
  4. Press Package Reform Forward, Make Breakthroughs in 
Major Areas, and Accelerate the Establishment of a Socialist 
Market Economic Structure 
  Reform constitutes the biggest motivation to accelerate 
development. The third plenary session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee adopted the "decision on some issues concerning the 
establishment of a socialist market economic structure" and 
sketched the basic framework and development process for the new 
structure. This indicates that the reform has entered the stage 
of resolving the most difficult problems for the establishment 
of the new structure. Located in the coastal area, with a 
relatively good economic foundation, Shandong is one of China's 
key areas opened to the outside world, and thus it also has the 
conditions necessary to establish the basic framework of the 
socialist market economic structure in advance. This year, a 
key year for the establishment of the new structure, the central 
authorities have decided to set forth a series of major reform 
measures that are unprecedented in depth, scale, and dynamics. 
Profoundly implementing the central authorities' "decision" and 
the provincial party committee's "opinions on implementing the 
decision" and energetically pressing forward all items of reform 
are the most important tasks for the government work this year. 
All levels of governments in the province should further 
enhance the sense of responsibility and the sense of urgency, 
combine the package reform with the breakthroughs in key areas, 
seek unity in understanding and actions, and do a solid job to 
win victory in reform. 
  A. Enterprise Reform 
  Enterprise reform is the core of the reform as a whole. The 
orientation of enterprise reform is to establish a modern 
enterprise system that meets the essential requirements of the 
market economy and in which the property rights, as well as the 
rights and responsibilities of enterprises, are clearly defined, 
government administration and enterprise management are 
separated, and scientific management is established. This year, 
we should continue to conscientiously implement the "enterprise 
law," the "regulations," the "general rule on financial affairs 
of enterprises," and the "criterion for accounting of 
enterprises." We should strive to make breakthroughs in 
changing the operational mechanism of enterprises. 
  The reform of property right system constitutes the major 
foundation for the establishment of the modern enterprise 
system. We should gradually bring the relations of property 
rights of state-owned enterprises into better balance. In line 
with the principles of state ownership, graded administration, 
division of work and supervision, and enterprise management, we 
should make an inventory and check of the stockpiles and capital 
of enterprises, define property rights, appraise assets, clarify 
debts receivable and debts payable, and verify the property 
shared by enterprises as legal entities. We should establish 
and perfect the state-owned property management organs and 
experiment on the system of appointing someone to assume 
responsibility for management of assets and appointing someone 
to supervise the management of assets. We should positively 
explore reasonable forms and effective ways to manage and 
operate state-owned assets with a view to changing the poor 
management and plugging losses of state-owned assets and to 
maintaining and adding the value of the assets. 
  We should positively explore specific ways to establish the 
modern enterprise system. In accordance with the "enterprise 
law," we should turn state-owned enterprises, large and 
medium-sized enterprises in particular, into corporations in 
groups and by stages. The enterprises with the nature of 
monopoly can be reorganized as the state-owned wholly invested 
limited-liability corporations. Most enterprises of competitive 
trades can be reorganized as the limited-liability corporations 
whose shares are owned by the state and by several other legal 
entities. We should choose a small number of large and 
medium-sized enterprises that net more profits and conform to 
the industrial policy, and then directly reorganize them as 
limited-liability companies whose shares are purchased by the 
state. This year, the province will choose 50 enterprises to 
try out the modern enterprise system. At the same time, the 
province will continue to profoundly carry out and perfect the 
reform of labor, employment, and distribution systems and expand 
the scale of the experiments for the shareholding system. Among 
small state-owned enterprises, the shareholding cooperative 
system should be popularized. Some small state-owned 
enterprises can be reorganized through the methods of 
incorporation, leasing, and auctioning. A small number of 
enterprises that have no possibility of halting deficits and 
whose assets cannot cover their debts can be declared bankrupt 
according to law. The enterprises initiated from now on should 
all carry out new operational mechanism according to new 
standards. 
  In the course of persistently regarding the publicly owned 
economy as the mainstay, we should continue to encourage the 
free development of the individual, private, and cooperative 
sectors of the economy and create a social environment 
characterized with equal competition and common development for 
all sectors of the economy in the fields of policy, law, and 
media. 
  B. Reform of the Financial and Tax Systems 
  Changing the revenue responsibility system into a 
revenue-sharing system to suit the needs of the socialist market 
economy will help bring into better balance the relations 
between the state, the localities, and the enterprises in terms 
of distribution and will also change Shandong's financial 
capacity and structure. All levels should take the overall 
situation into account and facilitate the reform of the 
financial and tax systems in an active and prudent manner. 
  We should further clarify the financial authority of the 
province and cities and prefectures and establish a new revenue 
distribution system compatible with Shandong's reality. In 
compliance with the central authorities' basic principles for 
and requirements on the provincial financial system, we should 
unify the provincial methods for revenue division and transfer 
payment of tax revenues and strengthen the provincial-level 
necessary macroeconomic regulating and controlling capacity to 
boost the enthusiasm of all localities for increasing revenues 
and reducing expenditures. To build the basic framework of the 
revenue-sharing system in an active and prudent manner, we will 
implement the old and the new systems simultaneously this year, 
continuing the subsidies, delivery to higher authorities, and 
some final accountings of the original system to maintain the 
vested interest of various sectors. Regarding the tax categories 
of the province, as well as cities and prefectures, the original 
pattern will basically remain unchanged except for the revenues 
to be handed over to the central authorities so that the 
province, as well as cities and prefectures, will have their own 
major tax categories and all levels will have steadily 
increasing sources of revenues. 
  We should facilitate the reform of the tax system in an 
active and prudent manner and enhance the tax regulating and 
controlling function. We should implement the principle of 
"unifying tax laws, levying taxes fairly, simplifying the tax 
system, and sharing power in a rational manner," conscientiously 
enforce the state's tax laws and regulations, and use the local 
tax legislation authority to establish a local tax collection 
system conducive to economic development. We should improve the 
tax collection and management work, actively popularize the tax 
payment report system and tax affairs agent system, and 
establish a strict auditing system. In line with the principle 
of stabilizing the contingent and helping the development of 
undertakings, we should do a good job in establishing branch 
offices of tax organizations and establish a management system 
under which sate and local tax organizations coordinate and 
closely cooperate with each other. 
  Beginning this year, all state-owned enterprises should 
implement the new profit distribution system. A good job should 
be done in linking it with the contract system, and transitional 
methods should be applied to the enterprises whose contracts 
have not expired. We should formulate new policies to help 
enterprises handle their hidden deficits and get rid of their 
burdens. 
  C. Reform of the Banking System 
  A success in the banking work is very important to 
Shandong's 
economic development. Governments at all levels should support 
and coordinate with the reform of the banking system, establish 
the new banking system more rapidly, and effectively distribute 
and flexibly lend funds. Implementation of the credit policy 
should be combined with that of industrial policy, and all 
monetary organizations should be guided to arrange and use 
credit funds focusing on Shandong's economic development plan 
and priorities and in a rational manner, to speed up the 
turnover of funds, and to achieve unity in their own benefits 
and social benefits. We should strive for establishment of 
branch offices of relevant state monetary departments and 
establishment of foreign-funded banks in Shandong Province. We 
should make active efforts to organize urban and rural local 
cooperative banks. Based on rural credit cooperatives, we 
should first organize county joint cooperatives and then 
gradually build rural shareholding cooperative banks. Based on 
urban credit cooperatives, we should organize central 
cooperatives and then build urban cooperative banks group after 
group at different times. Cities and prefectures where 
conditions permit may carry out this work ahead of others. We 
should attach importance to and develop the role of commercial 
insurance and establish specialized and regional institutions to 
promote beneficial competition. We should improve local 
money-lending institutions, enhance their money- lending 
capacity, expand and improve the security and bond trading 
markets, and establish a complete money market system as soon as 
possible. In the reform of foreign exchange management, we 
should adopt effective measures to successfully regulate, 
collect, and use foreign exchange and use it on a priority basis 
in key construction projects, key technical transformation 
projects, agriculture- oriented projects, and scientific and 
technological projects. We should step up efforts to establish 
a new system of debt repayment funds to ensure timely repayment 
of foreign debts. 
  D. Reform of the Investment Structure 
  We should bring into full play the market mechanism's 
functions in the investment spheres and comprehensively 
implement the principle that "whoever makes investment and makes 
policy decisions should take risks." We should scientifically 
divide the rights to handling the investment affairs among the 
province, the city, prefectural, and county governments, and 
enterprises. According to the projects' economic results and 
social benefits, we should define the main body of investment 
and the forms to circulate capital. The basic projects should 
mainly be invested by the governments in the form of collecting 
funds. The province should assume sole responsibility for the 
construction of transregional large key infrastructural 
facilities and basic industries that are related to the overall 
situation. The prefectural, city, and county governments should 
collect funds to build the projects for themselves. The 
province should appropriately give subsidies to the economically 
underdeveloped areas. The public welfare projects that belong 
to the province should be undertaken by the province. Each 
level should undertake the projects of its own level. 
Enterprises play a key role in making investment in competitive 
projects, have decisionmaking power, and take risks by 
themselves. From now on, legal persons should be defined for 
construction projects. The legal persons should assume 
responsibility for the entire process of making plans for 
projects, making investment, organizing construction, engaging 
in production and management, and returning loans and run risks 
for investment. According to the requirements for optimizing 
structures, developing leading industries, and cultivating 
financial resources and on the basis of scientific appraisals, 
we should select the projects with competitiveness, make 
positive efforts to gain state investment out of policy 
consideration, and attract investment by commercial banks. 
  E. Reform of the Foreign Trade System 
  According to the orientation of unified policies, 
decentralized management, equal competition, sole responsibility 
for profits and losses, combination of industry and trade, and 
implementation of the system whereby foreign trade corporations 
act as agents for other enterprises, we should set up, 
step-by-step, a new-typed foreign economic and trade system 
suitable to the development of the market economy and the 
international provisional regulations. It is necessary to 
reform the import and export management system, the system of 
issuing fixed quotas of licenses, and various examination and 
approval systems. We should strive to have increasingly more 
production and circulation enterprises gain external management 
rights; and set up a multilayered, multichanneled, and all- 
directional foreign trade pattern. We should set up an export 
encouragement mechanism, extensively carry out the method of 
"wages involving U.S. dollars," link distribution with foreign 
exchange earnings and economic results, and encourage to export 
more and create more foreign exchange. According to the ideas 
of institutionalization, industrialization, and 
internationalization, foreign trade enterprises should 
accelerate the implementation of the shareholding system and 
organize, as soon as possible, a large number of export-oriented 
enterprise groups. We should gradually reform the method of 
management of overseas enterprises, internationalize the 
circulation of capital, localize the management, and develop 
various professions. It is necessary to set up the export 
development fund, the risk-running fund, and the overseas 
enterprise development fund; and to promote a stable increase in 
creating foreign exchange through exports. 
  F. Price Reform 
  On the premise of maintaining a relative stability of the 
general goods prices and according to the principle of linking 
readjustment with decontrol, we should positively and steadily 
carry out the price reform and set up a perfect price mechanism 
mainly formed by markets. This year, we should emphatically 
reform the prices of energy resources and farm products, reduce 
the scale of prices fixed by the governments, and balance the 
prices of the small number of commodities whose prices are fixed 
by the governments and service charges. We should strictly 
enforce the price discipline and carefully organize forces to 
implement the items on price reforms as arranged by the central 
authorities. No levels are allowed to raise prices or charges. 
We should try as soon as possible to stagger the time to 
implement the price reform measures formulated by the province, 
cities, and prefectures and by the central authorities to reduce 
social repercussions. As for the important commodities that 
have a bearing on the people's daily lives, we should set up a 
perfect storage system, a risk-running price fund system, and a 
regulation fund system to stabilize the prices of these 
commodities. We should intensify the monitoring of the general 
market price tendency and the prices of the people's basic daily 
necessities and the major farm products, strictly investigate 
and handle the units and individuals that wantonly raise prices 
and collect fees and charges, and realistically protect the 
legal rights and benefits of enterprises and the broad masses of 
consumers. 
  G. Reform of the Housing System 
  We should reform the old housing investment and distribution 
system and accelerate the pace of commercializing and 
socializing houses. This year we should give simultaneous 
attention to selling, renting, and building houses, enlarge the 
degree of reform on rent, and comprehensively promote the 
housing public accumulation fund system. Positive and reliable 
steps should be taken to sell public houses, rationally set the 
prices in line with the economic capacity of normal families, 
sell houses at a standard price, and gradually effect the 
transition of selling houses at a low-profit price. We should 
strictly implement the unified stipulations of the central and 
provincial authorities and prevent and check the practice of 
selling houses at a low price. It is necessary to raise the 
proportion of expenditure on rent of family income and gradually 
make the burden of rent approach or attain a rational level. 
Efforts should be made to comprehensively promote the housing 
public accumulation fund system and establish relevant 
management organs. All administrative units, enterprises, and 
institutions and their staff and workers should pay housing 
public accumulation funds in line with the principle of "saving 
funds personally with housing allowances from their own units 
and placing these funds under unified management for special 
use." We should pay attention to developing and building 
economy and useful houses and solve the housing problems of 
staff and workers with an average income. 
  H. Change of Government Functions and Organizational Reform 
  It is necessary to improve the relationship between the 
governments and enterprises in line with the principle of 
separating government functions from enterprise management. 
Governments should delegate the functions which are within the 
scope of operational decisionmaking power to enterprises, shift 
the functions of resources allocation to the market, delegate 
some social service and supervisory functions to intermediary 
organs in the course of conducting economic activities, and make 
public and standardize and institutionalize the administrative 
functions and the examination and approval functions which they 
have retained. Governments at all levels should be good at 
applying economic, legal, and essential administrative means to 
manage the economy and social affairs, shift their main energy 
to macroeconomic regulation and control and overall 
coordination, to the building of infrastructure facilities, the 
establishment of social guarantee system, and the creation of a 
good development environment, and enhance their ability to 
control the market. This year, on the basis of consolidating 
the achievements of county and township organizational reform, 
we should comprehensively complete the provincial, city, and 
prefectural organizational reform and gradually implement the 
public service system. Through organizational reform, we may 
initially establish an applicable and highly efficient 
administrative management system with comprehensive functions, 
rational structure, and coordinated operation, and can promote 
the development of the socialist market economy in the province. 
  Under the new situation in which the market economic system 
is being accelerated, rapidly establishing and improving a 
multilayered socialist guarantee system is of great significance 
in promoting reform and development and maintaining social 
stability. In line with the current development of productive 
forces and our province's actual situation, we should fully 
mobilize the enthusiasm of all sectors according to the basic 
principle of "unified leadership, division of responsibility, 
each performing their own duties, and service throughout the 
whole course," and accelerate the establishment and improvement 
of the social guarantee system with enterprise labor insurance, 
rural old-age pension insurance, and social security insurance 
of organs, institutions, and units as the main aspect. 
Governments at all levels should accelerate the change of 
functions and render all sorts of support services; departments 
concerned should actively coordinate with the governments, 
maintain close cooperation with them, pay attention to working 
efficiency, build our province's social guarantee system in a 
coordinated way, and gradually standardize and improve it to 
ensure its sound operation. 
  Fellow deputies: This year's reform degree will be big, the 
scope will be large, and the reform work will be carried out in 
a concentrated manner. It will involve the readjustment of 
interests, classification of powers, the creation of new 
systems, and other in- depth major issues. All levels should 
fully understand the necessity, urgency, and arduousness of 
reform, thoroughly study the guidelines, conduct propaganda and 
mobilization, pay close attention to the new situation and solve 
new problems in our work, strengthen leadership, and carry out 
reform carefully. As long as we persist in emancipating the 
mind, seek truth from facts, do experiments boldly, and work 
diligently, we will surely fulfill all reform tasks and make a 
decisive step in the course of building the socialist market 
economic structure. 
  5. We Should Persistently Attend to and Be Competent in Two 
Tasks Simultaneously, and Achieve Success in Building the 
Spiritual Civilization and Building the Government Itself 
  The socialist spiritual civilization is an important 
characteristic of the socialist modernization and an important 
guarantee for the healthy development of reform, opening up, and 
economic construction. The more we accelerate reform, opening 
up, and economic development, the more we should promote the 
socialist spiritual civilization and build the government well. 
We should let the principle of attending to and being competent 
in these two tasks simultaneously be manifest in the entire 
process of the modernization drive, in all trades and 
professions, and in all our specific work. 
  A. We should persistently arm the vast number of cadres and 
the masses with the theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. 
  Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics is the spiritual pillar of the entire 
party and the people across the country and a powerful 
ideological weapon to continuously facilitate reform, opening 
up, and the modernization drive. Arming the vast number of 
cadres and the masses with this theory is a strategic task of 
far-reaching significance. At present, we should adopt various 
measures to extensively organize cadres and the masses to study 
well the third volume of the "Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping," 
conscientiously read it in the original, and master its essence 
to guide our work practice. Leading comrades at all levels 
should take the lead in studying it well. We should do a good 
job in studying the theories on the socialist market economy and 
studying scientific and general knowledge to further emancipate 
our minds and update our ideas. Aiming at training 
socialist-minded people who have lofty ideals and moral 
characters and who are better educated and well-disciplined, we 
should strengthen the ideological and political work in the new 
situation, intensify the education on the party's basic line and 
on patriotism, collectivism, and socialism, carry out extensive 
activities to learn from heroes and models, attach importance to 
improving social morality and professional ethics, educate 
cadres and the masses to embrace correct outlook on life and 
value, develop healthy trends, eliminate evil trends, and 
establish good social conduct. 
  B. We should actively promote socialist democracy and legal 
system. 
  We should fully develop democracy and exert continuous 
efforts to make our policy making more scientific and 
democratic. Governments at all levels should earnestly subject 
themselves to the supervision of people's congresses and their 
standing committees and the supervision of the masses. They 
should further develop the role of CPPCC, democratic parties, 
and personages without party affiliation in political 
consultation and democratic supervision, attach importance to 
the role of trade unions, Communist Youth League, women's 
federations, and other mass organizations as bridges and 
channels, and achieve success in the nationalities and religious 
work. They should formulate and implement major policies, 
adhere to the mass line, and extensively give heed to the 
opinions of all circles of society. They should continue the 
system of "making work procedures and work results public to the 
scrutiny of the masses" and do a good job in the democratic 
appraisal of government personnel. They should handle well in a 
serious and responsible manner the suggestions, criticisms, and 
opinions of people's congress deputies and motions of the CPPCC 
and improve the quality in handling them. They should attach 
importance to people's letters and visits and address well the 
hot issues and difficulties that concern their vital interests. 
  We should persist in ruling the province according to law, 
improve the socialist legal system, and legally codify and 
standardize the management of economic and social affairs 
step-by- step. We should strengthen legislation work and 
improve local laws and regulations in compliance with the 
objective requirements of the development of the market economy. 
At present, we should particularly speed up establishment of 
the laws designed to standardize the mainstay of the market, 
safeguard the market order, improve and strengthen macroeconomic 
regulation and control, and improve social security. We should 
strictly enforce laws, establish and improve the system to 
supervise law enforcement by administrative departments and the 
intermediary legal service institutions, do a good job in 
disseminating and publicizing the knowledge on laws, enhance all 
the people's sense of respect for the legal system, and make 
sure that laws are abided by and strictly enforced and law 
violations are dealt with. We should strengthen grass-roots 
political power, improve the neighborhood and villagers' 
autonomous organizations, establish systems according to law, 
rule according to systems, run villages, plants, and schools in 
a democratic manner, and ensure people's rights as masters. 
  Governments at all levels and their personnel should take 
the initiative in studying, mastering, and applying laws, 
persist in handling administrative work according to law, learn 
to use the legal means to manage economic and social affairs, 
work in strict accordance with the law, and resolutely deal with 
and correct law and discipline breaches. We should do a better 
job in the education on national defense to enhance people's 
sense of state security, carry out in-depth activities to 
support the Army and give preferential treatment to families of 
revolutionary martyrs and servicemen and to build civilized 
units by the Army and civilians together, support the endeavor 
to build a regular and modern Army, achieve success in the 
militia and reserve service work, and consolidate and develop 
the Army-government and Army-civilian relations in the new 
situation. 
  C. We should attach importance to and achieve success in 
cultural, public health, and sports work. 
  We should accelerate the development of cultural 
undertakings 
to enrich the people's spiritual and cultural life. We should 
adhere to the orientation of "serving socialism and serving the 
people" and the principle of "letting a hundred flowers blossom 
and a hundred schools of thought contend" and establish more 
quickly a new system for cultural management that conforms to 
the market economy. We should improve the development plans for 
cultural undertakings and pay attention to construction of key 
facilities. We should correctly handle the relations between 
social benefits and economic benefits, put social benefits 
first, advocate the main melody of this era, train outstanding 
personnel, and greatly make art production flourish. We should 
actively develop the cultural undertakings of enterprises, 
school campuses, and communities. Taking advantage of the 
satellite relay of radio and television programs, we should step 
up construction of rural radio and television networks, expand 
their coverage, raise the quality of programs, and make 
propaganda more effective. We should intensify the construction 
and management of cultural markets, improve policies and laws, 
build a good contingent, and resolutely check and eliminate 
spiritual garbage. 
  We should implement the principle of prevention first and 
combination of traditional Chinese medicine with Western 
medicine, develop public health undertakings, and improve 
medical service. We should intensify construction of medical 
facilities, improve the medical service networks at various 
levels, and strive to alleviate people's difficulty in receiving 
medical service. We should attach importance to the technical 
training and professional ethics of medical personnel and 
conscientiously correct unhealthy trends. We should carry out 
extensive a mass patriotic public health campaign, continue to 
put the focus of medical care and public health on rural areas, 
replenish grass-roots medical personnel, improve the means of 
medical service, and actively develop rural cooperative medical 
service. 
  The development of sports is the overall reflection of our 
levels of the two civilizations. We should extensively carry 
out physical culture and sports to improve people's physique. 
We should give particular attention to competitive sports, 
reform the training, contest, and management systems, and 
improve the mechanisms of competition, encouragement, and 
restraint to make able persons step up and unable ones step 
down. We should strengthen scientific and technological joint 
research on sports and sports service, manage sports teams 
strictly, do a good job in ideological and political work, 
cultivate the work styles characterized by indomitable efforts 
and courage to fight tough battles and win championships, 
upgrade the level of competitive sports as soon as possible, and 
regain the magnificent bearing of "Shandong big fellows" and 
Shandong sports. 
  D. We should continue to strengthen comprehensive management 
of public security. 
  We should correctly distinguish and properly handle the 
contradictions among the people emerging in the new situation, 
stimulate the enthusiasm of all quarters, and turn negative 
factors into positive ones. We should strengthen the function 
of people's democratic dictatorship, strictly implement the 
leadership responsibility system in the comprehensive management 
of public security, combine the efforts of special organs and 
the masses, crack down on and prevent crimes simultaneously, 
adopt both stopgap and radical measures, deal strict blows to 
criminal and economic offenses according to law, and, in 
particular, resolutely crack down on and never be softhearted 
toward smuggling and sales of smuggled goods, abduction and 
trade of women and children, drug abuse and trafficking, 
prostitution and patronage of prostitutes, and other ugly 
phenomena that disrupt social order and undermine social 
conduct. We should wage special struggles to particularly 
tackle the criminal activities and public security problems at 
which the masses are strongly indignant. Major and serious 
cases should be strictly and promptly investigated and handled 
according to law. To achieve success in the comprehensive 
management of public security, we should rely on the masses and 
make persistent efforts to resolve contradictions while they are 
still at the grass-roots levels, still within departments, and 
still in the bud. We should replenish and rectify public 
security, procuratorial, and judicial contingents, standardize 
their law-enforcing activities, upgrade their quality, and 
improve their means so that we will serve reform and 
construction better and make sure that people live and work in 
peace and contentment. 
  E. Anticorruption campaign should be launched profoundly, 
persistently, and more effectively. 
  The anticorruption campaign is a major matter bearing on the 
future and destiny of the state, and thus it should not be 
neglected at the slightest degree. The objectives for 
anticorruption work set forth by the central and the provincial 
party committees must be fulfilled so that the government will 
win confidence among the people. All corrupt elements, whatever 
their ranks are and no matter who they are, should be 
investigated seriously and punished resolutely according to 
party discipline and state laws. While deepening the reform, we 
should pay attention to establishing regulations and systems, as 
well as effective supervisory and controlling mechanisms, to 
root out the soil that may cause corruption. Leading comrades 
at all levels should take the lead in maintaining honesty and 
being strict with themselves, should set an example for 
enforcing relevant regulations, and should, beginning with 
provincial-level organs, resolutely ban all sorts of unhealthy 
trends, such as unwarranted pooling of funds, arbitrary 
requisition of donations, exaction of fees from enterprises, 
tour at public expenses, and wining and dining at public 
expenses. With the idea of long-term fighting, we should 
persistently and unremittingly oppose corruption and maintain 
administrative honesty in the whole process of reform, opening 
up, and development of the market economy. 
  F. Self-construction of the government should be stressed. 
  New situation and tasks set even higher demands on 
self-construction of the government. Governments at all levels 
should further carry forward the "three major styles of work," 
namely, integrating theory with practice, maintaining close ties 
with the masses, and conducting criticism and self-criticism, 
and should strive to "make innovations of reform, be honest and 
diligent, work hard in unity, and render high-efficient service" 
in order to make new progress in building of ideology and style 
of work. First, the practice of study should be encouraged 
energetically. Leading cadres at all levels should every year 
schedule a considerable period of time to go deep into the 
grass-roots areas, particularly the places with more 
difficulties and problems, to conduct investigation and study 
and resolve problems simultaneously. Leading cadres should 
conduct forecasting in advance, be circumspect and resolute, and 
strive to improve their expertise of policy making and the 
quality of their work. Second, efforts should be made to 
maintain even closer ties with the grass roots and the masses. 
Leadership and administration should be combined with service. 
Governments at all levels should wholeheartedly depend on the 
working class, respect the pioneering spirit of the masses, 
firmly embrace the mass concept, care for the weal and woe of 
the masses, listen to the voice of the masses, and bear in mind 
the production, lives, and wills of the masses. For the people 
without enough food and clothes, for the workers of the 
enterprises whose production has stopped partly or completely, 
and for the retired persons with low income, special care and 
regular visits should be given, and effective measures should be 
adopted to resolve their problems. Third, practical work should 
be ensured. Governments at all levels should actually change 
their style of work, extricate themselves from tedious social 
intercourse, guard against formalism, subjectivism, and 
bureaucratism, and perfect the system concerning enforcement of 
and supervision over policy decisions and the feedback system. 
Fourth, governments at all levels should seek truth from facts, 
tell the truth, do tangible things, strive for practical 
results, report both good and bad news, oppose boasting and 
making false reports, and be responsible for both higher levels 
and the masses. Fifth, the concept of the whole should be 
enhanced, and discipline should be enforced strictly to ensure 
the smooth implementation of policies, decrees, and prohibitions. 
  Fellow deputies: In this new year, we should accelerate the 
pace of reform, opening up, and modernization and successfully 
fulfill all the tasks. Thus, our duties are glorious but 
arduous. Let us closely rally around the party Central 
Committee with Comrade Jiang emin as the core, hold high the 
great banner of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, 
emancipate the mind, seek truth from facts, enhance morale, and 
bravely pioneer the road under the leadership of the provincial 
party committee in order to constantly win a new and even 
greater victory in reform, opening up, and modernization. 

