Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, February 25 (KCNA) -- A national 
agricultural conference opened with a large attendance in 
Pyongyang today. 
  The great leader President Kim Il-song was present at the 
conference. 
  The conference which is open on the occasion of the 30th 
anniversary of the publication of "Theses on the Socialist Rural 
Question in Our Country" will review the great victory won by 
our party and people in the efforts to implement the socialist 
rural theses and discuss tasks to lift socialist rural 
construction to a higher stage. 
  Placed on the platform of the conference is a portrait of 
President Kim Il-song. 
  The more than 10,000 participants include managing officials 
of cooperative farms and state farms and labor innovators from 
all parts of the country who have made devoted efforts for the 
implementation of the socialist rural theses. 
  When President Kim Il-song stepped on to the platform of the 
conference, stormy cheers of hurrah burst forth. 
  Taking the platform were O Chin-u, member of the Presidium 
of 
the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Workers' 
Party of Korea [WPK] and minister of People's Armed Forces; Kang 
Song-san, Politburo member of the WPK Central Committee and 
premier of the Administration Council; Yi Chong-ok, Pak 
Song-chol and Kim Yong-chu, Politburo members of the WPK Central 
Committee and vice-presidents; and other party and state cadres, 
leading officials of the working people's organisations and of 
local party, administrative and economic bodies, chairmen of the 
management boards of cooperative farms, secretaries of ri party 
committees, model personnel of the agricultural domain, 
agricultural scientists and three-revolution team members. 
  A congratulatory message of the WPK Central Committee to the 
conference was conveyed by Vice-president Yi Chong-ok. 
  A congratulatory group of the Korean Children's Union 
entered 
the conference hall and presented a bouquet to President Kim 
Il-song. The group read a congratulatory message to the 
conference. Premier Kang Song-san made a report, which was 
followed by speeches. 
  The conference will be continued. 

