Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Beijing Central Television Program One 
Network in Mandarin at 0600 GMT on 28 February broadcasts the 
70-minute 10th and last installment of a 10-part series 
consisting of nine lectures and one question-and-answer session, 
entitled "TV Lecture Series on Several Current Major Programs 
for Reforming the Economic System." The 10th installment is a 
question-and-answer session in which Jin Xin, deputy director of 
the State General Administration of Taxation; Luo Zhiling, vice 
minister of the State Planning Commission; and Zhu Xiaohua, vice 
president of the People's Bank of China and deputy director of 
the State Foreign Exchange Administration, answer questions 
posed by an unidentified female moderator. According to the 
moderator, the three officials have been invited to answer 
questions in light of the "enthusiastic" response from viewers 
to the lecture series. The officials take turns fielding 
questions from the moderator that fall under their respective 
specialties. 
  Jin Xin discusses the value-added tax [VAT] issue. He 
explains that VAT is not repeatedly levied in each of the 
production stages, saying that deductions are allowed for in 
successive stages. When asked to comment on the scope of 
taxation, he notes that the tax encompasses "all industries, 
trades, and products ranging from production to distribution." 
According to Jin, the tax rate for most products is 17 percent, 
whereas a 13-percent rate will apply to basic goods and 
agricultural means of production. Next, Jin uses a chart to 
explain the formula for calculating VAT. He goes on to 
distinguish between ordinary and small-scale VAT payers. He 
also touches on state regulations regarding special VAT 
invoices, saying that malpractices, such as producing 
counterfeit invoices or using those invoices to cheat on taxes, 
will be "dealt with sternly in accordance with state laws." 
  Luo Zhiling addresses issues relating to commodity prices. 
He begins by underscoring the government's role in regulating 
prices despite the fact that most prices are now being set by 
market forces. He asserts: "Decontrolling prices does not mean 
that the government will no longer exercise control, and 
price-setting by the market does not mean that the state will no 
longer interfere." When asked to comment on the status of 
commodity prices, Luo observes that commodity prices are 
"relatively stable" because of government measures to stabilize 
prices following a 13.2-percent increase in last year's retail 
price index. Turning to the question of price mechanisms, Luo 
explains that a price mechanism consists of three components: 
"One for setting prices, another for determining the way prices 
function, and the third for regulating and controlling prices." 
  Zhu Xiaohua fields questions regarding foreign exchange 
control. He begins by describing the central features of reform 
of the foreign exchange control system: the merger of foreign 
exchange rates and the abolition of the foreign exchange 
retention system. While highlighting the need for the merger of 
foreign exchange rates, Zhu notes: "The state will adjust 
foreign exchange rates in light of the overall situation in 
macroeconomic development and of the actual state of revenue and 
expenditure." Turning to the foreign exchange retention system, 
he says that the abolition of this system means "nationally, 
foreign exchange supply and demand will be balanced through the 
market." Next, he discusses the central bank's currency 
stabilization measures, dwelling on the computerized linkup of 
foreign exchange trading centers spread throughout the country. 
He also elucidates the method for computing median foreign 
exchange rates which are quoted by the central bank. The next 
issue he addresses concerns renminbi bank accounts for 
foreigners. He explains that foreigners are permitted to open 
special renminbi bank accounts, and they can convert their 
legally earned renminbi proceeds into foreign currencies and 
remit them abroad. 
  The session ends at 0710 GMT. 

