BFN 

<F P=106> [By BUSINESS-TASS correspondent Irina Bolshova] </F>
  [Text] Moscow May 23 TASS -- In 1993 China became Russia's 
second important trade partner (after the Federal Republic of 
Germany) with the volume of trade turnover of about 7.7 billion 
U.S. dollars, Oleg Davydov, Russian minister of foreign economic 
ties, told BUSINESS-TASS today in connection with the 
forthcoming visit to China of the an official delegation of the 
Russian Federation headed by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin. 
  It is necessary to resolve a number of problems for the 
further mutually beneficial development of bilateral economic 
ties, Oleg Davydov believes. 25-30 per cent of contracts remain 
unimplemented due to the absence of the real possibilities of 
cargo transportation. Therefore, this makes it necessary to 
widen traffic capacities of the existing border crossing points 
and open new ones, intensify the use of transit directions 
through Mongolia and Kazakhstan, establish joint transport and 
construction companies and introduce more actively container 
transportation. 
  Both countries are also confronted with an acute problem of 
insuring the safety of goods, particularly on the Russian 
territory, the minister noted. 
  Oleg Davydov also regards as a more and more pressing need 
to 
partly reconsider the terms of payments under the inter- 
governmental agreement on economic and technical cooperation in 
the construction and reconstruction of industrial objects in 
China signed on July 10, 1985. According to Oleg Davydov, the 
currency clearing system of payments under this agreement has 
lost its advantages and practically has come to inter-state 
barter transactions. 
  It is also necessary to take into account changes in the 
internal economic situation in Russia, specifically the complex 
financial condition of many Russian plants-suppliers which makes 
them raise the question of the need to change over to a hard 
currency in payments for complete equipment delivered to China. 
  The minister believes that as both countries are short of 
hard currency it is expedient to reach agreements between their 
central banks on the partial use of national currencies in 
payments for trade operations outside the framework of 
inter-state trade. 
  The further development of trade and economic ties between 
the Russian Federation and China will be impossible without 
strengthening and improving their contractual and legal base. 
The top priority task in this field must be the signing of 
inter- government documents on the protection of the rights of 
intellectual property and on avoiding of double taxation, the 
Russian minister noted. 
  It is also probable that in connection with the possibility 
of both countries joining the general agreement on tariffs and 
trade (GATT) in the future it will be necessary to review some 
provisions of bilateral treaties in accordance with GATT 
requirements. 

