Narcotics   Problem 

<F P=102> AU1104110494 Tbilisi SAKARTVELOS RESPUBLIKA in Georgian 24 
Mar 94 pp 1,2 </F>

<F P=103> AU1104110494 </F>
<F P=104>  Tbilisi SAKARTVELOS RESPUBLIKA </F>
<F P=105>  Georgian </F>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Security Minister Igor Giorgadze by Davit </F>
Gvelesiani; place and date not given: ``Give Me a Foothold 
and....''--introduction and all questions published in boldface] 
  [Excerpts] Life today is so bad for the republic's 
population that nobody remembers if life has ever been good. 
They ``console themselves'' with the thought that the refugees 
and those people made homeless are in a worse position than 
themselves. A person could overcome the economic difficulties 
if it were not for the pillage and robbery, murders, terrorist 
acts, and so forth. One gets the impression that apparently 
nobody is any longer capable of establishing the peace and order 
that people long for. However, the republic's Security Minister 
Igor Giorgadze does not share this pessimistic view. 
  Gvelesiani: Batono [Georgian polite form of 
address] minister, you were in western Georgia for almost 
one month. What was the purpose of such a long trip? 
  Giorgadze: In accordance with instructions from 
the head of state, I was entrusted with forming a brigade and 
going to western Georgia in order to familiarize myself with 
current processes there and implement effective measures aimed 
at discharging the extremely serious crime situation. 
  From 20 February until 14 March, we were in Poti together 
with the operational brigade, which was carrying out extremely 
complex and labor-intensive work. Accompanying me were special 
units from the Ministry of Security that were conducting 
operations aimed at exposing and seeking reconciliation with 
armed groups. These were not punitive operations. We held 
talks with leaders of armed groups that fought on the side of 
the ex-president and that, until now, have been hiding in the 
forests. It is superfluous to speak about a general 
reconciliation since all those who have been robbing and 
intimidating the peaceful population have committed criminal 
offenses and therefore have to be brought to account before the 
law. The fact that there no longer exists the fear of the 
revival of ``Zviadism'' in its armed form can be viewed as the 
biggest achievement. We can confidently say today that the fear 
of a new civil war in western Georgia has been eliminated. I 
believe this is due to the work of employees of the Ministry of 
Security and others. 
  For 24 days we held talks with three armed groups. It is 
true that we were unable to achieve reconciliation with all of 
the 160 persons united in these groups. However, the talks are 
continuing and they require prudence, patience, and time. 
Certain members of the law enforcement bodies have themselves 
complicated our work; it has turned out that they have been 
demanding fairly large sums for ``reconciliation'' from those 
people who have been coming out of the forests with their 
submachine guns. In addition to weapons that have been 
surrendered voluntarily, we have managed to confiscate a large 
quantity of firearms. We have retrieved stolen trucks and 
equipment. However, this is the material side of the trip, 
which I consider to be less important. The main thing is that 
people have declared their trust in our department, and this has 
the greatest social and political importance. [passage omitted] 
  Gvelesiani: Batono Igor, the violations in the 
banking and credit and financial system, the misappropriation of 
humanitarian aid, and the removal of raw materials of strategic 
importance from the state leads us to believe that a powerful 
mafia is operating in Georgia. 
  Giorgadze: For almost two years now, there has 
been talk about violations in the credit and financial system; 
several commissions have been formed and are working; suspects 
have been arrested but, as can be seen, the major criminals have 
remained free, as not a single serious violation in the banking 
sphere has been cleared up. 
  On instructions from the head of state, our ministry became 
interested in this matter. On the basis of investigative 
materials, we arrested the vice-president of the National Bank. 
Given the reaction that this fact has caused among a number of 
senior officials, it can be supposed that we are dealing with 
serious violations whose successful investigation will expose 
all those who sacrificed the country's interests for their own 
gain. 
  The Ministry of Security has been entrusted with forming an 
independent economic service that will be able to control and 
examine violations in the economic and credit systems. However, 
at the moment, we do not have sufficient funds for this. It is 
certain that existing mafia groups have found support both in 
state bodies of administration and in executive power. 
Therefore, the struggle against them and their exposure will 
take a long time. This is a serious problem and the Ministry of 
Security alone will not be able to cope with it. 
  Gvelesiani: Does the fear exist that Georgia will 
become a transit country for drugs? 
  Giorgadze: Unfortunately, this process is already 
under way and the international narcotics business, which trades 
in illegal arms and narcotic substances, is interested in our 
territory. The point is that, whereas before, the narcotics 
route from Asia to Europe bypassed the USSR, it now runs as 
follows: eastern Asia--Pakistan--Afghanistan--Central 
Asia--Azerbaijan--Georgia. Therefore, Georgia unhesitatingly 
took part in the international conference held in Istanbul on 
the initiative of the Black Sea countries and devoted to the 
problems of the struggle against the narcotics business and 
terrorism. Work in this direction is intensively under way. My 
deputy and a special group are currently in Bucharest, where a 
meeting of special services is continuing at which the latest 
means and methods in the struggle against the drugs mafia are 
being perfected. Incidentally, a sizable amount of drugs has 
already been smuggled via Georgia to Europe. The absence of 
borders and strict customs controls and appropriate legislation 
are complicating our work very much. 
  Gvelesiani: The view is being spread here and 
supported by high-ranking officials in the power structures that 
Georgia is unable to restore order by itself and, therefore, is 
calling on an external force for help. 
  Giorgadze: I do not share such a view. Georgia 
can certainly establish order in its own land. This is borne 
out by the recent intensification of the struggle against the 
criminal world and the subsequent positive results that have 
been achieved. 
  The Ministry of Security just like its predecessor--the 
Intelligence and Information Bureau, was not tasked with acting 
upon information received. One got the impression that we could 
only obtain information while some ``distant uncle'' would 
establish order for us. Now, the situation is different. Those 
special divisions that make up the power structures of the 
Ministry of Security are well trained and well disciplined and 
composed of young men trained to carry out special operations; I 
believe it is possible to train similar groups in the Ministry 
of Internal Affairs as well. In my view, the power structures 
currently existing in the Ministry of Security should also exist 
in the future in Georgian military formations in the form of 
special subunits. The correct selection of professional cadres 
will enable us to form and train such special subunits in all 
the power ministries that will be able to restore order in the 
country in the shortest period of time. We need more than just 
the desire to do this. We need to create the appropriate 
legislation, material and technical base, and means for this. 
Then, we will no longer be reliant on external help but will be 
able to act entirely on our own. [passage omitted] 

