CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by editorial committee member Atsushi Suemura] </F>
  [Excerpt] [Passage omitted] Managing underwriter Nomura 
Securities, commenting on Sakura Bank preferred stock listed on 
the market on 1 April, said, "The theoretical price of preferred 
stock should be close to that of convertible bonds and less 
concern should exist for low pricing to the extent that it 
provides a high return." In the 16 trading days up to 22 April, 
the preferred stock trading volume averaged about 600,000 shares 
per day, which must be considered an improvement over previous 
preferred issues which were said to have faced poor 
marketability. 
  However, one head of a leading securities firm's research 
center states, "Since we have not received any inquiries from 
our trading departments, the truth of the matter is that there 
seems to be little interest in the issue," and some domestic 
institutional investors are "deliberately disregarding the 
issue." The question is, why? 
  If stock prices from the beginning of the year are indexed 
and the price of Sakura Bank's common stock is compared with the 
Nikkei industry sector average for bank stocks, one will note 
the clear-cut lag in Sakura Bank's common stock price. 
  Preferred stock with a total value of 100 million yean was 
issued; specifically, 50 million shares at an issue price of 
2,000 yen with a dividend payable of 45 yen and return of 2.25 
percent, no voting rights, and convertible into common stock 
between 1 July 1994 and 30 September 1997. All Sakura Bank 
preferred stock still outstanding as of 1 October 1997 will be 
converted into common stock. 
  With the exception of individual investors and other 
investors who need to buy Sakura Bank common stock paying an 
annual dividend of 8.5 yen because of special circumstances, 
investors should be attracted to the preferred stock for its 
high dividend and high-return qualities and should think of 
selling their common stock holdings to finance the purchase of 
preferred stock. Assuming that the financial condition of Sakura 
Bank is not noticeably worse than the average institution in the 
banking industry, it is possible that anticipated future supply 
pressures and current selling pressures noted above have 
adversely affected the price of the Sakura common stock. 
  The immediate situation in view of the three-year period 
before the mandatory conversion is another matter, but the 
question arises as to who would want to buy the preferred issue 
in the face of an impending mandatory conversion to common 
stock? Even the concern that "there is no guarantee about how 
long the quality of liquidity can be maintained," cannot be 
considered a criticism made with an ulterior motive. 
  Life insurance companies were critical that preferred stock 
was issued without any action being taken on common stock 
dividends with which they were unhappy. According to a major 
insurance company official, "We hear that underwriting 
securities firms did not offer the preferred stock to existing 
major shareholders, but that was probably the case because they 
did not want to stir up a "hornets nest" of selling in terms of 
common share holdings." 
  Major shareholders, including trust banks, have seen paper 
profits in their common share holdings of Sakura Bank shrink as 
a result of the drop in share prices. From the beginning of the 
year to 22 April, Sakura common stock shrank about 400 million 
yen in value or 8 percent, when compared to banking sector 
average performance for the same period. 
  Even if preferred stock per se is considered an attractive 
product, if the effects of such issuance have resulted in a drop 
in price of the common stock, it must be considered a "villain" 
that violated the interests of existing shareholders. 
  First, the issuance of Sakura Bank preferred stock is a 
"Tier 
I" measure conforming with the narrow definition of net worth to 
conform with the net worth regulations of the Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS), while the issuance of 
subordinate bonds and loans are measures which limit themselves 
to the "Tier II" measure conforming to the broader definition of 
net worth under the same regulations. Thus, under current 
conditions where authorities regulate the means of increasing 
capitalization, they cannot directly market secondary offerings. 
  Issuance of preferred stock which pays a dividend close to 
that of common stock is considered as an increase in 
capitalization, while issuance of bonds with coupons attached 
are not considered as belonging to "Tier I." It appears that 
they settled for a convertible preferred stock as the last 
resort, but it is said that the preferred stock does not carry 
provisions for accumulated dividends for the period of 
convertibility because such assurance of dividends would place 
them in the category of corporate bonds and render them 
unaccountable as "Tier I" instruments. 
  According to one institutional investor, in the sense that 
the Sakura Bank preferred stock was a product giving highest 
priority to facilitating the needs of the issuer by "issuing 
what was actually a secondary offering of common stock disguised 
by a three-year conversion period," they must be labeled as 
stock "with preference for facilitating the needs of the issuer." 
  All Japanese-listed stock are common shares with the 
exception of preferred stock issued as a "last resort." 
Preferred stock whose issuance has been simplified should be 
utilized more often, but no formula exists for assessing the 
value of preferred stock--which has a preference in the payment 
of dividends but no voting rights--or the "value of voting 
rights," and the valuation process becomes even more difficult 
in Japan where the effects of voting rights have been canceled 
out by interlocking stock ownership. 
  Hope seems to have faded that when the commercial law is 
revised, listed subsidiaries such as those of Hitachi will be 
able to issue "bona fide" preferred stock as a means of raising 
capital while the parent company retains majority voting rights. 
The reason is that even now stock of subsidiary firms is, in 
reality, preferred stock without voting rights and if nominal 
preferred stock is issued on top of the existing preferred 
stock, confusion will arise about distinctions between the two. 
  The creation of preferred stock which does not represent a 
measure of the last resort and which is responsive to the needs 
of investors will probably require as a premise the correction 
of the distortions in current common stock markets. 

