BFN 

<F P=106> ["Our Socialist Ideological Position is Impregnable" -- KCNA </F>
headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, May 3 (KCNA) -- The ideological front of 
our party, the socialist ideological position, will remain 
impregnable for ever as long as there are the dear leader 
Comrade Kim Chong-il, a great master of the socialist press, and 
the unit of loyal journalists and pressmen who share the destiny 
with him, declares NODONG SINMUN today. 
  The paper devotes one whole page to an article on the 20th 
anniversary of the publication of a historical work by Comrade 
Kim Chong-il on May 7, 1974. 
  Reviewing the immortal exploits performed by him in guiding 
media services, the article says: 
  The dear leader who had wisely directed media services from 
his early years by creditably inheriting the tradition of media 
founded by the respected leader Comrade Kim Il-song published 
the May 7 work and kindled the flame of revolutions in 
newspapers, news services and publications. 
  This occasioned a revolutionary change opening up a bright 
vista for the building of socialist media. 
  The paper says that Comrade Kim Chong-il is a great thinker 
and theoretician who fully propounded the idea of building 
socialist media of chuche. 
  The paper quotes Comrade Kim Chong-il as saying: 
  "Our party's publications, news services and broadcasts have 
inherited the superb revolutionary traditions established by the 
great leader and are guided solely by the great leader's 
chuche-orientated idea on the media. Their noble aim is 
considered to be the advancement and accomplishment of the 
glorious revolutionary cause pioneered by the great leader." 
  The paper further says: 
  The May 7 work is a powerful ideological weapon which 
enables 
our media to make an active contribution to modelling the whole 
society on the chuche idea. 
  In the work, the dear leader elucidated the character and 
basic mission of our party's media and set it as the basic 
principle of media services to adopt the principle of chuche as 
the fundamental, firmly establish the monolithic leadership 
system of the party and vigorously conduct the speed campaign 
with right seeds. And he gave comprehensive answers to 
questions arising in bringing about a revolutionary turn in 
media services and propaganda by making revolutions in 
newspapers, news services and publications. All these ideas, 
theories and policies laid down in the May 7 work served as a 
valuable press program which ushered in a heyday of socialist 
media as today. 
  Expounded in the dear leader's ideas and policies on media 
are all things ranging from the general orientation and basic 
duty of media to the characteristics of all kinds of items 
including editorials, articles, political essays and news 
briefs, the method of writing them and the mode of activities of 
editors and journalists. 
  Dear Comrade Kim Chong-il is an illustrious leader who has 
triumphantly directed news media to apply the chuche-based press 
idea with his refined organising ability and energetic practical 
activities. 
  He solved all the important policy matters arising in media 
services, providing valuable ideological and theoretical pabulum 
which constitutes the contents of our media. 
  Whenever a heavy task was raised before the party and the 
revolution and the situation at home and abroad was grim, the 
dear leader showed deep interest in increasing the militant role 
of media and saw to it that a massive ideological offensive 
might be launched. 
  When the imperialists are frantically trying to incite the 
reactionary idea in the minds of the people and spread corrupt 
and decadent bourgeois way of life among them, our newspapers, 
news services, broadcasts and books are discharging their heavy 
mission as important media correctly speaking for and defending 
the ideas and stand of the Workers' Party of Korea and 
propagandizing and implementing its policies under the banner of 
the chuche idea, the banner of socialism, without the slightest 
vacillation. 
  All these are a precious fruition of the tested leadership 
art and powerful method of press campaign of the dear leader who 
has skillfully and superbly solved all the matters, firmly 
adhering to the chuche-based stand and revolutionary principle 
in the ideological and press campaign. 
  The dear leader general Kim Chong-il is an illustrious 
leader 
and teacher who has brought up a large army of revolutionary 
pressmen who are boundlessly loyal to the party and the 
revolution, the country and the people. 
  In our country, the relations between the leader and 
journalists, men of the press, are not merely relations of 
guiding and being guided, but relations between the great 
teacher and his disciples and between a tender-hearted father 
and his children. Lying in this blood ties, the steel-like 
singlehearted unity, are the greatest happiness and glory of our 
journalists, men of the press, and invincible might of our media. 
  United around the great general Kim Chong-il are all the 
officers and men of the People's Army with arms, 5 million youth 
vanguards resolved to become bullets and bombs and the ranks of 
faithful journalists, men of the press with iron faith and will, 
pens of the revolution tightly held in their hands. 
  No force on the earth can break the ranks of our 
journalists, 
men of the press, who resolutely defend him politically, 
ideologically and theoretically with absolute worship and 
loyalty and filial piety to their leader. As long as there are 
these iron ranks, our party's media will shine as media of the 
great Comrade Kim Chong-il forever. 

