Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Franz Frisch: "6,000 Rpm in a Grain of Rice: A </F>
2-mm Motor Goes Into Series Production -- Leading-Edge 
Technology from Mainz"] 
  [Text] The engine has been running continuously for weeks 
as a fatigue test, its rotor making 6,000 revolutions per 
minute. What is so special about it is that it has a diameter 
of only 2 mm, the size of a grain of rice. It is to be launched 
in 1994 as the world's first electric motor manufactured using 
modern microengineering techniques to come onto the market. 
  Silicon chips first fired information technology, and now 
miniaturization is also moving into conventional fields such as 
mechanical and electrical engineering and metrology. 
  Contrary to what has happened in microelectronics, Europe 
still has its nose out in front in this technology of the 
future, which makes it possible to produce a vast range of 
microscopic components. Over the last 15 years, its inventor, 
Professor Wolfgang Ehrfeld, has been granted about 50 patents 
for what is known as the LIGA (standing, in German, for 
lithography, electroplating, and molding) process. 
  The first micromechanical motor thus comes not from Boston 
or 
Tokyo, but from Mainz, where Ehrfeld set up the Institute of 
Microengineering (IMM), a 120-strong research corporation 
sponsored by the Land of Rhineland-Palatinate, in 1991. 
  Like semiconductor chip circuits, these mini-components are 
first designed in large scale then projected onto the material 
in an extremely reduced scale. The three-dimensional structures 
formed by exposure to parallel x-rays, which are now available 
worldwide in synchrotron centers (such as DESY [German Electron 
Synchrotron] in Hamburg). 
  Simple micromechanical products are already in industrial 
use: Ehrfeld, who first worked at the Karlsruhe Nuclear Research 
Center, began setting up the microengineering division at the 
STEAG AG group in 1988. In 1990, this division turned into the 
Dortmund company, Micro-Parts, which now has 60 employees and 
exports microtechnology -- to Japan as well. Outstanding 
examples are its perfectly formed nozzles with diameters ranging 
from 20 to 100 micrometers for inkjet printers. 
  The IMM in Mainz goes for more complex applications ranging 
from a plug for optical communication systems that is only 1 
centimeter wide, is easily inserted, and accurately connects 12 
ultrathin glass fibers on 1 micrometer, to a device the size of 
a cigarette packet for measuring thin films on chips. 
Electronic circuits can even be conjured onto mini-components 
made of silicon. 
  The demand for microtechnology solutions, which are on 
average 100 times smaller than their conventional counterparts, 
is showing a marked increase: Joint projects with industry in 
Mainz rose from 11 to 45 in 1993 alone. 
  Over the three years of the IMM's life to date, Ehrfeld has 
consolidated its leading position. For example, he has managed 
to raise the surface quality of ceramic microstructures 100-fold 
(previous roughness: 3 micrometers, compared with Ehrfeld's 
current 30 nanometers). Gold-coated diamond membranes give 
unprecedented precision for x-ray masks -- the negatives for 
lithography. Jena-based Jenoptik GmbH and the IMM have jointly 
developed an automated machine for producing LIGA structures, 
the first two models of which have been sold to France and the 
United States. 
  As the head of the IMM is aware that the technological lead 
that it has acquired over the United States and the Far East can 
only be maintained if research and development reach critical 
mass, he has established a European network of firms and 
research institutes in 12 European countries. The EU [European 
Union] has awarded this joint project a grant of approximately 
3.5 million German marks. 

