Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Prof. Volodymyr Lapin, Doctor of Economics, </F>
chief advisor to the Ukraine President representative for 
economic issues in Odessa Oblast: "Does the President Have Any 
Power?: Ruslan Bodelan Dreams of Communism in an Independent 
Bodelan Kingdom"] 
  [Text] It is no secret for anyone in Odessa Oblast that the 
majority of deputies in the Odessa Oblast Council, chaired by 
former CPSU-CPU Secretary Ruslan Bodelan, have been for two 
years ardently championing the resuscitation of the single 
inviolate USSR. What causes concern, however, is an initiative 
that has emerged lately from the bowels of the oblast council 
bureaucracy: "an experiment to broaden regional economic 
independence." 
  To implement this experiment in accordance with its concept, 
approved by the decision of the oblast council, the state must 
delegate to Odessa a share of its legal and economic rights. 
These include operational control over the region's economy, the 
building of infrastructure and investment of foreign and 
domestic capital in the oblast "to open it up to the world 
market." How about that? Who cares about Ukraine or the 
Ukrainian people? Every man for himself. 
  When words such as region and oblast are stripped from the 
oblast council resolution, the aspirations of Odessa 
independence-seekers toward the so-called free economic zone 
become clear. In paragraphs mandating the establishment at the 
regional level of special regimes for foreign business and 
export-oriented activities and regulating the registration of 
foreign company offices, control over the compliance by the 
participants in foreign business activities with Ukrainian laws 
and conditions of international agreements, taxation of business 
entities and licensing of their business activities a large part 
of Ukrainian law will be suspended for the duration of the 
Bodelan experiment. 
  Thus, we are talking of regional statehood or, at least, 
autonomy. Apparently they are expecting heaven on earth in 
Bodelan's Odessa, once the free special economic zone has been 
established. It is a strange tug-of-war. So far, no one in Kiev, 
the seat of Ukrainian statehood, has asked: "What kind of 
kingdom is the head of the oblast council trying to carve for 
himself?" Instead, there is talk that the resolution should be 
examined by the Cabinet of Ministers, that the legislative 
groundwork for the establishment of such a zone needs to be 
done, including detailed technical and economic characteristics, 
even sectoral orientation; blueprints for the development of 
industrial and social infrastructures; economic and research 
potential; levels, sources and forms of financing; price and tax 
regimes; systems of foreign exchange, financial, credit and 
tariff regulations, etc. 
  One can imagine the diligence and rigor of the analysis of 
all these points, including from the point of view of economic 
security of Ukraine, while the documents pass through the 
appropriate bureaucratic channels. It is a wonder than serious 
people, patriots of independent Ukraine (if they are patriots), 
have nothing else to do. Moreover, the Odessa advocates of 
Soviet Power have chosen to get there through the back door, by 
hoping to go around the law. They claim that this is only a 
special, temporary experiment. We know how the Crimea has been 
experimenting: it has already elected its own president. 
  Do we not exaggerate the dangers of the Odessa experiment? 
Let me try to analyze its essence. Free economic zones are part 
of a national policy, the main goal of which is for the country 
to gain foreign investment, obtain new technology and increase 
the intake of foreign currency for the state budget. This is why 
the state offers special incentives on taxes, tariffs, 
insurance, credits, foreign exchange, prices, etc. at its free 
zones. The state often limits union activity in such zones, the 
right to strike and even the application of minimum wage laws. 
Naturally, in such conditions, elements of social pressure 
inside the zone may increase and, as world experience shows, 
present the danger of an explosion. 
  One other thing provides cause for concern: who it is that 
tries to abrogate the rights of the state to establish a free 
economic zone. Let us recall that in the past three years the 
Odessa supporters of the USSR and socialism have undertaken a 
number of actions the clear goal of which was the territorial 
dismemberment of Ukraine and the loss of its independence. In 
the fall of 1990, as is well-known, the bureau of the Odessa 
CPSU-CPU obkom organized a rally by South Ukrainian workers at 
the walls of the Supreme Council under the main slogan: Unless 
the Union agreement is signed, the Black Sea region will secede 
from Ukraine. A year later, in Odessa, they staged a joint 
session of the presidiums of three South Ukrainian oblast 
councils and the Crimean Autonomous Republic to set up the 
legislative framework for the South Ukrainian Assembly. Finally, 
as all efforts failed, the last trump card was put into play: 
"The Ukrainian economy can be saved from collapse only by an 
economic union with the CIS." And, since the CIS also stumbled, 
they discovered the Odessa economic and legal experiment, the 
goal of which is, in essence, to ignore legislative acts of 
Ukraine on its territory. 
  Of course, a free zone itself could be successful and could 
benefit the entire nation, but only if all of its structures 
function within strictly defined limits of the existing 
legislation and, necessarily, under the control of the supreme 
organs of state power in Ukraine. 
  The same can be said about attempts by the Odessa Oblast 
council to assume the right to manage the national property. 
This includes not only major industrial enterprises but also 
transport and energy-producing entities, ports, electric 
transmission lines and highways--all that is indispensable for 
the normal functioning of a country. If all this is given up to 
the oblast council, the question arises what will happen to such 
economically important entities as the Odessa port plant and 
refinery, the steam ship company and the pipelines. Will they 
become the material foundation of the Odessa Republic? 
  If we want to speak seriously of broadening economic 
independence at the local level and implementing oblast-level 
programs and projects, they are currently being developed in the 
Odessa region. For instance, there are plans for the structural 
rebuilding of the machine building complex in the oblast, and 
for the support and development of entrepreneurship. The oblast 
executive authorities patiently work to implement them. But the 
input by the oblast council in this important area cannot be 
seen through the magnifying glass. Please, work on these issues. 
But no. 
  Time has come to develop and implement the general program 
for the support and development of the farming movement in the 
oblast, and for the long-term development of inter-farm ties at 
the oblast level in Ukraine as well as with the nearby regions 
of the near abroad. This is what oblast deputies should 
primarily focus their attention on, and not on empty populist 
slogans and calls for the creation of a new Union. By the way, 
if they could implement the idea of inter-oblast cooperation 
with regions of the near abroad, the very issue of the new Union 
would have fallen away immediately. In this respect, positive 
experience already exists in Nikolaev, Dnepropetrovsk and some 
other Ukraine oblast. 
  It would have been praiseworthy if the oblast council, 
instead of engaging in the tiresome talk about the 
impoverishment of workers, had developed clear ways of providing 
direct aid to socially unprotected and poor citizens, and 
instead of debating the shortage of heavy fuel and other fuels 
had drafted a program for saving energy and using alternative 
fuels, for instance those obtained from wastes at agricultural 
processing plants. There are also other issues that are very 
important for the oblast. 
  But the leaders of the oblast council and its chief have no 
time for this. They have contracted an autonomy fever. 
  Analyzing the actions of the Odessa Oblast Council and its 
decisions one becomes convinced that the very system of 
communist soviets is destructive. Thank God, there are 
precedents of how to do without them. This is how small states 
Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia live, and, in all likelihood, this 
is how a great state, Russia, is going to live. We alone (except 
for North Korea and Cuba) are ahead of the entire planet, 
bolstering this historical atavism. I think that it is time for 
us to switch to a system of municipalities, prefectures and 
mayors, which efficiently function everywhere in the world on a 
professional basis and do not wave around their red banners 
which have long ago become discredited. One would wish that the 
president of Ukraine, like Yeltsin with respect of Sverdlov's 
creation, acted more decisively and directed his representatives 
to do likewise. 

