Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Provided with new identities and accompanied by 
their families, five reformed terrorists left the country last 
year to begin new lives and forget the sequels of terror and 
bloodshed in which they participated when they made the mistake 
of joining the ranks of the Shining Path [Sendero Luminoso-SL] 
and MRTA [Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement]. 
  They are among the country's 1,500 reformed terrorists, 
1,300 
of whom have already been reintegrated into society and are 
working in different areas. 
  A number of them are now members of the Peasant Patrols 
working in rural areas. Others, numbering about 50, have assumed 
new identities and gone with their families to other parts of 
the country to take up different activities. 
  Concerning the reformed terrorists who left the country, a 
reliable source reports that they are "intermediate-level" 
leaders of the Shining Path and MRTA who provided important 
information leading to the capture of the main cadres of the 
terrorist organizations. 
  The government has lent them its complete support, providing 
them with traveling allowances in dollars enabling them to get 
along until they can get settled. 
  They have traveled to other South American countries (for 
reasons of security we cannot say where), where the Peruvian 
Embassies are discreetly monitoring them. 
  Six or seven other cases of reformed terrorists are now 
under 
study by the Evaluating Committee, which will determine the 
possibility of sending them abroad. 
  Daniel Espichan Tumay, special attorney general for cases of 
terrorism, was summoned by EL COMERCIO yesterday, but refrained 
from providing details on the matter for reasons of security. 
  Nevertheless, he did explain that the change in identity and 
residence, whether inside or outside of the country, is an 
additional benefit extended to the reformed individuals in 
accordance with the law. 
  He noted that as a member of the Evaluating Committee, he 
observed that here in Peru, the entire procedure is fraught with 
delays and that dishonest legal officials are even turning a 
profit. 
  He said that five members of the single board of the High 
Court of Chiclayo had been removed from their posts when it was 
proven that they were charging a reformed terrorist for handling 
his case, which they had deliberately chosen. 

