BFN 

<F P=106> [By Heather Tyrrell, PRESS ASSOCIATION News] </F>
  [Text] Scores of Britons escaping the civil war in Yemen 
flew back home today, leaving another 700 behind. 
  The Foreign Office said up to 150 more wanted to leave and 
it 
was now working out how to evacuate them via the airport in the 
capital Sanaa, which is effectively closed. 
  "Probably about 100 have got out now through various means. 
We are now looking at about 100 to 150 who would still like to 
come out," said a Foreign Office [FO] spokesman. 
  "We will probably try to get a civilian airliner in over the 
next day or so to fly out from Sanaa," he said. "No definite 
decision has been made yet but we are likely to press ahead if 
the situation remains calm enough." 
  Option B, he said, was to launch a military evacuation. 
  Fighting broke out after the failure of efforts to unite the 
old states of North and South Yemen. The situation in Sanaa was 
relatively calm and British diplomats there report "no great 
state of panic" among those left behind, said the FO spokesman. 
Otherwise, steps to evacuate them would be "more drastic." 
  Today, around 42 Britons -- mainly administration workers 
for 
the Canadian Occidental Petroleum company in the former southern 
capital of Aden, and their dependents -- flew back into Stansted 
airport, Essex, on a flight from the Red Sea port of Djibouti at 
6:30am today. They had been taken to Djibouti from Yemen by a 
French warship. 
  Several evacuees expressed their relief at being back home 
to 
BBC News. One man said: "I went out on to the balcony and saw 
flashes of light and explosions coming up from the airport and 
it was at that point that I thought: `This is it.'" 
  Another said: "We were in a compound not 100 yards from the 
airport and there were bullets flying all over the place." 
  A spokesman from Canadian Occidental said of the evacuees: 
"They were nervous about the situation in Aden but they were in 
all in very good shape. Nobody was injured." 
  Britons were among their staff remaining behind in Yemen, 
but 
they were working in the oil fields away from the fighting, he 
said. 
  Other British evacuees are said to have arrived on a flight 
laid on by the oil company Yemeni Hunt into Stansted and on an 
Air France flight into London's Heathrow airport. 

