Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Ambassador to the United States </F>
Dr. Fayiz al-Tarawinah, head of the Jordanian delegation to the 
peace talks, in Washington, by Kassab Samawi in Amman; on 24 
January -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Samawi] Dr. Fayiz, since the last round of the 
peace talks, the peace process has witnessed rapid and extremely 
important developments. The most important of these 
developments were the signing of the Palestinian-Israeli 
Declaration of Principles and the mutual recognition, as well as 
the Arab-U.S. summits, foremost of which were the meeting which 
was held between His Majesty King Husayn and U.S. President Bill 
Clinton, and the Syrian president's meeting with the U.S. 
President. Can you tell us about the impact of these 
developments' on the peace process? 
  [Al-Tarawinah] There are many points. Of course, there are 
positive signs, particularly that all sides have announced their 
commitment to the peace process itself. However, we want to 
clarify the bases and to further test intentions and the 
negotiations process itself. This is because there are detailed 
issues. There are also relevant principles. Therefore, the 
summit meetings are positive developments. Moreover, there were 
developments that made the situation more ambiguous, 
particularly the talks on the Palestinian-Israeli track. Based 
on this, we must test intentions, at the level of the 
negotiators, to define the nature and form of the next round of 
negotiations. We still insist on a full track that proceeds 
simultaneously with the other brothers, based on the Madrid 
formula and the terms of reference. Of course, we should take 
into consideration all the developments that have taken place. 
As for us, since we initialed the agenda on 14 September 1993, 
we have never had the chance to discuss items on this agenda. 
This is why we are concerned about a full track that proceeds 
simultaneously with the other brothers in order to be able to 
begin discussion of the details on the agenda. 
  [Samawi] Recent Arab-U.S. summits focused on the need for 
the 
U.S. Administration to play a more effective role in the peace 
process. What are your expectations regarding the U.S. role. 
  [Al-Tarawinah] The U.S. role at this stage, concerning 
consultations among heads of delegations, will be a facilitative 
role regarding preparation for and facilitating the meeting 
itself. However, taking into consideration that they are the 
cosponsor of the peace talks, we will update them. There will 
be direct contact with them. At the end of the consultations, 
which we do not know how long they will take, we and the U.S. 
side will hold a joint assessment in order to decide on the next 
stage. The U.S. side is tirelessly trying to create an 
atmosphere where all sides would eventually achieve progress. 
However, they will not directly participate in the meetings of 
the heads of delegations. They will take part in the assessment 
process at the end of the meeting. Each party will also hold 
separate consultations with the U.S. side. 

