Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview by Libyan leader Colonel Mu'ammar </F>
al-Qadhdhafi to an "Egyptian media delegation" at al-Qadhdhafi's 
headquarters in al-'Aziziyah, near Tripoli, by Hilmi al-Namnam; 
date not given] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] "Brother leader" is the name by 
which Colonel al-Qadhdhafi goes in Libya. You never hear his 
real name there, nor is he referred to as a head of state or any 
other official title, for that matter. You just see his picture 
and hear him referred to as the brother leader. 
  On the day following our arrival, the members of our 
Egyptian 
media delegation, had an appointment with the brother leader. 
We went to al-'Aziziyah, his official headquarters, a 10-minute 
drive from the capital. We entered a compound containing a 
number of small villas. Tanks, military vehicles, and armored 
vehicles lined the road to al-Qadhdhafi's tent. 
  Al-Qadhdhafi does not live in the tent, as we had imagined. 
He merely uses it as an office. The tent was furnished with a 
number of chairs and a desk with a telephone, a clock, and many 
copies of The Green Book on top. More copies of "The 
Green Book" and books written about The Green Book 
sat in bookcases about the tent. 
  The true al-Qadhdhafi is different from anything you may 
have 
read or heard. A minute after our arrival, he entered the tent 
with an escort of youths, all under 25. Only one girl, olive 
skinned, green-eyed, wearing jeans, was in the entourage. 
  When he talks, al-Qadhdhafi makes you feel that you are in 
the presence of a shrewd politician. A little while later, he 
changes into a rebel who wants to change everything and start 
all over. Sometimes he sounds like a young man, discontented and 
desperate. A bit later he is jovial, even clownish. In all 
events, you do not see him as a statesman. You almost ask 
yourself: How has this man stayed in power for a quarter of a 
century? A jumble of contrasting Islamic, nationalistic, 
socialist, and pan-Arab concepts race in his mind. 
  That morning, the Libyan press made a scathing attack on the 
Arab League, accusing it of complete impotence. Commentaries to 
this effect appeared on the front pages of three newspapers, all 
with similar headlines and phrasing. 
  Al-Qadhdhafi said that the Jamahiriyah's Unity Secretariat 
had verbally notified the League that it is thinking of 
presenting [to the People's Congresses] the issue of withdrawing 
from the League. 
  Al-Qadhdhafi said that there is no further justification for 
Libya's remaining in the League or for the League's very 
existence, saying that the Israeli enemy has become a strong 
candidate for membership in the Arab League. 
  Al-Qadhdhafi said: Qatar supplies Israel with natural gas. 
Muscat receives the Israeli foreign minister. Qatar is filing a 
complaint against Bahrain with the International Court of 
Justice. All this happens and the League is unable to do 
anything. 
  The Libyan leader added that he aims by this move to jolt 
the 
League into action and make it amend its charter. He said: The 
Warsaw Pact has been dissolved and so has the Soviet Union. 
Soon, God willing, NATO will be dissolved. Meanwhile, the Arab 
League has not changed. 
  I pointed out to Col. al-Qadhdhafi that his move comes at a 
moment he knows full well is inappropriate for amending the 
League's charter and therefore may weaken the Arabs and divide 
them further. He said: "By God, if no change is possible, let 
the entire Arab League lay in ruins. Let us abrogate Arab 
borders, open them up." 
  Al-Qadhdhafi said that he personally appreciates the efforts 
of Arab League Secretary General Dr. 'Ismat 'Abd-al-Majid, but 
the lack of cooperation on the part of Arab rulers renders these 
efforts futile. 
  The second urgent topic raised at this meeting was the 
Libyan-Western crisis over the Lockerbie affair. In this 
regard, Al-Qadhdhafi praised Egypt's efforts and President 
Mubarak's diplomacy and repeated exchanges with the United 
States, the United Kingdom, and France. He added: Despite 
Egypt's efforts, they have remained intransigent. They do not 
think much of the Arabs. We do not "impress" them. 
  I asked him how far could the confrontation between Libya 
and the West go, considering Western insistence on the handing 
over of the two Libyan citizens? He said: We no longer have 
anything to give. We have our backs to the wall, and we are not 
afraid of anything. We have stopped importing goods and spare 
parts from the West. Even France, in solidarity with the United 
States and Britain, has refused to work out a solution. If the 
Arabs had broken off negotiations with Israel, the United 
States, which supports Israel, would have resolved the problem 
with Libya. But the Arabs failed to do so. 
  Nonetheless, there is nothing that we fear; we are prepared 
to resist. I'll bet you have seen the armed people "and they 
are ready to bring the temple down on both themselves and their 
enemies." [reference to Biblical story of Samson] 
  Asked about the acts of terrorism in Egypt and Algeria, 
al-Qadhdhafi said: It is known that the leaders of terrorism 
and the new atheistic movements live in Washington, Bonn, 
London, and Paris. From there they send instructions to carry 
out of acts of sabotage inside Egypt and Algeria. This is all a 
part of a Western-crusader-Zionist conspiracy against the Arabs 
and Muslims. Their principal objective is to destroy Egypt, 
because they know well the importance of Egypt's weight and 
role, and that by sabotaging it they would cripple the Arab 
world. They are trying to stunt and balkanize Egypt. All those 
are Zionist objectives and the new atheists are implementing 
these objectives. 
  They should not call themselves Islamic Jihad, because jihad 
stands for the liberation of Jerusalem or coming to join with 
Libya to liberate Ceuta and Melilla. Jihad does not mean 
killing innocent people in Egypt nor killing truthful 
journalists in Algeria. This is not Islam. 
  To a question about the fate of former Libyan Foreign 
Minister Mansur al-Kikhya, al-Qadhdhafi said: He is a Libyan 
citizen and we are concerned about him. It is not true that he 
was an opponent. He was a junior employee when the revolution 
broke out. He worked with me until he assumed the position of 
foreign minister. He then became Libya's representative to the 
human rights committees. He sent me a message with our friend 
'Ashur Qarqum, saying that he would visit Libya. I told him 
that he is welcome, because he has been abroad for a long time. 
He was scheduled to visit the Jamahiriyah after his visit to 
Cairo. But I do not rule out the possibility that U.S. 
intelligence knew about it and kidnapped him. 
  He added: The CIA [preceding term in Roman script] is behind 
the whole thing and the U.S. President had nothing to do with 
it. Clinton is a good guy and he was against the Vietnam war. 
But the CIA is deceiving him; it made him support the 
bombardment of the Russian parliament building by tanks and 
strike Iraq. Al-Qadhdhafi said Clinton is a Democrat and they 
are our friends because, like them, we sympathize with the 
blacks. But the CIA is deceiving Clinton and has recruited 
agents to kidnap al-Kikhya. 
  When asked if he has evidence, he said: There is no 
evidence, but there is the CIA's black record. [passage omitted] 

