CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by L.N. Makarovskaya, A.I. Shcherbanyuk, I.V. </F>
Kasatkina, V.A. Zurabyan, Antiplague Scientific Research 
Institute, Rostov-na-Donu] 
  [Abstract] The value of third generation cephalosporins, 
particularly third generation cefotaxime which is distinguished 
from first and second generation preparations by improved 
pharmacological properties, a broader impact spectrum, and a 
higher activity to gram-negative bacteria, especially 
Enterobacteriaceae which are resistant to various 
first and second generation antibiotics, prompted an attempt to 
assess cefotaxime from the viewpoint of its activity relative to 
the plague microbe in an in vitro experiment with an 
experimental plague infection and to investigate the possibility 
of its joint use with other antibiotics. To this end, cefotaxime 
synthesized in Russia, a preparation developed by Servo Mihal 
(Yugoslavia), and amikacin (U.S.) are used in an experiment with 
albino mice. The antibiotic minimum inhibitory concentration 
relative to the plague microbe strains is determined in 
Hottinger's agar while the efficiency of cefotaxime and its 
combinations with amikacin is examined in mice infected with a 
suspension of Yersinia pestis 231 whereby cefotaxime 
was injected intramuscularly. The outcome of combined 
application of cefotaxime with amikacin in prevention of 
experimental plague in albino mice is summarized. The findings 
reveal that cefotaxime--a representative of third generation 
cephalosporines--has a 0.05-0.1 g/ml minimum inhibitory 
concentration for natural plague microbe strains compared to 
first generation cefazolin and cephalothin and second generation 
cefmethazole, i.e., is the lowest, thus confirming its high 
efficiency in the prevention and treatment of experimental 
plague in albino mice. The results demonstrate the possibility 
of combined uses of cefotaxime and amikacin for plague infection 
prevention and treatment. Tables 3; references 7: 3 Russian, 4 
Western. 


