Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Joint statement by Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Estonia, </F>
Latvia, and Lithuania at the conclusion of their meeting in Riga 
on 23 March, issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
Estonia] 
  [Text] The Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Estonia, Latvia 
and Lithuania issued the following joint statement at the 
conclusion of their meeting today in Riga: 
  The Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Estonia, Latvia and 
Lithuania met in Riga on 23 March, 1994 to discuss inter-Baltic 
cooperation, integration of their countries into all-European 
economic and security structures, relations with the Russian 
Federation, and ties with Ukraine. 
  The Ministers reaffirmed their governments' strong 
conviction 
that all ex-Soviet forces have to be withdrawn from the 
territories of Latvia and Estonia by 31 August, 1994. They 
called upon the international community to continue its 
vigilance that this date will be observed. 
  They expresssed the hope that the Russian Federation and 
Estonia will initial the already prepared draft agreement on the 
withdrawal of all Russian Federation forces from Estonia during 
the upcoming round of negotiations in Moscow on 5-6 April, 1994. 
  The Ministers welcomed the entry into force of the Baltic 
Free Trade Agreement on 1 April and agreed that there is further 
room for strengthening inter-Baltic ties, including the field of 
agricultural trade, where a protocol to the free trade agreement 
needs to be signed. They welcomed the initiative to convene a 
meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Visegrad states 
and Baltic countries to strengthen cooperation between them. 
  The Ministers recalled that they signed a joint letter to 
the 
European Union and the governments of the countries having 
associate memberships with the Union expressing the desire to be 
included in political consultations between associate countries 
and the Union. They reaffirmed that no lines should be drawn 
between the six associate countries, on the one hand, and the 
Baltic states and Slovenia, on the other, and that all 10 of 
these countries should have equal prospects of becoming full 
members of the European Union. They stressed the validity of 
this principle in relations with the Western European Union as 
well and welcomed, in this context, the Pact for Stability in 
Europe, which does not draw such lines. 
  They also welcomed the further developments within NATO's 
Partnership for Peace [PfP] program and reaffirmed their 
countries' commitment to participate actively in the development 
of the PfP, including through the establishement of a joint 
Baltic peace-keeping battalion. They also emphasized their 
countries' desire to eventually become full members of NATO. 
  On the issue of Ukraine, the Ministers agreed that the 
stable 
and democratic development of this country is of great 
importance to security and stability in Europe and concurred 
that it is of utmost importance that international assistance to 
this country be increased to assist its democratic development 
and to help reverse its economic decline. 
  [Signed] Juri Luik, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Estonia 
  George Andrejevs, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Latvia 
  Povilas Gylys, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Lithuania 
  Riga, 23 March, 1994 
  The three foreign ministers also signed a "Protocol on 
Consular Representing in Consular Posts of the Republic of 
Estonia, the Republic of Latvia and the Republic of Lithuania." 
The Protocol precedes the signing of an agreement which will 
allow consular posts to provide economic, cultural and other 
information, to protect the rights and interests of the citizens 
of the three Baltic states in cases of detention, death and 
accidents, and to issue certificates of return to citizens who 
have lost their identification documents. 
  A meeting of the expert groups of the Baltic foreign 
ministers took place March 22. 

