BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report over video] </F>
  [Text] Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin has asked the UN 
Security Council to lift the arms embargo imposed on the Muslims 
of Bosnia-Herzegovina. After attending the meeting of the 
Islamic Conference Organization's [ICO] Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Contact Group, Cetin addressed the Security Council. 
  Cetin said that the Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina are trying 
to defend themselves and democracy, adding that Security Council 
Resolution 713 regarding the embargo cannot and should not be 
enforced with regard to Bosnia-Herzegovina. Pointing out that 
the interference with this right is encouraging Serbian 
aggression, Cetin added that the world public should learn from 
the recent developments in Gorazde. He noted that the embargo 
on the aggressor should be strengthened and that diplomatic 
pressure should be applied to the Serbs. Stressing that the 
defeat of the United Nations in Bosnia-Herzegovina would 
adversely affect the Balkans, Europe, and the entire world, 
Cetin added that one cannot remain impartial when one side is 
the aggressor and the other the victim. Cetin said: The 
aggressor understands only harshness and fierceness. How can we 
create an atmosphere conducive to peace talks if we leave the 
Bosnians undefended? 
  Cetin said the NATO decisions should be implemented 
immediately in order to defend the safe havens in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. Recalling that Bosnia-Herzegovina is not 
made up of only safe havens, Cetin added that these regions 
should not be turned into open prisons. He noted that the time 
has come for the Security Council to prevent the ethnic 
cleansing in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Cetin stated that following the first NATO ultimatum 
concerning Sarajevo, Turkey asked that it be extended to cover 
the other safe havens. Condemning the Serbian genocide against 
the Bosnians and pointing out that the Serb attacks on Gorazde 
are aimed at testing the effectiveness of the United Nations, 
Cetin recalled that Turkey's efforts to raise this issue did not 
yield any results. He further welcomed last night's Security 
Council resolution on the reinforcement of the peacekeeping 
forces in former Yugoslavia. 
  Expressing Turkey's wish to begin high level talks on the 
issue of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Cetin noted the need to invite the 
ICO Contact Group to such a conference. Pointing out that 
Turkey will continue to assist the Bosnians, Cetin concluded by 
saying that from the very start, Turkey has supported the idea 
of securing a just and lasting peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
through negotiations. 
  After the Security Council meeting, Cetin left New York for 
Turkey. 

