BFN 

  [Text] Lima, 9 May (EFE) -- Peruvian drug trafficker 
Demetrio Chavez Penaherrera, also known as "Vaticano," today 
before a congressional committee charged that military officers 
ranked as high as captain were involved in his illegal 
activities in the Upper Huallaga jungle region. 
  "Vaticano's" revelations were disclosed today by Congressman 
Julio Castro Gomez, chairman of the congressional committee on 
drug trafficking, who, along with other members of the 
committee, interrogated the drug trafficker in his cell at the 
Callao Port Naval Base, where he is serving a 30-year sentence. 
  Castro quoted "Vaticano" as saying that he carried out his 
narcotrafficking activities "with the acquiescence and 
collaboration" of personnel ranked as high as captain from the 
Punta Arenas military post in the jungle department of San 
Martin. 
  "Vaticano," who is considered to be the main Peruvian drug 
trafficker, noted that he had received "collaboration and 
protection" from these Army personnel in building a clandestine 
airfield in Campanilla and carrying out his overall drug 
trafficking activities between 1990 and 1992, in exchange for a 
$5,000 payment for each drug shipment. Colombian planes that 
came to pick up cocaine paste were landing at and taking off 
from the Campanilla airfield. 
  "Vaticano" was considered to be the main Peruvian supplier 
for the "Cali cartel." "Vaticano" also told the congressmen that 
civilian authorities, such as the mayor of Campanilla, were 
aware of his activities. 
  According to Castro, "Vaticano" denied allegations that he 
was linked to the Shining Path terrorist gang or that he was 
forced to make payments to the subversive group to be able to 
carry out his drug trafficking operations. Castro added: 
"Vaticano" even noted that some of his men had clashed with the 
terrorists. Castro added that "Vaticano" did not identify the 
officers he claimed to have bribed. 
  Castro reported that "Vaticano" was questioned for more than 
four and a half hours, and he told the committee he had informed 
drug enforcement police and antiterrorist police about his 
connections with military and civilian authorities. 
  "Vaticano" was first sentenced to life by a military court 
on 
charges of treason against the fatherland for having supplied 
weapons and food to the Shining Path. His sentence was reduced 
last week to 30 years in light of evidence that he had not 
participated either in murders or as a leader of the terrorist 
organization. "Vaticano" is also facing a civil lawsuit for his 
involvement in drug trafficking activities. 

