BFN 

  [Text] Amman, 11 Apr (PETRA)--Talal Sat'an al-Hasan, 
minister of state for foreign affairs, today received Ozdem 
Sanberk, under secretary of the Turkish Foreign Ministry, who is 
currently on a visit to Jordan. 
  The minister and the guest discussed bilateral relations, 
the 
means to reinforce and develop these relations, the latest 
regional and international developments, and the peace process. 
Al-Hasan explained Jordan's position toward the peace process 
and the vital role it is playing, as well as His Majesty King 
Husayn's efforts to bring about a just, comprehensive, and 
lasting peace in the region based on the principles of 
international legitimacy and UN Security Council Resolutions 242 
and 338. 
  Al-Hasan stressed the importance of lifting the suffering 
caused by the siege on the Port of al-'Aqabah and the need to 
intensify efforts to stop these measures, which have resulted in 
serious losses for the Jordanian economy. 
  For his part, Sanberk stressed the depth of the traditional 
ties linking the two countries. He praised His Majesty King 
Husayn's wise and enlightened leadership and the sincere efforts 
his majesty is exerting to achieve peace and maintain security 
and stability in the region. 
  In another development, the Jordanian side, led by Nayif 
al-Hadid, secretary general of the Foreign Ministry, and the 
Turkish side, led by Ozdem Sanberk, under secretary of the 
Turkish Foreign Ministry, held talks at the Foreign Ministry 
building today. The talks dealt with bilateral relations and 
the need to upgrade these relations beyond coordination and 
cooperation in all available fields. 
  Al-Hadid briefed the guest on Jordan's policy toward the 
peace process and the pillars of the Jordanian stand. This 
stand is represented by the need to implement the principles of 
international legitimacy and Resolutions 242 and 338; Israel's 
withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories, particularly 
Jerusalem; securing the legitimate rights of the Palestinian 
Arab people on their national soil; restoring the Jordanian 
rights to land, security, and water; and solving the refugees 
problem. 
  Al-Hadid stressed the great importance of ending the siege 
imposed on the Gulf of Aqaba in light of Jordan's commitment to 
UN resolutions and its constructive stands toward the peace 
process and toward the region's stability and security. 
  For his part, Sanberk said that Jordanian and Turkish views 
were identical on the need to adhere to the principles of 
international legitimacy in order to achieve a just and 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. He praised the 
Jordanian role and His Majesty King Husayn's role in achieving 
security and stability in the region and in pushing peace 
efforts forward. 
  Attending on the Jordanian side were the Jordanian 
ambassador 
in Ankara and a number of Foreign Ministry officials. Attending 
on the Turkish side were the Turkish ambassador in Amman and 
members of the accompanying delegation. 

