Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Ou Zhengtao (0260 2973 3447)] </F>
  [Text] Hefei, 23 Feb (XINHUA) -- Since the National 
Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory [NSRL], which is located at the 
Chinese University of Science and Technology [CUST] in Anhui, 
formally opened to the public in April 1993, it has provided 
advanced-level conditions for scientific research institutes and 
researchers at home to conduct scientific research and 
experiments. So far, it has undertaken more than 120 scientific 
research tasks from 45 research institutes, colleges, and 
universities across the country and has scored a number of 
gratifying achievements in physics, chemistry, life sciences, 
materials sciences, and other branches of learning. 
  Synchrotron radiation is an extremely powerful 
electromagnetic radiation emitted by high-energy electrons 
traveling in the direction of the orbital tangential line at a 
speed close to light in a ring-shaped accelerator. It is very 
powerful and bright, has a continuous frequency spectrum and 
good polarization, has a pulse time structure, and has a clean 
vacuum environment. It has extensive applications in such basic 
sciences as physics, chemistry, biology, medical science, 
surface science, and metrology as well as in fine processing and 
super integrated circuits. As such, it is an advanced means for 
scientific research in the world today and constitutes a field 
of very active forward science and technology. 
  NSRL's synchrotron radiation installation in Hefei is the 
first installation of its kind in China and the only one in 
operation. Construction of the NSRL, which was mainly designed 
by CUST personnel, was completed in 1989; the installation began 
emitting light the same year. It was checked and accepted by 
the government in December 1991. Its major performance figures 
have reached the advanced level of similar installations in 
other parts of the world. After more than a year's operational 
practice, adjustments, and tests, it has succeeded in producing 
a high-brightness operational pattern for the first time through 
adjustments and tests. Its synchronous light source can 
continuously emit light 24 hours a day. With annual operation 
time in excess of 6,000 hours, it can provide more than 3,600 
hours for experiments. All five of its stations for experiments 
in photochemistry, optoelectron energy spectrum, soft X- ray 
microscopy, X-ray phototechnology, and time-sharing light 
spectrum have been put into operation. 
  According to a briefing by Professor Zhang Xinyi, principal 
person in charge of the NSRL and vice president of the CUST, the 
NSRL's scientific and technological personnel and the CUST's 
task force have conducted extensive cooperation with researchers 
of some research institutes of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Southeast China University, Fudan University, Xiamen University, 
Zhejiang University, and the Anhui Provincial Family Planning 
Commission. Using the NSRL's advanced means and multiple 
functions, they have conducted intensive research and 
exploration in both basic sciences and applied technologies, and 
have scored one achievement after another in just a few months. 
Some of their achievements have not been reported to the world. 
Using synchrotron radiation phototechnology to manufacture 
micromachinery is a high technology that rose in the world in 
the eighties. Using the mask they made, lab scientific and 
technological personnel succeeded in etching out a gear with a 
thickness of 50 micrometers plus, which is thinner than hair. 
The technology's development makes it possible to manufacture 
machinery for surgical operations in human blood vessels. They 
have made comparatively great progress in the research and 
application of porous silicon and other materials. They have 
developed porous silicon capable of photo- and 
electroluminescence; and they have observed photosensitive, air 
sensitive, and moisture sensitive phenomena. Among the 
materials they have developed, the moisture sensitive 
transmitter has been granted a patent by the government. They 
have achieved important successes from conducting a great deal 
of research in and tests with such catalysis as oxidation and 
nitrodation on the surface of semiconductors and vacuum 
ultraviolet reflection light spectrum. Taking advantage of 
synchrotron radiation light's special ability to conduct 
microexamination of fresh and living specimen, they have 
succeeded in taking micrographs of the contact between cancerous 
cells in esophagus. They have made satisfactory progress in 
conducting microscopic mechanical research of defects inside 
silicon beams, in conducting research in a free-electron laser 
device and accelerator which were included in the "863" high 
technology program, and in conducting research in short lived 
nuclide radiation medicine. Meanwhile, a number of projects 
currently under research and experimentation are also making 
rapid progress. 
  Scientific and technological personnel have made many 
improvements of the light source of synchrotron radiation, 
thereby greatly enhancing its stability in operation and 
receiving favorable comments from lab users. 

