Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Vasin, candidate of economic sciences and </F>
NEZAVISIMOST economic observer, and Valentin Likhodey, candidate 
of economic sciences and docent of Kiev University imeni T.G. 
Shevchenko: "Do Not Sleep: Think About SPI! Elimination of 
Illiteracy-94"] 
  [Text] SPI means property privatization certificate 
(a different word order would lead to an abbreviation that would 
be not quite so euphonious). SPI is the Ukrainian voucher whose 
distinguishing feature is that it can be neither seen nor felt 
nor sold at a bazaar. It is the right to participate in 
privatization or, more precisely--a noncash means of payment for 
acquiring certain shares. 
  A certain confusion is already arising here. The 
advertising is being presented in a form that implies that by 
investing your SPI somewhere your shares will make you a real 
owner of some enterprise. But in reality the owner is the 
joint-stock company and the individual investor has only the 
right to vote at the general stockholder meeting (practically a 
formality) and the right to part of the joint-stock company's 
income, that is, a dividend. You cannot take back the money you 
invested in the joint-stock company. You can only sell your 
shares if, of course, you can find a buyer for them. The 
certificate itself, therefore, should be called not a 
privatization certificate but an investment certificate. 
  In order to utilize his SPI a citizen of Ukraine must, first 
of all, select an object of privatization, that is, find an 
enterprise that has announced the sale of its stocks for 
privatization certificates. And here it is important to 
emphasize at the outset that two scenarios are possible: The 
first involves direct purchase of a state enterprise for 
collected privatization funds, after which it is transformed 
into a joint-stock company; the second involves preliminary 
formation of a corporation out of the enterprise, whereby it is 
transformed into a state joint-stock company (that is, a 
joint-stock company with predominant participation of state 
capital) which would like to sell its shares for SPI's. 
  While with the first version it is still possible to speak 
about participation in privatization (the SPI investors actually 
play the role of cofounders of the joint-stock company), with 
the second the change in the form of ownership occurs 
independently of the investors. And this ownership itself turns 
out to be quite curious: On the one hand a small group of 
managers of the former state enterprise declare the private 
nature of their joint-stock company and recruit individual 
investors; on the other--the company elite dispose of state 
capital according to their own will and demand economic support 
from the state at the same time. As a series of scandals has 
shown, in the distribution of income both the investor and the 
state are taken for a ride. According to the instructions of the 
State Property Fund of Ukraine, after selecting an object of 
privatization the citizen fills out an application for acquiring 
shares which (pay special attention to this) is addressed to the 
commission for sale of shares of the given joint-stock company. 
And if you do not fulfill this condition and then end up 
deceived, you have only yourself to blame. It is necessary to 
speak about this because we already see the practice whereby 
joint-stock companies create subsidiary intermediary firms which 
enter along with the citizens into transactions involving the 
sale of shares in the parent company for SPI's. (In order to 
distinguish the subsidiary enterprise from the parent one, pay 
attention to their full title, only a certain part of which they 
share in common.) And it is almost probable that in the 
undisclosed regulations of the subsidiary firms a special 
stipulation is made concerning the absence of mutual liability 
for obligations of the subsidiary and parent enterprises. With 
all the possibilities that ensue from this in our times of 
highway robbery. 
  After filling out the application for acquiring shares you 
receive a privatization payment instruction (PPP), which is the 
basis for using the SPI. After obtaining the PPP you go to the 
central rayon savings bank where your name should already be on 
the lists compiled in the place of residence. A privatization 
deposit account (PDS) is opened for you, in which the sum of 
1.05 million karbovantsy are deposited (stand still you precious 
moment!) and from which it is now transferred to the recipient 
indicated on the PPP. 
  The sum of 1.05 million karbovantsy was arrived at as a 
result of a 35-fold indexation of the initial amount of the SPI 
of 30,000 karbovantsy established in May 1992 prices. And the 
sum of 30,000 karbovantsy was determined (approximately) as 
152-millionths of the value (restored) of state property subject 
to transfer to the population free of charge. On the whole this 
value was estimated at 1.52 trillion karbovantsy and then, 
according to the Privatization Program, the proportion of 
nonstate property was to increase over three years from 4 to 46 
percent. 
  And here we come to the most interesting thing. It is all a 
matter of the fact that in May 1992 the exchange rate of the 
dollar fluctuated in the range of 115-135 karbovantsy per 
dollar. Consequently, one SPI could be valued at more than $200. 
But today, when you purchase shares for your SPI and then sell 
them and obtain cash, the cost of the SPI ends up to be less 
than $30. A sevenfold difference appeared because the nominal 
value of the SPI was indexed 35-fold while the exchange rate of 
the dollar has increased almost 300-fold during the time that 
has passed, and prices--even more. 
  Hence it follows that if the real share of state property 
subject to privatization free of charge remains the same, the 
nominal value of the SPI today has been reduced many times over 
as compared to May 1992. Therefore if the SPI's enter the sphere 
of circulation in one form or another, their price as 
representatives of the actually existing material wealth should 
grow in correspondence to the level of prices of other 
constituent parts of society's wealth--goods, services, 
securities, and currencies that are on the market and mutually 
exchangeable. 
  All this means that the million plus that was deposited into 
your PDS and transferred out of it in keeping with a special 
payment is by no means the same thing as a million coupons in 
your pocket. The special nature of the privatization funds 
remains even in the hands of their recipients, which is attested 
to by the accumulated PPP's. In particular, there is still the 
possibility of further transferring the privatization funds and 
using them to purchase state property whose value has been 
clearly reduced. This is why it is convenient to have subsidiary 
intermediary firms and this is why, like the investment funds in 
Russia, trust companies are being created in our society (trust 
and holding companies) which will themselves distribute the 
SPI's, paying you dividends under various conditions. But if the 
trust companies take on certain obligations, the intermediaries 
who sold you the shares have the right to dispose of the SPI's 
at their own discretion and in their own interests. 
  Consequently, you must have a clear idea of precisely what 
you will receive in exchange for your SPI, and this is important 
even when filling out the application. From the preceding it is 
clear that it is by no means a matter of indifference whether 
you receive in exchange shares that are already being sold on 
the market or those that are being emitted (issued) for the 
first time. In the former case you are using your privatization 
million precisely as if you were spending cash money. In the 
latter case you can count on the fact that with relatively 
reasonable management of affairs in the joint-stock company in 
which you have become an investor, in time the rate of its 
shares will increase several-fold as compared to the nominal 
rate which is determined on the basis of a reduced assessment of 
the value of the fixed capital. 
  It is worth noting that for the owner of shares their price 
quotation is even more important than dividends since during a 
year it can grow much more and when selling the shares the 
shareholder can receive appreciable net income. This is the 
tendency that prevails in countries of the West which, of 
course, does not lead to mass sale of shares since the 
shareholders are expecting their quotation price to increase in 
the future as well. Therefore when buying shares the selection 
frequently depends on an assessment of the expected growth of 
their price quotation. 
  But in order to make a correct choice it is necessary to 
have 
the most diverse information, which our compatriots do not have. 
Moreover, there are always random factors that determine the 
relationship between supply and demand and, hence, also both the 
level of dividends and the level of the price quotations for the 
shares. 
  For example, it is natural to want to invest your SPI's 
close 
to home so you can have more information about the object of 
privatization. But the structure of the location of the 
population does not coincide with the regional structure of the 
value of privatized property. On the other hand, today many 
people are ready to use their SPI's while only a small 
proportion of the facilities for privatization have actually 
been included in the process of the formation of joint-stock 
companies. Just as by the end of the three-year period 
calculated for the privatization program many facilities, on the 
contrary, will not be available for purchase because of a lack 
of free privatization funds. 
  And many issues remain unclear. Thus the nominal sum of the 
initially emitted shares must be equal to the value of the 
purchased fixed capital and therefore surpluses of privatization 
funds received at one enterprise or another will signify a 
reduction of the nominal value of the package of shares issued 
in exchange for one SPI. Will the prospect of modernizing 
production with additional privatization funds compensate for 
this reduction? Which is more advantageous--to use your SPI's 
now or wait for an increase in the number of facilities that are 
actually being privatized? What will happen to the SPI's that 
are invested in facilities that have not collected a sufficient 
sum of funds for purchase? 
  In addition to these questions one can already see signs of 
growing confusion in the means of obtaining shares for SPI's. 
Anyone who has thoughtfully followed our economic history since 
the times of perestroyka will undoubtedly agree that it will be 
impossible to get through without mass cheating. But here 
everyone will have to decide for himself. This is not the first 
and probably not the last time we will be granted an opportunity 
to play the role of monetary capitalists, and therefore one 
person's fiasco will not arouse sympathy in the rest. 
Incidentally, let us not forget that life--and especially the 
buying and selling of shares--is a game. 

