Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [press release from the UK Department of the Environment: </F>
Ratification of the Basel Convention] 
  [Text] Environment Minister, Robert Atkins, today 
announced that the United Kingdom's ratification of the UNEP [UN 
Environment Program] Basel Convention will enable it to become a 
Party on the same date, 8 May, as the European Community. The 
Convention helps to ensure environmentally sound management of 
exported wastes. In answer to a written Parliamentary Question 
from George Kynoch MP (Kincardine and Deeside), Mr Atkins said: 
  "The United Kingdom deposited its instrument of ratification 
for the Basel Convention on 7 February. This means that the 
United Kingdom will become a Party to the Convention on 8 May. 
The EC will also become a Party on 8 May.'' 
  "The Convention provides a framework for states to control 
shipments of hazardous waste. Where these do occur, the onus is 
on the exporting state to ensure environmentally sound 
management of the wastes. Shipments are not allowed between 
Parties and non- Parties without specific agreements. Parties 
may ban imports of waste.'' 
  "The Waste Shipments Regulation (259/93/EEC), which 
incorporates the obligations of the Basel Convention will apply 
on 6 May. The Regulation will enable the UK to control more 
effectively waste imports and exports. The Regulation covers 
shipments destined for the recovery operations, as well as those 
going for final disposal.'' 
  "The UK is firmly committed to the objectives of the Basel 
Convention. We have been making voluntary financial 
contributions to the running of the Convention each year since 
1990." 
<H5>  Notes To Editors </H5>
  The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Basel 
Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of 
Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal provides a framework for 
states to control movements of hazardous waste. Where shipments 
do occur, the Convention provides for a global system of 
environmental controls in which the onus is on the exporting 
state to ensure environmentally sound management of the wastes. 
Shipments are not allowed between Parties and non-Parties 
without specific agreements. Parties to the Convention may ban 
imports of waste. 
  The UK ratified the Convention on 7 February, the same date 
as the EC. Both the UK and the EC will become Parties on 8 May 
(the Convention provides for a 90 day period between the date of 
depositing the instrument of ratification and becoming a Party). 
The EC Waste Shipments Regulation (259/93/EEC), which implements 
the obligations of the Basel Convention in the Community, will 
apply on 6 May. 
  The new Regulation, which supersedes the existing 
Transfrontier Shipment of Hazardous Waste Regulations 1988 
(implementing EC Directive 84/631/EEC, as amended), will enable 
the UK to exercise strict controls over imports and exports of 
waste. For waste exports, responsibility will lie with the UK as 
the exporter to ensure that the waste will be handled in an 
environmentally sound manner in the country of destination. The 
Basel Convention is administered by a Secretariat based in 
Geneva. The Secretariat is financed by contributions from 
Parties and other signatories, including the UK. 
  Press Enquiries: 071 276 0929; (Out of Hours: 071 873 1966); 
Public Enquiries Unit:071 276 0900 

