Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In a series of meetings with the leaders of the 
ruling coalition parties on 1 March, Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa explained "the idea of merging the coalition parties 
into one." The idea Hosokawa proposed has given rise to 
arguments within the ruling coalition that it is aimed at 
opening the way to political realignment. Hosokawa said: "The 
idea has been misinterpreted. It has nothing to do with 
political realignment. What it means is the coalition parties 
have no choice but to cooperate to win against the large, 
opposition Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] in House of 
Councillors elections next year." While also touching on the 
reported discord between Shinseito Chief Secretary Ichiro Ozawa 
and Chief Cabinet Secretary Masayoshi Takemura, Hosokawa 
revealed what could be termed "Hosokawa's three principles" in 
his remarks on measures needed to win in national-level 
elections, and on political realignment. 
  According to a top official in the ruling coalition, during 
meetings with coalition leaders Hosokawa said: 
  Concerning measures needed to win in national-level 
elections: "When there is much accumulated sludge, it is better 
to flush it out in a vast flow. It does not matter whether the 
flow is impure or clear." 
  Concerning political realignment, the premier said: "Various 
types of carpenters are gathered from many parts of the nation 
to construct a building. When you are having your house built, 
you cannot be choosy about the carpenters. Now is the time to 
gather carpenters to build a house." 
  In connection with the future course of Japan, Hosokawa 
said: 
"It is not time to discuss (Takemura's proposal of) making Japan 
`a small but brilliant nation' and (Ozawa's proposal of) making 
Japan `an ordinary nation.' We cannot afford to hand over power 
to the strong LDP." 
  By using such metaphors, Hosokawa reportedly explained the 
idea of merging the coalition parties into one. However, it is 
uncertain whether he won the understanding of coalition leaders, 
who are preoccupied with the planned cabinet reshuffle. 

