Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bonn/Paris (DPA) -- Germany, France, and Poland 
intend to cooperate more closely at the military level. This 
was agreed by the defense ministers of the three countries, 
Volker Ruehe, of the Christian Democratic Union [CDU], Francois 
Leotard, and Piotr Kolodziejczyk, respectively, in a joint 
meeting in Paris on Thursday night [3 March]. 
  On Friday, the Defense Ministry in Bonn stated that this was 
the first time in history that the defense ministers of these 
three countries had met for trilateral talks. The three sides 
agreed, among other things, that German, French, and Polish 
units should carry out joint exercises. The first land and sea 
forces exercises have already been planned for this year. No 
details have been made public yet. 
  Paper exercises, that is to say exercises without the 
participation of military units, should also be planned and 
held. In addition, the ministers decided to consult Eurocorps 
partners on the possibility of inviting a Polish unit for 
exercises held by the German-French Brigade. Experts should 
hold joint meetings designed to improve knowledge of individual 
defense principles. 
  The ministers expressed their determination to further 
promote cooperation through annual meetings. The objective is 
that "cooperation serves security and the shaping of a unified 
Europe." France and Germany support the desire of Poland and 
other Central and East European countries to become an integral 
element of the European Union and to cooperate more closely with 
the member states of the Western European Union [WEU] and NATO. 
  The ministers described the development of a cooperation 
program in the Atlantic alliance with the view to a Partnership 
for Peace as an important step toward this goal. At the same 
time, they welcomed the fact that NATO is open for membership to 
other European countries capable of promoting the principles of 
the Washington Treaty and of contributing to the security of the 
North Atlantic territory. 
  As far as the assessment of the situation in the former 
Yugoslavia is concerned, the three partners concurred that the 
determination of the community of peoples and NATO's 
demonstrated commitment on behalf of the United Nations to help 
the people in Sarajevo, whose very existence is threatened, and 
enforce a cease-fire. [sentence as received] The three 
ministers expressly recognized "Russia's positive role." 

