Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, January 18 (XINHUA) -- China's coastal 
provinces and municipalities are working out plans to further 
tap marine resources. 
  Jiangsu Province has decided to develop marine 
bioengineering 
and set up three marine economic development zones in its 
coastal cities of Lianyungang, Yancheng and Nantong. 
  Liaoning Province will focus on the development of offshore 
oil and sea farms, and Zhejiang Province is to make full use of 
its islands and harbors to develop maritime industry and fishing. 
  China has a 32,000-km coastline, 17,700 sq km of polders and 
24.8 billion tons of continental shelf oil reserves. Its 
territorial waters are as large as one third of the country's 
territory. 
  Until 1979, when China began its national reform, China's 
development of marine resource was limited to fishing and sea 
salt processing. 
  But the past few years have seen an overall development of 
sea resources. Marine product breeding, offshore oil 
exploitation, tourism and marine science are booming. 
  Statistics show that the output value of the national marine 
economy reached 75.5 billion yuan in 1992 and more than 90 
billion yuan last year. 
  The aquatic breeding sea area has been expanded to more than 
500,000 ha, with an annual production output amounting to 2.4 
million tons, ranking first in the world. 
  A number of provinces, including Shandong and Jiangsu, have 
set up hundreds of aquatic product breeding farms. 
  The exploitation of offshore oil and natural gas is in full 
swing. 
  China has concluded 92 contracts on oil co-operation with 55 
companies in 15 countries. These contracts involve 3.6 billion 
U.S. Dollars. 
  As a result of building and improving tourism facilities, 
China's more than 5,000 islands have attracted 9.16 million 
visitors a year, with the annual income from tourism surpassing 
10 billion yuan. 
  China's sea areas abound in tidal and wave energy, as well 
as 
minerals. 
  While making use of these resources, the country has set up 
a 
number of ocean science and technology development zones in 
Qingdao, Dalian and Tianjin to develop high-tech products. 
  A survey shows that coastal areas have built about 300 
deepwater berths forming large port groups along Bohai bay, the 
Chang Jiang estuary and the south China coastal area. 
  At present, China's coastal ports handle 600 million tons of 
cargo a year, and its gross tonnage of ocean-going merchant 
shipping ranks eighth in the world. 
  The past 15 years have seen the country set up five special 
economic zones, a dozen bonded zones and a number of economic 
and technology development zones in its coastal areas. 
  According to the survey, the coastal area, accounting for 13 
percent of the country's total territory, produces more than 60 
percent of the gross national product. 
  At present, the pearl, Chang Jiang and southern Fujian river 
deltas, and the area around the Bohai Sea present a prosperous 
scene of economic development. 

