Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [By RENMIN RIBAO correspondent Mao Lei (3029 4320) and 
XINHUA correspondent Zhang Sutang (1728 1372 1016)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 27 Dec (XINHUA) -- Ren Jianxin, member of 
the Secretariat of the CPC Central Committee and president of 
the Supreme People's Court, said today the basic tasks for all 
levels of the people's courts in 1994 will be: to continue to 
severely crack down on serious criminal activities, guided by 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and by the guidelines set forth at the 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee; to do 
an even better job on trying major and important cases, 
particularly major economic criminal cases; to vigorously 
regulate economic relationships; to protect the legitimate 
rights and interests of citizens, corporations, and other 
organizations in a down-to-earth manner; to strictly enforce the 
law; to raise the level of judicial work; to help maintain 
social stability; to promote a clean administration building; 
and to expedite the establishment of a socialist market economy. 
To put it briefly, courts need to raise their prestige by 
seriously cracking down on crime, to produce results in handling 
major and important cases, and to achieve major progress in 
regulating economic relationships; they also need to raise the 
level of judicial work in a comprehensive manner. 
  Ren Jianxin proposed the above tasks today at the opening of 
the National Conference of the Presidents of the People's Higher 
Courts. Ren Jianxin noted next year will be a critical one for 
achieving all-round progress and for making major breakthroughs 
in reforming the economic system. Deepening reform, expediting 
development, and maintaining stability are the priority and 
important tasks for the entire party and for people throughout 
the nation. 
  Ren Jianxin said social stability is the necessary premise 
and guarantee for developing the economy. As a whole, the 
current situation is good; however, factors for instability 
still remain. The social order is still grim. The increase in 
the number of major vicious criminal cases and the terrible 
social order are "hotpoint" issues which cause great concern 
among the masses. 
  Therefore, Ren Jianxin pointed out the need for local courts 
to continue to persist in their severe crackdown and to severely 
crackdown on those criminal activities which seriously endanger 
the national security, sabotage social stability, and disrupt 
social order. It is necessary to timely launch special 
anti-crime campaigns in areas where criminals run rampant and to 
engage in concentrated crackdowns against criminal activities 
which arouse the people's indignation. We must swiftly hand 
down heavy sentences to criminals and should never be 
soft-hearted towards them. The purpose of the severe crackdown 
is to create momentum, to raise our prestige, to produce marked 
social effects, and to help create a peaceful and satisfactory 
social environment for the masses. 
  While engaging in the severe crackdown, Ren Jianxin also 
called on court presidents to become more involved in the 
comprehensive management of social order, to creatively spread 
the concept of law among the masses, to sum up the court's work, 
and to vigorously explore new ways for the courts to implement 
the party's mass line under the new situation. 
  Ren Jianxin stressed that the government will continue to 
exert great efforts in reform next year. He said a new 
breakthrough is expected to be made in reform next year, 
particularly in establishing a modern enterprise system and 
market structure as well as in the areas of finance, planning, 
investment, and foreign investment. Both the interest pattern 
of the old system as well as the various unreasonable interest 
patterns which developed in the course of system changes are 
expected to undergo great changes. Therefore, new contradictions 
and confusion are bound to rise. 
  To adapt to the changes in and readjustment of the pattern 
of 
the state's economic system, he said the courts should achieve 
fresh breakthroughs in economic trial work next year in addition 
to making new progress in civil and administrative trial work. 
They must make still better use of the law as a means to timely 
regulate economic relationships according to law; to standardize 
the behavior of the market economy; to protect legitimate 
competition and fair trade; to help the market thrive; to 
correctly and properly handle the contradictions among the 
people; to safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of the 
citizens, corporations, and other organizations according to 
law; to directly provide effective legal services for 
establishing a socialist market economy system; and to help 
create an excellent legal environment for the orderly operation 
of the market economy. 

