BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Ljubljana MLADINA in Slovene in its 17 
May edition on pages 37 and 38 carries a report by Svetlana 
Vasovic, entitled "Perfidious Resourcefulness," about the 
financial machinations that led to the collapse of Dafiment Bank 
and the alleged involvement of the state and the Serbian 
politicians. 
  As Vasovic says, "an affair has broken out in Belgrade these 
days that unveils how Serbia and Montenegro managed to raise 
enormous funds needed for the financing of the war in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia into a truly unusual detail. The 
entire action was based on rapid emergence and an even faster 
collapse of private banks, primarily Jugoskandik of Jezdimir 
Vasiljevic and Dafina Milanovic's Dafiment Bank. In short: 
Naive savers, be it out of need or greed, entrusted several 
thousands (even hundreds of thousands) of German marks to these 
private banks, which either lent their money or invested it in 
such a way that the state got it and then collapsed. The top 
representatives of the Serbian political elite and Milosevic's 
sympathizers received the money, including enormous interests, 
prior to the collapse of these banks." As Vasovic proceeds, 
"the fact that this is a dangerous affair is also seen in that 
as soon as the biweekly DUGA published a confession by the owner 
of collapsed bank Dafina Milanovic and the photocopies of 
receipts that prove the large amounts of money that individual 
Serbian and Montenegrin officials drew from their accounts, the 
Federal Parliament placed the Law on Protection of Privacy on 
its agenda, which would prevent further publication of such 
documents." 
  The correspondent also writes that when the opposition 
weekly 
SRPSKA REC published "the documents that proved that great 
quantities of German marks from the bank were also withdrawn by 
Milosevic's wife Mirjana Markovic (278,411 Swiss francs), her 
son Marko Milosevic (330,769 German marks), the editor of 
Television POLITIKA Aleksandar Tijanic, and numerous other 
influential potentates, the public prosecutor, just like in the 
old times of socialism, simply banned the issue of the magazine." 
  Going back to the history of the creation of private banks, 
Vasovic writes that the National Bank of Yugoslavia "in 
violation of numerous laws and with the assistance of some state 
inspectors" at the end of 1991 and in the beginning of 1992 
issued licenses for work and the so-called "major authorization" 
to several private banks. At a time of enormous inflation, 
these banks offered higher interest rates than anyone else in 
the West, ranging from 15 to 18 percent per month, Vasovic 
continues, recalling the days when people stood in line for 
hours to deposit their money. "Private banks without any 
appropriate state guarantees naturally worked "successfully" for 
nearly a year and then rapidly folded one after another," she 
says. 
  Her report then analyzes in more detail the collapse of 
Dafiment Bank, whose owner publicly disclosed some of the people 
and the projects that her bank had financed. "In August 1991, 
for example," Vasovic writes, "Dafina Milanovic equipped 500 
Knin special troops led by Captain Dragan [Vasiljkovic]. She 
paid 1.5 million German marks in cash to Brana Crncevic, a 
Serbian ideologist and president of the association of the 
Serbian refugees." "To bribe the Serbian politicians in the 
hope that she would receive concessions for investments in 
important projects," the correspondent continues to write, 
Dafina Milanovic decided on "charitable" acts that were 
"completely at odds with common sense." A comparison between 
"Dafina's sobbing apologies to the public" and "the list of 
illogical investments" of her bank further convinces Vasovic 
that "Milosevic's regime set up Dafina Milanovic to play its 
role." "For the 'Fast Serbian Railroads' project, even though 
she knew 'this could not be lucrative,' she -- allegedly only so 
the railroad workers could 'at least get their salaries' -- gave 
40 million German marks to the Serbian state," Vasovic writes 
"which were in armored cars transferred from her safe to the 
Serbian National Bank safe. She gave 10 million German marks to 
Simpo enterprise (which is one of the most important companies 
that is even today successfully dodging the embargo) that 
vanished into thin air." As it is further stated, "for several 
months, Dafiment Bank, just as it would have been a social 
welfare service and not a private bank, was also paying for 70 
percent of all pensions in Serbia, allegedly out of pure 
compassion of its owner." 
  "Dafiment Bank also directly financed the war in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina. The bank gave millions of German marks to 
[President] Radovan Karadzic and [presidency member] Biljana 
Plavsic from the Serbian Republic in Bosnia, and [President] 
Goran Hadzic from Krajina." Vasovic quotes Dafina as saying: "I 
would give them cash. They used to take it away in sacks, 
either Hadzic and Karadzic or Klara Mandic for them." The 
article claims that Arkan's center in Erdut received 3 million 
German marks, while Dafina Milanovic also paid nearly 34 million 
German marks in "special" taxes to the state. "Finally, only 
212 million German marks were left, which were then withdrawn by 
the most prominent Serbian politicians and officials," while, as 
Vasovic writes, "thousands of small account holders remained 
empty handed." 
  The author concludes her article by drawing a comparison 
between the fate of Dafiment Bank and the unexpected success of 
Avramovic's monetary reform, which has prompted numerous people 
to sell their foreign currency for new "convertible" dinars. 
She observes that the praise for Avramovic "uneasily reminds 
one of similar praise for Dafina Milanovic, a failed banker who 
a year ago boasted in front of the very same people with her 
safes, filled for the state budget." 

