BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 15 Jun (LOS TIEMPOS) -- Bolivian Air Force 
Commander General Jose Perez Reyes Ortiz officially announced 
today "the merger of the commercial activities of TAM (Military 
Air Transport) and TAB (Bolivian Air Transport) under the legal 
guidelines of the Capitalization Law on the main strategic state 
companies. [no closing quotation marks as published] 
  Gen. Perez Reyes made this announcement during the 49th 
anniversary of the 71st Air Group in La Paz today. 
  He said: "With the entire support of military aviation, we 
are witnessing the end of the cycle of TAM as an operational 
unit, and the beginning of a new stage with TAB." He added: 
"This is how a real commercial air enterprise is created, 
operating within the legal regulations prevailing in the 
country." 
  "Thanks to the impetus and effort of a generation of 
military 
aviators (...) we are carrying out this objective with a new 
command policy, in accordance with the changes demanded by this 
historic moment," said Gen. Perez Reyes during the ceremony. 
  Gen. Perez Reyes, who was addressing acting President Victor 
Hugo Cardenas, cabinet ministers, and the high military command, 
said: "The 71st Air Group has been reactivated with a new 
strategy." 
  He also mentioned the logistical tasks to be carried out by 
the air brigade, such as "its participation in support 
operations against drug trafficking, air missions in support of 
the Army and the Navy, and support for civilian society in civic 
action programs." 
  He said that to carry out the short, medium, and long-term 
objectives drawn up by his general command, "creative 
organizational measures are being taken in transferring the 
commercialization activities of TAM to TAB." 
  Gen. Perez Reyes said: "This decentralized entity of the Air 
Force, in accordance with its legal status (...), has great 
administrative and financial capabilities which we are certain 
will help in its economic recovery through fresh resources to be 
obtained from different channels." 
  He said there is an economic advantage due to "the 
effectiveness of Air Force personnel, and due other financing" 
that can be obtained from private national and even 
international sectors. 

