CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Aleksey Kudrin, first deputy chairman of the </F>
Government of St. Petersburg, by Dmitriy Travin; place and date 
not given: "`The City Will Become More Manageable'"] 
  [Text] The creation of the Government of St. Petersburg 
cannot be considered a surprise. Such a reorganization of the 
mayoralty had been planned for a long time. However, until the 
very last moment there had been no precise concept of this new 
organ. It had not been clear whether the government was to be 
created to emulate Moscow, or to enhance the status of city 
leaders, or to carry out a truly important reform of the 
management. 
  To a degree the situation has become clearer now. The system 
of city management has indeed been reorganized, affecting the 
financial and economic block to the greatest degree. The united 
Economy and Finance Committee (KEF) is being created out of two 
old committees of the mayoralty. The committee will be headed by 
Aleksey Kudrin, who has been appointed first deputy chairman of 
the Government of St. Petersburg. 
  Kudrin is 33. He graduated from St. Petersburg University; 
he 
is a candidate of economic sciences. In 1990 he made a change 
from a scientific to an administrative career by creating, 
together with Anatoliy Chubays, the Economic Reform Committee of 
the Leningrad City Executive Committee. After the mayoralty of 
St. Petersburg was established, Kudrin worked first as deputy 
chairman of the Economic Development Committee (KER), and 
subsequently as chairman of the Finance Committee. 
  Today Aleksey Kudrin shares with readers of NEVSKOYE VREMYA 
his reflections on the role an organ such as the government can 
play in the life of St. Petersburg. 
  [Travin] Aleksey Leonidovich, why does St. Petersburg need a 
government, after all? Is this a fad or a reflection of changes 
that are now taking place in the country? 
  [Kudrin] Of course, this is associated with changes. The new 
Constitution has substantially enhanced the rights of components 
of the Federation, of which St. Petersburg is one. The 
enhancement of rights goes beyond mere words. Following 
ratification of the Constitution, absolutely specific regulatory 
documents appeared which created a new working environment for 
us. On one hand, the city authorities will now have to hustle 
much more in order to make ends meet. On the other hand, they 
have been given new rights to ensure the regular course of life. 
  [Travin] The rights of regions have been growing in our 
country for a long time, since as early as when Yeltsin was 
travelling throughout the country and saying (under the 
functionary Gorbachev): "Take as many rights as you can." 
However, until recently the real potential of the regions was 
determined by their clout in the lobby of the minister of 
finance. 
  [Kudrin] Precisely--"until recently." Perhaps not everyone 
in 
St. Petersburg knows that effective this year, the minister of 
finance "put a large lock on his door." At present, the amount 
of funds allocated by the Ministry of Finance to support a 
certain region (ours, in particular) is determined by strictly 
objective criteria. We will not succeed in "shaking anything 
loose." Therefore, we must procure all possible funds ourselves 
in order for the city to be able to live. 
  Previously the head of the administration could say that he 
was responsible for these facilities, and the federal organs of 
power--for those facilities. Now he should essentially be 
accountable for everything. For example, in St. Petersburg the 
largest museums which are the most valuable to us, such as the 
Hermitage and the Kunstkammer, should technically be financed 
out of the funds of the entire country. However, last year they 
had it worse than the facilities financed by the city because 
the Government of Russia was clearly not providing enough money. 
We could not allow this situation to occur and helped out the 
leading museums. If the Hermitage sustains any damage, it will 
make no sense to shift the blame to Moscow. At present, we have 
no other way out but to assume complete responsibility for the 
life of St. Petersburg. However, we are demanding greater powers 
since the responsibilities of the city authorities are greater, 
and we are already getting such powers. 
  [Travin] Can you distinguish specific questions in resolving 
which St. Petersburg is becoming more independent? 
  [Kudrin] First, all decisions of the federal authorities 
associated with increases in expenditures from local budgets are 
now nonbinding. I would like to invite the attention of the 
citizens of St. Petersburg to the fact that no matter how 
generous the edicts and decrees are that are issued in Moscow, 
we will have to come up with the funds to implement them 
ourselves. For example, the recent decision to extend the war 
veterans' preferences to the survivors of the blockade was not 
backed up by a single kopek from the federal authorities. 
  The survivors of the blockade are sacred to us; we did 
allocate funds for the implementation of this decree. However, 
in general we will now have to determine ourselves in each case 
whether a particular measure can be financed. 
  Second, now we can introduce new taxes and fees ourselves 
and 
reduce or increase, up to a certain limit, the rate of profit 
tax. The city authorities will now have to decide how to find 
the optimal form of taxation so as, on one hand, not to do in 
the economy of the city by high requisitions while, on the other 
hand, not leaving sectors financed from the budget without 
funding. We have made a difficult decision today--to support 
entrepreneurship and to not increase the overall burden of taxes. 
  Third, components of the Federation have now been granted, 
for the first time, the right to sign intergovernment agreements 
in their own name. We can establish direct contacts with any 
foreign state in order to solve problems facing the city. 
  [Travin] The formation of the KEF instead of two committees 
represents the greatest structural change in the government of 
St. Petersburg (compared to the structure of the mayoralty). 
Such an organ as the KER has actually been liquidated. 
Meanwhile, it was always a key organ within the structure of 
city management. Are the transformations associated with 
objective changes in economic processes or with a personnel 
reshuffle? 
  [Kudrin] Generally, the merging of the two committees is not 
surprising at all. Please note that as soon as reforms began in 
Russia, the issue of merging the Ministry of the Economy and the 
Ministry of Finance at the federal level was raised. Gaydar's 
first government title in 1991 was "deputy prime minister, 
minister of the economy and finance." So, the reformers 
immediately raised the issue of coordinating efforts in these 
two most significant areas. To be sure, coordination 
subsequently petered out as the position of radical reformers in 
the Government of Russia weakened. 
  [Travin] Why is close coordination in the areas of the 
economy and finance so important right now? 
  [Kudrin] Let us recall what the work of the Planning 
Commission of the Leningrad City Executive Committee, 
subsequently transformed into the KER of the mayoralty, was all 
about. It collected and collated the plans of individual 
enterprises and regions. It was an element of an administrative 
management system. The collected data were submitted to the CPSU 
Central Committee and the government. 
  The industrial enterprises of the city have now become 
independent, and for the most part even privatized. The 
Government of St. Petersburg does not engage in managing 
industry. However, the methods of work of the KER have, 
unfortunately, changed little. What need is there to keep an 
organ operating under a scenario that is at least three years 
old? 
  In turn, the functions of the Finance Committee have grown 
sharply because in a market economy money plays an incomparably 
greater role than in the environment of the administrative 
management system. We should take into account changing economic 
conditions, inflation, the possible decline in the volume of 
production, the intake of conversion credit, the influx of 
foreign capital, as well as quite a number of other factors. The 
city just will not survive in the absence of a thorough 
analytical effort in this area. 
  [Travin] Do the city authorities really have to know the 
projected state of affairs at the Kirovskiy or Izhorskiy Plants? 
After all, the authorities do not manage their operations. Would 
it not be sufficient to analyze the state of affairs at 
municipal facilities, public transit, health care, and culture, 
that is, the areas for which the government of St. Petersburg is 
directly responsible? 
  [Kudrin] If we do not project the situation at the Kirov 
Plant, we will not be able to evaluate the volume of tax 
revenues taken in by the city treasury, to plan our 
expenditures, and therefore to maintain our municipal 
facilities, transportation, health care, and culture in a 
regular manner. The Finance Committee has been really interested 
in projections, whereas the KER has so far lacked a precise 
notion of who it was preparing projections for: either still for 
a report to the CPSU Central Committee (in which case old 
methods are needed) or for drawing up the city budget (in which 
case new methods are needed). A real opportunity to restructure 
the operation of organs involved in making projections has now 
appeared. 
  The system of mutual relations with investors who invest 
money in our city is also changing. They no longer come to the 
KER for permits to open branches or build plants. Enterprises 
plan all of this themselves. However, they do come to the 
Finance Committee to ask for tax relief, deferments, and loans. 
We must analyze the proposals made from the standpoint of their 
significance for the city, the probability of credit repayment, 
and so on. From this point of view, work on projections should 
also be subordinated to financial tasks. 
  The reform of the system of city management on the whole and 
the restructuring of the financial and economic block in 
particular will help the authorities to better solve the 
problems of St. Petersburg. I hope that in the immediate future 
the citizens will feel that the city is becoming more manageable 
than before. 

