Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Kokorin, economist: "Viewpoint. A </F>
Pseudodemocracy and a Pseudomarket"] 
  [Text] Moscow--Entering the market in our right mind, 
we have the right to lay claim to at least one of the stages of 
the capitalist cycle. And taking into account society's hopes 
that are related to it, we would like at least to end up in the 
stage of invigoration. Alas! Even depression is inaccessible to 
us. The bitter crisis determines the democratic reality. Reform 
ideologists have been forced to look for people to blame. Again 
the directors are frequently the ones they choose. 
  Not so long ago the Western economy would periodically 
experience crises, which included mass bankruptcies of 
enterprises. But nobody made any attempt to look for the causes 
of this in the incompetence of the entrepreneurs. The capable 
ones were being destroyed as well. Just as good, productive 
equipment was being destroyed and skilled workers were ending up 
out on the street. A crisis is a crisis. Although no two are 
alike. 
  Ye. Gaydar and his team are placing most of the blame for 
the 
Russian crisis on the planned nature of our previous system. But 
why does the system approach betray them when it comes to the 
crisis that is occurring before our very eyes? Why not assume 
that the cause lies in the imperfection of the economic model of 
the transition period? Because, of course, then the very 
strategy of reform would come under attack, and the authors of 
this strategy along with it. And in order to deflect suspicion 
from their own incompetence, they point to the incompetence of 
the directors. 
  Any new economic system must retain all that was positive in 
the old system. That is the law. It is a guarantee that only in 
the worst case would it be possible to have an insignificant and 
short-lived slump followed by rapid growth. The peculiarity of 
our radical reformers consists in that they see nothing positive 
in the old system of management. At the same time they are 
dividing up the wealth gained under the old system. And they are 
dividing it up with great enthusiasm, wanting to take as much as 
possible as quickly as possible. They even reach the point of 
quarreling. 
  But where did this wealth come from? Why is it that 70 years 
after the institution of private property was eliminated it has 
turned out that we have something to divide up and appropriate? 
How did it happen that, even without private property, public 
wealth multiplied, and by extremely large amounts? Why is it 
that over 40 years, from 1921 through 1961, Russia, backward and 
destroyed by war, became an industrial and even a space power? 
  The answer is obvious. The most advanced economic 
mechanism--planning--lay concealed under the totalitarian cover. 
This is what our radical democrats do not want to, and cannot, 
understand. It was not the planned economy but the totalitarian 
regime that led the country into the swamp of stagnation. The 
totalitarian regime undermined the economy and the planning 
system saved it. If in addition to the political regime our 
economic mechanism had been no good, the department of Mr. A. 
Chubays could not have started to work because there would have 
been no property. 
  The planning system saved the economy as long as the 
advantages of integration covered the costs of bureaucratism. To 
be sure, bureaucratism is a property of any large organization. 
But most frequently it is generally quite tolerable. It is 
possible to fight it successfully. Which is being done in the 
West. But bureaucratism is terrible and invincible when it is 
conditioned by a strict political system that precludes any kind 
of legal basis for fighting against state arbitrariness. 
  The planning mechanism in its final form, as the only 
instrument for management of the economy, of course, is 
inseparable from its totalitarian covering. But not because the 
totalitarianism grows out of the planning, or because the GULAG 
follows from the Gosplan [State Planning Committee], and only a 
market and private property can guarantee democracy. The 
opposite is logically correct. A market system and private 
property inevitably appear under the conditions of democracy in 
the given stage of development. Economic reform as a continuous 
process of improvement of the economic system should consist not 
in completely refraining from planning but only in augmenting 
the planning principle with the market principle. The 
planning-bureaucratic mechanism is the thesis, and the market is 
the antithesis. But where is the synthesis, Mr. radical 
democrats? The synthesis consists in a combination of planning 
and the market, in democratization of planning and gradual 
introduction of the market mechanism, which in general is what 
was discussed at the beginning of perestroyka. 
  Any coordination of actions of producers, that is, direct 
ties, is no longer a market principle but the principle of 
planning. Historically the edifice of planning is constructed on 
the basis of direct ties. If direct ties encompassed all aspects 
of the activity of all producers without exception we would have 
a uniform economic plan, and not a bureaucratic-centralized one 
but the democratic version. Of course, reformers do not deny the 
significance of direct ties. But when under the banner of 
monopolization large production associations are destroyed, the 
system of direct ties, which is impossible without associations, 
is destroyed as well. 
  A market regulated by the state is not the synthesis; it is 
essentially the antithesis in which the concept of the "planning 
principle" is lacking, and the market will always be the basis 
of the economic mechanism. The planning principle means the 
state and corporations, that which makes up the basis of the 
economic mechanism of Western countries, where the market is 
only an auxiliary, secondary instrument. But both state and 
corporate management are being undermined during the course of 
reform. This is ultimately what causes the decline of 
production. This is also where the threat of mass bankruptcies 
comes from. Bankruptcy of the enterprises means bankruptcy of 
the economic strategy of the radical reformers who lived here 
and looked to the West and therefore understood neither what was 
happening here nor what was happening there. 
  The circumstance that the plan and not the market makes up 
the basis of the economic mechanism of developed countries that 
are traditionally called market-based and capitalist countries 
is no secret to a number of economists of the West. The eminent 
American economist, J.K. Galbraith, for example, wrote about 
this 30 years ago. But we hold in esteem economists of the old, 
classical school like J. Sachs, whose ideas are too conservative 
to be applied in our homeland. This category of economists, like 
our radical reformers, does not want to recognize the 
fundamental changes in the sphere of management of the economy. 
  This is also partially where the idea of Russia's special 
path comes from. In Russia the planned economy was created 
through revolution--while the West is proceeding toward it 
gradually, carefully reforming its economic mechanism. But there 
is just one path: from the market to the plan, from private to 
public property. What, for example, is the property of 
corporations where hundreds of thousands of shareholders all 
have insignificant shares of the total capital? This is not 
private or even private group property. It is private-group 
property that is gradually becoming public. 
  It is not a matter of Russia's special path but merely the 
peculiarities of the movement along one and the same path. 
Discussions about Russia's special path are the best gift to our 
radical reformers. Try and show us now that we should not 
destroy but transform, that it is possible to reform the economy 
without curtailing production and without destroying productive 
forces. 
  The reformers have not succeeded in retaining the positive 
that existed in the old system. Moreover negative processes were 
further developed. The arbitrary behavior of state bureaucrats 
has exceeded all conceivable and inconceivable limits. As a 
result, a mafia-bureaucratic market has also been created. Such 
a market cannot exist under the conditions of democracy. It is 
either-or... 

