CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by O. Vlasov under the heading "Law and Order": </F>
"Criminal Economy: Society's Well-Being Is Not Just Up to the 
Department of Economic Crime"] 
  [Text] The fact that economic crimes are constantly 
increasing is clear for all to see. For example, last year the 
oblast reported an increase by a factor of 2.5 in violations of 
regulations governing currency transactions in comparison to the 
previous year, a 33.3 percent increase in bribery cases and a 
4.1 percent increase particularly large-scale embezzlement... 
Personnel with the oblast Internal Affairs Administration's 
Department of Economic Crime [OBEP] calculate total losses from 
economic crimes last year at R483.9 million [rubles]. 
Furthermore, according to studies conducted by the All-Russian 
Ministry of Internal Affairs Scientific Research Institute, 
internal affairs agencies only uncover one economic crime in 
five. The rest, like the bulk of an iceberg, remain hidden. 
  Incidentally, even the cases that have come to light thanks 
to the efforts of law enforcement agencies give one something to 
think about. A tremendous number of crimes are being committed 
in connection with foreign economic activity, privatization and 
the lending and financial system. It is these that we will 
address. 
<H5>  Goods Are Leaving the Oblast, but Where Is the Money From </H5>
Abroad? 
  Were you aware, dear reader, that our oblast has more than 
1,500 entities engaged in foreign economic activity? Among these 
are 327 industrial enterprises, 62 companies established jointly 
with foreign partners, and 530 joint-stock companies of various 
types. As is traditional for Mother Russia, accustomed to 
trading in her most vital riches, 93.6 percent of exports from 
Sverdlovsk Oblast consist of raw materials and other materials 
(we will come back later to the question of where they 
originate). Machinery and equipment account for only 3.6 percent 
of total exports, and services comprise 1.8 percent. Consumer 
goods account for 0.1 percent or, to put it more simply, one 
one-thousandth of total exports. 
  The most interesting thing is that the oblast does not 
receive the proceeds from this newly-emerged business of 
supplying foreign countries with everything they need. Odd, is 
it not? But judge for yourself: with foreign exports worth a 
total amount of R274.5 billion (the equivalent of roughly $429 
million) the Central Urals received foreign products worth R36.5 
billion ($57 million), or just 13.3 percent of what left the 
oblast. 
  And if you think that instead of products we are getting 
money -- the "greenbacks" that attract such universal attention 
in the Russian market --then you will be sadly disappointed. 
Business people are depositing their funds with foreign banks, 
in violation of current licensing procedure. 
  Inspections carried out by the service assigned to combat 
economic crimes uncovered a massive number of violations. 
  For example, law enforcement agencies have determined that 
special export enterprises, taking advantage of the lack of a 
clear-cut oversight system, are able to deal in raw materials 
and strategic materials under regional quotas for oblast social 
programs and are employing the services of middlemen to do so. 
Once the goods cross the border, these special exporters 
conveniently "forget" about their import obligations. 
Accumulating hard-currency funds in their accounts with foreign 
banks and companies, they reap additional unseen profits, and 
you and I wind up with no medicines, food products or other 
items. 
  A curious fact: out of the 290 joint ventures registered in 
Sverdlovsk Oblast that were inspected, there were 110 in which 
the foreign partners had not contributed a single kopeck to 
their authorized capital -- so where is that money "circulating"? 
  Another very interesting fact: seven enterprises (out of 52 
inspected) were found to be keeping $111 million abroad without 
the appropriate license to do so, i.e. illegally. A telling 
detail: if it had not been for the famous agency Interpol, we 
would probably not have discovered these violations. Local law 
enforcement personnel have no hard currency for official trips 
abroad, so there is no investigation. I can only assume that the 
personnel of renowned Interpol are not terribly interesting in 
looking into the tricks and dodges of Russia's nouveau 
riches, either. They have plenty of foreign affairs of 
their own as it is. 
  Our local internal affairs administration has attempted to 
shake loose at least a little hard currency from the Russian 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, but even there the financial 
situation is not the best at the moment. All hopes rest on the 
local government, especially since currency policy could be just 
the thing to kill two birds with one stone. 
  It is no secret to anyone that the gold mine of foreign 
economic contacts has prompted an upsurge in all forms of 
embezzlement. Last year 661 cases of thefts of ferrous, 
non-ferrous and precious metals were reported. Losses were in 
excess of R182 billion rubles. Every possible means is used to 
legitimize this illegal trade, such as forged trade and 
transport documents and fictitious certificates -- often 
obtained in exchange for bribes. The crime business has expanded 
its scope -- sometimes stolen goods are transported using 
military units' vehicles, including military transport aircraft. 
That fact seriously complicates the work of those assigned to 
combat economic crimes -- it is impossible to inspect every 
military airfield or to establish customs checkpoints at every 
one of them... 
  Of course, hard currency is not the only problem, though 
there is no doubt that if some were available certain problems 
could be solved. But corrupt officials and commanders should 
probably be overseen by those who are above them. After all, 
OBEP capabilities have their limit. 
<H5>  What Is Being Privatized, and by Whom? </H5>
  The privatization process is proceeding exactly according to 
a popular Russian proverb. "The farther into the forest you go, 
the more firewood you find" -- remember that one? Well, the 
firewood -- i.e. violations -- are more numerous in this area 
than in any other "forest." 
  OBEP subunits have uncovered numerous cases of the currently 
fashionable limited-liability companies [tovarishchestva s 
ogranichennoy otvetstvennostyu (TOO)] being created out of 
state-owned enterprises. Their founders are directors and 
officials of higher-level organizations. In violation of 
privatization law, officials are transferring fixed capital and 
operating capital to commercial structures either free of charge 
or for a purely symbolic amount. 
  Founding agreements are being amended without proper 
authorization. Often state-owned enterprises' actual 
contribution to a TOO's authorized capital and the amount of 
dividends paid out are not in keeping with the figures contained 
in founding agreements. 
  Some violations would not happen at all if local authorities 
-- city and rayon administrations -- were stricter about 
registering new enterprises, requiring authorization from 
regional state property management committees. Like the saying 
goes, a businessman should be watched by more than one eye... 
  It is precisely because of this lack of supervision by those 
in power that dubious capital is being laundered through the 
most commonplace structures. Private entrepreneurs are using 
dirty money to actively "work on" the heads of municipal 
enterprises undergoing privatization. They propose pooling funds 
and taking part in the auction to purchase an enterprise on 
behalf of its employees. It is a well-known fact that the latter 
have certain privileges and hence a better chance of winning. 
  Here is one typical example. In Nizhniy Tagil the employees 
decided to convert a certain consumer services combine into a 
TOO for privatization purposes. As it turned out, the combine's 
employees did not have the money to pay for its fixed capital, 
so therefore Citizen A., who deals in commercial transactions, 
was formally made part of the company. He promised to provide 
one-half of the amount of authorized capital required. In order 
to appear more convincing A. was even listed as an employee -- a 
truck driver... 
  The most interesting part began after the auction, i.e. 
after 
the employee group became owner of the combine. Their benefactor 
was elected director of the TOO. But... pursuant to Article 30 
of the "Law on Privatization" the city's Tagilstroyevskiy Rayon 
Procuracy is reviewing documents with a view to filing suit with 
a court of arbitration to have the deal declared illegal. 
  So he who pays the piper does not always call the tune. 
<H5>  The Mint Is Not the Only One Printing Money </H5>
  A total of 545 cases of counterfeiting and other document 
forgeries were uncovered last year by the service that combats 
economic crime. If one divides that figure by the number of days 
in a year, it turns out that our valiant guardians of law and 
order are uncovering one or two counterfeiting cases every day. 
During the year 725 banknotes and privatization vouchers were 
removed from circulation, for a sum of R20 million. 
  Almost all these forgeries were manufactured using copying 
machines and other reproduction equipment and then colored. 
Furthermore, now that office equipment is being bought and sold 
without restriction and in a wide assortment it has become 
increasingly difficult to oversee its use. Previously, every 
piece of equipment had to be registered with law enforcement 
agencies, but now that procedure has been dropped. On the one 
hand, a correct decision -- no one benefited from the 
superfluous red tape -- but, on the other hand, nowadays some 
managers have no idea what their employees are reprinting, 
whether documents or currency. Some of those employees are 
trying their hands at producing little masterpieces worth lots 
of money. 
  OBEP personnel apprehended 36 individuals attempting to pass 
counterfeit money and eight counterfeiters. 
  A case has been filed against Citizen A., who sold eight 
counterfeit $100 bills. Incidentally, that is the denomination 
most often counterfeited... 
  Moreover, some smart individuals on the street long ago 
realized that counterfeiting even the highest-denomination bills 
is too much trouble. It is much more convenient to take 
advantage of the imperfect accounting system to steal a million 
from some bank, or maybe three or four million. 
  Criminals have given the lending and finance industry many 
unpleasant surprises. However, over the course of the year 21 
cases of embezzlement using forged bank documents -- advices -- 
were successfully prevented, saving a total of R6.0 billion. 
  Criminal charges under Article 93, footnote (particularly 
large-scale embezzlement), have been filed against Citizen I. 
This clever individual, representing himself as the commercial 
manager of a state-owned enterprise in Nizhniy Novgorod, 
presented in payment two fictitious clearinghouse checks 
totalling R390 million, thereby acquiring five kilograms of rare 
earth metal from a joint-stock company in Yekaterinburg, and 
then fled. The criminal was subsequently caught and arrested. 
<H5>  It Takes Two To Tango </H5>
  In my opinion the picture is extremely clear -- and that 
despite the fact that under current conditions OBEP is by no 
means able to uncover all violations of the law. Yet blaming law 
enforcement personnel for that seems somehow ridiculous. Normal 
operations require not only personnel but also, I repeat, money, 
equipment, computer programs... 
  Considering that the state at every level has declared over 
and over again that efforts to combat crime are among its most 
important tasks, it should also do everything it can to help 
those who are trying to uphold the law. But it is one thing to 
make nice-sounding declarations and quite another to find 
funding when the budget is already on the point of collapse... 
  Meanwhile commercial structures, often semi-criminal in 
nature, frequently offer their help, either directly or via the 
Law and Order Fund. Of course, there is a price for the money 
and computers that businessmen are willing to contribute: if 
something should happen in the future, they expect their 
expensive gifts to be remembered... Those hopes are far from 
realistic. But the situation itself is abnormal -- we cannot 
protect the state's interests with money that does not come from 
the state. How our society greets tomorrow will depend on the 
way the militia's needs are dealt with by the Russian and oblast 
governments and by local authorities at all levels today. 

