BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vitaliy Churkin, the Russian president's </F>
special envoy to Bosnia-Herzegovina and deputy foreign minister 
by correspondent Yevgeniy Kiselev; place and date not given -- 
recorded] 
  [Text] [Kiselev] Vitaliy Ivanovich, because of the events 
in Yugoslavia you are now as famous as General Sir Michael Rose, 
the commander of UN peacekeeping forces. They say you were 
inside Gorazde at the very moment when the Serbian tanks burst 
into the town and it was only your personal intervention that 
stopped the onslaught. What happened in reality? 
  [Churkin] This thing about my personal intervention and the 
tanks breaking in is an obvious exaggeration. In reality, this 
is what happened: While Akashi, the UN secretary general's 
representative in former Yugoslavia and myself, were making 
desperate final efforts to come to an agreement with the Serbs 
that they should withdraw -- at least slightly -- their heavy 
armaments and troops from Gorazde, Rose sent us a panicky report 
that even after all undertakings to cease-fire, not only was the 
fire continuing, albeit not very intensely, but also that three 
tanks were approaching the town, which could start the shelling 
at any moment. Rose said he was unable to tolerate this any 
longer and if the tanks did not make a U-turn there and then he 
would be requesting air strikes. At that point I did indeed 
intervene, because it was Akashi who was to give the go-ahead 
for this action. I told him this was breaching the resolutions 
of the UN Security Council because the tanks were not, in fact, 
firing. 
  [Kiselev] That is you intervened, in fact, not in order to 
stop the onslaught, or the advance of these three tanks, but 
with the view to preventing the NATO strikes. 
  [Churkin] Yes, for prevention. I told him however -- and in 
this I did take rather a lot upon myself -- that if in the 
future just one tank fires even once, I am giving him the 
go-ahead, if he needs an official go-ahead from a Russian 
representative -- to ask for air support, so that these tanks 
are dealt with accordingly. 
  Because this game -- broken promises, undertakings to 
cease-fire, while continuing to shell the town, the advancement 
of tanks -- this game continued for a few days and could not be 
tolerated any longer. 
  [Kiselev] Was it the game led by the Serbian leaders? 
  [Churkin] It was the game conducted, as I understand, by 
some 
people, leaders, from among the Bosnian Serbs, mainly the 
military. 
  [Kiselev] While you have been working in Yugoslavia -- I am 
saying "working in Yugoslavia" because I think you are spending 
more time there in Yugoslavia than here in Moscow, you have 
certainly built personal relationships with many Serbian 
leaders, such relationships that give one the right to be hurt 
or puzzled, or to expect -- on the other hand -- personal 
support. How would you describe the Serbian leaders as 
personalities? 
  [Churkin] I would not like to talk about personalities right 
now. I would only say that they are strong people. There are 
also strong, major politicians in Belgrade. In fact, I have a 
personal relationship with many of them, but I have not been 
using them to replace the state policy by some kind of personal 
contacts, this would have been absurd. However, I have used 
them to speak with utmost frankness about the problems as they 
were emerging. The conversations, especially the very recent 
ones, probably went beyond the bounds of any concept of 
political and diplomatic contacts. I am actually quite sure 
they did. Both in the gravity of what was being said and, 
excuse me, even in the tone of it. This was being done 
deliberately -- because I felt that they were approaching a 
catastrophe, and that as a professional, I should be able to 
tell myself later: I have done all I could have done, said all 
I could have said, used all opportunities to bring it home to 
them that they were making a colossal mistake and that this 
absolutely must not be done, and that events must be made to 
take a different course. 
  [Kiselev] That statement, very abrupt, I would say 
unexpectedly abrupt for a tried and tested professional 
diplomat, that you made in the airport on returning to Moscow -- 
what was it, an echo of those emotions, some kind of overspill, 
or do you not regret your words? 
  [Churkin] I do not regret it at all. Furthermore, now I am 
even more convinced that it was correct, the statement was well 
considered. I will tell you why it was correct. In general, 
during my work in Yugoslavia, this is the third time I have 
resorted to this device, but perhaps in this case it was the 
most open, naked, and extreme in form. 
  With this statement I wanted to achieve three things. First, 
I wanted to tell the Serbs with complete clarity the threat they 
are facing. Second, I wanted to somehow shake up public opinion 
in Russia, so that people would stop for a moment and realize 
that something wrong is happening there, that very threatening 
events could really be approaching. Third, I wanted it to be 
clear to everyone in the world that Russia dissociates itself 
from the nightmares and horrors being created by the Bosnian 
Serbs in Gorazde. 
  [Kiselev] Alright. Your point of view -- or probably it is 
less your point of view than the point of view of the Russian 
Foreign Ministry, if I understand correctly -- how much weight 
does it carry when Russia's stance as a whole is being 
determined? After all, foreign policy is not determined by the 
Foreign Ministry alone: There is also the military, the military 
intelligence service and the foreign intelligence service, which 
also report to the president, and the president formulates the 
stance after summarizing this information. 
  [Churkin] Of course. Of course. At least [words indistinct] 
Yugoslavian but also European, in two years working as deputy 
minister I do not recall any case in which the president adopted 
a decision that differed sharply from the view of the Foreign 
Ministry. That is of course, there are sometimes certain 
nuances and the president himself can introduce a certain nuance 
into a draft decision presented to him, independently of the 
departments. But I cannot remember any cases in which there has 
been a complete reversal. 
  [Kiselev] Tell me, please, is there now in the Russian 
approach to appraising the Serb side's position, a return to the 
situation of 1992 when the Serbs used to be divided into good 
and bad? You remember, that at the time there was a policy of 
supporting not Milosevic but Panic. 
  [Churkin] Well, I have always said and keep repeating that 
extremists from all the three sides are the main difficulty and 
danger in the whole Bosnian conflict -- I have told this to the 
Serbs, too -- extremists among the Serbs, among the Muslims and 
among the Croats. It happens now that at this moment, precisely 
when peace was within reach, or maybe precisely because there 
was such a moment, that genie was let out of the bottle. What 
can we do now? I believe that we should try to single out 
commonsense in the Serb side proceeding simply from some normal 
ideas of Serbia's interests. In conversations with Milosevic, I 
have asked him more than once: Does Serbia really need Gorazde? 
What is a town with 60,000 people from the point of view of the 
entire Serb people? I must say that he agreed with me. Serbia 
needs peace, Serbia does not take part in the war, not directly, 
at least. The people are suffering from the sanctions. So, 
Serbia should be interested in lifting the sanctions and 
therefore in putting pressure on the extremists among the 
Bosnian Serbs in order to stop the conflict. But for the time 
being, as I see it, I will say the following: For the time 
being I see no signs of Belgrade's pressure on Bosnian Serb 
extremists yielding palpable results. This is a tragedy. 
  [Kiselev] That is, you are saying that they are becoming 
increasingly unmanageable? 
  [Churkin] Perhaps, yes. I see a solution here in Serbia 
finding an inner strength to separate itself from these actions 
by the militarists among the Bosnian Serbs. 
  [Kiselev] To what degree do your words apply to Karadzic, 
the 
main leader of the Bosnian Serbs? 
  [Churkin] I would not like to mention names now. I have 
clear ideas about everyone but I would not like to speak about 
this now. 
  [Kiselev] Now, perhaps the last question -- about you 
personally, Vitaliy Ivanovich: Right now in those circles of 
people keeping a close watch on Russia's diplomatic efforts in 
the former Yugoslavia there are rumors that you may fall victim 
to an intrigue directed against you within the state machinery. 
Do you think this is true? 
  [Churkin, laughing] I am probably circulating these rumors 
myself, because...no, I do not have this impression at all. I 
have not got wind of any intrigues within the state machinery 
whatsoever. But, I think I will soon have to find the right 
moment to draw a line under all my stormy activities connected 
with Yugoslavia and hand over to another, perhaps more worthy 
and less emotional person. Two years is quite enough. 
  [Kiselev] Doesn't it mean that you have simply given up? 
  [Churkin] No! No, I have not given up. Just that, we have 
this rotation system, one of the sacred traditions of diplomatic 
service, and not just of ours, it is international. But while 
there is no result, no realistic result, I think I should keep 
working. So long as no other decisions are taken in connection 
with other circumstances. 
  [Kiselev] Thank you, Vitaliy Ivanovich. 

