BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jaroslav Kmenta: "Viruses Kept by the Army Could </F>
Have Killed on a Large-Scale; Research Requested by Military 
Secret Services of the USSR"] 
  [Text] Prague--In the 1970's and 1980's, Czechoslovak 
scientists in military establishments studied several dozen 
particularly dangerous exotic viruses and bacteria that could be 
used as lethal bacteriological weapons. Their collection was 
liquidated by the Army, along with all common viruses such as 
influenza or mumps, only in February 1994. 
  The dangerous viruses and bacteria studied by Czechoslovak 
experts belonged to the group that mainly cause severe cases of 
meningitis. The military officials of the former Eastern bloc 
states were allegedly convinced that these organisms could be 
used by the enemy in the event of a bacteriological war. The 
military secret services of the former USSR therefore designated 
several dozen particularly dangerous microorganisms and 
recommended their research with the aim of creating serums for 
diagnostic and protective purposes. 
  Following the liquidation of the bank of virus strains, the 
Ministry of Defense was accused of having developed 
bacteriological weapons in its military establishments. The 
Army command, along with the Ministry of Health, denied this, 
however. The Ministry of Defense stated that the research 
involving those viruses was of a purely defensive nature. Some 
experts argue, however, that it is virtually impossible to 
distinguish between defensive and offensive research. 
  According to expert circles, it cannot be ruled out that the 
results of Czechoslovak studies could have been used by the 
Soviet Union for military purposes. This suspicion is confirmed 
by the recent admission of Anatoliy Kuntsevich, chief of the 
Russian presidential committee for chemical and biological 
weapons, who confirmed last September that, even though Moscow 
had signed the treaty on banning these weapons, the former USSR 
and, subsequently, Russia, continued to develop for 20 years 
bacteriological weapons and aircraft and missile systems for 
their transport. 

