Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Leonid Gurevich, deputy chairman of the </F>
Russian Federation Committee on Precious Metals and Precious 
Stones (Roskomdragmet), by DELOVOY MIR correspondent Sergey 
Nikishov: "Russia May Become the Fifth Diamond Center"; date and 
place not given] 
  [Text] Three years ago, when the reorganization of 
Russia's diamond complex was being contemplated, Leonid 
Gurevich, as co-chairman of the parliamentary commission on this 
matter, was concerned, first of all, about how to preserve the 
industry. Now, from the standpoint of the deputy chairman of the 
Russian Federation Committee on Precious Metals and Precious 
Stones (Roskomdragmet), he considers it possible to turn Russia 
into one of the world's diamond centers. The prerequisites for 
this exist, although there are also quite a few difficulties, he 
declared in an interview with DELOVOY MIR correspondent Sergey 
Nikishov. 
<H5>  It Is Better Not To Fight </H5>
  [Nikishov] Recently, there has been a lot of talk in Russia 
about diamonds, which has seriously begun to affect the 
economics of this business. It happens that high-ranking state 
officials, without thinking about the consequences, are making 
statements which are causing appreciable losses. For example, 
statements about the fact that, in the near future, diamonds 
will be sold, so that funds will be available for paying wages. 
This is not done in commerce. 
  Yet, since approximately December of last year, a campaign 
has been unleashed in the world press, including in the special 
diamond publications, to discredit Russia as a partner in 
international affairs. It is being accused of violating 
international agreements, in particular, with the De Beers 
company. This matter has reached far beyond the bounds of the 
diamond theme and is inflicting harm on the country's investment 
policy. I perceive in this the longing of those who have 
monopolized the markets for diamonds, weapons, oil and so on, to 
drive us out from among the competitors. 
  [Gurevich] I was recently in the RSA [Republic of South 
Africa] and I saw for myself that the De Beers company is a real 
empire and a very serious organization. Of course, it is better 
"not to fight" with it. Although, it can be said, we are in an 
equal position with it. And De Beers should not "fight" with 
Russia either. From my point of view, both partners understand 
this. 
  [Nikishov] At one time, as far as I know, you believed that 
the De Beers company was not dealing with us completely 
honestly. Has your point of view changed? 
  [Gurevich] There are no grounds for maintaining that we are 
being deceived in trading with De Beers. But we cannot assert 
that we are trading without losses for Russia. Unfortunately, we 
have no objective criteria for investigating this. 
  [Nikishov] But it is possible to control the prices for the 
Russian raw materials sold to the De Beers company with the help 
of the 5-percent cuts. According to the 1990 5-year, 95 percent 
of the Russian raw diamonds is supposed to be sold through De 
Beers' Central Sales Organization (TsSO), while we can sell the 
remaining 5 percent ourselves. 
  [Gurevich] Yes, we regard the 5-percent cuts as controls. 
Last year, we finally established certain things. We sold 
industrial diamonds, which are not covered under the limitations 
of the agreement with our South African partner. This batch was 
first offered to De Beers, but the company declined them. And we 
sold them to other partners at a much higher price than we could 
have sold them based on De Beers' price list. 
  The accusations made against us that a parallel diamond 
market is being thereby created are completely unfounded, 
inasmuch as the industrial diamonds, in terms of value, amount 
to a small portion of the overall sales of gem diamonds. 
Nevertheless, we have obtained access to the price-setting 
mechanism and have verified in practice to what extent the 
price-list price of our diamonds corresponds to the actual 
market price. And now we can extrapolate the results of the 
experiment with industrial raw materials to possible results 
with gemstone raw materials. 
  But we see the greatest problems as being not abroad, but 
rather, in our country. It is necessary to overcome the 
opposition of those who would not like to change the situation 
in the diamond industry, which took shape over decades, and to 
lose the opportunity to participate in the distribution. The 
Russian Federation Committee on Precious Metals and Precious 
Stones, the central organ for the regulation (but not the 
management) of relations in this sector, was given these 
functions in May of last year. Only after this did the 
possibility emerge of opposing the lobbying groups which are 
"wooing" the government and the president. 
<H5>  For the Good of All </H5>
  [Nikishov] It has already been reported in the press that, 
at 
the present time, the government is examining an entire set of 
questions associated with diamond matters. Along what lines is 
the work proceeding and is it possible to talk about preliminary 
results? 
  [Gurevich] I can say that, for quite some time now, the 
government has been studying a broader question than the one 
which is being frequently raised in the press. This is the 
question of Russia's overall diamond strategy and policy in this 
area for the foreseeable future. And, as strange as it may 
sound, the problem of relations with the De Beers company, in my 
opinion, is not the main one here. Trade with De Beers is an 
obligatory measure and nothing more. 
  We have currently approached the examination of the diamond 
industry from a completely different perspective, based on the 
conviction that Russia may well become the world's fifth diamond 
center. The entire diamond world maintains that Russia should 
become one of these centers. Four currently exist -- New York, 
Antwerp, Tel-Aviv and Bombay. All of them are large centers for 
the buying and selling of raw diamonds and their processing. For 
example, in Antwerp, the annual diamond turnover amounts to $15 
billion (importing and exporting is approximately 
half-and-half). And this is in the absence of actual mining. 
And, last year, through the Central Sales Organization in 
London, the Almazy Rossii-Sakha [Russia-Sakhalin Diamond] 
Company sold nearly $1.2 billion worth of Russian diamonds. 
  [Nikishov] But developed consumer articles markets have long 
been established there. And this took years. 
  [Gurevich] But who is currently hindering us from seriously 
getting into this business? Whereas, previously, we set the task 
of just processing diamonds and selling cut diamonds, we now 
believe that it is necessary to build lapidary plants with the 
idea of inviting partners who have their own niche in the 
foreign market. Those who will place orders for enterprises and 
introduce jewelry of contemporary design. There are a great 
number of people who wish to operate in Russia now. 
  But, all the same, cut diamonds are just a semifinished 
product. But if this task is viewed on a broader scale? Let us 
go farther and also develop jewelry production together with 
gem-cutting. But let us go to the performance of this task from 
the market. 
  [Nikishov] Obviously, you have in mind the differentiation 
of 
incomes occurring in our country and, as a consequence, the 
increase in the class of people who are capable of buying 
expensive ornaments. 
  [Gurevich] I am certain that the capacity of the market for 
jewelry in Russia is sufficient for building serious social 
programs. Given a correct formulation of the matter, we can 
obtain serious revenues for the budget through the sale of 
jewelry. 
  [Nikishov] Is it possible to call this the second stage of 
the concept developed with your participation for the 
reorganization of the rough-and cut-diamond complex? 
  [Gurevich] It is possible. In the first stage, we set the 
task of preserving what we already have, in particular, the 
lapidary industry. And we have managed to do this. Last year, we 
reached newer frontiers in the use of the raw material 
(approximately $100 million worth more of cut-diamonds were sold 
than in 1990). 
  New enterprises and joint ventures have appeared in our 
country. But also important are the qualitative changes. We have 
begun to cut raw material which was traditionally not cut in 
Russia but, for which, a large currency efficiency is being 
attained. These qualitative features also, without fail, entail 
quantitative changes with respect to an increase in sales of 
already finished cut diamonds. 
  In addition, the creation of new jobs in the sector will 
also 
contribute to the solving of social problems. Unfortunately, we 
do not currently have enough gem cutters. Approximately 12,000 
people are employed in the sector, while there are about a 
million gem cutters in India. This industry has a low 
capital-output ratio and is rapidly beginning to produce a 
profit. 
  There is a possibility of establishing lapidary enterprises 
even in the VPK [military-industrial complex], where today, in 
view of the lack of orders, skilled personnel are standing 
around idle. The idea consists of employing the released sites 
and specialists. However, we will be trading with De Beers even 
after 1995. 
  [Nikishov] Can we consider the rough- and cut-diamond 
complex 
to now be on the threshold of substantial changes of both an 
internal sectorial nature and an external economic nature? 
  [Gurevich] We are not on the threshold of changes, but 
rather, we are in motion. In this connection, it is necessary to 
remember that work on the Arkhangelsk diamond field has started. 
At the beginning of this year, a license was finally issued to 
AO Severoalmaz [Northern Diamond Joint-Stock Company] for its 
pilot commercial development. 
  According to the predictions, this field should have a 
substantial impact on the future diamond market, because, based 
on their qualitative characteristics, the Arkhangelsk diamonds 
are better than the Yakut ones. The percentage of gem-quality 
diamonds and the amount of precious stones in the dirt are 
higher. 
  We are considering the possibilities for the broader use of 
scientific potential. Now, a large number of institutes are 
engaged in studying natural diamonds with specific properties. 
For example, there is a group of diamonds with a low nitrogen 
content. Some scientists believe that they will have a large 
future in the development of a new generation of computers. Such 
stones have a very high thermal conductivity, which 
substantially changes the processors' parameters. This is much 
more serious than gem diamonds. And Russia has almost a monopoly 
on their supplies. 
  The Americans and the Japanese are working in this field and 
collaboration with them is possible. 
<H5>  The Idea Should Seize the Masses </H5>
  [Gurevich] In order to coordinate all work associated with 
diamonds, we want to establish a Federal Diamond Center (FATs). 
  [Nikishov] This is what was being talked about back 2 years 
ago in connection with the development of the concept of the 
rough- and cut-diamond complex? 
  [Gurevich] Yes, the idea of establishing the center arose in 
connection with the need to control the sales of diamonds to the 
De Beers company. And it has now come back to us. What is needed 
is a large umbrella over everyone involved with diamonds. The 
Russian Federation Committee on Precious Metals and Precious 
Stones has submitted the appropriate proposals to the 
government. It is being proposed that the Federal Diamond Center 
be given the functions of coordinating all work, forming the 
corresponding information field and developing policy 
recommendations in this area. 
  [Nikishov] And how are your relations with the State Duma on 
this matter shaping up? Will the appropriate legal basis be 
prepared? 
  [Gurevich] I have already been in the Duma and tried to draw 
attention to this matter. We need to adopt a law on precious 
metals and precious stones. I believe that a draft of such a law 
will soon be submitted for the State Duma's consideration. And 
we will be happy if we find people there, who are also "taken" 
with diamonds. This is truly a fine, patriotic idea. 
<H6>  * * * </H6>
<H5>  P.S. </H5>
<H5>  De Beers' Revenues Are Growing </H5>
  The world monopolist in the trading of rough diamonds, the 
De 
Beers company, recently reported an increase in its revenues in 
the past year by 21 percent. The profits of the company, which 
combines the South African De Beers Consolidated Mines, Ltd., 
and the Swedish De Beers Centenary AG, amounted in 1993 to $595 
million ($491 million in 1992), which made it possible to 
increase the per-share dividend from 79.1 cents to 84.4 cents. 
  Named among the reasons for such a sharp rise in revenues 
are 
the record sales of rough diamonds and the renewed increase in 
sales in the diamond ornaments markets. As stated by De Beers 
Board Chairman Julian Ogilvy-Thompson, whose words are cited by 
the Reuters Agency, an increase in retail sales of jewelry 
ornaments with cut diamonds was noted first over the past 3 
years. He expressed the hope that the noticed trend would 
continue, provided the predictions for the growth of the world 
economy as a whole are proven correct. 
  Last year, $4.37 billion worth of precious stones, which is 
28 percent more than in 1992, were sold through De Beers' 
Central Sales Organization (TsSO) in London, which controls 
around 80 percent of the world sales of rough diamonds. 
  According to data from the Central Sales Organization's 
management, originally, the increase in the demand for jewelry 
ornaments with cut diamonds (by 7-9 percent on the whole) was 
noted in the United States, which is the largest sales market 
for these goods. But subsequently, an even greater increase in 
demand (by 15-16 percent on the whole) occurred in the countries 
of Southeast Asia. At the same time, a drop in sales volumes was 
noted in Europe. 
  Specialists are predicting an increase in the demand for 
jewelry ornaments with cut diamonds in Japan, South Korea, 
Thailand and Taiwan. 

