BFN 

<F P=106> [By Fung Wai-Kong and Linda Choy] </F>
  [Text] Six senior journalists in ATV's [Asia Television 
Limited] News and Public Affairs Department resigned yesterday 
after the station management rejected a documentary about the 
1989 Beijing massacre. At least two other reporters indicated 
they were also ready to resign from the team of about 50 
covering Chinese and English channels. 
  Those who submitted their resignations yesterday were newly- 
appointed Acting News Controller Poon Fu-yin, Assistant News 
Controller Selina Li Yuklin, Executive Editor Lo Wing-hung, 
Managing Editor Lui Wan-sang, Assignment Editor Choy Pui-ying 
and City Editor Lau Kok-wa. 
  The news division had planned to include a Spanish 
documentary in the News Magazine programme on the Home Channel 
on June 3 to mark the fifth anniversary of the massacre. The 
programme contains film which seemed to support the long-held 
Chinese position that there was no killing in Tiananmen Square 
when People's Liberation Army troops crushed the pro-democracy 
movement with tanks and rifles. The massacre has become known as 
the Tiananmen Square incident, even though it is widely accepted 
that most of the deaths occurred in the streets around the 
square. 
  The management last Saturday ordered that a short segment 
promoting the film be taken off the air. Executives reportedly 
told news staff that as five years had already passed since the 
massacre, it did nobody any good to look back at the issue and 
that one should be prospective rather than retrospective. 
  According to one ATV journalist the decision was "very sad 
and disappointing." "This is only 1994, still three years 
before the handover and yet media owners and senior managers 
have begun to do things like that. It's a very sad thing. The 
decision actually leaves no choice for the news management 
staff. It is extremely difficult for them to remain in their 
posts when the news department no longer enjoys editorial 
independence." 
  He emphasised that the resignation of the senior staff was 
not a bargaining tactic, but rather a strong disapproval of the 
decision. "We hope this action will alert the public to the 
growing gag on the news media and to discourage other media from 
taking the same path." 
  It is understood management will meet staff today. 
  ATV management denied any knowledge of the controversy. 
  Assistant Controller of ATV's Public Relations and Publicity 
Department Lu Fung said she had not heard of the resignations 
and so was unable to comment on the issue. She added that she 
was unable to contact the station's senior management. Deputy 
Chief Executive Clarence Chang Ching-po, who has overall control 
of the news division, was unavailable for comment last night. 
  The ATV newsroom is still recovering from a major shakeup a 
fortnight ago. The Assistant Chief Executive Timothy Jim and 
News Controller Garman Chan left their posts on May 16, soon 
after Mr Chang was appointed. 
  Independent legislator and a vocal supporter of press 
freedom, Emily Lau Wai-hing, said she was astonished by the 
decision which she felt was an indication that ATV was imposing 
self-censorship on sensitive programmes. She warned that the 
credibility of the company would suffer as a result of this 
incident. Rejecting the explanation that the programme was 
undesirable because five years had gone by since the massacre, 
Ms Lau said: "This is unacceptable. On Sunday we had thousands 
of people out on the streets to commemorate the incident." 
  She said it was ridiculous for ATV to make such a decision 
only a day after the company's representative criticised rival 
TVB for blocking a documentary on the private life of Mao 
Zedong. She called for an explanation from ATV management and 
asked that the journalists who resigned reveal the background to 
the incident. 
  The Journalists' Association was last night trying to 
contact 
ATV staff and would not comment. 
  Prominent Hong Kong-based activist Lau Shan-ching said: "It 
is a clear evidence of commercial interest taking precedence 
over journalistic ideals." 
  Recently television companies had been stepping up efforts 
to 
expand their market into the mainland and they also benefit 
substantially from advertisement of China's property market, he 
said. It was only natural that they feared offending their 
financial sources in broadcasting the sensitive documentary. 
  Admitting that it was inevitable, he said the only effective 
way to prevent the event from happening was to enact laws to 
prevent interference from journalistic judgment. 

