Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The government has decided to increase official 
development assistance (ODA) for joint projects with other 
advanced nations. With the growing number of ODA recipients, it 
has become increasingly difficult for Japan to undertake 
assistance alone due to linguistic or technical problems. Japan 
will, therefore, aim at more effective aid through joint 
international ODA projects. It will discuss new joint projects 
in African and Asian countries with Canada, Sweden, South 
Africa, Israel, and the EC Commission, while also increasing 
existing joint international ODA efforts with the United States, 
Britain, and other countries. 
  Japan's ODA has again surpassed the United States in 1993, 
becoming the world's top aid donor for three consecutive years. 
While ODA from the Western nations has leveled off, Japan's ODA 
has been increasing not only in Asia, but also in Africa and 
Latin America, where it used to give minimal assistance. Plans 
for ODA in East Europe and the Central Asian states of the 
former USSR have also come up for consideration since 1993. 
  However, there are problems such as the shortage of Japanese 
technicians who can speak the local languages. Japan will 
attempt to solve these problems by cooperating with other 
advanced nations. Furthermore, this will also ensure more 
efficient management of ODA, the appropriations for which have 
not been increased as expected due to Japan's financial 
difficulties. 
  Japan is considering a joint aid program with South Africa 
for the economic reconstruction of Mozambique, Lesotho, and 
other neighboring countries of South Africa. Such a joint aid 
program with South Africa will also express the Japanese 
Government's approval of the democratization efforts in South 
Africa, which has succeeded in instituting a general election 
with black participation for the first time in history. 
  Joint ODA efforts in Africa are also being considered with 
Sweden and Canada, while joint projects will be implemented in 
Africa or Vietnam with Canada. Sweden and Canada are advanced 
nations in terms of ODA. Japan also hopes to acquire ODA 
knowhow from these countries. 
  Cooperative efforts in the area of refugee relief in the 
Philippines, and agricultural development in Thailand have 
already been undertaken with the United States. Japan wants to 
cooperate with the United States in a wildlife conservation 
program in Indonesia. 

