OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94UM0237H </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel N. Vladimirov] </F>
  [Text] The British firm Royal Ordnance has developed and 
tested the ROMANS (Rapid Operational Minefield Attack and 
Neutralization System) lightweight mineclearing linear charge, 
designed for clearing dismounted patrol lanes in antipersonnel 
minefields. In creating it, specialists were guided by the 
following basic criteria: Maximum simplicity of use, minimum 
time for activation, and the capability of one-man use. 
  The basic components of the kit are a gunpowder rocket with 
a 
very simple launching device in the form of a pin; the charge 
itself, which is a reinforced detonating cord 50 meters long 
(has SX2 plastic explosive that is insensitive to penetration by 
a bullet) with a detonating mechanism; a braking device; and the 
container. The latter contains all the kit accessories and 
supplies. The kit, including the container, weighs a total of 
8.9 kg. 
  To clear a lane in a minefield, the charge is placed at the 
edge of the minefield and the rocket motor is ignited, which 
moving over a low trajectory tows the charge to the obstacle. 
After actuation of the braking device, the charge, having 
straightened out, falls to the ground and detonates. The 
mechanical-fuze high-explosive and fragmentation antipersonnel 
mines in the immediate proximity are detonated by the blast 
wave, as a result of which a dismounted patrol lane 0.6 meters 
wide and 60 meters deep is cleared in the obstacle, over which 
it is possible for personnel to move single file. 
  The first variant of the charge, designated Mk1, was 
initiated at the obstacle by an operator using a blasting 
machine. The Mk2 variant was subsequently developed, which is 
equipped with an automatic detonating device that initiates the 
charge after it falls to the ground. 
  Presently, an experimental batch of new charges is 
undergoing 
evaluation testing in the British Army. In particular, they are 
studying the high-explosive properties of several charge 
variants having different explosive charge filling. At the same 
time, they are also being evaluated by American specialists, who 
are determining the effectiveness of the new weapon when used 
against various types and models of antipersonnel mines both 
buried and on the surface, including those laid by remote means. 
During the course of the testing, they are also clarifying the 
possibility of increasing the length of the charge, which would 
make it possible to clear lanes in obstacles of greater depth. 
  The need to equip ground forces units with light linear 
charges is caused by a number of reasons, two of which are the 
main ones: 
  --the ever-increasing danger of subunits executing a 
maneuver 
or taking up a defense encountering minefields that have been 
laid suddenly, which will require crossing in an extremely short 
period of time or abandoning the mined area; 
  --significant expansion of the scale of conducting mine 
warfare in the future, which will not make it possible any time 
to use only combat engineers to cross minefields. 
  That is precisely why it is proposed to entrust some of the 
missions associated with crossing minefields directly to 
combined-arms subunits, for which they are being equipped with 
the appropriate weapons. For infantry, light mineclearing linear 
charges are one such weapon. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye", 1993 

