Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by A. Frolov, report on population's health with </F>
table on cancer mortality rate, and report on counterfeit 
therapeutic balms by A. I. Leontyev, under the rubric "House of 
Nature": "The White Book of Moscow"] 
  [Text] The White Book "State Report on the Condition of 
the Natural Environment of the City of Moscow" has been 
published for the first time in the city's history. 
  The report was prepared by decision No. 18 of the presidium 
of the Mossovet dated 15 April 1993. The client was 
Moskomprirody [Moscow Nature Committee] and the chief agent was 
the Moscow Special Purpose Fund "Ecology and the Condition of 
the Living Environment" (MTsF ESSO ["Moskovskiy tselevoy fond 
`Ekologiya i sostoyaniye sredy obitaniya'"]. The chairman of the 
editorial board was A. V. Yablokov. 
  For decades the city's nature protection organs maintained a 
humble silence regarding the activity of the city authorities 
and the Council of Ministers nomenklatura, who turned Moscow 
into an ecological disaster zone. 
  This humility cost Muscovites dearly -- millions of 
residents 
have died 8-10 years early and hundreds of thousands of children 
have been born with birth defects and pathologies. 
  This humility cost the state dearly too -- each person who 
died early or became disabled could have benefited society. Just 
the cost of treatment and sick leave eats up hundreds of 
billions of rubles. 
  This humility left the managers of hundreds of small 
"Chernobyl's" which contaminated the city unpunished and doomed 
any good ecological programs to failure for a lack of objective 
information. 
  But now the first breach has appeared in the wall of silence 
-- the White Book of Moscow, which for the first time makes it 
possible to assess the condition of the living environment and 
the population's health both for the city as a whole and by 
individual zones. 
  There is no reason to retell the report's content. Suffice 
it 
to say that the report includes chapters which characterize the 
natural conditions in the city, the condition of the atmospheric 
air, water resources, soils, and the plant and animal worlds, 
the scope of technogenic impact, radiation, noise, and 
electromagnetic pollution, technogenic changes in the geological 
milieu, the state of public health, and the activity of the 
nature protection organizations. The report includes more than 
40 maps and figures which for the first time make it possible to 
comprehensively assess the condition of the living environment. 
  I am certain that every Muscovite will be interested to know 
the report's contents and find out just what is happening in his 
microrayon and on his street. 
  But the history of the report's appearance is no less 
interesting. 
  First, the report appeared against the bureaucrats' wishes. 
The city administration deliberately did absolutely nothing to 
prepare it, hoping that the idea would die of itself. A 
paradoxical fact is that the State Report was financed not from 
the city budget but at the expense of the City Ecology Fund. 
Only the sincere enthusiasm and the unselfishness, rare in our 
times, of the researchers enabled this unique publication to be 
prepared. 
  They were able to defend the principle that it is first of 
all the performing organization that determines the report's 
content; and that organization was MTSF "ESSO," which hired such 
organizations as MGU [Moscow State University], MosTsGMS, IMGRE 
[Institute of Mineralogy, Geochemistry, and Crystallochemistry 
of Rare Elements], VIMS [All-Russian Scientific Research 
Institute of Mineral Raw Materials], GMPP of Aerogeology, MGTs 
SEN, NIiPI Genplana, Geoekotsentr [Geoecocenter], and others, in 
all more than 20 organizations. In preparing the report they 
managed to avoid nomenklatura censorship or being placed under 
the eye of the latest city "father." 
  Taking into account the trend toward restoration of the 
nomenklatura dictatorship in Russia, it is quite possible that 
the report will become a bibliographic rarity. One may predict 
that subsequent reports, if they are prepared, will be done with 
proper humility. 
  Of course, the report was no great revelation. It once again 
used the example of Moscow to prove that the condition of the 
environment is the dirtiest secret of the obsolete totalitarian 
state. But the report gives an objective and fairly frightening 
picture of the party-management nomenklatura's genocide against 
its own people. 
  Much of what was intended in the report was not 
accomplished. 
The trends toward change in the condition of the environment 
were not followed for a long period of time, a substantiated 
prediction of the possible consequences of maintaining the 
present attitude toward nature was not given, comparative data 
with other major cities of the world were not given, the 
correlation between certain types of diseases and environmental 
pollution was not specified, and economic substantiation of the 
benefits of rational nature use was not given. 
  The report will be useful to teachers in schools, students, 
businessmen who occupy city real estate, bureaucrats making 
decisions, and simply Muscovites who love their city. 
  I would like to thank everyone who took part in preparing 
the 
report. In 15 years, or even in 50 years, this book will be 
remembered as the basis which first gave comprehensive 
information on the city of Moscow, information against which all 
subsequent changes will be compared. I would very much hope that 
the changes will be for the better. That was the reason the 
report was prepared. 
  Call telephone number 281-93-56 on questions about obtaining 
the report. 
<H5>  The Population's Health </H5>
  From 1985 through 1990, indicators of natural population 
growth differed by regions of the city of Moscow. The highest 
natural population growth per 1,000 inhabitants was found in 
Zelenograd (+4.3) and Solntsevo (+3.3). There was negative 
natural growth in Frunzenskiy Rayon (-6.4), Pervomayskiy Rayon 
(-5.5), Leningradskiy Rayon (-5.2), and Oktyabrskiy Rayon (-5.1). 
  Against the background of the sharp drop in the birth rate, 
the proportion of children born with developmental defects is 
rising. The mortality rate of the population in the city of 
Moscow is gradually increasing, by 2-3 percent a year beginning 
in 1987. In 1991 the mortality rate was a record for the last 30 
years. Child mortality is a most important indicator of a 
society's health. In the last 5 year period, an average of 2,923 
children 14 years of age and under and 527 adolescents aged 
15-19 years died every year. Infant mortality (children under 1 
year old) is of most significance in describing the population's 
sanitary-hygienic condition. In the early 1980's, around 20 
children died per 1,000 births. This indicator has now dropped 
to 15. Birth defects and birth-related deaths dominate in the 
structure of infant mortality. That is the cause of death of 
75-83 percent of the infants. 
  Mortality from diseases of the respiratory organs is 
significant (17 per 10,000 births). Children over 1 year of age 
most often died from injuries and accidents (2 per 10,000), 
birth defects (1.75), or tumors (1.6). Adolescent mortality rose 
from 8.3 per 10,000 in 1987 to 10.4 in 1991. More than 50 
percent of the adolescents die of injuries and accidents and 
about 15 percent of them die of tumors. 
  Mortality among working-age Muscovites was 50.5 per 10,000. 
The working-age population dies at a rate 6 times higher than 
that of people aged 2-19. Over the last 5 years, an increase has 
been observed in the mortality rate of the working-age 
population. The greatest increase in the mortality rate was 
found among persons 30-40 years of age. The main causes of death 
among the working-age population of the city of Moscow are heart 
and vascular diseases -- 33.8 percent, tumors -- 26.1 percent, 
and injuries and accidents -- 24.4 percent. As compared with 
1988, mortality rate indicators from injuries and accidents rose 
by 61 percent in 1991, and from tumors and cardiovascular 
diseases -- by 16 percent and 15 percent, respectively. The 
cancer mortality rate in the city of Moscow in the last 30 years 
is on a steady increase. Thus, the mortality rate indicator from 
lung cancer was 26.8 per 100,000 inhabitants in 1959 as compared 
to 36.3 in 1989, while for stomach cancer this indicator dropped 
from 71.8 to 41.7. Mortality from cancer of other parts of the 
body is rising gradually. High indicators of cancer mortality 
which were substantially above the average city level were found 
in six of the city's rayons: Kalininskiy, Kiyevskiy, 
Zheleznodorozhnyy, Sevastopolskiy, and Solntsevskiy rayons and 
the city of Zelenograd. Average life expectancy for those born 
in Moscow from 1980 through 1991 is 69 years. 
  From the state report on the condition of the environment in 
the city of Moscow. 


General Indicators of Natural Population Change (per 1,000 people). 
Distribution of Mortality Rate from Oncological Diseases for the City of 
Moscow in 1988-1989 (per 100,000 in population). 

City of Moscow                         Russian Federation 

Year       Birth       Mortality       Natural        Natural Increase per 
           Rate        Rate            Increase       1,000 in Population 
                                       (per 1,000 
                                       people) 

                                                      Overall       In Cities 

1980       13.6        11.7            +1.9           4.9           5.8 

1985       13.8        12.1            +1.7           5.3           5.2 

1986       14.3        11.5            +2.8           6.8           7.1 

1987       14.2        11.9            +2.3           6.7           6.9 

1988       13.1        12.0            +1.1           5.3           5.5 

1989       11.8        12.4            -0.6           3.9           4.0 

1990       10.5        12.8            -2.3           2.2           2.3 

1991       9.2         12.9            -3.7           0.7           0.6 


<H5>  Attention: Counterfeit! [by A. I. Leontyev] </H5>
  Not only money but even Karavayev therapeutic balms are 
being 
counterfeited. 
  Almost 3 years ago the Public Fund To Promote Research and 
Initiatives of Citizens on Making Man and the Environment 
Healthy was set up in Moscow; it was named after V. V. 
Karavayev, the philosopher and scientist who formulated the 
integrated preventive-therapeutic system. 
  A person can be healthy only when the three basic metabolic 
processes in his system occur normally, Karavayev asserted. They 
include a physiologically normal diet, breathing, and the 
exchange of mental information (thinking). Any deviation in 
these processes has an immediate effect on the acid-base 
equilibrium (ABE) in the blood. Each person can ascertain the 
ABE in his blood by the color of the conjunctiva (the inside 
surface of the lower eyelid). Normally it is bright pink. If 
there is a skew toward the alkaline, it is dark red to beet red. 
With a skew toward acidic, it is pale pink. For most of our 
fellow countrymen, the ABE of the blood is skewed toward acidic 
(acidosis). 
  Karavayev balms, which affect the skin and mucous membranes, 
are one way to restore the balance. They are Vitaon, a butyric 
extract, Auron, a hydrous extract, and Somaton, a 
hydrous-butyric extract, from medicinal plants. There are from 9 
to 13 medicinal herbs in them, including St. John's wort, 
yarrow, mint, calendula, licorice, thyme, and others. 
  The therapeutic qualities of the balms are unique, and 
urologists, stomatologists, gynecologists, gastroenterologists, 
radiologists, and other specialists immediately started to use 
them. 
  The Karavayev Fund developed the technology and organized 
industrial production of the balms. They immediately became 
popular among Muscovites and do not last long on pharmacy 
shelves. 
  Unfortunately, slick operators have recently, at the peak of 
the balms' popularity, begun moving in: counterfeit Karavayev 
balms have appeared, poured into similar bottles and with 
Karavayev labels. But the counterfeits do not have the 
therapeutic effect inherent in the real Karavayev balms. One can 
distinguish the Karavayev balms from the counterfeits only by 
looking at the quality passport on the Karavayev balms. The seal 
and stamp of the Karavayev Fund should be there. 
  So before you lay down your good money, ask the manager of 
the pharmacy to show you the appropriate documents. 

