Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, January 21 (KCNA) -- Kaesong is situated 
160 kilometres south of Pyongyang. 
  Kaesong is attracting tourists because it was the capital of 
the Koryo Dynasty (918-1392), a unified state which existed 
nearly 500 years and it is the home of Koryo Insam (ginseng) and 
a city near the Military Demarcation Line. 
  There are many scenic spots in and around the city. 
  Among them are Pakyon falls, one of the three best water 
falls in Korea, historic remains such as the wall on Mt. Taehung 
and the Taeung hall of the Kwanum temple in its neighbourhood. 
Beautiful mountains, strangely shaped rocks, crystal-clear 
water, fascinating waterfall blend well with the time-honoured 
historic remains, presenting a wonderful beauty and taking the 
fancy of the visitors. 
  Preserved in their original state in the city are more than 
100 important historic monuments belonging to the Koryo Dynasty, 
among them the Koryo Songgyungwan academy, the South gate of 
Kaesong, the Sonjuk bridge, Manwoldae (the site of the royal 
palace), Chomsongdae and the Anhwa temple. 
  Drawing particular attention of the tourists are the tombs 
of 
King Wang Kon, the founder of the Koryo Dynasty, and King 
Kongmin, its 31st king. The tombs show well the excellent grave 
architecture of the Korean nation. 
  Panmunjom that is still a place of showdown between peace 
and 
war belongs to Kaesong municipality. 
  Situated there are the conference room of the military 
armistice commission, the room of Korean armistice talks and the 
hall where the armistice agreement was signed on July 27, 1953 
and the evidences of those days. 
  Visible at Panmunjom is the concrete wall built in the area 
South of the Military Demarcation Line, which divides Korea into 
the North and the South. The wall stretching more than 240 
kilometres from the east to the west across 8 counties divided 
122 villages and cut off 3 highways and upwards of 220 roads 
and railway lines. 
  The visitors to the city can see at first hand and purchase 
the real Koryo insam and its processed goods, widely known as 
the elixir of life. 
  Tourists can board and lodge in Korean style at the national 
hotel. And they can taste Yakbap, ball-shape Kimchi, roasted 
chicken with Kaesong insam inside it and Kaesong insam wine 
peculiar to Kaesong. 
  Foreign tourists spend a good time, guided by the kind 
officials of the international travel company of the DPRK. 

