Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] After the initial fervor, the former DC [Christian 
Democratic Party] members who moved into the right-wing camp are 
now discovering that finding their place between the [Northern] 
League, Forza Italia, and the MSI [Italian Social Movement] is 
no simple matter. They are stepping up efforts to reach an 
accord by asking [Forza Italia leader] Berlusconi to be their 
protector with regard to [League Secretary] Bossi and [National 
Alliance coordinator] Fini. 
  Significantly, the two CCD [Christian Democratic Center] 
coordinators Clemente Mastella and Pierferdinando Casini began 
"crucial talks" with their heavyweight allies at Forza Italia's 
Rome headquarters yesterday. The Christian Democrats met for 
three hours in the morning to discuss the entire political and 
electoral "package" which they intend to submit to the other 
parties. Franco Fausti, from Rome, made no secret of where the 
crux of the matter lies: "It would be a serious political 
error," he said, "to restrict discussions with us to a mere 
matter of constituencies. What we want, above all, is to be 
recognized as a relevant political force. And clearly this 
aspect must be made evident to the voters: This recognition can 
under no circumstances be restricted to a simple pat on the 
back." 
  The political accord with Forza Italia and the Center, [CCD 
coordinator] D'Onofrio added, was established "on the basis of 
the full recognition of our essential role. If this premise is 
lacking, we will obviously not be able to take part in furtjer 
meetings with the other political forces, National Alliance and 
the League. We want to ascertain whether Forza Italia attaches 
primary importance a political alliance with the CCD, in the 
sense of a political party rather than a group of people seeking 
to uphold their own candidacies, preferably in safe 
constituencies. I have no doubt that any if grass-roots leaders 
were to oppose this move, this would be endorsed by its national 
leaders." 
  Meanwhile -- partly as a message to their own allies -- the 
CCD's men are making a show of their strength. Francesco 
D'Onofrio stresses that "in certain areas like Lazio we are 
reaping the benefits of the `erosion' of the Italian Popular 
Party and we expect more people to join." And Alberto Alessi 
swears that in Sicily "60 percent of the votes that previously 
went to the DC are ours." 

