Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by News Research and Commentary Group] </F>
  [Text] Three days of intensive talks between the 
representatives of the PLO headed by Faruq Qaddumi, the head of 
the PLO political bureau, and the Jordanian delegation headed by 
Deputy Prime Minister Sa'id al-Tall in Amman concluded with the 
signing of a joint communique by the two sides yesterday. 
  This communique specifies all the areas of cooperation in 
political, economic, and security matters between Jordan and 
Palestine following the establishment of Palestinian rule under 
the Gaza-Jericho autonomy accord. The implementation of a major 
part of the elements depends on the implementation of the 
Gaza-Jericho accord, which is now rather ambiguous as a result 
of differences between the PLO and Israel. 
  With this accord, Jordan has consolidated its future 
position 
in the autonomous regions. Recently, as a result of an 
agreement between Jordan and Israel, Jordanian banks are seeking 
to resume activities in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
The activities of these banks had been suspended following the 
usurpation of these areas in the six-day Arab-Israeli war in 
1967. Besides, the Jordanian dinar is currently circulating in 
these areas alongside the Zionist regime's currency, the shekel. 
In view of the fact that one-third of Jordanian currency is 
circulating in these areas, Amman does not wish to relinquish 
this sector of its economic activity. 
  The consolidation of the Jordanian dinar and the banking 
activities of this country in the occupied areas of the West 
Bank and the Gaza Strip has been affirmed with the signing of 
this agreement. In conjunction with economic agreements, 
committees on the issues of Jerusalem, refugees, homeless 
persons, security, borders, and social affairs have been 
envisaged in this agreement. PLO-Jordanian talks commenced a few 
days after King Husayn's vehement criticism of 'Arafat and the 
PLO. King Husayn described these talks as the last chance for 
coordination of relations between Palestine and Jordan. 
  Political observers believe that Jordan's insistence on this 
agreement stems from numerous factors, most importantly that 
Jordan is concerned that 'Arafat is giving preference to 
coordination and cooperation with Israel even at the expense of 
adversely affecting cooperation with Jordan. In view of the 
considerable number of Palestinians living in Jordan, which 
exceeds half of the country's population, Jordan is greatly 
affected by these developments. In fact, 'Arafat's regional 
cooperation with Israel undermines Jordan's historical role. 
What is interesting in this matter is the regional rivalry over 
the economic future of autonomous Gaza and Jericho without any 
clear picture of the actual situation. 

