Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Michio Shioda] </F>
  [Text] Washington, 4 Feb -- The Clinton administration is 
sorely perplexed with Japan that does not care for "gaiatsu 
[outside pressure]." Commenting on this, an American newspaper 
recently said the U.S. pressure on Japan is "just like calling 
at a house on fire to notify someone about a PTA [parent-teacher 
association] meeting." 
  In the wake of the enactment of the political reform laws, 
U.S. President Bill Clinton dispatched U.S. Trade Representative 
(USTR) Mickey Kantor and Deputy Assistant to the President 
Bowman Cutter to Tokyo to directly apply pressure on Japan. 
Following Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen's Tokyo visit, this 
was the second time the United States sent minister-level 
special envoys for the framework talks. This should be 
considered as President Clinton's clear signal of his desire for 
a "successful" conclusion of the Japan-U.S. summit talks. 
  As stressed by USTR Kantor, the United States says Japan's 
pump- priming package and market liberalization measures 
guaranteed by numerical targets are indispensable prerequisites 
for the successful conclusion of the summit talks. It appears 
U.S. negotiators have no intention to make concessions on that 
point. 
  On the other hand, Japan is still sticking to its position 
to 
consistently refuse "numerical targets." In connection with the 
pump-priming measures, the Japanese political scene is currently 
in confusion -- the coalition government might be dissolved over 
a proposal for the consumption tax hike. During the 3 February 
public hearing at the Congress, Under Secretary of Commerce 
Jeffrey Garten acknowledged the U.S. Government's view that the 
framework talks are more likely to fail. 
  The U.S. Government intends to finalize its strategy for 
negotiations with Japan after USTR Kantor's return home. Under 
Secretary of Commerce Garten said: "We will consider every 
possible option." 
  U.S. leaders often say "a bad agreement is what we do not 
need." President Clinton is the very person who criticized 
negotiation style of the former Republican administration and 
declared "result- oriented" approach must be applied to 
negotiations with Japan. 
  Yet, "gaiatsu," the United States' conventional weapon for 
negotiations with Japan, is losing its effect since Japan is 
busily occupied with a series of political crises. To say 
nothing of numerical targets, it is uncertain whether Japan can 
prepare the pump-priming package before the summit. While Japan 
has always been yielding to high-handed U.S. negotiators, the 
United States is becoming aware that such an approach may be a 
serious "mistake" this time. 

