Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Letter to the editor from Wirasak Futrakun, Thai ambassador </F>
to Burma] 
  [Text] I have read the editorial column entitled, "Burma 
[Myanmar] dams are clearly a crime against humanity," that 
appeared in THE NATION on Nov 15, 1993 with deep concern that 
your distinguished newspaper might not have been correctly 
informed about the hydroelectric projects along the Thai-Myanmar 
borders. As someone who knows something about these projects, I 
would like to clarify the status of these projects in order to 
allay some of your anxiety as follows: 
  1. It is true that seven projects have been identified for 
possible cooperation between Thailand and Myanmar since 
hydro-power is clean and renewable comparing to other sources of 
energy such as nuclear reactors or coals. It is not true that 
feasibility studies for seven of these projects have already 
been carried out. So far, only one feasibility study has been 
carried out. 
  2. At present, there exists no agreement between Thailand 
and Myanmar regarding the construction of the Salwin 
hydro-electric project. The decision to go ahead with the 
construction of this project must await a feasibility study 
which will take a few years and will include as part and parcel 
of the feasibility study an environmental impact assessment. 
Even now, there exists no agreement between the two countries 
on the implementation of a feasibility study of this project. 
  3. If and when there is a mutual agreement between Thailand 
and Myanmar regarding the Salwin hydroelectric project, the 
aforementioned environmental impact assessment will definitely 
take into consideration any impacts on the peoples living along 
that river, be they Karens, Shans, Paos, Was and many other 
ethnic groups. The dams, should they be built, may not even be 
located in the areas where some of the Karens are living along 
the Thai-Myanmar borders since there are several possible sites 
along this long river. 
  4. The present Government of the Union of Myanmar is just as 
environ mentally conscious as the Thai Government. The decision 
of the Government of the Union of Myanmar to terminate timber 
concessions along the Thai-Myanmar border is based on its 
concern to conserve the forests along the border which happen 
also to be watersheds for several of Thailand's own rivers. 
Although this decision has caused pain to many Thai logging 
companies, the Government of Myanmar also sacrifice revenues of 
more than two hundred million dollars per year in order to 
conserve these forests. We should respect their decision and 
should realize that a government that is willing to sacrifice 
such large revenues given its relatively small foreign exchange 
reserves for the sake of preserving its environment is unlikely 
to agree to any hydroelectric projects without undertaking prior 
environmental impact assessment and securing environmental 
safeguards. 
  5. As for the Karens living along the Thai-Myanmar borders, 
their fate is not limited to being, as THE NATION puts it, 
"forced into making a terrible choice between living in Slorc 
[State Law and Order Restoration Council] concentration camps or 
Thai refugee camps." First of all, there are more Karens living 
in other parts of Myanmar such as the Ayeyarwaddy Division than 
along the Thai-Myanmar border and they are living not in 
"concentration camps" but in towns and villages similar to other 
135 ethnic groups that comprise the people of Myanmar. Second, 
they can enter into negotiations with the Government of the 
Union of Myanmar as other ethnic groups such as the Kachins, the 
Was and the Kokangs have done so successfully in securing their 
autonomous areas and their ways of life. I sincerely hope that 
they will choose this option of negotiations instead of 
prolonging the war that has gone on nearly half a century, and 
has already brought about three or four lost generations of 
Karens, who could have been devoting themselves to develop the 
Karen State in the framework of the Union of Myanmar. 
  It is in Thailand's interest that there be national 
reconciliation with dignity among all the ethnic groups in 
Myanmar because a peaceful and prosperous Myanmar will be the 
best possible neighbour for Thailand. 

