Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Jan Fuelle: "The Half-Life of Disintegration"] </F>
  [Text] The rainbow is beginning to fade. This is perhaps 
the briefest way to characterize the events of recent weeks. The 
Slovak prime minister is increasingly less successful in 
maintaining at least the personnel compactness of the movement, 
if not the solidity of prevailing viewpoints. In addition, many 
of the steps that he undertakes under the constant pressure of 
recent events, and those undertaken by the most faithful 
followers under his leadership, give rise to unpleasant question 
marks at best and to fears at worst. 
  After the elections, Vladimir Meciar was promising sweat and 
tears. Outwardly, this formulation did not sound overly 
optimistic while it was sympathetically modest. Except that in 
the rhetoric of meetings and "10-minute sessions" he more 
frequently speaks of successes and has seen an economic miracle 
where it simply does not exist. Vladimir Meciar has thus gotten 
himself into a very curious situation--he fulfilled that which 
he promised, but is refusing to admit it.... 
  By coloring the sweat and tears a rosy color, we become 
witnesses to many other paradoxes. Those who were formerly 
faithful are being characterized as having little faith and, 
according to the prime minister, no longer have the right to sit 
in parliament. The formerly faithful speak of Vladimir Meciar as 
a person for whom falsehood is a working method. All of this 
mutual sniping tends to convince us primarily of one factor--the 
Slovak prime minister has managed to bring about the most 
tenacious opposition within the movement that he himself 
established and leads to this day. 
  The events of recent days, at a minimum, convinced him of 
yet 
another fact--he cannot even believe all of those who are 
remaining within the movement. Prior to the negotiations at 
Trebisov, Foreign Minister Jozef Moravcik granted an unusually 
candid interview to NARODNA OBRODA. He did not use diplomatic 
language to speak of the events that took place at Zlata Idka, 
and it was as though he had forgotten about his profession on 
the occasion of other sharp and unequivocal formulations. Why 
then is the result of the Trebisov negotiations outwardly again 
so unequivocally in favor of Vladimir Meciar? For example, 
perhaps because during the final balloting, Jozef Moravcik and 
several other members of the movement's leadership were behind 
closed doors. 
  The resistance that is growing in several waves within the 
HZDS [Movement for a Democratic Slovakia] will likely 
definitively surface during the voting on the state budget for 
next year. It can be expected--much as was the case when a vote 
of confidence for Viliam Sobon was being taken--that the HZDS 
delegates will show each other their ballots. Except that this 
method has once before proved not to be viable--precisely during 
the above-mentioned vote--and it is therefore only with 
difficulty that success can be anticipated. 
  Moreover, in voting on the proposed state budget, there is 
more involved. Following the experiences of 1993, the delegates 
will have a more difficult time raising their hands in favor of 
a budget that is submitted at the last moment, one in which the 
opposition does not criticize the deficit, but above all 
criticizes the fact that it is compiled unrealistically. If we 
place the rarely unified opposition and the currently quarreling 
delegate clubs of the HZDS and the SNS [Slovak National Party] 
on one side of the scale, it is only with great difficulty that 
one can believe that the budget for next year will be 
successfully approved. 
  If this were not to succeed, it will only be the logical 
culmination of everything that has occurred during the past 
year. A very poor relationship with the opposition, the gradual 
development of a lack of confidence and suspicion within the 
HZDS parliamentary delegation, an expedient coalition between 
the HZDS and the SNS, "toughened" more by personnel shifts 
rather than by clean relationships and clear goals. 
  Let us return once more to the introduction. After the 
elections, Vladimir Meciar was actually promising sweat and 
tears. He fulfilled his promise, except that he himself would 
rather speak of an economic miracle. In forecasts for the next 
year, he speaks of the fact that we shall halt the downward 
trend and begin to climb upward in 1995. And this is the very 
thing the voter should perceive. Realistic promises, even if 
they are presented with unrepeatable self-confidence, become 
unrealistic. Given today's economic situation, in Slovakia as 
well as throughout the world, we have a long way to go before 
achieving an economic miracle, halting the recession, and seeing 
gradual growth. Professional disseminators of optimism have a 
difficult time today. Realists have become pessimists. 
Pessimists consider realists to be turncoats. 
  We shall find out soon into which categories we shall be 
able 
to place delegates after the voting on the proposed state 
budget. It is not much, but perhaps it will please at least the 
pessimists. 

