Language: <F P=105> Macedonian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by C. Stefanovski: "Good-Neighborliness for Peace </F>
and Stability!"] 
  [Excerpts] Kumanovo, 28 February -- Two days ago a large 
public rally was held in the "Hristian Karpos" military barracks 
to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the formation of the 3d 
Macedonian Elite Group. [passage omitted] 
  After paying an anniversary tribute to the surviving 
fighters, to the members of the Macedonian Army, and to all the 
others, President Gligorov emphasized that on 26 February 1944 
the 3d Macedonian Elite Group was formed in the Kumanovo village 
of Zegljane, consisting of over 320 fighters whose number 
subsequently kept growing. 
  "The National Liberation War of the Macedonian people and 
the 
nationalities living in Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia -- FYROM] during World War II, like all previous 
rebellions and insurrections, was for national liberation and 
was defensive. Macedonia, occupied by various conquerors and 
aspirants to foreign territories over the centuries, sacrificed 
and shared, but never surrendered. Not only in the battles, in 
which around 24,000 soldiers lost their lives just between 1941 
and 1945, but it also won its sovereignty and independence in a 
peaceful, dignified, and democratic way, and there are few such 
countries in the world. The Republic of Macedonia has avoided 
the war that has been raging in our immediate neighborhood for 
two years. It has avoided divisions, and ethnic, inter-ethnic, 
and religious conflicts. It has avoided intervention from 
abroad and the possible expansion of the war onto our 
territories. It is of great importance not only for our state, 
but also for Europe and the international community. 
  The Republic of Macedonia has become a member of the United 
Nations, as well as of other international forums and 
associations. The Republic of Macedonia has been officially 
recognized by many countries, and by members of the European 
Union, which have opened diplomatic offices in our country. 
Because of all this, we are deeply interested in building 
relations and cooperation with all our neighbors on the basis of 
good neighborliness and in the interest of peace and certainly 
stability in the region. This constant determination that we 
have cannot be endangered by any blockades, or political or 
economic pressures, such as the latest measures by the Greek 
Government in closing the borders and the port of Salonika to 
our goods. As we always have in the past, we are resolutely 
opposing all pressures and we shall not allow anybody to deny 
our centuries-long Macedonian name. Macedonia is surviving and 
it will continue to survive," President Kiro Gligorov told a 
rally in Kumanovo celebrating the 50th anniversary of the 
formation of the 3d Macedonian Elite Group. 

