BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The Participation of the North Sulawesi </F>
Business Delegation at the East ASEAN Economic Conference"] 
  [Text] The Indonesians reacted angrily to the plan by the 
University of the Philippines and several non-governmental 
organizations to hold a conference in Manila from 31 May to 1 
June to discuss the East Timor issue. Indonesia became more 
disappointed when, apart from being annoyed by the the plans for 
the conference, a business delegation from North Sulawesi 
Province had to cancel its attendance at the East ASEAN Business 
Conference (EABC) [preceding five words in English] scheduled 
for Davao City at end of this month. 
  According to Ir. [Engineer] J.W.T. Lengkey, chairman of the 
North Sulawesi Regional Chamber of Trade and Industry, the 
provincial trade delegation's decision not to attend the EABC is 
related to Indonesia's opposition to the conference on East 
Timor. Ir. Lengkey said the Davao conference organizing 
committee had been informed of the cancellation by a facsimile 
message on 16 May. 
  We are aware of the current efforts to boost East ASEAN 
cooperation, which involves Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, 
Malaysia, and the Philippines. For this purpose, we are paving 
the way for cooperation in the triangle growth project linking 
South Philippines, North Sulawesi, and Sabah. This is the first 
step toward the creation of the East Economic Growth Area 
(EAGA). Several months ago, Manado, the administrative seat of 
North Sulawesi Province, asked for the East ASEAN economic 
cooperation's permanent secretariat to be based there. 
  The process of promoting the East ASEAN economic cooperation 
is now one step backward as a consequence of the business 
delegation's decision not to attend the EABC conference in Davao 
City, even though trade relations between North Sulawesi and 
Davao remain normal. We fully understand why the trade 
delegation made such a decision, because this is intended to 
protect Indonesia's national interest and national pride. 
  On the other hand, we also have to be careful to not allow 
the political implications of the East Timor issue to slow our 
national development, which must be given priority for strategic 
reasons. The priority given to the economy is not inappropriate. 
Since the emergence of the New Order government, we no longer 
adopt the attitude that "politics commands everything" because 
such an attitude resulted in many development projects abandoned 
without being completed. In this connection, is it not too early 
for the North Sulawesi trade delegation members to cancel their 
attendance at the EAB conference? This is because East Timor, 
which is purely a political issue, has caused an economic 
implication. It is better for us to avoid falling into such a 
political trap. 
  We have to admit that East Timor is a sensitive matter in 
Indonesia and this sensitivity should not therefore be under 
estimated. Foreign Minister Ali Alatas has reminded the 
Philippines about Indonesia's feelings on this matter during a 
meeting with Raul Manglapus, special envoy from Philippine 
President Fidel Ramos, at the Foreign Affairs Department in 
Jakarta on 16 May. The meeting between Ali Alatas and Manglapus 
ended with mutual understanding. 
  We can fully understand that the Fidel Ramos government is 
faced with a dilemma about human rights, democracy, and the 
freedom of speech. Such issues are very sensitive in the 
Philippines since the Marcos government was overthrown. 
Therefore, it is rather difficult for the Philippine Government 
to prevent the Asia-Pacific Conference on East Timor from taking 
place in Manila. The Philippine Government has nothing to do 
with the conference and it is sponsored by a group of 
non-governmental organizations. Manglapus said that he was sent 
to Jakarta by Ramos to give assurances on the Philippines' 
solidarity with Indonesia, a close neighbor and friend in the 
framework of ASEAN. 
  Manglapus also gave assurances that his country's commitment 
and support for the integration of the East Timor territory with 
the Republic of Indonesia has not changed. Ali Alatas, however, 
has reiterated that Indonesia is very disappointed at the 
Philippine Government's inability to prevent non-governmental 
organizations from organizing the conference. This is because a 
conference that discusses political issues will provide a 
platform for East Timorese who remain opposed to the integration 
to launch a political campaign against Indonesia. 

