Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, February 24 (KCNA) -- National seminars 
were held in foreign countries to celebrate the birthday of the 
dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il. 
  The 29th national scientific seminar on the chuche idea was 
sponsored by the National Liaison Council of Japan Societies for 
the Study of the Chuche Idea and the Kochi Prefectural Executive 
Committee for the national seminar in Kochi City, Kochi 
Prefecture, Japan. 
  Fujio Hanawa, chief secretary of the National Liaison 
Council, in his keynote report said that the chuche idea is 
studied in many countries of the world because this idea 
correctly reflects the demands of the people fighting for 
independence and indicates their way ahead. He continued: 
  "Activities to study, disseminate and propagandise the 
chuche 
idea are honorable activities to acquire a scientific outlook on 
the world and realise the people's demand for independence. 
  "The triumph of Korean-style socialism greatly inspires the 
progressive people of the world. We must deepen our study of 
the chuche idea and become workers glorifying the new history of 
mankind." 
  The 14th Portuguese national seminar on the chuche idea was 
held in Lisbon. 
  The chairman of the Portuguese Central Committee for the 
Study of Kimilsongism, made a report, to be followed by speeches 
and congratulatory addresses. 
  They said Comrade Kim Chong-il expounded that man is an 
independent and creative social being with the consciousness of 
independence, thus greatly contributing to the world people's 
struggle to build a new world, independent and peaceful. 
  Letters to President Kim Il-song and Comrade Kim Chong-il 
were adopted at the seminars held in Japan and Portugal. 
  A Finnish national seminar on the history of revolutionary 
activities of Comrade Kim Chong-il was held in Helsinki. 
  Pekka Rantala, chairman of the Finnish National Committee 
for 
the Study of the Chuche Idea, and other speakers dwelt on the 
history of the revolutionary activities of Comrade Kim Chong-il 
and explained his greatness and wise leadership. 
  Messages of greetings to Comrade Kim Chong-il were adopted 
at 
the seminars. 

