Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Xi'an, 8 Oct (XINHUA) -- Last year 1,750MW of 
installed electric power generating capacity was built and put 
into operation in the northwest, and this year more investments 
were made to step up construction of 10 or more key national 
thermal and hydropower projects, signalling a major new stage of 
development for the northwest electric power industry. 
  Tens of thousands of electric power construction workers in 
Shaanxi, Gansu, Ningxia, Qinghai, and Xinjiang are winning the 
battle to tame the wilds of the upper Huang He with a barrage of 
construction sites. Having smoothly diverted the river and 
completed the excavation for the foundation for the 
multi-purpose Lijiaxia hydropower station where four 400MW 
units, the country's largest, will be installed, they began 
pouring the concrete for the 165-meter high dam in April and for 
the main machinery room in July of this year. The units for the 
3,110MW power project are now being installed and will be coming 
on line by year's end. 
  There is a wealth of coal, hydropower and wind power 
resources in the vast territory of the five northwest provinces. 
Since 1986, the northwest has built 11 large and middle-sized 
hydropower stations and thermal power plants, such as the 
Longyangxia and the Jingyuan. By the end of last year, the 
installed capacity of the northwest reached 14,417MW, and annual 
power output reached 60.093 billion kWh, nearly half of which 
was produced by hydropower stations. 
  Hydropower resources development is the main feature of 
electric power construction in the northwest. Hydropower 
stations are being developed at Ankang and Shiquan on the Han 
Jiang in Shaanxi, and at Bikou on the Bailong Jiang in Gansu, 
while Qinghai and Ningxia are joined in an effort to build two 
large-scale cascade hydropower stations on the upper Huang He at 
Longyangxia and Liujiaxia, and three more at Yanluoxia, 
Bapanxia, and Qingtongxia for a total installed capacity of up 
to 3,268MW. The five large-scale reservoirs accompanying these 
stations will irrigate over 16 million mu of agricultural land 
on both sides of the river. The excellent regulating ability of 
these reservoirs has basically solved the flood and ice damage 
problems along the middle and upper reaches of the Huang He, and 
they have clearly improved the ecological environment of the 
northwestern plateau. 
  The latest developmental program worked out by the Northwest 
Power Industry Administrative Bureau and the Northwest 
Hydropower Survey and Design Academy calls for the construction 
of six stations in addition to those already built, and seven 
more large-size stations at Gongbaixia and Laxiwa etc., and 12 
more middle-size cascade stations at Daxia etc., which will 
increase the total installed capacity up to 15,740MW and the 
annual power output up to 57 billion kWh. The schedule has been 
set for construction of 19 new cascade stations on the upper 
Huang He, and it is expected that the development will be 
wrapped up sometime early in the next century. 
  Authorities of the Northwest Power Industry Administrative 
Bureau expect that during the course of these electric power 
construction projects, power generation in the northwest will be 
increased up to 69 billion kWh by 1995. 

