BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jorge Benitez] </F>
  [Text] Asuncion, 31 May (EFE) -- According to official 
sources contacted by EFE, the ambitious integration project 
pursued by Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay will only 
partially achieve the goals initially established for 1995, and 
the formation of a common market will most likely have to wait 
until the year 2001 or 2005. 
  In this regard the final negotiations will begin on 6 June 
in 
Asuncion, the same city where the four countries signed the 
Common Market of the South (Mercosur) treaty in March 1991. 
  The bilateral agreement establishes that there must be a 
free 
zone for the transit of goods, services, and productive elements 
as of 1 January 1995. This involves the removal of customs 
duties and bureaucratic restrictions. The countries are also 
required to implement a Common External Tariff (AEC) and a 
similar trade policy for other nations as of 1 January 1995. 
  In addition, the macroeconomics policies must be coordinated 
and the respective legislations in fiscal, monetary, 
transportation, foreign trade, agriculture, industry, and 
communications areas, among others, must be harmonized. 
  Antonio Felix Lopez, the Paraguayan vice minister for 
international economic relations, told EFE that according to the 
progress achieved in the AEC negotiations and the decisions made 
during the past three years, "now we are aware of the fact that 
Mercosur will actually be established between the years 2001 and 
2005." 
  Lopez believes the implementation of the free trade zone is 
guaranteed "because nothing leads to the belief that the tariff 
removal program will be postponed." The program's penultimate 
tariff removal, before establishing a zero level for customs 
duties on regional products levied by the four partners, by 31 
December at the latest, will be established on 30 June. 
  Nevertheless, the source pointed out the existence of doubts 
on the formation of a "customs union" involving the AEC 
implementation, "which might occur by 1 January 1995, even 
though it is more likely to happen a little later." 
  The source added that macroeconomic coordination represents 
another key factor, "even for the implementation of the free 
trade zone, and even though it includes the AEC, there are other 
additional elements that must still be harmonized." 
  Any possible delays in Mercosur's final goals might be 
cleared on 10 July during a joint meeting between the Common 
Market Council [Consejo del Mercado Comun] (CMC) and the 
presidents of the member states. 
  On 6 June in Asuncion, various Common Market Group [Grupo 
Mercado Comun] (GMC) committees will meet to discuss the 
mechanisms to draw up the AEC exemption lists, and their 
decisions will be submitted to the economy vice ministers, who 
will meet on 17 June in Montevideo. The GMC is the Mercosur's 
executive body. 
  Later, the vice ministers will meet twice again -- probably 
on 28 June and 7 July -- before delivering their recommendations 
to the GMC, whose members will visit the Uruguayan capital on 8 
and 9 July. 
  This series of negotiations meets the requirement of 
reaching 
an agreement as soon as possible on each partner's "sensitive" 
products that will be protected by high tariffs -- ranging 
between 21 and 35 percent -- which will initially be applicable 
until the year 2001. 
  A reduction program must also be established so that these 
tariffs will gradually be reduced until reaching an ideal level 
agreed upon by the four partners. 
  Lopez explained that conversely, the same will happen with 
those products imported from outside the Mercosur zone with paid 
duties that are below those to be established in the decisions 
on the future customs union "because no one wants an abrupt 
transformation, but rather a gradual and convergent 
transformation." 
  Mercosur represents a market of more than 190 million 
consumers in the four member states, whose territories 
altogether represent about 70 percent of South America. 

