BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by King Husayn and U.S. Secretary of State </F>
Warren Christopher with unidentified correspondents in London on 
25 April--recorded, in English; passages in italics in Arabic] 
  [Text] [Husayn] Ladies and gentlemen, I'd like to express 
before you once again joy at having the opportunity to meet a 
very dear and old friend [words indistinct] Christopher here. 
We've had some very, very fruitful, open, and frank discussions 
on a number of issues of mutual interest to us, but also to all 
of you. I'm very happy indeed to have had this chance. I'm sure 
you have questions that you wish to address to the secretary and 
myself, and we'll be more than happy to respond to them. 
  [Christopher] Good morning, or good afternoon, I guess it is 
by now. I did have the honor of meeting with King Husayn again 
here in his residence in London, and I have to say that we've 
had a very constructive discussion of a number of issues. We, 
of course, discussed the peace process and the importance of 
pushing for progress on all four of the tracks, looking toward 
and understanding the great importance of comprehensive peace. 
We talked about resumption on the four bilateral tracks in 
Washington D.C. rather soon after I complete this visit to the 
Middle East. We particularly agreed on the importance of moving 
forward to rapid implementation of the Declaration of Principles 
between the Israelis and the Palestinians after they conclude 
their agreement which we hope will be in the very near future. 
  On a matter of importance, I informed his majesty that, 
subject to some fine tuning, the United States Government will 
support the establishment of a land-based regime for verifying 
enforcement of sanctions against Iraq. The inspections will be 
carried out by a private independent, not-for-profit company of 
international stature and integrity, Lloyds Register of the 
United Kingdom, which will operate at the port of al-'Aqabah. 
The United States is convinced that this new inspection regime 
will be as effective as the MIF [Multinational Interdiction 
Force], effective in guaranteeing that no Iraqi trade will 
transit al-'Aqabah other than transactions which have been 
specifically permitted by the United Nations. Indeed, we 
believe that in some respects land-based inspections will [word 
indistinct] an improvement in our ability to enforce sanctions 
against Iraq. And I want to emphasize that the king and I 
discussed these matters today, and the United States and Jordan 
and our MIF partners are all fully and definitely committed to 
the enforcement of the sanctions. After careful study, I'm glad 
to say we became convinced that this proposal for a new 
inspection regime not only takes into account in response to the 
legitimate concerns that his majesty has indicated to me on a 
prior occasion, but will also make it easier to sustain and 
enhance the sanctions against Iraq. The king and I have agreed 
that Jordan and the United States will cooperate closely 
together with the Sanctions Committee and other interested 
parties to effectuate and establish this new on-shore 
enforcement regime to make it work efficiently and 
expeditiously. Thank you very much, and as the king said, we'll 
be glad to try to respond to questions that you have. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, does this mean now, this new 
development, that you can participate fully in the Middle East 
peace process? And can you tell us a little bit more on how 
will this actually operate on shore? 
  [Husayn] Well, initially I believe it was a Jordanian 
suggestion that we have discussed with our friends over a long 
period of time to try to address the problems that we are facing 
and which caused us in Jordan tremendous damage not only in the 
material sense but also the feeling that Jordan was treated in a 
way that was different to any treatment of other neighbors of 
Iraq. So, the idea that is now adopted is one that we have 
looked at and we have contributed in terms of the recent past, 
and I am very happy indeed that we see eye-to-eye on this 
particular approach. 
  At the same time, I would like to make it very very clear, 
that we are, and have been, adhering to Security Council 
resolutions and implementing them to the best of our ability. 
And as the secretary has mentioned, we are very very deeply 
concerned with the suffering of the Iraqi people as a result of 
this whole situation that Iraq has faced over a number of years. 
And we hope that conditions will permit an end to this 
nightmare as far as the people are concerned before too long. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, did you today agree on a date 
to resume talks with Israel in Washington as part of the 
four-track process? 
  [Husayn] [Words indistinct] secretary's visit to the region 
will determine that probably. But as far as we are concerned, 
no one has, we believe, contributed more to the cause of peace 
or has been committed more to that than we in Jordan. At least, 
we are equal with the best of the flock, [word indistint] ahead 
of them. And It's something that we say with pride and with a 
feeling that we have always realized our responsibilities 
towards future generations. So, the cause of peace is very very 
dear to us. But we have done our best so far and I think we've 
moved, helped move the process along through the various stages 
that have passed. Now, we will look and see what developments 
will occur. Our problem that we raised, I believe, is addressed 
now in a satisfactory manner; that is, that of al-'Aqabah and 
the continuing suffering that we've endured over a period of 
time there. So I hope that the secretary will meet with every 
success during his trip to the area. And as far as peace is 
concerned, it's very dear to us and it's an area where we will 
do whatever we can, whenever we can, to see a comprehensive 
peace in that region that will transform it and give future 
generations a chance to live as they desire. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, would you like to see the 
easing of the naval blockade as the first step towards totally 
lifting the sanctions on Iraq? 
  [Husayn] Definitely, this is a part of it and I hope that we 
will see it end as a mechanism comes into place to provide all 
with a satisfactory solution to the problem. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Christopher, are you aware of any secret 
talks between Israel and Iraq? 
  [Christopher] No. [mild laughter in audience] 
  [Correspondent] Can you tell us when this naval blockade of 
al-'Aqabah could be lifted, and why it wasn't lifted before? 
  [Christopher] Well, we're talking now about the 
Multinational 
Interception Force which had its purpose preventing violations 
of the sanctions regime. I spoke of some fine tuning, and by 
that I mean we do need to have some consultations with the other 
members of that force to find the best way to carry and to 
effect this on-shore regime. I think they'll be very prompt. I 
can't give you a definite date, but I think it will be in the 
very near future that we are able to shift over to the on-shore 
inspection regime. You asked why it was not done in the future 
[as heard] and I think the fact is that the enforcement of the 
sanctions is highly important. It was done efficiently and 
effectively by the Multinational Interception Force, but this, 
as it turned out, was having a very adverse effect here in 
Jordan, and so, we responded to the king's request to try to 
search for an alternative mechanism. We wanted to satisfy 
ourselves that the alternative mechanism could work. We have 
concluded that it will, and we are going to move to put it into 
effect as soon as possible. I think it's a, I believe it is 
common ground between the king and the United States that this 
will not resolve in any attenuation of the sanctions regime 
itself, but indeed as simply an alternative, and perhaps more 
effective way of carrying out the regime. The sanctions 
themselves can only be lifted, in the view of the United States, 
when there is full compliance by Iraq with the United Nations 
Security Council resolutions. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, you recently made some 
comments 
about the status of Jerusalem in the final solution. Did the 
question come up at all and what is Jordan's stand on the final 
status of Jerusalem in an overall peace settlement? 
  [Husayn] I don't think we discussed the final status of 
Jerusalem today, but our friends are aware of it, and that it is 
clear in my mind that there are two facades to the problem; one 
which is political and demographic in terms of Security Council 
Resolution 242, in terms of the rights of the Palestinian 
brethren there, in the hope that Jerusalem will be the symbol 
and the essence of peace between the Israelis and the 
Palestinians. And the other is in regard to the holy places, 
and our hope, and our determination is to do anything we can to 
serve what we believe is the [words indistinct] that small area 
should be that important to all the followers of the three great 
religions, that sovereignty over those holy places should be to 
God only, and that we should encourage the ongoing dialogue 
between the followers of the three monotheistic religions. And 
I hope, eventually, that we will find a status that will make 
Jerusalem once more the essence and the symbol of peace between 
the followers of these three great religions. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty: Jordan has troops in Bosnia. 
Did you discuss the latest developments in Bosnia with the 
secretary? And what is the feeling, what is your own feeling 
about the situation of the Muslims now in Bosnia? 
  [Husayn] It is one of deep anxiety. And we do have troops 
there. And I believe we probably have the second largest 
contingent of UN forces after France there. And we will try our 
very very best to serve the cause of peace and justice for all, 
and alleviate the suffering of people there. I think it is a 
very, very dangerous, difficult moment. And it is a test, not 
only for the goodwill of people in the world, but for the United 
Nations and its future, and for the credibility of the UN, and 
the credibility of the world in terms of its ability to address 
such problems adequately and to arrive at solutions that are 
just and fair. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty: How soon do you expect to see 
a comprehensive peace for the Middle East? 
  [Husayn] I wish it were with me, we would probably progress 
much more rapidly. But, there are many other parties involved. 
However, I believe that what is important at this stage, and I 
am sure that the secretary feels the same way, is that the 
overwhelming majority of people, what I call the peace camp on 
either side of the divide, we have in the recent past seen a 
change. And there was so much enthusiasm for peace, and so much 
hope. It hasn't been dampened by the recent tragic events and 
by the slow pace of progress in attaining a just and 
comprehensive peace. I hope that the secretary's efforts, and 
the efforts of all concerned will see us really address problems 
seriously, and with total commitment and determination. And I 
can't give a timeframe. But, I hope it will be as soon as 
possible. 
  [Correspondent] Excuse me Your Majesty: Two more questions, 
please, ladies and gentlemen. 
  [Correspondent] [as heard] Why didn't the United States work 
hard to make United Nations resolutions work in Bosnia like it 
did with Iraq? 
  [Christopher] You mean where [words indistinct]? 
  [Correspondent] I said in Bosnia. Why did the United 
Nations' resolutions not work like they worked in Iraq? 
  [Christopher] First, let me say that his majesty and I did 
have a good discussion of, with respect to Bosnia today. We 
talked about the recent progress that has been made there in 
connection with Sarajevo. We talked about the federation that 
has been formed between the Croatians and the Muslims in Bosnia, 
both of those being positive steps. The United States is 
working very intensely to try to achieve an end to the killing 
there, and have a settlement that would bring some peace to that 
land. We are also trying very hard to contain the situation 
within Bosnia itself. No one would regard this as a simple 
problem. All would agree that it is extremely complex. The 
United States is devoting great energy to carrying out the 
United Nations resolutions, as well as to trying to seek peace 
there. You know the long list of things the United States has 
done in connection with this largest humanitarian contributor 
out of many other nations, the no-fly zone. The flights bring 
food in the longest airlift in history. Ten million meals have 
been dropped most recently, leading the way to a NATO coalition, 
which first established an ultimatum for Sarajevo, which brought 
some measure of normality to that city, and now leading the way 
to NATO resolution, which seems to be working this morning in 
Gorazde. The United States will continue to devote its efforts 
to achieve some more rational settlement of the situation in 
Bosnia. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty, you threatened not to 
return to the peace negotiations if the siege on the port of 
al-'Aqabah is not lifted. Has there been any new development, 
particularly after your meeting? 
  [Husayn] [Words indistinct] a positive development in 
what was conveyed to me today by the U.S. media that this siege 
is about to be lifted on al-'Aqabah. They accepted what we 
suggested regarding finding another way to address the problem 
in a satisfactory manner. 
  [Correspondent] Will you return to the negotiating 
table with Israel soon? 
  [Husayn] I believe that we offered much, and perhaps 
more than others did, to serve the objective of establishing a 
just and lasting peace in the region. We are committed to doing 
the impossible to reach a just, honorable, lasting, and 
comprehensive peace in the region, which will return the rights 
to their owners, particularly the Palestinian rights on the 
Palestinian national soil, and which will also give the 
generations an opportunity to live under circumstances different 
from those under which we lived. In fact, our commitment has not 
changed. We do not know precisely what the coming phase will be 
in terms of the secretary of state's move in the region. We 
said clearly and frankly that we are suffering from a problem, 
which we have long been suffering from, with regard to the port 
of al-'Aqabah and that this problem should be addressed. It 
seems that this treatment is now [sentence incomplete as 
heard] 
  [Correspondent] What about the harassments made by the 
Israeli prime minister with regard to the Hamas issue? It seems 
that he is interfering in Jordan's internal affairs. There are 
clear harassments. What are your reactions to these 
harassments? 
  [Husayn] Sir, the reaction is simple. In fact, with 
regard to the whole issue, the reply would have been clearer if 
these statements were not made by the Israeli prime minister 
with the foreign minister attending. With much simplicity, we 
are against terrorism; we have always been against terrorism and 
we fought it and paid a dear price with the blood of our sons 
and kinsfolk in Jordan while standing against terrorism from any 
source whatsoever. With regard to the Palestinian dimension, we 
practically ['amaliyan] deal with the PLO, the sole legitimate 
representative of the Palestinian Arab people. We stressed this 
decision in Rabat in 1974. Israel is now negotiating with this 
organization and the Palestinian side regarding the Palestinian 
rights on the Palestinian national soil. We practically do not 
recognize any other organization and will not allow it to carry 
out its activity on Jordanian soil in a way that threatens the 
Palestinian arena with division. Since the beginning of the 
phase of working for peace and since the PLO embarked on its 
steps I have frequently said, cautioned, and appealed to the 
Palestinian brothers to be one hand and one heart in this phase. 
We do not seek division and fragmentation but the closure of 
ranks, and we only deal with the PLO. 
  [Correspondent] Your Majesty the King, are you 
satisfied with the level of coordination with the Arab parties 
in the peace talks? You always said that you wanted these talks 
to be based on [Resolution] 242. Is this resolution still valid 
when we see some Arab parties working alone, for example? Not 
all parties are actually coordinating, and this is what is 
surfacing. 
  [Husayn] Sir, naturally, I will continue to hope that 
coordination will be at the required level. Matters are only 
judged by their results. So far, I do not believe that 
coordination is at the level required by the situation and 
through addressing a cause with such a degree of accuracy and 
seriousness, not only at the level of the parties concerned but 
also with regard to the atmosphere we are experiencing as an 
Arab nation in this crisis. However, we hope that matters will 
improve. 

