Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow February 2 TASS -- NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA on the 
state of affairs in the Viktor Chernomyrdin cabinet: 
  "Observers note the consolidation of the positions of Viktor 
Chernomyrdin who has evolved from a business executive premier 
to a politician-premier. He is reckoned a person capable of 
guaranteeing stability in society, which is so importnat to 
President Boris Yeltsin now. Chernomyrdin is backed, albeit 
with reservations, by the president, the leaders of regions, 
autonomous entities, the Federation Council, by many deputies to 
the State Duma, and by executives of powerful ministries..." 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA carries an interview with security 
Council Secretary Oleg Lobov, who comments on the work of the 
commission for the certification of the leading personnel of 
Russia's Federal Counterintelligence Service. 
  Asked about criteria for the certification of officers, 
Lobov 
said: "A thorough selection is under way on the strength of 
criteria which are applied to counterintelligence service 
personnel, primarily professional ones. 
  "The commission takes into account the ability to get one's 
bearings under new conditions, knowledge, and experience. 
Political views will also be taken into consideration, of 
course to judge to what extent a person seeking a job in the 
newly established service supports the reform policy". 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA on the demographic situation in Russia. 
  The newspaper carries an article headlined "A Demographic 
Disaster Has Become a Reality. According to Even Most 
Optimistic Forecasts, the Russian Population Decrease Will Not 
Come to a Stop Earlier Than 1997". 
  "Owing to discrepancy between mounting mortality and 
decreasing birth rate, the Russian Federation (particularly its 
Russian- populated regions) is clearly defined as a country with 
a population decline. Over the first half of 1993 alone, the 
population of Russians decreased by 352,000, and the process 
rapidly accelerates." 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA on former parliamentary opposition 
leader's hunger strike: 
  "Ilya Konstantinov, leader of the National Salvation Front 
and former leader of the parliamentary opposition, who is kept 
in the Lefortovo Prison, went on a hunger strike on Tuesday. 
  "In the morning of January 31, he wrote an application 
addressed to the investigator and the prosecutor-general, in 
which he pointed out that, firstly, he was arrestted unlawfully 
because he was entitled to parliamentary immunity -- at any 
rate, it remained in effect until the latest elections -- at 
the moment of the arrest -- and, secondly, there are no 
investigation proceedings with regard to Kosntantinov..." 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA carries an interview with Daoud Barakat, 
the ambassador of Palestine to the Russian Federation, who 
touches upon matters concerning the Middle East peace process. 
His opinion is that "Russian interests in the Middle East are 
no longer of as great importance to Russia as they used to be. 
Neverthless Russia is a reliable partner in the Mideast peace 
process". 
  IZVESTIYA on the start of elections to local governemnt 
bodies: 
  "Penza region has been one of the first to hold the 
elections. The outcome is disquieting: nomenclatura (former 
Communist Party and industrial appointees) have gained the upper 
hand. Forty out of 45 seats in the regional legislature have 
been gained by former secretaries of Communist Party committees 
and deputies to the abolished local governing councils, 
administration chiefs and deputy chiefs, and directors of state 
farms and factories." 
  IZVESTIYA on the problem of inflation: 
  "The rate of inflation somewhat slowed down by the end of 
January compared to rather high weekly inflation rates recorded 
at the beginning and the middle of the month. Over the period 
of January 18 to 25, prices went up by 3.4 percent. 
Nevertheless the overall inflation rate since the beginning of 
the year is almost 21 percent" 
  TRUD runs an interview with former Belarusian parliament 
chief Stanislav Shushkevich, who said in particular that those 
who expect a Russian magic wand to save them would "badly 
miscalculate in the end. I view the merger of the monetary 
systems as a forced act but still an act of inter-state 
relations. I do not visualise this merger as surrender of 
statehood, which government officials maintain in their 
market-related helplessness" 
  TRUD carries an interview with Sergey Almazov, director of 
the tax police department. 
  "The results of our work are determined not only by the 
amount of revealed or prevented tax-related offences but also by 
a real income to the state budget," Almazov said. 
  "Last year, together with the state taxation service, we 
spotted and prevented more than 15,000 breaches of tax 
legislation. We revealed more than 1,000 enterprises and 
organisations which were not registered in state taxation 
agencies. It has been estimated that there are 100 roubles of 
revenue per rouble invested by the state in the maintenance of 
tax police". 
  St. Petersburg VEDOMOSTI reports that the Greens Party has 
won a suit in the regional court against the Leningrad region 
administration in a demand for the reversal of the decision to 
allot land for the construction of an Ust Luga merchant seaport. 
  Ilya Baskin, president of the Garant holding company, which 
intends to build a seaport at Ust Luga with the aid of 
investors, believes that the court ruling would not stop the 
cport construction process but will only make it difficult. The 
company has filed an appeal with the Supreme Court of the 
Russian Federation. 

