Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with economist and Yabloko group leader Grigoriy </F>
Yavlinskiy by Antonio Pollio Salimbeni in Davos, Switzerland; 
date not given: "`My Russia Has Reached Rock-Bottom' -- Premier 
Not Up To Job: `He Makes Empty Promises'"] 
  [Text] Grigoriy Yavlinskiy is the leader of Yabloko, which 
means "apple" in Russian, and it is by no mere chance that its 
first two letters are the same as the first two in his surname. 
"I am an economist forced to throw myself into politics," he 
says with a smile. "My party has about 8.5 percent of the vote 
in this country, and it is enough to get my voice heard." 
Yavlinskiy is playing the role of the anti-Chernomyrdin at the 
Davos international economic conference, almost hounding him 
from seminar to news conference and keeping up a constant stream 
of dissent. "It is time we had new faces too in Russia." 
  [Salimbeni] What do you mean, you have no more faith even in 
Fedorov, in Gaydar? 
  [Yavlinskiy] The time has come for them, too, to step aside. 
They both need to take some time out. A new generation of 
political leaders has now emerged both in and outside Moscow, 
who are fully in tune with the needs of a radical reform of the 
Russian economy and Russian society. If it were up to me to 
form a new government, I would have the names ready: Zadornov, 
head of the parliamentary commission on the budget and banking, 
Mikhaylov of the commission on economic policy, Ivanenko of the 
commission on privatization. 
  [Salimbeni] There has just been a government reshuffle, so 
it is unlikely that Yeltsin will make any more changes, don't 
you think? 
  [Yavlinskiy] We shall see. There is no doubt about one 
thing: The individual ministers still count for little in my 
country, and it is the "premier" who gives the orders. That was 
how it was with Gorbachev, how it was with Gaydar, so it's 
hardly likely to be any different with Chernomyrdin. In my 
opinion, Russia has reached rock-bottom with this reshuffle and 
the ejection of Fedorov. The present government is more 
homogeneous than its predecessor; there will be no more 
paralyzing conflicts between the finance minister and the 
minister of agriculture or industry. The problem in this case 
is that homogeneity serves to slow down the reform, or rather 
the counterreform. 
  [Salimbeni] Here in Davos, the prime minister presented 
himself as the valiant defender of "neomonetarist policies" ... 
  [Yavlinskiy] I do not believe him. How many times have his 
inflation forecasts been adjusted? Just ask Fedorov: First it 
was from 3 to 5 percent, then 8 or 9, and now from 15 to 18 
percent. My forecast is 30-percent monthly inflation in early 
spring, with a drastic drop in production. After a period of 
relative stability during the summer, we shall have a black 
autumn: 50 percent a month. It will be nothing short of an 
explosion. 
  [Salimbeni] Will Gerashchenko's central bank continue 
printing money? 
  [Yavlinskiy] Gerashchenko is on slippery ground, and he too 
will somehow have to avoid measures that result in the 
government losing financial control. He will have to choose. 
The problem is that Chernomyrdin is proceeding as he has done 
to date, replacing the liquidity that the industrial and 
military enterprises need. The domestic and foreign markets 
continue to decline, and no one is laying up currency reserves. 
There is a constant drain on capital, and there is no 
stabilization program: $50 billion have vanished to the west 
and Asia. The pattern of relations between the state and 
businesses, the state and producers has now become 
schizophrenic: Either they churn out rubles and distribute them 
or they fail to pay for the products. If you had been a Russian 
farmer full of good intentions at the time of the Gaydar 
government, how would you have reacted if the state had bought 
your grain without paying for it? And do you know why the 
farmers were so trusting as to give their grain to the state? 
They had no choice, they simply would not have been able to 
sell it any other way. Our distribution system is paralyzed or 
run by the Mafia. And they managed not to step up the pace of 
agricultural reform so as not to dismantle the old state trading 
departments. 
  [Salimbeni] After the two years of the Gaydar-Fedorov 
government, the balance was not entirely negative, but the 
"shock therapy" that we heard so much about only lasted for the 
first four months of 1992; nevertheless, it reduced the 
inflation rate and the public deficit. 
  [Yavlinskiy] That is true. Gaydar took pretty firm action 
against inflation, he had clear ideas on reform, he did not want 
to print paper money to meet the needs of the big military and 
industrial structures. But he very soon lost the support of the 
people. However, we were living in different times then. 
Chernomyrdin, today, has no governing strategy in mind. I do 
not even believe he can have seen the story of his own life. 
The only thing he believes in is increasing production at any 
cost, without considering structural issues, those of a new 
balance of power, the currency, the urgent need to give the 
ruble a real market value, to resume monetary relations between 
Russia and the other CIS states on a realistic footing. 
  [Salimbeni] Does Yavlinskiy the reformer also accept the 
idea of the "great ruble"? 
  [Yavlinskiy] First and foremost, both Russia and the other 
states must be aware of what is happening. When the Ukrainian 
Government contacted me to ask advice on monetary policy, I 
asked whether they had any idea of the status of their balance 
of payments, of their domestic and foreign debt. Nothing, they 
knew nothing. A great black hole. My dear friends, we will get 
together some other time, I told them. 
  [Salimbeni] What is your greatest fear at this time? 
  [Yavlinskiy] A raising of nationalist barriers: The 
political orientation and the very mentality of the team of 
ministers have narrowed as regards both financial and 
international policy. The priorities have changed. Look, I 
have no faith even in all this talk about western aid. They 
profess themselves worried, but at heart they know we shall be 
able to get by. What is more, not even I think that western 
capital can solve our problems: Neither the government nor 
Russian society are ready to make use of it. What I would ask 
of the West is massive technical support in drawing up the 
programs for reforming the financial and industrial structures, 
in getting the state to exercise its proper functions. U.S. 
Vice President Gore was wrong to launch the "less shock, more 
therapy" slogan. Of course, it is a fine idea in theory, but, 
as my grandmother would say, it is better to be rich and happy 
than desperate. 

