Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Zhongyu, minister of the State Economic and </F>
Trade Commission: "China's Economy: Review and Prospects"] 
  [Text] With a great feeling of joy, we ring out the old 
year and usher in the new. Looking back on 1993, China's 
economy maintained its rapid rate of development, both the 
social and political situations remained stable, and the living 
standards of the people continued to rise. In addition, 
measures for macroeconomic control adopted by the central 
government achieved tangible returns, featuring healthy national 
economic development. 
  Compared with 1992, China's 1993 GDP rose by 13 percent, 
with 
total industrial output value rising by some 22 percent and 
agricultural output value by 4 percent. Aggregate investments 
in fixed social assets increased by 46 percent and the total 
import and export volume grew by 14 percent. 
  In the coming year it will be important for China to 
maintain 
rapid economic development, and a year crucial to the country's 
efforts to advance the establishment of a socialist market 
economic system. In line with the adoption of reform measures 
related to taxation, finance, investments and planning 
structures, China's national economy will improve further in 
terms of the macro- environment and there will be a golden 
opportunity to introduce new reforms and development. 
Economically speaking, investments in fixed assets will 
continue to rise somewhat. The national economy is expected to 
maintain a rapid rate of development, and a brisk market is 
expected, along with continued steady development. Substantial 
growth will be recorded in imports and exports and the 
introduction of foreign capital. 
<H5>  Looking Back on 1993 </H5>
  China's national economic development in 1993 had the 
following salient features: 
  -- Rapid economic development and distinct phased changes. 
China's GNP for the first half of 1993 represented an increase 
of 14.1 percent over the previous year's period, with industrial 
output up by 25.1 percent, while the output of state-owned 
enterprises rose 10 percent. Economic growth since the central 
government adopted macro-economic control measures has been on a 
progressive downward trend and tangible changes have taken place 
in stages. Compared with figures for the corresponding period 
in 1992, the country's total industrial output from January to 
October 1993 decreased by 1.9 percent. A sector breakdown 
reveals that output of heavy industry dropped by 3 percent, 
light industry by 0.8 percent, output of state-owned enterprises 
by 1.4 percent, collective enterprises by 4.9 percent, rural and 
township firms by 10.2 percent and other industrial enterprises 
by 2.5 percent. In terms of yearly figures, however, overall 
national economy saw a high growth rate in 1993. 
  -- Increase of economic returns. With a high growth rate in 
the industrial economy in 1993, the returns of industrial 
enterprises improved. The marketing rate of their products in 
the first nine months was at 94.48 percent, up 0.7 percentage 
point over the previous year's period. Industrial enterprises 
under state budget contributed 169.26 billion yuan in profits 
and taxes during the first nine months of the year, an increase 
of 38.3 percent. Such enterprises also recorded a 2.08-fold 
increase in profits for the period. However, in overall terms, 
the aggregative index of industrial economic benefits 
experienced a progressive decline. A survey of 360,000 
industrial enterprises at and above the township level which 
practice independent business accounting indicated that their 
aggregative index stood at 96.34 percent for the first six 
months, a fall of 2.97 percentage points compared with the 99.3 
percent figure for the first six months of the year. 
  -- Market development advances. At present, China's consumer 
goods market has initially developed into a network. The 
capital goods market was the subject of active progress and 
standardization was advanced step by step. Financial and stock 
markets experienced brisk development, with technological, 
information and real estate market emerging in certain areas. A 
market pricing system has also taken shape, and relations 
between domestic and international markets have been 
strengthened. 
  Even though China recorded progress in market construction 
during 1993, certain problems surfaced in terms of systems and 
orders. Efforts should be made to strengthen laws and 
regulations for standardizing the market as the mainstay, 
adjusting market relations, maintaining the market order and 
improving the economic environment, while at the same time 
coordinating the relationship between market construction and 
management. 
  -- The quality of economic operations has improved, but a 
comprehensive and coordinated effort must be further 
strengthened. Banking and economic orders took a turn for the 
better in 1993 as a result of the adoption of macroeconomic 
control measures. In addition, a number of prominent 
contradictions and problems related to economic activities were 
mitigated: the supply of major raw materials and social 
resources increased substantially; contradictions between power 
supply and demand were alleviated; and relevant reforms 
developed at an accelerated rate, organizing and coordinating 
activities related to instituting macroeconomic controls, 
measures were taken on the principle of group guidance and in 
accordance with different trades to solve contradictions and 
problems which emerged in the course of economic development. 
However, owing to a lack of experience, it is necessary to 
further explore ways to strengthen the work of making full use 
of macroeconomic control measures to comprehensively coordinate 
economic operations in the process of deepening reform. 
  -- Macroeconomic control achieved tangible returns. As part 
of its effort to solve contradictions and problems which 
resulted from rapid economic growth in the first half of 1993, 
the central government adopted various economic, legal and 
necessary administrative means to achieve order in the banking 
system. Thus far, the efforts have achieved remarkable 
progress. These efforts not only guaranteed healthy national 
economic development during 1993, but also created positive 
conditions for deepening reform of the economic structure in 
1994. 
<H5>  Prospects for 1994 </H5>
  Economic and trade efforts in 1994 will focus on 
enterprises, 
with emphasis on enterprise reform, cultivating new markets, 
undertaking technical renovations and updating enterprise 
management. Economic activities will be subject to 
comprehensive coordination in order to ensure sustained rapid 
and healthy national economic development. 
  -- The pace of reform of state-owned enterprises, especially 
large and medium-sized enterprises, will be accelerated. Wide- 
ranging reforms will include the following: 
  1. Actively establishing a modern enterprise management 
system, which represents the orientation of China's reform in 
state-owned enterprises. 
  2. Continuing to implement the Regulations on Changing the 
Management Mechanisms of State-Owned Industrial Enterprises and 
Regulations On the Supervision and Management of State-owned 
Assets, granting further decision-making power to enterprises in 
terms of management, and strengthening the management over 
preservation and increase of the value of state assets. 
  3. Accelerating readjustment of the organizational 
operations of large enterprises. 
  4. Consolidating the management of the business operations 
of enterprises. In line with the Bankruptcy Law of the People's 
Republic of China, enterprises which have sustained losses for 
an extended period or those whose assets cannot cover debt 
should apply for bankruptcy. Successful enterprises will be 
promoted, while those which fail will be eliminated. 
  5. Adopting practical measures to lighten the unreasonable 
burdens and debt of enterprises. 
  6. Increasing the amount of circulating funds available to 
enterprises through various channels. 
  -- The technological progress of enterprises will be 
vigorously promoted. In 1994, the technological development and 
renovation of enterprises will stress optimizing the structure 
and decreasing energy consumption and production costs, striving 
to reach the goal of rationalized technology and equipment, 
advancing industrial processes and raising the quality of new 
products. 
  -- The pace for market development will be accelerated in 
order to promote the establishment and perfection of the market 
system. The State Economic and Trade Commission will actively 
participate in the construction of a production-factors market 
for the finance, labor, real estate, technology and information 
sectors. Specific plans will be devised to achieve coordinated 
development. Intermediate service organizations for the market 
will be vigorously developed to make full use of their service, 
linking, notary and supervisory functions. Policies and 
measures related to the development of markets for various 
products will be adopted and priority will be given to the 
construction and improvement of bulk agricultural and 
by-products markets, as well and the capital goods market. 
[sentence as published] The State Economic and Trade Commission 
will adopt guidelines for further expanding the sales scope for 
certain commodities and will further activate commodity 
circulation in rural areas. The commission will cooperate with 
related departments in the effort to promote the development of 
chain retail stores and supermarkets throughout the country, and 
develop markets for other commodities. 
  -- The import and export business of enterprises will be 
properly handled and foreign trade developed. Attention will 
focus on the following: 
  1. Actively using foreign capital to accelerate the 
technological renovation of old enterprises. 
  2. Simplifying tax reimbursement procedures regarding export 
commodities. 
  3. Drafting policies and measures designed to upgrade export 
commodities, ensure product quality, and expand exports of 
textiles, machinery, electronic and technology-intensive 
products. The overall structure of export commodities will be 
readjusted. 
  4. Granting enterprises import and export rights in order to 
help solve related problems. 
  5. Stepping up contacts with foreign governments, banks and 
foundations. Efforts will be made to collect and master more 
information related to international cooperation and opening new 
channels to support and guide enterprises in efforts to expand 
cooperation and exchanges with foreign economic entities. 
  6. Conducting research on policies and measures regarding 
China's early re-entry into the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade (GATT). 
  7. Adopting a general program to gradually lower the general 
level of tariffs and rationally readjust the structure of 
tariffs at the earliest possible date. Adjustment measures, 
such as establishing provisional tax rates, will be adopted to 
promote the development of agriculture, industry, and foreign 
trade. 
  -- Conscientious efforts will be made to enact comprehensive 
economic laws and regulations. In a certain sense, a market 
economy is regulated by law. Consequently great attention will 
be directed to strengthening economic laws and regulations. 
Efforts in 1994 will center on enterprise reform and market 
construction, and research and work will be undertaken to draft 
and complete laws and regulations regarding the standardization 
and expansion of the market, readjusting the trade relationships 
of markets, maintaining the market order, establishing 
macroeconomic controls and improving the economic environment. 
The establishment of economic laws and regulations will be 
combined with structural reform and economic development. 
Attempts will be made to explore new effective ways to use laws 
and regulations to ensure the comprehensive coordination of the 
economy. 
  -- Great effort will also be extended to strengthening and 
improving macroeconomic controls and regulations, and 
coordinating the economic operations of various sectors. 
Relationships between various sectors and industries of the 
national economy will be given full consideration, and emphasis 
will be placed on coordinating the relationship between 
production and circulation, internal and external trade, and 
markets and enterprises 

