Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, January 24 (KCNA) -- The North side 
headquarters of the National Alliance for the Country's 
Reunification (Pomminnyon) will not tolerate any legal and 
institutional mechanism obstructive to great national unity and 
any move of the anti-reunification forces, declared its 
chairman, Paek In-chun, in a statement today vowing to reunify 
the country in the 1990s without fail. 
  The statement was issued on the lapse of three years since 
the inauguration of the North side headquarters of Pomminnyon. 
  Paek In-chun recalled that since the formation of 
Pomminnyon, 
its organisations had vigorously waged a joint struggle, 
contributing to strengthening the internal forces of national 
reunification and inciting the nation's desire for reunification 
at home and abroad. 
  The great leader President Kim Il-song in his New Year 
address called on all Koreans at home and abroad to open a new 
phase for national reunification, the chairman noted, and [words 
indistinct] of the North side headquarters of Pomminnyon to make 
this year "A year of great national unity" and a year of a new 
phase for national reunification so that the country may 
certainly be reunified in the 1990s. 
  He said: 
  "The present rulers of South Korea are increasing tensions 
between the North and the South, while scheming to continue the 
`Team Spirit' joint military exercises and other large-scale 
manoeuvres. And they are further intensifying the suppression 
of the pro-reunification patriotic forces of South Korea by 
invoking the `National Security Law' which defines fellow 
countrymen in the North as the `enemy.' 
  "The Kim Yong-sam group seeking confrontation and division 
against the fellow countrymen's desire for reunification far 
outdistances the former military dictators in craftiness and 
viciousness. 
  "We, regarding those who antagonize Pomminnyon, the mother 
body of great national unity, and try to disintegrate and outlaw 
it as the enemy of the nation who obstructs the reunification of 
the country and the unity of the nation, will staunchly fight to 
get rid of them. 
  "We strongly demand that the present South Korean 
authorities, who have persistently rejected the formation of the 
South side headquarters of Pomminnyon, promptly stop their 
perfidious acts and positively ensure Pomminnyon's patriotic 
activities for reunification." 
  Paek In-chun called on the 70 million fellow countrymen in 
the North, South and overseas to join Pomminnyon in stepping up 
the grand march towards reunification, under the banner of great 
national unity. 

