SUMMARY:      Press articles written last year by members of South 
Korea's military and civilian S and T establishments call for a 
"coordinated program" to develop "dual-use" technologies that can be 
used to manufacture highly advanced weapons "if the need arises." 
Although unequivocal evidence that such a policy is being adopted 
has not been observed in Seoul media reporting, articles on several 
new technologies and equipment types that qualify as "dual-use" by 
standard criteria have appeared over the past few months in ROK and 
Japanese publications.  Seoul press sources note that any efforts by 
the ROK to acquire advanced weapons components or technology would 
be enhanced by S and T agreements recently concluded with Russia, 
China, and Israel. 

   Dual-Use Technology for an 'Uncertain' Future 

   In the past year, several articles have appeared in the ROK press 
urging the government to support "dual-use" technology as a hedge 
against an "uncertain" future.  For example, the December 1992 issue 
of Seoul KUKBANG KWA KISUL argued that changes in the world's 
geopolitical relationships have made it impossible for South Korea 
to defend itself by relying on foreign equipment and technology. 
Not only are traditional suppliers reluctant to transfer technology, 
the defense requirements themselves are changing, forcing South 
Korea to "consider medium and long-term plans to secure the military 
power to deal with countries on the periphery through S and T 
development for national defense and qualitatively superior weapons 
systems."  The journal claimed that the key to both problems lies in 
"strengthening the bonds" between government and the defense 
industry, and for South Korea to use its own technology to develop 
sophisticated independent weapons systems. 

   The same journal in its May 1993 issue featured an article by a 
nuclear engineer from South Korea's Agency for Defense Development 
(ADD) on the need to apply nuclear technology to national defense. 
The article maintained that the distinction between civilian and 
military use of nuclear technology is not clear, and that products 
with defense applications can be "derived" by making improvements in 
how the ROK uses nuclear power.  KUKBANG KWA KISUL highlighted the 
ADD engineer's remark that "we must vigorously invest right now in 
research and development of the nuclear power industry, so that we 
can make use of it under new conditions if the situation changes. 
We have to maintain at least a technical capability." 

   Similarly, a senior researcher at the Korea Institute of Science 
and Technology's (KIST's) Policy Management Research Institute wrote 
in the July 1993 issue of KUKBANG KWA KISUL that "South Korea needs 
to establish a new policy that can achieve the two national goals of 
economic development and national security."  What is needed, 
according to the KIST researcher, is a "coordinated program" to 
develop "dual-use technology" with both civilian and military 
applications, that will enable South Korea to "deal with changes as 
the need arises."  The 4 August 1993 CHUGAN MAEGYONG made the same 
basic plea for "dual technologies," developed through coordination 
between the ROK's Defense Ministry, the Ministry of Trade, Industry, 
and Energy (MOTIE), and the Ministry of Science and Technology 
(MOST).  In the 30 August 1993 MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS), the head 
of the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 
which was directly responsible for two of the dual-use projects 
listed below, wrote that South Korea's present task is to create an 
independent national defense based on high technology appropriate to 
the post-cold war era and developed through greater cooperation 
between the military and industrial sectors. 

   New Technology, Equipment With Potential Weapons Applications 

   Recent ROK and Japanese media reports describe some commercial 
technologies developed or acquired by South Korean companies and 
government institutes, which conceivably could be used to design or 
manufacture highly advanced weapons.  For some of these 
technologies, the potential military applications are obvious; 
others are more generic, with possible uses in a number of high-tech 
weapons programs.  All qualify by widely accepted criteria as "dual- 
use" in the sense described above. 

   1. An "electron beam welder" developed jointly by the Korea 
Institute of Machinery and Metals (KIMM) and Korea Ion.  The device 
reportedly cost 200 million won ($250,000) to develop, and can be 
used for precision welding and to join metals of different types (23 
October 1993 MKS). 

   2. An "ion nitriding electric furnace" and "numerical-controlled 
gas cutting machinery" by the same institute (29 December 1993 
CHUGAN MAEGYONG).  Of the 18 dedicated institutes within MOST, 
KIMM's 1994 S and T budget at $70 million is the third largest after 
the Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute and the Nuclear 
Environment Management Center (1 January 1994 MKS).  According to 
KIMM's director, the Taedok-based institute plans to "greatly 
increase its testing and evaluation functions for advanced machinery 
and equipment and expand related activities" in 1994 (7 January 1994 
MKS). 

   3. An "ultra-high precision (nanometer scale) lathe" developed by 
KAIST, also located at Taedok (29 December 1993 CHUGAN MAEGYONG). 

   4. High-speed "image processing equipment" to observe "how 
molecules of a material undergoing a disintegrating reaction are 
spatially distributed." Developed by a team from KAIST's chemical 
research laboratory, the equipment uses a high-energy charge coupled 
device for "direct observation of the size and form of the 
disintegrating material's distribution in three dimensions."  Only 
three institutions in the world reportedly have this equipment: 
Sandia Labs, and two universities in the United States and Japan (22 
January 1994 MKS). 

   5. Manufacturing technology for instruments able to measure high 
pressure, from an (unidentified) Russian research institute.  The 
item is one of several technologies reportedly being obtained by ROK 
firms through R and D contracts with Russia, according to the 11 
September 1993 HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN (HKS). 

   6. A high-energy capacitor able to withstand severe shock, 
extreme temperatures, and to operate in a vacuum, developed by 
Daewoo (9 June 1993 CHUGAN MAEGYONG). 

   7. Technology for a "solid fuel rocket engine" able to lift a 50- 
70 kg payload to an altitude of 80-90 km, by the Korea Aerospace 
Research Institute (KARl).  Projected performance doubles that 
achieved by South Korea's indigenous KSR-42Os rockets launched in 
1993, and gives the ROK the ability to develop a "rocket booster 
that meets South Korea's particular needs" (29 December 1993 CHUGAN 
MAEGYONG). 

   8. A "small gas turbine" to be developed by Korea Air for 
commercial use in generating electricity and as a prototype to 
develop related technology "for such things as aircraft engines" (5 
January 1994 MKS).  KIMM's director also stated, without mentioning 
the Korea Air project, that his institute would "indigenize" a 
"small gas turbine engine" (7 January 1994 MKS). 

   9. An "inertial navigation system" (INS) by Korea Air.  The 
company plans to acquire aviation electronics technology through a 
buyout of Litton Korea, "a firm which specializes in INS equipment" 
(5 January 1994 MKS). 

   10. A pilotless helicopter used to spread seeds and agricultural 
chemicals, being developed by Daewoo Heavy Industries in cooperation 
with Russian scientists (April 1993 SIN TONGA, 5 April 1993 CHOSON 
ILBO). 

   11. A "Cray model C916 supercomputer," reportedly the company's 
most powerful, for KIST's Systems Engineering Research Institute. 
The computer reportedly will be used for "structural analysis and 
fluid mechanics simulations, weather forecasting, and researching 
environmental problems" (30 June 1993 Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO). 

   12. A "computer software research center" established in Moscow 
by Samsung Electronics.  Samsung, a major defense contractor, hopes 
to take advantage of the "large number of high-level military 
software development technicians who were trained in the former 
Soviet Union," and plans to become involved in joint projects with 
Russian Government research agencies (29 November 1993 Tokyo NIKKEI 
SANGYO). 

   Foreign S and T Agreements Conducive to Weapons Technology 
Transfer 

   South Korean efforts to acquire dual-use technologies presumably 
would be enhanced by S and T agreements recently signed with three 
major arms and arms technology exporting countries--Russia, China, 
and Israel--a fact duly noted in the ROK press.  Russia in 
particular has attracted South Korean media attention by its 
reported offers to barter advanced weapons (24 January 1994 CHUNGANG 
ILBO) and "enriched uranium" (25 January 1994 YONHAP) to repay its 
ROK debts.  Infrastructure is already in place for acquiring other 
types of sophisticated Russian technology.  In addition to various 
"S and T cooperative centers" and "industrial cooperation 
information centers" established in Russia during the past year, the 
ROK Government operates at least two organizations aimed at 
recruiting Russian scientists and transferring advanced technology, 
through MOST (13 October 1993 HKS) and MOTIE (9 November 1993 MKS). 

   Arrangements to acquire Russian aerospace technology have been 
concluded by South Korea's three largest defense contractors, Daewoo 
Heavy Industries (8 January 1993 MKS), Samsung Aerospace (1 August 
1993 HKS), and Hyundai--which reportedly sent some 30 PhD's to 
Russia to study "satellite technology" (31 July 1993 HKS), and has a 
joint venture with the aerospace firm Yakolev (5 November 1993 
CHUNGANG ILBO).  A 24 December 1992 CHUGAN CHOSON report describes 
how an unnamed South Korean company was able to bribe a Russian 
technician to hand over electronics technology that could not be 
obtained through formal channels; the incident suggests another 
route through which Russian weapons technology could be transferred. 

   On 5 November 1993, YONHAP reported some details of an S and T 
agreement signed by China and the ROK on 20 September 1993, 
including joint development of a "multipurpose satellite, aircraft 
design and testing technology, and medical lasers."  The satellite 
project was interpreted by YONHAP as "paving the way for a Sino- 
Korean partnership in the defense iridustry."  Citing "diplomatic 
sources," YONHAP also noted that "cooperation in nuclear energy may 
be not only in the reactor sector but could possibly develop into 
closer and wider partnership in the field."  In addition, the 5 
October 1993 CHOSON ILBO reported an agreement with Israel for 
scientific cooperation on several levels.  The paper observed that 
Israel, which is shifting much of its state-funded research from 
military to civilian projects, is entering the agreement partly out 
of "concern about employment for its high-level S and T personnel in 
defense-related industries." 

   (Author:  Hannas.  Question and/or comments, please call Chief, 
Southeast Asia/Korea Branch at (703) 733-6522) 
EAG/25February1994/MILF/TECHTF/TACF/TNDF/Asia Division 
CB 25/2104z Feb 

