Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Leader Iddih Hopes Clinton-al-Asad </F>
Meeting Would Produce a Solution for Lebanon"] 
  [Text] Paris, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- Lebanese National Bloc 
leader Raymond Iddih yesterday wondered: "Will the 
Clinton-al-Asad meeting produce the solution"...for Lebanon? 
The Lebanese opposition leader living in France believes that 
Lebanon should be "the last Arab state to sign a peace agreement 
with Israel." 
  On the occasion of the upcoming U.S.-Syrian summit between 
Presidents Bill Clinton and Hafiz al-Asad in Geneva, Iddih made 
a statement in which he reviewed Lebanon's contemporary history 
and realities. He said that on 22 November 1943 Lebanon got its 
independence, its democratic parliamentary system, its political 
and economic liberal system, its freedom of the press, and its 
Islamic-Christian coexistence. These qualities upset and are 
still upsetting some parties, especially Israel since 1948. He 
added: Israel covets southern Lebanon up to al-Litani river 
because it wants to exploit the river's water. 
  On 15 March 1978 Israel suddenly invaded Lebanon up to 
al-Litani without any acceptable justification. On 19 March the 
UN Security Council passed Resolution 425 "calling (on Israel) 
to withdraw its forces from all Lebanese territory without 
delay." On 6 June 1982 Israel invaded Lebanon for a second time 
on feeble pretexts. Its army which, under the agreement with 
U.S. Secretary of State Alexander Haig, should not have advanced 
more than 40 km, reached Beirut and bombarded it from land, sea, 
and air. 
  The Security Council quickly passed Resolution 509 
"insisting 
that Israel immediately and unconditionally withdraw all its 
military forces from Lebanon up to Lebanon's internationally 
recognized borders." Despite these two UN Security Council 
resolutions, the Israeli Army still occupies southern Lebanon 
and that has resulted in armed resistance. 
  After calling for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from 
Lebanon, Iddih said: We must not forget that Lebanon is the 
only Arab state with a Christian president. That is why Lebanon 
should be the last Arab state to sign a peace agreement with 
Israel. Until that happens, Lebanese-Israeli relations should 
only be governed by the armistice agreement signed by the two 
countries on 23 March 1949, which is still valid. 
  Finally, Israel has nothing to fear regarding its security. 
It is the only nuclear power in the region. Its army is the 
strongest and best trained, and it is far superior in that it 
manufactures aircraft, tanks, and arms which it sells abroad. 
  Furthermore, it enjoys the political, financial, and 
military 
support of the United States. That is what has enabled it to 
annex territories that do not belong to it, particularly 
Jerusalem and the Golan and, perhaps some day, southern Lebanon. 
He wondered: In the face of this reality, what could be done 
for the liberation of Lebanon? Will the upcoming 
Clinton-al-Asad meeting find the solution? 

