Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed "froe": "Euro-Spacemen Short of Funds"] </F>
  [Text] Bonn -- In redefining its space program, the 
European Space Agency, ESA, is counting on cooperation with the 
United States and Russia for cost reasons. At the ESA council 
meeting held in Paris on Monday [31 January], the funding of 
manned space travel could, however, not be resolved. This was 
reported by Research Minister Paul Krueger at a news conference 
in Bonn on Tuesday. 
  According to the research minister, studies and preliminary 
research work on the European contribution to the international 
space station -- working title Columbus -- are to be carried out 
by the end of 1995. After that date, a decision shall be made 
on whether Colombus is to consist of any further elements beside 
a laboratory section that can be docked with the station. By 
June 1994, ESA wants to present proposals on how ESA can 
participate in the actual construction of the space station. 
The United States and Russia agreed on a large-scale 
cooperation last year. 
  In addition, a new program for manned and unmanned 
transportation systems (MTSP) is to be worked out by the end of 
1995. MTSP is to replace the ambitious Hermes project, which 
was mainly favored by France and was canceled for cost reasons 
last year. The new four-item program includes an "intelligent 
top stage" for the efficient Ariane-5 booster for approaching 
the space station automatically, and a transport capsule, which 
is also to be transported by Ariane. Krueger said Germany will 
try to become coordinator of the intelligent top stage, and 
France wants to take the leading role with the capsule. 
  Funding has remained a controversial issue during the ESA 
meeting. The ESA financial system is based on calculation units 
that are fixed for one year. Due to changes in the ECU exchange 
rate, countries with devalued currencies have to make extra 
payments to ESA, while countries with upvalued currencies can 
expect refunds. Germany has suggested to introduce the ECU as 
calculation unit from 1 January 1997. It is expected that a 
compromise on the funding system will be reached on 15 February. 
According to ESA, some 540 million German marks [DM] have been 
allocated to Columbus during 1995/95, DM414 million to MTSP. 
Krueger emphasized that the envisaged costs for both programs 
will now only be some 40 percent of the costs estimated at the 
ESA meeting at the end of 1992. He said the German share in the 
programs will be DM120 million in 1994, and DM140 million in 
1995. For the first time, Krueger lowered the ESA share in the 
1994 research budget by DM62 million to DM1.092 trillion. 
  ESA does not seem to be planning any cuts in its utilization 
programs, which includes the environment research satellite 
Envisat. Two new meteorological observation satellites are to be 
financed by the Federal Transportation Ministry. This means 
orders worth DM400 million for German industry. 
  Josef Vosen, the Social Democratic Party of Germany research 
expert, said ESA is claiming insolvency. The financial problems 
of the devalued currency countries will mean higher 
contributions for Bonn, he said. 

