BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 11 KYODO -- A former publisher of an 
economic magazine admitted Monday [11 April] he had been 
involved in investing funds belonging to Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa but denied he had used them on the financial black 
market. 
  Yusei Kuwata, 60, said in an interview with Kyodo News 
Service, "as I heard (Hosokawa) needed 500 million yen to form a 
faction in the future, I cooperated in investment of his funds." 
  He denied any illegality in his use of the funds. 
  Hosokawa on Friday abruptly announced he would step down, 
citing a fresh questionable financial deal as one of the reasons 
for his decision to resign. 
  Kuwata said Hosokawa and he played golf together in Shiga 
Prefecture on a day in 1981 when the premier was a Liberal 
Democratic Party member of the House of Councillors. Kuwata was 
introduced to Kiyoshi Sagawa, founder of the Sagawa Kyubin 
trucking group, at the center of a money-and-mob scandal, in 
Hosokawa's residence in Kyoto that night. 
  On a train returning to Tokyo, Kuwata proposed to Hosokawa 
cooperating in raising funds and Hosokawa said 500 million yen 
was necessary to form a faction. 
  Kuwata received funds through Masatoshi Miyama, Hosokawa's 
secretary, one month later and promised payment of interest of 
at least 12 percent a year. He invested the funds in stocks and 
convertible bonds and made a profit of 20 million yen until 
1985, Kuwata said. 
  In 1991, Kuwata received 30 million yen from Hosokawa and 
invested the money in stocks but the money became unrecoverable, 
he said. 
  Hosokawa told a news conference Friday, "From 1981 and for 
several years, my office let a certain person use the funds, and 
he gained personal profit from it. That person is an old 
personal friend of mine." 
  "He specifically requested that money be entrusted to him, 
because he would manage it for profit. But there were some 
problems in the process of the management of that particular 
fund," Hosokawa continued. 
  He declined, however, to elaborate on the specifics of the 
new suspicions, saying an investigation by his political office 
was still under way. 
  Kuwata said he did not invest the funds on the black market. 
  Kuwata advised Hosokawa to buy shares in Nippon Telegraph 
and 
Telephone Corp. (NTT) in August 1987 when Hosokawa was Kumamoto 
governor. NTT was then planning to go private by selling its 
shares. 
  Kuwata introduced Shuzo Fujiki, an investment consultant and 
president of a Tokyo-based consulting firm, to Miyama. 
  Three hundred NTT shares were brought in the name of 
Hosokawa's father-in-law, Shohei Ueda. 
  Hosokawa said at the news conference, "Concerning NTT 
shares, 
I have repeatedly mentioned that my father-in-law personally 
purchased them, that my former secretary was involved in that, 
and that the returns for that service, at least part of it, were 
made to the personal accounts of my father-in-law." 
  Fujiki, however, has said the NTT share transaction was 
Hosokawa's. 

