BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nigel Collard and Tony Patey: "EU Targets South </F>
Africa"] 
  [Text] High-level trade and finance delegations from 
Brussels and Britain are going to South Africa in the first 
official visits since the Nelson Mandela government came to 
power. 
  They aim to put European Union [EU] trading nations firmly 
in 
the front line in the threecornered fight between Europe, the 
United States and the Far East over access to the resources-rich 
nation. 
  The EU delegation will be made up of representatives from 
several major directorates-general and will be in South Africa 
from 27 June to 2 July. Trade, investment and tariffs are to be 
discussed in depth as part of a comprehensive package earlier 
agreed by the Council of Ministers. 
  Britain's trade and economics group, which will be at least 
60-strong, will be headed by board of trade president Michael 
Heseltine and is believed to be one of the largest delegations 
to leave the UK this year. 
  During the visit -- from 10 to 15 July -- the British group 
will meet business people and politician; in Johannesburg, 
Durban and Cape Town. Britain has already pledged a $150 
million loan the largest amount from any European country. 
  The EU delegation will arrive in Cape Town for talks with 
Trevor Manuel, South Africa's minister for trade and industry 
and other senior ministers, before going on to Pretoria and 
Johannesburg. Apart from wider issues, the talks are crucial 
because South Africa's status as a trading partner and as a 
suitable investment prospect has to be clarified. 
  If firm future trade links are to be set up, a bilateral 
agreement between Brussels and Pretoria is seen as a matter of 
urgency. So far, the EU has left it to member states to enter 
into investment protection, double taxation and bilateral trade 
agreements with South Africa, but has now accelerated the pace 
at which it feels agreement must be reached with South Africa in 
the face of American initiatives. 
  With the total U.S. commitment of $420m in loans towards 
economic and social regeneration in South Africa both from 
public and private sectors, the pledges of $179m this year from 
the EU and member countries apart from the UK may look small in 
comparison. However, EU contributions will be grants, without 
strings attached. 
  In April, the EU foreign affairs council finalised its 
policy 
on a joint trade and aid measures programme and following the 
South African elections, this is a priority issue on the 
delegation menu. 
  The visit is seen as the first of a two-phase thrust to 
establish future relations. The second phase will begin with a 
conference in the EU with delegates from all southern African 
countries. Mandela has already agreed in principle to the 
creation of a Southern African Economic Community and this will 
be actively pursued. 
  The EU wants to prepare the way for other areas of 
cooperation in education and training, industry and commerce, 
telecommunications science and technology. 

