Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The National Environment committee yesterday 
approved the Pasak Dam project, saying the environmental impact 
would be small compared with the benefits it would bring. 
  "The committee has analyzed every aspect, both negative 
impacts and advantages, and concluded that it should go ahead," 
Prime Minister Chuan Likphai, chairman of the committee, said. 
  The Pasak Dam project was initiated by His Majesty the King 
in 1989, but was shelved following public resistance. The 
project was resurrected in December when the King said in his 
birthday address that he wished to see the dam completed in time 
for his 72nd birthday in 1999. 
  The Irrigation Department has said it will take four years 
to 
build the dam, to be located at tambon Nong Bua, in Lop Buri's 
Phatthana Nikhom district. 
  The total cost of the project is estimated at Bt [baht] l4 
billion, with the dam itself costing about Bt4 billion. When 
complete, it will hold 785 million cubic metres of water. 
  Chuan said 70 percent of the allocated budget will be used 
for land expropriation, and compensation. He dismissed 
speculation that unscrupulous businessmen might try to cream off 
some of the money. "We have repeatedly emphasized that the 
benefits will go to the villagers," he insisted. 
  He said that conservationists need not to be worried about 
the negative effects on the environment, since the relevant 
government agencies would concern themselves with forestation. 
  Science, Environment and Technology Minister Phisan 
Munlasatsathon said that the ministry is prepared to resettle 
people and animals from the site. Villagers would be relocated 
to five reserved deteriorating forests. 
  Government Spokesman Aphisit Wetchachiwa said that 
government 
would spend Bt9.9 billion to help in the resettlement programme 
and to find measures to cushion the environment impact. 
  About 120,000 rai of farmland and an estimated 17,663 rai of 
deteriorating forest will be flooded by the dam lake. 

