Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Kiev UNIAR in Ukrainian at 1730 GMT on 3 
February carries a 350-word Ukraine Supreme Council resolution 
on the START I Treaty as follows: 
  "The Supreme Council of Ukraine has resolved:" 
  "1. Taking into account the specific measures taken by the 
president and Government of Ukraine regarding the implementation 
of the provisions of the Supreme Council resolution dated 18 
November 1993, and the steps to meet Ukraine half-way on the 
part of the United States and Russia, in order to remove the 
reservations regarding the article of the Protocol to the START 
Treaty signed in Lisbon on 23 May 1992." 
  "2. To charge the Government of Ukraine with carrying out 
the exchange of instruments of ratification of the START Treaty. 
  "3. To accede to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty dated 
1 July 1968, which will hereafter be termed the Treaty, as a 
state not owning nuclear weapons, with the following statement:" 
  "(1) Ukraine owns the components of the nuclear weapons that 
it inherited from the former USSR, and after the weapons have 
been dismantled and destroyed under its control, and in 
accordance with procedures that will rule out the possibility of 
reusing these weapons' components for the original purpose, 
Ukraine intends to use the material extracted from them 
exclusively for civilian purposes, in particular as fuel for 
Ukrainian AES [nuclear electric power station], or receive 
compensation for them;" 
  "(2) The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty [NPT] does not 
fully cover the unique situation that arose as a result of the 
disintegration of the USSR as a nuclear state. The presence of 
nuclear weapons on the territory of Ukraine until they are 
eliminated entirely, as well as appropriate activity to 
maintain, service, and eliminate them, does not contravene the 
provisions of Articles 1 and 2 of the Treaty." 
  "(3) Ukraine will hold talks with the International Atomic 
Energy Agency with the aim of concluding agreements regarding 
the guarantees envisaged by the Treaty." 
  "(4) The violation of the territorial integrity or 
inviolability of Ukraine's borders on the part of any nuclear 
state will be viewed by Ukraine as a violation of the Treaty." 
  Kiev UNIAR in Ukrainian at 1900 GMT on 3 February then 
carried the following service message: 
  "The news agency RESPUBLIKA [UNIAR] apologizes for the 
incorrect information about the approval by the Ukrainian 
Supreme Council of the resolution on the fulfilment by Ukraine's 
president of the Supreme Council of Ukraine recommendations made 
during the ratification of the START I Treaty. The Supreme 
Council approved a resolution of two items:" 
  "1. Taking into account the specific measures taken by the 
president and Government of Ukraine regarding the implementation 
of the provisions of the Supreme Council resolution dated 18 
November 1993, and the steps to meet Ukraine half-way on the 
part of the United States and Russia, in order to remove the 
reservations regarding article of the Protocol to the START 
Treaty signed in Lisbon on 23 May 1992." 
  "2. To charge the Government of Ukraine with carrying out 
the exchange of instruments of ratification of the START Treaty. 
With this aim to step up the activity of the Government on 
concluding specific international agreements stemming from the 
reservations of the Supreme Council resolution on the 
ratification of the START I Treaty." 
  "Item 3 on Ukraine's accession to the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty was excluded from the resolution due to 
the fact that it was not discussed in Parliament. Deputy Sergey 
Golovatyy made a remark to the effect that Ukraine could not 
announce itself simultaneously a nuclear state while acceding to 
START I and a non-nuclear state while participating in the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Issues of compensation for 
the nuclear weapon components were touched upon with regard to 
the difference in prices for the fuel uranium on the U.S. 
internal and external market, etc. Deputies Sergey Golovatyy, 
Tetyana Yakheyeva, and Sergey Semenets proposed to discuss this 
in the standing commissions, and to then submit it for the 
consideration of the Supreme Council. After this the issue on 
accession to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty will be 
solved." 

