Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Managua, 12 Feb (NOTIMEX) -- Elvin Talavera, also 
known as "Chacalin," the rebel chief of the 3-80 Northern Front, 
has said he is willing to disarm his forces under the condition 
personal security guarantees are provided for the group under 
the supervision of a verification commission. 
  "Chacalin," the younger brother of the main chief of the 
3-80 
Front, Jose Angel Talavera, alias "el Chacal," warned that they 
"will not deliver their rifles and go home with just a little 
piece of signed paper, as this would be equivalent to disarming 
in exchange for a coffin." 
  According to military reports, "Chacalin" reportedly died in 
combat with government troops two weeks ago. However, Talavera 
himself denied this report and delivered statements to the local 
press in Quilali, 280 km north of Managua. 
  In spite of the disarmament order, a group of "recontras" 
under the command of "El Gato" on Friday broke the cease-fire 
when it ambushed a civilian vehicle in La Reforma. According to 
military sources in Quilali, one policeman was killed and three 
were injured in this ambush that took place on Friday night, 225 
km north of Managua. 
  Nonetheless, military spokesmen in Managua said that the 
truce is not officially over, due to the incident that left one 
policeman dead and several wounded. 
  There is a meeting scheduled for this weekend between the 
rebels and the OAS International Commission of Support and 
Verification (CIAV-OEA) in Las Segovias Mountains to determine 
the details of the unconditional disarmament of the "recontras." 
Sergio Caramagna, the coordinator for the CIAV-OEA -- created 
in 1990 to oversee Contra reintegration into civilian life -- 
said that possibly the first contacts will be made this weekend. 
  The U.S. Embassy in Managua, meanwhile, denied reports that 
"el Chacal" had sold several Redeye SAM missiles to U.S. 
officials for $50,000 to $150,000. The transaction reportedly 
took place in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, toward the end of 1993 or 
at the beginning of this year. According to a news bulletin, 
however, the U.S. diplomatic delegation in Managua said the 
reports were mistaken. The United States, the note reads, 
supports the process of reconciliation among Nicaragua and 
condemns the use of violence. 
  The truce began last Thursday to allow the rebels to disarm. 
The rebels announced a cease-fire and accepted a peace proposal 
presented by Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo and author Pablo 
Antonio Cuadra. 
  "Chacalin's" statements are in agreement with those 
expressed 
on Thursday by General Humberto Ortega, commander in chief of 
the Sandinist People's Army. Ortega said that "no one wants war 
anymore," but there is mistrust amid the recontras. Talavera 
told local reporters that "we are ready to disarm, but we do not 
trust the Sandinists -- their enemies during eight years of war 
-- because the are traitors." 

