BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chan Wai-Fong] </F>
  [Text] It was not the lack of legislation but strong 
resistance from government and party officials that has hindered 
the development of unions in Hong Kong and Taiwan-funded 
factories in China's southern provinces, a local unionist said. 
Apo Leung, researcher at the Trade Union Education Centre in 
Hong Kong, pointed out that unionisation had met with tremendous 
difficulties in these factories most of which had only very 
short-term investment plans in China. "It's not a matter of 
law. Resistance from government and party authorities [against 
unions] has been strong because they are afraid that unions will 
scare off investors," Mr Leung said. 
  Aside from official resistance, the unionist said that 
workers' high mobility was also a factor behind the low rate of 
unionisation in these factories. During the past decade, Hong 
Kong and Taiwan investors have been pouring into China, with the 
bulk in the Pearl River Delta region. Rough estimates show that 
these industries now employ five million to 10 million migrant 
workers. "It's difficult to organise them. And the bosses hold 
enormous authority," Mr Leung said. 
  Not only were these workers unaware of the concept of trade 
unions and their rights to organise, they were also 
discriminated against by official unionists, he said. Some 
workers had no idea what unions were while others believed 
unions were just welfare and recreational clubs, Mr Leung said, 
recounting his experi ence with migrant workersin Shenzhen. But 
even when individval unions were set up in these factories, he 
argued, "they are just window dressing... serving to control 
rather than protect workers' interests". In China, all unions, 
in state or foreign-funded enterprises, come under the auspices 
of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions. "It's an 
administrative measure all the way down, a control mechanism," 
Mr Leung said. 
  During the past year, China has called for the unionisation 
of all foreign-owned enterprises in view of their worsening 
safety records and the increasing number of labour disputes. Mr 
Leung suggested that it was a means to dominate and suppress any 
independent move by workers. He noted that some preliminary 
groupings, though not well organised, had recently emerged 
mostly among migrant workers. 
  The unionist, however, suggested that there existed 
possibilities for change, even within government sanctioned 
unions, since some union members were elected from workers, 
particularly in joint ventures. "And workers in these 
enterprises are more aggressive, daring and eager to learn [than 
those from state enterprises]. These are favourable elements," 
he said. There were also some liberal-minded union federation 
cadres, Mr Leung said. "They supported the autonomous workers' 
movement in 1989. And some of them are still active in cadre 
training and theoretical studies." 

