BFN 

<F P=106> ["Second Cocom Must Not Be Allowed" -- KCNA headline] </F>
  [Text] Pyongyang, April 7 (KCNA) -- The Western 
imperialists including the United States and Japan are 
reportedly scheming to lay a new embargo on the anti-imperialist 
independent countries including the DPRK under the pretext of 
"prevention of terrorism and regional dispute" in the wake of 
the March 31 disbandment of the Coordinating Committee for 
Export to Communist Area (Cocom). 
  Japan is most zealous in this. The Japanese authorities 
openly declared they would strictly control the goods banned by 
the Cocom, charging some countries with "terrorism" and 
"dispute," the NHK reported recently. 
  This shows the Japanese Government is sticking to the 
hostile 
policy to the DPRK. It is an unpardonable challenge motivated 
by the urge to isolate and stifle the DPRK through pressure and 
"sanctions" and, at the same time, block the movement of the 
world revolutionary people for independence against imperialism. 
  The persistent effort of the imperialists of the West 
including the United States and Japan to fabricate a second 
Cocom for their sinister political purpose under the cloak of 
"prevention of terrorism" and "regional dispute" after the end 
of the Cold War is an anachronistic act of those who remain a 
captive to the concept of confrontation. 
  It is outrageous of them to use "prevention of terrorism" 
and 
"regional dispute" as a pretext to fake up a second Cocom. 
  It is the United States where terrorism is openly pursued as 
a state policy under the cloak of "prevention of terrorism," and 
it is also the United States that encourages regional disputes 
in the world and makes the situation more complicated through 
interference. 
  It is ridiculous of the masterminds of international 
terrorism and regional disputes to take a new measure of export 
ban, charging some countries with "terrorism and regional 
disputes." 
  Although the Western imperialists are working to fabricate a 
second Cocom after its disbandment and put a spoke in the wheel 
of the movement of the world revolutionary people for 
independence against imperialism, it is a foolish attempt. 
  They must revoke the new measure of embargo, clearly mindful 
that their criminal act against the trend of the times will only 
run up against strong criticism and rejection from the world 
people. 

