BFN 

  [Text] Varadero, Cuba, 18 May (PL) -- Tourism Minister 
Osmany Cienfuegos Gorriaran said here today that Cuban 
recreational facilities are able to receive more than 1 million 
visitors. 
  In a news conference at one of the halls of the 
Melia-Varadero Hotel, Cienfuegos explained that the sector's 
infrastructure and personnel are ready to increase the presence 
of vacationers in the next two years. 
  As part of the 15th Cuba '94 Tourism Convention, the 
minister 
met with nearly 120 foreign and local reporters who were given 
detailed information about the reorganization of this economic 
sector in Cuba. 
  He confirmed the presence at this fair of representatives 
from 26 nations, 13 from America, 12 from Europe, and Algeria, 
who is attending for the first time. 
  Cienfuegos reiterated that last year, Cuba earned 
approximately $720 million in gross revenue from tourism, a 30 
percent increase compared to 1992. For 1994, he added, the 
revenue is expected to reach $900 million as a result of greater 
efficiency and better training of personnel. 
  He explained that in the 12 months ending in December, an 
average hotel occupancy rate of 50 percent was achieved, but 
that the new facilities, such as the Melia, have satisfactory 
occupancy rates. 
  The minister described his ministry's structure -- with only 
50 officials -- as compact, adding that it was created under the 
concept of efficiency, which should prevail. 
  He also said that 560,000 tourists entered the country in 
1993. The largest number came from Canada, Germany, Mexico, and 
Spain, indicating that 54,100 arrived from Spain. He compared 
these figures with the plans to reach 1 million visitors in 
1995, adding that tour operators and agencies are focusing on 
that objective. 
  As an element of comparison, he said 20 million vacationers 
visited the Caribbean last year, with a 50 percent distribution 
between hotel installations and cruise ships. He said Cuba must 
become the preferential market in the area, adding that it does 
not plan to compete with its neighbors but to seek regional 
integration. 

