CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by David Leppard, home affairs correspondent] </F>
  [Text] Senior police officers admit they are losing the 
fight against Yardie drug gangs because dozens of witnesses have 
been intimidated, bribed or blackmailed into not giving evidence 
in court. 
  Scotland Yard detectives say that at least six prosecutions 
against key Yardie figures for murder, drugs and firearms 
offences have collapsed during the past year because of witness 
"nobbling". 
  Senior officers fear that drug-related violence by the 
Jamaican gangs in London, Manchester, Birmingham and Bristol has 
spread so rapidly in the past year that concerted action is 
needed. The problem prompted recent calls to arm the police. 
  They are particularly concerned by the emergence of one gang 
in south London that has been linked to the murder of a 
policeman and the attempted murder of at least eight other 
officers since last October. 
  Gang members were implicated in the murder of PC Patrick 
Dunne, a community policeman in Clapham, south London, and in 
the attempted murder of two policemen in Brixton last month. In 
both cases gangsters resorted to the ritual of raising their 
guns in the air and firing shots in a formal "salute" of 
defiance before fleeing the scene. 
  The gang's members call themselves "Rude Boys" and have 
developed nicknames for their personal weapons, usually powerful 
Uzi semi-automatic machine guns. 
  "This is a very dangerous gang, whose violence has spread 
alarmingly," said Detective Superintendent John Jones, a Yardie 
expert. 
  "There are quite a large number of recent cases which have 
either been dropped or come to an unsatisfactory conclusion 
because prominent prosecution witnesses have either failed to 
attend court; or have completely lost their memory; or said that 
they made a mistake when they made their original statements," 
Jones said. He added that these witnesses had either been 
intimidated, bribed, or accused of betraying their own community. 
  Detective Chief Superintendent Roy Clark, Scotland Yard's 
deputy head of criminal intelligence, said witness intimidation 
in Yardie prosecutions had grown alarmingly. 
  Last year Michael Howard, the home secretary, told Paul 
Condon, the Metropolitan police commissioner, that the 
government viewed Yardie gangs as a serious threat to law and 
order. Condon set up a special intelligence-gathering squad to 
target the gangsters, but senior officers say the unit has 
failed to curb the increase in drug-related murders. 
  In the Brixton area of south London, there have been nine 
Yardie murders since the beginning of 1993. In northwest London, 
19 people were shot last year in attacks linked to Yardie 
gangsters. 
  Detectives say the murder rate among black people has more 
than doubled in the past five years. Much of the increase is 
blamed on warfare between rival gangs struggling for control of 
the lucrative market in crack, the cocaine derivative. 
  In one particularly shocking case, a young Jamaican woman 
was 
thrown out of the window of her 18th-floor north London council 
flat by Yardies. Police say the prosecution was withdrawn after 
witnesses were threatened. 
  Sir John Smith, president of the Association of Chief Police 
Officers, said that police chiefs and government ministers would 
have to act soon to tackle the need to protect witnesses and 
informants. "It is something we will need to concern ourselves 
about," Smith said. "There are more reports coming through that 
this sort of thing is happening." 
  British police were first alerted to the gangs, named after 
the backyards of Jamaica, by the FBI in the mid-1980s. The FBI 
said that Yardie "posses" have since branched out from dealing 
in crack to kidnapping, bank robberies, extortion and 
loan-sharking. 
  Scotland Yard detectives claim some Yardies in Britain and 
America are using torture as part of their reign of terror. 
"They are the most dangerous groups of sociopaths known to 
modern society," one officer said. 
  Police point to last year's change of government in Jamaica 
as a source of the growing problem. "Since then many gunmen 
previously employed by the authorities have found themselves 
without work and in many cases sought by the police," said 
Jones. "An ever-growing number of these people are now entering 
this country illegally and are resorting to indiscriminate 
violence." 

