CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Irina Petrovskaya: "How Do We Measure </F>
Emptiness?"] 
  [Text] There are broadcasts which have no viewers or 
practically no viewers. On various channels. For various 
reasons. Sometimes the viewers are at fault--those who have a 
duty to work but want to escape from it, those who prefer the 
easier mass culture to what is serious. Sometimes the television 
companies themselves are at fault because they are unable to 
find programs which deserve the viewers' attention and are 
worthy of air time. In a word, all the unlucky broadcasts are 
unlucky in their own way. But for an entire channel to manage 
without viewers for its entire existence! This is impossible, 
you will say. There is such a channel, I respond. It is called 
"Severnaya Korona," and it is on Sagalayev's Channel 6. 
  Strictly speaking, "Sagalayev's Channel 6" is an 
exaggeration. There is a "TV-6 Moscow" company whose president 
is Eduard Sagalayev. And there is the "Severnaya Korona" 
Company, which broadcasts on the same frequency as Sagalayev. 
There are two major differences, as they say in Odessa. 
  The cohabitation of two different broadcasters in the same 
broadcasting space, from the standpoint of common sense, began a 
year and a half ago as the result of the competition for the 
last free channel in the meter waveband. The heated struggle was 
no laughing matter at that time, and there were many contenders. 
The licensing commission decided on a compromise and issued two 
licenses right away: to the Moscow Independent Broadcasting 
Corporation headed by E. Sagalayev and the International 
Television Business University headed by V. Novikov (who is also 
a director of the Board of Interregional Programs of Russian TV). 
  The palliative decision of the licensing commission led to 
perplexity among the specialists familiar with broadcasting 
concepts such as programming policy and channel integrity. 
However, the eternal Russian desire to give earrings to all 
the sisters won out. 
  The "sisters" began broadcasting on 1 January 1993. 
"Severnaya Korona," unlike "Moscow TV-6," was maintained 
modestly, advance payments and promises were not dispensed, and 
it did not organize a wide-scale advertising campaign in the 
newspapers--let us set up the business, they said, equip it 
properly, and then we will relax. From remarks appearing in the 
press every now and then, however, it was learned that 
"Severnaya Korona" had been planned as an educational channel to 
provide regular television instruction in various disciplines, 
including business, management, and marketing. 
  For the sake of fairness, it should be pointed out that 
"Severnaya Korona" was put under difficult circumstances from 
the very start, for it received broadcasting time from 1500 to 
1900 hours daily. This time (especially from 1500 to 1700) is 
not considered the most "watchable" on the other, popular 
channels. A song of admiration could have been sung for "the 
foolhardiness of the brave," if not for the quality of the 
programs presented for the verdict of viewers. These 
kinds of programs do not attract viewers, but turn them 
away. While the primitive level of most "Severnaya Korona" 
broadcasts could have been explained in the beginning by its 
poverty and lack of experience, now, after a year has passed, 
this is impossible to explain by anything but the lack of 
professionalism of its founders. 
  The main content of the channel (except for occasional 
foreign documentary films) consists of endless direct contact 
with various "talking heads." You will recognize "Severnaya 
Korona" easily by its "picture"--dull, expressionless, with poor 
lighting and a fixed camera. Even on days off, when it would 
seem that the time that is disadvantageous on other days can and 
should be used to its maximum effect, one such broadcast is 
replaced by another--without inventivenes, imagination, or any 
kind of intervention by a director. 
  At the same time, despite the fact that there are few 
obvious 
advertisements on the channel (what kind of advertiser would 
place advertising in a void?), most of the discussions in the 
studio are poorly concealed advertisements. It is obvious that 
these are so-called paid materials: a guest or guests pay for 
their statements on the air themselves. 
  For example, here is an unconvincing discussion with the 
stage singer "Nika" and her producer. And the telephone of 
"Nika's" studio is given in a subtitled still shot for the 
entire 10 minutes of the discussion. After "Nika" there is a 
group of identical faceless men representing some firm. A 
discussion about the transformers produced by the firm is 
accompanied by subtitles: "Delivery of oil-immersed power 
transformers... Telephones such and such." Even a viewer 
inexperienced in the subtleties of television production will 
easily see through the commercial format of the studio 
discussion--despite the impertinent statement by the announcer: 
"I think most viewers are interested in conctacts with your 
firm." 
  Everything else has the same relationship to the education 
declared by the channel as the oil-immersed transformer has to 
the interests of most viewers. We can confidently acknowledge 
only one achievement by "Severnaya Korona"--it is the first and 
only really independent channel. It truly does not depend on 
viewers at all. According to the Sociological Service of V. 
Vilchek, the rating of "Severnaya Korona" has not once climbed 
higher than 2 percent during its year of existence; this 
actually means zero, nothing. "Severnaya Korona" has 
never been mentioned in any of the regularly 
conducted surveys of viewer preferences! This is the kind of 
broadcast misunderstanding there is in Russia's capital. 
  I do not know who is financing all this, but since the 
channel exists, it means that there are reckless persons who are 
paying for emptiness. Amazingly, "Severnaya Korona" has 
accumulated everything in its small broadcasting space that is 
bad about TV in general--banality of musical broadcasts, boring 
econoimic broadcasts, tedious political broadcasts, and 
shameless advertising broadcasts. In concentrated form, this 
"compote" is definitely not edible, and the viewer turns up his 
nose. And correctly so. There is more appetizing food on the 
daily TV menu. 
  Well, there is one more lesson: it turns out that 
independence from the state in itself is no panacea for the lack 
of talent and professionalism. 

