BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on crime, investigations, trials, sentencings, and other 
judicial-related activities in the PRC monitored by Hong Kong 
Bureau during the period 17-31 May. The source and mode of 
processing are given in parentheses at the end of each entry. 
Certain reports deemed more significant may have been filed 
separately, in which case the summary will include the serial 
number of the separately filed item. 
  As evidenced by the stories listed below, during the month 
PRC crime reportage focused on no single issue. 
<H5>  National </H5>
<H5>  Dangerous Railway Travel in Mainland China </H5>
  After the Qiandao Hu tragedy, the Tourism Bureau of the 
Transportation Ministry of Taiwan announced a safety grading of 
mainland tourist spots, listing 11 tourist spots as high risks. 
In fact, tourists may be facing dangers everywhere in the 
Chinese mainland now. 
  The public security department of China's railway authority 
revealed that 15 railway lines were regarded as dangerous. 
These railway lines included the Chengdu-Kunming line, the 
Guangzhou-Chengdu line, the Guiyang-Kunming line, and the 
Lanzhou-Urumqi line. In 1993, 3,200 robbery cases occurred on 
railway lines, causing more than 260 million yuan in losses. 
Security authorities arrested more than 2,300 railway robbers 
and executed more than 370 such criminals. In the first three 
months of this year, robbery cases increased by 7 percent over 
the same period of last year. (Summary) (Hong Kong CHENG MING 
in Chinese 1 May p 25) 
<H5>  Sale of Fake Jeeps Rampant in China </H5>
  The legal affairs office of Beijing Jeep Corporation Limited 
[BJC] disclosed that assembling and selling counterfeit BJC 
Brand jeeps is quite rampant. So far more than 2,000 fakes have 
been discovered, but the actual number is much higher than this. 
Counterfeit Jeeps have been found in 29 provinces and autonomous 
regions throughout China. More than 600 counterfeit jeeps were 
discovered in Hubei in 1992; some 200 others were found in 
Yunnan in 1993; and more than 100 were unearthed in Xinjiang. 
Tax evasion through the sales of counterfeit Jeeps has caused a 
revenue loss of tens of millions of yuan to the state each year. 
(Summary) (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0754 GMT 
16 May 94) 
<H5>  Fujian, Guangdong Authorities Cooperate on Human Smuggling </H5>
Cases 
  Since April this year, public security departments in 
Guangdong have assisted Fujian public security departments in 
curbing three major cases of smuggling human cargo. About 140 
illegal emigrants from Fujian and east Guangdong have been 
arrested along with four organizers from Hong Kong and Taiwan. 
(Summary) (Hong Kong HSIN WAN PAO in Chinese 16 May 94 p 2) 
<H5>  Nationwide Tax Inspection Turns Up Evasion Cases </H5>
  Special nationwide tax inspections on 8,090,000 tax-paying 
individual business households by the State General 
Administration of Taxation in 1993 yielded 1.435 billion yuan in 
deferred tax payments, fines, levies on tax default, and so on; 
834 tax offenses were referred to judicial authorities, 422 of 
which were concluded, including 51 people getting court 
sentences. Self-inspections were allowed for 7,560,000 
individual business households, and tax authorities concentrated 
on another 3,330,000. [figures as published] The inspections 
identified two problems: Private firms trying to evade taxes by 
claiming to be collective units; and the doctoring accounts by 
issuing unsubstantiated invoices. (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in 
Chinese 25 May 94 p a5) 
<H5>  International Bank Draft Forgery Scam Exposed </H5>
  The Ministry of State Security arrested a few days ago in 
Beijing eight people suspected to be members of an international 
fraud gang and seized 25 forged bank drafts each worth $10 
million, and fake seals and name chops of government officials 
and enterprises in a $250 million financial scam that came to 
light when Zhang Changsheng, a manager of the Changzhou 
Agricultural Bank, contacted the Industrial and Commercial Bank 
of China in Beijing alerting it to the suspicious bank draft 
copies issued by a Gibraltar (Hong Kong) Company payable by the 
bank. The bank notified the security ministry when it found out 
that the bank drafts were forged. (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN 
SHE in Chinese 1205 GMT 29 May 94) 
<H5>  Provincial </H5>
<H5>  Beijing </H5>
<H5>  New Laws for `Unhealthy Practices' in Entertainment Venues </H5>
  Municipal authorities are drafting new regulations to 
control 
the practice of bar hostesses "keeping customers company." Over 
1,000 such establishments staged more than 90,000 entertainment 
nights for some 6 million customers last year. In some cases 
sex services were offered, and a harsh crackdown on such 
activities has failed to correct the trend. 
  The new regulations are aimed at strengthening comprehensive 
administration of entertainment venues and at curbing unhealthy 
trends. They clearly state that all such venues must apply for 
business and safety permits and business licenses. No keeping 
company with customers by female attendants will be allowed. 
Pornographic and other unhealthy means will not be allowed to 
attract customers. Violations of the regulations may result in 
the loss of business permits or licenses, depending on the 
seriousness of the offenses. (Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN 
SHE in English 1339 GMT 25 May) 
<H5>  Fujian </H5>
<H5>  Authorities Deal With Rash of Crimes by Migrant Workers </H5>
  The Fujian police revealed that a large number of migrant 
workers from Sichuan, Anhui, and Jiangxi rural areas have been 
stranded in the southeastern Fujian cities of Fuzhou, Xiamen, 
and Zhangzhou since the spring of this year. Because of high 
rainfall in these cities, many construction projects have been 
halted, leaving many migrant workers with no work to do. To 
make a living, they have to steal, rob, and engage in 
pornography, causing serious problems to social order in these 
localities. In the Fuzhou and Xiamen railway stations, about 
700 migrant workers have been arrested for carrying out criminal 
activities. (Summary) (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 18 May 
94 p b16) 
  Juvenile Crime Rate on Increase in Quanzhou 
  According to the public security organs in Quanzhou, the 
city's juvenile delinquency rate is rising sharply. In the 
first quarter of this year, the city's procuratorial organs at 
city and county levels arrested 490 juvenile delinquents, far 
surpassing the 209 arrested in the same period of last year. 
  According to information, influenced by the Hong Kong and 
Taiwan movies which depict martial arts and gun battles, some 
young people organize gangs and fight. The Licheng Public 
Security Bureau recently cracked a criminal gang which called 
itself "pocket knife society." The youngest member of gang was 
only nine years old, and the eldest was not over 18, but every 
one of them was armed with a small knife and had a mark on his 
arm, making it resemble a secret society. 
  A circular here holds that one of the causes leading to the 
rise of the juvenile delinquency rate is the failure of schools 
to pay attention to moral education, while parents are busy with 
money-making businesses and neglect mental cultivation of their 
children. Increasing the crackdown on such juvenile activities 
only tackles a symptom, whereas the way to tackle the root rests 
on a society cherishing care and education for children. 
(Summary) (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 1012 GMT 
21 May 94) 
<H5>  Gansu </H5>
<H5>  Lanzhou Executes 20 Criminals on 20 May </H5>
  A public sentences pronouncement rally was held in Lanzhou 
yesterday morning. At the rally, a total of 20 criminals found 
guilty of major and serious crimes were sentenced to death, and 
21 criminals who had committed murder, robbery, or other hideous 
crimes were sentenced in accordance with the law. 
  Among those sentenced to death and executed yesterday were: 
  Li Qingyong and Liu Bin, who had been found guilty of 
embezzling public funds totalling more than 2.416 million yuan 
on five occasions while working in a Lanzhou aluminum factory; 
Gao Hongying, who had been found guilty of embezzling public 
funds totalling more than 298,500 yuan while working in a 
Lanzhou department store; and Chen Jun, who had been found 
guilty of murder and hooliganism. (Summary) (Lanzhou Gansu 
People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 GMT 20 May 94) 
<H5>  Guangdong </H5>
<H5>  Smuggling Cases Down for Year in Dongguan </H5>
  Last year, Dongguan authorities cracked 171 smuggling cases, 
a decrease of 53 percent as compared with the previous year. 
Among the goods seized were 22 boats, cars, television sets, 
video recorders, cigarettes, and wristwatches. (Summary) (Hong 
Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 16 May 94 p b8) 
<H5>  Shenzhen Improves Social Order, Investment Environment </H5>
  Since New Year's Day, the Shenzhen Government has taken 
massive and extensive measures to improve public order and gain 
a better investment environment. 
  Statistics show that from 1979 to 1993, Shenzhen attracted a 
total of 13,489 foreign projects, involving agreed upon capital 
of $14.83 billion and actual use of $5.9 billion. Enterprises 
run directly by foreign investors total 9,326. 
  The illegal flow of people from other localities to Shenzhen 
has aggravated the city's public order. People who have no 
legal documents, jobs, and fixed residence total 400,000. Over 
90 percent of the city's recent traffic accidents and 
prostitution are related to these people. 
  In January, the city cracked down on highwaymen, arrested 
more than 500 offenders, seized more than 50 rifles and 300 
other lethal weapons, and recovered over 2 million yuan of 
stolen money and goods. In February, the police dismantled more 
than 60,000 huts erected by undocumented emigrants, repatriated 
230,000 to their home provinces, smashed 17 human trafficking 
rings and 33 dens involved in forging traveling documents, and 
arrested 1,200 offenders. In March and April, 229 cases of 
vehicle robbery were cracked and 277 offenders were arrested. 
  Shenzhen has been selected by Guangdong to undertake an 
experiment in "administering the city according to law," in 
which new legislation and administrative measures are expected 
to be introduced this year. (Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN 
SHE in Chinese 1210 GMT 17 May 94) 
<H5>  Provincewide Criminal Gang Arrested in Huizhou City </H5>
  A provincewide armed criminal gang, rare in Guangdong 
Province for the last 40-odd years, was cracked in Huizhou City 
recently. This gang had committed 57 crimes, killed five people, 
injured seven others, and stolen property worth 2 million yuan. 
A few days ago, the Huizhou police arrested 38 gang members 
while the rest are still at large. This case is still under 
investigation. (Summary) (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in 
Chinese 0932 GMT 19 May 94) 
<H5>  Public Security Ministry Commends Guangdong Police </H5>
  China's Public Security Ministry has recently issued an 
order 
conferring a Merit Citation, First Class, on the Zhaoqing City 
Public Security Bureau's special group for investigating the "3 
October drug trafficking case" and on a special team organized 
by the Guangzhou City Public Security Bureau's Fenghuang Street 
Police Station for cracking the "20 February drug trafficking 
case." 
  In early October, 1993, after being tipped off on a 
forthcoming big drug deal between domestic and overseas 
criminals, the Zhaoqing City Public Security Bureau successfully 
captured 19 overseas and domestic criminals on 3 October. After 
more than one month of hard work, the Zhaoqing police arrested 
another seven drug traffickers, thereby thoroughly smashing a 
notorious drug-trafficking gang composed of overseas and 
domestic criminals. 
  On the evening of 19 February, 1993, tipped off on 
whereabouts of Li Guoding, an armed robber wanted by police, the 
Fenghuang Street Police Station under the Haizhu District Public 
Security Sub-bureau of the Guangzhou City Public Security Bureau 
set up a special team for tracking down the criminal. As a 
result, Li was captured in the small hours of 20 February. 
After being interrogated, Li confessed to having bought and 
sold drugs in collaboration with criminals from Hong Kong and 
the hinterland. Soon afterwards, the police successfully 
captured six other drug-traffickers, thus smashing another 
notorious drug-trafficking gang. (Summary) (Guangzhou Guangdong 
People's Radio Network in Mandarin 1000 GMT 20 May 94) 
<H5>  Apparent Highjack Attempts Thwarted in Shenzhen </H5>
  The Shenzhen airport police disclosed that recently a female 
passenger was arrested for carrying 10 rounds of ammunition; 
another male passenger was arrested for carrying an anti-riot 
gun and a bullet. This brought to 16 the number of such cases 
handled by the Shenzhen airport police this year. (Summary) 
(Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 1049 GMT 24 May 94) 
  Criminal Gang Arrested in Shunde City 
  After an eight-month investigation, police in Guangdong's 
Shunde City have crushed a criminal gang; arrested 19 gang 
members; and seized one army assault rifle, three handguns, two 
grenades, one double-tube hunting rifle, as well as some 
ammunition and long knifes. Other materials seized include four 
cars, three motorbikes, and cellular phones which were used to 
commit crimes. Police have solved 17 serious cases relating to 
the gang, such as robbery. Mai Zhangqi, head of the gang, was 
arrested in January this year. (Summary) (Hong Kong MING PAO in 
Chinese 24 May 94 p a12) 
<H5>  Major Anti-Car Theft Campaign Yields Arrests, Property </H5>
Recovery 
  Shantou police report success in an anti-car robbery 
campaign 
begun in March. The public security bureau of this Guangdong 
city reports capture of 611 car thieves, destruction of 71 
criminal groups, and recovery of 16 cars, 210 motorcycles, and 
4,792 bicycles. In addition the campaign has resulted in action 
against 1,746 motorists who were unable to present lawful 
documents such as licenses. Reported cases of car theft dropped 
by 52 percent in April compared to March. (Summary) (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1306 GMT 25 May) 
<H5>  Police Return Five Stolen Yachts, Six Criminals to Hong Kong </H5>
  On 25 May, Guangdong police returned five stolen yachts to 
hong Kong police, promising to further cooperate in the pursuit 
and arrest of criminals wanted for crimes in Hong Kong. Six 
criminals wanted in Hong Kong have been returned since the 
beginning of this year. 
  The yachts, which had been stolen from Hong Kong between 
February and June of last year, were valued at more than 10 
million Hong Kong dollars. They had been sold to travel 
agencies in Guangdong for between 900,000 and 1.5 million Hong 
Kong dollars. Their recovery was the result of an eight-month 
effort by a special team set up by Guangdong authorities. 
(Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1429 GMT 25 
May) 
<H5>  Death Sentences Passed on 33 People for Robbery, Theft, </H5>
Violence 
  According to the Guangdong Provincial Higher People's Court, 
the intermediate courts of 14 cities would call sentencing 
rallies the next day against 101 people convicted in 34 car 
theft and robbery cases, 33 of whom were to receive death 
sentences. Liu Qinghai, vice president of the higher court, 
referred to the sentencing rallies as part of a crackdown on car 
theft and robbery launched this March. The 34 cases involved a 
range of car models and a total of 6.5 million yuan. In 10 of 
them criminals used violence and killed or wounded 21 people. 
Liu pointed out that syndicates are becoming the main 
perpetrators of car theft. (Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO in Chinese 27 
May 94 p 3) 
<H5>  Zhuhai Executes 10 Men for Murder, Kidnapping, Theft </H5>
  Ten people convicted of murders, kidnapping, and car theft 
were tried and shot and 22 received heavy jail terms yesterday 
in Xianzhou and Doumeng towns, Zhuhai City, Guangdong. The ten 
were He Junwei, Yao Wensheng, Chen Yinglin, Lin Guanzhan, Yan 
Qingde, Liao Wanjin, Wu Mai, Lin Yichang, Xu Wen, and Xiao 
Yingwei. 
  Thirty-year old He Junwei from Zhongshan City was found 
guilty of murdering a Macao citizen called Lu on 14 April 1993 
over a debt dispute and cutting up his body and dumping pieces 
of it by the roadside. Two men convicted for kidnapping on 4 
January 1993 a Mr Cai for a 2 million yuan ransom; one was 
executed, the other given a life sentence. Four others were 
convicted of the 19 December 1992 kidnapping of a 13-year old 
student, who they had falsely imprisoned in a hair salon and 
then telephoned the boy's father demanding 300,000 yuan as 
ransom. Three of the men were sentenced to be shot and the 
fourth was given a 10-year sentence. Six men were found members 
of a car theft ring which had stolen cars worth over 2 million 
yuan between October 1992 and March 1993. Officer Xiao Ying, a 
driver attached to the Zhuhai Transport Company of the Jilin 
Provincial Armed Police Force, was guilty of stabbing a resident 
to death at an inn in Doumen town on 2 November 1993 in a 
quarrel. Xiao was arrested the following day and sentenced to 
death by court. (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 28 May 1994 p 
A11) 
<H5>  Guangxi </H5>
<H5>  Guangxi Cracks Down on Indecent Establishments </H5>
  Since mid-April, 179 massage lounges suspected of engaging 
in 
indecent business in Qinzhou, Beihai, and Fancheng Port along 
the coast of Guangxi have been banned during an 
"anti-pornography" campaign; at the same time, over 2,100 
massage beds have been dismantled, and 24 persons who offered 
sex services or visited prostitutes have been detained. 
  Guangxi has mobilized more than 2,300 personnel in the 
"anti-pornography" campaign along the coast. Major efforts have 
been made to inspect 902 beauty parlors, sauna rooms, and barber 
shops; 257 karaoke clubs; 110 shops which show, rent, and sell 
audio-visual tapes; and a number of billiard rooms, electronic 
games rooms, and newspapers stalls. Over 300 pornographic books 
and magazines and 3,000 illegal video tapes and discs have been 
seized. A total of 63 shops which show and rent video tapes 
have been banned or suspended for rectification. (Summary) 
(Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 23 May 94 p b10) 
<H5>  Successes in Anti-Gun Smuggling Campaign Reported </H5>
  In the last six years the frontier guards of the Guangxi 
armed police have seized 357 gun-running cases, 1,770 guns, and 
14,000 rounds of ammunition. From July last year to the 
present, the Guangxi Armed Police Corps has destroyed 49 
gun-running gangs and arrested 239 suspects. The Guangxi 
authorities will take further measures to exercise stricter 
management over border areas so that gun running will be 
stopped. (Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 
1408 GMT 14 May 94) 
  Hainan 
<H5>  Haikou Anit-Crime Campaign Yields Arrests, Gun Seizures </H5>
  Over the past 15 years or so, 298 criminals have been 
arrested, 35 criminal cases solved, 14 gangs destroyed, and six 
guns seized. (Summary) (Haikou Hainan People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 17 May 94) 
<H5>  Hunan </H5>
<H5>  Anti-Crime Drive Hits Violent, Economic Criminals </H5>
  Recently, people's courts at various levels have severely 
punished a number of hooligans, local ruffians, and lawless 
elements who carried out holdups on trains and buses, with the 
stress on striking at rapists, murderers, and other criminals 
whose cases were vicious, and launched a special struggle 
against criminal activities to sabotage power and 
telecommunications facilities. One criminal from Hengyang 
City's Nanyue District who sabotaged power facilities, stole and 
stripped two distribution switchboards and transformers from 3 
to 21 January 1994, thus causing 60,000 yuan or so in direct 
economic losses and bringing about great indirect economic 
losses to the state and great harm to society was executed, as 
were a number of other lawless elements. (Summary) (Changsha 
Hunan People's Radio in Mandarin 2300 GMT 26 May 94) 
<H5>  Jiangxi </H5>
<H5>  Jiangxi Province Law Courts Sentence Criminals </H5>
  On 10 May, the law courts in Jiangxi Province held 
verdict-reading rallies to sentence a number of vicious 
criminals who had committed crimes which adversely affected 
public order and the economic environment. The criminals 
sentenced this time included those who looted, killed, stole, 
robbed, raped, and so on, to the extent of seriously disrupting 
the reform, opening up, and economic construction. (Summary) 
(Nanchang JIANGXI RIBAO in Chinese 11 May 94 p 1) 
<H5>  Kunming </H5>
<H5>  Drug Addicts From Hong Kong, Taiwan Receive Treatment in </H5>
Kunming 
  Since July 1991, the PLA-run Drug-Dependent Rehabilitation 
and Prevention Research Institute of the Kunming General 
Hospital has helped the rehabilitation of some 1,300 drug 
addicts including 48 from Hong Kong and Taiwan. At the 
institute, drug addicts usually can quit their habits in less 
than 10 days. Professor Sha Lijun of the research institute 
said they used Western and Chinese medical methods to help 
reduce pain in the process of ending drug addiction. She said 
that the institute is currently researching with the Beijing 
Military School of Medicine and Science a new medication which 
is expected to be more effective in helping drug addicts quit 
their drug-taking habit. (Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 
in Chinese 1131 GMT 26 May 94) 
<H5>  Ningxia </H5>
<H5>  Fifty Day Anti-Crime Drive Results in 800 Arrests </H5>
  A 50-day crackdown on crimes launched by Yinchuan City 
Public 
Security, Ningxia Region, since mid-March solved 833 cases, 
smashed 31 rings, and lead to the arrest of 800 people. Among 
the crimes solved are: A rape case; a gang stealing 
transformers and copper wire; eight drug cases, with three drug 
dens smashed and 30 people arrested; and a murder and robbery 
case from 1989, with a revolver and some ammunition seized. The 
operations included raids on bars, coffee houses, snooker rooms, 
and television game centers. (Yinchuan NINGXIA RIBAO in Chinese 
19 May 94 p 3) 
<H5>  Shanghai </H5>
<H5>  Nanjing Police Report Drop in Crime Rate </H5>
  Nanjing City police's persistent efforts to fight crime have 
brought the crime rate down for three consecutive years. 
Figures show that the crime rate in 1992 decreased 4.6 percent 
when compared with 1991 and 6.7 percent when compared with 1992, 
and the crime rate in the first four months of this year 
decreased 9.1 percent when compared with the same period of last 
year. In April, Nanjing City police crushed four criminal gangs 
and arrested 57 gang members. (Summary) (Beijing FAZHI RIBAO in 
Chinese 19 May 94 p 1) 
<H5>  Shanghai Procuratorate Prosecutes 26 Drug Criminals </H5>
  Shanghai Municipal Procuratorate has recently instituted 
proceedings against 26 drug-related criminals, among them most 
were unemployed or had previously served in reform-through-labor 
camps. A total of 558 grams of heroin has been seized. A person 
in charge of the procuratorate has given assurances that 
forceful measures will be taken to crack down on drug-related 
crimes. (Summary) (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 
1252 GMT 22 May 94) 
<H5>  More Shanghai Enterprises Evade Tax </H5>
  The situation of tax evasion among Shanghai's enterprises 
has 
become more serious. Since this year, the procuratorial organs 
have discovered 17 cases of tax evasion by enterprises, and the 
amount of money involved has reached 2.638 million yuan, 2.3 
times the total in the city last year. As more and more 
enterprises take part in market competition, the ways to evade 
tax also multiply. Some enterprises do not list their incomes 
in account books; some set up little treasuries or put money in 
the township and town enterprises, where they can withdraw at 
any time, so they can evade taxes constantly; some deliberately 
exaggerate operation costs and hide sales income; and some even 
utilize the preferential policy granted to them to write 
invoices for other people in return for money, and to help 
individual business operators or other units evade taxes. 
(Summary) (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0652 GMT 22 
May 94) 
<H5>  Sichuan </H5>
<H5>  Largest Ever Forgery Cases Cracked in Chengdu </H5>
  Chengdu City cracked a case of selling forged banknotes 
worth 
160,000 yuan or so, the biggest case of its kind in the city 
since the founding of the People's Republic of China, and on 13 
April this year captured five culprits involved in the case. 
Acting on the culprits' confessions, the Chengdu City Public 
Security Bureau spent one month seizing 560,000 yuan or so in 
forged banknotes in all. (Summary) (Chengdu Sichuan People's 
Radio in Mandarin 1100 GMT 21 May 94) 
  Xinjiang 
<H5>  Xinjiang Police Intensifies Crackdown on Crime </H5>
  An official of the Public Security Department of Xinjiang 
Uygur Autonomous Region recently said that since the beginning 
of this year, more than 4,000 criminal cases of various types 
had been cracked in the region, with some 6,000 criminals caught 
and ill-gotten money and materials worth a total of 16.15 
million yuan recovered. 
  In view of the fact that the cases of highway and railway 
robbery and theft were in the increase in the previous period, 
the public security organs throughout the region launched 
intensive campaigns against highway and railway robbers and 
thieves. Public organs along the highways in Northern Xinjiang 
took measures to crack down on highwaymen and prevent crimes and 
took coordinated actions to restore law and order in some key 
sections. In an anticrime action in Iri Prefecture, 134 
highwaymen and other criminal offenders were arrested, 20 
criminal cases of various types were cracked, and stolen money 
and materials worth 30,000 yuan were recovered. (Summary) (Hong 
Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0949 GMT 18 May 94) 
<H5>  Yunnan </H5>
<H5>  Courts Severely Punish Drug Criminals </H5>
  In 1993, courts in the whole province conducted first 
hearings of 2,391 drug-related cases and completed 2,316 of the 
cases, sentencing 3,940 persons. 
  Last year, Yunnan's law courts three times organized 
province-wide large-scale unified campaigns against drug-related 
crimes, convened verdict-reading meetings in 71 counties and 
cities, and executed a number of extremely vicious drug-related 
criminals. When the Dehong Dai-Jingpo Autonomous Prefecture 
Intermediate Court held a drug-banning, verdict-reading meeting 
in Wanding City, it also invited local officials from Burma's 
Muse, Jiugu, and Namhkam areas to attend; at the meeting, 17 
drug-related criminals were executed, and 300,000 grams of drugs 
were destroyed, witnessed by 5,000 people of various 
nationalities from inside and outside the border. 
  The town of Pingyuan held a verdict-reading meeting, which 
was attended by some 10,000 people; at the meeting, verdicts 
were read to 20 drug-related criminals, seven of whom were 
executed. At the same time, law courts in Wenshan Prefecture 
confiscated houses built by 54 drug-related criminals with 
illegal income from drug trafficking. 
  Among the verdicts which became effective in 1993, 3,122 
were 
handed down to drug-related criminals, including 1,039 death 
sentences, death sentences with a suspension period, and life 
imprisonment, thus dealing a severe blow to the arrogance of 
drug-related criminals. (Summary) (Beijing FAZHI RIBAO in 
Chinese 12 May 94 p 3) 
<H5>  Armed Forest Police Force Formed </H5>
  The Northeast China Armed Forest Police Force, which was 
affiliated with the Chinese Ministry of Forestry, was 
transferred to Yunnan Province to protect the province's forest 
resources. At the end of 1993, it formally formed the Yunnan 
Provincial Forest Police Detachment of the Chinese People's 
Armed Police Force, which is responsible for extinguishing 
forest fires, providing relief aid, and curbing illegal felling 
of forest trees and lumber trafficking. Almost all households in 
many villages on the border between Lijiang Prefecture and Dali 
Autonomous Prefecture arbitrarily engage in large-scale forest 
tree felling, totally ignorant of the fact that this is a 
criminal offense. Troops have been dispatched to northwest 
Yunnan to stop the illegal transportation of lumber, but 
smugglers have resorted to deception in transporting rare 
lumber. To stop the illegal felling of forest trees in the 
province, the provincial government has taken fundamental 
measures, including helping poor ethnic people out of their 
difficulties, propagating forestry laws, and expanding the 
forest police detachment. (Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN 
SHE in Chinese 0709 GMT 27 May 94) 
<H5>  Zhejiang </H5>
<H5>  Eight People Tried in Zhejiang for Boat Disaster </H5>
  The procuratorate in Jinyun County yesterday found eight 
people responsible for the sinking on 5 April of a boat which 
resulted in the deaths of 43 students. The principal and 
teachers of the students school were found guilty of negligence, 
and some teachers were charged with being absent from their 
posts. The owner of the boat was also found guilty of violating 
safety ordinances, purchasing the vessal without approval, and 
failure to receive navigation training. (Summary) (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 1330 GMT 17 May) 

