Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Piet Dankert, Netherlands state </F>
secretary for European affairs, by R. Timmer and R. Winkel; 
place and date not given: "For the European Parliament It Is 
Now or Never -- `Link EC Expansion With Democratization,' Says 
Dankert"] 
  [Text] The negotiations on the entry of Austria, Sweden, 
Finland and Norway to the European Community are in a decisive 
stage. After all the commotion around the Maastricht Treaty, 
the entry process was supposed to be flexible and smooth. In 
1995, the newcomers were to have been allowed in the Community 
on strict but fair terms. The EC was to be unrelenting if 
excessive demands were made of the Community's existing 
achievements, namely the varied range of treaties and behavioral 
rules which determine how cooperation takes place in the EC and 
European Union [EU]. But it was to be flexible enough to not 
make the referenda in the new member states a hopeless cause in 
advance. 
  But once again the European reality seems to be tougher than 
the illusions of bureaucrats and politicians. Norway and 
Austria are making more problems than expected. Suddenly Spain 
has had the idea that the new member states should not be 
allowed to participate in examining membership in the third 
phase of Economic and Monetary Union. 
  The Spanish and British are also demanding -- despite all 
their fine agreements -- that the relative importance of the 
large member states should not be affected. By way of reply, 
the smaller countries are already wishing aloud again about 
democratization and reviewing the Maastricht Treaty. In brief: 
The attractive timescale seems to have been strewn with thorns. 
With a little over a month remaining before the first deadline 
passes, caused by June's European elections, we are running a 
short series about the current state of affairs. We start with 
an interview with Piet Dankert, state secretary for European 
affairs, who in this capacity is at the front line of the 
negotiations. 
  Not for the first time in his colorful career, Dankert is 
currently in an ambiguous position. At present, he is still 
negotiating in the name of the Netherlands Government on the 
entry of new EC countries. In five months, once again he will 
take up his old position and judge the results of his own work 
in the name of the European electorate. Thanks to a high place 
on the PvdA's [Labor Party] list of candidates, Dankert is 
virtually certain of a seat in the European Parliament. 
  And it is this very Parliament which could take on a key 
role 
in the pandemonium, which is now slowly starting to occur, 
around the expansion question. A parliamentary majority has to 
approve the expansion, before ratification procedures can start 
in the national parliaments. If the negotiations are 
successfully concluded in early March, as is still officially 
intended, then the present Parliament could still give its 
verdict in May. 
  Dankert, who knows the circus in Strasbourg very well, 
thinks 
it will be touch and go. After all, the Parliament is close to 
its end. "Those 260 votes are not certain," Dankert said. 
"There are rather a lot of members who are leaving anyway and 
therefore will feel free to follow their own judgement." The 
MPs see this simply as a "nice issue" for the election campaign. 
  For the Parliament, which feels that it came off badly in 
the 
Maastricht Treaty, there is a very real opportunity for 
extracting more power via the expansion of the EC. "It is now 
or never," Dankert said. "Because nothing should be expected 
from the British and Danes in 1996." In 1996, the EC countries 
are supposed to discuss the review of the Maastricht Treaty. 
Pandora's box should remain closed until then. 
  However, already The Hague has opted to ask a committee of 
experts whether it would not be possible to cautiously open the 
lid now. Recently this suggestion was taken up by [Theodhoros] 
Pangalos, the Greek state secretary for European affairs and 
president of the Council. Negotiations on a binding mandate for 
this committee could be held with the European Parliament, which 
in exchange would vote in favor of the expansion agreement. 
  Dankert said that The Hague, despite the debacle with its 
plans for a European Union in 1991, was still eager to make the 
EC more democratic. "At the time the problem was the 
orientation and shaping of foreign policies, and to a lesser 
degree democratization," he said. He stuck to his position that 
Germany also wanted to go much further at the time. "I feel we 
must now try to achieve that goal through expansion," he said. 
"The UK can be blackmailed with that." 
  In any case, the Netherlands is also a resolute supporter of 
rapidly expanding the Community, "with some ministries being 
somewhat less conditional than others," he said. The Ministries 
of Agriculture, Finances and Economic Affairs see big 
advantages. The Foreign Ministry, which is working hard on a 
European policy document, "in contrast also sees an interest in 
an EC which works properly and democratically. But that is 
harder to put in statistical terms," he said. Nevertheless 
Dankert would not want to sacrifice expansion to 
democratization, a tendency he claims to detect in CDA 
[Christian Democratic Appeal] circles. The PvdA is somewhat 
more inclined toward expansion because of its political affinity 
with the Scandinavian countries. 
  "Technically," it is still possible to reach agreement by 10 
March, the state secretary says, although he does not completely 
exclude the possibility that the most difficult customers, 
Norway and Austria, will have to drop out before then. "But 
then you have to understand that a whole period will pass before 
a new opportunity occurs," Dankert said. "And, in addition, it 
undermines the campaign in the other countries." 
  Norway is demanding its own fishing zone above the 62nd 
parallel, and this demand contradicts the common fisheries 
policy. Not only does Austria want to benefit for another full 
12 years from a transit agreement on goods which it signed with 
the EC, but it also is seeking to use its membership to impose 
similar restrictions on large increases in East-West traffic. 
The Netherlands can agree with a German-Italian proposal to give 
the Austrians another three years' respite. It is still unclear 
whether that is equally true of the other EC countries and 
Vienna itself. 
  The demand, which has now been adopted by all the candidate 
countries, that second homes should remain reserved for their 
own nationals, is also troubling the negotiations. Dankert said 
there was a fear in Bonn that the Austrians were waiting for the 
German EC presidency in the second half of this year, in the 
belief that the Germans will not be able to refuse their 
southern neighbors any favors. 
  The problems with Sweden are almost solved. And, in The 
Hague's eyes at least, a solution is also feasible for the 
Finns, who are refusing to give up their high levels of support 
to farmers. Whereas elsewhere in Europe, exceptions and special 
support regulations are made for farmers in mountainous areas, 
in the high north a criterion based on the degree of latitude 
could be applied. The fact that this way, virtually all of 
Finland's farmers would end up indirectly on Brussels's pay list 
is seen as part of the deal by The Hague. The alternative, in 
the form of levies at the border, is worse. That could also 
cause delays and extra costs for products which are not 
supported, like flowers. 
  Dankert could not say whether the issue could be resolved 
politically by early March. "Even if you make it by 1 March, 
there are still a considerable number of obstacles on the way," 
Dankert said. Given the British attitude, Dankert doubts 
whether agreement could be reached with the European Parliament 
before July. In any case, he feels it is undesirable to meet the 
British/Spanish demand of increasing the relative power of the 
large countries in the Council of Ministers (by keeping the 
present number of votes at 23, despite expansion, which means a 
blocking minority can be reached by two large member states and 
one small one). "You must not make any concession which makes 
the EC less decisive," he said. 

