Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Salah-al-Din Hafiz: "All This Bloody Violence </F>
... Why?"] 
  [Text] We look today with great anxiety at the continuing 
sequence of bloody violence in our country following the 
extremist organizations' violation of the homeland's sanctity. 
They have started to spread havoc and to kill and assassinate 
without any legitimate support for such actions. 
  This bloody violence continues and constitutes a growing 
danger. Some people claim there is no solution to the phenomena 
of extremism and terrorist organizations other than absolute 
repression, even if others are hurt in this confrontation, and 
that there is no hope of eliminating extremists and terrorists 
except through more emergency laws, even if this disrupts the 
democratic process. 
  We stop at two fundamental observations while we deal with 
the issue of the bloody violence and blind extremism that 
threaten the homeland's security and stability: 
  The first observation concerns looking at the situation we 
are dealing with--bloody violence. Things are now at a critical 
stage in the lethal clash with all society, not just the 
government alone or the state's authority on its own. 
  We saw extremism grow and prosper slowly and over many years 
of neglect and slackness--at some times--and tacit encouragement 
and turning a blind eye--at other times--such that yesterday's 
cub has turned into a predatory beast, which is devouring those 
closest to it who sponsored and fed him only yesterday. 
  What do figures say now about the victims devoured by the 
beast of bloody violence. Confirmed reports say that around 200 
people were killed in Egypt in 1993 compared, for example, with 
2,000 in Algeria. Algeria and Egypt after it are witnessing the 
most violent clash between the extremist groups that use Islamic 
slogans as a cover and the state authority and society's 
democratic and enlightened forces. 
  It is useful here to refer to the latest report issued by 
the 
Egyptian Human Rights Committee on the signs of bloody violence 
in Egypt. It frankly states that the armed organizations 
belonging to political Islam are practicing terrorist activities 
and bloody violence, violating man's primary fundamental 
right--the right to live--in an unprecedented way. 
  Proceeding with our reading of this documented report, we 
find that 1993 saw escalating bloody violence that left 207 
dead. This figure is more than the total number of victims 
killed in the previous three years: In 1990-1992, only 139 
people were killed. 
  The Egyptian Human Rights Committee's information stresses 
that "these armed Islamic groups bear the major responsibility 
for all the acts of violence seen in the country" and that 59 of 
the police victims were killed willfully as part of acts of 
direct physical liquidation, which these groups carried out 
despite the police halting their physical liquidation of group 
members last March. 
  The report adds that the number of victims of physical 
liquidation and random killings attributed to Islamic political 
groups is 118, when the police killed only eight members of the 
Islamic groups. 
  Figures and statistics are important, but reading an 
analysis of these statistics, understanding their significance, 
and specifying what they indicate are also important. What do 
the indicators say regarding the bloody violence? 
  1. The acts of violence, murder, and terrorism exercised by 
the groups have witnessed a serious development in the use of 
modern technology, such as explosive devices, booby-trapped 
cars, timed bombs, and explosions by remote control to cause the 
biggest losses, particularly among innocent people. 
  For example, 1993 witnessed 12 terrorist operations in which 
huge explosives were used. Nine of these were designed to cause 
indiscriminate killing. The explosions left 22 people dead, 
including 19 innocent citizens, two foreign tourists, and one 
police officer. 
  2. Assassination and physical liquidation attempts against 
state figures such as politicians, ministers, and security 
officers have also increased considerably. The most significant 
of these attempts targeted the prime minister, the information 
minister, and the interior minister. 
  Although these attempts failed, they left 70 security men 
dead. Some 51 of these operations were designed to physically 
liquidate policemen. The Asyut Governorate--the largest arena 
of bloody violence--takes the lead in assassination attempts. 
Some 57 policemen have been assassinated by terrorists there. 
  3. The groups concentrated their terrorist operations first 
on the police and the innocent Muslim and Christian citizens and 
then on tourism and foreign tourists, which they targeted with 
their bloody violence to undermine the country's main source of 
hard currency. This has reflected in losses of $2-$3 billion a 
year. 
  4. The last indicator is that if these groups have partially 
succeeded in their indiscriminate murder operations, 
premeditated assassinations, and bloody explosions in public 
places to shake national security and spread alarm among the 
people, they have failed in word and deed to achieve any 
long-term political objective. On the contrary. They have 
aroused the public and stirred up the silent majority against 
their crimes and terrorist operations, which have caused 
financial loss and alarm. The people, even among the moderate 
Islamic trends and former sympathizers, have started to take an 
active role in confronting the growing bloody violence and armed 
terrorism side by side with the state authorities. Everyone has 
discovered that the beast of terrorism does not target just one 
government official or police officer, but the security of the 
country and the life of every citizen. 
  The state, with all its powers, and society, with all its 
sectors and its ideological, social, and political forces, 
should coordinate their activity to deprive these groups of the 
sources of their power and isolate them from their bases. We 
must prevent these groups from exploiting the stockpile of 
crises surrounding us--be they complicated economic and social 
problems or chronic political and ideological problems--whether 
this is represented in poverty, unemployment, and corruption or 
in extremism, frustration, despair, and the closing of the doors 
of hope to the youth. 
  How could we benefit from the state of alert and vigilance 
in 
society against the cycle of bloody violence, armed terrorism, 
and indiscriminate killing? How could we isolate the 
perpetrators of this violence and prevent them from exploiting 
the people's rancor and indignation generated by knotty economic 
and social problems? 
  First, we must all reiterate the principles and agree on the 
need to establish our great national objective. We must 
truthfully admit that despite the complicated and pressing 
problems, reform and change should not be made by force, 
violence, or terrorism. These should be carried out through 
sound democratic means based on free dialogue, accepting 
opposing ideas, and respecting everyone's will and opposition 
stances before those of the support, along with respect for the 
full rights of individuals. 
  When the channels for such a dialogue are open, those of 
extremism and violence are diminished. These channels are the 
fruit of the absence of dialogue, the silencing of the other 
voices, and the disdain for the ideas of 
opposition--politically, ideologically, and religiously. Again, 
we affirm that resorting to pressing emergency laws, as some 
demand, is condemned, because it represents a real obstacle to 
dialogue and democracy. 
  While some call for burying the current democratic 
atmosphere, particularly the freedom of opinion and expression, 
urging the authorities to enact more extraordinary laws, 
justifying the expansion of the use of the emergency law, 
President Husni Mubarak, the head of the supreme authority, 
insists on rejecting all this, resisting the temptation of the 
instigators, adhering to the democratic course, and resorting to 
the Constitution and law even if this costs time in the struggle 
against terrorism and the immediate wiping out of armed 
violence. This is what the president stressed during his 
meeting with writers and intellectuals at the international book 
fair last week in response to the claims and calls of the 
instigators. 
  What do we do in light of these principles? Our effort 
leads us by necessity to work through several principal routes: 
  Because the security policy, despite its decisive 
importance, 
is not enough alone to resist the violence and armed terrorism, 
the alternative is an all-out social effort. This initially 
demands efforts to end or reduce the factors of poverty, 
indignation, and despair, which the extremist groups exploit. 
The effort can be made by reviewing the state's existing 
socio-economic plan and amending its goals and methods in line 
with the demands of the vast majority and achieving their 
interests. 
  There is a need to open channels for comprehensive national 
dialogue and expand the circles of opinion and consultation to 
include--in deed, not in word--all the legitimate and true 
political and intellectual forces that express the people's 
clear interests. 
  Any dialogue that does not include all these forces will 
fail 
before it starts--notice, for example, the national dialogue 
conference experiment in Algeria--because it excludes some 
forces and deprives some groups of their rights. These groups 
will remain a source of anger, indignation, rebellion, and even 
extremism, facilitating the use of violence. 
  There is a need to energize civic society's political, 
religious, and cultural institutions, particularly the parties, 
the trade unions, the universities, al-Azhar, the research and 
study centers, and the press to play a more effective and 
influential role in society in an atmosphere of freedom of 
opinion, action, and movement. This perhaps demands a review of 
the laws restricting the activity of civic society, because the 
government authority alone, however strong it may be, cannot 
succeed without the help of the strong, effective popular forces. 
  The most essential issue is the need to introduce concrete 
reforms in the famous three-way system--education, information, 
and culture. These institutions formulate opinion, develop 
character, and raise generations from childhood. We still 
notice with great concern the infiltration of the ideas of 
fanaticism, extremism, backwardness, and superficiality through 
the channels of this system, helping to develop the mind in a 
direction opposed to the country's interests and prepare the 
popular ground, particularly among the illiterate, 
semi-educated, poor, and oppressed, to accept religious 
fanaticism, sectarian hatred, and despicable racism. 
  If we add to all this the incitement against the existing 
democratic system; the efforts to restrict freedom of opinion 
and expression in their various forms, particularly freedom of 
the press and information; the casting of doubt on the honesty 
and independence of the judiciary; attempts to justify 
corruption and deviation; and demands to resort to emergency 
laws, the issue will by necessity become serious, if not deadly. 
  This is what we do not want for the present and future of 
this country. 

