CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Anatoliy Polyakov: "Leonid Kravchuk Agrees to a </F>
Russian Naval Base in Sevastopol"] 
  [Text] The Ukrainian mass media are actively 
discussing the negotiation results, or more accurately the 
absence thereof, following the meeting between the military 
delegations of Russia and Ukraine. Many emphasize that the 
positions of the president and the military department of 
Ukraine are at opposite poles. 
  On Sunday, Leonid Kravchuk said on television that the 
various statements made by Defense Minister Vitaliy Radetskyy do 
not represent the position of the government of Ukraine. 
  "I support the realities that have evolved in Crimea," he 
noted. "A Russian naval base may be created in Sevastopol, and 
Russian ships should be stationed in Kerch, Feodosiya, Balaklava 
and other ports on the basis of supplementary agreements." 
  Leonid Kravchuk stressed that he never said that the USA or 
any other third party needed to participate in the negotiations. 
The meeting of the defense ministers was not a culminating 
point, but only part of the search for the final results. In 
Kravchuk's words, he exchanged opinions with Viktor 
Chernomyrdin, and they came to the conclusion that a meeting at 
the level of the presidents of Russia and Ukraine was needed in 
order to solve the Black Sea Fleet problem. 
  Judging from everything, Leonid Kravchuk does not yet share 
the same opinion regarding the future of the Russian fleet in 
Crimea held by Defense Minister Vitaliy Radetskyy, as was also 
true earlier of ex-Minister Konstantin Morozov. Moreover, it 
might be more proper to say that their views on its fate are 
diametrically opposite. Whether they find a common language, or 
another leader of the Ukrainian military department will have to 
be retired, only the immediate future will tell. 
  Nor did Leonid Kravchuk leave unattended the statements by 
Yuriy Meshkov concerning secession of Crimea, calling them 
ill-conceived. He emphasized that all Crimean edicts conflicting 
with the Constitution and laws of Ukraine will be nullified in 
the future as well, except of course those pertaining to 
economic reforms in Crimea. 

