BFN 

  [Text] Lieutenant General 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, 
Presidential Council chairman and commander in chief of the 
Armed Forces, yesterday visited the Dhamar Governorate. He was 
greeted by brother officials and a number of the governorates' 
shaykhs, notables, and community leaders. 
  The brother president visited al-Fatah Camp in Dhamar and 
Dhafar Camp in Yarim. He was received by the brother commanders 
of the two camps, officers, non-commissioned officers [NCO's], 
and the ranks. They expressed their gladness over the brother 
president's visit to familiarize himself with their conditions. 
They stated their high state of preparedness to fulfill their 
patriotic duty and to make sacrifices in the cause of defending 
the homeland and its unity and its gains and democratic, 
developmental, and other achievements and confronting the gang 
of rebellion and secession that has sought to destroy and tear 
up the homeland. They emphasized that Yemeni unity lives in the 
heart and conscience of every worthy citizen. The Yemeni unity, 
they emphasized, is the culmination of the fight of strugglers 
and the sacrifices of our people's martyrs and their Armed 
Forces. They stressed that all sacrifices are nothing when made 
for the sake of the homeland. They noted the depth of their 
loyalty to God, the homeland, the revolution, and unity, and 
their support for our patriotic leadership under brother 'Ali 
'Abdallah Salih, who has shown himself to be a unionist leader 
dedicated to the nationalist principles and the causes of the 
homeland and its unity. 
  The brother chairman of the presidential council, commander 
in chief of the Armed Forces, spoke to the brother officers and 
NCO's and ranks of the Armed and Security Forces. He paid 
tribute to their high morale and the heroic performance of the 
Armed and Security Forces who have proved loyal to principles 
and who have kept their promise to God. They were truly the 
soldiers of right, revolution, and unity, who have rallied to 
the will of their people at all times and written bright pages 
of acts of heroism in defense of our people's right to a free 
and decent life. He indicated the challenges the homeland is 
having to tackle following the actions taken by the gang of 
rebellion and secession. President Salih reviewed this gang's 
diabolical scheme through which it has sought to tear apart the 
homeland's unity, which was forged on 22 May 1990 as a fruit of 
a long struggle and dear sacrifices. The gang, he said, has 
forced this war on the homeland with the aim of destroying it 
and set out to ignite sedition among the sons of the one 
homeland to gratify their destructive selfishness and to serve 
their own ends, indifferent to sacrifices and to the chaste 
Yemeni blood that has been spilled. The brother president noted 
the devastation this has caused to the homeland. 
  All conspiracies targeting unity and democracy have crashed 
and will crash on the rock of the steadfastness and awareness 
and strong will of our people and their Armed Forces, the 
president said. He noted the gang of rebellion and secession's 
cease-fire violations committed within the context of their 
defiance of the will of the international community. This 
separatist, rebellious gang in the [Yemeni] Socialist Party, 
lacking all values and betraying all principles and covenants, 
has had no qualms about perpetrating the ugliest crimes against 
the homeland and the people and about disregarding all values, 
principles, and norms. The gang is continually violating the 
cease-fire and flouting the UN Security Council resolution. We 
would like to reiterate here, added the brother president, that 
if this murderous gang will not be bound by the cease-fire 
resolution and continues to breach it -- it is the fourth 
opportunity this gang has been given to abide by the resolution 
-- the forces of unity and legitimacy are going to force it into 
respecting and abiding by it. 
  The brother commander in chief of the Armed Forces 
reiterated 
our country's commitment to all the clauses of the Security 
Council resolution. He stressed that our valiant Armed Forces 
continue to be fully observant of the cease-fire resolution 
despite the recurring acts of aggression on their positions by 
elements of this rebellious gang, which is in its last gasps of 
breath and which is destroying all vital economic installations 
before its departure, including the Aden refinery and the 
electricity plant at al-Hiswah and other facilities as an act of 
revenge on the homeland and an expression of hatred for the 
Yemeni people and their achievements. 
  The brother president applauded acts of heroism by members 
of 
our valiant Armed Forces, who spearheaded the battle of honor 
and dignity for the homeland and people in the cause of unity, 
democracy, and constitutional legality. They have proved 
valiant heroes fearless of death in that they are fighting the 
cause of right against wrong. They are also fighting for the 
great principles and achievements that our people have fought 
for -- unity and democracy, above all. He exhorted the brother 
heroic officers and NCO's of the Armed and Security Forces to 
show increased vigilance and awareness and to be prepared to 
fulfill their patriotic duty. A great people stand behind you, 
rallying around you, supporting your efforts, and watching your 
generosity and sacrifices so that the banner of Yemeni unity 
stays hoisted over the united Yemeni homeland. Unity means 
pride, dignity, glory, and stability. No matter what the cost 
and the sacrifices our people and our Armed Forces may have to 
make, there can be no abandonment of unity. There is no future 
for Yemen without unity, asserted the brother president. 
  The brother president was accompanied, during the visit, by 
Interior Minister Brigadier General Yahya al-Mutawakkil. 

