BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ranjit Kumar] </F>
  [Text] India has achieved remarkable success in the 
production of high-quality fuel used in nuclear power plants. 
Due to its success in this field, India will no longer be 
dependent on the developed countries regarding nuclear energy. 
This has enabled India to join a select band of countries. 
India has successfully tried mixed uranium oxide as fuel for 
the Tarapur atomic power plant. It is worth mentioning that the 
United States refused to supply fuel for this plant and later 
prevented France from supplying fuel as well. The reason given 
was that India has not signed the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty. Indian scientists, however, have now developed an 
alternative to the U.S. fuel enriched uranium. Now India is 
ready to use indigenously developed fuel at Tarapur. 
  India has produced mixed uranium oxide fuel at the Advance 
Fuel Fabrication Center. A laboratory has also been set up to 
maintain the quality of mixed uranium oxide fuel. A plan has 
been prepared for plutonium reprocessing at the 200-megawatt 
pressurized heavy water reactor in Trombay. All practical 
aspects regarding the use of the alternative mixed uranium oxide 
as a fuel at Tarapur have been studied. Thus, in the nuclear 
power program, India has not only joined a select band of 
countries on the strength of its research, but additional 
successes achieved in the field of fuel fabrication has made it 
a world leader in some respects. 
  According to the annual report of the Department of Atomic 
Energy, India is successfully running the fast breeder test 
reactor at Kalpakkam. This marks the beginning of the second 
phase of the Indian nuclear energy program. The fuel fabricated 
for this fast breeder reactor is known as mixed 
uranium-plutonium carbide. The fuel is the total result of 
Indian efforts. This is the first time this fuel has been used 
in a fast breeder reactor. The Department of Atomic Energy is 
now preparing a blueprint for a 500-megawatt fast breeder test 
reactor using mixed uranium-plutonium carbide as a fuel. 
  India is now set to enter the ambitious third phase of its 
nuclear energy program. Under the third phase, fuel based on 
uranium-233 has been successfully fabricated. Encouraged by 
this success the Department of Atomic Energy has started working 
on the advanced heavy water reactor. This heavy water reactor 
will use thorium as fuel. The Kalpakkam fast breeder test 
reactor using indigenously fabricated carbide fuel has produced 
10.25 megawatt of electricity on trial basis. The research and 
development work at the Bhabha Atomic Research Center keeps in 
view the future needs of the country's nuclear energy program. 
The outcome of the center's research has greatly boosted hopes 
of increasing nuclear power production. The Bhabha research 
program includes development of the 500-megawatt pressurized 
heavy water reactor and thorium- based reactor. The fabrication 
of fuel at the nuclear power plants itself is considered as a 
significant success in the direction of producing power from 
nuclear energy. This step will help India achieve a credible 
self-reliance in the field of nuclear energy. India can now 
escape from the pressures like the one applied by the United 
States for signing the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty in return 
for the fuel for Tarapur. 

