BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, June 6 (KCNA) -- The great leader 
President Kim Il-song today sent a congratulatory message to the 
participants in the fifth congress of the Korean Children's 
Union [KCU]. 
  In the message President Kim Il-song extended warm 
congratulations to those who are attending the congress and all 
the other members of the Children's Union throughout the 
country, and said the fifth congress of the Korean Children's 
Union will be a proud congress which is of great significance in 
widely demonstrating the reliable features of our schoolchildren 
growing up happily and sturdily in the embrace of the party and 
in preparing the Children's Union members firmly as successors 
to the revolution. 
  President Kim Il-song further said: 
  The Korean Children's Union, which has inherited the 
brilliant traditions of the anti-Japanese children's corps, has 
traversed a glorious path of struggle. 
  Today our Children's Union members are receiving excellent 
education and growing up as reliable reserves for the revolution 
under the care of the party. With great ambitions and hopes, 
they study hard, lead a sound life and are all well-disciplined 
and cheerful. This is a great pride and immeasurable pleasure 
of our party and our people. 
  The Children's Union members are successors to our 
revolution 
and the masters of the future. They have the honourable task of 
taking over and continuing the revolution under the 
revolutionary banner and accomplishing the revolutionary cause 
of chuche. 
  In order to succeed to the revolution, they must prepare 
themselves fully as young guards who are unfailingly loyal to 
our party. 
  Our party regards children as the most precious treasures of 
the country and spares nothing for them. The members of our 
Children's Union are happy children who were born in the era of 
the glorious Workers' Party, learn to their hearts' content, and 
grow up as happily as can be in the world. 
  They should always trust and follow only our party, taking 
an 
immense pride in that it is the best party and its embrace is 
the best embrace; they should study and live as the party 
teaches them. 
  They must inherit the revolutionary spirit of Paektu by 
studying the revolutionary traditions in good faith, and should 
follow the example of loyalty of the young revolutionaries who 
fought self-sacrificingly for the country and the revolution. 
  They must become young patriots who love the country and the 
people, hate imperialism and class enemies and devote their all 
to defending and bringing honour to our socialist country. 
  They must prepare themselves fully as well-qualified 
builders 
of socialism who are knowledgeable, morally impeccable and 
physically strong. 
  Study is the first and foremost revolutionary task of the 
members of the Children's Union. They should study hard with a 
high ambition and ideal to become able workers who will shoulder 
the future of the country. Under the motto "Let Us Study for 
Korea", they must study hard in their school days, read many 
good books, learn a useful, working knowledge and give full play 
to their talent and aptitude. 
  The Children's Union members must endeavour to build up a 
lofty moral character. They must always love their comrades, 
help and lead each other forward and devote themselves to the 
organisation and the collective. They must acquire a good 
manner of speech, behave themselves properly, respect their 
teachers and elders and be model in observing social order and 
public morality. 
  They must harden themselves physically. Only when they are 
strong, can they study hard and contribute to socialist 
construction and national defence. They must take an active 
part in various sports activities regularly to harden themselves 
and cultivate a strong fighting spirit, courage and boldness. 
  They must engage widely in socio-political activities and 
the 
good-conduct movement and they must develop the spirit of 
organisation and discipline through their organisational life 
and unfailingly live up to the oath they have made before the 
flag of the Children's Union. 
  President Kim Il-song in the message stressed: 
  You are the future and hope of our country. Only when you 
grow up healthy and strong can our country be prosperous and the 
future of the revolution be bright. 
  I firmly believe that all the Children's Union members will 
grow up into the sons and daughters boundlessly loyal to our 
party and fulfil the duties as successors to our revolution with 
credit. 

