Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Hangzhou, January 28 (XINHUA) -- East China's 
Zhejiang Province is making active efforts to develop a 
diversified economy while maintaining stable grain production. 
  These efforts have already begun to pay off. Now, the crop 
planting, animal husbandry, forestry and fisheries have all 
experienced overall development. 
  At present, the output of meat, poultry and eggs is more 
than 
double the corresponding figures for the late 1970s. 
  The province has also established 40 specialized production 
centers for mushrooms and day lilies. Some 300,000 rural 
households are involved and they turn out 200,000 tons of edible 
fungus a year. 
  Besides producing the biggest quantity of good-quality tea, 
the province is also experiencing a sharp growth of honey, 
oranges, canned food, dairy products and processed aquatic 
products 
  With a coastline of more than 6,000 km, the southeast China 
province is blessed with a climate and soil ideal for 
agricultural production, but with a comparatively small per 
capita availability of farmland and the task of feeding a 
population of at least 42 million. 
  Beginning early last year, the provincial government 
initiated a coordination group for the development of non-grain 
sectors, and organized leaders of related departments and 
researchers and professors of local research institutes and 
universities to draw up the "Non-Grain Food Development Plan of 
Zhejiang Province in the 1990s". 
  According to the plan, the province will make great efforts 
to develop a wide range of non-grain foodstuffs, with the 
emphasis going to the development of high-quality aquatic 
products in many varieties. 
  Efforts will also be made to carry out an adjustment of the 
product mix of traditional non-grain foodstuffs, such as 
products related to livestock and poultry. 
  According to local officials, artificial breeding centers 
and 
specialized markets for wild fowls and animals, snakes and 
insects will be set up in a bid to enhance the output of more 
unusual foodstuffs. 
  Local officials said that the application of new techniques 
and the introduction of new varieties should be encouraged to 
increase efficiency and bring the initiatives of producers, 
traders and consumers into full play, said local officials. 
  They said that the catchwords for Zhejiang's efforts in this 
direction are "high quality", high output" and "high efficiency". 

