BFN 

  [Text] Addis Ababa, 2 Jun (KNA/PANA) -- The third bench of 
the Central High Court in Addis Ababa has sentenced Daniel 
Kifle, a journalist, to 18 months' imprisonment after finding 
him guilty of publishing malicious canards in a private Amharic 
weekly, FENDISHA, reports PANA. 
  According to the central prosecutor's office of Region 14, 
[Addis Ababa region] the court convicted Daniel of publishing a 
false report in the 14th January 1994 issue of the weekly, under 
the headline: "The Involvement of Prime Minister Tamirat Layne 
in Mercury Trade Exposed". 
  The story alleged that the prime minister sold confiscated 
mercury and gold for millions of birr (the local currency) while 
on working visits abroad. 
  A statement issued by the prosecutor's office said the 
journalist also published a series of fabrications including the 
replacement of troops guarding one of the country's major 
hydro-electric dam at K'ok'a [Central Province]. 
  Daniel was also reported to have published a false report 
under the headline "Everything to the Northern War Front", 
alleging the encampment of 10,000 troops in Debre Zebit [Central 
Province] with the mission of suppressing swiftly any 
anti-government uprising. 
  The prosecutor's office said the false stories constituted a 
malicious defamation of the prime minister and the defense 
establishment, and a violation of the country's press law and 
the penal code. The court passed the sentence on the convict 
after rejecting all his counter evidences presented during the 
trial, the prosecutor's office said. 
  In a related development, the Central Court imprisoned on 
Wednesday [1 June], Mulugeta Lule, editor-in-chief of TOBIA, a 
private magazine and fined him 10,000 birr, about 1,600 U.S. 
dollars, for publishing and disseminating false stories. The 
prosecutor's office accused him of publishing unfounded reports 
on troop deployments at Gondar and Gojam [Provinces] in the 
November issue of the magazine which reported that the Army 
killed 647 EPRDF (Ethiopian Peoples Revolutionary Democratic 
Front) militants and captured 60 others. 

