Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] At its Ariake plant (Nagasu-machi, Kumamoto 
prefecture) Hitachi Zosen Corp. (Yoshihiro Fujii, president) has 
introduced a high-speed LAN (local area network) linking area 
from design to the production floor in a network, thus becoming 
the first in the shipbuilding industry to construct such a 
full-scale CIM (computer-integrated manufacturing) system. Use 
of the system will begin in December 1993. It will be applied 
first to a robot welding system using three-dimensional CAD/CAM 
(computer-aided design and manufacturing). The plan is to 
complete the implementation of CIM by expanding it to painting 
robots and materials and accounting departments after three 
years. This is expected to improve productivity by twenty to 
thirty percent. Appreciation of the yen has pitted Japan's 
shipbuilding industry against Korea in a difficult battle for 
orders. Hitachi Zosen aims to shrink the cost gap by raising its 
level of production technology. 
  The optical LAN to be introduced has transmission capability 
of 100 mega-bits (one mega equals one million) per second. It 
will directly connect company-developed three-dimensional design 
and development structural CAD data with individual systems such 
as NC (numerically controlled) cutting, welding robots, and pipe 
processing and will transmit data in real-time. Currently the 
application rate for robot welding is only 16%. When 
usage is 
expanded to three-dimensional curved surfaces, the automation 
rate will be raised to 50%. 
  A painting robot in the middle of field testing will be 
introduced in the new painting plant under construction which is 
expected to be completed in two years. It will be directly 
connected to CAD data. It is estimated that productivity of the 
painting process will double after completion. About &yen;2 
billion is being invested in the LAN, the painting plant, and so 
on. 
  Hitachi Zosen will use to the fullest extent the 
shipbuilding 
CIM under development by the Ship and Ocean Foundation (SOF) for 
constructing systematization of other production systems 
starting with the building simulation system, optimal production 
plans, a general process network system, and a management 
information monitoring system. 
  The business organization system for materials, accounting 
and other areas that is in operation will be integrated with the 
newly established optical network. It will be used for 
procurement of steel materials and electronic data interchange 
(EDI) with steel manufacturers. This will make it possible to 
integrate systems involving operations, estimates, design, 
procurement, and production. As soon as this implementation of 
CIM is completed, it will be introduced at the company's Maizuru 
(Kyoto Prefecture) and Kanagawa plants. 

