Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Zoran Pirolic commentary] </F>
  [Text] After several various initiatives for the recall of 
Lord Owen, the European Union peace mediator, we have now 
finally had an official one. The deputies in the European 
Parliament have demanded in the strongest terms that Lord Owen 
be withdrawn. They have also demanded that the overall European 
policy toward Bosnia-Herzegovina be reassessed, as it is 
directed toward ethnic partition and the effective obliteration 
of a sovereign country. Lord Owen's reaction was predictable. 
He rejected this initiative, saying that he is only answerable 
for his policy to the Council of Ministers of the European 
Union, and not to the European Parliament. Without wishing to, 
the lord has come up with the perfect definition of the essence 
of the problem. 
  The departure of the English diplomat as the European Union 
mediator in the Bosnian crisis would not change a thing if the 
policy of the European 12 remained the same. Lord Owen is not a 
solo player but the cold and calculating implementor of an 
incorrect and absolutely unsuccessful policy. The European 
Union accepted the initiative set out by Tudjman and Milosevic 
on the ethnic carve-up of Bosnia, defining it as a peace plan, 
even though it was clear that it was only the accomplishment of 
the aims of aggression through different means, but with less 
loss of human lives and less public opinion odium. 
  French Minister Alain Juppe asked yesterday for the 
reopening 
of the Bosnian file, and used the words a new approach, which 
could mean that the approach used so far will at least be very 
seriously reassessed. 
  On the other hand, Lord Owen has been so insistent on a 
failed and practically impossible peace plan, equalizing the 
victim with the butcher, the defenders with the aggressors, that 
this should be reason enough for him to go. Cyrus Vance 
resigned when the peace plan that he devised with David Owen was 
rejected. The Brit will not do the same, even though all his 
mediating efforts have been a fiasco. It is no longer a 
question of morality -- that not being a commodity that the 
world applies to this horrible aggression on Bosnia-Herzegovina 
anyway. The lord has simply lost all his credibility and it is 
time he quit this job. 

