Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview by Vlado Vurusic with Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, </F>
leader of the Russian Liberal Democratic Party, in Bled; date 
not given: "Four Countries Will Emerge on Territory of Former 
Yugoslavia: Greater Croatia, Greater Serbia, Greater Macedonia, 
and Little Slovenia With Trieste"] 
  [Text] While the boat floats calmly on the cold Lake Bled, 
Zhirinovskiy, completely relaxed, explains how sex and morals 
influence politics. "A man and a woman," Zhirinovskiy says, 
eating a mandarin slowly, "have two ways of establishing a 
relationship -- either by consent, or the man rapes the woman. 
So, today in Russia, you have politicians, like Gaydar, for 
example, who rape the country, rape the economy. We do 
everything slowly, which is the result of my way of life and my 
eating habits, and that is why the Russians rejected the 
barbarians and the crooks at the elections. They tell us that we 
give them hope, and they no longer want to put up with Gaydar's 
deceptions. We are for true democracy. So far, we have had 
democrats-hermaphrodites in power." Zhirinovskiy quickly 
switches from politics to women. He says that he likes calm and 
quiet women that do not smoke, do not drink, and do not wear 
makeup, women that knit and do embroidery. "I particularly like 
women that moan and weep during intercourse, but women that cry 
out `More, more,' I do not like them, that is no longer 
democracy," Zhirinovskiy explains his sexual philosophy. 
  We continue the conversation in his presidential suite. 
Since 
the translator he asked for did not come, Zhirinovskiy asked me 
to translate for him the declaration given to him for signing by 
[Slovene National Party leader] Zmago Jelincic. 
  The fifth point of that declaration contains Jelincic's 
proposal that Zhirinovskiy should help Slovenia move the 
Slovene-Croatian border in Istria to the Mirna River. 
  "What do you think about that?" Zhirinovskiy asked me. I 
told him that it was not fair for everybody to snatch parts of 
Croatian territory. "Besides, you said that you are against the 
changing of borders," I said. "You are right," Zhirinovskiy 
said without much interest, but he theatrically crossed out the 
fifth point of the declaration, which in the end was left out 
from the document. 
  When most of the reporters had left Lake Bled, Zhirinovskiy 
invited a British reporter, a Norwegian one, and I to join him 
in the sauna and the pool, where -- in an atmosphere of sweat 
and burning brains -- he chatted about his political views 
regarding the world, and his intended trips to Spain, Turkey, 
and Poland. The conversation and the photo session in the pool 
and the trim-cabinet confirmed his eccentricity. Zhirinovskiy 
wanted us to play with him, who can stay under water longer, who 
can dive, jump the longest, lift more weights. All this 
bewildered the cold-blooded and condescending British colleague. 
He finally left without saying goodbye, while we had another 
drink by the pool (Zhirinovskiy had a soft drink). We 
completely lost awareness of the fact that we were in the 
company of a controversial and bizarre politician, seen by many 
as a very dangerous possible initiator of a third world war. 
  [Vurusic] Mr. Zhirinovskiy, the 13 million votes that you 
got make you a very important politician. Is not everything we 
witnessed at Lake Bled just an eccentric show? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] No, politics should be like that. You have 
to be sincere and open in politics. I am open, I hide nothing. 
During these last few days reporters have been following me 
freely. They have photographed me eating, walking, swimming, 
talking. I am like that. In politics, as in nature, there can 
be volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, hurricanes. I want to 
prevent that. I am very peace-loving, although there are 
constant attempts to smear me with mud. Actually, in order to 
prevent even worse consequences of the present situation, I am 
prepared to apply somewhat harsher measures. Sometimes a little 
violence has to be applied to prevent a lot of violence. 
  [Vurusic] Russia's public prosecutor has brought charges 
against you for spreading hatred and for war-mongering? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] That is all nonsense. They want to get rid 
of me, they want to discredit me because I won the elections, 
and because I will become the president of Russia after the next 
elections. I am in favor of a peaceful solution to all issues, 
and I have been fighting with all my might to find a peaceful 
solution to this bloody war in the Balkans. The events in the 
former Yugoslavia are, in a way, a preamble to what certain 
circles would like to see happen to us in Russia. 
  [Vurusic] Your views about the war in the former Yugoslavia 
have been causing some confusion, and even dismay. How do you 
see this war? Is it true that you support the Serbian side? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] It hurts me to see our brother Slavs killing 
each other. I love the Slovenes, the Croats, and the Serbs 
equally, and that is why I think that this war has to be 
stopped, but in a peaceful way. Our party has several solutions 
to stop the war. Believe me, it is no coincidence that it is 
the Slav countries that have disintegrated, Yugoslavia, 
Czechoslovakia, and the USSR. 
  [Vurusic] You told me in Moscow that you would like to see 
the reintegration of Yugoslavia, but that you would not insist 
on that. What does that mean? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] Why do you not want to be a powerful Slav 
state? There are 300 million of us Slavs! We are a force. Why 
should they constantly divide us, why should we wage wars, why 
should we defend the West from invasions from the East? All 
right, Yugoslavia does not have to be reintegrated if you do not 
want it so, but you must not fight. We, the Slavs, we have to 
stick together. If you do not want to be together, then three 
states can be formed: Slovenia, greater Croatia, and greater 
Serbia. 
  [Vurusic] You did not answer whether you nevertheless 
support the Serbs in this war? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] No, I do not support the Serbs, I support the 
Slavs. Perhaps the Serbs are closer to us, the Russians, 
because of religion. Besides, the Serbs love us and we have 
helped them a lot throughout history. However, I repeat, I also 
love the Croats and the Slovenes. 
  [Vurusic] You are going to Serbia, but not to Croatia? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] I would have gone to Croatia if I was 
invited. Actually, the representatives of one of your parties, 
with whom I met in Bled, have invited me now. I will come, of 
course, and I will tell your president to negotiate. I will say 
the same thing to Milosevic. 
  [Vurusic] What kind of solution do you offer for the end of 
the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] The foreign troops, including the UN forces, 
must first leave Bosnia-Herzegovina. The possibility of any 
sort of foreign involvement in the clashes, especially the 
possibility of an intervention against only one side -- the 
Serbian side -- must be eliminated. Afterward, clashes must be 
ended and the status quo frozen. If you wish, we can send the 
Russian battalions to stand between the warring sides and 
guarantee that there will be no more clashes. 
  [Vurusic] By freezing the status quo, Serbia will get the 
greatest part of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Zhirinovskiy] What is wrong with the Serbs getting the 
largest part of the territory? In this way they will grow into 
a force that will defend Europe from the Islamic fundamentalism, 
from the invasion of Islam toward the heart of Europe. Serbia 
will defend you from new wars and poverty. What will happen 
when the Turks advance via Bulgaria toward Europe one day? 
Somebody should stop them. The Serbs being in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina is like a flu, as they are preventing the 
spreading of AIDS to Europe. Better a flu in Bosnia than AIDS 
in Europe. Beside, one of the solutions is a greater Croatia 
and a greater Serbia in the Balkans. 
  [Vurusic] What do you mean? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] Let there be a greater Croatia, naturally 
slightly smaller than the greater Serbia. Three states should 
exist in the Balkans: little Slovenia, perhaps with Trieste, 
then Croatia with roughly half of Bosnia-Herzegovina, and 
greater Serbia. 
  [Vurusic] Will "krajina" be part of the greater Serbia? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] Whose is "krajina" actually? 
  [Vurusic] Croatia's. 
  [Zhirinovskiy] Good, then let it stay in Croatia while 
Serbia can get a part of Albania. 
  [Vurusic] What about the Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] What Muslims? They do not exist as a nation. 
They are an invention. How do I know what will happen to them, 
they can move to Iran! 
  I would like to stress the following: If the borders start 
to change then what I call Europe 2000 will emerge, and within 
it the Balkan pyramid. In principle, I am opposed to changes of 
borders, however, it they do start to change, they should change 
everywhere and not only in the Slavic countries. I have 
proposed the borders from 1900, 1918, 1945, 1975, or 1994 to the 
West. If the West does not want this, then my message to them 
is -- O.K. it is time for the borders of the year 2000. This 
time around, the Slavs must not come off badly again, but must 
change borders to our advantage. 
  [Vurusic] What is the Balkan pyramid? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] Little Slovenia with Trieste. As I have 
heard here, Trieste is rather controversial. Initially, a "free 
town" model can be applied, similarly to the free royal towns 
that existed in Europe in the past. Numerous towns in Europe, 
also in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Nagorno Karabakh, even Vukovar, 
about which I am constantly being asked questions ever since it 
has been learned that I will visit it, could get this status. 
Once the system of "free towns" is setup, the interested 
parties should agree peacefully what will go to whom. Anyway, 
to continue. Within Europe 2000 and the Balkan pyramid, Tirol 
must go to Austria. Italy will be a little debilitated, but we 
should help it in Sicily around its problems with the Mafia. 
The top part of the Balkan pyramid is Slovenia, the next, 
somewhat bigger, Croatia with a part of Bosnia-Herzegovina, the 
third, Serbia with Montenegro, the greater part of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, and a part of Albania, while the last and 
the fundamental part of the pyramid will form the biggest 
country -- Macedonia with its capital in Sofia -- which will 
stretch from the Adriatic sea to the Black and Aegean Seas. It 
will entail a part of Albania, Macedonia, Greek Thrace, 
Bulgaria, and the Romanian Dobrogea. In return the Greeks would 
get Cyprus, Gallipoli, and the Turkish islands in the Aegean 
Sea. Hungary with Transylvania would also be linked to this 
pyramid, however, this will happen later. 
  [Vurusic] You intend to accomplish all this without a war? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] All this can be resolved very easily. In the 
first phase, new Slovenia, greater Croatia, and greater Serbia 
will be created. Then it will be Macedonia's turn. True 
enough, the question of Austria can be resolved in the first 
phase, although it does not have such a complex situation as the 
countries of former Yugoslavia. The safety of these countries 
will be guaranteed by five Russian corps. One in each country. 
There would be no more war and you could concentrate on trade. 
  [Vurusic] How will you react if NATO nevertheless attacks 
the Serbian positions in Bosnia-Herzegovina? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] We shall oppose it adamantly. We will demand 
through our parliament and our diplomacy that intervention 
definitely be prevented. If need be, Russia will threaten to 
leave the UN. 
  [Vurusic] The Italians will probably be surprised that you 
wish to give Trieste a similar status to Vukovar? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] You see, there are numerous problematic areas 
in Europe, which should be marked. These are: the Basque 
Province, Catalonia, Tirol, Lvov, and Dniester, and Nagoro 
Karabakh. If we approach border changes, we must mark exactly 
all the problematic areas and give them a special status. 
Afterward, we will agree to whom what will go. 
  [Vurusic] What will you say in Vukovar? Is this a Croatian 
or a Serbian town for you? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] I will say that we, the Slavs, must not kill 
each other. I will seek that the Serbs agree with the Croats 
about the status of Vukovar peacefully. I will say that I shall 
do everything within my power to have the sanctions against 
Serbia lifted. Beside, I will advocate that sanctions not be 
imposed on Croatia, which some in the world demand. Why do they 
demand sanctions against Croatia? To exhaust yet another Slavic 
country and prolong the war. 
  Had the West cared about ending the war in the Balkans, it 
would not have demanded the isolation of Serbia and Croatia. 
The Serbs and the Croats must negotiate, and if they do not 
want to, the case of Northern Ireland will repeat itself. 
Little countries are dangerous, they merely escalate the 
possibility of clashes and wars and that is why I am sorry that 
Yugoslavia has disintegrated. In 1990, I was in Ljubljana, 
Zagreb, and Belgrade. I liked the towns and the people, 
however, now you are at war and in order to get from Ljubljana 
to Belgrade I have to travel via Hungary. 
  [Vurusic] So you nevertheless wish for the reconstruction of 
Yugoslavia? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] I think that this is the best. Why are you 
fighting? All the Slavs should be united. Like the Communists 
used to say -- Proletarians of all countries, unite! -- I call 
on you: All Slavs, unite! Nobody will be able to do a thing to 
us. However, I will not insist on Yugoslavia if that is the way 
you agree. It is your decision how you will link up: A 
federation, a confederation, or nothing at all. As I have said 
earlier, there are three countries, while other parts of the 
former Yugoslavia will enter one of these three countries. On 
these territories, either Yugoslavia or the Balkan pyramid, as I 
have proposed it, is possible. 
  [Vurusic] Why did you come particularly to Slovenia? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] There are parliamentary holidays right now 
and my friend Petar Ivanovich invited me to come here to rest. 
I need a rest, but I must again defend myself from attacks that 
I am a fascist. You see that I am not a fascist! I only want 
peace and happiness for the Slavs. I wish this to all other 
nations. To Russia I wish that it finally overcomes the chaos 
in which it is currently. 
  [Vurusic] However, you are feared in the West and in Russia? 
  [Zhirivnoskiy] Let them fear me, we have feared and curtsied 
to the West long enough. They fear me in the West because I 
speak the truth and fight for a more just solution. Why is 
America meddling in European affairs when it does not belong 
here? Why all this bowing to the West? In what way is Russia 
worse than the West? Is our culture poorer? Of course not. Is 
our Russian man less talented? No. Are our women less pretty 
than in the West? Those hermaphrodite democrats who are afraid 
of the true Russia are afraid of me. 
  [Vurusic] I would return to the issue of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
What about the Muslims, who are a majority ethnic group in 
Bosnia? Do you really want them deported to Iran? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] We have the same problem with the Muslims in 
Russia. The Muslims would like to take over Europe and they 
would like to do it through a Muslim state in the heart of 
Europe. I have nothing against the Muslims, let them live 
according to their traditions and Muslim laws. However, then 
they do not need television, roads, contacts with the 
Christians. Let their women wear a veil from the age of 12, let 
them bow five times a day, and live in their houses. They 
should not print books because they say that everything they 
need is written in Koran, anyway. I have nothing against them 
living in accordance with their customs. However, I think that 
they cannot live like this in the heart of Europe. 

