BFN 

<F P=106> [Olga Garbuzova report: "Agrarian Party Holds News </F>
Conference. Agrarians Have Taken President at his Word One Last 
Time"] 
  [Text] At yesterday's news conference, leaders of the 
Russian Agrarian Party faction shared with journalists their 
impressions about their earlier meeting with the president. 
Pointing out that the conversation was constructive, the 
representatives of the agro- industrial sector said at the same 
time that it was the last time they believed Boris Yeltsin's 
intention to change his methods of agricultural reform. 
  Although, the participants in the meeting themselves said, 
the president kept mostly silent and the agrarians mostly 
complained, the latter presumed after the conversation that the 
president is ready to change the methods of reforming 
agriculture. The promise of regular meetings with the president 
inspired optimism among the agrarians: in their view, this will 
help the president get an idea about the situation in the 
agriculture. For the time being, however, Deputy Vasiliy 
Vershinin said, "the president has a distorted idea of it and 
believes that things are going pretty well." The agrarians 
tried to change this view and thought the conversation with 
Yeltsin was constructive. According to Deputy Aleksandr 
Davydov, "we do not expect revolutionary changes from these 
meetings, but we hope that some mistakes made during economic 
reform will be corrected." 
  Their hopes are scarcely justified, however -- according to 
reports by the presidential press service, the agrarians were 
promised that reform in the countryside will proceed within the 
framework of the general reform strategy. It is hard to see in 
these words a readiness to change the course of agricultural 
reform, but the deputies saw just that. Moreover, participants 
in the news conference said that it was the last time they took 
the president at his word. They could not coherently explain, 
however, what they would do if the president fails to deliver. 
Obviously, the agrarians cannot do anything more menacing than 
stage a token Day of Peasants' Protest, which was organized last 
summer and failed to have any significant impact on the 
government. Undoubtedly, the authorities would like to see the 
Agrarian Party sign the Treaty on Public Accord, but the defiant 
agrarians said in the news conference that they are not going to 
do so. Evidently, so intransigent a stance will further weaken 
the authorities' desire to meet the agrarians halfway. 

