CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yang Shuzhen [2799 2885 3791]: "Concern for </F>
Jiaozhou Bay"] 
  [Text] Qingdao, known as the "Jewel of the Yellow Sea" and 
"Switzerland of the Orient", has grown from a small fishing 
village 100 years ago to today's developed coastal city with a 
centralized port and advantages in tourism, light and textile 
industry, aquaculture, and marine science, its benefits being 
derived from Jiaozhou Bay. With a broad harbor, deep water, 
small waves, and light silt, the excellent natural harbor at 
Jiaozhou Bay is the cradle that gave birth to Qingdao and the 
basis of Qingdao's future prosperity. However, for the past 
several years shrinkage of the water area and water pollution 
have consistently been two major threats to Jiaozhou Bay. 
Although through the efforts of local government and the related 
departments the overall environmental situation in Jiaozhou Bay 
is still acceptable, parts of it and development trends still 
worry people. 
  The sea area has been shrinking over the years and this is 
tending to become increasingly acute. 
  It has now shrunk from 560 km[.sup]2[/] before the 1960's 
to 390 km[.sup]2[/], which is a 30 percent reduction in its 
area from that time. The main cause of this acute reduction is 
man-made as over 10 million tons of all types of garbage are put 
into the sea each year, while large areas of the sea have been 
swallowed up by enclosure of the sea to create land and the 
opening up salt fields and shrimp pools. There is also serious 
water pollution. Because of urban population growth and 
industrial development, 84.67 million tons of industrial waste 
water and 39.28 million tons of household waste water are 
injected into Jiaozhou Bay each year. Furthermore, each year 
more than 2,700 ships enter Jiaozhou Bay which discharge about 
90,000 tons of waste water containing oil. Added to the frequent 
oil leak accidents, the quality of the water has become severely 
polluted. Because of this pollution from a variety of sources, 
the results of monitoring of the water in Jiaozhou Bay show that 
the water area where the water quality has been degraded now 
comprises about 29.29 percent of the total water area. 
  Shrinkage of the water area and water pollution have serious 
outcomes. Shrinkage of the water area inevitably results in 
reductions in the amount of tides and with the reduction in 
tides there is a weakening of the strength of water motion, 
which results in a reduction in replacement of the water body 
and in the silt- carrying capacity. This increases the 
possibility of pollution and silt accumulation in the sea and 
has caused the rate of sedimentation to rise over the years. 
Silt accumulation has also caused a reduction in the water area 
and in the amount of tides. Being repeated in this manner, it 
forms a vicious cycle whose outcome we cannot dare imagine. 
Moreover, greater pollution directly destroys the marine ecology 
and environment and seriously affects the existence of marine 
organisms. In Cangkou Bay, for example, there were 141 species 
of intertidal zone organisms in the 1960's including as many as 
52 species of crustaceans. By the 1970's only 30-odd species of 
organisms including just 12 crustacean species were left. In the 
1980's only 17 species of organisms including four species of 
crustaceans were left. By 1989, only nine species of organisms 
were left. At the same time, the seawater breeding industry, 
harbor piers, military facilities, beach environment, seawater 
bathing beaches, and the ecology and environment were all 
damaged to varying degrees. 
  Because of Jiaozhou Bay's unique status and important 
significance, people have become much more concerned about the 
situation in Jiaozhou Bay and the question of how to develop, 
utilize, and protect Jiaozhou Bay has consistently been a hot 
topic of concern debated by people for many years. The relevant 
experts and scholars have offered many countermeasures and 
suggestion, the main ones being: 
  1) Strengthen propaganda and education, raise people's 
consciousness concerning our maritime territory. Have a correct 
understanding of and scientifically evaluate the environmental 
situation in Jiaozhou Bay, establish the concept of coordinated 
development of the economy with environmental protection and 
moving forward simultaneously. 
  2) Establish a unified and authoritative comprehensive 
development and environmental protection management organization 
for Jiaozhou Bay for unified management of development and 
protection. 
  3) Rely on scientific management and decision-making to form 
an effective marine environmental protection scientific 
decision-making system, strengthen scientific research and 
scientific management of Jiaozhou Bay, creation of shrimp pools 
and salt fields, repair of shoreline walls, construction of 
tidal barriers, linking islands, and other projects should be 
debated before construction can begin. 
  4) Strengthen construction of the legal system, compile at 
Jiaozhou environmental protection and management law as quickly 
as possible, strictly control discharges of pollutants, dumping 
of wastes, oil leaks, and other pollution sources and establish 
legislation for all of them and manage affairs according to the 
law. 
  Being concerned about Jiaozhou Bay is not something based on 
imaginary or groundless fears. Its objective is to arouse a 
sense of urgency among people for protecting Jiaozhou Bay and 
make Jiaozhou Bay healthy and long-lived. 

