Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nasir 'Arif] </F>
  [Text] Palestinian sources have disclosed to AL-ASWAQ that 
Israeli-Palestinian contacts in Tunis over the past few days 
focused on drafting a special agreement that will be called the 
Palestinian security and protection agreement. The same sources 
indicated that the agreement will include the following: 
  -- Evacuating settlers from the city of Hebron. 
  -- Concentrating all Gaza Strip settlements in one place. 
  -- Drawing up a mechanism by which the settlers' weaponry 
will be restricted. The maximum limit of this mechanism would 
be withdrawing weapons from settlers for good while the minimum 
would be preventing them from carrying arms when moving around. 
  -- Deploying UN observers in Gaza and Jericho and some 
other areas in the West Bank cities in implementation of 
Security Council Resolution No. 904. 
  The sources, which declined to be named, told AL-ASWAQ that 
the Palestinians want this agreement to be one of the annexes of 
the Oslo agreement. Israel, however, rejects this and is 
reserved on the principle of drafting a special agreement on 
security measures for the Palestinian people. It prefers that 
such measures be taken on its own initiative so that they not be 
depicted as Israel complying with Palestinian conditions. 
  The sources expected all these matters to be discussed 
during 
a meeting between Israeli chief delegate Amnon Shahaq and the 
Palestinian leadership in Tunis. Meetings are also expected to 
continue, including the U.S. mediation effort through Dennis 
Ross, the U.S. peace coordinator, in order to work out these 
security issues and reach a formula acceptable to the two sides. 
  In a related development, a responsible Palestinian source 
said the PLO will not resume official talks with the Israeli 
side in Washington next month as agreed by the Arab states 
unless Israel adopts security measures to protect the 
Palestinians. 
  Arab sources told AL-ASWAQ that differences remain over the 
venue of the coordination meeting of the Cordon [al-tawq] 
States, the parties invited to it, and the nature of the 
decision that will be taken continue to prevent the convocation 
of such a meeting. Syria wants a tripartite meeting in Damascus 
by delegations from Jordan, Syria, and Lebanon, excluding Egypt 
and the PLO, because it believes the PLO departed from Arab 
coordination when it signed the Oslo Agreement. The Egyptian 
side wants a collective coordination meeting in Cairo for all 
states concerned in negotiations, including the PLO. 
  Commenting on these reports, Palestinian sources said the 
PLO 
does not care whether the coordination meeting is held in 
Damascus or Cairo, but believes the meeting should be 
consecrated to unifying Arab efforts to pressure Israel into 
adopting practical measures to protect the Palestinian citizens 
in the occupied territories. The sources added that the PLO 
believes the purpose of the meeting should not be coordinating 
stands on issues that will be negotiated with the Israeli side 
during the next round of talks because the PLO still has 
reservations on the resumption of talks before Israel starts to 
practically implement Security Council Resolution 904. 

